Sions Memento, AND Gods Alarm. IN A SERMON AT Westminster, before the
Honorable House of Commons, on the 31. of May 1643. the Solemn day of their
monthly Fast.

By FRANCIS CHEYNELL late Fellow of Merton College in Oxford.

Printed and published by order of the House of COMMONS.

REVEL. 19. ver. 19. 20. And I saw the Beast and the Kings of the earth, and
their armies gathered together, to make war against him that sat on the Horse,
and against his army. And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet.
-- These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

REVEL. 17. 1, 2. Come hither, I will show unto thee the judgment of the great
whore that sits upon many waters, with whom the kings of the earth have
committed fornication.

LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Dare not dispute your Power, for even Dr. Dr. Fern his Conscience satisfied
lately printed at Oxford. sect. 2. page 6.
Fern himself is Satisfied in his Conscience (or else he would never have
granted it in his Tract, entitled Conscience Satisfied) that the two Houses of
Parliament are, in a sort, Coordinate with His Majesty ad aliquid, to some Act,
or Exercising of Supreme Power, that is, to the making of Laws, by yielding
their consent: and this (says he) they have by a Fundamental Constitution:
Nay, the Order of the House of Commons cannot in reason but oblige all the
Commons of England; it does not indeed oblige the King, he is exempt by his
Sovereignty; the Lords plead Peerage, I have not yet heard of any other Plea,
and therefore I will not dispute your Power, but obey your Order. You shall
have the glory to command, mihi autem obsequii gloria relicta est, pardon the
expression: we Merton College men have been used to Tacitus, it is his
expression.

The times are sad, my Text was seasonable: Though Babylon be at Rome, yet
there are some sons and daughters of Babylon too here in England: Sion is now
surrounded by them, and your Honorable House is most eminently opposed by
them: Many there are that plot against you, all the Antichristian Politicians
in the Christian world are beating their brains how to destroy you, but their
Plots are discovered, their Designs defeated by the watchful providence of an
Omniscient God, Many there are that fight against you, against you, I say, for
it is evident that those many thousands who are up in Arms, do not fight for
the King, but against the Parliament: This man fights for a place at Court, and
the other, perchance, for a place in the Church, or rather over the Church: O
bloody Simony! some fight for Pluralities, and some for Bishopriks, some for
Patents, some for Monopolies; some have lost their places in the Star Chamber,
and High Commission, and have scarce any thing to ^rast to but the sword. The
Papists fight to subvert Religion: Delinquents, to subvert the Laws, and the
Parliament too, because it has power to make, declare, enforce the Law: The
Roysters fight to destroy your persons, and gain your estates to pay their
Tavern-tickets: and yet there is a Divine, one Dr. ^erne, who seems to excuse
all this, and by his excuse, does certainly encourage them, to do what is
inexcusable. And the good Doctor would fain persuade you and all the Commons of
England, to sit still the whilst, and lose your Religion for Conscience ^ake;
your Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, for Peace sake: And what will Peace
advantage your Posterity, if the Army in the North will give them Peace upon no
other terms then these; that either they must turn Papists, or else be content
to be Beggars, and which is worse, Slaves? Some that gloried in the Title of
Royalists, do now perceive, That it is not enough, to stand for the King,
unless they will declare themselves for the Queen: and they are not a little
startled at that: Is this the Bishops holy War for the Catholic Church? Be it
the Bishops War, says Dr. Fern in his first Book* Well, be it so: Why, then
sure the Bishops have much blood to answer for. For it is well known to this
whole Kingdom, and to some Churches abroad, that the Parliament desired to have
all Church Matters fairly debated, (...), as Nazianzen speaks, not by an Army,
but by an Assembly; the Bishops then have clearly declined this Rational way
of trial, and taken up Arms against the Parliament in the old quarrel, and
sure the Parliament has good reason to defend themselves. It seems the Bishops
arguments are spent, and therefore they call for Powder and Bullets, to prove
that Prelacie is Jure divino. I say Prelacy, for there is a great deal of
difference between Prelates, and Bishops. Pontifices nunc Bella juvant, sunt
caetera nugae. Palingenius.

What they cannot prove by the Word, they would fain make good by the sword.
What? because men of tender consciences can be no longer pursued in their
Courts, must they be pursued even unto death, by force of Arms? but stay:
What Is their fault? Why, they are enemies: They are enemies to such pomp and
state as (some Bishops cannot but confess) may well be spared. This Plot came
from Rome, for I remember Hostiensis says, That from the days of Pope Adrian,
till his time, the Cardinals and Bishops of Rome had scarce ever laid down
their Arms. Nunc belligerantur Episcopi, nec ali^d fere quam belligerantur.
Eras. Annot in cap. 3. Luc^.
Erasmus complained, that in his time the Bishops were men of war. When the
Duke D'Alva tyrannized over the Netherlands, there were new Bishops Mr. Fullers
Pro* fane State. (...). 19.
Sees erected in every City, and then presently the Inquisition was brought in
upon them: as if there could never have been any absolute tyranny without the
help of the Bishops. But you will tell me, that the Men may be faulty, and yet
the Order blameless. I answer, that the dignity of their Order should be tried
by the Word, and the men being faulty, should not be protected by the Sword*
Blush ye heavens, and be ashamed, O earth, that ever proud ambitious spirits
should inflame differences between King and Parliament, only that they may
feed themselves with vain hopes of being Bishops at last, and enjoying
Pluralities the whilst. Let the Searcher of hearts judge between us, and let
them beware that they do not hear aconfounding voice, like that in the
Historian, Quintili Vare read Legiones, Tu Episcope read Legiones, read
Animas. I was bold in my Sermon to lay Prelacy as low as Prelaticall men have
laid Monarchy. I was too bold, they say, in calling the Pope whore so often.
But it is as certain that Pope John the eighth, (or Joan the first) was a
Whore, as the credit of impartial Historians (I except the Sacred See Mr.
Alexander Co^k his Dialogue about Pope ^oane. Cognomine Anglicus, natione
Moguntinus* vide F^sci^ temporum ata^^ 6. ad An. 854.
only) can make a matter of fact certain, which was done so long ago. The
ancient Popish Historians acknowledge this truth. The Successor of Leo the
fourth is generally described, by name John the eighth, by firname English, by
place a Pope, by s^x a woman, aod by her lust a Whore: She tyrannized somewhat
above two years, some reckon the months and days; she played the beast with
one of her own servants, and died in travail, in time of solemn Procession in
the high street. No man ever went about to prove this Story a Fable, but he
proved himself a Fool. For this story is confirmed by the testimony of (...)
and (...)
Theodoricus de N^em, one of the Popes Secretaries, by (...)
Charanza Archbishop of Toledo, by (...)
^ulgosus, sometimes Duke of Gen^a, by D^ m^mora^
Platina, keeper of the Library in the Vatican at Rome, a man commanded to
write the truth by De (...)
Pope Sixtus the fourth; a man that had been racked and deprived of his
dignities by Paul the second: it seems he bad spoken truth too freely, and
therefore Sixtus restored him to his (...)
dignities, and did not only enjoin, but encourage him to write the truth. To
these I might add John of Paris, Divinity Reader in the University of Paris, g
Pola^^s an Archbishop, and the Po^es Pe^tiary, h Trithemius Abbot of S^.
Martins Monastery, i Philippus Bergomensis, I will not omit Krantius, he is an
excellent Chronographer, and k Bellarmine says, not to be suspected, because
he wrote before Luther, nor is Achil^es Gras^erus to be d^srespected, because
he collected his Epitome out of very ch^^ce Historians. Here is weight in these
testimonies, if any man look for number, he may see Sigebert, Boccace, Mantuan,
Petrarch, Gotefridus, Viterbien^s, Palmerius, Nauclerus, ^abellicus, Volateran,
Schedel, and diverse others cited at ^arge in that learned ^ra^t of Mr.
Alexander Cook, set out on purpose to confirm this truth: or he may read Mr.
Bell his Mo^ives, or his Survey of Popery; Books that I never yet saw answered.
But what if one Pope were a Whore, and delivered of a Bastard before all the
People, peradventure the rest of the Popes (...) D (...).
were more holy. No, John the eleventh was promoted to the Popedom by Theodora
a famous Whore: John the twelfth, was a Bastard begotten of Marozia (another
man's wife) by Pope Sergius the third: John the thirteenth abused his fathers
Concu^e. Some Popes have been notorious for Incest and Sodomy, Julius the
second, Martin the second, and diverse others; Boniface the eighth had issue by
both his Nieces, Lucretia was daughter and whore to Pope Alexander the sixth;
her Epitaph will be more lasting then Brass or Marble, Hoc jacet in tumulo
Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
You may see more instances in Platina, O^^phrius, Sleidan. We are so much
given to Roman Courtship now adays, and our ears have been so little used
till now of late to the old expressions of zealous Protestants, that such like
passages will be counted little less then railing by some Gentle Readers; but
let such hear what Reverend Dr. Abbor, sometimes Bishop of Sarum, a man of a
meek spirit, observed when he treated of this Argument. The Ib. ubi supra page
199.
Pontifical Chair, says he, was so infected with that She-Pope and famous
Whore John the eighth, that scarce any man ever since climbed up to that Seat
of Pestilence, but he has stunck of that, or some other Whore. I will not give
you occasion to stop your noses, by ripping up the beastliness of the fat
Monks, and wanton Priests, whom the people might well call Fathers, because
they begot Hos^iens de Orig. M^nach lib. 6 c. 3.
so many Bastards; Non male sunt Monachis gra^a indita nomina Patrum,
Cum numerent natos hic and ubique suos.


There has been enough said, to give (and I know all impartial men will take)
satisfaction. The great Design I had in my Sermon, was to overthrow Babylon,
and build up Sion. I touched upon the Heresy, Idolatry, Tyranny, of the
Antichristian Faction, that Protestants might be mo^e watchful, and Popery
more odious, It is my daily prayer, that God would unite the King and
Parliament; and my great Request to your Honorable House was, that you would
put forth your strength for the recovery of that Power, which the Antichristian
Faction by force, or fraud has wrested out of the Kings hand, that when it is
regained, it may be settled upon the Kings Royal Person, and Posterity. For
this end and purpose, I made an humble Motion to you, that you would seriously
consider what Points we must stand upon, and what Errors we must Protest
against, that so there might be a more special and punctual Covenant of Peace
drawn up, subscribed, nay sealed, and King and Parliament might Victoriously
join in an happy Union against the Antichristian Faction, this in England,
which is intimately Confederate with that in Ireland, and equally Rebellious
against the Kings Authority in His highest Court of Justice. In my discourse
about the Covenant, I mentioned a Book, which directs us how to make a
Christian Pacification by a through Reformation: The Author of that Book did
not set himself to dispute with Turks, or Jews, or gross Papists, but with
some treacherous Reconcilers, who under color of Pacification, and some
pretense of a moderate Reformation, would take away half Christ at least, and
three quarters of our old Creed, as if they could make us amends, by giving us
a New one, and we might Covenant to tear Christ and his Gospel to pieces for
Peace sake. The Protestants talked much of the Cause of Christ (says the same
Author) as long as they had (...).
their swords by their sides, but when they had laid down their Arms, and were
in danger of their lives, then they forgot the Cause of Christ, and began to
think that zeal was rashness, and constancy stubbornness. But if we love
Christ and our souls better then our lives, let us resolve never to embrace any
conditions of Peace which mingle the Inventions of men with the truth of God:
Let us maintain the Doctrine of free Justification, our Salvation depends upon
it, and let us preserve the Worship of God entire and pure; for says he, if we
look only to matters of Faith, and contend not for purity of Worship, we seem
to have less care of Gods honor, then of our Salvation. Moreover, in matters
of such moment, we must weigh and consider every phrase, word, title, lest by
obscure, or slipper^ terms, our Adversaries evade, and leave us in the lurch.
This is the substance of the first Chapter. His second Chapter concerns
Justification, and he would have us consider, that it is not enough to say, we
are justified by Faith, but we must say, we are justified by Faith, because
Christ's righteousness is imputed, and our sins are not imputed to us that
believe. We must not deny our Regeneration, and yet we must not confound it
with our justification. We must obey God with all our heart, and all our
strength, and yet we must not plead any other obedience for our Justification
at the Tribunal of God, save the obedience of Jesus Christ. Our good works
shall be rewarded, that is encouragement enough; but the reward is grounded upon
a free Pardon, and a gracious acceptance: if we were not first justified, our
works would not be accepted, nor rewarded; Because our persons are accepted in
Christ, therefore our works are rewarded for Christ; that imperfect
righteousness of works which we have, does wholly depend upon the
righteousness of faith; now the imperfection of our righteousness is
pardoned, the sincerity of our obedience is accepted, and yet we are not
justified by our own sincere obedience, no not in part, but are only (and
wholly, because perfectly) justified by the complete and perfect obedience of
Jesus Christ. We must then trust with our whole soul to the obedience of Jesus
Christ, and not trust at all to any good quality infused into us, or good works
wrought by us, for our Justification: This is the pure Protestant Religion,
commended to us in the second Chapter. In his third Chapter, he does largely
explain the office, and use of Faith, because Faith is the instrument of our
justification, and we can never keep the unity of Faith in the bond of Peace,
if we do not agree about the Nature, or the Offices, and use of Faith. I am
sorry I must lay aside this Book, but if you will be pleased to take it up, I
may conclude my Epistle; only give me leave to renew my suit to you,
concerning a National Covenant, a National Thanksgiving, a speedy and free
Assembly: If the Prelaticall men are displeased, that so many Bishops are
passed by, let them remember what the Archbishop of Canterbury Schol G* Naz. d^
d^ vit Cer. Archb. Cant. Relat. p. 27.
says, That there have been some corrupt crafty Bishops, who by plots and
tricks have disturbed all Synods, and most Councels. Astutos and veteratoriae
improbitatis Episcopos, qui ar^ibus suis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant.
I shall conclude all with that Prayer which I used at the Fast. Lord, never was
there any Kingdom that made an higher Appeal to thy Majesty then our poor
Kingdom has made: Both sides appeal to thee, not only by a War, but a
Protestation Lord, be pleased to decide the Controversy, let that side prevail
which does most sincerely desire thy glory, the Kings good, the Kingdoms
welfare by an happy Reformation, and a Christian Peace: I am sure you will say
Amen to the prayer of

Your daily Orator at the

Courteous Reader,
SOme passages in my Sermon have reference to a little treatise, which I lately
published about Socinianisme: in that book you will meet with much Latin
which is not translated, yet if you turn over but the first four or five
leaves, you may without the help of Latin, if you read attentively, pick out
the scope of the book; some quotations were scholasticall, and would not bear
English, some are full of blasphemies, others there are that will seem
superfluous to any but a scholar, who delights to know every circumstance. Be
pleased to read the book, the Sermon, and Epistle, believe and obey the
Scriptures, and prepare for Martyrdom, we know not how soon we may be called
to seal the truth with our dearest blood; lend the Author thy patience and thy
prayers.

F. C.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE late Fast, before the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
ZECHAR. 2. 7. Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the daughter of
Babylon.


BEhold two Nations, two manner of peodle struggling in the bowels of this Text
and Kingdom, Jacob and Esan, Sion and Babylon. Now the Kingdom lies groaning in
its throws and pangs, in its agony and bloody-sweat; let us fall into a devout
agony and penitent sweat, if we cannot sweat blood let us sweat tears, let
every pore of our body be a weeping eye, a crying, a praying mouth, to beg a
safe delivery for our laboring Mother, who travails in the anguish of her
spirit. Let us entreat God to comfort England, as he did Rebekah, Genes. 25.
23. And the Lord said unto her, Two manner of people shall be separated from
thy bowels: O let us pray that either Babylon may be separated, expelled out of
the bowels of Sion, or Sion delivered out of Babylon.

When the poor Jews were prisoners in Babylon, by the rivers of Babylon there
they sat down and wept, and wept amain, when they remembered Zion, Psalm. 137. 1.
Oh for Ieremies tears, and Ieremies spirit, that we might write another book of
Lamentations, to bewail the miserable security of this present age! Sion sits
down by the rivers of Babylon, the waters of (...).
strife, and rivers of Confusion, and shall there be no fountain in our Head,
or Heart; no penitent streams flowing from our eyes? The God of heaven make
this marble sweat, that we may not keep a Mock-fast to day, with dry eyes and
hard hearts.

Come, let us blow off the ashes from our zeal, let us inflame our hearts with
sad but servent devotion: Sure if, as Heraclitus dreamt, our soul were but an
Exhalation, the heat (...).
of our devotion would melt it into one indivisible tear: Our soul would be its
own tear, and we might well weep out our eyes and souls together on this day of
tears. Oh let us remember to join Zecharies zeal with Jeremies tears, let us
lie upon our faces to day, but up, up to morrow; the Prophet cries Ho, Ho, in
the verse before my Text, to awaken and inflame your zeal and indignation
against Babylon. Come, ^pread abroad like the four winds of heaven, says the
Lord: Deliver thy self, O Zion, etc.

In the words observe Zions bondage, and Zions deliverance: Zions Memento, and
Gods Alarm. Zions Memento, to put her in mind of her sad condition, she was
yet in the house of Bondage, like Galba's wit she had but a foul habitation,
(...).
an ill seat, and worse neighbors: Zion that dwell with the daughter of
Babylon. But that is not all, it is not a bare gentle Memento, in a still voice;
Heus, heus, divinum (...), Hark, hark, God himself sounds an Alarm. Zion's
fast asleep, she snorts again, and therefore the Prophet lifts up his voice,
and cries, So Ho, O Zion awake, awake, rouse up thy self out of thy secure
pleasing dream: Thy soul is asleep, awake, quicken thy spirits, put on strength
O Zion, put forth thy strength, use all possible diligence for thy redemption
and Deliverance. Deliver thy self O Zion, etc.

The Text at first glance presents these two Propositions to our serious
consideration.

1. It is sometimes the hard lot of Zion to dwell with the daughter of Babylon:
This point is so clear that I need not explain or confirm it, we will let that
pass, and hasten to the second.

2. Zion must take all fair opportunities, and use all lawful means to
deliver her self from Babylon: I desire to spend my strength upon this Doctrine.

Give me leave to open the point a little: Come, let us Explication.
walk the Round and survey the bounds of Zion, and the bounds of Babylon. By
Zion the Prophet means the people of God, whose Anima est ubi amat, non ubi any
mat, Bernard.
hearts were set on Zion, because God had of old set up his Ordinances there,
and made them a gracious promise, That they should return thither again, and
enjoy him once more in the Beauty, the Glory of Holiness. There were two
Mounts which did belong to Jerusalem, Mount Moriah, and Mount Zion; the Temple
was built upon Mount Zion, and therefore Zion was the Mount of Holiness, and
as it were the Throne of God here below, thither did the people flock, Micah 4.
2. Come, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord -- for the Law shall go forth
of Zion: behold Zion is the Mountain of the Lord. But we must consider further,
that besides the Jewish Sion, there is a Christian Sion spoken of in the
Prophets; and this very place of Micah which I have cited, points at the
Christian Sion, a Church consisting of all Nations, Gentiles as well as Jews;
be pleased to peruse the words. But in the last days it shall come to pass,
that the Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of
the Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and people shall flow
unto it: and many Nations shall come and say, Let us go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, verse 1. 2. That this is clearly meant of the Christian Sion, besides
the evidence of the words themselves, the last verse of the former Chapter, the
third Chapter of Micah, does sufficiently declare: for the Jewish Sion, Ne^
ullum restabit Civitatis vestigi^, pars in arva pars in rudera, mons etiam
^^mus Dei in excelsa ab^bit silvosa, nec non ^eraru^ lustra vide Ta^no^ in
(...).
Sion in the letter, was to be plowed as a field, and the Mountain of that
House was to be left as desolate as the high places of the Forest. Moreover
this Prophecy was to be fulfilled in the last days, Micah 4. 1. Finally, the
Law shall go forth of Zion, says the Prophet Micah, to the Jews the Law came
forth of Sinai, but to the Christian Church consisting of Jews and Gentiles,
the Law came forth of Sion when the Spirit was plentifully powered down upon
some of all Nations at Jerusalem, Acts 2. and therefore not Romans 11. 16, 17.
Rome, but the Church which was gathered at Jerusalem (if any Church) was the
(...). Theo^. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. (...). 9. I^ Jerusalem prim^ fan^a Ecclesia
totius or bis Ecclesias seminavit, ^iero^ym. Co^n Isa c. 2. 1, 2
Metropolitan or mother Church, and younger Churches were the daughters of
that Evangelicall Sion: For we are not come to the Mount that burnt with fire,
Heb. 12. 18. but unto Mount Sion, Verse 22. The Apostle does expound this
Allegory more fully, Galat. 4. 24. Which things, says he, are an Allegory; for
these are two covenants, (or testaments) the one from Mount Sinai which
gendreth to bondage, the other then is from Mount Sion, which tends to
freedom, a covenant of Grace, the spirit of grace and holiness which is more
plentifully poured Se^ Reverend M. Reynol^s his learned Annotations on psalm.
110. from p. 269. to 274. Hiero^olyma^ Matr^m and Fontem Religionis vocat
Teitull. cont. Marcion, lib 2. (...) per orbem ^^rrarum dispersa, ^^yus ^ives
sumus, ^uorum (...) est in ^a l^s Vide Be^ Annot. in c. 4 (...) Gal. ver. 26.
out upon the Christian Sion, makes us precious sons of Sion, freemen
indeed. You see the Bounds of Sion.

Let us now take a view of Babylon. I need not say any thing of Babylon in
Egypt, my Text points me to Babylon in Assyria; the Scriptures mention a third
1 pet 5. 13^ Babylo^is nomen multis plac^^t (...) ^fic^te con^usionem in urbe
Romana, Ioach, ^amerar. Babylona autem pro^^ie acc^pit (...) pro celebit ^lla
Assyriae urbe. Annot ^b. December reges odio habituros purpuratam meretricem, id
est, Romam, Bell. l. 3. de Romans P^nt. c. 13. Hieronymus cum Romae ad Asellam
scripsit in haec verba. Ora autem ut de Babylone a^ Hierosolymam regrediar. Cum
in Babylone versares and purpuratae Meretricis esse Colonus a^^ure Quiritium v^
v^rem. Hierenym ad Ger^nt. de monogamia.
Babylon, and in my Application the times will call upon me by Analogy and
proportion to speak much of this third Babylon, which is a Mystical Babylon,
the Romish Babylon; and yet I think we need not travail so far as Rome to
find out Babylon: did you never hear of an English Babylon in Ireland, and an
Irish Babylon in England, and a Romish Babylon even in Scotland? Is there not a
Babylon in the North, and another in the West? a Babylon almost in every City,
town and parish? nay if we are impartial in the search, we shall certainly
find some Malignant lusts, some brats of Babylon in our own bosom: you see
the bounds of Babylon.

I shall begin with the Jewish Sion, and show you what reason this Sion had to
deliver her self from the Assyrian Babylon.

1. The first Reason is, because God had so often called Reasons.
upon Sion to separate from Babylon: the people were First, awakened by
Jeremiahs prophecy. Secondly, they were encouraged by Cyrus his Proclamation:
you may find both put together, Ezra 1. 1. Now in the first year of Cyrus
King of Persia (that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
fulfilled) the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia that he made
Proclamation, etc. There was a threesold Call, a call from God, a call from the
Prophet, and a call from the King; and the Lord who stirred up the spirit of
Jeremy, and the spirit of Cyrus, did stir up the spirit of his people to
answer this call, and depart from Babylon; for upon this Proclamation diverse of
the children of the Captivity went up to Jerusalem under the conduct of their
General Z^rubbabel, as you may read, Ezra 2. 1, 2. Now these are the Children
of the Province, that went up out of the Captivity of those which had been
carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one
unto his City, which came with Zerubbabel, etc. Thirdly, the Governors and
people were quickened to this great duty of forsaking Babylon, and building Sion
by the ministry of the Prophet Haggai, and about two months after by the
Prophet Zechariah. Ezra 5. 1. Hag. 1. 1. Zech. 1. 1. They both prophesied in
the second year of Darius, Haggai in the sixth month, and Zechary in the eight
month. But it seems too many of the people upon some Carnal discouragements
were unwilling to go to Jerusalem which was now but an heap of old rubbish and
dead ashes, nay some were as willing to stay in Babylon as Lots sons-in-law to
^tay in Sodom. God therefore gave them another Call yet in the seventh year of
the reign of Artaxerxes, and then many went up from Babylon upon the motion of
Ezra the scribe: Ezra 7. 6, 7, 8. ver. But there were many lingerers behind
yet, and our long-suffering God who is rich in patience did vouchsafe another
Call yet, about thirteen years after in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes,
^or about that time Nehemiah began to stir, as you may read, Nehem. 2. 1. You
see here is Call upon Call; this may suffice for the first Reason; (...), the
Church takes it, very name from its obedience to Gods call. Omnes in Ecclesia
non sunt ex ecclesia.
because nothing but obedience to the Call of God can declare us to be the true
Church of God.

My second reason is taken from the Terminus a Quo, the Reas. 2.
place from whence they were called, Babylon; or the daughters of Babylon, the
City of Babylon was the Metropolis or mother City, the adjoining towns and
villages are called the daughters of Babylon, because they followed the ill
example of the City, they were nursed up in all manner of Babylonish Idolatry
and Impiety; Some of the people that belonged to Sion did certainly loyter too
long in these towns and villages, and therefore the Prophet calls upon them in
my Text. Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with Babylon, with the
daughters of Babylon that are as bad as their mother. Babylon is, in the
language of Augustine, The City of the Devil; and was it fit that the people
of God should lie loytering in the City of the Devil? Babylon was the
Malignant Church, the Sink of Sin, the stall of Beasts, the Throne of Idols,
the Temple of Devils, and mother of confusion. No place more infamous for
their pride and tyranny, their cruelty and Idolatry; well might Sion be weary
of such a loathsome prison, and noisome dungeon, which could not but be
offensive by its stench and darkness, even as Babylon the great is the
Habitation of Devils, the Strong hold of foul spirits, Rev. 18. 2.

The 3d. Reason is taken from the Terminus ad Quem, the place unto which they
were called, unto Jerusalem, unto Sion. Reas. 3.
Every motion takes its denomination from its Terminus ad Quem, but here even
the Travailers themselves who were to move take their Title from that Place
unto which they moved. The people are called Sion, because they were called
forth to go to Sion. Deliver thy self O Zion. Sion was a place beloved of God,
and all his people, the people were in love Psa^. 87. 2. (...): Lord loves the
gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob.
with Sion with respect to Gods Election, institution, Promise, Blessing. God
had chosen that place for his Seat of special Residence, and did there
exhibit himself to his people by a visible presence. Moreover God had by a
special Institution recorded his name, and set up his ordinances in Sion, and
therefore the Temple was to be built again on that mountain; the Jews were
confined to a certain place, to Sion; Some parts of public worship were so
appropriated to that place, that they were to be performed there, and no where
else: Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14. Take heed to thy self that thou offer not thy burnt
offerings in every place that thou see, but in the place which the Lord shall
choose in one of the Tribes, there thou shall offer thy burnt offerings, and
there thou shall do all that I command thee: The particular offerings are more
distinctly specified in the 11. verse of the same Chapter: Your burnt
offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your
hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the Lord. Finally, God had
promised a blessing to all them who came up to Sion, to worship the Lord in the
Beauty of Holiness: At first there was a general promise given, Exo 20. 24.
In all places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee. But when God had chosen Jerusalem for the Seat of Royalty, the place of
Justice, and Sion as the Mountain of Holiness, and place of public Worship,
then all the Tribes were to go to Jerusalem for Justice, and to Sion to
sacrifice, Psalm. 122. 4, 5. Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord
unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. For
there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the house of David. The poor
people had long been deprived of the benefit of Justice, and the liberty of
Religion; but now God had promised by his Prophet Zechary that their
Commonwealth should be settled, their Church established, their City and Temple
both new builded, Zech. 1. 16, 17. Therefore thus says the Lord, I am returned
to Jerusalem with mercies, my house shall be built in it, says the Lord of
Hoasts: my cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord
shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem. The first Temple was as
glorious as Art and cost could make it: but God who has gold and silver,
heaven and earth at his disposing, had passed his word to them, that he would
shake heaven and earth, sea and land, and fill the latter house with the glory
of the Lord Jesus, who is the desire and glory of all Nationa, Haggai 2. from
the 6. verse to the 9. Yet once it is a little while and I will shake the
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land. And I will shake all
Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House
with glory, says the Lord of Hoasts: the silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
says the Lord of Hoasts: the glory of this latter House shall be greater then
of the former, etc. The Prophet you see had good reason to invite them to new
Jerusalem here below, a kind of heaven upon earth, to Sion the habitation of
Justice, and mount of Holiness, the praise of the Jews, the glory of the
Gentiles, the House of God, and Type of Heaven.

Fourthly, God had now removed all rubs, he had opened the Kings heart and the
prison doors, if they would be active Reason 4.
it was in their own power to deliver themselves, and therefore the Prophet
calls upon them to use their power, and to take that fair opportunity which was
offered for their deliverance, and their glory, Deliver thy self, O Zion: Why
Zion, will thou be a Felo de Se? thy shackles are knocked off, the Po^ts are
open, the Commission is now sealed; come, be not cruel to thy self: what will thou be thine own tormentour, thine own prisoner? Before the seventy years were
expired, thou wast detained in Babylon, thou wast a prisoner there, but now thy
time is out, and therefore if thou stayest longer yet, thou are not a Prisoner,
but a dweller in Babylon. Deliver thy self O Zion, that [dwellest] in Babylon:
There Is the Emphasis and strength of the Prophets exhortation.

The Use of this Point is to stir up the Christian Zion, all true
Protestants, to deliver themselves from Antichristian Babylon, from the
Babylonish army, and the Babylonish Church. The I^wish Zion had a miraculous
deliverance from the Assyrian Babylon; though God be the Lord of Hosts and has
all armies at his command, yet Zion was to be delivered not by might or by the
power of an Army, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, by the Immediate hand
of God, Zech. 4. 6. But I do not find that Christian Zion shall be delivered
upon such easy terms from Antichristian Babylon, do not ^latter your selves
with vain hopes, our deliverance will cost blood. 1. This is clear to any man
that has studied the book of the Revelation, and what upon prayer and study
God has revealed by the clear Texts of the Revelation, I will this day deliver
unto you though I were sure to die S. John's death, or to be banished into S.
John's Island. The God of heaven give us a further Revelation of this Revelation,
that it may be interpreted by the same Spirit by which it was written. S. John*
tells me that the Spirits of Devils shall go forth to the Kings of the earth,
and of the whole world, to gather them to Armageddon, to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty, Rev. 16. 14. 16. Secondly I know it is a great while
yet to that great battle, yet the Spirits will be Scouting out long before.
And sure these Spirits have been at work of late in Ireland, England, and
Scotland too; the Babylonians are active, and must the precious sons of Sion
be merely Passive? No, they must all List themselves under the King of Kings,
whose vesture will be dipped in Antichristian blood: For as S. John shows that
the whore, the beast, the false Prophet, the Kings of the earth, and the Devil
join forces and gather their armies together; So will the Omnipotent Lamb,
whose name is the Word of God, judge in righteousness and make war, Rev. 19.
11. He will overthrow the spiritual Jurisdiction of Antichrist by his Word
and Spirit, by that sharp sword which goes out of his mouth. ver. 15. the
consciences of men In temple D^ se det Antichristur, hoc est, Anselmo
Interpret, in mentibu^ fidelium. Ansel^ in 2 These. cap. 2. In templo Dei, id
est in ecclesia, qu^^ multi de Ecclesia illum recipient, vel secundum August*
quod in templo Dei sedeat, id est, principetur. Aquin. in 2 These. 2. l^ct. 1.
Aug de C^^. D^i lib 20. cap. 19.
shall be so convinced by the powerful preaching of the Gospel, that
Antichrist shall no longer sit as God in the Temple of God, in the *
consciences of men, which are the peculiar Temple of God; and for this reason
the Antichristian faction does so violently oppose all powerful preaching.
But then for the Temporal dominion of Antichrist: Jesus Christ has prepared
a Rod of Iron, which shall break in pieces all his usurped power, and
dominion, like an earthen vessel, because he has his power from earth, and not
by any ordinance from Heaven; Christ will come and overruled him with a Rod of
Iron, and tread the Wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God,
Rev. 19. 15. and in that day of wrath Christ will have an army in the field,
Rev. 19. 19. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their armies
gathered together, to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against
his Army. Behold the Noble Army of the Lord jesus! and observe further, that it
is such an Army as is stirred up to fight from Scripture motives, not from
Politic consideratious, and therefore it is added in the 21. ver. That their
bodies were slain with that sword which proceeded out of the mouth of Christ:
and yet it was a bodily slaughter, for it follows, all the Fowls were filled
with their flesh: and no marvel if these soldiers were encouraged to fight
up-Scripture-motives, if you consider what kind of soldiers they are who do
the deed; Men Chosen and Faithful. For when the Kings of the earth have given
their power to the Beast, these choise-souldiers will be so faithful to the
King of Kings, as to oppose the Beast, though armed with King-like power. So S.
John, These [Kings] have one mind, and shall give their power and strength to
the Beast; These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him
are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful. Rev. 17. 13, 14. You see the faithful
people make no scruple at all of fighting against the Beast, though their
enemies were like enough to say, that by fighting against the Beast, they did
rebel against their own Kings, who had given their power, and strength unto
the Beast. Mark what that Text says, they were called to this service, chosen
and picked out on purpose, and therefore they had not been faithful had they
deserted the Cause, and refused the service. Nay they are encouraged to war by
a promise of victory, and therefore are resolved to fight against De^e aute
illa quae it a coaluerint regna -- cu^ Agus pugnabunt, victoria tamea tande^
penes Agm^m Dominum nostrum futura. Appl^c. Illud dudu^ factu^ est, ^que
etiamnum fit: Hoc etiam aliquat^ factu^, sed multo^ gloriosio^ victorta
quandoque impletu^ ^i speramus. Vti Doctissimus Interpret C^nt (...) Apocal. p.
261.
the Beast, though he come armed with the power and strength of ten Kings, so
S. John. I could now tell you a long story of the King of Spain, and another
of the King of France; but the times call upon me to speak plain and home, and
yet I will not speak Treason neither. To what end should we waste time about a
discourse of Hull, and the Militia? Come speak to the point. If a King of the
Protestant Profession should give his strength and power to his Queen a
Papist, and she give it to the Iefuits, to the Beast, it is neither Rebellion
nor Treason to fight for the King, to recover his power out of the hand of the
Beast; I say, for the King, that the power being regained may be settled upon
the Kings Royal person, and posterity; and then it is to be hoped that the
King and they will take warning and beware how they trust out their power
another time. We are engaged to fight against the Antichristian faction by our
very (...) T^^tu^ ad Martyr.
Baptism: Vocati sumus ad hanc Militiam Dei vivi iam tunc cum in Sacramenti
verba respondimus, as Tertullian to the Martyrs. See a little trea^^se which I
lately put forth of the Rise, etc. of Socinianisine.


But the Socinians and Anabaptists so much complained of, do here cast in a
scruple: We Christians, say they, are called to faith and charity, and
therefore it does not become us to go to war. It is true, Christians are called
to faith, and therefore to desend the faith, they must contend earnestly for
the faith, and be valiant for the truth. The Apostle reckons acts of valor
Jude v. 3^ Jer. 9. 3. Heb. 11. 33, 34.
amongst acts of faith: Through faith they waxed valiant in fight, etc. Much
more is it an act of faith to be valiant in the defense of the faith, an act of
Justice and Religion; so Augustine.

And if you talk of charity, consider that of the Author, Omnes, omnium
charitates Patria complectitur, Cic. off. l. 1. give me leave to say, Christus
complectitur. That is not true charity which will not consist with faith: Be
charitable to thine own soul, and the Church of God: Love thy Country, thy
Religion, and thy Savior better then thy estate, thy life, thy friends: be out
of charity with the Whore and the Quid enim culpatur in bello? an quia
moriuntur quandeque morituri ut dominentur in pace victur^t hoc reprehendere
tim^dorum est, non Religiosoru^ -- Alioquin Johannes cum ad cum baptiz andi
milites ve^irent dicentes, Et nos quid faciemus (...) responderet, Arma
abjicite, Militiam Ista^ de^erite -- sed quia s^iebat eos, cum hac militand^
facerent, non esse Homicidas, sed ministros legis, and non ultores injuriarum
suarum, sed Salutis publicae Defensores, vide August contra Mantch. lib. 22.
cap. 74.
Beast, they are fitter objects of thy hatred, then of thy charity; nay we must
hate the Whore, and burn her flesh; there is no mercy to be shown to this
Whore, she will never be quiet till she is burnt. It concerns the Governors of
Sion, who are as the Angelus vindemiator adbibitis Sanctis, quorum ad hoc
negotium ei praefectura deman data est, betros Bestianos putabit^ absci^detque:
Eaque putatione sua faciet in Armag^dduntem congregari, etc. Consulas velim
eruditi M. Mede Comment. in cap. 1^. Apocal. p. 255. and 265. ubi hac verba
legas: Qua multorum manibus peraguntur, Angelo tamen tanquam ^^i gerenda
Pr^sidi and Duci pre communi l^quendi more tribuuntur.
Angels of the Lord, to thrust in their sickle into the Romish vineyard, and
cut down vine, and grapes, and all, because it is the Vine of earth, it is not
the Vine of heaven, all the Antichristian clusters must be gathered together,
and thrown into thegreat Wine Press of the wrath of God: and when once the
Wine Press comes to be trodden, believe it blood will spring up to the very
Horse-bridles, for the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Revel. 14.
19, 20. This prophecy has reference to that great slaughter which shall be
made, Revel. 19. when the Lord Jesus shall come to tread the Wine Press, verse.
15. You may guess further yet at the greatness of the slaughter, by the
invitation of the fowls of heaven to supper, at the latter end of the day;
Come, gather your selves together unto the supper of the great God, verse 16.
You may read the bill of fare in the 18. verse, Come ye fowls of heaven, Come,
eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men,
and the flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all
men, both free and bond, both small and great. This Prophecy shall not be
fulfilled till the pouring out of the last vial, for this is the last blow it
will prove a bloody and a fatal Day; for the seventh Angel pours out his vial,
and cries the deed is done, it is finished when all the Babylonian troops shall
be gathered to Armageddon. the destruction of troops, as the word imports. The
Beast shall receive many a wound before, but this blow (...) (...) (...) (...).
shall dispatch him, he shall never hold up his head more. Deliver thy self,
then O Zion. Christ is the great Deliverer, but though Christ be Principal, we
must be Isntrumental in this great work of our own deliverance. Deliver [thy
self,] O Zion; and if thou can not be delivered without fighting, fight for
thy deliverance. Considerations.


1. Consider that Rome is Babylon; St. John never speaks one good word of Rome,
quite thorowout the book of the Revelation; he calls it Egypt, or Sodom, or
Babylon, the throne In Apoc. 17. appellatur Anti-Christus, meretrix Magna,
Sander. De Ant. Demonst 13. The Pope is the whore that rides the Beast, yet St.
John does sometimes call this whore the Beast, Rev. 1 ^ verse 11, 12. 1(...).
17. because (...) is the head of the (...), that is, of those people and
Nation, which are as subject to the Pope a^ a poor beast to a mercilesle^^
rider. (...), sid (...), scilicet (...). Non dicit ipsa (...). Be(...) a est,
ut perperam vertit vul^atus interpres, sed ipse, scil. rex. octavus est. Vide
Dounam, de A(...)o lab. 1. cap. 5. sect. 11. p. 57.
of the Beast, the strong-hold of foul-spirits, the habitation of Devils. Rome
was once the Spouse of Christ, but behold, she is not only turned an whore,
but the mother of Harlots, and fornications, the Metropolis of Apostasy, and
mystery of Iniquity, the great whore, Revel. 17. 1. a blasphemous whore in the
third verse, a whore in purple, verse the fourth, an impudent whore, that has
her beastliness written, not only upon her Cell, but upon her Forehead, verse
the fifth, a drunken whore, a bloody whore, in the sixth verse, I saw the woman
drunken with the blood of the Saints, with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.
We need not run to Antiquity to ask their opinion, what whore, and what beast
this is, or where this whore dwells; St. John speaks so plain, that the Vltimum
caput Bestia (impertum Romanura tenentem sine nomine Imperatotus) A(...)istum
esse fa^etur Bellarminus lib. 3. de Pontifice c. 15. Consulantur Viegas in Apo.
17. (...). 3. Ribera in Apot. 14. Numb 27. -- 20. Ambrosius Ansvertus in
Apocalip. lib. 6. Vbi est illa dudum super omma regna exaltata in^lyta Roma,
Babylon secunde? Beatus Rhenanus, Petrarcha, Aventinus, Dantes, Ludovicus Vives
in ab 18. Civ Dei. c. 22. Primasius in cap. 16. Apocalip. Roma est quasi
secunda Babylon, Aug de G^^^. con^. Manich. lib. 2 c. 1. Hieronym. Epist, ad
Eustoch. Paulin. Marcell. Idem in Catal. Script. Eccles in Marco Antichristus j
am pridem natus est Romae, and al^ius extolletur in sede Apostolica, inquit
Ioa(...) Abbas. Mal o de Antichristo p. 182, Bellarm. l. 3. de Romans Pont. cap.
13.
Jesuits themselves are forced to confess that this whore was to domineer at
Rome: It is the City which is built upon seven Hills, which had had so many
governments, five of which Septem urbs alta jugis, toti qua proesidet orbi,
Propert. l. 3 eleg. 10. Tertul. adv. Iudaeos. Idem Centra Marcion. l 3. c. 13.
were fallen before St. John writ this Book, Kings, Consuls, Tribunes,
Decemvirs, Dictatours; one remains still says St. John, namely the government
of Emperors, and the other, that of Popes, was not then come. And that we
might be sure not to mistake, St. John tells us, that it is the great City
which reigned over the Kings of the earth in his time, Revel. 17. 18.

2. Consider who is the General, or the Commander in Chief, of the Babylonian
Army; St. John has set him forth like a God of the world, with Titles enough,
the Serpent, the Dragon, the Angel of the bottomlesse-pit, for it is he, that
gives all the orders and directions to Antichrist: He advises him to lay claim
to a Power which belongs not to him. Irenaeus long since has clearly shown
that the Beast with two horns, and the False Prophet, are but one and the same
Beast: Learned Mr. Mede has shown that the Beast with ten horns, does signify
the Secular Power of ten Kingdoms, who by the impious subtilty of the Dragon,
combine Nam septe^ capitu^ numerus Romani regni insigne est, ut and december
cormium gestamen -- cornibus (quae solius novissimi capitis sunt, imposita
diademata regnu^ illud sub novissimi capitis vice exhiberi ost c^dunt. M. Med.
Co^. Apocal. p. 182. Per Bestiam c 13. Apoc. de terra ascendentem -- omnium
concordi sententia designatur Antichristus, Iodoc. Clict in Dam. l. 4. c 27.
Antichristu^ (...) observavit Cyrillus (...).
together to make a Body, a Romish Commonwealth; the Beast with two Horns is,
as you use to call it, the Ecclesiastical Power. The ten Kings, or Kingdoms,
were to make up but one Beast of burden, for the Whore to ride upon; that is,
they all join together to support the Whore, and therefore these ten Horns are
all placed upon the seventh Head, that is, they strengthen the last government,
the Popish government. Now as the great Dragon did manage the whole business,
whilst that Heathenisme was supported by the power of the Roman Emperors, as
St. John shows in the twelfth Chapter of the Revelation; so does the Dragon
overruled the whole business in the time of the Antichristian Popes, as St.
John shows in the thirteenth Chapter; for the Dragon gave the Beast his Power,
and his Seat, and great Authority, Revel. 13. 3. and they worshipped the
Dragon, who gave power to the Beast, verse the fourth, and therefore the Beast
is said to ascend out of the bottomless* pit, Revel. 17. 8. If you look upon
the Pope as Bishop of Rome, so he came up out of the earth, his Ordination was
not from heaven; but if you look upon him as Pope, as Universal Bishop, and a
Temporal Monarch, a King even of kings, we say he had (...). (...). A Cy^^ll^
tempore ratio ineunda est, uti de Alexandrinis sermo habetur; ut i a tempore
Bon^fa^i: ter^ii, (...), Nu^^us enim Ponti^icum Romanorum universalis Episcopus
salutatus erat a^te Boni^^cium (...).
(...) blacker Institution, he ascended out of the bottomlesse-pit. Take it
thus then, Satan had his Seat in Heathen Rome, but he has his Throne in Popish
Rome; ever since the Roman Court has had the confidence to call it self the
Catholic Church, it has offered more violence, and done more mischief to the
true Church of Christ, then ever was done by the Roman Empire; and therefore
as the 7. trumpets did sound an Alarm against the Roman Empire; so the 7.
vials are all to be poured out upon the Popish Empire, the Antichristian State.

3. Consider that where the Pope and his Agents prevail (...) ^^demque a^ (...)
Pro^tium in part A^emanni^ Po^ ma^^ (...) Mat (...) intelligas (...).
by a Babylonian Army, there they do constantly exercise a Babylonian Tyranny.
When the people were so mad as to prefer Caesar before Christ, God gave them
into the hand of the Roman Emperor, and he tyrannized over them, and God
would not deliver them; just as he threatened beforehand by his Prophet Zechary,
11. 6. I will deliver the men, every one into his neighbors hand, and into the
hand of his King, and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand will I
not deliver them. The Emperor did smite the land indeed, but the Pope of Rome
will tyrannize far worse then the Emperor. If ever God for our sins sell us
into the hand of that Man of sin, he will not only tyrannize over our bodies
and estates, but over our consciences too: If ever he enter England with his
tripple-crown, with his sword in one hand, and his keys in the other, he will
tyrannize like a Pope, he will curtall our Creed, and yet enlarge it: I believe
in the holy Catholic Church, that is, as they interpret it too often, in the
Pope; that must be our only Creed, and we shall find that a large one. We
must In Baptism^ (...) t^ esse and Im^tum ^^^ament^ O^eatenti^ ^^ga Pa^^m (...)
swear obedience to the Popes Commands, they say, that vow of obedience is
implied in their Baptism, and therefore they name the Trinity but for fashion
sake, and do indeed baptize their children in the name of Antichrist. Now if
the Popes Commands are in force, and the Commands of God dispensed with, the
Commands of the Pope will soon justle out the Commands of God. You know the
Pope has by the Capist p 23. B. Papa est quasi D^u^ in terr^, ma^jor homine
and minor De^l, Penitud^nem ^nens Petasta^. Vide qu^ lus^ sat sup^ique
blasphem^ de Paul^ 5. scripsit (...). ^ui^^us ab Al^asar in Apoc. ca^. ad Joan.
Apos^. -- qui nu^ Ve^^ ^^lit p^ Antichristus (...) sit se^vus, ^amen adora^
vult ut Deus. Iren^us li^. 5* c penultimo.
Plenitude of his power struck out the second Commandment, and by the same
authority he may when he please, strike out the first Commandment, and by
consequent all the rest; and then he may make a new Preface, and a new
Decalogue, if that number will content him, he may say as the Credere Dominu^
Deum nostrum Papam* ^onditorem dictae Decretalis -- non sic potuisse (...)
prout statuit Ha^ I^ Gl^ssa (...) Ca^ ^xtr. Joan, ^2 de verborum significat c.
Cum in^^^. Reform^ Glossae exemplar a^spiciis Grego^. editum (...) illam (scil
De^^) Vitio Typographo^um omissa^ resti^^^t. Q^imum ^vit R^ Episcopu^ D^t Diat*
ib de A^, l. 4. c. 10. p. 311.
Extravagant says, that he himself [is the Lord our God,] who desires to bring
us into the land of Egypt, the house of bondage (he should do well to put in
that) where we shall have no other God but the Pope, for he exalts himself
above all that is called God; but we may have as many Images, and Idols as we
please, and so take the Name of our God in vain; we must keep all the Saints
days, and then we shall not be at leisure to keep the Lord's Day; you know the
Popes Agents here in England, about four years ago, did not only dispense with
the people for observing the Lord's Day, but enjoin them to profane it: you
know their Doctrine about Aequivocation, and Fornication; they do too often
count Murder meritorious, a Doctrine which does well become the mouth of that
purple whore, who is drunk with the blood of Saints. St. John has drawn this
Monster to the life; you may guess how the Pope will tyrannize by the very
picture of the Beast, Revel. 13. 2. No one beast has ill qualities enough to
furnish the Pope, and therefore he borrows something from the Leopard, and
something from the Bear, and something from the Lion, besides what he has from
the Dragon; this Antichristian Monarch has all the tyrannizing qualities of
three of those Monarchies which the Prophet Daniel has described; the Leopard
was the type of the Grecian, the Bear of the Persian, the Lion of the
Babylonian Monarchy; it is observable that he has the Mouth of a Lion, a
Babylonian mouth, he will plead for Babylon, he will send forth such Edicts as
Nebuchadnezzar did, they shall be burnt alive who will not worship the Image
which he has set up: You see he has the mouth of a Lion, nay the mouth of a
Dragon, for though he pretends that he is the servant of servants, (and the
curse of Cham indeed is a fit title for him) nay though he say he is Christ's
Vicar, and has two horns like a Lamb, yet he speaks like a Dragon, Revel. 13.
11. What say you then, brethren, shall we run into the paw of this Bear, into
the mouth of this Lion, this Dragon, who is as great a tyrant as the Graecians,
Persians, Babylonians, put them all together? nay he comes in the power of the
Dragon, of the Devil himself, and therefore he will not only tyrann^ze as an
Emperor, but as a Devil. Deliver thy self, O Sion, from the Babylonian Army,
that thou may never groan under the iron yoke of Babylonian tyranny.

4. Consider that the men of Europe are most given to admire the Babylonian
Beast, and to submit unto him; All the world, says St. John, wondered after the
Beast, Revel. 13. 3. this was the Europaean world; take heed ye men of Europe,
do not wonder after the Beast, for fear you worship him, for so it follows in
the very next verse; first they wondered, and then they worshipped: be not
terrified with the strength and provisions of the Babylonian Army; if any man
be stricken with fear and admiration both at once, and cry out with those
admirers, and worshippers of the Beast, Revel. 13. 4. Who is like unto the
Beast, who is able to make war with him? let him take these following
Encouragements, and then he shall see, that there is one that is able to make
war with the Beast.

1. My first way of Encouragement is to remove your discouragements,
Encouragements.
and to affright you out of all your fears; you are afraid of the threats and
rage of the Babylonian Party. I will fright you more, Christ does out-threaten
Antichrist, therefore if you will be affrighted, fear Christ most, the wrath
of God, and the effects of his wrath, his punishments, are far more terrible
then any that can be inflicted by the Babylonian Army: read the fourteenth
Chapter of the Revelation, the ninth and following verses: If any man worship
the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his
[hand,] observe that, though by his forehead he may seem a Neuter, yet if he
have the Mark in his hand, and work closely under-board for Antichrist, that
man shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and ^e shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they
have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beaest, and his image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name. What think you now? have not they who
comply with Antichrist, greater discouragements then they that oppose him? had
not a man better adventure up to the very mouth of a Cannon, then be tormented
with the fire of He^^, or the wrath of God? Let the fear of God preserve thee
from all false fears. Timor Dei efficit ut caetera non timeantur. Fear not them
that kill the body, but fear him who can cast thy soul and body into Hell, yea
fear him. Do thou not believe a Resurrection? why then do thou fear them
that kill the body? show me an army that can keep my body from rising, or my
soul from ascending, and I will be afraid of them.

My second Encouragement is taken from Gods dealing with Babylon of old. I
shall not tell you any long stories out 2. Encourag.
of Xenophon, Herodotus, or the rest, about the taking of Babylon, but content
my self with what I find in Scripture.

1. God did dry up Euphrates, a river so deep and swift, that the Babylonians
laughed at all the attempts of any enemy that should go about to take their
City, and yet Babylon was soon taken, when God did but say to the deep, Be dry,
Isai. 44. 27. God did plead the cause of Sion, and dry up the sea of Babylon,
and all the springs. Ierem. 51. 36. And will not God plead the cause of his
Evangelicall Sion? will he not dry up the Euphrates, the Sea of Rome, and all
her springs? Yes surely, God does intend to dry up the Romish Euphrates, Revel.
16. 12. The River is not now so deep, it does not overflow the banks so far as
it has done of late days; we have gained much ground from the Romish-sea. Let
us look to our Banks, and keep what we have gained.

2. God did give up the Babylonians to luxury, drunkenness, security; I will
make them drunken that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
awake, says the Lord, Jerem. (...). 39. The people of Babylon were drunk, and
asleep, and left the gates open, Isai. 45. 1.

3. God did break through all their Fortifications, and make all those gates,
and bars which were fast, fly open, to make way for Cyrus, Isai. 45. 2.

4. God did discover all the hid treasure, and secret wealth of Babylon, Isai.
45. 3.

Finally, God did speak terror to the hearts of the Babylonians, their hands
did faint, their hearts did melt, their faces were like a pale trembling flame,
which rises now, and anon it falls, and at last goes away in a smoke; so I
understand that place, Isai. 13. 8. Their faces shall be as the faces of the
flames.

It is certain, that God loves his Evangelicall Sion as well as he loved the
Jewish Sion, and he hates the Romish Babylon more then ever he hated the
Assyrian Babylon: let us then depend upon the love and power of God, the
promises of the Gospel, the wisdom and fidelity of Christ, for the destruction
of Romish Babylon. The time will not permit me to speak distinctly of those
several Heads: Yet take a third Encouragement.

3. All the People of God are called upon to deal with 3. Encourag.
this Romish Babylon as she has dealt with them. Reward her, eve^ as she
rewarded you; nay higher yet, double unto her double, according to her works:
in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double, Revel. ^8. 6. Babylon was
wont to cast out Sion, let Sion now cast out Babylon; the base sons of
Babylon banished some precious sons of Sion as far as America, and when
they had done, they scoffed at them as if they were Barbarians, because
banished into a rude Barbarous Country, they might better have said as Salvian
did of old, Barbaros istos fecit nostra barbaries. Come then, let us deal as
justly with the Babylonians as they have dealt cruelly with us, let Papists
have as little encouragement to stay in England, as strict Protestants have
had; let those men of iron entrails, and brazen bowels, who are Spaniardized
and Italianated, I mean Jesuited, go live in Spain or Italy, such Monsters
are not fit for our Climate. You are Physicians to the State, and these are
Purging times, let all Malignant Humors be purged out of the Ecclesiastical,
and Politic Body. O let the Excrements be expelled, the vital, and integrall
preserved in health and strength. But if there be any who out of simplicity
have wondered after the Beast, and are now probably reduced and credibly
penitent, such may be spared in hope: yet it will not be amiss to give them a
little Physique to prevent a Relapse.

4. Christ is stronger then Antichrist; Oh let us depend upon his love to his
Brethren, his Members, his Church, his 4. Encourag.
Spouse. God will in due time make his enemies know that his Church has an
husband which will maintain her cause, and avenge her quarrel. The effectual
power, and watchful providence of Jesus Christ, is constantly employed for his
Churches good; the seven Horns of the Lamb are stronger then the ten horns of
the Beast. S. John does describe Christ by the Similitude of a Lamb with seven
horns and seven eyes, to note his power, and providence, Rev,. 5. 6. Though
the Beast has ten horns, yet he wants these seven eyes, these seven spirits.
Now the Lamb with seven eyes will discover all the plots, and projects of the
enemy, all the Arcana Belli, and Arcana Imperii too. What though the Dragon
assist the Beast, be of good comfort, Christ has overcome the Devil, he has
broke the Serpents Head, and that is the reason that the Politicians wits are
so often cracked, and that they delude themselves with such feverish conceits,
and brainsick inventions. The strength of a City was usually in the gates, and
there they commonly sat in Council, but Christ has promised that Hell gates,
that is, the Power and Policy of Hell, shall never prevail against his beloved
Church. Christ has this same crackt-braine Serpent in a chain, he can rebuke
him, or trample on him. The three troublers of Sion, the Beast, the false
Prophet, and the Devil, shall be all three tormented together in Hell for ever
and ever. Rev. 20. 10. And at the battle of the great day of God Almighty the
Beast and the false Prophet shall be both taken, and thrown alive into the lake
which burns with fire, and brimstone, Rev. 19. 20. So let all thine enemies,
all thy implacable and incorrigible enemies perish O Lord. I shall close up
this point with the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, Put your selves in array
against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the bow shoot at her, spare no
arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord -- take vengeance upon her, as
she has done do unto her, Ier. 50. 14, 15.

Hitherto we have considered the Babylonians as gathered into an Army, and I
have shown what encouragements we have to fight against them. I must now look
upon them as gathered into a Church, and show you what reason we have to
separate from them; this point is very pertinent to the Text, and times and
therefore give me leave to insist upon it. Flee from the Land of the North,
says the Lord in the verse before my Text, Babylon stood North from Jerusalem,
and therefore Flee from the Land of the North is as much as if he had said,
Flee from Babylon, deliver thy self O Zion that dwell in Babylon, dwell
there no longer, but deliver thy self by a Separation. The Prophet Jeremy will
make Ierem. 51. 6. 11.
the Call full and complete. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soul, be not cut off in her iniquity, for this is the time of
the Lords vengeance. ver. 6. yea the vengeance of his temple. ver. 11. Now that
we have the same Call from Heaven to depart from Romish Babylon, is most
evident, Rev. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, (...)
Arist. Topic.
Come out of her my people: and that for these two reasons, they are both
specified in the Text, the 1t. is, That ye be not partakers of their sins,
the 2d. That ye receive not of her plagues.

1. Be not Partakers of her sins, especially those sins Sententia D.
Davenant. de Pace procuranda inter Evangel p. 8. En grande and horrendum
obstaculum quo Ecclesiae Reformatae non absque summo animi dolor and ^orrore
coguntur extra Ecclesiae Romana commumonem manner.
which corrupt the worship of God, or faith of Christians, do not join with
her in that Grand sin, for which S. John calls her Whore so often, the sin
of Idolatry; it is such an unreasonable sin, that a sober and rational man
would be ashamed to be overtaken with, as the Prophet Jeremy observes, Cap. 51.
7. Babylon is a golden Cup in the Lords hand, it has made all the earth
Drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the Nations are Mad:
drunken and mad, or else they would never commit Idolatry. S. John in like
manner points at the Romish Harlot, the great Whore of Babylon, and bids us
observe the golden Cup in her hand full of En stigma Catholicae (...).
abominations and filthiness, in the 17. Chapter of the Revel. ver. 4. and
those that drink of this amorous Cup, full of enchantments, are bewitched and
drunk, or else they would never worship the Beast, and the Devil, as it is
plain they Principale crimen generis humani, summus saeculi reatus,
Idolololat^ia. Tertull de Idol.
do, Rev. 13. 4. I hope I need not spend time in dissuading any here present,
from worshipping the Devil and the Beast.

2. Another sin there is with which the Great whore does usually poison her
daughters, and her lovers, it is Heresy, Vide D. D^wnam de Antichrist lib. 3 c.
7. Catalogus error. de Principiis, nec non partibus Theologiae. Haeresis illa
magni momenti -- de l^stificatione and salute ex Meritis operum speranda --
justo Dei judicio in Ecclesiam admissa: ne n^mir^m qui Dei longanimutatem
Testiumque praedicationem tamdiu, tamque pertinac^ter co ^empserant --
postmodum acciperent de fructu A^ber^^ vitae etc. Com Ap^c. p 258. Vide bullam
Pai quarti super farma lura^. euti professionis fidei. Ego N. firma fide credo
-- omnia and singula quae continent ^rin Symb^lo fide^, quo sancta Romana
Ecclesia utitur, viz. Credo in unu^ D^u^ Patre^n: and deinde sequuntur 12
articuli novi Symboli. Articulus duo. lecimus sic se habet. Caetera item omnia
a S S T^^^ Synodo definita recipio, da^. nata rejicio. Vide Staepl. Relect.
cont 4. q. ^^ a ^3.
a kind of Catholic Heresy, all the Heretics almost that ever were, have
emptied their back ditches into the Sea of Rome, that receives all the filth of
former ages; but of all their Heresies, there is none more dangerous then that
of expecting Justification, and salvation, for the merit of their own works.
Learned Mr Mede observes, that Rome had played the whore a great while before
God gave her up to believe this lie. But now, says he, by the just judgment of
God, she has received that Recompense of her error which was meet: God for
herpertinacious contempt of the preaching of the witnesses, has by giving her
up to this Heresy, as it were turned her out of Paradise (that is his meaning)
lest she should eat of the tree of life and live for ever. The Papists repeat
the Apostles Creed, but they do not believe it in the Apostles meaning. Now it
is evident that a new sense does make a new Creed. But they are not so modest
as to content themselves with this grand corruption, though weak delusion, for
they have added new Articles of faith to our old Creed, they have composed a
Trent-Creed, and they will not admit any man into their Communion, who believes
the Apostles Creed, unless he will believe this Trent-Creed. Consider that the
private fancies of a domineering Faction were Canonized with a Curse, in the
Conventicle of Trent, and inserted into the Creed by Pope Pius the fourth. And
Stapleton tells us plainly, that the Trent Council had power to make a
Proposition an Article of faith, Etiamsi non confirmetur ne probabili
testimonio Scripturarum. I need not then say any more in this weighty point.
For the truth is, our Creed is the Creed of Sion, and theirs the Creed of
Babylon, their Creed is Roman, and ours Catholic. The greatest Article in
their (...).
account, which they add to the Creed, concerns the Supremacy of the Pope,
Subesse Romano Pontifici est de necessitate salutis; we must build our faith
upon the Popes Infallibility, and believe that he is the Foundation* the Head,
and Husband of the Catholic Church; we know not how to pardon this blasphemy,
or to hold this Head, unless we depose Christ, and set up Antichrist, who if
he had nothing else to hinder him, but the frailty and corruption of his
nature, all the world knows that he cannot sustain, quicken, save the Church,
and therefore is not the Foundation, Head, or Husband of the Catholic Church,
but the Head of the Malignant Church, the Whore that rides the Beast, the great
Antichrist, Romes God, and the Devils Vicar. Nay the Pope has proceeded
higher yet, he has given us a new Bible too, nay the Popes have given us more
then one, we must take one from Sixtus, and another from Clement, two Bibles
which do not agree with the Original, or with one another; the Papists are
puzzled which of these translations should be received: whether they should
adventure to be cursed by Sixtus, if they receive Clement's translation, or to
be cursed by Clement, for receiving Sixtus his translation. I am not at leisure
to say any thing of the Rhemish translation, or their Notes: I could give you
many other reasons why you should separate from Rome, but these may suffice, if
you will not Apostatise, Omnes Ecclesi^ Evangelic^ (...) cum (...) idol^^
f^^di^ ^o^ Secundarii capit^^ sive Fu^^^menti (...) a^ talp^^ and
^^spertiliones a^^^ceru^^ Dave* ^an^^^s ubi ^up^a ^ap^ quar^o d^ Fun^ame^to
M^ste^ial^ p. 65.
and commit folly with her, you cannot possibly communicate with her, unless
you will build upon a new Foundation, the Popes Infallibility, or the Jesuits
Prudentiall Motives; in a word, you cannot be admitted into the Roman
Communion* unless you will have a new Bible, a new Creed, a new Religion, a
new Head of the Church, that is in plain English* unless you will pull down
Christ, and set up Antichrist in the Throne of Jesus Christ: and if you yield
to that, all the plagues in this brook will light upon you; I need say no more
of the 2d. reason. But stay, if we should separate from the Antichristian
faction, here in England, we may be guilty of a grievous Schism, for our
separation will be grounded, as they say, upon the judgment, or rather
opinion of a few English Divines in a kind of National Assembly, and our
Antichristian men challenge all the world to give one Precedent for such a
separation. I do this day accept their challenge, and shall answer them in a
word. The And this is said to have amounted into a formal Separation from the
Church of Rome, and to have continued somewhat more then an hundred years.
Archbishop of C^^^. ^elat. p. 172. The church of A^ck made this separation in a
National Council of their own. Ibid. p. 174.
African Church made a direct separation from the Church of Rome for an hundred
years at least, and their separation was grounded upon no other Judgment then
the Judgment of a National Assembly in Africa, and occasioned merely by the
usurping pride, and tyranny of the Pope. It is evident that all the Martyrs,
which did suffer in the time of that bitter persecution under the Vandals* died
in the time of this Separation. If we have more weighty reasons then any that
are drawn from the Popes tyranny, we shall be no greater Separatist's then
those glorious Martyrs, and those famous Fathers, Augustine, and Fulgentius,
for they were Formal Separatists. Baronius was the first man that ever had the
face without forehead, or reason, to call this truth into question; Binius
follows him; Bellarmine saw that he must question; the most faithful, and
famous editions of the Counsels, if he denied a truth written with a
Sunne-beame, and therefore he had so much wit as to cry, Nihil affirmo, in his
2d book de Romano Pontifice, and 25. Chap. It seems the great Cardinal was put
to his wits end, when he had beat his brains and turned his books, he durst
not deny it, and yet would not affirm it. The Archbishop of Canterbury, though
no great friend to the^ who separate from Romish corruptions, is so ingenuous
as to subscribe to the convincing testimony The edition Anno 1524. by Isidore:
an old ^it^on printed, 1530. P. Crabbe his edition imprinted Anno 1538. the
edition of Valentinus Iove^iu^ 1555* of Suriu^ 1567. of Nicolinu^ 1585. B^ R.
Pont. ^b 2 cap. 25.
of so many unquestionable editions of the Counsels, you may read from p. 172.
of his Relation, to the 175. And it is well known how often Tota fe^e Germa^ab
is ante nostra^ ^tatem a sede Roman^ d^scessionem fecit Semel (...) divortium
facere cum ^xo^ c^gerent^r Presbyteri ^terum cum Gregorius septimus Hen* quanto
Imperatori infestus Germanos f^lminando vellet ab ipso divelle^e. Omittam
recentior^ Exempla, qu^ per se expendant sani Lect^res Vide Tractatum de vera
Pacificatio^^s and Ecclesi^ reformand^ ratione ab exim^o Theologo ante annos
80. editum. Number po^^^nte simili occasion recusum ope^a D. Riveti. Vide
Animadvers. Rive^^ in Annot. H. G. c. 15. p. 65.
Germany has made a Formal separation from the Antichristian faction.

But it will be further objected, That the Assembly which you intend to call,
is no Convocation, and therefore it cannot be of so much Authority as a
National Assembly.

To which I answer, That the Persons whom you have nominated, I except but one
[my self,] are more learned and judicious, more pious, nay more peaceable, take
so many for so many, then the members of the last Convocation.

Secondly, You have found by wosull experience, what it Hieronym, C^m meant in
Soph^^^ Au^eret Dominus nominae vanae gloria and admirati^n^ ^al^, quae
versantur in Ecclesia -- sed and nomina sacerdotum cum sacerdotibus qui ^^^stra
sibi applaudunt in Episcopali nomine and in Presbyter^i dignitate, and non in
opere Ed^^. Basil. 1537 p. 251.
is to rely upon such as are the Standing Members of a Convocation, or such as
are chosen after the ordinary manner, by persons as corrupt as themselves. St.
Hierom has a kind of prophecy in his Commentary upon Zephaniah; That in the
days of Reformation, idle Bishops should be removed, for God will take away
all Names of vain glory out of the Church, the names of Priests, nay the
Priests themselves, who did vainly boast of the Episcopal Title, and dignity
of Priesthood, but did nothing worthy of that Title or Dignity.

Thirdly, In these winnowing-times, when the chafe is in some measure
separated from the wheat, the secrets of many hearts are discovered, and those
that are approved are made Hoseah 4. 15. vide Hieronymum in locum. Non deb^^
sororis quonda^ tua in fornicatione exempla sectari, and cum ea idola ^^lere --
and ne as^en^as in Bethaven -- quia post* quam auret ibi vituli positi sunt --
non domus Dei appellatur, sed domus Idoli -- tanquam vacca lascivteus ast^o
percita insanivit Israel fornicationis spiritu percussus.
manifest, the State has good reason to approve those whom God himself has
approved, by making their fidelity manifest in this Day of trial, these
distinguishing times: but the State has no reason to trust them to Reform the
Church, who have indeed corrupted the Church.

Fourthly, It cannot be denied, but that a Church may reform it self, per
parts, if the whole will not join; Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah offend: if they will not amend with us, what reason have we to perish
with them?

Fifthly, If a State should make choice of men of mean parts, and ordinary
gifts to reform the Church, merely because they have been found faithful, must
these men be contemned for their weakness, when they preach none but Catholic
Doctrine, and press men to submit to Primitive Discipline? Vide Theodoret.
Eccles. Hist lib. 4. (...), etc. Haeretitorum omnium semper intentio fuit,
captare gloriam de singularitate Scientia. Bernard, in Cant. Ser. 65. Vitis
plebecula quicquid non intelligit plus miratu^. Hieron. Epist ad Nepot.
No sure, they should rather be respected and encouraged for their
faithfulness. Sure I am, there is a kind of Majesty in Truth, and somewhat
more then Majesty, to wit Dignitatus Scriptura est ipsa divinita^^ n^m sive
Auctorem, sive Argumentum, sive Interpretem (Spiritum Sanctum) spectes, omnia
divina sunt, and spirat^ divinitatem* vide Mendos. Praefat. in Com. in lib.
Regum.
Divinity, in Scripture-truths, and therefore such Truths need not borrow any
thing from the speaker, for the single Vote of one that is Orthodox, is to be
more respected then the Votes of many hundred learned Heretics.

In the 6th. place, give me leave to use their own Argument, which they
commonly urge against the Council of Trent: they say, That Council was of no
Authority, because it did consist of men that were professed enemies to all
that called for Reformation or a free Council. This reason is alleged, and
magnified by the Sea the Archbishop of Cant. his relation of the Conference.
sect. 27. p. 214.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and I believe it will conclude as roundly against a
Convocation, rebus sic stantibus, as it does against the Council of Trent: I
hope, says the Archbishop, an Assembly of enemies are no lawful Council, and
the Decrees of such an Assembly are Omni jure nulla; give me leave to add,
like the Decrees of the last Convocation.

Their last exception against the Assembly is, because you have named some men
that are Schismatikes; their reason is, because they deny subjection to their
Bishop or Metropolitan.

They shall receive an answer to this objection from Antonius de Dominis, a man
Prelaticall enough. It is not Schismatic, says he, to deny Jurisdictionall
subjection to a Bishop, Si autem ser^ata u^tate and charitate negetur alicui
Episcopo, vel Metropolitano, vel Primati etc. obedientia s^la, solaque
Iurisdictionalis subjectio, non esse vere ac propri^ Schisma, quando cum sola
persona Pr^l^ti dissensiones and simultates exerceantur. M. Ant. de Dom Rep
Ecclesiast. lib. 7. (...). 10. sect. 74. Se^ Dr. ^erne. Secundum Honorum
vocabula, etc. August. Epist. 19. Audi and aliud testimonium in quo
manifestis^ime comprobatur ^und^m esse Episcopum atque Presbyterum. Hieron.
Epist. ad Evagrium. Vide Era^mi Annotat. Excellenter tamen Canones duos tantum
sacros ordines appellari censent, Diaconatus s^il and Presbyteratus, qui^ hos
sol os Primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis pr^ceptum Apostoli
habemus. P. L^^b* lib 4. did. 24. And when the Master of the Sentences comes
to speak of the Quadripertite Order ^e passes this censure. Horum autem
discretio a Gentilibus introducta videtur, quod suos Flamines alios simpliciter
Flamines, alics Archi^^amines, alios Prothos^amines appellabant. Archiepiscopos
and Episcopos Flam^ and Archi* ^^ami^ loco in Anglia institutos ^^isse a Fagano
and Derviano a Papa El^utherio in Britanniam miss^^ (...) probat D. ^sserius
vir di^^usi^^im^ eruditioni^ de Britan. Eccl. Primord. c. 5.
or Archbishop, by reason of some Personal exceptions against him, because
such a man may embrace Communion with the Church, and yet separate from the
Bishop, or Archbishop without breach of charity, if his exceptions against him
be just, and necessary. But they will, I know, reply, That some men whom you
have chosen, do not only except against the Person, but the Office of a
Prelate. To which I answer, that they themselves do now confess, that Monarchy
is not Jure Divino, because they see it is clearly proved, that Episcopacy is
but Iure Humano; for they are resolved, that Episcopacy shall be at least as
high as Monarchy. They acknowledge that there is sufficiency of power to govern
in a State, where there is no Monarch; and why then by the same reason, is
there not sufficiency of power to govern in a Church where there is no Bishop,
I mean Prelate? They must not be angry, if we lay Episco^acy as low as they
themselves have laid Monarchy. Besides, ^d and ^d Bishop ^^w^ll proves at large
that Prelates are not Iure Divino, in h^s defense of the Apology of the Church,
^art 2. p 99 10^, 101.
I would advise them to take heed how they call every man a Schismatike who
denies Prelacy to be Iure Divino, lest by that censure they condemn their
betters. Our Conclusion then stands firm, You may deliver your selves from the
Antichristian faction in this Kingdom, by a just and necessary separation.

Be pleased to observe what I say, We have just and necessary cause of
separation from the Antichristian faction in In front per professione; (...)
manum, per operationem. August de Civ. Dei. lib. 20 c. 9. Inter septem
Sacramenta tria sunt in quorum p^re (...)tione Character Antichristi^ mi^ur --
I^ Baptismo q^^dem ^cculte Character impr^r^itur, in q^o tacitum esse dicu^t
and implicitum ^^ramentum obediontiae ^^^a Pap^ -- An ideo baptizan. tur
^omines in Christum ut serviant Antichristo (...) Down d^ Antich l. (...) p ^42.
this Kingdom; under which Notion, many will be comprehended who call
themselves Protestants; for admit these men are not of the Popish Religion, it
is enough that they are of the Popish faction; they have received the mark of
the Beast, if they have not received it in their forehead, yet they have
received it in their brain, and in their hand too, for the grand Delinquents do
plot for Antichrist, and fight for Antichrist, and that is more then enough. The
Papists have Covenan^ed to protect these Capital Delinquents, (in despite of
the highest Court of Justice in the Kingdom) and they again in requital, must
maintain the Catholic Cause, and promote the Antichristian Design, and
therefore these men are of, or belonging to the Antichristian faction. I doubt
not but that there is many a man in Italy, nay at Rome, who is not a Papist in
his heart, the folly, and villainy of the Priests being so notorious as it is,
and yet for some Temporal advantages, they receive the mark of the Beast,
because no man is permitted to buy or sell (no nor to keep what he has bought)
save he that has the Mark, or the Name of the Beast, or the Concerning the
number 25. which is the root of (...). the number of the Beast; Set Mr. Francis
P^t^ers Interpretation; as also of the opposition between ^2. and 2^. Christ
had 12. Apostles, Antichrist ^5. Cardinals. In England there were at first 25.
Bishops, and 3* Archbishop^ as lear^ed Dr. Usher shows Antiqu. Brit. c. 5.
There were 25. Abbots in England who ^ad voices in Parliament, as Mr. C^den;
and Mr. F. Potter Interpretat. c. 24. p. 167.
number of his Name; as St. John has it, Revel. 13. 17. And you know how it is
now in England at this very day: Let us not then Complement any longer; to
separate from them with whom we are forbid to communicate, is not Faction, but
Religion. I would not be mistaken, I do not go about to seduce you to
Brownisme, I am far enough from that, for I willingly embrace communion with
all Reformed Churches, or Congregations; but you know we must not communicate
with any Church, or Congregation in their present error, though that
Congregation be willing to be reformed, and have all things in it which are
simply necessary to salvation; much less may we communicate with the
Antichristian Faction, or with any company of men who do stubbornly maintain
their errors, and reject communion with all men who will not communicate with
them, even in their known and palpable errors.

Object. But such a separation as this would be exceeding scandalous. To which
I answer in the words of Bernard, Cum carpuntur vitia, and inde scand^lum
oritur, ipse sibi scandali causa est qui fecit quod argui debet, non ille qui
argu^t, Hernard Ep. 78.
That the Delinquents indeed are scandalous, and the cause of all the scandal
which arises upon the public reproof of their scandalous sins. I shall close
up this point with a word of Caution: Proceed you may to a Separation, but
proceed you must not to a peremptory damnation of all that do yet linger in
Babylon; for some may remain there out of the simplicity of their hearts, and
they that for the present are enemies, as concerning the Gospel, may be beloved
as touching the Election, Romans 11* 28. In the sixth of Zechary, and the 6th. I
read of some black Horses sent into the North-countrey, that is, against
Babylon, but there went out some white Horses after them, to show that God had
still a remnant in Babylon; and these white Horses, these good Angels, were
sent with a message of peace, to invite them to repentance, and bring them home
to Sion; and what by the service of the Vide Tarnovium in locum.
black Horses, and the ministry of the white, the spirit of the Lord was
quieted in the North-countrey, ver. 8. nay in the 14. verse crowns were
prepared for some that were yet in Babylon; Let us then suspend our censures of
this or that man's final estate, though if we consider his present estate, we
have no reason at all to communicate with him, but all the reason in the world
to separate from him.

3. Deliver your selves from Babylon by a through Reformation: Do not wonder
that I talk of a Reformation after separation, for you must separate before you
can reform: there is an untoward generation, which will never be reformed;
take St. Peter's counsel, Acts 2. 40. Save your selves from that untoward
generation, and then reform; and consider withal, that you are like to find
a great many men that will be forward enough to separate, and yet unwilling to
reform. Do you think there are no Statesmen, who love the Mount of Moriah,
better then Mount Sion? they would prefer the State, but no matter for the
Church, they care not if it sink and perish; I could wish that these Secular
men, just of Gallio's temper, would consider that when the Jews thought they
might preserve their State, if they did curry favor with the Romans, and
reject Christ, God made them slaves to the Romans for rejecting of Christ.
(...) need not apply. In the 11th. Chap. of our Prophet Zechary, we read of two
staves, the staff of Beauty, and the staff of Bands, When the people broke
Covenant with God, by disobeying the Ordinances of God, and rejecting Christ,
then God cut his staff of Beauty asunder, and broke that Church Covenant, the
external Covenant which he had made with T^ not the Covenant of Grace, but a
covenant which concerned the Administration of the (...) mea^^ of Grace.
that people, ver. the tenth, he did unchurch them, deprive them of his
Ordinances, which are the strength, the beauty, the glory of a Nation, and
therefore are called the staff of Beauty. Observe a little farther, that when
the staff of Beauty was broken, it was not long ere the staff of Bands was
cut asunder: Then I cut asunder my other staff, even Bands, ver. 14. Then,
When? Why, when they undervalued the Lord Jesus, they thought him worth but 30.
pieces, a goodly price; read the 12. and 13. verses: Then I cut asunder my
other staff, I broke the brotherhood between Judah and Israel: they were, in a
word, deprived of Gods Ordinances, and given up to Civill-wars* the ninth verse
of that Chapter does sufficiently express their misery. Then said I, I will
not feed you, that that dies, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let
it be cut off: and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another. If that be
not full enough, read the sixth verse. I will no more pity the inhabitants of
the land, says the Lord: but lo, I will deliver the men every one into his
neighbors hand, and into the hand of his King, and they shall smite the land,
and out of their hand I will not deliver them. A sad Text. Learn from hence:
That when a people are Un-churched, they are undone; if you desire to preserve
the State, be sure to preserve the Church, and if you desire to preserve the
Church, O then reform it, and do it suddenly too, for fear the disease grow too
strong for Remedies. Believe it, that part of England, which adheres to the
Babylonish faction, and will not be reformed, that part must be deserted; there
is good ground for it, Jerem. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is
not healed; forsake her; that is plain-English.

But what needs a Reformation? (say some) were not our Petrus de Alliaco Card.
Camerac. Libellum obt^dit in Council. Constant. de Reformatione Ecelesiae contra
opinionem eorum qui putatunt Concilia Generalia minus necessaria esse, quia
omnia been a Patribus nostris ordinata sunt. Fascic. Rerum Expet. p. 28.
Fathers wise and honest men? what need we be more wise, or pure then they
were? they lived happily here on earth, in peace and plenty, and they do now
triumph gloriously in heaven, what can be desired more?

1. I answer, Many of our Fathers were honest, and some of them very wise in
their generations, considering their light, and their means; we enjoy their
labors, the fruits of their wisdoms, and God be praised, a more glorious
light, and therefore no marvel, if we see some things more clearly then our
Fathers did.

2. Again, our Fathers saw many things amiss, which they were not able to
reform.

3. Had our Fathers enjoyed the same happy light which shines round about us,
and those fair opportunities which God has let fall from heaven into our lap,
there is no question but they would have reformed more in one year, then we
have done in two.

Parsons observes, that the Parliament of England, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, rejected the Catholic Doctrine, Popish Doctrins he means, but
says he, they retained something of the Catholic use in the whole government
of their Church; and therefore Mr. Cartwright found fault with them, and showed
them what was yet farther to be reformed: but Scotland, says Parsons, Holland,
Zeland, and some parts of France, followed Mr Cartwrights way; but Bishop
Bancroft was the principal opposer of this faction, he means Reformation in
England, You see Mr Cartwright did what he could, but Bishop Bancroft and the
Babylonian faction were too potent, and contrary to the judgment of Sion, of
the Reformed Churches abroad, Bancroft prevailed, for he suggested that this
discipline of Sion would not only overthrow the Babylonish Monarchy, but the
English Monarchy also. But it should have been considered, and let it be
considered now,

1 That the government of the Church is not Optato Scriptors Africano qu^iam
Episcopi di^ (...): sed qui jam aet^te Augustini ad^ovendam ambitione^ suam vel
altenam, e^m ^ppellationem quidam tra^e^ant -- ^n Conc^lio Ca^thag^ensi, ^llo
quo typhus titulo^^ est coercitus, etta^ iste Princeps Sa^erdotum damnatur. Et
^aron^o quidem in (...) historia factum displicet sed viris sanctis^im^ ratio
facti constitit: Et quae sunt dei^eps ^uta, quaeque ^e ^^dem^^, Deum ^lio
prae^ui^se, and illos Patr^s ^^iritu f^isse act^s prophetico* manife^^i^^ime
argu^^t, etc. Isaac. Casaub. Exercit. 15.
Monarchical, no Monarch save Christ alone is Head and King of the Church,
though every Monarch that is truly Christian be a King in the Church; For it is
one thing to be a King in the Church, and another to be King over the Church.

2. Every King as a member of the Church, is in an Ecclesiastical sense
subject to the discipline of the Church; for such a kind of subjection will
well consist with his Civil Sovereignty, because it is not a Civil
Subjection. Judicious Neque tamen ista inter se pugnant, ide^ ut imperet
Collegio Ecclesiastico and pareat idem: imperat enim qu^admodum medico imperat
Rex, paret ut paret medico. Nam si medicum facientem officium morte m^lct et,
nonfaci^t quod decet sap. entem Principem, sed quod faciunt furiosi and in^ani
-- Rex enim cum Sen^tui Ecclesiasti^o paret non par^t t^i ^bedientia Civili qua
Collegium respiciat, sed obedientia Religiosa quae Deum re^t. ^amero Pralect*
de ecclesia, T^mo primo; Eclit. quart. page 25.
Camero was a man very tender of pitching upon any conclusion which might be
prejudicial unto Kingly power, and he uses an excellent similitude to
illustrate this point: As it is in the cure of the body, so is it in the cure
of the Soul; now a King for the Cure of his body, must patiently yield
himself to his College of Physicians, for though he rule over them as a King,
yet he must be ruled by them as a patient. In like manner a wise King will (and
every King ought to) be persuaded by the College Ecclesiastical in point of
discipline to obey the Rules and orders of Jesus Christ; for the King in this
point does not obey the College, but Christ himself.

3. It is well known that Kings and Emperors have been subjected to
Episcopal, and too often enslaved by Prelaticall power. Who knows not that
the Bishop of Millaine Fatetur Bellarminus Antichristum fore ultimum qu^
tenebit Romanum Imperium sine nomine Romani Imperat. Bellarm. de miraculis
Antichristi, c. 15.
would not admit the Emperor to the Communion till he had repented of that
outrage, and bloodshed at Thessalonica, which was occasioned by the Emperors
passionate Command? It is generally confessed, that Ambrose did well in
rejecting the Emperor from the Communion, and that the Emperor was no less
an Emperor, and a far better Ioannes Constantinopolitanus fuit pracursor
Anti-christi, Bonifacius ipsus erat Anti-christus. Down. de Antichristo. l. 2.
c 8 sect. 2 p. 130.
man by submitting to a Minister of the Gospel, preaching, and administering
some part of the discipline of Jesus Christ. All the world knows that Babylon
grew great at first by claiming an universal Jurisdiction in Spiritualls over
the whole Church of God, by virtue of that usurped, and Antichristian title of
Ego autem fidenter dico quod quisqui^se Vniversale^ Sacerdotem vocat, vel
vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum procurrit Greg. Ep l. 6.
Indictione 15 cap. 194. Epist 30. p ^^8 Edit Parrhis. in aedibus Ioann^ Parvi
L'an. de grace mil cinq ce^s and dixbuit. Processu temporis Episcopus Constant*
universalis Patriarcha, Romanus universalis Papa dictus erat uti Onuphr. Annot.
in Platin. Bonifac. 3. Phocam a Bonifacio rogatum statuisse ut Ecclesia Romana
esset caput omnium Ecclesia^u^ and Magistra. Nam antea Ecclesia
Co^stantinopolitam primam sese scribe^at omnium Ecclesiaru^ Math.
Westmonasteriensis Mauritius titulum hunc ^rivolum, Gregori^ stultum
v^citarunt. Gregori^ ubi supra.
Universal Bishop. I have not breath or strength enough to tell you the story
of Boniface the third at large, nor am ^at leisure to relate how Pope
Hildebrand laid aside the two-edged sword of the Word, and took up the
twohanded sword of Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction; it is clear that by
the power of these two swords, Babylon was raised to such an height, that the
Popes have ever since tyrannized like Babylonian Monarchs, over Kings and
Emperors, as if the Pope had been Nebuchadnezzars successor, whose Title is
confessed by Daniel to be King of Kings, Dan. 2. 37. Much less can I relate
what violence has been used for the oppressing poor Protestants in every
corner of the world, by this Beast of Babylon: but give me leave in the name of
all the Churches to renew that charge of the Prophet, Jer. 51. verse 35.
The violence done unto me, and to my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the
inhabitant of Zion say, shall Germany say, and France say, and my blood upon the
Chaldeans, shall Jerusalem say, shall Ireland say, nay England, poor England,
does this day join in the Charge against all the Antichristian Protestants,
(give me leave to call them so) who are of the Antichristian faction, and join
with the popish army, in shedding the blood of Saints, under the notion of
Parliament dogs, and Rebels; the blood of England, and Ireland, be upon all
them who have shed the precious blood of Protestants out of a presumptuous and
malicious wickedness. This scruple being removed I shall now proceed, if my
voice will hold, to give you some plain Directions for a through Reformation:
the first Direction is Negative.

1. You must not build Sion with the Materials of Babylon, with any thing that
may truly, and properly be said to be fetched from Babylon; as old Babylon was
not to be built any more, so was there no stone to be taken from thence to
build any other place: They shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
stone for foundations, but everlasting desolations shall be upon thee, says
the Lord, Jerem. 51. 26. Beware then how you receive any Principles, any
Fundamentals, or Cornerstones from Romish-Babylon, let everlasting desolations
dwell upon it. Let us not receive the Babylonian-Creed, the Trent-Creed, nor
the Romish-Liturgie; the Church of God has a spirit of Prayer, and therefore
needs not send to Babylon, to Rome for prayers.

The Papists seem to acknowledge, that their Liturgy is corrupt, because they
have often pretended, and as some boast, have really made several Reformations
of their Liturgy. You see then, that those men have steeled* their brows with
a more then Babylonish impudency, who have been ever and anon altering the
English Liturgy for the worse, as if the Missall had been Jure divino, and
therefore the Liturgy could never come near enough to the Roman Mass.
Believe it, if the Faction that is now up in Arms prevail, we shall have that
Service book which was prepared for Scotland, or a Some Offices, Lita^ies,
Rosaries, Psalters composed in honor of the Queen of Heaven.
worse, some Babylonian-Service, imposed upon us as Divine-service; and can any
man that has but an English-heart within him, bear such a Cheat? If we had but
the noble valor which dwelt in the Britains of old, whilst they worshipped
the Goddess of Terram Britan^ ante adventum Christi in uni^^ Dei religionem
minime consensi^^e, nominatim vero And^asten, sive Andaten, Victoria Deam, Dio
Cassi^^, alii Apoll. and Dianam coli consu^visse prodider^n^. Arch. Armac.
Brit. Eccl. Ant. c. 1.
Victory, before they knew Christ, it is impossible but our spirits should rise
against such grand Impostures. But I forget you and my self. Be sure that there
be no Babylonian gods, no Romish Idols tolerated in England; let it be no
longer counted the piety of the times, to make our Churches houses of
temptation, let that prophecy Micah 1. 7. be fulfilled in our days: Let the
graven Images be beaten to pieces, and the hires thereof burnt with fire, let
all the Idols be laid desolate; for all was gathered of the hire of an Harlot,
and they shall return to the hire of an Harlot: You know there is hire taken
for both kinds of Harlotry at Rome. Let us have no more Babylonian Ministers,
Priests, (so they would be called) let us have no more Per singulos Martyrs
Jesus conde^natur: si condemnatur Christianus pro hoc tantum quod Christianus
est, Christus est qui condemnatur Orig. in Ier. Hom 11.
Babylonian Altars, for fear they bring in the Babylonian Sacrifice: You know
how many English Martyrs did sacrifice their lives in protesting against the
sacrifice in the Mass, and though some black-mouthed Priests of late have
called them Foxes-Martyrs, yet I will be bold to call them the Martyrs of the
Lord Jesus, and the Martyrs of the Holy Ghost. I must beg time to prove what I
say, it is a weighty truth, and we know not how soon we may be called to seal
this truth with our dearest blood. The Apostle proves it undeniably, by sundry
arguments, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the 7. 8. 9. and 10th. Chapters. I
will pitch upon the tenth, because there you have the sum of all. There is no
other Sacrifice which can take away sin, but the Sacrifice which Jesus Christ
himself offered upon the Cross; read the tenth verse. By the which will we are
sanctified through the offering: of what? of a wafer-cake? no, of the body of
Jesus Christ: But how often must his body be offered? once for all, not as
often as there is a Mass, but once for all. But who must offer the body of
Christ? why, Christ himself, this Man, verse the 12th. a Mass Priest cannot
offer up the body of Christ, for Christ is both Priest, and Sacrifice. But may
not a Mass Priest offer some other sacrifice for sins? No, there is but one
sacrifice for sin, ver. 12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins, and that one sacrifice is to be but once offered; the Apostle
repeats this, that we might not forget it, this sacrifice was offered once for
all, verse 10. once for ever, verse 12. once for all sins, once for all
times, it is of perpetual virtue and merit, once for ever: Is not that plain
and full? Oh but Christ is gone to heaven, and we are not yet perfected. Why
vain man, Christ has finished his work, and therefore is gone to heaven, he is
sat down, ver. 12. and he has done his work, or else he would not sit down,
he has not left any part of the Service to be perfected by a Mass Priest, and
therefore do not expect to be perfected by any other offering in the Mass, or
out of the Mass: read the 14. verse, For by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified: Ye are sanctified by that one offering, verse
10. and perfected by it, verse 14. But who is the witness of this truth? why,
the Holy Ghost, in the very next verse, the 15th. verse; Whereof the Holy Ghost
also is a witness to us. Judge now, whether they that did bear witness to
this truth, be not Co-martyrs with the Holy Ghost, and therefore Coheirs with
Jesus Christ. You see what reason we have to Protest against that Babylonian
sacrifice in the Mass. You have now received the knowledge of this truth, and
if you sin wilfully after you have received the knowledge of the truth, it is
principally meant of this truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
because ye have wilfully and maliciously rejected the Only All-sufficient
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, trusting upon some other Sacrifice, that of the
Mass, or the like, and done despite to the Spirit, by a most malignant
contempt of the witness of the Spirit. What argument can be more prevailing,
to persuade us to hold fast the Profession of our Faith, the Protestant Faith,
lest we fall from a coldness and neutrality in Religion, into a desperate
malignity, and unpardonable Apostasy. Away with Babylonish Gestures, Names,
and Titles, Rites, and Ceremonies, away with Babylonish Garments too: our
professed Babylonians begin now to air the moldy (...) sol^ m^ s^l^nn^a agenda
^^^ce^us. Epist. ex Regist. Greg^^. (...) 12. ^^ 15. Augustino Epis^op^
Anglorum de us^ (...). ^t super ^nes qu^ in ^uti swit vestibus alients --
^mplentes templu^^ e^us impietate and dolo-induite Christum, induite viscera
misericordia -- pro mise^^cordi^ ^ndui^ur ^ta^e, pro v^^tutibus vit^u, (i.) pro
Christo Anti-christo. Hieron. in Soph c. (...).
Copes, they wear the Babylonish Garment that they may have the wedge of gold,
and in their own phrase, they dissemble under a Cope, and are, if you will
believe them, Protestants in their Hear^s. Our Prophet Zechariah will inform
you how to deal with these men, Put them into an Ephah, that they may be kept
within compass, within their bounds, by severe discipline, and clap a talent
of lead, a weighty censure, upon the mouth of the Ephah, Zech. 5. 8. Let the
Ephah be lifted up on high, between heaven and earth, verse 9. that is, let the
sentence be so Public that all may take notice of it, and then let the Ephah
be carried away quite out of Sion, and let an house be built for it in the land
of Shinar, that is Babylon, ver. the 11th. let their Habitation be there, from
whence they drew their Corruption, for there they may settle upon their own
Base, their own Lees, their own corrupt Principles. If such as are Notorious,
and Incorrigible, were Excommunicated by an Assembly of Divines, and some
Civill-punishment inflicted upon such as are within your reach, by an Ordinance
of Parliament, the sin would not be National, men would see and fear, and do
no more so wickedly in England. For the sharpest punishments are inflicted
only (...), by way of Prudence, for terror, and reformation, not (...), by
way of retribution; for no punishment inflicted by man, can possibly
countervail a sin against God.

2. Make Gods Authority your Foundation, build upon it, it is an Impregnable
Rock; though the winds blow, the rain beat, the waves roar and dash themselves
into Foame, yet your House will stand and your Orders can never be disanulled,
if built upon the Rock. Make Gods word alone the Rule of Reformation, and keep
close to your Rule, and then all your Orders will be acknowledged to be
Responsa prudentum, Responsa Prudentum ^^m legis obtinebant apud I^dices, qua
postea dictasunt Rescripta Principum.
and such as deserve to be Rescripta Principum: this is the way to make your
Orders prevail, not only by your Authority, but by their Own Authority.

3. Pray for the Holy Spirit, for the Spirit gives both Light, and eyes: You
will meet with so many new sins, new dangers, new temptations, new mercies,
new troubles, that you had need beg hard for a spirit of Prayer, that you may
be able to make new Prayers every hour, several Prayers upon several
occasions. Sion must prevail by Prayer, Sion was the Mount of Prayer, there was
the house of Prayer; this is, as they use to call it in some Reformed-Churches,
a Prayer-day, but every day must now be a day of prayer, extraordinary prayer,
we must spend more time then ordinary in our private devotions. Get ye up to
Mount Olivet, and there pray for Mount Sion, join heads, and purses, and
forces, and prayers together; Josuah's sword will not prevail without Moses his
prayer: Be of good comfort, though your enemies can out-swear you, yet they
cannot out-pray you: If they be a thousand thousand strong, and march against
you with all their might, Call upon the Name of the Lord, and rest upon your
God; Asa did so, and by the prayer of faith prevailed against a thousand
thousand Ethiopians, and three hundred Chariots, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9, to the 12th.
verse: Oh send to France, and Ireland, and Germany for their experimental
Prayers.

4. Humiliation is an excellent Preparative for Reformation, and there is no
duty more pertinent to the Text, and proper, not only for this day, but for
these times: In those days, and in that time, says the Prophet Jeremy the 50.
Chap. and the 4. verse; what times? what days? why, when the children of
Israel shall come out of Babylon, they and the children of Judah together;
going and weeping, they shall go and seek the Lord their God. Honorable, and
Beloved, let us this day seek our God with tears; if ye would be Princes with
God, and have power with him, as Prince Jacob had, you must weep and make
supplication in Bethel, the house of God, there God will be found, and there,
here he has spoke with you to day; read the twelfth of Hoseah, the third and
fourth verses. Blessed be our great God, who did put it into your hearts, to
draw up a Catalogue of the sins of this Nation: O that you would weep over
every sin in that Catalogue, before you sleep. O let us read our sins in those
miseries which are come upon us. We have nourished Malignant lusts within us,
which rebel against the spirit, and fight against the soul; we have made sport
and past-time with those sins which shed the blood of the Lord Jesus, O let
those sins draw tears from us, which drew blood from Christ. We have grieved
the holy Spirit, and therefore well may the Spirit refuse to comfort us, who
have grieved him. Well may the God of heaven bathe his sword in our blood, and
make the land ^at with our carcasses, for we have forfeited our very Estates,
and lives; we do not deserve one bit of bread, or drop of water; justly may God
feed us with the bread of sorrows, and give us tears to drink. We would not
serve God with joyfulnesse, for the abundance of all things, and therefore well
might God send us to serve our enemies in the want of all things; Deuteronomy. 28. 47*
48* Behold, the heaven is as brass, and the earth as iron: because we have had
a brazen brow, and there is an iron sinew in our necks, we have gone on
impudently, and stubbornly in our sins: Gods Doctrine has dropped as the
rain, and distilled as the dew, but not as the dew upon the tender herb; for
our hearts have not been tender, our lives have not been fruitful, well might
our unfruitfulnesse be the cause of the lands barrenness. We have abused Gods
blessings for the maintenance of our pride, luxury, wantonness, we have sought
against God with his own blessings, and therefore he has good reason to
disarme us.

Oh let us weep for Ireland and weep for England, weep for the King, and
weep for the Parliament: you know that all the Politicians in the Christian
world are now beating their brains, and studying how to seduce our beloved
King, his Throne is compassed about with snares, and he is even wedded to a
Temptation, his very Counselors are, too many of them, Seducers, or
flatterers, like the house of Achzib, a lie to Mic^h 1. 14.
the Kings of Israel, and therefore it is no marvel if our King be misled. O
then let us weep for our tempted King, for our seduced King; Be it known to
all the world that we do still Reverence both his person, and Authority, and
are ready to obey any lawful Commands which he shall send us in a Legal way.
Be it known to our enemies, that we weep for our King, and pray for our King,
only we dare not flatter him, we dare not strengthen that party which does
seduce him, because we do truly love and honor him.

5. Let us enter into a covenant of Reformation; this was the stratagem of
Sion, when they came out of Babylon; see whether their case be not ours, you
may read it, Neh. 9. 36. and following verses. For the Land which thou gave
our Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof: behold, we are
servants in it, and it yields much increase unto the Kings whom thou have set
over us, because of our sins; also they have dominion over our bodies, and over
our Cattle at their pleasure, and we are in great distress; And because of
all this we make a Sure Covenant, and write it, and our Princes, Levites, and
Priests seal unto it* The people of this land have made a general Covenant by
taking the Protestation, but we want such a distinct, and special Covenant as
this was, you may read the particular points of the Covenant, Neh. 10. Oh that
you would be pleased to make as distinct a Covenant, as you have made a
Confession. Let us come to particulars in our Protestation, there will be but
little Reformation till this be done, nay there can be no Safe, Rational,
Christian Pacification till this be done: That you may be fully convinced of
this truth, be pleased to peruse a book of Christian Pacification, and
Reformation, printed about 80, years since, but lately published by judicious,
and learned Dr Rivet, you shall find it at the end of Dr Rivets Animadversions
upon Grotius his Annotations on Cassander. In that book you will find what
errors we must protest against, and what points we must stand upon when we
come to conclude a Pacification. For, says that Reverend Author, our enemies
know that we shall never have peace if they can seduce us from the Author of
peace, and if they can prevail with us to let go one truth, they will hope to
prevail with us in due time to let go all. For when men do wilfully let fall
any truth, God does usually give them up to believe lies. Think sadly of this
business; believe it, no business is of higher concernment, you had need have
a Choice Committee of both Houses, and an Assembly of learned, pious, and
experienced Divines, to consult about it; till Articles of agreement are drawn
up, it is impossible we should ever agree, and therefore there is no way like
this to settle truth and peace at once, and make them greet and kiss each
other. Be pleased to take some course that this Covenant may be National: you
know the godly part of a Nation are the National Church. You see a Reason why
I do not meddle with particulars, that is not the work of one man; only let us
be thus punctual for the present, let us every one in our several places and
callings resolve to do all that lies in our power to Reform particular
Congregations, and our own particular Persons. First for particular
Congregations, you know the great grievance in every parish. Sion dwells with
Babylon, with a profane ignorant multitude who are all borne with a Pope in
their belly, and are not yet redeemed from that gross superstition and vain
Conversation which they received by Tradition from their Fathers. We have a
little Temple, and a great Court, as it is, Revel. 11. 12. Give me leave to
speak unto you as Jotham spoke to the men of Sechem, Iud. 7. 9. Hearken unto
me, you Worthies of England, that God may hearken unto you. I beseech you by
the tender mercies of God and the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, that there
may be some course taken to keep back Dogs from snatching away the childrens
Bread: my Soul melts within me when I consider that men that are scandalously
ignorant and profane men that have not knowledge enough to discern the Lords
body, or grace enough to Examine, or prepare themselves, are suffered to eat
and drink their own damnation. Oh consider what it is for so many thousands in
England to remain guilty of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus: can a deluge
of our blood wash away a guilt of so deep a dye? You know our chiefest
happiness does consist in communion with God in Christ, and therefore we
should consider to whom we deliver the seals of this Communion. Why should any
that are not yet Saints be admitted to one of the highest privileges of
Saints, Church communion in the highest? The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a
distinguishing Ordinance, and therefore it is not fit that men should come as
promiscuously to the Sacrament as to an Ordinary The Canaanite of old was a
thorn in the eyes and sides of Gods people, but in the day of Reformation, the
Canaanite was to be turned out of the house of the Lord of hosts, they are the
last words of our Prophet Zachary. They who have no union with Christ can have
no Communion with him; they who have not yet tasted of the special love of God
the Father, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, or the communion of the holy
Ghost, can have no right to this communion, this Sacrament; for he can never
eat the Body of Christ who has not the Spirit of Christ, because it is to be
spiritually eaten. There were of old Greg. l. 9. Ep. 61* vide bella^m. de Ec.
les. l. 3 c. 2.
Communicatory letters sent from one Church and Country to another; and why
might there not in perplexed Cases be some Communicatory letters sent from an
Ecclesiastical College to direct poor simple congregations, and doubting
Pastors, who should be admitted, and who rejected? I cannot omit one Caution,
which is briefly this, that no man must be excommunicated merely because it
does not evidently appear that he is regenerate, because a man may be
regenerate, and yet not able to evidence his Regeneration to himself, much
less to others. In some cases a regenerate man may be secluded for a while,
and one that is not known to be unregenerate may be admitted, till his
scandalous conversation does set some black mark, or brand upon him: For some
men's sins go before to judgment, and others follow after; glorious hypocrites,
and close Malignants cannot long be hid, 1 Timothy 5. 24, 25.

In the last place, let us make it our saddest business to reform our own
particular persons. Honorable, and Beloved, are there no sins amongst you?
even amongst you? Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? Have the Reformers no need of
Reformation? turn your eyes inward, tell me sadly, what do you discover there?
are there no Babylonish Inmates protected there? such as can never be defended?
are there no unruly passions, no unmortified lusts, no self ends, or sinister
respects, such as beg your privilege, and enjoy your favor? These, these are
the Brats of Babylon; O happy, thrice happy shall he be, who takes these
Infant-lusts, before they are grown up, and dasheth them against the Rock; as
it is in Ps. 137. ver. 9. This is the proper work of a Fast. What have you done
to day? You have sat here five or six hours, and missed a dinner; Is this the
Fast that God has chosen? is this all that he requires of you? Does he not
command you to humble your souls, to break your hearts, to afflict your
spirits, to mortify your lusts, deny your selves, reform your lives, take up
your cross and follow Christ? Will you cut off your right hands, and pull out
your right eyes? Will you take Christ's yoke upon your necks, his burden upon
your shoulder? Will you lay down your honors, your estates, your lives at the
feet of Jesus Christ? Will ye live to him, and if he calls you to it, will you
die for him? If you have wrought your hearts to this temper to day, then you
have fasted to the Lord. God takes notice of your zeal; you beat down Crosses,
and Images, but take heed you do not leave some idols standing in your own
bosoms: Is there no lust of covetousness, or lust of uncleanness, no pride,
ambition, envy, malice, enshrined within your hearts? Down, down, with these.
You know there are Idola saeculi, as well as Idolatempl^: (...) sunt (...); all
your lusts must be Anathematized, Cursed, that they may, like the fig tree,
after it was cursed, die and wither at their very root. Tell me, is not
self-love an Idol? is it not the great Whore? is not lust a Beast, a Monster
with many heads and horns? Oh hate this Whore, mortify self-love, and you
stab the Beast to the heart, for self-love is the very heart and soul of
Original sin, it is the last enemy which will be destroyed: it was primum
vivens, and it will be ultimum moriens: Come then, let us beat down our bodies,
and cry to God to humble our souls, and beat down our corruptions, let not
only Reason Vote down your lusts, but Faith and Zeal pray them down. The
precious sons of Sion are most troubled with this same Babylon within, and
therefore they do make most frequent and penitent complaints against
themselves, and put up most zealous prayers to God, to give them power and
victory over their headstrong and stomackfull corruptions: and in their
prayers, their faith ever closes with such promises as assure them of grace
enough to resist temptations, and mortify their corruptions; this is the way
to keep a faithful, penitent, holy, zeaelous, heavenly Fast. This is to fast
as our Savior did, who made it his meat and drink to do the will of his Father.

Be pleased to consider that you must not only beat down Babylon, but build up
Sion, Sion is built by faith and holiness: In the first place then,

1. Look to your faith: The walls of Babylon, like the walls of Jericho, are
battered down by faith: all the faithful prisoners in Babylon, whose hearts
were sprinkled by the blood of the Covenant, were prisoners of hope, and
therefore were sure to be delivered from the bottomlesse-pit, in which there is
no water; for Babylon was a type of Hell. As for thee also by the blood of thy
Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water,
Zechar. 9. 11. Beasts live by sense, Heathens live by reason, Christians must
live by faith, they must mortify their lusts, renounce their merits, rest
only upon Christ's perfect obedience, and full satisfaction for their
justification; for we cannot be Constituted righteous but by the obedience of
Christ, Romans 5. 19. In this faith, (...).
let us live, in this, let us die.

2. Study Holiness: Holiness is the beauty of Sion, for there they were to
worship God in the beauty of holiness, there can be no beauty in our souls, no
glory in our Congregations without holiness. Sion was the Mount of holiness,
Zech. 8. 3. Holiness is the end of Humane society; Vtque alios alii de
Relligione docerent,
Contiguas Pietas jussit habere domos,


Certainly this Age is even grown Barbarous, or else Holiness, which is the
end of Humane society, and the life of Christian society, would never be
contemned, and despised, as it is now adays in this wicked generation. O what
a base thing is it for a Nation to be ashamed of its glory, and to glory in its
shame! Men think it a base thing for to be holy, and yet God himself is
glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. Certainly if this Nation would be glorious
in Holiness, Gods right hand would be glorious in power, and dash our enemies
to pieces, Exodus 15. 6. Without holiness we cannot have any intimate
acquaintance with God, or good men: We long for Peace, but Peace is a Jewel
which God gives to none but those that are of his acquaintance. Job 22, 21.
Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby good shall come unto
thee. A godly life, is the life of God: those that were strangers to a godly
life, are said to be alienated, or estranged from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.
18. They then that strike at holiness, strike at the life of God, and have a
kind of Atheistical murder in their thoughts, they would lay the Church a
bleeding, let out the very heart-blood of Religion, and take away the life of
God. If England will not be holy, it cannot be happy, if we continue in our
lukewarmnesse, and profaneness, Woe, woe be unto us, though it go well with
Sion, it will go ill with us; Sion was preserved, even when Jerusalem was
destroyed and England may be destroyed for its unthankfulness,
unfruitfulnesse, heresy, idolatry, lukewarmnesse, and profaneness, etc. and
yet the Church preserved, for the Church is not confined to any place. It
concerns us then to be such manner of men, in all holy conversation, 2 Pet. 3.
11. such pilgrims on earth, and citizens of heaven, that it may appear that we
seek a better Country, an Heavenly, and then God will not be ashamed to be
called our God, Heb. 11. 16. But if we go about spiritual duties, with carnal
hearts, and worldly minds, if we lie at catch, waiting for a fair opportunity
to return into Egypt, the God of heaven will be ashamed to own us for his
people. Heb. 11. 15, 16. Brethren, if we live in the spirit, let us walk in the
spirit, as the Apostle advises, Gal. 5. 25. let us March fair and straight, in
rank and file, as the word signifies, (...) Mihi videtur (...) aliquid amplius
quam (...) significate, ^^mpe ^a inced^re ut certum ordi^ teneas, and quasi
lineamnen transilias. Bez^. Annot. (...) ^st ordo in aci^ servatus, a fron^^
incipi^^^, and p^r succenturiatos a tergo ^ive Substites sigillatim ad extrem^m
agm^ porrectus.
(...), walk according to the Canon given to Evangelicall Soldiers, Gal. 6.
16. and if we walk according to Rule, this Rule of the new Creature, Verse 15.
mortifying our lusts, crucifying our selves to the world, and living unto
Christ in righteousness and true holiness, Peace will be upon us, and upon
Sion the Israel of God, verse 16. We must not conceive, that we may walk every
man according to a Canon of our own devising, this man according to one Canon,
and that according to another; no, it behooves us all (...), to walk according
to the self same Rule, or Canon, and (...), to mind, savor, relish, the self
same thing, to promote the great Design, namely the quickening, and seasoning
this Kingdom with the Power of godliness; for we have been a great while sick
of a Form of godliness, a mortal disease, for it was but a dead Form; The
Lord quicken, and awake us out of our Dead-sleep, for if we content our selves
with this Dead-form, we are in danger to be buried in our own ruins. You see
we are not afraid to discover our Plots, and truly I am guilty of no other,
then what I have this day discovered: I shall employ my utmost strength,
consecrate my Totum nil, blow my Rams-horn against Babylon, and study how to
build up Sion, that is all I intend. Honorable, and Beloved, let us as it
becomes men of Sion, devote our selves to God, and spend our strength in the
Practice of Piety: Let us be better acquainted with our selves, and with our
God; let us learn what sin, and what grace means; let us be watchful over
our own hearts, with an holy jealousy; nay let us set a watch before our
mouths. and all our sens^s, nay let us watch over one another, that we may
provoke one another unto holiness, and good works. Let us beseech the God of
heaven to kindle gracious desires in our hearts, that we may oppose and conquer
all our filthy and unplacable lusts, for our lusts set us all in a Combustion.
From whence come wars, but from the lusts of Jam. 4. 1.
pride, envy, malice, ambition, covetousness? The Lord speak to our
consciences, and convince them, to our implacable lusts, and mortify them, and
we shall be all at peace. Believe it, we want peace, merely for want of
holiness: Keep close to the rule of holiness, and I dare warrant you, you
shall (as Josiah did) die in Peace, though you are killed in War.

3. In the third place, let us study Thankfulness: We may well sit down and
consider how to be thankful to our good God, for the dawnings of our
deliverance: The sons of Sion were very joyful in the House of thanksgiving,
long Ezra 6.
before their work was finished. Should we not be thankful for Ireland? has
not God been the helper of the friendlesse? has he not wrought miraculously,
even without means, above means, and against means? And should we not be
thankful for England? has not God done wonders enough for our Nation, to
stir up your hearts to enjoin a solemn^day of Thanksgiving quite thorowout
the Kingdom? Some of our Deliverances have been National; Oh let the
Thanksgiving be National, as well as the Deliverance. You did not long since
hear good news from the West, but were you thankful? if you were not, why
then, sure you may conclude, that the sad news which you lately received from
thence, was the just punishment of your unthankfulness. The very Heathens will
condemn us for our unthankfulness; they never received a considerable victory,
but they brought in their Opima spolia Jovi Feretrio. O let us sing unto the
Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, he is our strength and song, and is
become our salvation: He is our Exodus 1^.
God, our fathers God, and we will exalt him: Jehovah is a man of war,
Jehovah is his Name. He has redeemed us in his mercy, and he will guide us in
his strength to his holy Habitation; The Lord will establish his Sanctuary
amongst us, and he shall reign over us, and our posterity for ever and ever.
Who is like unto thee, O Jehovah, amongst the mighty ones, who is like unto
thee? glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, and doing wonders? Who is
like unto thee, O Ireland? The Eternal God, who rides upon the Heavens, is
thy refuge, and underneath are his everlasting arms, he shall thrust out the
Enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them. O Deuteronomy. 33.
let Ireland be a land of Plenty, let the Heavens drop down their dew, and the
fountain of Jacob be upon it. And happy art thou, O England; who is like unto
thee, O people, saved by Jehovah, the shield of thy Help, and the sword of thy
Excellency? thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee; keep Covenant with
thy God, and thou shall not be Confounded world without end.

In the last place let us keep a Charitable Fast to day; here is a Bill
presented for a Contribution to Maimed Soldiers, I want strength to publish it
distinctly and audibly. I believe you will easily be persuaded to part with
your money to them who have shed their blood for you; their bodies have bled
already, now let your purses bleed; And here is an Order which concerns
Ireland. Oh let Ireland live in your bosom! why do we not fast, three or
four times every week, that we may send some provision to the poor
Protestants in Ireland? If our fasting may keep the most considerable part of
that kingdom from starving, are we not bound to Fast? And forget not the other
Churches, they all come under this endearing Title [thy self.] Deliver thy
self O Zion: Is not Ireland our self? and Scotland our self? and Bohemia our
self? are not all the Reformed Churches our self? plot for them all, and pray
for them all, love them and treat with them, and so far as the Scripture will
give you leave, conform to the^ in point of Disciplme, that we may all speak
the same thing, and be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the
same Judgment. And the Lord preserve this resolution in the hearts of us, and
all his people for ever, that we may all live like Saints, or die like Martyrs.
Amen, Allelujah, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

