CHILLINGWORTHI NOVISSIMA. OR, THE Sickness, Heresy, Death, and Burial OF
WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH. (In his own phrase) Clerk of Oxford, and in the conceit
of his fellow Soldiers, the Queens Arch-Engineer, and Grand-Intelligencer. SET
FORTH IN A Letter to his Eminent and learned Friends, a Relation of his
Apprehension at Arundell, a Discovery of his Errors in a Brief Catechism, and
a short Oration at the Burial of his Heretical Book.

By FRANCIS CHEYNELL, late Fellow of MERTON College.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1644.

TO THE LEARNED AND EMINENT FRIENDS OF Mr CHILLINGWORTH, And in particular TO
Sir JOHN CULPEPPER, Knight, Doctor JOHN PRIDEAUX Bishop of Worcester, FELL
Deane of Christ-Church, BAILEY Deane of Sarum, SHELDEN Warden of All-soules,
POTTER Provost of Queens, and MORLEY Canon of Christ-Church.


SIRS,
YOur deceased friend is not yet speechless, he calls upon you to beware and
repent; some preach more, at least more practically, when they are dead, then
ever they did whilst they were alive. You that were his Patrons and
Encouragers, as he acknowledged ever, Dr. Bailey, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Fell.
when he was in the height of his Rebellion, do you beware lest a worse thing
come unto you. You that were the Licensers of his subtle Atheism, Repent,
Repent; for he was so hardened by your flattery, that (for ought the most
charitable man can judge) he perished by your Approbation: he ever appealed to
his works even to his very dying day, and what was it, which made him dote upon
them, but your License and Approbation? Hark what he says, The third and
last part of my Accusation was, That I answer out of principles, which
Protestants themselves will profess to detest: which indeed were to the
purpose, if it could be justified. But besides that, it is confuted by my whole
Book, and made ridiculous by the Approbation premised unto it, etc. read Mr
Chillingworth his Preface to the Author of Charity etc. Sect. 30. Sure I am,
that the Accusation may be justified, and therefore is to the purpose; but the
Approbation cannot be justified, and is therefore justly Reprobated: The
Accusation is so serious, that the Approbation cannot make it (but may well
make the Approvers and their Church) ridiculous. O what a ridiculous Church do
the Licensers make the Church of England to be, by saying that there is nothing
in Mr Chillingworth his Book contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England;
sure they meant the Church of Canterbury. But Dr Fell, and Dr Bailey are not
ashamed to say, that there is nothing in that Book contrary to good manners,
which Dr Prideaux would not say; but enough of that.

Sirs, the following History will testify my compassion toward your deceased
friend, whom I ever opposed in a charitable and friendly way. (...).
I do not account it any glory to trample upon the carcass of Hector, or to
pluck a dead Lion by the beard; should I misquote his Book, and make that
error mine own by a false citation, which I pretend to be his in an
Accusation, you that were the unhappy Licencers of his Book would soon take me
tripping. If you conceive that he deserved a more Honorable burial, be
pleased to answer my Reasons, and patronize his errors with all the learning
Bodleyes Library can afford: or else study his Catechism, pardon my boldness,
some Courtiers never learnt, and some Doctors have forgot their Catechism, or
else this man we speak of had never been so much admired, his Book extolled,
or these Antichristian wars fomented by such great Clerks and busy wits.

I looked upon Mr Chillingworth as one who had his head as full of Scruples as
it was of Engines, and therefore dealt as tenderly with him as I use to do
with men of the most nice and tender consciences: for I considered, that though
Beef must be preserved with salt; yet Plums must be preserved with sugar. I
can assure you I stooped as low to him as I could without falling, and you know
he is not a wise man in the judgment of the Philosopher, who stoops so low to
another man's weakness, that he himself falls into weakness: and it is a Rule
with us at Westminster, that he falls into weakness who falls into sin.

Do not conceive that I snacht up my pen in an angry mood, that I might vent
my dangerous wit, and ease my overburthened spleen. No, no, I have almost
forgot the Visitation at Merton College, the Denial of my Grace, the
plundering of my house and little Library: I know when and where and of whom to
demand satisfaction for all these injuries and indignities. I have learnt
Centum plagas Spartana Nobilitate concoquere. I have not yet learnt how to
plunder others of goods or living, and make my self amends by force of arms.
I will not take a living which belonged to any civil, studious, learned
Delinquent, unless it be the much neglected Commendam of some Lordly Prelate
condemned by the known Laws of the Land, and the highest Court of the
Kingdom for some offense of the first magnitude: I can, without straining my
conscience, swallow such a gnat, a camel I should say, for every one of their
Commendams has a bunch upon its back, and may well make a bunch upon their
conscience. I shall not trouble you with any long discourse about State
matters, only you will give me leave to say what the Lacedemonian slave said,
when he stood to be sold in the market; (...).
and one asked him what he was? I am (says he) a Free man, and so am I, for
though I have not taken Antidotum contra Caesarem, yet I have taken Antidotum
contra Tyrannidem. I could never yet stoop so low to the most tyrannical
Prelate as to cry Your humble Slave.

Sirs, we hear you have made a New Almanac at Oxford; and some conceive that
you hold correspondence with all the swore Planets, and that you have enticed
the trusty Sun from his Ecliptic line, and taught him to go Retrograde. We
wonder, I must tell you, that the Sun never came into Libra, that Opinions,
Protestations, Actions were seldom or never weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary: and we wondered more, that Venus (I had almost forgot my Astronomy,
and said Juno) was shufled into Virgo's place, and the sign was in the Dogs
head, when we did expect it in a more propitious place, the Lions heart. I
remember that of Tertullian, Habet and Ecclesia dies Caniculares, the Church of
Christ has cause to complain of Dog days; for the Dog does not only show his
teeth; we hear him bark and feel him bite; we may in every month write the
Dog days in capital letters, nay you write them for us (so capital are your
crimes) in letters of blood. What is England become a Wilderness? if it be
not, why are so many wild beasts suffered to go loose and prey upon the
zealous Protestants? for shame chain up those beasts before the first of
March: if shame work not, fear may, the same fear which falls upon the men of
Northumberland, the fear of a Scottish Reformation: I will not listen at the
door of your Iunto to hear what news, nor will I peep into your pretended
Parliament, no nor into Merton College, for fear I should see some sights
like those in the eighth of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 8. 16.
some with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward
the East; and if I should look farther, one that is no Prophet tells me, that I
may see greater abominations then these. Sir, I beseech you keep down your
staff: but if you will hold it up, as Eurybiades did, I must cry as
Themistocles did, (...), strike if you please; yet hear me, or at least hear
what the Prophet says to me, does he not speak of you? Then he said unto me,
Ezekiel. 8. 17. 18.
Have thou seen this O son of man. Is it a light thing to the house of
Judah, that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have
filled the Land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and lo
they put their branch to their nose. Therefore -- read and tremble at the rest.
Come, come away with this learned Atheism, your Judge looks upon you, the
searcher of hearts and discoverer of secrets is acquainted with all your plots.
The Lord sees what the Ancients of Oxford do in the dark, every man in the
chambers of his imagery: the Lord hears what you say -- O do not say as the
Ancients of Israel said, The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the
earth. I am afraid that you have the same temptations at Oxford, which were
presented to Origin, an Ethiopian woman, and an Idol; he was (you know) put to
this unhappy choice, to commit folly with which he pleased. Some lust as mnch
after idols, as others do after women; if in these days of liberty you
restrain from neither, you do in effect tempt to both, and are the grand
seducers of the hopeful Gentry: but alas you are guilty of a more ambitious
wickedness, it is your study to seduce a King.

I remember an old story of King Canutus, who (as the Chronicler relates) took
off the Crown from his own head, and set it upon the Crucifixe at
Westminster: But tell me (you that have read some Italian Jesuit more subtle
then the Politicians Saint, Saint Machiavel) do you conceive that you can
persuade our King to take off his Crown from his own head, and place it upon
your idol the Queen, or her idol the Crucifixe, at Oxford? We have none at
Westminster. Well, plot on my Masters, and walk in the light and warmth of
that fire which you have kindled; Isa. 50. ult.
but hear what the Prophet says, Behold all you that kindle a fire, and
compass about your selves with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and
in the sparks which you have kindled; This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall
lay down in sorrow. Pardon our just fear, if we dare not say a confederacy to
all those Welsh Atheists, Irish Rebels, bloody Papists of the French or Spanish
faction, to whom you say, A confederacy; Associate your selves together (you
know what follows) take counsel together (in your pretended Parliament) and
it will be brought to naught, Isa. 8. 9, 10.
enact and pronounce a decree, imagine mischief as a Law, yet you shall not
prosper, for God is with us. I know you urge the 13 to the Romans, to justify
your royal cruelty; but you know what Chrysostom, and many others, have said
upon that place: But I shall only ask you one queshion (with which I stopped
your friend Chillingworths mouth) be pleased to answer it: Do you believe
that Tyranny is Gods ordinance? I ever held it a violation of Gods ordinance:
and whether the supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom may not repel that force
with force, which would violate Gods ordinance, judge ye; for it is absurd to
talk, as Doctor Fern does, of a moral restraint in such a case. Sure I am,
the Parliament has power to raise an Army to preserve Gods ordinance
inviolable, Vbi jus humanum, natural vel divinum, arma e^pere jubet, ibi juris
autoritas intervenit, etiamsi expressa voluntas principis non accedat. Biel. 4.
Sent. q. 4.
when it cannot be preserved by any other means: They do certainly resist
Gods ordinance who seek to violate it; You endeavor to violate it, We to
preserve it; who is in the fault?

I have examined your great Champion Doctor Fern his three books, and cannot
find any thing in them, whereby the conscience of an impartial Scholar may be
fully resolved or satisfied. It is very impertinent, in my weak judgment, to
talk of the privileges of the Kings of Judah, who were immediately elected by
God; or to discourse of the power of the Roman Emperor, or the first draughts
of Government in the Saxon and Norman lines; for Doctor Fern does acknowledge
that it is not injurious to his Majesty's posterity, Dr Fern his 2. book p. 33.
that the King swears to a limited power, a power limited by privileges and
immunities, granted, or restored to the people since the conquest; which
privileges grants, Dr Fern ib. p. 27
liberties, though not original, yet are they irrevocable. Doctor Fern
distinguishes between the Title of the King, and the Power of the King; but
we did never so much as once question his Majesty's Title, whether it be
limited or no? It is confessed that his power, and therefore much more the
exercise of his power, is limited by the Privileges of the Parliament, the
immunities of the Subject, and the Kings own oath: Nay, it is acknowledged
that the two houses of Parliament are in a sort coordinate with his Majesty,
Dr Ferns 2. book p. 6.
to some act or exercising of the supreme power, by a fundamental constitution
Truly here is, in my judgment, so much granted, that the rest need not be
disputed. But what if these powers be divided, and clash one against the other?
why then the power is not fully in King or Parliament, for the power which is
in the three Estates is suspended, whilst one part suspends: Book 2 p. 34.
So Doctor Fern. Give me leave to ask him, and you, whether the power of the
Militia be not in the three Estates, as well as the power of making Laws? if
it be not, then sure the power of making Laws is to no purpose, because they
have no power to defend or enforce I aw: and if the power of the Militia be in
the three Estates, then the Kings power of levying, arming men, etc. is
suspended by the several Ordinances of Parliament; for it is Doctor Fernes
conclusion, that the power which is in the three Estates is suspended whilst
one part suspends; Ergo, much more if two Estates suspend.

But on the other side, I desire Doctor Fern to show how the Kingdom is
secured by the government of three Estates, if the two houses of Parliament
have not sufficient power to preserve the King and the Kingdom, in case the
King refuse to preserve it or him. Book 2. p 28.
It is unreasonable (says Doctor Fern) that the supply should be made by the
body only, without the head: nay rather, Doctor, it is unreasonable for the
Head to neglect the preservation of it self, and the body; but it is very
reasonable for to lift up both arms, to defend the head, and the whole body;
and therefore reasonable for both houses to take up arms, and lift up their
arms, put forth their whole strength to defend the King and themselves. Book
2. page 6.
Doctor Fern talks of a Fundamental constitution, which has provided this
temper of three Estates, as the reasonable means of our safety. But I must
confess, that it cannot enter into my dull pate to conceive, that our
Government is of any settled temper; or that we have any reasonable means
provided for the safety of this Kingdom, by that fundamental constitution, if
the King may do what he pleases, seize on our goods, ('it is Doctor Fernes
supposition) imprison our persons, kill us outright, and (which is worse)
overthrow our Laws, our ^iberties, our Religion, and all at once, and by
consequence enslave not only the bodies, but the consciences of our posterity;
and there is no more power in both houses of Parliament to protect us by force
against force, then if we had no such remedy provided, as the government of
three Estates. Are we not subjected to an absolute Monarch, if the other two
Estates have no legal power to releeve our neglected or oppressed
Commonwealth? how are we secured by the temper of three Estates? or how can it
be called a temper? or a temper of three Estates? if the first of the three may
oppress us, and the other two have no power to releeve us? Sure I am, that by
this account there is but one Estate that has a true power, and therefore that
Estate must be an estate of absolute Monarchy, which Dr Fern himself seems
to abhor; and yet so vain is that Doctor, as to call the Power of Supply
legally placed in both Houses of Parliament, a Conceit, nay a vain Conceit;
his words are these; The Conceit of Supply by the two Houses in case the King
refuse (to preserve the Kingdom) is a vain Conceit: 2 Book p. 28.
and if that be true, then I must conclude, that this provision of a Temper of
three Estates is no Temper, no provision, two of the Estates are no Estates; or
else this provision is in the phrase of Doctor Fern, Ib. ubi supra.
a lame provision, which argues the first contrivement of our Ancestors very
inconsiderate; because then it follows, that there is no Reasonable Mean of
safety provided for this Kingdom by that Fundamental Constitution which
provided this Temper of three Estates, 2 Book p. 16.
so the Doctor loves to call it, though he make one Estate so praedominant,
that as there is no Temperamentum ad pondus, so there will be no Temperamentum
ad justitiam neither by his conceit. How say you Sir John, are not you of my
persuasion, or are you ashamed to tread in the steps of your learned
Countryman? The Lord open your eyes, and clear your eyesight; you are
naturally sharp-sighted, but if your eye look red or yellow, you know your
disease by the symptom. It sball be my prayer, that your eye may neither be
dim nor blood-shotten. Judge. 9. 24.


Consider that the blood of the 70 was laid upon Abimelech their brother who
slew them, and upon the men of Shechem, which had aided him by strengthening his
hands to kill his brethren. Whether you have strengthened their hands who slew
their Brethren, only for being too zealous in the maintenance of that Religion
which you profess, I appeal to God, your Conscience, and the evidence of the
fact. If you have dealt truly and sincerely with this Ac ne maledicis verborum
in eos uti conviciis arguamur causam perditionis publicae ne cuiquam ignota sit
non tacemus, Hilar. contra Arian p. 214
Reforming Parliament, nay with your own party, rejoice and flatter your
selves with hope of a desired success; but if not, then take heed the curse of
Iotham do not fall upon you: Judge. 9. 19, 20, 23 and 57 verses.
there may be an evil spirit sent between the Irish and English, the French
and Spanish factions; nay, fire may come out from the Queen and consume the
Prelates, and fire from the Prelates and consume the Papists; or else there may
come a fire from the North, a fire to purge and refine, not to destroy; which
is my prayer, and will be your happiness.

I will not hold you any longer upon the rack: Learn the first lesson of
Christianity, Self-denial; deny your own will, and submit your selves to
Gods; deny your reason, and submit to faith: Reason tells you that there are
some things above reason, and you cannot be so unreasonable as to make reason
judge of those things which are above reason: Remember that Master
Chillingworth (your friend) did run mad with reason, and so lost his reason
and religion both at once: he thought he might trust his reason in the highest
points; his reason was to be Judge, whether or no there be a God? Whether that
God wrote any Book? Whether the books usually received as Canonical be the
books, the Scriptures of God? What is the sense of those books? What Religion
is best? What Church purest? Come, do not wrangle, but believe, and obey your
God, and then I shall be encouraged to subscribe my self

Your Friend and Servant, FRANCIS CHEYNELL.

A brief and plain Relation of Mr Chillingworths Sickness, Death, and
Burial: together with a just Censure of his Works, by a Discovery of his
Errors collected out of his Book, and framed into a kind of Atheistical
Catechism, fit for Racovia or Cracovia:
And may well serve for the instruction of the Irish, Welsh, Dutch, French,
Spanish Army in England, and especially for the Black Regiment at Oxford.
I Am very religious in observing that old proverb, if it be taken in its
right sense, Nothing is to be spoken of the dead but good. If that be true
which Quintilian says, adversus miseros (I may better say adversus mortuos
inhumanus est jocus; that man is void of humanity who makes sport with the
dead. Mr Chillingworth was looked upon by me at the first sight as a conquered
man, and therefore I was not only civil, but (as he confessed) charitable unto
him: and now he is dead, I cannot deal with him as Nec Plancus illepide, cum
diceretur Asinius Pollio orationes in eum parare quae p^st mortem Planci
ederentur ne resp^ndere posset, cum mortuis non nisi larvas luctari; quo apud
erud tos nihil impudentius judicatur. Plin. Praefat. Hist. Natural.
Asinius Pollio did with Plancus, set forth an Oration to which no answer is to
be expected, unless according to the desire of Saul or Dives, a messenger
should arise from the dead to give me an answer as full of terror as
satisfaction. It is no glory to triumph over one that is conquered, nay dead;
for that of the Poet is true,

Nullum cum victis certamen Scilicet esse oportet.
and aethere cassis.
But I consider, that Mr Chillingworths party is alive, though he be dead; and
though one of his Books is buried, there are many hundred Copies divulged; and
therefore though I speak not of his humane frailties, or personal infirmities,
and imperfections, which died with him; yet I may speak of his Heretical Book,
and of some destructive policies he used, which do yet survive in their sad
and lamentable effects. Judge what I say, put the case a man commits notorious
crimes scandalously, because publicly, and does not only hold, but vent
damnable heresies; and vent them not only in the Pulpit, but in the Press;
shall not his damnable heresies and printed heresies be confuted after his
death? shall thousands be seduced and perish, and all Orthodox Divines silenced
with that one Proverb, Nothing is to be spoken of the dead but good? Nay, put
the case further yet, suppose a man has had his head full of powder-plots, and
his heart full of bloody desires, nay has been a Ringleader and Encourager of
others to bloody practices against the very light of nature as well as
Scripture; must nothing be said of such a man when he is gone, but good?

Mr Chillingworth and I met in Sussex by an unexpected providence: I was driven
from my own house by force of Arms, only (as the Cavaliers confessed) because
I was nominated to be a Member of the Assembly: and when I heard that my Living
was bestowed upon a Doctor (who if some Cambridge-men deceive me not, became
the stage far better then he does the Pulpit) I resolved to exercise my
Ministry in Sussex amongst my friends, in a place where there has been little
of the power of Religion either known or practiced. About the latter end of
November I traveled from London to Chichester, according to my usual custom,
to observe the monthly Fast; and in my passage, with a thankful heart I shall
ever acknowledge it, I was guarded by a Convoy of 16 Soldiers, who faced about
200 of the enemies forces, and put them all to flight. Upon the twelfth of
December I visited a brave Soldier of my acquaintance, Captain James Temple,
who did that day defend the Fort at Bramber against a bold daring enemy, to the
wonder of all the country: and I did not marvel at it, for he is a man that
has his head full of stratagems, his heart full of piety and valor, and his
hand as full of success as it is of dexterity: My grateful pen might well run
on in his commendation, to the eternal shame of those who have been
ungrateful to him, to whom they do (under God) owe their preservation. But I
intend not to defraud others of their deserved praise, who were present at that
fierce encounter. There was present Colonel Harbert Morley, a Gentleman of a
nimble apprehension and vigilant spirit; but the Cavaliers were kept at such a
distance, that they never put the Colonels Regiment of horse to any trouble:
There was present likewise Captain Henry Carleton, the Antiprelaticall son
of a learned Prelate, a man of a bold presence and fixed resolution, who loves
his country better then his life. Captain Simon Everden was there also, a man
of slow speech, but sure performance, who deserves that Motto of the old
Roman, Non tam facile loquor, quam quod locutus sum praesto. You cannot expect
that I should name all the rest of the Commanders: But there were (you see)
some difficulties in my way, which seemed insuperable, and yet the Lord of
Hosts did bring me through these difficulties safe from Bramber to Arundell,
upon the 21 day of December, if I forget not. Master Chillingworth was at that
time in Arundell Castle, which was surrendered to the much renowned Commander
Sir William Waller, Serjeant-Major-generall of all the associated Counties in
the East and West, upon the sixth of January. As soon as the Castle was
surrendered, I represented Master Chillingworths condition to Sir William
Waller, who commended him to the care of his worthy Chaplain; and his
Chaplain showed so much charity and respect toward him, that he laid him upon
his own bed, and supplied him with all necessaries which the place did afford.
When the rest of the Prisoners were sent up to London, Master Chillingworth
made it evident to me, that he was not able to endure so long a journey; and if
he had been put to it, he had certainly died by the way: I desired therefore
that his journey might be shortened, and upon my humble motion he was sent to
Chichester, where I entreated the Governor that he might be secured by some
Officer of his acquaintance, and not put into the hands of the Marshall; the
Governor gave order that Lieutenant Golledge should take charge of him, and
placed him in the Bishop of Chichesters Palace, where he had very courteous
usage, and all accommodations which were requisite for a sick man, as appears
by the testimony of his own man at Oxford, and a Letter of thankful
acknowledgment from Master Chillingworths father to Lieutenant Golledge: nay,
by Master Chillingworths Codicill, which he desired should be annexed to his
Will, in which he gave 10 li. to Captain King, 10 li. to Mistress Mason, who
keeps the Bishops house, and attended Master Chillingworth in his sickness,
and 10 li. to Lieutenant Golledge: And it may further appear by a Letter of
Captain Kings sent to Oxford, and the testimony of Master Edmonds, his
Apothecary; both which are as follows.

Captain Kings Letter sent to Mr Walter Jones, one of the Chaplains of
Christ-Church in Oxford, Ian. 23.
Kind friend,
MAster Chillingworth was in so weak a condition, by reason of a violent
flux, that I persuade my self he could not have lived the first night of his
journey, had he gone farther; for it was very tedious to him to be brought
hither. He lies very ill, and (for ought I perceive) in a desperate condition;
and how God may dispose of him we know not: if any of his friends have a
purpose to come into these parts, they shall have free passage without any
molestation. Lieutenant Golledge performs the part of a real friend in every
kind; neither is Christobell wanting in her best care and diligence.
Lieutenant Golledge has already disburst 10 li. or thereabout: It would not be
amiss that some of Master Chillingworths friends were present with him,
whilst there is some hope of life; for it will be a great satisfaction both to
him and others: There must be no delays either of time or money.

I hear that Master Chillingworths Sister, whom he has made Executrix, is
traveling with child, and therefore unfit for travel, but he is very
confident she will not let him want for necessary supplies whilst he lives,
and that he may have decent burial (befitting one of his merit) if it
pleases God he chance to dye. Among other of his friends, I pray acquaint
Doctor Shelden, the Warden of All-soules, with what is written, whom Master
Chillingworth does very highly esteem.

Your very affectionate friend, Robert King.
From Chichester Jan. 23.

The testimony of Master Edmonds.
A Friend standing by him, desired him to declare himself in point of
Religion, for two reasons: first, Because the Jesuits had much defamed and
traduced him in that particular: secondly, Because he might be able to give an
account to his friends, in case he should survive. He answered, he had declared
himself already in that point sufficiently to the world. His friend told him,
that there went abroad some hard opinions that he had of Jesus Christ, and
wished him to deal heartily and plainly to the world in that point. He
answered, for those things he was settled and resolved, and therefore did not
desire to be further troubled. Being demanded, what course should be taken for
his interment, in case God should take him away in this place; he replied, that
where ever God should please to take him, he would there be interred; and (if
it might be obtained) according to the custom of the Church of England; if
not, the Lords will be done. And further (said he) because the world will be
apt to surmise the worst of things, and there may be some inquiry made after my
usage in this place, I must testify and declare to all the world, that I have
received both of Master Golledge and his wife, abundance of love, care, and
tenderness, where I deserved it not; and that I have wanted nothing which
might be desired of them: and I must in all conscience and honesty do them
this right, to testify the truth to the world: or to that effect.

Anthony Edmonds.

And for my part, I believe that in the course of nature he might have
recovered, had he not neglected and distrusted an able Doctor (who freely
offered himself) only because he was Physician to Sir William Waller; sure I
am that jealousy was more deadly then his disease. Yet Master Chillingworth
did, when it was too late, discover and confess his error, and we persuaded
the Doctor to visit him afterward, and he was in an hopeful way of recovery:
but then his spirit was much dejected, because his friends neglected, or
delayed, to send him some good news from Oxford: his heart was so set upon his
release, and his head was still working and projecting, how he might be
exchanged, or ransomed; and therefore certainly the News of his friends active
endeavors for his release, was the only Cordial which could possibly revive
his spirits; and for want of such a Cordial his heart was even dead within him
before he died. I entreated him to pluck up his spirits, and not to yield to
his disease; but I perceived, that though Reason be stout when it encounters
with faith, yet reason is not so valiant when it is to encounter with
affliction: and I cannot but observe, that many a Parliament-souldier has been
more cheerful in a prison, then this discoursing Engineer, and learned Captive
was in a Palace: Believe it, Reader, believe it, that neither gifts, nor parts,
nor profession, nor any thing else but faith, will sustain the spirit of a man
in spiritual straights and worldly encombrances, when without there are
fightings, and within there are fears.

Another reason there was, which (as I conceive) was very destructive to this
Man of Reason; he was disrelished, and (I believe) abused by most of the great
Officers who were taken Prisoners in Arundell-castle; they looked upon him as
an intruder into their counsels of war, and (as one of them whispered) the
Queens intelligencer, who was set as a Spy over them and all their
proceedings. When Major Molins came to treat, he spoke very coldly for Master
Chillingworth; and a greater Commander then he, told me, that they were bound
to curse that little Priest to the pit of hell, for he had been the ruin of
them all: I replied in his behalf, that I wondered much that they should make
so weak an Apology, for I could not believe that Master Chillingworths single
Vote could turn their Council of war round, and make them giddy: The
ingenious Gentleman made use of the liberty of his judgment, and replied; Sir,
Master Chillingworth has so much credit at the Court, and the Court-councell
has so much influence into our military Council, that we were even overawed,
and durst not contradict Master Chillingworth, for fear lest our own
resolutions might succeed ill, and then his counsel would have been esteemed
the better. I told the Gentleman, that I thought Master Chillingworth wanted
experience for the ordering of military affairs, and therefore could not well
apply the general rules of reason aright, and bring them down to practice in
cases which were difficult, because unusual. The Gentleman replied, Sir,
Master Chillingworth is so confident of his great wit and parts, that he
conceives himself able to manage martial affairs, in which he has no
experience, by the strength of his own wit and reason: Sir (quoth I) you may
forgive him, for though I hope to be saved by faith, yet Master Chillingworth
hopes that a man may be saved by reason, and therefore you may well give him
leave to fight by reason. Sir (says that witty Gentleman) I confess it is a
sad objection, which I know not how to answer; and so in stead of an answer
we went to dinner. But I did examine the business impartially afterward, and
perceive that these great Commanders have grossly abused Master Chillingworth,
in laying all the blame upon him, as if he were guilty of losing the
out-workes, the Town, the Castle, and all; and therefore I shall do Master
Chillingworth so much right, as to offer some considerations, which may tend to
his excuse or vindication: For what though Master Chillingworth were the
grand-Engineer at Gloucester and Arundel, and both projects failed, the fault
might be in the Officers and Soldiers, and not in the Engineer: Put the case
the Lord Hopton, Baron of Stratton, Field-Marshall-generall of the West,
promise to bring three thousand men, and the Engineer make a line of
Communication which cannot be defended with fewer then two thousand; but the
field-Marshall does in the mean time forget himself, and quarter his men in
three or four Maniples; but his enemy being a more wary and prudent Commander,
keeps his men in a contracted and compact body, which is too strong for the
best of his Maniples, and falls upon one of the field-Marshals Quarters, takes
and kills near upon a thousand men, and the field-Marshall by such an
unexpected blow is utterly disabled for the fulfilling of his promise, of
sending three thousand, nay is not able to send above 1500 men: shall the
Engineer or the field-Marshall be blamed in such a case?

Nay, what if the enemy advance before the Engineer has quite finished his
works? yet if he has made them defensible against any sudden onset, and the
Soldiers, which should defend the works, quit their Trenches, and run all
away, before any one man be slain in the Trenches, shall the Engineere be
blamed in such a case, or the Soldiers, who were stricken with fear when
there was no considerable cause of fear?

Finally, if the Lord of Hosts, who did strike a terror to the very heart of
the Soldiers, do show himself a God of wisdom, and infatuate the counsels
of the grand Achitophels; nay, show himself a sin-revenging God, and smite the
Soldiers in the Castle with deadly diseases, with one Pox more then they
carried in with them, with the Flux, the Calenture, the spotted. Fever, and
the like: if in the midst of these distresses the Soldiers break forth into a
mutinous flame, and set all their fellows in a combustion, must the Engineer
be blamed if the Castle be surrendered in such a case? Now I appeal to their
Council of War, whether their case were not so like to these cases which
have been put, that it is hard to say wherein they differed. Let not then
Master Chillingworth be charged with more faults then he was guilty of; I
cannot but vindicate his reputation from all false aspersions, which are cast
upon him by some who know not how to excuse themselves: I took all the care I
could of his body whilst he was sick, and will (as far as he was innocent)
take care of his fame and reputation now he is dead: nay, whilst he was alive,
I took care of something more precious then his health or reputation, to wit,
his precious and beloved soul; for in compassion to his foul I dealt freely
and plainly with him, and told him that he had been very active in fomenting
these bloody wars against the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, his
natural country, and by consequent, against the very light of nature: I
acknowledge (says he) that I have been active in these wars, but I have
ever followed the dictates of my conscience; and if you convince me that I am
in an error, you shall not find me obstinate. I told him, I conceived that he
might want sleep, being at that time newly come out of the Castle, and
therefore I gave him time to refresh himself: and when I came to him again, I
asked him whether he was fit for discourse; he told me, yes, but somewhat
faintly: I certified him, that I did not desire to take him at the lowest, when
his spirits were flatted and his reason disturbed, but had much rather
undertake him when he was at the highest, because I came prepared to receive
satisfaction, and looked upon my self as unlikely to give satisfaction to one,
whom I acknowledged so much above me, in regard of his parts, gifts,
experience; he having studied books and men, and more accurately discussed
that question of State then ever I had done. He then told me, that he was
pretty well refreshed, and as able (as he used to be in these times of
distraction) for any discourse about that great controversy of State. He
desired me to begin: I satisfied his desire, and told him that it would be very
requisite in the first place to state the Question aright; for (as I conceived)
many ingenious men were grossly mistaken even in the very state of the
Question.

First then be pleased (quoth I) to consider, that the original difference was
not between the King and the Parliament, but between the Parliament and
Delinquents; and indeed, between the Queen and the Parliament: I told him,
that he could not be ignorant that upon the fourth of January, two years
ago, the King went unto the Parliament upon the Queens errand; and I believed
that he knew better then I, how much the Queen was discontented, because her
bloody design was not put in execution: He told me, that he could not deny it,
and he would not excuse it. When I was going on to discourse about other
matters of fact, he confessed very honestly, that he did now perceive, that
they had no certain information of matters of fact at Oxford: whereby I
perceived that it was no wonder that so many brave men were seduced to fight
against the Parliament.

Upon further discourse, he told me that he observed a great deal of piety in
the Commanders and Soldiers of the Parliaments Army: I confess (sath he)
their discourse and behavior does speak them Christians, but I can find
little of God or godliness in our men; they will not seek God whilst they
are in their bravery, nor trust him when they are in distress; I have much
ado (says he) to bring them upon their knees, to call upon God, or to resign
themselves up to God, when they go on upon any desperate service, or are cast
into any perplexed condition. I liked him well, when I heard him run on so
fluently to this effect, and I closed with him, and desired him to tell me
freely, whether in good earnest he thought the Parliament did intend any thing
else then the taking of the wicked from before the King, the establishing of
the Kings throne in justice, the setting up of Christ's ordinances in power,
purity, liberty, and the settling of the known laws of the land, the
privileges of the Parliament, and liberties of the subjects, in quiet and
peace.

Sir (says he) I must acknowledge that I do verily believe that the
intentions of the Parliament are better then the intentions of the Court, or of
that Army which I have followed; but I conceive that the Parliament takes a
wrong course to prosecute and accomplish their good intentions; for war is
not the way of Jesus Christ.

Truly I was ashamed to dispute with him any longer, when he had given me so
much advantage: For first, he clearly condemned himself for being confederate
with them, whose intentions were destructive; because no man must promote an
ill design by any means whatsoever, be they never so lawful. Secondly, he
confessed himself clean out of his way when he was in Arms; for war, says
he, (and he learnt to say so of the Anabaptists and Socinians) is not the way
of Jesus Christ; all that he could say for himself was, that he had no command
in the Army; and yet their greatest Officers told me, that in a true
construction there was no man else that had a command to any purpose, but
Master Chillingworth. And as touching their intentions, it is no hard matter to
guess at the intentions of the French and Spanish faction at Court, or the
Irish intentions of the Papists, Prelates, Delinquents, etc. that follow the
Queens Army. I am sure one of the Captains that was taken Prisoner at Arundell,
had a Spanish head, a French nose, and an Irish heart: And there was a Letter
found in Arundell-Castle, which was directed to Master Beckingham, the Earl of
Arundels Receiver, which does declare the good intentions of the Queens Army. I
took a copy of it, which I will here transcribe word for word.

Good Mr Beckingham,
I Doubt not but you are acquainted with the general and voluntary
contribution of the whole Catholics of this Kingdom, both to declare the true
affection of their hearts toward his Majesty, in this, as in all other
occasions: as also to exhibit such aid as their estates do afford, to assist
his Majesty in this present business, which does concern each one in
particular.

The moneys which the Catholics are to give, must be presented this Term, and
therefore I entreat you that you will be pleased that what your liberality will
bestow in so good a cause, you will cause it to be delivered to me in London,
and I shall give (an account thereof to such as it does concern, and) you a
sufficient discharge.

The subscription and name was torn away.


I need not make any observations upon this Letter, it speaks for it self;
and it speaks so bad English, and such perfect policy, that I believe the man
that writ it was no Englishman borne.

There was a Commission found there likewise (which does declare their good
intentions) directed to Sir Edward Ford, etc. to secure the persons of all men
in Sussex, who had contributed to the Parliament, and to seize their estates,
and sell their goods to the utmost value, for the best advantage of his
Majesty; and the Commissioners were to give an account of their service to the
field-Marshall General, Baron of Stratten, Commander in chief of all his
Majesty's forces in Surrey, Sussex, Kent, etc. Now their intentions are as you
see: And as touching the means used, Master Chillingworth himself would not
say that the Queen and her adherents, Prelates, Papists, Delinquents,
Malignants, of the French conspiracy, the Spanish faction, or the Irish
Rebellion, and their confederates, do take better courses, and use more
lawful means to accomplish their intentions, and bring about their designs,
then the Parliament of England, the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Protestants
in Ireland: since then Master Chillingworth did (as all ingenuous and active
spirits do) detest Neutrality, he might have seen (for he had light enough
to see) the way of Jesus Christ.

I desired him to tell me, whether the highest Court of justice in the Kingdom
may not compel Delinquents (who are protected by force against Law) to come in
by force of Arms, that they may be tried according to Law?

First, he acknowledged that the Parliament is the highest Court; and
therefore (I conclude) not to be controlled by some few of the Kings Council,
or by a pretended Assembly, consisting of Fugitives and Delinquents. Secondly,
says he, I must deal plainly with you, though the Parliament has voted some
to be Delinquents, and the Queen her self to be a Traitor, yet I do not
believe that their judgment is infallible. I was able to answer him out of
his own book, that the judgment of a Court or person (especially where there
is evidence of the fact) may be certain, though that Court or person be not
infallible: Secondly, though the judgment of the highest Court be not
infallible, yet it is final, and therefore we cannot appeal from the
judgment of the Parliament, to any Court, but the Court of heaven. True,
(says Master Chillingworth) but this is it which sticks with me, that there
is no fundamental constitution for the government of this Kingdom by a
standing Parliament: To which I had many answers to return; first, there is a
fundamental constitution for the government of this Kingdom by the three
Estates: secondly, there is a Law for the frequency of Parliaments: and
thirdly, the virtue and strength of every Parliament continues in the Acts of
every Parliament, by which the Kingdom is governed, even after the dissolution
of that Parliament; every Parliament does live in its unrepealed Acts, and
therefore lives even after its dissolution; and in that respect we have many
Parliaments yet standing; some old Elisabeth- Parliaments do as yet live,
breath, move, and operate, with strength and vigor: fourthly, there is an Act
passed for the continuance of this Parliament, by the unanimous consent of all
three Estates; and the Kings Council could not find any other probable means
under heaven for the disengaging of his Majesty, then the framing and passing
of that Act of continuance. Master Chillingworth (putting off his hat) cried, I
acknowledge that Act with all reverence, and there is your strength. He seemed
pretty well satisfied with that answer; and as touching the way of Jesus
Christ, I desired to know whether the Saints were not to make war against the
Whore and the Beast? Whether it be not an act of charity, for Protestants to
lay down their lives for their Brethren? Whether it be not an act of faith, to
wax valiant in fight for the defense of that faith, which was once delivered
to the Saints? I perceived my Gentleman somewhat puzzled, and I took my leave,
that he might take his rest.

My heart was moved with compassion toward him, and I gave him many visits
after this first visit; but I seldom found him in fit case to discourse,
because his disease grew stronger and stronger, and he weaker and weaker: I
des^red to know his opinion concerning that Liturgy which has been formerly
so much extolled, and even idolized amongst the people; but all the answer that
I could get was to this purpose, that there were some truths which the
Ministers of the Gospel are not bound upon pain of damnation to publish to the
people: and indeed he conceived it very unfit to publish any thing concerning
the Common Prayer Book, or the Book of Ordination etc. for fear of scandal. I
was sorry to hear such an answer drop from a dying man and I conceived it
could not but be much more scandalous, to seduce or hoodwink the people, then
to instruct and edify them in a point which did directly concern the public
worship of God in this Land.

When I found him pretty hearty one day, I desired him to tell me, whether he
conceived that a man living and dying a Turk, Papist, or Socinian, could be
saved?

All the answer that I could gain from him was, that he did not absolve them,
and would not condemn them. I was much displeased with the answer upon diverse
reasons: First, because the question was put home, of a man living and dying,
so or so. Secondly, it was frivolous to talk of Absolution, for it was out of
question that he could not absolve them. Thirdly, it showed that he was too
well persuaded of Turcism and Socinianism, which run exactly parallel in too
many points. Fourthly, he seems to Anathematize the Socinians in the Preface to
the Author of Charity, maintained Sect. 28. when Knot had reckoned up some
Socinian Tenets, Mr Chillingworth answers, Whosoever teaches or holds them, let
him be Anathema. I have not Knots Book by me now, I mean his direction to N.
N. and Mr Chillingworth was so wise as not to reckon up the number of those
impious doctrins, or name them in particular, because they were all fathered
upon him, and he would not assist Mr Knot so far in the spreading of his own
undeserved defamation, ibid. Sect. 28. I am afraid that Knot reckoned up too
many points of Socinianism, or did not form his Interrogations aright, and
then Mr Chillingworth might safely anathematize, and yet be a Socinian in many
points which were not reckoned up, or not well expressed; And yet his Anathema
is warily pronounced, he does not say, Whosoever teaches or holds them or any
of them, let him be Anathema. Moreover, if the Socinians be asked, whether
Christ be God, they will say, Yes; but then they mean that he is the Son of
God, borne after an extraordinary manner by the overshadowing of the holy
Ghost, Luke 1. 31, 32, 35. or that the word of God came unto him, and therefore
is called God, because of his extraordinary Commission from God, or the like,
John 10. 35. Now either Mr Chillingworth was guilty of some such equivocation
and fly evasion, or else he grew worse and worse, and would not anathematize a
gross Socinian. And if in these latter days Seducers grow worse and worse, I
shall not wonder at it, 2 Timothy 3. 13.

When Mr Chillingworth saw himself entangled in disputes, he desired me that I
would deal charitably with him, for, says he, I was ever a charitable man: my
answer was somewhat tart, and therefore the more charitable, considering his
condition, and the counsel of the Apostle, Titus 1. 13. Rebuke them sharply,
or (as Beza has it) precisely, that they may be sound in the faith; And I
desire not to conceal my tartness, it was to this effect: Sir, it is
confessed that you have been very excessive in your charity; you have lavished
out so much charity upon Turks, Socinians, Papists, that I am afraid you have
very little to spare for a truly reformed Protestant; sure I am, the zealous
Protestants find very little charity at Oxford.

The last time I visited him, was on the Lords day, for I thought it a
Sabbath-duty, and then he began to speak of some questions which I formerly
propounded to him, whereof this was one; Whether Tyranny was Gods Ordinance? I
presently took him off from that discourse, because I knew he had been laid up
fast by that argument before; for it is impossible that any man should ever
prove, that Tyranny is not to be resisted upon this ground, because we must not
resist Gods Ordinance, unless they could prove, that which is blasphemy to
mention, viz. That Tyranny is Gods Ordinance. I desired him that he would now
take off his thoughts from all matters of Speculation, and fix upon some
practical point which might make for his Edification.

He thanked me (as I hope) very heartily, and told me that in all points of
Religion he was settled, and had fully expressed himself for the satisfaction
of others in his Book, which was approved and licensed by very learned and
judicious Divines. Upon further discourse I began to tell him what meditation
did most comfort me in times of Extremity: and I added that the meditation was
very proper for a man in his condition, if he could lay hold upon the Covenant
of Grace. I made choice of that Scripture, 2 Samuel 23. the five first verses;
and I began to open the fifth verse a little to him: I told him that all our
hopes of salvation are grounded upon the Covenant of Grace, for it is a sure
Covenant, an ordered Covenant, nay, a Covenant in all things ordered and sure,
an everlasting Covenant, a saving Covenant; they were David's last words, this
is all my salvation. And I press this point the rather, because he does
acknowledge in his Book, that the Doctrine about the Covenant is a Fundamental
Doctrine; and because his expressions are very imperfect and obscure in his
subtle Book, I was in good hope that he would have explained himself more
fully and clearly in that Fundamental point; but I could not obtain what I
desired. Not long after I told him, that I did use to pray for him in private,
and asked him whether it was his desire that I should pray for him in public:
he answered, yes, with all his heart; and he said withal, that he hoped he
should fare the better for my prayers.

I observed that Mr Chillingworth was much troubled with a sore throat, and
oppressed with tough phlegm, which would certainly choke him up* if there were
not some sudden remedy. I sent therefore to a Surgeon, one of Mr
Chillingworths belief, an able man, that pleased him well, and gave him some
ease. And the next day being Monday, at our morning-exercise in the Cathedral,
I desired the soldiers and Citizens that they would in their prayers remember
the distressed estate of Mr Chillingworth a sick Prisoner in the City, a man
very eminent for the strength of his parts, the excellency of his gifts, and
the depth of his learning: I told them that they were commanded to love their
enemies, and therefore were bound to pray for them, especially when God moved
the heart of an enemy to desire their prayers: We prayed heartily that God
would be pleased to bestow saving graces as well as excellent gifts upon him,
that so all his gifts might be improved and sanctified: we desired that God
would give him new light, and new eyes, that he might see, acknowledge, and
recant his errors, that he might deny his carnal reason, and submit to faith:
that God would bless all means which were used for his recovery, etc.

I believe none of his friends or my enemies can deny that we made a
respectfull and Christian mention of him in our prayers. The same day I rid to
Arundel to move the Doctor to come over again to visit Mr Chillingworth, but
the Doctor was sent for out of Town (before I got thither) to visit Sir
William Springot, and so I lost my journey, and the Doctor saw him no more. In
my absence a religious Officer of Chichester garrison followed my suit to Mr
Chillingworth, and entreated him to declare himself in point of Religion; but
Mr Chillingworth appealed to his Book again, and said he was settled, as you
may see it more largely set down in Mr Edmonds his Testimony before. From my
first visitation of Mr Chillingworth to the last, I did not find him in a
condition which might any way move me (had I been his deadly enemy) either to
flatter or envy him, but rather to pity and pray for him, as you see I did. I
dare appeal to his eminent and learned friends, whether there could be more
mercy shown to his body, or charity to his soul, whilst he was alive? Consider
what it is worth to have a fortnights space to repent in. O what would Dives
have proffered for such a mercy? if Mr Chillingworth did not improve it, that
was not fault of mine; And shall not my charity to his soul and body whilst
he was alive, acquit me from being uncharitable toward him after his death? No
reasonable man will deem me guilty of such an uncharitable madness as to be
angry with a carcass, or to go wrestle with a ghost; for I consider that his
ghost might cry in faciem sepeli, Bury me with my face downward, if you please,
for when the Macedonians (give me leave to change the story a little, and say*
when the Irish) come, and they were then near us, they will turn all upside
down: I am no Sylla, I did not give any command to scatter the relics of
Marius: Marii reliquiat dissipari jussit, acerbiore odio, quam si tam sapiens
suisset quam vehemens fuit. Cicero de L^g.
though I have not much Wisdom, yet I have more charity then to deserve that
lash of the Orator, He had been more wise had he been less violent; and yet
I will confess that I am, and ought to be violent for Christ and Heaven, and
my passions are too often as hot as my zeal, but They may bear with small
faults, and in this business I have proceeded with deliberation and
moderation: I consider that I am in the body, and my body may be delivered (I
know not how soon) into the enemies hand; I do not expect (though I might
desire) that half that mercy which I showed to Master Chillingworth may be
shown to me; Defunctorum cineribus violentiam infer sacrilega praesumptio
est, is a Rule (if I mistake not) in the Civil Law; and I shall be able to
justify my carriage in the business of his Funeral to the face of his
greatest Patrons, from all inhumanity or sacrilege, Sacrilegae bustis
abstinuere manus.


Let us (if you please) take a view of all our proceedings, and of Master
Chillingworths opinions, and then (I am afraid) some will say there was a
little foolish pity showed on my part and the uncharitableness will be found
in them only, who censure me for want of charity.

First, there were all things which may any way appertain to the civility of a
funeral, though there was nothing which belongs to the superstition of a
funeral: His body was decently laid in a convenient coff^n, covered with a
mourning Hersecloth, more seemly (as I conceive) then the usual covering,
patched up out of the moldy relics of some moth-eaten copes: His friends
were entertained (according to their own desire) with Wine and Cakes; though
that is, in my conceit, a turning of the house of mourning into an house of
banqueting: All that offered themselves to carry his corpse out of pure
devotion, because they were men of his persuasion, had every one of them
(according to the custom of the country) a branch of Rosemary, amourning
Ribband, and a pair of Gloves. But (as it does become an impartial Historian)
I confess there were three several opinions concerning his burial.

The first opinion was negative and peremptory, That he ought not to be buried
like a Christian, 1. Who refused to make a full and free confession of
Christian Religion: 2. Nay, if there had been nothing else against him, but his
taking up of Arms against his country, that they conceived a sufficient
reason to deny the burial of his corpse. I will not trouble you with many
reasons, that one place of Scripture was to them in stead of many reasons, to
prove that an Heathen might be buried in all the outward pomp and glory that
can be devised, rather then one who has destroyed his own land, and slain
his own people, Isa. 14. 18, 19, 20. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of
them lie in glory, every one in his own house; But thou art cast out of thy
grave, like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a
carcass trodden under feet: Thou shall not be joined with them in burial,
because thou have destroyed thy land, and slain thy people, (mark that
Reason:) the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned. In the third place,
some were bold to say that he was Felo de se, guilty of his own death, by his
foole-hardinesse. Finally, it was alleged that he was an Heretic, no member
of any of the Reformed Churches, and therefore to be reckoned as an
Excommunicated person; now you know what law it is which denies burial to
Heretics, and Excommunicated persons, though they be excommunicated for
inconformity only, for not appearing, or not paying of 3. s. 4. d. or some
such like cause; Read Pickerings Case in the high Commission. The truth is, we
looked upon Master Chillingworth as a kind of Nonconformist, nay (to speak
strictly) a Recusant rather then a Nonconformist; for Non-conformists refuse
to subscribe to Canons which concern Discipline, but Master Chillingworth
refused to subscribe some Articles of Religion, as he himself acknowledges
though he thought charitably of them who did subscribe them: For (he says) he
does not undertake the peculiar defense of the Church of England, but the
common cause of Protestants; and yet he does not hold the doctrine of all
Protestants true, because they hold contradictions, yet he conceived them free
from all error destructive of salvation: and though he did make scruple of
subscribing the truth of one or two Propositions, yet he thought himself fit
enough to maintain, that those who do subscribe them are in a saveable
condition, See the Preface to the Author of Charity maintained Sect. 39. You
see Master Chillingworth did refuse to subscribe. What think ye (Gentlemen are
not Chichester men pretty good Disputants? Can you confute these Reasons? If
you can; do your best; if you cannot, I have no reason to prompt you; scratch
your heads, beat your deskes, bite your nails, and I will go sleep, and will
not hear what they said of Master Chillingworths Argument on Fieldings case.

The second opinion was your opinion, and the opinion of such as you are, my
good friends at Athens; the men of a Cathedral spirit thought it fit that
Master Chillingworth, being a member of a Cathedral, should be buried in the
Cathedral; and being Cancellarius, it was conceived that he should be buried
intra cancellos, and rot under the Altar, near the pot of Incense, that the
constant perfume of the Incense might excuse the thrift of his Executrix --
Ossa inodora dedit. It was answered, that he was of or belonging to the
Cathedral at Sarum, and therefore they might carry him thither; but then his
Will could not be performed, because he desired to be buried at Chichester, in
case he did end his days in that City. But some more serious conceived, that
this desire of burying him intra cancellos was but the issue of a superstitious
conceit, that the Chancell, or sanctum sanctorum, was more holy then other
places; and the carcass of a Priest as sacred as that holy ground: And it was
their opinion that a modest and well-grounded denial of this request, would be
the most effectual confutation of that superstitious conceit. The ground of
the denial was Master Chillingworths fantasy, viz. That there are two ways
to make men faithful, (and consequently to bring them to Heaven) without
either necessity of Scripture or Church; his words are these; And Saint Paul
tells us, that (...) might be known by his works, and that they had the Law
written in their hearts: Either of these ways might make some faithful men,
without either necessity of Scripture or Church, Cap. 2. Sect. 124. page 100.
the first Edition: Now show me any place of Scripture (say they) to prove that
such a man's corpse should be buried in the Church, who maintains that men may
be saved without Church or Scripture. This passage is the more observable,
because in some places of his book he would bear us in hand, that he does not
think that Heathens shall be immediately saved without faith in Christ; See
chap 3. Sect. 13. page 133. but you see he does not mince the matter in the
place forecited, for it is clear and evident that there is nothing of the
Gospel written in the heart by nature, or in any of the works of God by the
first creation.

The third opinion (which prevailed) was this, that it would be fittest to
permit the men of his own persuasion, out of mere humanity, to bury their
dead out of our sight; and to bury him in the cloisters, amongst the old
Shavelings, Monks, and Priests, of whom he had so good an opinion all his life.

The Prelaticall men do conceive, that there is a kind of holiness in a
cloister; no excommunicated person must be buried there, unless there be an
absolution sent, either before the death of the party, or to the dead corpse,
(which they must call their beloved brother) because they themselves are as
loathsome and rotten as the corpse: Nay, a Papist must not be buried in the
Cloisters without special dispensation from the Bishop; and you know the
Prelates would dispense with Papists alive or dead. It is usual to bury men of
good rank and quality in Collegiate Cloisters; and sure I am, the Cavaliers do
not bury their dead so honorably, though they esteem them the Queens
Martyrs, they throw them into ditches or rivers.

Finally, Mr Chillingworths bones shall rest without any disturbance, he shall
not be used as Wicliffe was by Papists, or as Bucer was served by the
Prelaticall faction at Cambridge, Consulas Histor. de vita and obitu Buceri.
who vouchsafed him an Honorable burial in the days of Edward the sixth,
anno 1551. because they knew it would be an acceptable service in the eyes of
Saint Edward, as judicious Hooker styles him; but in the days of Queen Mary
(the first of that name) the same men plucked him out of his grave again after
an inhumane and barbarous manner: but in Queen Elizabeth's days, the same men
wheeled about a third time, and made an honorable commemoration of him again
in Panegyricall Orations, and flattering verses. Mr Chillingworth was buried by
day, and therefore we had no Torches or Candles at his grave. Tertullian
assures me, Tertul. in Apolog. Synod. Eliber. Can. 34. 37. Vigilantius cum
Synodo praedict. illam gentilium consuetudinem damnavit: Prope (inqu^t
Vigilantius) ritum gentil^um videmus sub praetextu religion^s introductum in
Ecclesias Dei, Sole ad^us fulgente moles cereo^um accendi: Hieron. ad Vigilant.
cap. 2. Virgil. En^id.
that the Christians used no such custom, though the Heathens did, and the
Antichristians now do. Non frangimus lucernis, lucem Dei. I know no reason why
Candles were used by Heathens at the Funeral of the dead, but because they did
burn the dead bodies.

-- subjectam more parentum
Aversae tenuere facem --
Observe that I say, at the Funeral, for I know full well that they had some
Anniversary Commemorations, at which it was usual to bring Candles, and burn
them at Sepulchers in honor of the Dead. I remember a famous instance in
Suetonius in the life of Augustus, there is mention made of a great company who
flocked together at the Tombstone of one Masgabas, who had been dead about a
year, and they brought abundance of lights thither, as their custom was. But
it is strongly objected that my great and unanswerable fault was, that I did in
extremo actu deficere, I refused to bury him my self, and left it to others:
Sirs, I confess it, and shall deal freely and heartily in the business.

First, Mr Chillingworth in his life time, desired to have some part of the
Common Prayer Book read over his Corpse at the grave in case it should please
God to take him away into another world by that sickness. Now I could not
yield to this request of his for many reasons which I need not specify; yet I
shall say enough to give satisfaction to reasonable and modest men. I conceive
it absurd and sinful to use the same form of words at the burial of all
manner of persons; namely, to insinuate that they are all elected, that they
do all rest in Christ, that we have sure and certain hope of their salvation,
etc. these and the like passages I durst not make use of upon that occasion;
and all this, and a great deal more, was desired by Mr Chillingworth: blame me
not if I did choose rather to satisfy my own conscience, then his desire; for
what learned Doctor Usher says of more Ancient Forms of praise and prayer, is
true of these passages; which kind of Intercessions, etc. proved an occasion
of confirming men in diverse errors, especially when they began once to be
applied not only to the good but to evil livers also, unto whom by the first
institution they never were intended. Dr Usher his Answer to the Jesuits
Challenge, page 192. Edit. London 1625.

Secondly, Videsis Greg. Naz. Orat. in laudem Gorgor. Comment. in Job vulgo
ascripta Origeni lib. 3. Ambros. de Valent. and Gratiano disser^n. Beati ambo
si quid meae orationes valebunt: nulla dies vos silenti^ praeteribit nulla
inhonoratos vos mea transibit oration, nulla nox non donatos aliqua precum
mearum contextione transcurret, etc. Ambros. de obitu Valentiniani Imperatoris.
I do not know to what end and purpose we should pray over the dead, unless
we conceive it fitting to pray for the dead. I do consider upon what slight
occasions the people have heretofore run into intolerable errors; and there
is a kind of natural superstition ingraffed in the mind of ingenuous men in
this great business: men are apt to slide out of their civility and blind
devotion, into detestable superstition. They who began to complement with the
dead at first, did little dream that their Complements should be urged as
Arguments to prove that we may make prayers to the dead: and yet they who have
searched farthest into the original of that rotten superstition, and gross
idolatry, do as clearly demonstrate my observation to be solid and rational,
as if it were a truth written with a Sun-beame: Take Doctor Fields observation
upon this Argument; Notwithstanding (says he) it is most certain that many
particular men extended the meaning of these Prayers further etc. -- and so it
is true (says Doctor Field) that Calvin says, That many of the Fathers were
led into error in this matter of prayer for the dead, etc. See his third Book
of the Church, and the 17 Chapter.

They conceived that the Saints continue their love to their brethren which
they left behind them, that therefore they recommend to God those particular
necessities of their brethren, which were made known to them here: nay, they
did entreat Saints, lying on their deathbeds, not to forget their friends on
earth when they were translated to heaven. Add to this, their reckoning up the
names of Martyrs at the Eucharist; the Sacrifice of praise; the anniversary
commemorations, and Panegyricall Orations, on the several days of their
friends death, and I need say no more: Read the same Author (Doctor Field) in
the same Book, the 20 chapter, and you will be satisfied.

When I read of Funerals in the old Testament, Genesis 50. 7, 9, and 14 verses.
celebrated in the presence of Idolaters mingled with the faithful servants of
God, is there any probability that there were any Prayers made over the dead
corpse? would the Idolaters have joined with the faithful in any spiritual
exercise of Religion presented to the true God? The Heathens had strange
conceits, that by Prayers and Sacrifices Persephone might be appeased, and so
the deceased party fare much the better for the sacrifices, or the prayers;
(shadowed by the Sacrifices) for with them the Devil was worshipped, and so
(as they thought) appeased: Read Doctor Reynolds in the first Tome of his
prelections on the Apocrypha, page 1498. Itaque Persephone and sacrificiis and
precibus placabatur ab Vlysse, Odyssea 11. Apollonius apud Philostratum lib. 4.
cap. 5. qui negat sibi opus fuisse, obtulit tamen preces and orationes; atque
ita, aut sacrificiis, aut orationibus, quas sacrificia adumbrabant, placabatur
Sathanas, colebatur and adorabatur. Now if prayers were made over the dead by
Heathenish Idolaters, and are still made by Romish Idolaters; and the Reformed
Churches have no such custom; I humbly conceive that I shall not be condemned
by any sober Christian, for not imitating Heathens or Papists.

Be pleased to observe the practice of Reformed Churches, and then you will not
deem me singular in my opinion. There was a Liturgy printed not long since,
and presented to the Parliament, (let it not be thought the worse because it
came from Geneva, or because it is said to be approved by Mr. Calvin, and the
Church of Scotland) and in that Liturgy you shall find that there was no great
store of Service said or done at the interring of the dead corpse: The corpse is
reverently brought to the Grave, without any further Ceremonies; which being
buried, the Minister, if he be present and required, (observe those two
limitations) goes to the Church, if it be not far off, (mark that likewise)
and makes some comfortable exhortation to the people, touching death and
resurrection. You see that in their judgment the corpse may be reverently
interred without a Minister; yet if he be present, there are no prayers
appointed to be said over the dead body; but the Minister is to repair to the
Church, and preach to the Congregation, as I did upon the advantage of the like
occasion.

The practice of the Church of Scotland is set forth by that reverend and
learned Commissioner of Scotland, Master Rutherford, Professor of Divinity at
Saint Andrews, cap. 20. art. 9. p. 319. in these words: Interring and burial
is not performed in the Word of God with preaching, reading Service over the
dead, singing Scniptures (as Papists) which tend to superstition, etc. -- The
place of burial with us is not under the Altar, or the place of Assembling
(the Church) for the Word or Sacraments, as Papists do, but in some public
place, either near the Church, or some enclosed field; because the Jews buried
sometimes in a Cave, Genesis 25. 9. sometimes in a Valley, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. sometimes
in a garden, Joh. 19. 41. I hope you will not say at Oxford that there is no
Christian burial to be had in Scotland, because they do not interre the corpse
in the Church, or read Service over the dead.

But however you will say it must be acknowledged that singing of Hymns, and
(...) were used of old amongst funeral offices.

To which I answer, Dr Usher his answer to the les^ites Challenge, upon the
Argument of prayer for the dead.
that the learned Doctor Usher proves out of the Author of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, that such a Rite could not be observed in its pomp and glory unless
there had been some Bishop present, at whose sacred hands the dead body might
receive as it were a sacred coronation.

2. The singing of Psalms, and these thanksgiving prayers, are not signs of
mourning, but rejoicing: and how it would have been interpreted at Oxford (you
may judge) had we shown the least sign of rejoicing at the fall of such a
subtle enemy.

3. In those hymns and Psalms they did express their confidence, (...).
Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in epist. ad Heb.
that the deceased party was crowned in glory; and of that I have said enough
above, to show that I had no such confidence.

But if any of Master Chillingworths Catholic friends at Oxford should speak
out, and tell me that there may (as Augustine says) be Petitions and
Propitiations, made for men that are not very bad, after their death; I will
ingenuously confess that Augustines judgment was very unsettled in this point,
and diverse of his expressions are inexcusable: But to answer them according
to their folly, if they conceive that Master Chillingworth was a Martyr for the
Catholic cause, they will likewise acknowledge (as Augustine in sundry places
does) that to frame Petitions for a Martyr after his death, is an injury to the
Martyr, and to the cause for which he suffered.

If any man do yet remain unsatisfied, let him consider, that had I conceived
it fitting to read some Service over a dead corpse, yet it could not be expected
in reason and equity that I should perform this last office to the body of
Master Chillingworth: For it is well known, that long before these unnatural
and bloody wars, in the times of greatest compliance, I never gave Mr
Chillingworth the right hand of fellowship, but did freely and constantly
protest against those damnable heresies, which he did cunningly subintroduce
and vent in this Kingdom, not only whilst he was a professed Papist, but
since his pretended conversion, (give me leave to call it so) you will see
there is good ground for that diminishing term, when you come to read the
Catechism anon. I am not ashamed to tell the whole University, the whole
Kingdom, that I never looked upon Master Chillingworth as my brother, in a
religious respect, for we were not men of the same Religion, or Communion: to
speak plain we were not members of the same Church, for (as he says truly in
his subtle book) they who differ in Fundamental points are not members of
the same Church one with another, any more then Protestants are members of the
same Church with Papists. Chap. 3. Sect. 9. page 131.

Finally, it was favor enough to permit Master Chillingworths disciples or
followers, the men of his persuasion, to perform this last office to their
friend and Master. Now there was free liberty granted to all the Malignants in
the City to attend the Hearse, and interre his corpse. Sure I am, that if Mr
Chillingworth had been as Orthodoxe and zealous a Preacher as John the Baptist
was, he might have had as honorable a burial as John the Baptist had; for all
the honor that John had, was to be buried by his own Disciples, Matthew. 14.
12. If the doctrine of this eminent Scholar was heretical, and his Disciples
were Malignants, I am not guilty of that difference. As devout Stephen was
carried to his burial by devout men, so is it just and equal that Malignants
should carry Malignants to their grave. By Malignants I mean such kind of men
who join with the enemy, or are willing upon any occasion offered to join
with him, to promote the Antichristian Design now on foot; those, and only
those, I call Malignants. When the Malignants brought his Hearse to the burial,
I met them at the grave with Master Chillingworths book in my hand; at the
burial of which book I conceived it fit to make this little speech following.

A Speech made at the Funeral of Mr Chillingworths mortal Book.
BRethren, it was the earnest desire of that eminent Scholar, whose body lies
here before you, that his corpse might be interred according to the Rites and
customs approved in the English Liturgy, and in most places of this Kingdom
heretofore received: but his second request (in case that were denied him) was,
that he might be buried in this City, after such a manner as might be obtained,
in these times of unhappy difference and bloody wars. His first request is
denied for many reasons, of which you cannot be ignorant. It is too well known
that he was once a professed Papist, and a grand seducer; he perverted diverse
persons of consider^^^^ ^anke and quality; and I have good cause to believe
that his ^e to England, commonly called his Conversion, was but a false and
pretended Conversion: And for my own part, I am fully convinced that he did
not live or dye a genuine Son of the Church of England; I retain the usual
phrase, that you may know what I mean; I mean, he was not of that Faith or
Religion, which is established by Law in England. He has left that fantasy,
which he called his Religion, upon record in this subtle book: He was not
ashamed to print and publish this destructive tenet, That there is no necessity
of Church or Scripture to make men faithful men, in the 100 page of this
unhappy book, and therefore I refuse to bury him my self; yet let his friends
and followers, who have attended his Hearse to this Golgotha, know, that they
are permitted, out of mere humanity, to bury their dead out of our sight. If
they please to undertake the burial of his corpse, I shall undertake to bury
his errors, which are published in this so much admired, yet unworthy book;
and happy would it be for this Kingdom, if this book and all its fellows
could be so buried, that they might never rise more, unless it were for a
confutation; and happy would it have been for the Author, if he had repented of
those errors, that they might never rise for his condemnation; Happy, thrice
happy will he be, if his works do not follow him, if they do never rise with
him, nor against him.

Get thee gone then, thou cursed book, which have seduced so many precious
souls; get thee gone, thou corrupt rotten book, earth to earth, and dust to
dust; get thee gone into the place of rottenness, that thou may rot with thy
Author, and see corruption. So much for the burial of his errors.

Touching the burial of his corpse, I need say no more then this, It will be
most proper for the men of his persuasion to commit the body of their deceased
Friend, Brother, Master, to the dust, and it will be most proper for me to
hearken to that counsel of my Savior, Luke 9. 60. Let the dead bury their
dead, but go thou and preach the Kingdom of God. And so I went from the grave
to the Pulpit, and preached on that Text to the Congregation.

Some conceive that I studied on purpose, to pick out the most piercing Text
in the Bible; a Text which does much reflect upon the party deceased: but these
men err, not knowing the Scriptures; for had I used that Prayer at Master
Chillingworths grave (which was dictated by the Spirit upon the like occasion,
the fall of a great enemy of Israel, Judges 5. 31.) doubtless that Prayer
would have reflected more upon the party deceased, and all his surviving party:
So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, but let them that love thee be as the
Sun when he goes forth in his strength. They would have been more
displeased, had I taken that Text, which is applied to no less a man then the
son of Josiah, by the Prophet Jeremiah: They shall not lament for him saying,
Ah my brother, or, ah sister* -- ah Lord, or ah his glory: He shall be buried
with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem, Ierem. 22. 18, 19. Doubtless that man deserves the burial of an
Ass, who believes his own Reason more then the God of truth; he that dares
not condemn, nay, admires those for rational men, who would reason Christ and
the holy Ghost out of their Godhead, and even dispute them both out of the
Trinity, does certainly deserve the burial of an Ass. Man is born like a wild
asses colt, as silly, wild, and coltish as the Colt of a wild Ass; and if he
prove an old Colt, and perish by his Coltish tricks, wonder not at the sharp
censure of the holy Ghost. You see then there are sharper Texts then this that
I pitched upon for the ground of my discourse.

Secondly, all that understand that Text, Luke 9. 60. will acknowledge, that
the Text did reflect rather upon the living, then the dead. But why then was he
buried at all? I have told you already, his followers were permitted to bury
him out of mere Humanity. I pleaded for his burial from that great example
recorded at length by the holy Ghost, 2 Samuel 1. from the eleventh verse to the
end of the chapter. Saul you know was forsaken of God long before his death;
the spirit of the Lord, (the excellent gifts and common graces of the Spirit in
particular) the spirit of government departed from him: Moreover, he consulted
a witch, and by her the Devil at Endor, and an evil spirit from the Lord took
possession of him; yet Saul was solemnly buried, bewailed, nay extolled by
David for those things which were lovely in him, as you may read in the place
forecited, 17, 21, 24. verses. And I dare boldly say, that I have been more
sorrowful for Mr Chillingworth, and merciful to him, then his friends at
Oxford: his sickness and obstinacy cost me many a prayer, and many a tear. I
did heartily bewail the loss of such strong parts, and eminent gifts; the
loss of so much learning and diligence. Never did I observe more acuteness
and eloquence so exactly tempered in the same person: Diabolus ab illo ornari
cupiebat; for he had eloquence enough to set a fair varnish upon the foulest
design. He was master of his learning, he had all his arguments in procinctu,
and all his notions in numerato. Howl ye fur trees, for a Cedar is fallen:
lament ye Sophisters, for the Master of sentences (shall I say) or fallacies is
vanished: wring your hands, and beat your breasts, ye Antichristian Engineers,
for your Arch-engineer is dead, and all his Engines buried with him. Ye
daughters of Oxford weep over Chillingworth, for he had a considerable and
hopeful project how to clothe you and himself in scarlet, and other delights.
I am distressed for thee, my brother Chillingworth, (may his Executrix say)
very pleasant have thou been unto me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing
the love of father, husband, brother. O how are the mighty fallen, and the
weapons, nay engines of war perished! O tell it not in Gath, that he who
raised a battery against the Popes chair, that he might place Reason in the
chair in stead of Antichrist, is dead and gone: publish it not in the streets
of Askelon, that he who did at once batter Rome, and undermine England, the
Reforming Church of England, that he might prevent a Reformation, is dead; lest
if you publish it, you puzzle all the Conclave, and put them to consider,
whether they should mourn or triumph.

If any man enquire, whether he has a Tombe-stone, as well as an Elegy, let
him know that we plundered an old Friar of his Tombe-stone, and there is room
enough for an Epitaph if they please to send one from Oxford; if not, give us
leave to say, we have provided a Sepulcher, and it is your fault if you do not
provide a Monument: for as Laurentius Valla the master of Elegances observes, a
Monument is nothing else but a speaking Sepulcher: Vixque Monumentum dixerim,
nisi literae aut alii tituli appareant, quae si desint, magis sepulchrum quam
monumentum erit. Laur. Vall. Elegant. lib. 4. cap. 75.

If there be any man yet unsatisfied, that this great Philosopher,
Mathematician, Orator (and any thing but what he pretended to be, a Divine)
has had no more honor at his death, then a plain Tombe-stone, and such a
song of lamentation as was taken up for Saul, let him read this following
Catechism; and if he be either Papist, or Protestant, he will be satisfied, if
he be true to his own principles.

A Profane Catechism, collected out of Mr Chillingworths Works. Question.
HOw shall I be able to prove to an Atheist, that there is a God, and that the
Books of the Old and New Testament are the word of God?

Answ. When Protestants affirm against Papists, that Scripture is a perfect
rule of Faith; their meaning is not, that by Scripture all things Absolutely
may be proved, which are to be believed; for it can never be proved by
Scripture to a gain sayer, that there is a God, or that the Book called
Scripture is the word of God -- for (as he says a little before) nothing is
proved true by being said or written in a Book, but only by Tradition, which is
a Thing credible of it self, chap. 1. p. 55. Sect. 8. the first Edition
approved at Oxford.

Doubtless the Atheists and Papists will give him hearty thanks for this
answer, which does prefer Tradition (which the Atheist vilifies) before
Scripture, which the Papists vilify: he has pleased them both. The Papists
will be well pleased to see this doctrine licensed by the Protestants of the
University of Oxford, that Tradition is more credible then Scripture, for
Tradition is credible for it self; but the Scripture, when it is to be proved
a perfect Rule to us, is credible only by Tradition in Mr Chillingworths
conceit, page 96. and where shall we meet with this universal Tradition?

2. But I find another answer, page 53. Tradition may be helped out by
natural Reason. Controversies, wherein the Scripture it self is the subject
of the question, cannot be determined, says Mr Chillingworth, but by Natural
Reason, the only principle, beside Scripture, which is common to Christians,
cap. 2. sect. 3. And in his marginall observations on a passage of Mr Hookers
he lays down this as a Rule; Natural Reason then built on principles common
to all men, is the last Resolution, page 65. Nay, Reason is in some sort Gods
word, see his answer to the Preface, page 21. How then (will the Atheist say)
is Reason credible for it self, since (Mr Chillingworth says) that Gods word
is not credible for it self? Surely these answers will never bring a man to
divine faith; for to rely upon Tradition, is but to rely upon Humane testimony;
and such as the testimony is, such is the faith: if the testimony, which is the
ground of faith, be humane, then the faith cannot be divine. Again, natural
Reason is not infallible, nor is it able to judge of truths which are above
Reason: now it is clear, that supernatural truths are above natural Reason.
Finally, faith is not grounded upon Reason, but upon Authority.

He gives a third answer, chap. 1. page 36. God has confirmed the doctrine of
the Scripture by miracles; but then he says, we have nothing to assure us of
the truth of those miracles, but Tradition; and therefore we are not got one
step nearer faith or Heaven by that shift: and if he fly back to Reason,
then consider what he says, page 117. God has no where commanded men to
believe all that Reason induces them to believe.

Qu. But if this great point must be tried by Reason, what Reason can you
produce, to prove the Scripture to be the word of God?

An. There is as good reason for it, as there is to believe other stories or
matters of Tradition: He requires men to yield just such a kind or degree of
assent to the Gospel of Christ, as they yield to other stories or matters of
Tradition, chap. 1. page 37. for God desires us only to believe the conclusion
as much as the premises deserve, ib. sect. 8. p. 36. And the Chronicle of
England, joined with the general tradition of our acquaintance, deserves as
much credit in Mr Chillingworths conceit, as the Gospel of Christ; for his
words are these, chap. 2. sect. 159. p. 116. 117. We have, I believe, as great
reason to believe there was such a man as Henry the eighth King of England, as
the Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. The Lord rebuke that spirit of
error, which moved the great men of Oxford to license this blasphemy! What
have I no more reason to believe the three persons in the holy Trinity,
speaking in their glorious Gospel to my heart and conscience, then I have to
believe Stowes Chronicle* or the general tradition of my own acquaintance, or
some such other fallible testimony?

Qu. But what if I cannot be assured, that any part of the Scripture is the
word of God, may I be saved without believing this weighty point?

An. Yes, says Mr. Chillingworth, chap. 2. sect. 159. if a man should believe
Christian Religion wholly and entirely, and live according to it, such a man
though he should not know, or not believe the Scripture to be a Rule of faith,
no nor to be the word of God; my opinion is he may be saved. Excellent Divinity
indeed! what, is not this a principle of Christianity, that Scripture is the
word of God, and rule of faith? and if it be, how then is it possible for a man
to believe the Christian Religion wholly and entirely, and yet not believe this
principle? Yes, I may believe the Scripture as I do Augustins works, page 114.

Qu. But if I am assured that some Scripture is the word of God, how shall I
know what books are Canonical, and what not?

An. By universal Tradition. I must receive those books for Canonical, of
whose Authority there was never any doubt or question in the Church, page 148.
I may then, it seems, doubt of the Epistle of James, the second of Peter, the
second and third Epistles of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of
Jude, the book of the Revelation, the books of Job, Esther, Ecclesiastes, etc.
He says, he cannot in reason so undoubtedly believe those books to be
Canonical, which have been questioned, as those which were never questioned.
At least I have no warrant to damn any man -- that shall deny them now, having
the example of Saints in Heaven, either to justify or excuse such -- their
denial, chap. 2. sect. 38. page 67. Surely here is a pretty tempting excuse
for, if not a justification of those Libertines who question these books, and
may upon Mr Chillingworths principles question all the rest, if they
acknowledge one of the Gospels, that contains as much as all the rest; Ergo
that is sufficient, page 93. 101.

But if they believe no book to be Canonical, and therefore will not assent
to any book of Scripture, they do not commit a sin of derogation from Gods
perfect and pure veracity; for he only gives God the lie, who denies some book
or point which he himself knows or believes to be revealed by God, chap. 3.
sect. 15, 16, 17. Now it is impossible that a man should know one thing to be
true, and believe the contrary; or know it and not believe it, sect. 18.
Whither these and the like principles (which frequently occur in his
writings) tend, let the most sober and charitable men judge. The only
Fundamental Error in Mr Chillingworths judgment, is to deny something which
the party himself knows or believes to be revealed by God: and therefore in
his judgment none but downeright Atheists err fundamentally, cap. 2. p. 135.
136. Atheism then, as the Jesuits and Arminians conceive, is the formality of
an Heretic, p. 100. for it is downright Atheism for any man to deny that to
be true, which he acknowledges to be spoken by the God of truth.

Qu. But if I do believe the Scripture to be Gods word, is it necessary to
believe that controversies are to be decided by that Word?

An. No, says Mr Chillingworth, this is no Fundamental point; his words are
full. I say that this position (Scripture alone is the rule whereby they which
believe it to be Gods word, are to judge all controversies in faith) is no
Fundamental point, chap. 2. page 115. His intent is by this assertion to make
good a dream of his, that some controversies in faith need not be judged or
determined at all. Mr Chillingworth pretends, that he holds the Scripture to be
a perfect rule of faith, and yet he says it is not necessary to judge all
controversies (and those no small ones, because they are controversies) in
faith by that perfect rule. It is a perfect rule, but we need not be ruled by
it in all points of faith.

Qu. But is there then any other way to decide controversies which has any
color of probability from the Scripture?

An. Yes: nine or ten several means of agreement offered themselves to Mr
Chillingworth upon the sudden, (and happily more might have been thought on if
he had had time) and these that are offered, have as much probability from
Scripture, as that which Papists obtrude upon us. And truly he was such a ready
blasphemer, that he could vent extemporary blasphemies; yet such as the
Licentious men at Oxford approved chap. 3. page 130. 131.

First he says, we could, if we would, try it by lots, whose Doctrine is true,
and whose false; for which he cites Prove. 16. 33. It may be, this Sophister did
cast lots for his Religion, and it was his hard lot to draw Popery first, then
Arminianisme, and then his doctrine run lower and lower, till it came almost to
the very dregs of Socinianisme.

Secondly, we could refer it to the King, Prove 16. 10. and 21. 1. Mr
Chillingworth might make merry with his own profane doctrine, but I admire
that he should dare to sport himself with the Majesty of Scripture, and the
Majesty of the King: But truly I am afraid, that some are so indifferent in
point of Religion, that they are content not only to refer it to the King,
but to the Queen. It were proper for them to vent such Doctrine, who have, as
the old Tradition and proverb has it, taken an oath to be of the Kings
Religion.

Thirdly, to an Assembly of Christians assembled in the name of Christ, Math.
18. 20. Let them not then blame the Parliament for consulting an Assembly of
learned and pious Christians, and most of them Ministers of the Gospel,
assembled in the name of Christ.

Fourthly, to any Priest, Malach. 2. 7. This makes well of the Queens side.

Fifthly, to any Preacher of the Gospel, Pastor, or Doctor, Math. 28. 20.
Sure Mr Chillingworth was more independent then they that are commonly so
called.

Sixthly, to any Bishop or Prelate (why not then to the Bishop of Rome?) for it
is written, Obey your Prelates, Heb. 13. 17. Mr Chillingworth since his
pretended conversion was very apt to be seduced by the vulgar (or Rhemish)
translation, or some version received at Saint Omers; but this was a voluntary
and devised means, as he says in the same page.

Seventhly, to any particular Church of Christians, seeing it is a particular
Church, which is called the house of God, a pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy
3. 15. and seeing of any particular Church it is written, He that hears not
the Church, let him be unto thee an Heathen, Matthew. 18. Mr Chillingworth is
sometimes Prelaticall, and sometimes Congregationall.

Eighthly, we might refer it to any man that prays for Gods spirit; for it
is written, every one that asks, receives, (this is one step beyond the
Brownists) Matthew. 7. 8. James 1. 5.

Lastly, we might refer it to the Jews, for without all doubt of them it is
written, My spirit that is in thee, etc. Isaiah 59. 21. And why not to the
Socinians? they have natural reason, a very competent Judge in Mr
Chillingworths conceit. What wonder is it that so many blasphemies and quibbles
for every quibble upon Scripture is a blasphemy) should be licensed by grave
and learned Professors of Divinity? what if Papists take liberty to blaspheme
and put the Scripture upon the rack to force it to confess what makes for
their turn; must Protestants or such a one who undertakes the common Cause of
Protestants (though he was no Protestant) be permitted to blaspheme by the
License of an University? Repent dear Doctors, once more repent; and I will
proceed.

Qu. But how shall I know the true sense of Scripture, there being such variety
of conceits which pass for Interpretations?

Answ. Here help me Reason again and Implicit Faith. For, the last Resolution
of my Faith in his conceit must be into Reason, page 65. 96. and still he
labors to prove that Reason is Judge; and he frequently jeares at Knot for
accounting it an absurdity for every man and woman to rely upon their Reason in
the interpreting of Scripture p. 98. Reasons drawn out of the circumstances of
the Text cannot convince me, unless I judge of them by my Reason; and for
every man or woman to rely on that -- in the interpreting of Scripture, you say
is an horrible absurdity. And p. 99. Reason will show this to be the meaning:
yes, if we may use our Reason, and rely upon it. Protestants use their reason,
but Socinians rely upon their reason. And he teaches implicit faith all along
his book: Protestants, says he, do agree with an Implicit faith in that sense
of the whole Scripture which God intended, whatsoever it was, p 129. 130 cap.
5. sect. 3. a ready way to tempt men to believe very little concerning the
sense of Scripture: for, men will be apt to say, that the sense of this and the
other place of Scripture is not plainly and fully revealed, and Mr
Chillingworth does not require any thing to be believed with an explicit faith
which is not plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture. My reason (says
he) is convincing and demonstrative, because nothing is necessary to be
believed, but what is plainly revealed, p. 92. But nothing in his judgment is
plainly revealed about any point which is called in question, if there be a
seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority
with Authority; in such a case he cannot well understand how it can be truly
said, that God has manifestly revealed the truth on either side, chap. 3.
sect. 9. p. 136. 137. Well, but admit that the appearances on my side are
answerable, and grant that Scripture, Reason, Authority, are all against me,
because on the other side; yet consider the strange power of Education and
Prejudices instilled by it, and what Passions I am subject to, and then my
error is unavoydable, and therefore excusable; for though the truth is in it
self revealed plainly enough, yet to such a one as I am, prepossest with
contrary opinions, the truth in that point is not plainly revealed, read page
137. Sure the corruption of our Nature is as unavoydable as prejudices and
passions, and therefore he must (according to his principles) conclude that God
who knows whereof we are made, will not enter into judgment with us for those
things which (all things considered) were unavoydable; they are his own words
page 137. Nay, besides education, prejudices, and passions, inadvertence may in
the fourth place excuse us if we dis-beleeve a plain Revelation. Finally, in
the fifth place, multitude of buisinesse, distractions, hindrances, will excuse
us, and hinder God from imputing our errors to us as sins. In his answer to
the preface p 19. I am verily persuaded that God will not impute errors to
them as sins, who use such a measure of industry in finding truth, as humane
prudence and ordinary discretion (their abilities and opportunities, their
distractions and hindrances, and all other things considered) (he will be sure
to give liberty enough) shall advise them unto in a matter of such consequence.
But certainly humane prudence and ordinary discretion will teach men to plead
these excuses, which he has framed for them, when any point of faith shall be
pressed upon them; they will say, our opportunities are few, our distractions
and hindrances many, our education mean, our abilities weak, our prejudices
strong, our passions violent, our inadvertence pardonable, and therefore we
will content our selves with a modest humble implicit faith; we believe the
whole Scripture to be true, in that sense which God intended, whatsoever it
was, but we have not time to search or ability to judge what it was: if we
believe nothing explicitly, or to disbeleeve a clear revelation, that
revelation, though clear in it self, is not clear to us, our error (the
corruption of our nature, our prejudices, contrary opinions, with which we are
already prepossest, and all other things considered) is unavoidable, and
therefore God will never impute it to us as a sin. Whither these Principles
tend, let the pretended Parliament at Oxford judge.

Qu. But are we not bound to hear what the Church will say to us for our
direction in weighty points?

Ans. I must believe the Church in every thing she proves, either by Scripture,
Reason, or universal Tradition, be it, Fundamental, or be it not
Fundamental, page 149. These disjunctives seem to imply that something
fundamental may be proved by reason, or universal Tradition, which cannot be
proved by Scripture. The Licencers may do well to declare what that
Fundamental point is, or how many there are, if there be more then one: I may
go to Heathens, I need not go to the Church for any thing which Reason teaches,
the Philosophers can sufficiently instruct me; and if what the Church teaches
be finally resolved into my own reason, as he affirms p. 96. then I do not
believe either God or the Church, but my own reason: By you (says Master
Chillingworth to Knot) as well as by Protestants, all is finally resolved into
your own reason, Sect. 115. cap. 2. Sure I am then that such Protestants and
Jesuits are in their highway to pure Socinianisme, and therefore it is no
marvel if some Jesuits have been such Anti-Trinitarians as Master
Chillingworth pleads in his own defense. Preface and Answer to the directions
to N. N. Sect. 16, 17, 18, etc. the Church has lost the interpretation of
obscure places, page 56 and plain places need no exposition at all.

Qu. But what if the Church err?

Ans. Then a man may learn of that self same Church (which taught him) to
confute the errors of that Church: that is, I may learn to confute the
erroneous conclusions of that Church, by those very rules and principles which
that Church teaches, Chap 3. sect. 40. p. 150. First then, a private man is
presumed to have more Logic then that teaching Church. Secondly, the Prelates
(who call themselves the Church) may give my brethren of the Assembly leave to
confute their erroneous conclusions, by some rules and principles which they
themselves have delivered. Thirdly, a man may learn of the Church how to teach
the Church. Principles which lead to these harsh truths, being licenced at
Oxford, are an argument to me that they approved this book before they read it.

Qu. But how shall we do then to find out the true Church, and the true
Religion?

Ans. For commands to seek the Church I have not yet met with any; and I
believe (says he to Knot) you (if you were to show them) would be your self to
seek. Cap. 3. Sect. 41. p. 150. And for Religion, how little pains or care we
are to take about it, has been already showed.

Q. But which must a man choose first, his Religion, or his Church?

Ans. Every man is to judge for himself with the judgment of discretion, (which
he calls humane prudence, and ordinary discretion, in the place of his Answer
to the preface forecited, p. 19.) and to chase either his religion first, and
then his Church, as Master Chillingworth says; or as Knot, his Church first,
and then his Religion, page 57. Every man then is Judge, the Scripture (for
fashions sake) he calls the rule, but he makes every man's natural reason the
rule, to judge whether such a Text be the Word of God, and then what is the
sense of that Text; and so all is still finally resolved into our own reason,
into humane prudence, and ordinary discretion; for Tradition is a principle,
not in Christianity, but in Reason; nor proper to Christians, but common to all
men, p. 72. cap. 2. sect. 51. Come away then to the School of Socrates, for
this is just, sit anima mea cum Philosophis. Read from the 9^ to the 100 page.
I will advise with God and that Reason he has given me, page 158. he adored
God and Reason.

Qu. But is it not possible for men to become faithful without either Church
or Scripture?

Ans. Yes, by the works of God without us, and the Law of God written in us by
Nature.

Either of these ways might make some faithful men without either necessity
of Scripture or Church. chapter 2. sect. 124. p. 100

Qu. What is Faith?

Ans. It is the Assent of our Understandings.

Qu. Are not the Essential Doctrines of Christianity to be embraced with our
will?

An. The assent of our understandings is required to them, but no obedience
from our wills, chap. 4. sect. 2. p. 193.

Qu. What are these Essential doctrines of Christianity?

Ans. I do not know.

Qu. Do you not know what ye are to believe? Or, cannot the church tell what
these necessary Truths called the Essential and Fundamental parts of
Christianity are?

Answ. No, there is no such Church that Mr. Chillingworth was ever acquainted
with. We are not to learn of the Church what is fundamental. cap. 3. sect. 39

Qu. What does Mr Chillingworth think Fundamental?

Ans. All points which are intrinsecall to the Covenant between God and man.
page. 193. cap. 4. sect. 3.

Qu. What are these points?

Ans. Repentance from dead works, and faith in Christ Jesus the form of God,
(oh that he would have confessed him to be God) and Savior of the world: this
is all that is simply necessary, page 159.

Qu. What is it to believe in Christ?

Answ. It is to expect remission of sins, and salvation from him upon the
performance of the conditions he requires, p. 134. Observe more conditions
beside faith required to Justification 2. No mention made of Christ's
performance, but ours. 3. No mention of free grace: it runs like a Covenant of
works.

Qu. What are these conditions?

Answ. One is, that we believe what God has revealed, when it is sufficiently
declared to have been revealed by him. You have had the English of that
already, read page 134.

Qu. Is it simply necessary to salvation to believe in Christ?

Ans. It is simply necessary for them to whom faith in Christ is sufficiently
propounded, as necessary to salvation, p. 134.

He will wrangle with you if you say faith in Christ is sufficiently propounded
to Jews, Turks, Heathens: for observe that he presently adds in the self
same page, That may be sufficiently declared to one (all things considered)
which (all things considered) to another is not sufficiently declared, and
consequently that may be Fundamental and necessary to one, which to another is
not so. In his conceit then it is not necessary for some men's salvation, that
they should believe in Christ. And it has been formerly observed, that some
men (as he conceived*) might be made faithful men without necessity of Church
or Scripture. Finally, in the 133 page he says expressly, that Cornelius was
but a meet Gentile, one that believed not in Christ, and knew not but men
might be worshipped; and yet we are assured, that his prayers and alms, even
whilst he was in that estate, were accepted. Ergo in his judgment a mere
Heathen and an Idolater may have access to God in prayer, and be accepted
without the mediation of our only Mediator the Lord Jesus, God blessed for
ever. But the truth is, Cornelius was a Proselyte, instructed in the Jewish
Religion, who believed in the Messiah, and that faith was sufficient for his
acceptance, before the Gospel of Christ was preached unto him. The prayers and
alms of idolatrous Heathens (who know not but they may worship men) cannot be
accepted without faith in Christ: nor do their prayers and alms please God so
well, as that for them or by them they should be promoted to a higher degree of
knowledge, the knowledge of Christ, that so they may be saved by Christ: for
what is this, but to deserve a Savior, which is meritum de congruo at least?
nay, let the Licensers consider, whether to deserve Christ, be not more then to
deserve Heaven. Moreover, he is much mistaken, when he says, that they who
never heard of Christ, may seek God as to please him, and that they shall be
rewarded for their seeking of him with the knowledge of the Gospel* or says
in Christ; sor he who does not seek God in and by Christ our only Mediator,
does not come to God, but runs quite beside him: to such a carnal seeking* God
never yet promised such a spiritual reward. Consider that of the Apostle Romans
9. 30, 31, 32, 33. and the next chapter, the second and third verses. That text
Hebr. 11. 6. should be compared with, and expounded by John 14. 6. and then it
will be evident that no man can seek so as to find him, or come to him after
an acceptable manner, unless he seek God in, and come to him by Jesus Christ,
who is the way, the truth, and the life, the true way to eternal life. I
hasten to the next question.

Qu. What other Condition is there of the Covenant besides believing?

Answ. Repentance of sin, and obedience to Christ; for God is a punisher of
them that obstinately offend him; therefore repentance of sin is necessary,
and Jesus Christ is the son of God and Savior of the world, by obedience to
whom men must look to be saved, p. 101. Mark, he does not say, by whose
obedience men must be justified, and yet this is the fairest confession that I
can meet with: I read often of our obedience to Christ, but I never read any
thing yet in Mr Chillingworths book, of Christ's obedience imputed to us; now it
is the imputation of Christ's obedience to us, and Gods free pardon of our
disobedience, which make the covenant appear to be a covenant of grace.

Qu. What is repentance?

Answ. An universal sorrow for all those sins which we know we have
committed, and which we fear we may have committed. Answer to the Preface p.
20. If we have been betrayed into, or kept in error by any sin of our will,
if that error be discovered, there must be a particular and explicit
repentance of that error; if it be not discovered, then a general and
implicit repentance for all sins known and unknown does suffice, Ib. p. 21.
Observe that he says nothing of the hatred of sin, or the forsaking of
sin, in which the life and power of repentance does consist. A man may live
and die in his sins and be saved by an universal sorrow. Men are damned,
says he, who die in wilful errors without repentance; but what if they die
in their errors with repentance? Answer to the Preface p. 20. That is a
contradiction, says the Jesuit, and he says true; but it appears by that
speech, that Master Chillingworth conceived that an universal sorrow for sin
without any hatred of, or turning from sin, was saving repentance.

Qu. What other condition is required in the Covenant between God and man in
Christ?

Answ. Sincere obedience. Answer to the Preface, p. 18. This indeed is the
prime condition he means, when he says, p. 134. That to believe in Christ, is
to expect remission of sins from Christ upon the conditions he requires. This
is pure Socinianisme, to believe that we shall be pardoned upon our obedience,
or as the Socinians express it, and justified (according to the Covenant) by
our own obedience; not as we say, by the obedience of Christ, and freely
pardoned for the al sufficient satisfaction of Christ, made in our stead, and
put upon our account. Besides, if a man neglect never so many duties, live in
never-so many errors, and commit never so many gross sins, he conceives that
an Implicit Faith and a general Repentance of all sins known and unknown,
are sufficient Antidotes, and his Obedience shall pass for sincere Obedience;
as you may clearly see in those places which have been already alleged. If a
man be not convinced that Christ is God, (by his principles) an Implicit Faith
and general Repentance will serve the turn, though that truth has been
sufficiently propounded to him, and it is merely his own fault that he is not
convinced, for in his conceit as long as this man remains (as he says)
unconvinced (but as we say, obstinate) so long he does not derogate any thing
from Gods veracity or truth. His words are these. But if the proposal be only
so sufficient, not, that the party (to whom it is made) is convinced, but only
that he should, and but for his own fault would have been convinced of the
divine verity of the doctrine proposed. The crime then is not so great, for the
belief of Gods veracity may well consist with such an error. Yet a fault I
confess it is, and without Repentance, damnable, if all circumstances
considered (that is, men's passions, hindrances, etc. considered as above said)
the proposal be sufficient, p. 18. of his answer to the Preface. Now what he
means by repentance has been shown, a general sorrow for all sins known
and unknown; such a repentance as will consist with a man's obstinate denial
of a truth, for he may die in this error with Master Chillingworths
repentance, and neither the error nor the obstinancie shall be imputed to him,
because he is sorry for he knows not what, and remained unconvinced of his
error, though it was merely his own fault that he was not convinced. This is
a ready way to save Jews, Turks, Socinians, Papists Infidels, and all; for he
does merely retain the names of faith, repentance, sincere obedience, without
the substance, life, and power of them. The Faith he talks of, leaves the will
at liberty: he starts at the Apostles phrase, the obedience of faith. You
(says he to Knot) say there is some merit in faith, we some obedience in it,
which can hardly have place where there is no possibility of disobedience, as
there is not, where the understanding does all, and the will nothing, p. 329.
Sure I am, the Devil has such a says, an assent without obedience; his faith
is no faith, because grounded merely upon probabilities; he only says that the
precepts of Christianity are most likely to come from God, p. 36. chap. 1. but
the Spirit of God being implored by devout and humble prayer, and sincere
obedience, may and will by degrees advance his servants to an higher certainty,
p. 36. 37. But this certainty is a reward given to believers; so then men are
believers before the Spirit gives them any certainty that the Christian
religion did proceed from the fountain of goodness: Now he who only believes
the Christian religion of all other religions to be most likely to be true, is
not very likely to implore the Spirit very earnestly either by prayer or
obedience; for who will obey the precepts of Christianity till he be assured
that they and the promises are divine? But says Master Chillingworth, men may
talk their pleasure of an absolute and most infallible certainty, but did they
generally believe that obedience to Christ were the only way (mark that, the
only way) to present, and eternal felicity, but as firmly and undoubtedly as
that there is such a City as Constantinople, nay but as much as Caesar's
Commentaries, or the History of Salust; I believe the lives of most men, both
Papists and Protestants would be better then they are, chap. 6. page 327. Sure
Christ's obedience for us is the way to happiness, therefore our obedience is
not the only way. 2. It is certain that all true Protestants do believe the
Gospel more firmly then (Caesar's Commentaries or Salust) profane Histories. 3.
Such a Faith as this will not implore the Spirit by devout and humble prayer,
or by sincere obedience. 4. I appeal to all indifferent men what kind of
obedience is like to spring from an implicit faith in unsanctified reason; a
faith that is a bare assent without obedience, the faith of Devils, not the
faith of Christians. 5. The repentance of obstinate men, (I mean in sensu
composito, as Master Chillingworth means) a general sorrow which he calls
repentance (that is, humiliation without reformation) repentance of sins
which I love and live in and damnable errors which I die in, is not that
repentance from dead works which Christ requires; sure Heresy in the language
of the Apostle is a work of the flesh, and therefore as dead a work as any
other; we may then safely conclude (that an implicit faith in unsanctified
reason or fallible tradition, and a general sorrow for I know not what sins
and errors (though gross enough for to be known) such sins and errors as
the party does love, live, and die in, and never so much as confess to be
sins or errors, because he is so obstinate that he will not be convinced of
them) I say, safely conclude, that this faith and this sorrow are both
unchristian, if not Antichristian. He that has an implicit faith in his own
unsanctified reason makes himself a Pope. Sanctified reason sees but in part,
and therefore unsanctified reason is spiritually blind, it cannot see any thing
which is spiritually discerned. Besides, I fear that he conceived there was
some merit of congruity in the lame obedience of this blind believer, because
he says the sincere obedience of such a believer does implore the Spirit. Now
whether a man that relies upon his own reason, and his own obedience, in
stead of relying upon Gods authority and Christ's obedience, can be saved by the
Covenant of Grace, let all true Christians judge.

Qu. What other condition is required of us?

Answ. A true, sincere and cordial love of God. Answer to the Preface, p. 20.

Qu. How may a man be raised to this love?

Answ. By the consideration of Gods most infinite goodness to us, and our own
almost infinite wickedness against him, Gods Spirit cooperating with us, may
raise us to a true, sincere and a cordial love of God. in the same page.

Qu. Wherein does this infinite goodness of God manifest it self?

Answ. 1. In creating us of nothing. 2. In creating us after his own image. 3.
In creating all things for our use and benefit. 4. In streaming down his
favors on us every moment of our lives. 5. In designing us, if we serve him,
to infinite and eternal happiness. 6. In redeeming us with the precious blood
of his beloved Son. 7. By his patience toward us in expecting our
conversion. 8. In wooing, alluring, leading, and by all means (which his
wisdom can suggest unto him, and man's nature is capable of) drawing them to
repentance and salvation.

I have picked out the marrow of his notions the best Divinity his works
afford, but observe. 1. We are (says he) designed to eternal happiness if we
serve God; which is perfect Popery, shall I say, or Socinianisme? here is a
conditional decree, and the condition is works. 2. God expects our conversion,
I thought he had effected our conversion; if God stay till we will turn off
our selves or cooperate with his Spirit in the first act of our conversion, we
shall never be converted. Sure I am, this Implicit faith grounded on
unsanctified reason, and fallible tradition, will rather resist, then cooperate
with* the holy Spirit. The Scripture tells us that we do never love God in good
earnest till we do believe Gods love to us: compare the 16. and 19. verses of
the 1 John 4. And faith is not wrought in us by our cooperation with the Spirit
but by the Almighty power of God who quickens us whom he finds dead in
trespasses and sins unto a lively faith; as is evident in the two first
chapters of the Epistle to the Ephesians.

Qu Is it possible for a man that lives and dies a Papist to be saved?

Ans. Yes very possible in the judgment of Master Chillingworth. 1, Because
the Papists do not err in Fundamentals chap. 3. Sect. 56. page 164. For the
only and main reason (says he) why we believe you not to err in Fundamentals
is your holding the Doctrine of Faith in Christ and Repentance. The worst sort
of Papists who have means to find the Truth, but will not use them, may be
saved if they die with a general repentance for all their sins known and
unknown, because the Truths which they hold of Faith in Christ, and repentance
are as it were an Antidote against their errors, and their negligence in
seeking the truth. Especially, seeing by confession of both sides we agree in
much more then is simply and indispensably necessary to salvation, Chap. 3.
Sect. 12. page 133. And truly I do believe if the worst of Papists, and the
worst of Protestants did agree in fewer things then they do, there would be
more hope of the salvation of Papists.

Qu. What is the best way to bring Papists and Protestants into one communion?

Ans. The framing and proposing of a Liturgy which both sides hold lawful. p.
132. This was perchance the great stratagem aimed at in the framing of that
Liturgy which was sent into Scotland; and this is a point which deserves the
consideration of the pretended Parliament or Assembly at Oxford.

Qu. Is the Spirit absolutely promised to the succession of Bishops?

Answ. No: for many of them have been notoriously and confessedly wicked men,
men of the world: whereas this Spirit is the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because he sees him not, neither knows him, p. 146, 147.
Whether this be not as true of some Popish Prelates in England, as of the
Bishops of Rome, let the learned determine.

Qu. What if a Church maintain an error contrary to Gods Revelation known by
that Church to be a divine Revelation?

Ans. The Church that does so is no longer a Church. p. 137.

Qu. Does not Master Chillingworth sometimes contradict himself, and call the
Roman Church the Catholic Church.

Answ. He seems to do so, p. 132. His words are these* We believe the
Catholic Church cannot perish, yet that she may, and did err in points not
Fundamental; and that Protestan^ were obliged to forsake these errors of her
Church, as they did, though not the Church for the errors, for that they did
not, but continued still members of the Church. Observe that the question is
about forsaking the Church of Rome, and he talks of the Catholic Church. 1.
The Catholic Church did not err with the Roman; the Greek Church did forsake
the errors of the Roman. 2. Those Protestants who did protest against the
Church of Rome, were a considerable part of the Catholic Church. 3. Those
Protestants did not continue members of the Roman Church but did renounce her
communion, because of her errors. 4. His distinction which follows between
the Catholic and Roman Church makes his former observations nonsense at
least. 5. He says they separated from the Roman Church only in things which
they conceived superstitious or impious -- and (he says) they were obliged to
do this under pain of damnation. Not (says he) as if it were damnable to
hold an error not damnable, p. 132. Did those Protestants rightly conceive the
practices of Rome to be superstitious and impious, or did they not? if they did
conceive aright, then superstion and impiety are in Master Chillingworths
judgment not damnable; if they did conceive amiss, why does Master
Chillingworth justify our separation from the Church of Rome? Sure Master
Chillingworth was no fit man to maintain the common cause of Protestants
against Papists.

Qu. May not a man be damned by maintaining errors which are not in
themselves damnable?

Ans. Yes, because it is damnable outwardly to profess and maintain, and
join with others in the practice of that which inwardly we do not hold: for
this is (as he confesses) damnable dissimulation and hypocrisy, p. 132. Men
may do well to take notice, that Mr Chillingworth does account something
damnable; and I note this the rather at this time, because men are so apt to
profess one thing in one place, and another thing in another in these days of
liberty, and to join with others in the practice of that which they inwardly
dislike. Yet Mr Chillingworth says, that if in him alone there should have met
a confluence of all the errors which all the Protestants in the world have
fell into out of humane frailty, he would not be so much afraid of them all, as
to ask pardon for them, because to ask pardon for them, were to imply, that God
is angry for them, Answ. to the Preface p. 19.

Qu. May a man go constantly to Mass, and be saved?

Ans. Yes, if he be devout at it (for that he means by a godly Layman) if he
be strongly persuaded that there is no impiety or superstition in the use of
the Latin service, Answ. to the Preface p. 9. sect. 7. It seems there is no
fault in the Mass, but that it is in Latin.

Qu. What profit might be gained by the Masse-book if it were in English?

Ans. Much devotion, instruction, edification, salvation, in the place
forecited. Was not this a stout Champion, chosen by Canterbury on purpose, not
to confute, but harden Papists, and seduce Protestants.

Qu. What are the causes of error?

Ans. Negligence in seeking truth, unwillingnesse to find it, pride, obstinacy,
a politic desire that that Religion should be true, which suits best with my
ends, fear of men's ill opinion, or any other worldly fear or worldly hope,
these seven betray men to, and keep men in damnable errors, p. 158. It is one
of the most honest passages in his book. Brethren let us beware of these
motives.

Qu. What kind of man was Knot?

Ans. One that went about to delude his King, and Country with strange
captions; Sure Mr Chillingworth and he were both of a make, read 117.

Qu. How may a King usurp an Absolute Lordship and Tyranny over any people?

Ans He need not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of abrogating Laws,
made to maintain common liberty; for he may frustrate their intent, and
compass his own design as well, if he can get the power and authority to
interpret them as he pleases, and to add to them what he pleases, and to have
his interpretations and additions stand for laws; if he can rule his people by
his Laws, and his Laws by his Lawyers, p. 51. cap. 2. I think our Judges
followed his directions in the point of Ship Money.

Qu. What weapons of warfare may be justly called carnal?

Ans. Massacres, Treasons, Persecutions, and in a word all means either
violent or fraudulent. p. 52. God grant that the Irish forces which land daily,
do not make us as well acquainted with this warfare in England, as they are in
Ireland.

Qu. What obedience do we owe to the laws and judgments of Courts?

Answ. Only external obedience, not internal approbation. p. 97.

Qu. If I disapprove the judgment of any Court, am I bound to conceal my own
judgment?

Ans. No, I may lawfully profess my judgment, and represent my reasons to the
King or Commonwealth in a Parliament, as Sir Thomas Moore did without
committing any fault, p. 97 Why then are men so much blamed for professing
their judgment against some things which seem to be established by Law, and
representing their reasons to the Parliament? and why did not Master
Chillingworth yield external obedience to the Commonwealth of England in this
Parliament? for who can deny that the Commonwealth of England is assembled in
this Parliament?

Qu. May not a Court which pretends not to be infallible, be certain enough
that they judge aright?

Answ. Yes, our Judges are not infallible in their judgments, yet are they
certain enough that they judge aright, and that they proceed according to the
evidence that is given, when they condemn a thief or a murderer to the
Gallows. p. 140.

Now Reader judge Master Chillingworths works, my proceedings, and this
Treatise according to the evidence given: and think an implicit faith in
thine own reason almost as bad as implicit faith in the Church or Pope of
Rome.

I conclude all as Doctor Fern concludes his last book. The God of Power and
Wisdom cast out all Counsels, and defeat all Designs that are against the
restoring of our Peace, and the continuance of the true Reformed Religion Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

