PRotectors, Parliaments, and all, see, hear,
And quake for fear: O do not jeer, nor swear
Against God, who roars from Sion on your sin,
Against such High Places which you worship in.
Jah with his burning blasts of lightnings quells
The Peoples Idols-Temples-Steeples-Bells.
A most prodigious and fearful storm of wind lightning and thunder,
mightily defaceing With comb-church in Deuon. burneing and slayeing diverse men
and women all this in service-time, on the Lords day October: 21 (...).
woodcut

TO His Highness the Lord Protector, etc. AND To the Parliament of England.
Valiant Swordmen, and Honorable Gentlemen,
NAaman the Syrian was a man high and honorable, because by him the Lord had
given deliverance to Syri^: he was also a mighty man in valor; but he was a
leper. And he was wroth against the Prophet of the Lord without a cause, and so
went away in a rage. But his servants came near, and spoke unto him and said,
My father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not
have done it? how much more rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and be
clean? Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan according to
the saying of the man of (...): and his flesh name again like unto the flesh of
a little child; and he was clean. And being thus cleansed of his leprosy he
promised thenceforth not to offer unto other gods, but unto Jehovah. Yea, he
knew it was a sin to go into the house of R^mmon to wait upon his Master the
King (to be his leaning-stock in that Idols temple) when he worshipped there. 2
Kings 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18.

Sirs, I presented you formerly with a Book entitled Thunder from the throne
of God (against the temples of Idols) which the foolish people count a work of
madness, but indeed were solid words of truth and soberness: yet such
thundering and convincing Arguments were not acceptable nor delectable unto
you; being for the quite plucking down of the Idolatrous High Places, which are
still kept up, under pretense of usefulness and convenience for Worship. But
humane pretenses without divine precepts, are like an empty Parliament House
without members, or a Parliament without power: even so is a bare name of
godliness, famous with men, but infamous with God, like that fear toward him
which is taught by the precepts of men.

Tell me, ye great men, did not Constantine the great give the Heathens
Idol-temples for Christians to worship in? and was it not a snare to him and
them, like the Cross in his Banners? And what followed at the last? was not
Constantinople lost, and the head of Constantine held upon the top of a spear?
And how can such your frequent appearances of evil avail you in your Spanish
Wars, O ye mortal gods, who must die like men, and fall like one of the
Princes? Psalm. 28.7.

Is it not remarkable, that the Jews for the space of these 1600 years were not
so totally blinded, as to hold such a correspondencie with Gods enemies the
Papists, as to uphold their Idols or Idols Temples: but do pray heartily for
their utter destruction: And the Law of God [for the quite plucking down of all
the Idols Temples] is not repealed by Christ. And although the Jews (whom the
foolish people would convert as the Spaniards the Indians) are not permitted
here by the Law of this Land; yet I would not that ye should be ignorant of
this mystery (lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in
part (I say not wholly but in part) ^^^^pened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.25, 26. But
concerning the Idolatrous Gentiles, who profess Christ, but deny him in their
works, there is no such promise; but contrariwise, it is prophesied concerning
them, That (after the destruction of the third part of men, by the fire, and
smoke, and sulphur) the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues,
yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship
devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood, which
neither can see, hear, nor walk; neither repented they of their murders, nor of
their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of their Thefts. Rev. 9.18.20,
21.

The Jews at mount Sinai had Ten Commands given unto them from God Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5. the Gentiles in mount Sion had Four given unto them in charge, Act. 15
20. for so it seemed good unto the holy Ghost, and the holy separated Church,
to lay upon the Christian Gentiles no other burden then those four necessary
things, verse. 28. amongst which, to keep themselves from things offered to
idols was one principal, Acts 21.25. But the Idols Temples, with the Steeples
and Bells, are so (as may appear unto you by this ensuing Treatise) and
therefore they must be demolished, that the names of the Idols may be utterly
destroyed out of the Land.

O ye Senators of England, you are raising money now to maintain Wars against
the Spaniards; and to Wars you will go: Go, and prosper: But be well advised,
and take direction out of the book of the wars of the Lord: for there it is
written, When the Camp goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from
every evil thing, Deuteronomy. 23.9. Idols Temples, the Steeples and Bells, are evil
things, and ought to be thrown down. So long therefore as you will uphold them,
how can ye expect the victory? for they are great stumbling blocks to the Jews,
and hinder them from embracing Christianity; and do encourage the Gentiles in
their idolatry, and do give offense to the Church of God: yet you will uphold
these Steeple Houses, under pretense of usefulness, and convenience for Worship.

But what have you to say to the Steeples themselves? doubtless you cannot but
confess they are very useless and unprofitable: yea, they are idolatrous, and
ought to be utterly destroyed.

Our first Parliament, after seven years service and experience, driving a
great trade in that Warehouse of Justice which you keep, began to be such
perfect Crafts-men, that they had no further need of their Masters cunning:
whereupon they were so witty, as in the very nick of time to cut off his Royal
head, to strengthen themselves in the Regal power, and abolished the Kingly
Office as useless and unprofitable: How much more ought these Steeples to be
demolished, for the uselesness and unprofitableness thereof? And therefore you
ought to root them out lest the great God of heaven root you out, as he did
your predecessors.

They took away the Crosses from the tops of the Steeples as idolatrous; but
gave no order to demolish the Steeples: for their judgments were not informed,
and they saw not that the Steeples were idolatrous, as the Crosses thereupon.
But it is no new thing for better and wiser then they to be mistaken, like the
Scribes and Pharisees, who held a tradition, that Whosoever swears by the
Temple, it is nothing: but whosoever swears by the gold of the Temple, he is
a debtor. But Christ says, (Woe unto you ye blind guides) Ye fools and blind:
for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
Matthew. 23.16, 17. So it may be said contrariwise of these; Whether is greater,
the Crosses, or the Steeples the pillars and foundations thereof? Therefore
when they pulled down the Crosses from off the Steeples they should have pulled
down the Steeples also, the Steeples being as idolatrous and useless as the
other. Therefore down with these old Chyming chimneys of the drunken whore of
Babylon, that so the fire and smoke of abomination which makes desolation may
be utterly extinguished, with the names of the idols out of those places.

It is written in the Law, Ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the
nations served their gods, Deuteronomy. 12.2. and you shall break down their
idolatrous pillars, Deuteronomy. 7.5. and 12.3. And what are these Steeples? are they
not the Popes pillars? for they were erected by the Catholic Papists, in
honor to their Popish gods?

Therefore although these towers of Babel are builded to reach up to heaven As
Sin Botolphs Steeple at Boston in Lincolnsh: upon which a thunderbolt came a
year since.
, and some of them have as many steps in height as there are days in the year;
down with them and their Babylonish Bells to the very ground, and let not a
stone of them remain upon another.

And in so doing, ye shall do well.

Fare ye well.

Postscript.
BEing informed that the Parliament is about to establish the Cathedral of
Gloucester to be used constantly as a place of public Worship; and knowing
that God will have such places utterly rooted out: In discharge of my
conscience, I have here published this following Letter, which has layn by me
diverse years. Dated from Gloucester, the 24 day of the 11 Month, 1652. and
directed to me,

Loving friend Mr. Chidley,
HAving received so many favors from your self, I am thereby engaged to
acknowledge your love to me, and to return you hearty thanks for all your
kindness. Through the goodness of God, I am more satisfied in the justness of
your public business, then when I was at London; though then I thought it my
duty to endeavor the utter extirpation of superstition, and quite plucking
down (not only of the abominable High Places, but also) of all the Idols
Temples in general, as being no fit temples for the holy Ghost to be worshipped
in. The honor of God is the chief moving cause (if my heart deceive me not:)
The next motive is from what I have seen and heard since I came to this ancient
(I may say) deluded City of Gloucester, where the people for the major part are
so deluded by the Antichristian Priests, that they are even wedded to the grand
Idol of that place, called the College (or Collegiate Church) so as they have
some purposes to sell two or three of the Idols Temples, that thereby they
might be better able to uphold that place, wherein does still remain most
abominable provocations to superstitious Worship. the Priest himself affirming
a plain lie to the people the last first day in the open Auditory. And the
chief end (for ought I hear) of their preaching in that place, is only to keep
it from being accounted an useless Collegiate place: for they have eight or
nine Steeple Houses, and but four Priests in the Town. And for my own
satisfaction, and that I might write unto you something that my eyes have seen,
I took an opportunity to go to see the place. But for me to set out the
abominations that have been, and some of which still-remain, would be too
tedious to recite. But the full conclusion of what I have to say of it, is
only this: It is a pillar upon which Popery has been established, There are
about it several Cloisters. Within the Quire, at the East End is the Altar: the
steps to the Altar-place, and the Tables of the Commandments still remain.
Behind this, is a place called Purgatory still standing with three open holes
at the top thereof; the place being somewhat dark. In a Gallery over the high
Altar, and over Purgatory, is a place which is called the Whispering-place; and
behind it, is a place prepared for the Abbots etc. to sit, where they could
hear the people what they whispered by reason of the hollowness of the
whispering place; and when the people came before them, they could tell the
people what they had said: and so the people took them for Gods, by reason of
this piece of knavery. Over the High-altar are two holes in the top of the
Leads, over which are two round boards to cover the holes, and two strings,
with which they could let down a Pigeon or two; and there they persuaded the
people that the holy Ghost ascended and descended upon their Sacrifices through
those holes: one of the strings are still on the top of the leads. Under the
Quire is a place called The Bone-house, where at this day are heaps of dead
men's sculls, and dead bones, piled up like piles of faggots, and locked up
within that place: the Sexton keeps the key, There are several Chapels: in one
whereof lies (the last Abbot that was) Abbot Parker, with a Lion at his feet,
an Angel under his head, and a Mitre upon his head: his picture is not at all
defaced. Much more might be written, but time will not give me leave at
present. The Lord in his due time will root out all such abominations, and raze
to the ground those idolatrous High Places.

Thus with my respects to your self, and all other friends in general, I at
present take leave, and subscribe my self

Your friend, etc.

FINIS.

