HELL, With the Everlasting Torments thereof Asserted.

SHOWING 1. Quod sit, That there is such a place. 2. Quid sit, What this place
is. 3. Ubi sit, Where it is.


Being Diametrically opposite to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Foundation and
Pillars of Hell Discovered, Searched, Shaken, and Removed.

For the Glory of God, both in his Mercy and Justice, the comfort of all poor
believing Souls, and the terror of all wicked and ungodly wretches.

Semper meditare Gehennam.

By NICH. CHEVVNEY, M.A.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Tho. Dring, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Sign of the George in Fleet Street, near Cliffords-Inne, 1660.

To the Worshipful, and his ever honored Friends, William Parsons Esquire; and
Mrs. Dorothy Parsons, his virtuous Consort.
THough either of your Names were more then sufficient Honor done to this
small and weak piece in the Patronage of the same; yet, whom God has joined
together, I did not dare to sever. To you both then do I make this Application,
and Dedication. Yours was the Principal, and to whom else should pertain the
interest? What you shall meet with of Vigor, and Solidity, I desire you would
entertain and cherish; for it is Yours, Yours first in the Birth and Occasion;
now in the Nourishment and Protection. What more languishing and abortive,
impute to the Author; it is mine, like me, I Will Father it. However it will
implore your Charity, the Charity of your fair Interpretation, which if you
shall vouch safe, you have Nobly rewarded the Endeavors of,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant, N. C.

To the READER.
WHat Anonymus tells thee in the beginning of his Epistle, thou know to be
true, and wilt gratify him with a concession of the same, that what he
presents there is both new and old, to wit, an old Originian Heresy new vampt
on the Socinian last. In the reviving of which, that he may be indulgent to the
Creature, he considers not how injurious he is to the Creator, whose mercy
while he seems to magnify, he vilipends his justice. For if there be no Hell,
no place of everlasting Torment after this life, (which he vainly endeavors to
prove) not only the wicked, how loose and licentious soever in their lives,
how profane and scandalous soever at their death, but even the Devils
themselves (who were reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day) may at last be saved. And how then will the
infinite justice of God be satisfied, in which, as well as in his mercy, he
will everlastingly be glorified?

I was once in the mind to have followed this bold Undertaker passibus aequis,
and to have set before thee his ignorant mistakes, his wilful errors, his
false glosses, his fair pretenses, his foul purposes, his undervaluing the
Scriptures, his diminution of Christ and his sufferings; but I suppose these
must needs be obvious to every judicious eye; I have then contented my self
(and I hope thee) with this downright confutation. In which, God knows, my aim
is aut praevenire errori, aut revocare errantem; Either to prevent a man before
he erres, or to recall and recover him erring. It is a phrase often used by the
Apostles, Let no man deceive you with vain words. Nihil facilius est quam
errare, There is nothing easier then to err. There is no man but does err;
sometimes in via pedum, often in via morum. That provision then is very
necessary for us, (...), especially in these bad times, when deceits lie as
thick upon the Earth, as the Grasshoppers did upon the ground in Egypt, that a
man can scarce set his foot beside them. But woe unto those, by whose pride and
self-conceitedness the world is so filled and furnished with them.

I but, say some, they urge the Scriptures for their opinions. So did Arius,
Novatus, Aerius, Montanus, Donatus, Pelagius, and the Devil himself. Neither
has there been at any time, any Heretic so fruitless, that has not used the
copy of their countenance; nor in any place any error so shameless, that has
not been over-cast with the blaze of these orient colors. Impostors make use
of the scriptures, to undermine those that desire to be guided by them, by
their corrupt interpretations of them.

Yet is it no disgrace to the Scriptures, that they are thus depraved; it seems
rather some grace unto them, that Satan and his Impes do meddle with them. For
thereby they tacitly acknowledge, that there is virtue and power in them. The
Be gathers honey on the same stalk, from which the Spider sucks poison. Some
have been infected by their meats and drinks; yet either these things must
nourish us, or nothing. Nor is it possible for Impostors to find out a better
color for their Errors and Heresies, then out of the Scriptures. Therefore
with that heavenly gold, they guild over their base metal, that it may pass
the more current. But what they get hereby they may put in their eyes and see
near the worse; for they pervert the scriptures to their own destruction.

Truly I could wish, that such Impostors as these before they be suffered to
meddle with the Scriptures, might be forced to put in sureties, that the sense
they give of them should be sound and Orthodox, and consenting with the Church
of God: For the trusting of every man upon his single bond, to interpret any
place of scripture, is the occasion of very much Error, as we find by woeful
experience. Hence grow they bold to utter their own fancies, and look to be
credited upon their bare word. And what is this but Dominari fidei, to Lord it
over the faith of others? Hence it is, that the scriptures themselves, which
were by God ordained as a special means to bring us to the knowledge of him, by
Satan's illusions become occasions of our more offending him.

As in dark nights Pirates use to kindle fires, and make great lights upon the
Rocks and Maritime Coasts: whether, when the poor weather-beaten Seamen steer
in hope of harbor, they meet with nothing but wrack and ruin: so Heretics
flourish with the scriptures, or at least some seeming flashes thereof, under
the pretense of new, but false Lights, to which, when distressed souls repair
for succor, these pestilent seducers feed them with nothing but pernicious
error.

This is the cunning of these wicked Impostors, something they will have good,
to draw down the evil, the greater part shall be evil, to poison the good.
Miscent recta perversis, etc. But as the Apostle from God, so I from the
Apostle, by the command of God,, do warn thee of these wicked perverters of the
Word of God, which come indeed in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening Wolves, that thou take heed of them, that thou be not led, and so led
away by them, least thou fall into the error of the wicked.

It may be this council may be slighted by thee, but they of whom I warn thee,
would give much, that such as I am, though now mean and contemptible in the
eyes of the world, would hold our tongues, and forbear speaking; our hands, and
forbear writing against them. If they could procure (as who sees not it is their
great endeavor) our mouths to be muzzled, or our hands manacled by Authority,
or else delivered over to their wolvish cruelty; Error would then play Rekes,
Darkness triumph, Hell (though now divided) make play-day, Truth languish, and
all goodness fall slat to the Earth. From which sad influences, let every
Christian pray, in that which was once the Dialect of the Church, Good Lord
deliver us, etc.

HELL, With the everlasting Torments thereof Asserted.
THere are three ways proposed by S. Bernard for our apprehending of divine
Things; The first whereof is the Understanding, which relies upon Reason. The
second is, Faith, which relies upon supreme Authority. The third is Opinion,
which relies upon Probability, Et very Similitudo. Now there may arise in some
men, some mistakings, some misapprehensions of the sense of some place of
Scripture, there may arise some paradoxical imaginations in them, and yet these
never attain to the settledness of an opinion, they float in the fancy, and are
but waking dreams. Yet such Imaginations, and Fancies, and Dreams, receive too
much honor in the things, and too much favor in the persons, if they be
questioned or reproved.

By this means it comes to pass sometimes, that that which was but straw at
first, being blown by vehement Disputations, sets fire on Timber, and draws men
of more learning and authority to side with, and mingle themselves in these
impertinencies; Therefore it is good council that the wise Man gives, Prove.
26.4. Answer not a fool according to his folly, least thou be like unto him.
Every bewildred fancy that arises, must not be so much as reproved, or called
in question.

And though Fancies grow to be Opinions, and that men come to think, that they
have reasons for their opinions, and to know that they have other men on their
side in those opinions; yet so long as they be but opinions, of a little too
much, or a little too little, in matter of ceremony or circumstance, as long as
they are but deflectings and deviations upon colloterall matters, no foundation
being shaken, no Cornerstone displaced, as long as they are but preteritions,
not contradictions; but Omissions, not Usurpations; they are not worthy of
conviction; and there may be more danger then profit, in bringing them forth
into an over-vehement agitation: For those men whose end is Schism, Sedition,
and Distraction, are brought near their own ends, and the accomplishment of
their desires, if they can set other men together by the ears, and make sober
men to wrangle.

They must be Opinions then, not Fancies; and those opinions must have a
contrariety, an opposition to certain Truths; they must be held, maintained,
pesisted in, and published, before it be fit to call them in question, or to
afford them a confutation. A man admits an opinion sometimes to lodge in him so
long, as that transit in intellectum, it fastens upon his understanding; and
that that he did but think before, he now seems to know and believe; and then,
Fides si habet haesitationem, infirma est, as that faith that admits a scruple
is weak: So, Opinio, si habet assertionem, temeraria est, When that that is but
an opinion comes to be published and avowed for certain, yea, for a necessary
truth, then it becomes dangerous: and that grows apace; for scarcely does any
man believe an opinion to be true, but he has a certain appetite and itch to
infuse it into others.

This Itch, I suppose, has troubled this appetite stirred up, and provoked a
certain confident Anonymus, in whom all these pieces meet, and make up a body
of error, which he stiffly holds, and publicly persists in; otherwise I had
never troubled, either my self, or the Reader, with this confutation; whose
great endeavor it is, to undermine and blow up Hell in the belief of others,
because he himself is persuaded there is no such place. I have therefore set my
self Diametrically opposite to what he has written to that purpose, and in the
management hereof, shall proceed by the consideration of these Three
Circumstances.

1. Quod sit, That there is such a place of misery prepared and appointed for
the wicked.

2. Quid sit, What this place of misery is.

And 3ly, To satisfy (if possibly) the curious enquiries of those who make
most question of it; I shall with as much light as the Father of Lights has
afforded me, determine Ubi sit, where this place of Misery and Torment is.

First, That there is a Hell; which place, though some think God never made,
but that it grew out of our sins; yet it is manifest it had a being even
before sin; and that God made it before he had present occasion for it, or
actual use of it. It was, without question, constituted ere the Angels fell.

Hell was framed before sin was hatched, as Heaven was formed and fitted
hefore the Inhabitant was produced. For we must observe, that God created
Angels and Men after his own Image, Ratione sapientes, vita innocents, dominio
potentes, wise, innocent, powerful. But withal be gave them flexibilem
naturam, a mutable condition, which had power of standing, and possibility of
falling: Power to stand, was of God the Creator; possibility to fall, was of
themselves as Creatures. If God had given them an immutable nature, he had
created them Gods, not Creatures. Now out of the whole host of Angels, he kept
some from falling; and when all Mankind was fallen, he redeemed some by his
Son. As he shows mercy upon some in their salvation, so it is fit he should
show justice upon others in their condemnation. And because there must be
distinct places, for the exercise of the one, and for the execution of the
other, which are in God equally infinite, by an irrecoverable decree from the
foundation of the world, a glorious habitation was ordained for the one, and a
terrible Dungeon for the other, Mat. 25.46. These shall go into everlasting
punishment, and the Righteous into life eternal. So certain are both these
places, that they were of old prepared for that purpose, Mat. 25.34. Inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world, verse. 41.
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
As God foresaw the different estates and conditions of Men and Angels: so he
provided for them distinct and different places. That there is a Hell.

First, The Scriptures do plentifully testify, and that both in the Old and
New Testament, though Anonymus see it not; But who so blind as he that will not
see? In the old Testament, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell,
and all those that forget to turn to God. If School here signify the Grave
only, what punishment is here threatened to the wicked, which the Righteous is
not equally liable to? I am sure Mollerus was of another mind, who says; The
Psalmist there declars the miserable condition of all those who live and die in
their sins, Aeternis punientur paenis, They shall be everlastingly punished.
And Musculus reads the place thus, Animi impiorum cruciatibus debitis apud
inferos punientur, The Souls of the ungodly shall be punished in Hell with
deserved Torments. Also, Psalm. 18.5. The sorrows of Hell compassed me about.
Some read the bands or ropes; for Chebel signifies both, but in the plural
number Cheblee, rather signifies Sorrows, as of a Woman in Travail. The word
Scheol is Translated Hell. Osiand. Pelican. So the Septuagint (...), the Ropes
or Bands of Hell. And they so apply it first to David, Credebam me ob peccata
mea inferno proximum. I thought sometimes by reason of my sins, that I was
nigh to Hell. So Pelican. And what let but that this good man might justly
fear the indignation of God, when he considered the heynousness of his
impieties? Then to Christ, as prefigured in David, Qui peccatum and maledictum
factus propter nos inferni dolores and cruciatus sensit; Who being made a sin
and curse for us, did feel those sorrows and torments of Hell, which we had
deserved. So Osiander also, Videbar captus in laqueis inferni, and quasi in
infernum detrudendus, etc. I seemed as taken in the snares of Hell, as like to
one thrust down and detained there, because of the burden of sin which lay upon
me.

But if it be Objected, that this punishment, and these sufferings, and that
death, which our Savior Christ endured, cannot be said to be eternal, because
they lasted but a time, which being expired, they were likewise finished. I
answer, that a thing may be said to be eternal two ways, either in respect of
the Substance, or in respect of the Circumstance, the being or continual being
of a thing in the former sense, Christ suffered eternal death, not in the
latter; He suffered the essential part of those Torments, which all the Elect
should have suffered unto all eternity, though not the circumstantial in
respect of duration. Besides, eternal death, in the phrase and dialect of the
Scriptures, does not signify the perpetual dissolution of body and soul, as
some do understand it, for so the damned themselves do not suffer eternal
death, but either the immeasurable greatness of infernal torments, or the
everlasting continuance of the same. The first of which is Essential, the other
but accidental, that Christ suffered; this he could not, ought not to undergo.

Could not, because he is Eternal Life it self, God blessed for ever. Amen.
Ought not, because it was his office, and his great undertaking in the same, to
free us from death, by conquering the power, and taking a way the sting thereof.

Lastly, Christ may be said to suffer eternal death potentially, (if we may
borrow that expression to declare our full and direct intention) though not
actually; that is, a death always enduring; though not by him always to be
endured. There is this proportion between that death which we should have
suffered, and that which Christ did suffer for us; the one being infinite in
time, the other infinite in weight and measure. The Son of God then truly
suffered eternal death in respect of the greatness of those miseries which he
endured, and the sense of Gods wrath in those sufferings which he sustained.

This may be more clearly illustrated, if we consider wherein this eternal
death of which we speak, does principally confist, which on all hands is
acknowledged to be in these two things, namely, the punishment of loss, and the
punishment of sense, both which Christ our Redeemer suffered for us: Of loss,
when being fastened to the Cross, he was as it were, at least for a time, cast
out from the presence of God, and deprived of the apprehension of his favor,
as appears by that sad complaint, and doleful exclamation, which he made, Mat.
26.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Nor are they competent Judges
of the condition of the Lord Jesus, who thus sadly cried out, that say it was
because God had left him in the hands of the wicked Jews, to use him at their
pleasure; for many of Gods servants have been exposed to like malice and
mischief, and yet never so passionately affected with it, as to cry out in the
midsts of their sufferings, that God had forsaken them, because their enemies
have prevailed against them. No, no, it was the sensible apprehension of Gods
dereliction, that constrained him to break out into that dolorous exclamation.
Of sense, when he drank so deep of the Cup of divine wrath, that as Mark 14.33.
expresses it, he was sore amazed; and he himself complains, Mat. 26.38. that
his very soul was heavy unto the death.

And in this sense, if there were no other, may we maintain that Article of our
Creed, and in spite of Opposition, truly affirm, that Christ descended into
Hell: At which Anonymus does shrewdly carp, and with which boldly quarrels,
saying, These words are not to be found in the most ancient Creeds, and so
would beat us with our own rod: But admit they be not; yet can we not believe
(as some do think, and say) that they crept into our Creed by negligence; for
they came not in at a heat, or hand over head, but with grave advice, and great
deliberation were there inserted. And as Calvin Just. 2.16.8. says of them,
They were received with the common consent of all the Godly, and that there are
none of the Fathers, but do make mention of them. So that it matters not when,
or by whom they were inserted, seeing there is nothing therein contained
(setting aside some unnecessary interpretations thereof) but what is consonant
to the analogy of faith proposed to us in the most sacred word of God. And if
the bitterness of some against them be such, that they will not suffer them to
have admittance: Calvin in the place forecited, does undertake to make it
plain, that there is so much of our Redemption interressed therein, that they
cannot be omitted without an apparent loss of much fruit and benefit conveyed
to us by the sufferings of our Savior, who in the working out of our
Redemption, underwent the heavy burden of Gods wrath, and felt those very
infernal pains (as an effect thereof) which we had deserved, that we might
everlastingly be freed from the same. Thus David, Psalm. 116.3. speaking in the
person of Christ, says, Angustiae infernales invenerant me, The pains of Hell
gat hold upon me: Nor is it impossible (says Willet) to feel the Toments of
Hell, though not in the proper place. For the place considered in it self,
conduces little to the suffering of the wrath and curse of God, says
Polyander; If Christ (says he) tormented the Devils, as themselves complain,
Mat. 8.29. in the Land of Judea, out of that infernal place: God could bruise
Christ for our sins, by the heavy weight of his wrath, in the same land, out
of that place of torment, as he did, and is manifest by that prophecy of
Isaiah, 53.10.12.

What contrariety then is among the learned, concerning the descent of Christ
into Hell, is principally in opposition to the Papists, who affirm, that he
went down in Soul to deliver the Patriarks, and the Souls of just persons there
detained in bondage, till his death and passion; for, otherwise it is fully
agreed among them, that Christ by virtue of his death and sufferings, did
vanquish and overcome Hell and the Devil, with all the powers of Darkness. This
(says Willet, page 1050.) being taken for granted, that Christ by his descent
into Hell, shook the infernal Powers, and triumphed over them, as is by some of
our Reverend Fathers, and Learned Brethren, upon great persuasion of many
forcible Reasons and Arguments affirmed, is not by me impugned. So then I shall
proceed.

Solomon, Prove. 5.5. says of his Harlot, That her feet go down to death, her
steps take hold on Hell; where Scheol is translated Hell, and in the judgment
of Lavator, is well translated to Foveam vel infernum passus ejus tenebunt;
which (says he) is spoken, not so much of natural death, as of spiritual, and
that eternal destruction, which follows thereupon: And he gives this for a
reason of so understanding the place; Whoredom being an abominable sin,
defiling the members of Christ, dissolving and making void the Covenant between
God and Man, must needs be accompanied with an equivalent judgment, even
excluding those that are guilty thereof without repentance, the Kingdom of
Heaven, into which pure and undefiled place, no unclean thing can enter, Heb.
13.4. and mark the words, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: If man
will not, God himself will, and give them a portion of misery answerable to
their transgression. To second this, we read, Prove. 9.18. Nescit convivas
tandem in profunda tartara deturbari, ut in aeternum cum impiis and sceleratis
affligantur: So Lavator; and is well translated by us; she knows not that the
dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of Hell. What can be
plainer then this? and yet Anonymus sees it not.

That the Greeks Translate Scheol into Haides, is most true, but that Haides
comes from Adam, is far fetched, and very suspicious; who would not rather
conclude it to proceed from the primitive particle, (...), non videre; not to
see: or from (...), by reason of the darkness and obscurity of that place. And
if the word Hell be not (as he either ignorantly, or impudently affirms) to be
found in Greek, I would fain know how he would better Translate these words of
our Savior Christ, Mat. 16.18. (...), The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: Beza and Pareus read it, Portae inferorum non superabunt eam: That
is, says the one, Quicquid consilio vel viribus potest Satan, Whatsoever the
Devil by policy or power can bring to pass; potentia aut Machinae Satanae,
says the other, The strength, or the crafty and subtle devices of the Devil,
shall not be able to prevail against that Church, which is so founded upon the
Rock Christ.

In the New Testament, the Pharisees having put a false gloss upon those words
of the Law, Mat. 5.21. Thou shall not Kill; our blessed Savior as the heavenly
Doctor, does strenuously oppose it by his authority, ver. 22. But I say unto
you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, etc. teaching
them, and in them us, that a simple forbearance of the real and actual
slaughter of our Neighbor, is not sufficient to satisfy the strictness of
that command; but that the violation thereof is to be extended, even to the
very heart and tongue: For, besides exterternal murder, there are three kinds
of internal murder, which are all forbidden by the same; every one of which
makes a man liable to the judgment of God. Now as these three degrees of
internal Murder do differ in weight, so does he proportion a punishment
agreeable to the heynousness of the same.

The first is rash anger against our Brother, by which we are moved to an
unlawful revenge: and for this allots the danger of judgment, declaring
thereby, that look what punishment they in the Sanhedrim inflicted upon actual
and apparent Murderers, the same were they liable to, and did deserve at the
hands of God, who were guilty of this secret kind of Murder, being angry, even
to revenge against their brother; which Doctrine the Scribes and Pharisees were
altogether ignorant of, and did not, would not apprehend.

The Second kind of inward or secret Murder, is to say to our Brother, Racha;
which word, be it Hebrew, Syriack, or Caldee, it matters not, we suppose it,
and that upon very good grounds, to be some apparent manifestation of a mind
beyond measure incensed against our Brother, by outward countenance, gesture or
motion, either of the mouth or hand, declaring thereby the rancour and malice
that we have conceived in our heart against him; such an one our Savior says,
is in danger of the Council; That is, contracts as great guilt unto himself,
and is subject to as severe a judgment in the Court of Heaven, as any capital
Crime that is censured in the Sanhedrim, or high Court of the Jews. For here
again (as before) is an allusion to the great Sanhedrim, which took a
cognizance of such notorious crimes as were committed, and inflicted, deserved
punishment upon such offenders for the same.

The Third kind of secret Murder, is an open reviling and reproaching of a
Brother; for the word in use among the Hebrews, does not only signify one
bereft of Reason, as we commonly understand it, but also a wicked and ungodly
wretch, Psalm. 14.1. The Fool (so Translated) or the wicked and wilful Atheist,
has said in his heart, there is no God: Now such an one, says Christ, is in
danger of Hell fire. In which he again alludes to the great Sanhedrim, and the
highest degree of punishment that was inflicted by them, namely, to be burned
in the valley of Hinnom, which by a known Metaphor is transferred to Hell it
self, and the inexpressible torments thereof. For as those poor wretches being
enclosed in a brazen Idol heat with fire, were miserably tormented in this
valley of Hinnom: so the wicked being cast into Hell, the prison of the damned,
shall be eternally tormented in unquenchable fire. This valley, by reason of
the pollution of it, with slaughter, blood and stench of carcasses did become
so execrable, that Hell it self did afterward inherit the same name, and was
called Gehenna, of this very place. And that, 1. In respect of the hollowness
and depth thereof, being a low and deep valley: 2. For the fire which poor
souls here did, the wicked there do miserably sustain: 3. Because all the soil
and filth was cast into this place, and so are all unclean and polluted persons
into Hell. To this last judgment of the Sanhedrim, does Christ appropriate
that kind of murder, which is by open reviling of a Brother, that he might
notify the heynousness of this sin, then which (more is the pity) none
commonly is accounted lighter, nor more familiar. And that no man might
justify himself, but that every man laying his hand on his heart, may
acknowledge, that by evil will, rancour and reproache against his brother; he
has violated the commandment, and thereby has deserved death and damnation
in the judgment of God, as much as open and notorious murder did deserve
condemnation in the judgment of men. The Gloss that Anonymus puts upon the
words, thereby to carry them to another sense, and wring from them another
signification is corrupt, and his reasons alleged to that purpose, not worth
the answering. Again, Luke 16.23. speaking of that rich Man, And in Hell he
lifted up his eyes being in torments, etc. This, he says, is no proof, nor the
less because he says it; but why not? because, says he, it is a Parable, not
a History. We have but his bare word for it; for Marlorate calls it a History,
in which, says he, Christ describes spiritual things under such figures, and
in such terms as he knew would be most obvious to our capacity, and so best
apprehended and applied by us. Besides, Tertullian contra Marcion. Hillar. in
enar. Psalm. 2. Ambr. on Luc. and many others call it so: Now whether we shall
believe Anonymus, his single report and repute of it, or all these pious and
learned Authors in their joint issue concerning it, let the Reader judge. For
my part, I think it no less then blasphemy, to say, that it is a fabulous and
feigned story; for Christ, who is truth it self, used not to sport with
fictitious tales, to allure with vain pollicitations, or terrify his Auditors
with idle disguises, or fantastical appearances, as the Poets of old in their
Fables of Sisyphus, Tantalus, and the Elisian fields, these were the whole
heaven wide from truth; but this of our Savior was most true.

Yet grant it to be a Parable, why then (says Anonymus) we are not to grant a
Doctrine upon it; to which I reply, that the scope and proper intent of
Parables, is either manifest and certain, or else conjectural and uncertain; if
uncertain, then may not a Doctrine be founded thereon, unless we have some
supply from other places of Scripture, for the clearer illustration and more
firm confirmation of the same, and in this sense it is, as is commonly
affirmed. Theologia parabolica non est argumentativa: Parabolical Divinity is
not Argumentative; That is to say, when the scope of a Parable is doubtful, as
concerning those things which beyond the purpose are collected from the
circumstances of a Parable. But if the purpose and drift of a Parable be
apparent, why may not some certainty be collected, and something proved thence,
so we pass not the bounds, or wander from the purpose and the scope thereof.
The words then of Christ in this Parable, do evidently declare, that the souls
of the faithful, immediately after they are separated from their bodies, are
transported to a place of joy and happiness, and that the souls of the wicked
so separated, are cast into misery and torment. As for other things, which are
but (as it were) circumstantially added, they are not, ought not, strenuously
to be urged in proving Doctrines of Faith, seeing they serve for illustration
only, and make little to any other purpose.

Moreover, if all those places, which consist of figurative and parabolical
speeches, be doubtful and uncertain, and so prove nothing: What certainty I
pray you may be gathered out of the Scripture, seeing that very many, and the
very necessary and material truths, in the scriptures are parabolical and
figurative?

1. If no Doctrine may be built upon Parables, many excellent Sermons of our
Savior Christ, the great Bishop of our Souls, were preached and penned in
vain, and to no purpose, which were spoken in Parables to the people, and are
in and under the same parables commended unto us; but this is most absurd to
think. And therefore that,

2. If all Scripture, given by divine inspiration, be Profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righteousness; then that
scripture which is contained in Figures, and comprehended in Parables, is
profitable for Doctrine, and will also afford certain ground for the same. But
the first is true, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, says
the Apostle, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Therefore the latter also, 2 Timothy
3.16. All the reasons by Anonymus alleged to the contrary, not being worth one
fig.

I will add one Scripture instance more, and then draw to a conclusion of this
first circumstance, Rev. 14.10. The same (speaking of those wicked ones which
worshipped the Beast and his Image, etc.) shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation,
and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. We have here in this denuntiation, or
divine Anathema, these particulars to be considered.

1. What is denounced, to wit, That they shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God.

2. The quality of this wrath, to wit, Without any mixture of mercy.

3. The measure of it, to wit, A Cup of indignation.

4. The effect of it, to wit, Torment by fire and brimstone.

And 5. In whose presence, to wit, Of the holy Angels, and of the Lamb.

First, That which is denounced is, That as they drank of sin, which was the
wine of Babylons fornication: so they should drink of Punishment; wine for
wine, but wine of the wrath of God: It was sweet, though poysonable wine of
which they drank first; but it shall be sharp and sour of which they shall
drink next, and that most justly too: because as the Lord says, Isai. 5.4. He
looked for sweet Grapes at their hands, who owned the Christian name, and
claimed the privilege to be of his Church, but behold sour Grapes: therefore
of such Grapes as they gave to him, such wine he returns back to them, (...),
indignation and fury, as Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup,
and the wine is red, etc. And Ier. 25.15. Thus says the Lord, Take the wine
cup of this fury at my hand.

Secondly, The quality of this wrath, It is without mixture, to wit, of any
Mercy: So Ribera, Non erat mistum divinis miserationibus. There was a time when
mercy might have been had without any mixture of justice, which being
neglected, now justice must be executed without any mixture of mercy. God has
suffered much, and he has suffered long too; much in burden, long in
continuance; he has not been eased by repentance, he is constrained to ease
himself by his just vengeance. For though he suffer long, in mercy: there is no
reason that he should suffer always, in justice. Mercy having had her time,
Justice must have hers also: Indeed, the Cup that God gives to his own for
their sins, is full of mixture, as Psalm. 75.8. tempered by his medicinal and
fatherly hand, with the sweetness of mercies, and comfort in the end, whereas
it is far otherwise with wicked and impenitent sinners.

Thirdly, the quantity of it, It is a cup of indignation full to the brim; in
which God seems to deal equally, and proportionably with them: as they filled
the cup of their iniquity, so he fills the cup of their misery: They shall see,
I and feel too, with what a proportionable Analogy, their sinning meets with
their suffering, whereby he manifests a very great difference between his
punishing of the wicked in wrath, and the correction of his own in love, upon
whom he will lay no more then they are able to bear, and whom he ever corrects
in mercy and in measure.

Fourthly, The effect and operation of this direful and dreadful draught, The
Cup of the Lords indignation, and that is Misery and Torment, and that in the
highest degree, as of burning by fire, mingled with brimstone, as the fuel
thereof, which is found to be, 1. Most obnoxious to the eyes. 2. Most loathsome
to the smell. And 3. Most fierce in burning; well therefore does he speak of it,
who said, Facillime incenditur, pertinacissime fervet, and difficillime
extinguitur. It is easily kindled, violently fewelled, and hardly (very hard
indeed, which is never) extinguished

Fifthly, This their tormenting shall be in the presence of the holy Angels,
and of the Lamb. 1. Of the holy Angels, because in their sight they sinned, and
in their sight they shall be punished. And 2. Of the Lamb, against whom they
sinned in siding with his Enemies, while they professed themselves his
followers: Therefore, says Ribera, Ipsi magis crucientur, intelligentes se ab
eo videri: It is an addition to their misery, when they shall consider that he
beholds them, that was once slighted and contemned by them.

Thus we see as clearly as if it were described with a ray of the Sun, that
there is a Hell, a place of torment provided and prepared for all wicked and
ungodly wretches, and that plainly by Scripture proved. I know there are and
have been, many besides our Anonymus, that have vi and armis opposed it, and
wrangled against it. Danaeus reckons up nineteen several sorts of Heretics
that denied it. But say what they will, the wicked would give much to be sure
that the scriptures in this particular were not true, Credere nolunt, and non
credere nequeunt; they will not believe, and yet they cannot choose but believe;
truly their case is fearful.

The very Heathen, though he deny it, have prescribed to the truth thereof,
that there is a Hell, a place of torment for those that rebel aginst the Gods,
Homer Iliad 8. not far from the beginning, says, (...),
(...), etc.


Where Jupiter speaking to the other Gods concerning the Grecians and Trojans.

If any shall so hardy be,
To aid each part in spite of me;
Him will I tumble down to Hell,
In that infernal place to dwell.
For Tartarus Obscurus, was then, and so ever since, has been taken for hell,
that place of Torment appointed for the wicked. Also Horace, lib. Ode. speaking
concerning Jove's Thunderbolts, says, Quo bruta tellus and vaga flumina,
Quo styx, and invisi horrida Taenari,
Seeds, etc.
With which Earth Seas, the Stygian Lake,
And Hell with all her Furies quake.


Nor was Virgil ignorant thereof, when he said, -- Dent ocyus omnes,
Quas meruere pati (sic stat sententia) paenas.
-- They all shall pack,
Sentence once past, to their deserved rack.


The horror of which place he acknowledges he could not express.

Non mihi si centum linguae sint, oraque centum,
Omnia paenarum percurrere nomina possum.
No heart of man can think, no tongue can tell,
The direful pains ordained, and felt in Hell.
They ever retained so much light, as sufficed to make some discovery of that
place of darkness; yea, some of them have been terrified with their own
inventious concerning it, and distracted with the sense of those very Torments,
which their own Pens have described. As Pigmalion doted on his own Picture: so
were they amazed with their own Comments. How much more if they had known those
unspeakable miscries, and intolerable horrors, as they are in themselves, and
inflicted upon those damned spirits, that must for ever undergo them? Par nulla
figura Gehennae, Nothing can truly resemble Hell.

Besides, many wicked wretches are punished, and many as wicked escape
unpunished; now justum est, ut qui pariter peccarint, easdem paenas luerint: It
is fit that partners in sin, should not be parted in judgment: God does not
punish all here, that he may show his mercy, in allowing some space of
repentance; nor does he forbear all here, that he may manifest his justice,
lest the world should turn Atheist, and deny his providence. Parcit ut puniat,
punit ut parcat: He spares that he may punish, and he punishes that he may
spare. He afflicts some in the suburbs of Hell, that they might never come
into the City it self. But those evil persons, which he suffers to pass on
uncorrected here, he reserves to be condemned for ever hereafter. Sin knows its
doom, it must smart, either in this world, or in the world to come.

Yet further, in all things natural and supernatural, there is an opposition
and contrariety. There is good, there is evil; light and darkness, joy and
sorrow. Now as there are two several ways, so are there two distinct ends;
Heaven, a place of admirable and inexpressible happiness, whether the good
Angels transport the souls of the Saints, such as by a holy and rectified
conversation have glorified God, and adorned their profession; Hell, a place of
horror and confusion, whither the black and grisly spirits do hurry the souls
of wicked incorrigible and impenitent wretches, when they are once separated
from their bodies.

Again, all men naturally do honor the good, and punish the evil. The
Barbarians themselves have Laws of Castigation, and Instruments of execution to
cut off irregular and exorbitant persons. And shall the great Creator come
short in justice of his Creatures, and those Barbarians too? The Law of Nations
does require, that Malefactors, if they escape with life, be banished for ever.
And shall not God banish such as have been Rebels on earth, from his glorious
presence in Heaven, dooming them to that dreadful place of eternal torment? If
this were not, stabit cum Nerone Paulus, Nero were as good a man as Paul, Esau
should still have his birthright in bliss, and Cain be a Saint as well as
Abel. As believers say, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men most miserable; so might the wicked say, If in this life only we have
sense of sorrow, we are of all men most happy.

Lastly, Every Prince is allowed this concurrence to his state, that as he has
a pleasant Palace for himself, his Nobles, and his Attendants: so he has a
Goal and Dungeon for Thieves and Traitors. That Heaven is glorious, where the
great King keeps his Royal and Magnificent Court, the outer side of whose
pavements we delight to behold, and admire the transcendent beauty thereof. So
is that Hell a dismal Dungeon, where he secures his Enemies, the outside
whereof men are not permitted to have a sight of, lest they should be presently
struck dead with the horror of the place. They that have seen the flames, and
heard the roarings of Aetna, the flashing of Vesuvius, the thunderings and
burning flakes evaporating from those marine Rocks, have not yet seen, no not
so much as the very glimmerings of Hell. A painted Fire is a better shadow of
these, then these can be of Hell torments, and the miseries of the damned
therein. Having then cleared our passage thus far, let me in sober terms ask
Anonymus this question: Do thou verily (whosoever thou art) believe as thou
writest, that there is no Hell? Quis daemonum it a credit? What Devil does
believe so?, they know it and feel it. Why art thou come to torment us before
the time? torments they knew were prepared for them, and a time when these
torments should be fully and fatally inflicted on them, and loath they were to
suffer before that time. Shall not men tremble to deny, what the Devils are
forced to confess? What, eat, drink, and play, Epicure, Post mortem nulla
voluptas? No pleasure after death? none indeed to reprobates; there is nothing
but Hell for them, and they will find but small pleasure in that. O Anonymus,
Anonymus, take that Council which the Father gives, Creed and fuge, credendo
fugies, Believe it and avoid i^: by believing thou shall avoid it. We are sure
there is such a place, let us be but half so sure that we may escape it and we
shall do well enough. Fear it, that we feel it not. If we tremble at these
torments, while the wicked laugh and are jovial, we shall put off our fear of
them, laugh and be merry, when trembling and astonishment shall seize upon
them, as Daniel 4.19. said to that Monarch, Let not the Dream trouble thee, the
dream shall be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation to thine Enemies:
So may I say, Let us from the bottom of our hearts repent and bewail our former
iniquities, believe the exceeding great and precious promises of mercy, which
God in Christ has set before us, and then the terrors of this place will not
be terrible unto us; the terrors shall be to the devils that hate God, and to
the Reprobates his Enemies, that daily provoke God. For their tormenting cares,
we shall have flourishing Crowns in the communion of Saints and Angels.

2. And so I come unto the next question; namely, What Hell is? Though it were
far more easy to enform the Reader, what it is not, then what it is; yet will
I make the best discovery thereof that I am able, according to our first
Proposal. And if any complain of want of Method, let him know, that the nature
of the place admits of none. For who can speak orderly and methodically of
that, Quod nec modum, nec methodum novit, that knows no Method, keeps no Order?
And if any man expect an absolute description of this place, I excuse my self,
with that of the Poet forecited, Non mihi si centum linguae. But as Pythagoras
guest at the stature and pitch of Hercules, by the length of his foot; and we
say in the Proverb, Ex ungue leonem: so by shadow and resemblance, we may a
little conceive what it is in sufferrance. It is then that place to which the
Justice of God confineth reprobates for their eternal punishment. The plagues
whereof are external, internal and eternal; External, which consists, 1. In a
privation of all comfort, a privative cause has a positive effect. Tully
banished from Italy, though it were into Greece, the Academy of the world, wept
bitterly, when he remembered Rome. Exiled Demosthenes, though he found much
kindness among his Enemies, yet would shed tears in abundance, when he looked
toward Athens: The captive Jews hung up their Harps, when they remembered Sion*
Ovid laments, that Roma relinquenda est, he must leave that famous and
flourishing City; but when he considers Scythia est quo mittitur, he could not
be comforted. It is the most unhappy part of unhappiness to remember former
welfare. 2. In a sensible passion of universal anguish; the sight being
punished with weeping, smoke, and the direful aspect of ugly Devils, and their
damned crew; the ears with the dreadful howlings, horrid blasphemies, and
horrible roarings of those miserable Caitiffs that are there tormented; the
taste with thirst and hunger, even hot and dry, empty and unsatisfied; the
smell with noisome scents and filthy savours; the feeling with scorching and
burning, even as it were to the frying of the very marrow in the bones; yea the
whole frame and fabric of their once trimmed bodies, shall be defaced and
deformed, dull, heavy, and unweildly, as a brand in a great fire, no part free
from burning; such is the extremity, and universality of those pains. Internal,
That consists in a plenary desertion of God; they shall be utterly deprived of
his glorious presence, in whose favor is life, and at whose right hand there
are pleasures for evermore, but never to be seen or tasted by these damned
wretches, nor shall they behold the sweet and amiable countenance of the Lord
Jesus Christ, or enjoy communion with his Saints; but shall be as continual
sinners, so continual sufferers: Two contrarieties being reconciled in them,
which otherwise would be impossible; the one extreme Presumption, the other
extreme Despair. Presumption, for with bitter malice, and a cursed heart, they
shall perpetually blaspheme, and despitefully sin against the spirit of
grace, Rev. 16.11. Desperation, without all hope of mercy, or admitting one
thought of Peace. The one being a sin against the justice of God, the other
against his Mercy; both these proceeding from that sting of conscience, which
they continually feel, and is that worm which never dies. Eternal, not
determinable with time, for then time shall be no more, everlastingness shall
make their sorrows absolute. If all the lives (I say not men, women, and
children only, but of all) and every of the Creatures, that ever lived upon
the earth, or shall live to the worlds end, were all added one to another, and
all spun into one life, this one life of these damned wretches exceeds them
all. Ubi per millia millia annorum cruciandi, nec in seculo seculorum
liberandi, says S. August. Myriades of years shall not determine, or put a
period to their sufferings. The gulf is so deep, there is no getting out; Ex
inferno nulla redemptio. Therefore it is called Infernus, ab inferendo, of
casting in; for the wicked are so cast in, that they can never be able to get
forth. As no Habeas Corpus from death; so no Habeas animam, out of Hell: That
rich Man, Luke 16. solicited for his Brethren: why did he not beg his own
deliverance, who was able to have taught them by his own sad and woeful
experience? O he saw Ingentem hiatum, a vast interposed Gulf. He must let that
alone, and alone for ever.

Those laments must needs be comfortless, which afford to the distressed no
hope of any kind of consolation; neither the comfort of mitigation; for Luke
16.24. all hope of (...), relief, is there denied, even to a drop of water to
cool the tongue of the tormented. Nor the comfort of liberation, no
deliverance, no not at the last; for ver. 26. ^he is given to understand by
reason of the great partition, their case is such, Ut non possunt, they cannot
for ever look for any freedom thence, but must there remain in torments
everlastingly. So neither the comfort of relief in, or delivery from the
miseries of this place. Not the poor comfort, which in all the calamities of
this life, does still stick by us, and never leave us. -- Dabit deus his quoque
finem, an end will come. Here an end will never come; which (never) is never
deeply enough imprinted in us, nor seriously enough considered by us. That this
(now) shall be now still, and never have an end; and that Cruciaris, Luke
16.25. be Cruciaris for ever, and never declined into a preter-tense, is an
exaltation of this sad contemplation, and the greatest aggravation of their
unhappiness.

Now because it is the main design of Anonymus to overthrow, (if it were
possible) this truth. I shall therefore fortify it with the greater strength,
and prove by diverse (I hope) considerable arguments, that all Reprobates shall
be tormented with the Devil and his Angels, and that everlastingly, never
admitting either case or end.

1. The Scriptures, setting forth the nature of these torments by diverse
emphatical expressions, do evidently declare the same, as (1.) per (...), most
exquisite pains, such for the suddennese and sharpness, as the pains of women
traveling in Childbirth, Luke 16.24, 26. (2.) per (...), most miserable
tortures, such as are inflicted upon the most notorious malefactors, Apo,
20.10. (3.) per (...), most dangerous and deadly plagues, Apo. 22.18. Whosoever
then are liable to, and reserved for such pains, tortures and plagues, shall
never be annihilated, but for ever remain in and under the same. But the first
is true of the wicked, and therefore the latter.

2. The continued succession, or rather the perpetual continuation of Hell
torments, is notably expressed, Apo. 14.11. which is the amplification of the
former judgment, from the eternity thereof; showing, that it is such as shall
be both easeless and endless.

1. He says, that the smoke of their torment ascended up for ever and ever;
not (to speak properly) that there is any smoke in Hell, because smoke proceeds
from the resolution of the matter, which by fire is consumed. Now if there were
any such thing in Hell, it were probable that the fire would sometimes be
extinguished; but smoke here is. 1. Either a Metonymie of the sign for the
thing signified, as smok is a sure sign that there is fire, and so the sense
is, that the fire wherein they are tormented shall remain for ever. Or 2. That
with this fire, wherein they are tormented, is perpetual smoke, and darkness,
so that they have not so much comfort therein as a little light may afford; and
this smoke shall be a torment to them, if not equal with, yet not much inferior
to the fire it self; and therefore it is called the smoke of their torment,
that is, the smoke that troubles and torments them.

And indeed it is but just; for as the smoke of their unrepented sins
ascended first, by which God was sorely displeased, and exceedingly provoked to
take vengeance on them; so that the smoke of their eternal torment should
ascend next, to show that God had now given them smoke for smoke, Apoc. 20.10.
And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone.
Here is set before us, the full and final destruction of Satan himself, which
may be called his second imprisonment for ever in that infernal pit; where
likewise the beast and false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night,
which the very next words expound, saying, for ever and ever, according to the
like usual phrase, Chap. 7.15. and 14.11. For there is no vicissitude of day
and night in eternity, nor is there any day in Hell, but eternal night: This
kind of expression therefore is used to declare, that those torments which the
Devils and the damned do there suffer, shall be without any cessation or
intermission.

3. The grace of repentance for sins past, and amendment of life for the time
to come is eternally denied to them; As the Tree falls, so it lies, Mat. 25.10.
The door shall be shut, the gate of mercy, by which they might have entered;
shall for ever be shut against them. These Chains can never be broken, were
they of Cords, of wreathed Trees, of Iron, they might be burst asunder, but the
chains of vengeance never; besides, a great gulf does interpose, by which they
are for ever disabled to pass unto the habitations of the blessed. Now they to
whom Grace is for ever denied here, and glory hereafter must necessarily be
detained in misery unto all eternity; The first is true of all Reprobates and
impenitent wretches; and therefore the latter:

4. That infernal Dungeon has no back doors, no egress at all, Mat, 5.28.
Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall not come forth thence, till thou have paid
the utmost farthing, which can never be done unto all Eternity; why then those
that are fast bound in Chains in such a place, out of which there is no
getting, must needs abide by it for ever: the first is true, and therefore the
latter.

But here it is saucily objected by Anonymus, etc. How stands this with the
justice of God, to punish temporal offenses with eternal scourges? It was the
rule of his own law, that paena non debet excedere culpam, Deuteronomy. 25.3. How can
he then inflict eternal damnation for a momentary and temporal transgression.

I answer, 1. There is a double quantity considered in punishment; the one
according to the intention of pain; the other according to the duration of
time. In respect of the former, the quantity of punishment must be answerable
to the quantity of sin, Revel. 18.7. How much sin, so much sorrow: the more
pestilent iniquity, the more torturing fire. For the other, we must not think
that the continuance of punishment is limited with the continuance of the fact.
Among men, Adultery is but a short pleasure, yet often pursued with a long
penance. But the duration of torment respects the disposition of the
delinquent. Poenae singulorum inaequales intention, poenae omnium aequales
duratione, Aquin. The pains of all are equal in continuance, unequal in
grievance.

But Secondly, and more particularly, I answer, It will appear to be most just,
both in respect of the mind, and intention of the sinner, of the matter wherein
he sins, and of the person against whom he sins.

First, The mind and intention of the sinner considered, it will appear to be
most just; for though the act it self, the sin committed, be but temporal and
finite, yet the mind of the sinner is eternal and infinite; insomuch, that if
he could live ever, he would sin ever; and therefore, as Gregory says, Quia
men's in hac vita nunquam voluit carere peccato, justum est, ut nunquam careat
supplicio: Because the mind of man in this life would never be without sin,
it is just that it should never be without punishment in the life to come.

2. If the matter and subject of sin be considered, we shall find it to be
of, and in the soul; like as then the wounding of the body, causes the death
and destruction of the same, by reason of which there is no returning unto life
again: so sin being the death of the soul, it must necessarily follow, that
it be perpetual and everlasting.

3. Sin, as it is a transgression of the Law of God, is so much the more
heinous. As he that smites the Prince, to whom principally and especially he
ows his Allegiance, does more grievously offend, then he that strikes a
private person: So every sin is of an infinite nature, because of the infinite
dignity of the person, and his glorious Majesty, against whom it is committed;
and therefore it deserves an infinite punishment; which because it cannot be
infinite, secundum intentionem, in the intention and greatness of it, it
remains that it should be infinite, secundum durationem, in respect of the
duration and continuance of the same.

Now further, the equity of Gods justice in punishing the temporal act of sin
with eternal torments, Hugo does fitly illustrate by these examples; Like as
(says he) when marriage is contracted, per verba de praesenti, By words
uttered in the present-tense, though the contract it self, in respect of the
ceremony thereof be soon done, yet the marriage as the substance thereof
remains in force all the life long: So when the Soul and Sin are contracted
together, it is no marvel this contract holding so long as the soul endures,
if it deserve everlasting punishment. And like as where the fuel and matter of
the fire continues, the flame still burns: So sin, leaving a blot in the
soul, being the matter of Hell fire, is eternally punished, because there is
still matter for that everlasting fire to work upon.

Thus then we see it is no injustice in God to punish sin eternally, he does but
reward them whom he so punishes, according to their works: For though the
action of sin be temporal, Voluntas tamen peccandi, quae per paenitentiam
non mutatur, est perpetua, says Gorrhan: Yet the will to sin which is not
changed by repentance, is eternal and perpetual. For the further description of
Hell, the Scripture uses three principal terms; The Worm that never dies;
Outer Darkness; And fire that cannot be quenched, Mark. 9.44.

First, The Worm; This must not be understood of a corporal worm; which, if it
were, would be terrible enough; for a man to live always dying, and die
always living, with an adder sucking and stinging his vital parts. But we must
know, that after the worlds dissolution, there shall remain no mixed body, but
only man: no generation or corruption in the revived bodies. Therefore this
worm cannot be corporal, but spiritual, the stinging of a vexed, gauled,
tormented, and tormenting conscience. This, oh this is even Infernum in mundo,
a Hell on earth; and consider, O consider, Qualiter sentient in inferno, what
it shall be to their sense, who shall be tormented therewith in Hell it self.
It is so essential a part of their torment, that Christ Jesus makes a threefold
repetition thereof in one, yea at the close of one Sermon, Mark. 9.44. Where
their worm dies not: And again, ver. 46. Where their worm dies not; and
again, ver. 40. Where their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out.
Great, yea very great, and inexpressible must this punishment needs be, which
our Savior does so often inculcate, within so small a space. The Heathen Poets
made this one of those three furies, which they fictioned to torment the damned.

-- Scindes latus una flagello,
Alter a tartareis sectos dabit anguibus artus.
Tertia fumantes incoquet igne genas.
One brings the Scorpion which the conscience eats
The Other with Iron whips the back flesh beats.
While the third boils the soul in scalding heats.
But if the testimony of a Heathen will not pass for current, or bear no weight
at all with us; hear then what an ancient Christian Poet, Prudentius by name
says to this purpose.

Praescius inde Pater liventia tartara plumbo,
Incendit liquido, piceasque bitumine fossas,
Infernalis aquae furvo suffodit Averno,
Et Phlegethontaeo sub gurgite sanxit edaces,
Perpetuis scelerum paenis obrodere vermes.
The prescient Father black hell burns,
With scalding lead, and ditches turns
Into a flame, with sulphur mixed,
Th'internal streams rolling betwixt;
And gnawing worms has put therein,
To torture wretches for their sin.
Some take this worm to be recordatio prateritorum, the remembrance of things
past; and they are either sins committed, or good things enjoyed; Of sins,
which shall so long gnaw their souls and bodies, like a vulture preying on
their hearts, as the remembrance of former iniquities committed shall continue,
which will be for ever. Of good things enjoyed; S, August. observes, that of
the rich man's pleasure, Omnia dicit, Abraham de praeterito, He speaks of all in
the time past and gone. Dives erat, vestiebatur, epulabatur, recipisti; There
was a rich man, did lare, did go, had received, all past, and vanished away;
all (like the counterpane of a lease) expired, or like wages received and spent
before hand. This fuisse felicem, the remembrance of what he had been, must
need; be a sharp corrosive to him. So that for these poor rejected and damned
wretches, to remember the evils they have done is bitter, the good they once
had more bitter, the good they might have had, most bitter. Therefore fore it
is good council for us now, pravidere mala futura, ne recordemur bona
praeterita, to foresee with fear the evil that shall be hereafter, least we
remember with grief the good that has been heretofore. O that our foresight
were but half so sharp as our sense! Let us now consider seriously the pains
that shall be, that we be never put to remember sadly the joys that have been.

Secondly, Outer darkness, Mat. 22.13. speaking of the unprofitable servant
cast him into outer darkness. But God made not darkness; and whereas in the
beginning of the Creation, it is said, Genesis 1.2. That darkness was upon the
face of the deep; This was not a thing created, but a mere privation, absence,
or not being of that light, which was made afterward. Nor do we think this
mist of darkness, into which the damned shall be cast, and in which tormented
in Hell, to be a positive thing: but as when the Sun is hiden, darkness
necessarily follows: so here, not any emanation of any beam of Gods
countenance, not a spark of his light comes into this prison of Hell, therefore
where there is such a privatio lucis, there must needs be intolerable darkness.

A good day makes amends for a bad night; but to this night belongs no day, it
is everlasting darkness. The roughest tempest, the weariest journey, is not
without some comfort, because there is hope of an end: but these pains be as
endless in quantity, as they are easele^e in quality. Joshua. 10.13. had a long
day when the Sun stood still in the Firmament; yet that day had an end, the Sun
fell to his course again, and at last did set: but here, the Sun and Moon shall
utterly cease to measure time by any motion. That is a long sentence that has
no period, a doleful night which has no morning, a woeful darkness where no
star shall afford a glimpse, no Taper befriend it with its light; yet with such
night, and such darkness, does God punish all wicked and ungodly wretches, that
shun the light here, -- clausi tenebris and carcere caeco, In darkness and
blind prison shut, shall they remain unto all eternity.

Let us then decline the works of darkness, as we desire to escape this place
of darkness, and the darkness of this place. Inferior darkness must be doomed
to inferior darkness. What is more just, then that they who refused the light
when they might have had it, should be deprived of it, when they most desire
it? There are two many of these among us, that nuzzle themselves up in
ignorance, as if they meant to make their own beds in Hell: Alas, it is a
fearful place to take up a lodging in, and so much the more fearful, by how
much it is more then a lodging, even an everlasting habitation. Voluntary
blindness shall be confined to necessary blindness: and they that might now
see, if they would but open their eyes, shall there open their eyes, yet shall
not be able to see; not see what they would, yet see what they would not, even
to avoid the seeing of which, they would wish themselves to have no eyes. Now
the God of Grace and Mercy, the sweet Father of Lights, defend us from the
Prince, and from the power, and from this place of outer darkness.

Last of all, Fire unquenchable. Five several times does our Savior Christ
make mention of this Fire, at the close of that Sermon of which we formerly
spoke, Mark. 9.43, Into the fire that never shall be quenched, and v. 44. And
the fire is not quenched; as also ver. 45.46, and 48. as if he could never
speak enough of it, to terrify all that heard him from it, that they might not
betormented in it, which continually burns the souls of the damned, and yet
shall never convert them into ashes. A fire indeed it is, but neither tolerable
nor terminable. The breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone does inflame
it, and the breath of ten thousand Reprobates shall never be able to blow it
out. Scalding Sulphur, and burning stench universally shall rack them; where
heat does follow smoke, and fire heat, and stench fire, and torment stench, and
burning shall be added to burning, The Prophet, Isai. 33.14. puts that to
question which is out of question, who among us is so hardy as to dwell with
the devouring fire? who among us can dwell with everlasting burning? surely
none.

I know Anonymus cannot away with the word ever or everlasting, if it do come
in his way, as come it will, he endeavors to carry the sense of it another way
then is intended by the holy Ghost. But he has very ill luck in it: for he
exceedingly bewrayes his ignorance by it. It is sometimes (says he) used for a
limited time, therefore it must always be so used, good Logic. But let him
give me one example where (...) is so used. Sin is like oil, and torment like
fire, so long as the oil lasts, so long the fire burns, and that is for
ever. If after so many millions of years, as there be drops in the Ocean, there
might be deliverance, there might be some hope; Alas in Hell there is no
limitation, when the Lord shall give over his being, they shall have ease, and
not before. An infinite Majesty is offended; therefore an infinite penalty is
imposed, which these miserable Caitiffs must for ever undergo, unless some
better informed, and more merciful man, such as Anonymus, shall get the keys
of this place of horror, unlock the doors, and for mere pity let them out of
this place of torment. I know also, that it has been much controverted among
the Learned, Whether the Fire in Hell be sustantial, or only Allegorical.
Calvin, and some others are for the Allegory, and they give this for a reason.
There is mention of Wood, and of Worm, as well as of fire: now these are
Allegorical, and therefore the fire. But in Scripture things spoken together,
are not always taken in the same nature and manner: As for example; Christ is
called the Rock of our salvation; the Rock is Allegorical, is our salvation,
therefore Allegorical? Likewise, Luke 22.30. Ye shall eat and drink (says our
Savior) at my Table in my Kingdom: Eating and drinking is Allegorical, is
therefore the Kingdom Allegorical too? For my part, I think we may safely
conclude, that there is true and substantial fire in Hell, Isai. 66.15. The
Lord will come with fire to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with
flames of fire. Si in igne damnabit reprobos, quare non in igne cruciabit
damnatos? says that Father. If he will judge the Reprobates in fire, why not
condemn them to fire?

Grant it then to be substantial Fire: yet another question will be, whether it
be material, corporal, or spiritual. It is not material; for that kind of fire
must be continually supplied and nourished with fuel. Yet he that makes the
damned live without food, is able to maintain this fire without wood. Not
spiritual; Indeed, Gregory calls it an incorporeal fire: but it passes the
nature of fire to be spiritual; yet if with fear, and without curiosity, we may
look upon those flames, we may at tribute a spiritual nature, to that more then
natural fire. Though spirits have nothing material in their nature, which that
infernal fire should work upon: yet such is the powerful judgment of that
Almighty Arbiter of the world, justly willing their torment, that he can make
Spirits most sensible of those fiery tortures: and such is the obedible
submission of their created nature, that they may be immediately wrought upon
by those appointed pains. And as this inspection cannot be with too much
caution, no more can the conclusion that is drawn there from, be with too much
heed: for he that makes it spiritual fire only, goes about to make it no fire
at all. It is therefore by the consent of many of the Godly learned, held to be
a coporal fire; which being granted, there arise notwithstanding some
exceptions against the same.

Object. 1. If it be corporal, how can it diversely torment diverse Reprobates?
There is but one fire in Hell, but yet that fire does not excruciate and
torment all the wicked, which are therein after one manner and measure: the
more wicked men have been here, the more wretched shall they be there; The
mighty shall be mightily tormented.

Res: For Answer; For the better understanding hereof, we must know; that this
fire is the instrument of divine Justice: now no instrument works only by its
own virtue, and after its own manner, and in its own measure: but is regulated,
ordered, and disposed according to the will and power of the first Mover. The
Fire in a Furnace is augmented or qualified, according to the will of him that
kindles it, or has to do with it: so is this enflamed or mitigated by the
power and will of God, Isai. 30.33. The breath of the Lord, like a River of
Brimstone, does kindle it. One and the same fire does otherwise burn Iron, then
Wood or Straw, and that (as one says well) Secundum duritiem vel durationem
materiae, According to the nature of the incensed matter, is the rage and fury
of the fire. Gregory in the Fourth Book of his Dialogues, has a notable saying
to this purpose: Quod hic diversitas corporum, illic agit diversitas
peccatorum; That which is wrought here by the diversity of bodies, is wrought
there by the diversity of sins: one and the same fire may be common to all yet
may it afford a several degree of pain to every one according to the pleasure
of the great disposer.

Object. 2. If it be corporal fire, it must be maintained with fuel, or else
it will quickly languish and be extinguished; But there is no fuel in Hell, at
least no such fuel as can maintain it to eternity; for (says Anonymus) the
wicked are compared to chafe and stubble, and so are quickly consumed and come
to nothing: but will he say, they are such, because they are compared unto
such: would he be contented that any man should infer, because he (as a man)
is compared to a beast that perishes, therefore he is a beast. I suppose he
would rather reply, nullum simile est idem; For that Similitude and Identity
are different things; as, He that is like me, is not my self; Indeed, man is
compared unto such, in respect of his fading condition in this life: but this
mortal shall after put on immortality. These bodies shall be so rarefied, as
they shall not admit of a diminution, much less of an annihilation.

Ans. We let him pass, and answer, that the bodies and souls of the damned
shall be loco carbonum and lignorum, instead of fuel; and because those
materials (as they are qualified) are everlasting; it follows, that Hell fire
must be everlasting also; for it is against the nature of fire to cease, so
long as it has any combustible matter to feed upon.

Obj. 3. If it be corporal fire, then it is of the same species with our fire:
now we know what the nature of this fire is, but not of that.

Answ. In the bodies, which are the matter of the fire, there may be a
difference, as lignum igneum, and ferrum ignitum; burning Wood, and burning
Iron differ, still it is fire though diverse from ours in certain properties,
which are unknown to us; and (if it be the blessed will of God) may we never
know them. But seeing it is substantial and corporeal fire, it will not be
amiss to take notice of some particulars wherein it differs from this
elementary fire of ours, which may be considered in these five respects.

1. In regard of Heat; our fire is hot, nor is there any element in the
extremest fury more afflictive to the sense, then fire; but the fire of Hell
is far more hot and more afflictive. The fire in a Lantsckip, which is ignis
pictus, a painted fire, or that purgatory fire, which is ignis fictus, a
feigned fire, yet has so warmed the Popes Kitchen, is a better representation
of elemental fire, then elemental can be of that fire, which is eternal. That
furnace, whose heat was septupled, Dan. 3.19. insomuch that the flames thereof
licked up them, for whom it was not meant, was raging, very raging, and of
great violence, but not a glowing sparkle compared to the everlasting fire of
Hell.

2. In regard of Light; our fire comforts in shining, that is oppressed with
horrible darkness: Ardet noster and lucet, Our fire burns, and in burning
shines: but this, as divine Justice has disposed it, burns, but shines not,
unless it be for the greater torment of those that are frying in it; Vim
comburendi retinet, illuminandi amisit, says Basil, It retains the property of
burning, it has lost the property of shining. Therefore it is called Hades,
Sine sole domus, a House without light. The Apostle Jude calls it, the black
darkness. The darkness of Egypt was strong and horrid, so thick that it was
palpable, yet nothing to the darkness of Hell. In Egypt they had but an
over-casting, they enjoyed the glorious light of the Sun again: in Hell, Non
videbunt lumen in aeternum, They shall never see light more.

3. Elemental fire burns the body only, Eternal the soul also. The passion of
the body, is but the body of passion; the soul of pain, is the pain of the
soul: yet if a consumable body be not able to endure burning flames for a day,
how will an unconsumable soul and body be able to endure the scorching flames
of Hell for ever?

4. Elemental fire as it burns, so it consumes, Hell fire rages more, and
wastes less. The reprobate shall have the punishment Uri, to be burned, but
not the happiness Exuri, to be burned out. So Prosper when he says, Poennae
gehennales puniunt, non finiunt corpora. Hell torments punish, but do not
finish the bodies. In Hell there is no cessation of fire burning, nor of matter
burned: The Poet, Prudentius, speaks thus sadly of it.

Vermibus and flammis, summis cruciatibus aevum,
Immortale dedit, Senio ne flamma periret.
To Worm and Fire, to Torments there,
No term he gave, they cannot wear.
If this fire were terminable, it might then be tolerable, but being endless,
it must needs be easless.

Lastly, Our Fire may be quenched, but the fire of Hell never goes out. Our
Fire is maintained with Wood, and put out with Water: but that, as it has
nothing to maintain it, so nothing to extinguish it. All their weeping cannot
mitigate the fierceness of those flames. And if there be any tears, they shall
rather be like oil to feed it, then like water to quench it.

The sum then is this: The Torments of Hell are comprised under fire, because
that is the most violent and vehement of all the elements whatsoever. Water
does only kill, Fire does vex, terrify, and torment in killing; yea, which is
worse, this fire does never kill

Let fools then solace themselves with a conceit, that there is no such place,
they will one day find it, and feel it to their misery. Without doubt it is
good for us, Semper cogitare gehe^nam. And as we desire to escape the fire of
Hell, let us avoid the fire of sin. There are certain fiery sins, that shall
find fiery punishments. S. Paul calls lust a burning sin. It is better to marry
then to burn; who then would burn in lust here, that fears to burn in Hell
hereafter? Rage and Malice are burning sins, therefore anger is called
Excandescentia, a waxing hot. They that nourish this fire within them, are
nourished for a worse fire without them. Blasphemy is a burning sin, let
those whose mouths flame with Oaths, and whose Tongues are set on fire of
Hell, venting nothing but cursed speeches, fear these torturing and tormenting
flames. Drunkenness is a burning sin, too much wine is the oil of Hells own
lamp. They inflame the reckoning till they inflame their brains, inflame their
bloods, inflame their bodies, purchase as much sickness as comes to a burning
fever, and as much sin as serves to inflame their own Hell. All the world is on
fire with sin, to make work for the fire of Hell. And there is but one only way
to put it out: The water and blood that came out of the most precious side of
the Lord Jesus: only that water can quench the fire of sin in us here, and that
blood quench the fire of Hell against us for ever hereafter.

I might here enlarge my self with the consideration of the dire and dismal
effects of these torments, which are principally two, to wit, Weeping, and
gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 8.12. Fletus de ardore, stridor dentium de frigore,
says Rabanus, Weeping caused by the hear, and gnashing of Teeth, by reason of
the cold. This declares that there are these two extremitis in Hell,
intolerable Heat, and incomparable Cold, Greg. on Mat. 8. Called therefore,
Avernus absque vera temperatura: where the freezing cold shall not mitigate the
scorching heat, nor the scorching heat qualify the freezing cold.

It is observable, that while we are here, the expense of Tears outwardly
mitigates and allayes the sorrow that lies hard and heavy within, and gives an
ease to the surcharged heart: So the Poet, -- est quaedam flere voluptas, The
burden of indigestible grief (as it were) venting and emptying it self at the
eyes: but Hell by eternal tears could never yet qualify eternal pains.
Besides, if we do admit of weeping here as the Text is plain for it, it arises
from the extreme perturbation of the soul, and the horrible anguish of the
body, and may be said to be rather a howling like Dragons, then any true
shedding of tears. Yet seeing one effect of the horrors in Hell is weeping, and
such weeping as shall never be comforted: Let us prevent our weeping there, by
weeping here, where we may be comforted. The time of living is the time of
repenting; if we die without repentance, repentance is dead to us for ever.
Weep then here, and the time will come when God will wipe away all these Tears
from our eyes: For God has disposed, Flentes ad risum, ridentes ad fletum;
weepers to laughing, and laughers to weeping.

Gnashing of Teeth; This is another effect of these Tortures, and arises from
the sense of some sorrow mixed with indignation: a just and fit punishment,
that they who once gnashed their Teeth at others, should gnash their Teeth at
their own Torments, they showed their teeth in derision; They shall gnash their
teeth in indignation. O the dreadful horror, and fearful terror of this sad and
direful place, where there is neither help nor hope! No help, God will not,
Saints or Angels cannot; nor would the damned themselves help one another, if
they could: for they rather wish all others damned with them, then that any
should be freed from them. No hope; Men say in extreme passions, if it were not
for hope the heart would break: there is no hope in Hell, and yet the heart
must hold: It is a misery to these damned souls that it cannot break, ever in a
dying condition, yet without any hope of expiration. Seeing then there is no
help, no hope of help in that place of torment: Let us seek help while we may
have it, and make much of hope, that we may be enriched by it. The Apostle
tells us, Romans 5.5. That hope makes not ashamed, because it is never
disappointed: for if it could be illuded, it would be ashamed. Now if we would
hope well, we must do well. He that tempts God, does not hope in God; that
hoping, thrusts all upon God, and will out of a lazy devotion do nothing for
himself. Many stretch themselves upon their beds, as Lepidus in the shade, and
cry out, O utinam hoc esset salvari! but you know who said it, Take that
unprofitable servant, and cast him into outer darkness. It is in vain for a man
to hope to do well hereafter, as most men do; when he continues doing nothing
but that which is evil here. The means must be used, where hope is nourished.
Hope is only for the present, it has nothing in reversion: the Saints in
heaven have no hope; for they are in full possession of joy, the damned in Hell
have no hope, for they are in full possession of torment. Only the living have
hope, and in the living God is their hope, which he increase here, that it may
be comfortably consummated hereafter.

3. The last question is, Ubi sit, Where the place of torment is? I know that
to rest within the bounds and limits of precedents, is to over-active, and to
curiously inquisitive persons, a thing very contemptible: nothing is accounted
wisdom with such, but what is exalted above the reach and pitch of those that
went before us. To rest in positive divinity, and Articles confessed by all the
Churches, to be content to know that there is a Hell, wherein tortures and
torments are provided for the damned, and there is a Heaven too, wherein
salvation is prepared for the just, and raise no estimation, no emulation, no
opinion of singularity by the way, only to edify, and not to amaze; only to
bring men to an assent, and to a practice, and not to an admiration, is now
adays reputed but homespun divinity, made up only of humane Learning, so
much decryed, as that they hold it not necessary for carrying on the great work
of instruction and edification.

Let us know (say these high-flown men) what God meant to do with man, before
ever God meant to make man; we care not for that Law, which Moses has written,
that every man can read, and that he might have received from God in one day:
Let us know that Cabal, that which passed between God and him, and all the rest
of the forty days. We care not for Gods revealed will, his Acts of Parliament,
his public Proclamations; Let us know his C^binet Councels, his bosom, his
pocket dispatches. Is there not another kind of Predestination, then that which
is revealed in the Scriptures? May not a Man be saved though he do not; and may
not a man be damned, albeit he do perform those conditions, which seem to make
sure his salvation in the Scriptures? How many miles are there between Earth
and Heaven? and where is that very place that is called Hell? Our Country man
Holkot upon the Book of Wisdom, says well of that Wisdom which we seek in the
Book of God. All wisdom is nothing to me, if it be not mine; and I have title
to nothing that is not conveyed to me by God in his scriptures: And in the
wisdom manifested to me there: I rest, as in other things, so in this,
concerning the local being of Hell.

Now the Scripture says, and that frequently too, that it is downward, Psa.
140.10. Let them be cast into the deep pits, that they rise not up again. Bring
them down into the pit of destruction, Prove. 9.18. They are in the depth of
hell, Prove. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart
from hell beneath. So the terms declare it, and the words describe it. Scheol
is sometimes taken for a pit, sometimes for the Grave, and sometimes, and that
significantly too for hell, as we have already showed, all down-wards. Mercerus
upon Genesis 37. says, that Scheol generally signifies all places under the
Earth: whence perhaps arises that conceit, that Hell is in the heart of, or
under the earth: without doubt it is below, because it is every where opposed
to heaven, which is above. It is therefore called Abyssus, a deep Pit, a vast
Gulf, such a pit as by reason of the depth thereof, may be said to have no
bottom. The Devils entreated Christ, that he would not send them to this place,
Luke 8.31. In abyssum, which is, says Beza upon Mat. Immensae profunditatis
vorago, quasi absque fundo: A Gulf of an immeasurable depth, etc.

The Apostle that preached to the Jews, used the word Gehenna, Jam. 3.6. Where
speaking of an unruly Tongue, says, It is set on fire, a Gehenna, of Hell,
(...). So Piscator, that is, it is set on fire by the Devil, and that by a
Metonymie of the subject, as on the contrary, we find Coelum, Heaven, put for
God in Heaven, Luke 15.21. I have sinned against Heaven: So Hell is put for the
Devil. But Piscator upon James, tells us, That (...) is by the Hebrews
corruptly called Gehinnom, that is the valley of Hinnom. For so in the time of
Christ and his Apostles, was the place of the damned called, which is vulgarly
termed, Infernus, and by profane Authors is called Orcus: and so indeed (as
Anonymus affirms) the Apostle spoke to them in a known Dialect, and used an
expression that was familiar among them.

They also that preached to the Gentiles, when they spoke of this place, used
the word Haides, which they then took (and sure they could not be mistaken) for
a place of darkness and obscurity, wherein the wicked were everlastingly to be
tormented. The Apostle 2 Peter 2.4. speaking of the Angels that sinned, says,
God cast them down into Hell; So Beza in his Annotations, tells us, the
Greeks called that place, which was ordained for the Prison and torment of the
damned. And reason it self does teach us, that it must needs be opposite and
contrary to that place, in which the spirits of just men made perfect do
reside, which on all hands is granted to be above, therefore Hell must needs be
below.

But against this it is objected: That Dives in Hell saw Abraham and Lazarus,
which he could not do, if Hell were so deep and so remote a place as commonly
is affirmed. I answer, That albeit Hell is below, and down-ward in respect of
Heaven; yet (as some think) it may not be so in regard of Earth, Rev. 12.12.
Woe unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Devil is come down among you: so
that he was cast no lower then the surface of the Earth. I know there are
diverse Arguments on both sides. As that they that live know not the state of
the dead: so the dead know not the state of the living, much less of the Saints
in heaven.

But against this is opposed. That if they in Hell had not the sight of Heaven,
their own sufferings would less afflict them: for their most grievous torment
shall arise from the vision of what joys they have eternally lost, Wisd. 5.2.
When they see it they shall be tormented with terrible fear, and be amazed at
the Saints salvation. So Ber. The faithful shall have a sight of Hell, and the
Reprobate a sight of Heaven, Ut illi magis laetentur, videntes quid evaserint,
and hi gravius crucientur, videntes quid manserint. That the one may be the
more comforted, by seeing what miseries they have escaped: the other the more
afflicted, by seeing what happiness they have forfeited, Psalm. 112.10. The
wicked shall see it, and be grieved: he shall gnash with his teeth and melt
away. Bar then the sight of their eyes, and you mitigate the grief of their
hearts. That weeping and gnashing of Teeth, of which our Savior speaks, Luk,
13.28. proceeds from sight; when you shall see Ahraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and your selves thrust out. It is their
exile from the presence of the Lamb, from the society of Saints and Angels,
from the felicity and joys which they behold, that shall most bitterly molest
and trouble them: else could they not be under the misery of that which is
called paena damni, the punishment of loss. On the other side, it is said, That
the sight of Heaven is never afforded, no not to Saints, but as an high, an
inestimable favor. It was S. Paul's greatest grace, and that which had like to
have transported him beyond the limits of his holy profession, to be wrapped up
into the third Heaven; and to behold the life which the blessed live with God.
But what extraordinary grace or favor is this, if it be also granted to the
Reprobates? The answer is easy; S. Paul saw that life, and had a sight of
those joys, experiendo, by tasting them, and hoped again to see them
participando, by a blessed partaking of them: such a sight is not permitted to
the children of perdition. They see them to the grief of their hearts, and
terror of their souls that they cannot enjoy them, but are for ever deprived of
them.

But how could that rich Man, spoken of in the Gospel; or how can other damned
spirits be said to see the glory of Heaven, when as they want those luminary
Organs of the body, the disposition of sight; besides, the great distance
between the several places, and the the thick darkness interposed? which is a
great question with Anonymus. I shall easily remove this block out of the way:
for even Spirits see, though not with bodily eyes; they have the eyes of
intelligence and apprehension, by which they are able to distinguish matters of
intricacy and perplexity, and that at distance too; much more between Light and
Darkness. They apprehend this Glory either universally or particularly. An
universal apprehension they have, whereby they perceive the Saints to be in
great glory: in particular, what this Glory is, they know not. They see it, and
they see so much of it, as shall augment their torment, Tam propter invidiam
alienae faelicitatis, quam propter carentiam illius quietis, both in regard of
others gain, and their loss; the transcendent happiness which the Saints are
for ever made partakers of, and their own want of the same. Now if it be
granted, That the damned shall see the glory of Heaven, then it will probably
follow, that Hell is in the Air, only separated with a great unpassable gulf,
that either may not come to other. And I have read of certain Hills, whose tops
have bin so near one to another, that men might talk one to another; but could
not without many days travel come one to another. If they do not see it, then
it is as probable, that it may be in the bowels of the Earth. However, it is
below, down-wards, in the more inferior parts of the workmanship of him, who as
the Poet styles him, is Ille opifex rerum, the great Creator of all. But
precisely to determine, whether in the Air, or in the Water, or on the face of
the Earth, or in the Center of the Earth, or in the center of the worlds
Center, Tegitur, non legitur, periculose disquiritur, tuto ignoratur, is kept
secret, and not discovered; is safe to be ignorant of, cannot but be dangerous
to dispute. That saying of Scaliger would be a seasonable curb to restrain us
from a curious indagation, and scrupulous enquiry after the place it self, if
it were minded of us.

Nescire velle, quae Magister optimus,
Docere non vult, erudita inscitia est.
What the great Master will not have made known,
Our greatest Wisdom is, to let alone.
Yet thus far may we boldly conclude concerning it. That as just Spirits
separated from their bodies, do presently ascend into the Emperial Heaven,
there to possess joy and happiness: so the Souls of hard, obdurate, and
impenitent sinnets, whose hearts neither the mercies of God could mollify, nor
his Judgments terrify, are confined below to the inferior Elements, there to
remain in everlasting miseries and torment. And this (as I take it) is, (...),
to be wise to sobriety, according to the wholesome advice of the Apostle; But to
determine positively where Hell is, and to measure out, and to dispose of every
foot contained in the same, is (...), audacious curiosity; and is carefully to
be avoided by us.

Now because there is a difference among some, that are more nice then wise
about the Ubi: Anonymus concludes against the Quod: to the bewraying either of
his ignorance, or infidelity, or both; because men will not be rash in it,
therefore such Atheists will rashly deny it. If any then shall ask further
concerning the local place of Hell; I answer, with Socrates, I was never there
my self, and my hope is never shall be; nor spoke I with any that came from
thence, and therefore cannot satisfy his curiosity: herein I confess many
doubt concerning Hell, Ubi sit, where it is: none can describe Quid sit, What
it is; but all (all I mean in their right minds) do agree, Quod sit, That there
is such a place, where the damned shall be imprisoned, and in which tormented
unto all eternity.

Seeing then (as we have upon good reason concluded) that Hell is a descent,
downwards; let us keep our selves so far as we can from it, while we live, that
it may never devour us, when we dye. Sin is a burden that presses down-ward.
The Prophet Zachary 5.7. compares it to a Talent of Lead; how heavy was it on
the back of Judas? it never left him, till it had pressed him down to his own
place. As the heaviest bodies draw to the Center of the Earth: so do the
saddest and heaviest spirits, such as the mercy of God has quite forsaken,
draw down to the Center of Hell. Sin brings a man easily down, Facilis
descensus Averni.

Things nearest Heaven, take less care for Earth; The Fowls of the air neither
plow nor sow, nor carry into Barns. But men most love that which they must
shortly leave, and think seldom or never of that place, where they must, after
the consummation of a short time here, abide for ever. O Lord give me the grace
to consider the evil of my ways; Et semper cogitare Gehennam, ne in gehennam
incidam; If nothing else will work me to repentance, to think often of Hell
here, that I may not fall into hell for ever hereafter.

The life of the damned is a death without end; the death of the damned is to
live in eternal Torments. When the wrath of God shall cease toward them, then
shall Torments cease to be inflicted on them. But the wrath of God is Eternal,
therefore their plagues must needs be eternal also. When those damned wretches
shall repent of their impieties, then shall they be freed from their miseries;
But the space of repentance was by them neglected, and the grace of repentance
is now denied. Therefore there is no deliverance to be expected. O Eternity,
eternity, thou alone do add to, and aggravate the punishments of the damned
beyond all measure. Their misery is grievous in respect of the acerbity and
sharpness thereof; more grievous in respect of the variety and diversity
thereof, but most grievous in respect of the eternity and everlastingness
thereof.

Anonymus (how advisedly, and upon what grounds I know not; for all his
pretended reasons make nothing to that purpose) says, That this opinion (as he
calls it) to wit, of the everlasting duration of Hell torments, has caused
much sin. I answer, How lightly soever he seems to set by it, by the term he
puts upon it, it was a real and substantial truth before his Cradle was made,
and will be so when his Coffin shall be rotten. And if corrupt men will draw
hellish conclusions from heavenly instructions, who can help it? such bad
consequences are not the legitimate Children of Gods sacred Truth; but the
bastards of man's own corruption, to whom they are to be brought, and by whom to
be fathered for their maintenance. Sure I am, if we take a right course with
it, there is good use to be made of it.

1. The glory and comfort of eternal life does more, and the more manifestly
appear hereby. This is a significant and delightful demonstration, which one
contrary gives to another, when they are diametrically opposed. The day would
not seem half so clear, if the departing Sun should not leave night to follow
it. The foil adds grace to the Jewel. It (no less then) glorifies Learning,
that the malicious Tongue of ignorance does bark at it. He knows the benefit of
heat, that has felt the sharpness of a freezing cold: If there were no
sickness to trouble us, health it self would not be precious to us. Even their
opposition is an Exposition of their nature: The consideration of the deformity
and darkness of Hell, does add a greater, and more glorious luster to the
beauty and brightness of Heaven, and those heavenly Mansions, which the merits
of Jesus have purchased for the righteous.

2. This Doctrine (for so Alstedius calls it) is very necessary for the Godly,
that they may be moved in the serious consideration thereof to acknowledge with
the greater affection the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, by which they are freed
from so great a misery, as this of eternal damnation, which we affirm (though
Anonymus do deny it; and by that, if there were nothing else to do it, Ex ungue
leonem, discovers what he is) that Christ our surety, in our place and stead
did suffer for us. And that this is an undoubted truth, at which none but the
Children of darkness can take exception, that which follows, will (I hope)
sufficiently testify.

First, That Prophetical speech of David, Psalm. 88.4, 5. etc. where are fully
and emphatically described, the grievous torments and infernal dolours, which
Christ our Saour sustained in the time of his passion: being such, as no Saint
was able to undergo. And that the Psalmist does there prophecy of the
sufferings of Christ, the circumstances of that Psalm do evidently declare.

Secondly, The Type and Figure thereof in the person of David, who by the
instigation of wicked men, the Sons of Belial was exceedingly troubled; and of
which in many of his Psalms he sadly complained, manifestly prefigured the
future sufferings of the Lord Jesus, in especial, Psalm. 18.6. The sorrows of
Hell compassed me about, and the snares of death prevented me: compared with
that of Psalm. 116.3. where we have the like expressions.

Thirdly, The description it self of the passion of Christ, what horrible
anxiety he suffered in his Soul; what consternation and contristation, in
regard of those infernal torments with which he violently conflicted even to
this death, for the sins of all the Elect, and the wrath of God due unto them
for the same, which lay so hard upon him, that his sweat was great drops of
blood, and an Angel was sent to comfort him, Mat. 26.36. Luke 22.43.

Fourthly, The surrogation of Christ in our place, forasmuch as he suffered
instead of all the faithful, and all those things which should have been
sustained by us, he in our place sustained for us, as Mat. 20.28. The Son of
man came to give his life a ransom for many, Ioh. 11.51, 52. speaking
concerning the prophecy of Caiaphas; he foretold that Jesus should die for
that Nation, and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather
together into one all the Sons and Daughters of God, that were scattered
abroad, 1 Timothy 2.6. Also 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust. But among all those things which he suffered for
us, the chief was the infernal death, which by reason of our transgression was
due unto us, without which, all his sufferings had been to no purpose. And to
this our Doctrine tends, what ever wicked men think of it, or speak against it;
and therefore confidently and comfortably affirm, that Christ our Mediator in
our stead has undergone this also for us.

Fifthly, The susception and taking of our sin, which was by imputation laid
upon him; seeing he has taken our sins upon himself, and born them for us,
as plainly appears by that place of Isai. 53.6. and 2 Cor. 5.21. It is
necessary also, that he bear the punishment of the same; the principal part
whereof is this infernal death and condemnation, Deuteronomy. 27.26.

6ly, The execration which he underwent, for he was made a curse for us, who
were under the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Concerning which, I have already
declared my self else where: since then this Curse does infer, that we were
liable to eternal death and condemnation, from which, Christ becoming a curse
for us, did graciously deliver us; It is manifest, that the death of Christ was
different from the death of any, of all Saints whatsoever; who in all their
sufferings, were neither made sin, nor a curse, nor were they forsaken of
God, nor tasted the cup of his indignation; but were only fatherly chastised
by him; nor did they colluct or wrestle with Hell, and the powers of darknese,
unless it were, as with Enemies already foiled, whom Christ by his death had
vanquished and subdued.

Lastly, The confession of Crellius (and other of the Socinian brood, to whom
Anonymus, though he vvish well, must necessarily subscribe, as not being
worthy to carry their Books after them) who says, that Christ suffered
death, instar maledicti a Deo (let him crack that Nut) the effect whereof must
have been our punishment unto all eternity.

We had spoken to this purpose before, and had then done with this Argument,
but that Anonymus would needs make the world believe, that we are they that
labor to overflow the sufferings of Christ, when indeed we are so far from
overthrowing them, and the sufficiency thereof, by leaving any part thereof
unperformed by him, or to be completed by us, that we magnify them rather,
and his love to us, that undergoing such misery for us, we might thereby be
eternally freed from the same.

This is a truth, against which the Gates of Hell shall never be able to
prevail, much less the slight assaults of such poor and feeble undertakers as
Anonymus; who, while he charge us with undervaluing the sufferings of Christ,
does himself (by a Socinian trick that he has) undervalue the person of
Christ, by that corrupt gloss which he puts upon the words of S. Paul, Romans
5.19. By the obedience of one, many are made righteous. It is not (says he) by
the obedience of God, nor by the obedience of God-man, but by the obedience of
one man (which word (man) is not expressed in that verse, though it be, with
note of distinction, or opposition in some verses before) are many made
righteous. It Is true, not by the obedience of God; for God cannot be said
either to obey or suffer; but by his favor, by the obedience, testified both
by the Action and Passion of that one person, which was God and Man, many are
made righteous. For the Apostle there used the term, man, not understanding
thereby hominem merum, mere man, sed hominem verum, but true man. It was fit,
that the Redeemer of man should be true man, in regard of the justice of God,
which could not punish sin, but in that nature which had offended: It was
fit also, that he should be more then man, in regard of the heavy burden of
Gods wrath, which was to be sustained by him. The righteousness of whom, by
which we are constituted righteous, is therefore by the communication of
properties (says Downam) called the righteousness of God, being the
righteousness of that person, which is God, as well as man; It is not the
obedience of the Godhead; no, nor the obedience of the Man-head, but the
obedience of Christ our Mediator, considered as God and Man, by which we are
made righteous.

I cannot, but by the way, lament the growth and insinuation of this pestilent
Heresy of Socinianism, which under pretense of giving glory to Christ, does
rob him of all that true glory that belongs unto him. It will allow him to be a
holy, a thrice holy man, an unreproachable, an irreprehensible, an admirable,
an incomparable man; a man, to whom, he that should equal any other man, were
worse then a Devil; A man worthy to be called God, in a far higher sense then
any Magistrate, any King, any Prophet; But yet he was no God, says this
Heresy and these Heretics, no Son of God; A Redeemer by way of example, but
no Redeemer by way of equivalent satisfaction. S. Paul says, Ephe. 2.12. He is
an Atheist that is without Christ. And he is as much an Atheist still, that
pretends to receive Christ, and not as God; for if the receiving of Christ must
redeem him from being an Atheist, there can no other way be imagined, but by
receiving him as God, for that only, and no other good opinion of Christ,
overcomes, and removes his Atheism. After the great day, whatsoever is not
Heaven, is Hell; He that then shall be where the Son is now (if he be not in
Heaven) shall be as far from heaven, as if he were where the Center of the
Earth is now: He that confesses not all Christ, confesses no Christ. And this
is the wickedness that keeps down Anonymus, and the rest of that Heretical
brood, that they cannot, will not be raised up to the consideration of Christ
as God. But we proceed.

3. The serious meditation of this Doctrine, does restrain wicked men from
their impieties: Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. -- Bad men for fear of
pain, do ill detest -- The Apostle, Romans 2.4. says, The goodness of God
leads to repentance: and well are they that will be led; But some there are
that will not lead, with whom there is another course to be taken, such must be
driven on whether they will or no. John Baptist, Mat. 3.2. proposed the
goodness of God, as a special argument to persuade his Hearers to repentance;
do it, repent, and the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, hard by you.

One would think this would have done it, have even led them to it, but it
stirred them not: He is fain to lay Heaven by, and the life, joy, glory to
come; And to betake himself to Hell, to the anguish, tribulation, torments
there, for all these are in the eighth verse, under those words, the wrath to
come; so to drive them (if it may be) to it, since leading would not serve the
turn. How strangely does sin besot men, that the Kingdom of Heaven works not
so kindly with them, as does the wrath to come? The loss of Heaven, if that
were all, would never restrain any from it: if no, Ira ventura, wrath to come,
they would never care for the loss of Heaven. Repent, or you lose Heaven; alas,
this works not any change or alteration: Repent, or you must to Hell, the place
of endless and easeless torments, that bites soon: This does strike fear in
their hearts, and that fear brings forth repentance. So that this fear, even
the fear of punishment is good, though it be ignorantly condemned by some. It Is
true, that the Apostle says, Romans 8.15. That the Sons of God have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of adoption, whereby they
cry Abba, Father: The spirit of Bondage is inferior to the spirit of Adoption;
yet that spirit is better then the spirit of Belial, or that spirit of slumber,
which the Prophet mentions, Isai. 29.10. whereby men's eyes are closed up, that
thy cannot see the judgments of the Lord.

It is a Maxim, that actio perfecta non recipitur, nisi imperfecte primo;
there is no perfect action, but at first it is imperfect, and is perfected by
degrees. It is a good thing to be a Son, yet it is better to be a Servant; A
doorkeeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness. It
is good to be in Canaan, the Land of promise, but (in the mean time) it is
better to be in the Wilderness then in Egypt. So fear and spare not, says S.
August; for, Sinondum potes amore justitiae, at timore poenae: Do it, if it be
not for love of goodness, yet for fear of punishment; and his ground is out of
Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were in them (says God) such an heart that they would
fear me, and keep my Commandments. Nothing brought the Jews to the love of
God, but the terror they conceived of his judgments, which they visibly saw
before their face; yet God wished that they might have such an heart in them
always, that they would so fear him; which for ought I can perceive from that
place, was but a servile fear, procured by the terrible sights at the delivery
of the Law.

There is no fear of God then, though it have some servility in it (so far as
servility imports but a fear of punishment) but is good; for timor est amor
inchoativus, says S. August. The love of God begins in fear, and then amor est
timor consummatus, The fear of God ends in love. God presents to us the joys
of Heaven often, thereby to allure us, but we have seen how coldly we are
affected toward them, and therefore as often the torments of Hell, thereby to
terrify us from the evil of our ways. Gehennae timor regni nos affert
coronam; even the fear of hell gets us heaven, and we thank that pain which
gives us sight. Though there may be difference between timor and tremor, Fear
and Terror; yet the difference is not so great, but that they may both be found
in, and fall upon the best of men. When God talked with Abraham, a horror of
darkness, says that Text, Genesis 15.12. fell upon him. The Father of Lights, and
the God of all comfort present, and present in an action of mercy, and yet a
horror of great darkness fell upon Abraham, the father of the faithful. When
God talked personally and presentially with Moses, Moses hid his face; for
says that Text, Exodus 13.6. He was afraid to look upon God. When we look upon
God in those terrible judgments, which he has executed upon some, and see
that there is nothing between us, and the same judgments (for we have sinned
the same sins, and God is still the same God) what can we do, but stand in awe
of him that we sin not.

He urges that place in John, 1.4.18. to prove this fear and sin, but to
little purpose; for the wise man says, Prove. 1.7. Timorem domini esse initium
sapientiae, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and therefore
Jonah to the Ninivites, Joh. 3.4. and John Baptist to the Jews, Mat. 3.10. and
all the Prophets to sinners, have used to provoke them to this fear, by
threatening the dangers that were imminent, if they repented not. But yet
afterward, when men are reclaimed from their iniquities, converted to God, and
have made some progress in his service; then do they change every day more and
more their fear into love, until they arrive at last unto that state whereof S.
John there speaks; which cannot be suddenly, nor fully expected of any. S.
August. has a pretty expression to this purpose: He says, That fear is the
servant sent before, to prepare place in our hearts for his Mistress's love,
who being once admitted into, and possessed thereof, fear departs, and gives
place unto love. But where this fear never enters at all, it is impossible
that ever love should take up a habitation.

And albeit this fear of punishment be not in those that are come up to that
degree of perfection, of which the Apostle there speaks, or is at leastwise
less in them, then in others; yet being joined with that reverence that becomes
it; it is most necessary and profitable for such Christians, whose life is not
so perfect, nor love so great. This appears by that of our Savior Christ,
Luke 12.5. Fear him, who after he has killed, has pomer to destroy both body
and soul in hell. Also S. Paul testifies of himself, 1 Cor. 9.27. That he kept
under his body, and brought it into subjection, least that by any means, when
he had preached to others, himself should be a cast away; meaning thereby, that
notwithstanding all those favors, which he had received from God, yet he
retained such a fear of God, as that he was careful of those relapses, which
considered in their own nature, deserved exclusion out of those heavenly
habitations, the glory whereof in a very great measure, he has had some ocular
demonstration of.

Now (my friend Anonymus) if such a man as S. Paul did thus stand in awe of the
justice of God, notwithstanding his Apostle-ship, and those rare endowments,
with which he was plentifully furnished for the execution and administration of
the same, a man so holy as he, what ought we to be in whose consciences
remains the guilt of many thousand notorious impieties? This know, says the
same Apostle, Ep. 5.5. That no Whoremonger, or unclean person, or covetous man,
which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of
God. And, as though this had not been sufficient, he adds, Let no man deceive
you with vain words; for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. As if he should say, Those that flatter you in
your sins, and boulster you up in your iniquities, with this, tush, God is
merciful, and is easily won to pardon these or the like impieties,
notwithstanding a delightful continuance therein; These men do but deceive you;
for the wrath and vengeance of God comes upon the Children of disobedience for
these very things: The Author to the Hebrews tells us, Horrendum esse incidere
in manus Dei viventis, That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God: The same Apostle rendering a reason, Deus enim noster est ignis
consumens, for our God is a consuming fire. They then that will not believe
Gods justice, nor are in any measure terrified with his threats against sin,
but presuming of his mercy, do continue in their impiety, shall suddenly be
surprised, and irrecoverably be confounded, when Gods judgments do seize upon
them.

I but, says Anonymus, this causes Melancholy, and exceeding trouble of
mind: Truly if we consider the condition that we are in by nature, we have very
small cause to be jovial: For 1. There is a captivity, wherein we are violently
detained under the slavery of sin and Satan. S. Paul knew it, and speaks of it,
Romans 7.25. and in the sense thereof cries out, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver, me? I hope Anonymus will not be so foolhardy as to say, this
trouble of the Apostle was a sin, who being sensible of it, could, not but be
troubled with it. Indeed there is no Turk so hurries his Gallie-slaves, and
puts them to so base services, as sin does her Captives. Give me one that has
been in this Captivity, and by the mercy of God is freed from it, and scit,
quod dico: He knows what I say is certainly true. 2. There a Prison too; Ask
David else, who never was in any Goal, what he means, when he said, Psalm. 88.8.
I am so fast in prison, that I knew not how to get out? What else caused him to
cry out so passionately, Psalm. 142.7. O bring my Soul out of Prison: And S.
Mat. 4.16. says of some to whom Christ preached here, That they sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, even as men in a Dungeon use to do. 3.
There are Chains too, A sinner is tied with the Chains of his own sins, Prove.
5.22. With the bonds of iniquity, Acts 8.23. And these are they for which David
gives thanks to God, Psalm. 116.16, That he had broken them in sunder. A man
need no other bonds, if once he come to feel them. The galls that sin makes
in the conscience, are the entering of the Iron into his soul.

But perhaps these are not felt by some; no, not felt? Take this then for a
Rule. If Christ heal them, that be brokenhearted, brokenhearted we must be,
ere he can heal us. He is Medicus cordis, the Physician of the heart indeed;
but it is cordis contriti, of the broken heart; it is a condition ever annexed
to make us the more capable; and likewise a disposition it is, to render us the
more curable. It is our fault, and a great fault it is, that we are more ready
to laugh with the merry Philosopher, then to weep with the mourner; Mirth
seldom knocks twice at our doors without entrance; but sorrow shall not in, so
long as we our selves, with all the miserable helps that we can muster up, can
keep it out. He that sees heaven lost, Paradise vanished, the Earth accursed,
Hell enriched, the World corrupted, all Mankind defaced, will have small cause
to laugh. Man fell by affectation of joy, he must rise again by the affection
of sorrow. That part of the world that shall be cast into the bottomless lake,
spend the days in laughter; that part which shall rejoice for ever, must be
first drowned in tears. For my own part, I am none of those, that desire to go
merrily to hell; I had rather have Gods Vinegar, then Anonymus his Oil; Gods
Wormwood, then his Manna, Gods Justice, then his mercy; Sorrow and mourning
here, then misery and torment for ever hereafter. For a conscience troubled in
it self, is Odor quietis, as Noah's sacrifice was, a favor of rest with God.

I but, says he, this opinion (for he will not allow it any other term)
provokes to despair; I confess, to despair of the mercy of God, is a sin of
a very high nature: but for ought I see, not so frequent as is by some
imagined. I have read of whole sects, whole bodies of Heretics, that denied
the communion of Gods grace to others: The Cathari denied that any man had it,
but themselves: The Novatians denied that any man could have it again, having
once lost it, by some deadly sin committed after Baptism. But I never read of
any sect that denied it to themselves; no sect of despairing men. We have some,
somewhere sprinkled; one in the old Testament, Cain; and one in the New
Testament, Judas; and one in the Ecclesiastical story, Julian; but no body, no
sect, of despairing men. Therefore he that abandons himself to this sin of
desperation, sins with the least reason of any; for he prepares his sin above
Gods mercy; and he sins with the fewest examples of any; for God has
diffused this light with an evidence to all, that all sins (excepting that sin,
which is not without a great deal of difficulty, and some incertainty, defined,
the sin against the Holy Ghost) may be forgiven unto men, yea unto all men
without exception.

But we must take heed, least in magnifying the mercy of God, we decry his
justice, while we seek to keep some few poor souls from dashing themselves to
pieces on the rock of despair, we give not occasion to thousands to engulf
themselves on the quick sands of presumption. And so we cast out one Devil with
another, and the latter prove the greater. Presumption is a sin to which we are
naturally prone, and therefore the more dangerous. Soon is a man invited to
make much of himself, to approve and applaude his own endeavors, to look big
upon his own performances, hardly won to his own affliction, or brought about
to his own disestimation. Despair is a thing grievous to trembling nature: Not
often does that Archer of Hell head his Arrows with such displeasing assaults.
Besides, this has often turned (invito diabolo) to a hearty contrition for
sin, and a holy conversion from sin; like a violent Fever, that has boiled
up all the choler and corruption of sin, so that a man becomes the better
after it. But to presume is so sweet a sin to flesh and blood, that it once
foiled Innocence it self. Satan has not a more tried shaft in all his quiver,
then to persuade men, while they are sinning, to bear themselves boldly upon
the favor of God. Therefore as the wise Man eats moderately of the dish which
he best likes, because he knows there is more danger of surfeit in that, then
in all the rest; So it becomes us to be most shie and heedful of that sin,
which we know will soonest take us, and take God from us. We may say of them
both, Despair and Presumption, as the Israelitish woman did of Saul and David
in their harmony, after the slaughter of Goliath, Saul has slain his thousands,
and David his ten thousands: so where despair has hurried away some, with a
great deal of noise and clamor, presumption has engulfed more, many more,
without any noise at all.

Together with this sin of despair, in his Linsey woolsey discourse, he links
the performance of holy duties. I know the Devil and his instruments are
professed Enemies thereunto: but after that way which they deny, so will we
worship the God of our Fathers. The Tree is known by the fruits: It is not well
said, but well done thou faithful servant, that by the mercies of God, in the
merits of Jesus will gain acceptance and admittance. Has not God promised to
reward every man according to his works? Has not Christ our Savior confirmed
us by the same promise? and will this fellow make them liars? Does not the
Apostle enjoin his Corinthians, 1.9.24. So to run, that they may obtain? Did
not Jacob wrestle with Christ, the Angel of the Covenant for a blessing, and
prevail? And how did he wrestle, but by prayer and supplication? As the Prophet
excellently expresses it, Hos. 12.3, 4. What is this, but with Diogenes, to
trample upon Platoes pride with more pride, to condemn our presumption (as he
judges it) with greater presumption? For by his new Divinity, or rather old
fustian, he presumes to cross even the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who wills us,
Mat. 7.7. to ask, that we may have; And S. James 4.2. tells us the reason why we
have not, even because we ask not.

Methinks they should be ashamed to print and publish to the world, that which
is so apparently cross and contrary to the word of God, thereby seeking to
bring men into a cursed condition, even to neglect and contemn the performance
of those duties which we are enjoined for to do, in the name of the Lord Jesus.
What will he, what can he say to that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.12. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling? And that of the 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord? 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in
this world, etc. laying up for themselves a good foundation, Rev. 22.12.
Behold, I come quickly, says Christ, and my reward is with me, to give to
every one according to his works. Therefore it is evident (notwithstanding his
negation) that we may escape Hell, and do our selves much good (though not for,
yet) by our good works. Surely after we have prayed for hallowing Gods name,
the coming of his Kingdom, etc. We may pray, not only for daily bread, but
pardon of, and power against sin, and not lose our labor. We are commanded
to hear, Isai. 55.3. that our souls may live: For though God has promised, and
Christ has purchased all good things for believers, yet we cannot, not so soon
at least expect them, unless we seek for them, by those means which are
appointed. See what the Prophet says to this purpose, Ezekiel. 36.37. God has an
intention of good toward his people; Yet, says he, I will be enquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them.

Thus we see the Scriptures themselves are point blanck for the performance of
holy duties, But his intents and his purpose, his aim and his end, is to
undervalue the Scriptures, by telling us, we have not the very Books that were
written by the Prophets and Apostles: Nor is it enough (says he) that we have
Books in Hebrew and Greek, unless we could certainly know, that these Copies
(as they are called) do agree word for word with those that were written by
those Holy Penmen.

To which I answer; If his ignorance be such, that he knows not whether they
accord or no, let him sit by, and submit to the judgment of the Godly Learned:
let him not raise a dust to blind the eyes of others, because he himself cannot
discern truth from falsehood. But yet forsooth, under a probable and plausible
show of some learning, which God knows is very small, which is to strongly
presumed is none at all; under the pretense of zeal and devotion, holiness and
humility, labors to obtrude his paralogisms unto the people, as sugared baits
of serpentine deceit, which he persuades himself cannot be done, but by
endeavoring to overthrow Religion, and the very basis and foundation thereof,
the holy Scriptures. But that he may not outface us with a Card of ten, we
affirm, that the original Text, the authentic Hebrew of the Old Testament,
with the Greek of the New, is entire and incorrupt; and for proof hereof, do
commend these ensuing Arguments to the Consideration of the judicious and
Christian Reader.

The first whereof is drawn from the want of proof on their side, who endeavor
to lay so foul an imputation upon the Scriptures, which they are bound to make
good by some evident demonstration, but hic labor. They are a Tree so firmly
rooted, that all the cold storms of humane reluctance and opposition could
never shake. They then deserve, and that justly too, to be branded with a vain
and profane suspicion of that, for which they never yet, nor ever will be able
to give a reason.

Secondly, From the testimony of Christ himself, Mat. 5.18. Where he says,
that one (...) or tittle of the Law shall not pass away; yea, Heaven and Earth
shall pass way, before the word of God shall suffer the least diminution.
Whence it is manifest, that God will not permit his word contained in the
Scriptures, to suffer any the least depravation.

Thirdly, From the incredible devotion, even to superstition, which the Jews
bore to the holy Scriptures; whence it was enacted by them, that if any one
should presume to change or alter any thing therein, they were judged guilty of
an unpardonable offense. Besides, if they would have done it, they could not;
for it must have been done either before the coming of the Messiah, or after;
If before any such wickedness had been committed by them, they could not have
have evaded the just reprehension of Christ and his Apostles: If after, the
Copies thereof being dispersed among the Christians, would have rendered such
attempts vain and fruitless. And that they did it not, may appear by those
places concerning the coming of Christ in the flesh, which above all, and
before all others would have been corrupted by them.

Fourthly, From the care and vigilance of the Fathers, who have ever had
recourse to, and made use of these spiritual weapons against Heathens,
Heretics, and profane persons, insomuch that no manifest depravation of the
Text could possibly creep in, without public notice taken of it, and as
public clamor and scandal against it.

Fifthly, From the consideration that almost every age has afforded notable
and famous Critics, such as Origin and Jerome of old, Erasmus, Beza, and an
infinite number of others in latter times, who with an Heroic industry and
diligence, have weighed every tittle in the balance of the Sanctuary, and
sound it entire; so that there cannot be any visible corruption found in it, or
apparent depravation of it.

Lastly, From the providence of God. If God could and would preserve the
Original and Authentic Scriptures inviolate, and propagate them to posterity;
there is no doubt to be made but that they were preserved: But that God could,
none can, none dare deny; That he would, his providence to the Church does
testify, to whom he so delivered his holy Word, that without any suspicion of
error, it might receive instruction and information from it, Mat. 28. ult. Lo I
am with you (by my word and spirit) unto the end of the world.

Now for Translations, I confess, they cannot have that propriety, and
delicacy, and harmony, and melody of language, which the Holy Ghost delighted
in, and made frequent use of, in the penning of the Scriptures. We know, that
when the Grecians and the Romans, and S. August. himself undervalued and
despised the Scriptures, because of the poor and beggarly phrase that they
seemed to be written in, the Christians could say little against it, but turned
still upon the other and safer way, we consider the matter, and not the phrase,
because for the most part, they had read the Scriptures only in Translations,
which could not maintain the Majesty, nor preserve the Elegancies of the
Original. But howsoever the Christians were at first fain to sink a little
under that imputation, that their Scriptures had no Majesty, because those
imbellishments could not appear in Translations, with which the Original did
abound; yet now that a perfect knowledge of those languages has brought us to
see the beauty, and to behold the glory of those Books, and to come up so near
unto the same in our Translations: Let a man that is endued with the spirit of
discerning, read the Books in our Translation, he shall apprehend the Author to
be God; the matter to be divine and absolute that is therein contained, the
manner and form to be no barbarous, or trivial, or market, or homely language,
but as full of Majesty as possibly could be rendered in the simplicity of words:
And the end whereat they aim to be the glory of God alone, may thence conclude
these are the Scriptures, and the very word of God. By the Scriptures
themselves then in the Original, and by Translation as near and agreeable to
the Original as the best and ablest Expositors could possibly render them, have
we proved, that there is a place prepared, wherein all wicked and ungodly
wretches shall be tormented with the Devil and his Angels, and that for ever.

I but God delights not in the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18. much less in the
eternal damnation of any of his Creatures. Answ. Yet as mercy has had her
place and day, so Justice must have hers, whom mercy saves, she saves for ever,
though their works were short, and nothing unto God; yea, the very effects of
his own grace. Therefore whom Justice condemns, she condemns for ever, not so
much respecting the persons that have sinned, as the person against whom they
have sinned: Almighty God, as he is good, is not delighted with their torments:
but as he is just, he is not satisfied without their torments. Factus est malo
dignus aeterno, qui hoc in se peremit bonum, quod esse posset aeternum, says
August, He is justly plagued with an evil that is eternal, who has corrupted
himself in a good that might have been eternal.

But if Gods justice must be satisfied upon those sinners, for whom Christ
satisfied not; why is it not rather in reducing them to nothing? Seeing the
unthankful deserve to be deprived of all benefits. Now one special benefit is
Being; therefore ipsum esse amittant, let them not be. Answ. Its true, the
Creature that disobeyes the Creator, deserves to lose his being: but because it
was given him to this purpose, that he should serve him; therefore it shall
never be taken away, for God will have his homage and service out of that very
being, whether of grace and salvation, to the praise of his mercy, or of
punishment and confusion, to the praise of his justice.

But Anonymus is of an opinion, that the mercy of God will terminate their
sorrows according to that in Wisd. 11.23. Thou shall have mercy upon all, and
thou love all the things that are: and Romans 11.32. God has concluded all
under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all; Sed conclusit and daemones;
he has also concluded the Devils under sin. Neither will his goodness suffer
that, which he made for blessedness to perish for ever in torment. Alas, these
be but the plausible conceits that over-mercifull Origin did first bring forth
for the recovery of lost spirits; who notwithstanding the doom of Christ,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
would have these words rather, Minaciter quam veraciter dicta, spoken by way of
threatening, then by way of truth. But the Scripture delivers it plain, ac
plene, Rev. 20.10. The Devil shall be tormented in the Lake of fire day and
night for ever.

Besides, this opinion does both extendere and extenuare misericordiam; as it
straineth, so it restrains mercy. It extends it to the future deliverance of
the damned, it extenuates it in regard of the happy condition of the blessed.
For if the lost be ever to be released out of Hell; then will it follow that
the Saints are one day to be excluded out of heaven; And so, what the bad shall
gain, the good shall lose: yea, the very mercy of God cannot get more glory by
the one, then it shall lose by the other,

But though the Devils be everlastingly chained up, yet there may be mercy for
reprobate men they may get loose, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive
with man; therefore his indignation shall cease. And he does often threaten,
but not do as we see in the case of Ninive. Answ. God does many times menace
and not strike, because our repentance steps between: But when everlasting
burning has wasted all the moisture of repenting, will he do so then? Here
indeed we may speed as well as Ninive, and find God in mercy enclining toward
us: for we cannot choose but stand, so long as our sins fall: but we must needs
fall, if our sins stand. But at that day, the date of repentance will be quite
out. I but as David puts the question, Psalm. 77.7. Will the Lord cast off for
ever, and will he be favorable no more? No certainly, while there is life,
there is hope: for that is spoken only of temporal afflictions, with which the
Church is exercised while it is militant here below. But still as the joys of
heaven, so the pains of Hell are eternal. If they that say otherwise, Anonymus
and his gang can tell us when, and at what time they shall expire, then will
they say something to the purpose.

For the conclusion of the whole matter; methinks God may justly say to
Anonymus, as he did to that wicked and unreformable person, Psalm. 50.16. What
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant
in thy mouth? seeing thou not only hate it it in thine heart, but also
pervertest it with thy lips? It were fit and necessary that such men, before
they be suffered to meddle with the Scriptures, should put in sureties, that
the sense which they give of them, should be Orthodox and consenting with the
Church. For the trusting of every man upon his single bond, to interpret any
place of Scripture, is the occasion of much error: So grow they bold to utter
their own fancies, and look to be believed upon their own bare word, which is
Dominari fidei, to take upon them to be Lords over the faith of others. If
Satan come to us in broad terms, charging us to renounce Christ, we should
openly and utterly defy them; Therefore he creeps in like a Serpent, and as
our Savior tells us, Mat. 13.25. Superseminat Errores, sowes Tares: that these
growing together with the seeds of truth, may in time choke them.

The things that were ordained for a means, whereby the Gentiles might come to
know God, by Satan's illusion became occasions of their more offending him, Romans
1.20. By the visible things of the Creation, they might have understood the
invisible things of the Godhead. But they fell to worship the Sun, Moon, and
Creatures, omitting the knowledge of the Creator: Where should we know Christ
but in, and by the Scriptures? Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, says he, they
testify of me. Yet as it often happens, that in the very highway we cannot
see for dust; so upon the face of this sacred Spring, the Devil collects such
clouds of errors; that many men do lose Christ even in the very place where
they are appointed to find him. Or, as in dark nights, Pirates use to kindle
fires, and make great lights upon the Rocks, and maritime Coasts: whether, when
poor Seamen steer, in hope of harbor, they meet with nothing but wrack and
ruin: So Heretics flourish with Scriptures, or at least with some flashes of
it, like false Lights, to which when distressed souls repair for succor, these
pestilent seducers feed them with nothing but pernicious errors. Fowlers by
setting up a dead Tree, besmeared with Lime, and beset with dead birds, as if
they were living, allure the live birds to them, as to their friends and
acquaintance, and so bring them to destruction. The application is easy; the
experiment too common. Dead errors are made snares for living souls.

This is the cunning of these wicked Impostors, something they will have good,
to draw down the evil, the greater part shall be evil to poison the good;
Miscent recta perversis, says Gregory in his Morals, Ut ostendendo bona
auditores ad se pertrahant: and exhibendo mala, latenti peste corrumpant. They
seem Saints at a distance, and speak well, if you may believe them; but if you
approach near to them, and make a more narrow discovery of them, you shall find
they are in sheeps clothing. If Rome had not some truth, she would never be
believed: if she were not full of errors, her followers could not be deceived.
As the Apostles from God, so the faithful Ministers of God, from the Apostles,
by the commandment of God, do warn us of these things, that we fall not into
the error of the wicked. It may be that we slight them speaking: but they of
whom they warn us, would give much to have them hold their peace. You know the
story; Philip of Macedon besieging Athens, sent Legates to the City, that if
they would deliver into his hands ten of their Orators, such as he should
choose, whom he pretended to be disturbers of the Commonwealth, he would raise
his siege, and be at peace with them. But Demosthenes quickly smelt out his
plot, and with the consent of the Athenians, returned him this Apological
answer. The Wolves came to Treat of a League with the shepherds, and told them
thus; All the fraud and discord betwixt you and us, arises from a certain
generation of Dogs, which you maintain among you: deliver up those Dogs, and we
will be good friends with you, neither will we any ways wrong you. The Dogs
were delivered up, and the Peace was concluded, the shepherds secure: But O the
woeful and cruel massacre that was presently made amongst the poor Lambs: they
were all devoured, the Shepherds undone, and all by parting with their Dogs.
If the Popish and Schismatical faction, who like Sampsons Foxes, are joined
together by the tayls, though their heads seem to be different one from the
other, could once get the Ministers of the Gospel to hold their peace, or
procure them to be muzzled by Authority, or to be delivered over to their
wolvish cruelty, woe were to our poor souls. Error would then play Rekes,
Darkness triumph, Hell make play-days, Truth would languish, and all goodness
lie prostrate on the Earth. As little as they are now regarded, or as much as
they are slighted; we should then dearly miss them, and earnestly wish for
them; and say, blessed are they that come to us, not only in the name of the
Lord, as most seducers do, but sent from the Lord, to his glory and our
establishment.

Let us then, while we do enjoy them, gather strength from them against
vacillation and inconstancy. There be some, of whom the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 4.4. That will turn away their Ears from the Truth, unto Fables, very
toys will lead away fools. Alas, a quid novi, carries them any where. A new
fashion does not more take your proud Lady, a new Play your roaring Gallant, a
new Tavern your deep Drinker, a new Trick your nimble Cheater, nor a new Drug
your gulling Emperick, then a new opinion does your light-heel'd Schismatic.
Christ questions the Jews, Mat. 11.7. What went ye out into Wilderness to see?
a Reed shaken with the wind? yea rather, O ye Reeds shaken with the wind, what
went ye out into the Wilderness to see? a vanity lighter then your selves? yet
as the golden Calf took the Israelites, because it was made of their Earings:
So a fictitious conceit transporteth too many among us, because it is made fit
for their Ears.

Let us truly weigh the folly of inconstancy, Heb. 13.9. Be not carried about
with strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing for the heart to be established
with grace. To be loose then in the main joints, of Religion, must needs be
very bad. The tottering wall is soon blown down, but being down, who shall
erect and set it up again? The righteous soul is like a body of a square
figure: turn it on which part you will, lay it how you list, it will still be
constant, and like it self. An unstable Christian is the worlds worst movable:
a little resembling the Silkworm, but not of such profit: one day you shall
find him a fly, another a Maggot, very seldom twice in the same shape. Take
Gold, and throw it into the water, yet it loses neither value nor color, cast
it into the fire, and it comes forth the purer; but dirt is hardened with the
fire, and dissolved with the water: The Sons of levity are such, as that which
they are joined withal would have them to be: hard or soft, cold or hot, tall
or low, great or small, of any temper. Their souls are like common strumpets,
they take in all suggestions: If one say there is no Hell, they believe it: If
another shall come and say, there is no Heaven, no Angel, no God, they are apt
to be taken with it. For shame let us be steady, before we be laid in the
steady Earth, where there is no motion at all. In the Grave the most
pragmatical busie-body shall be quiet. There is no shifting of ground, no
changing of sides there. They that troubled all the Country with their
fantastical Opinions, to get themselves a name, shall there lie as quiet as
their fellow-clods. The body shall be confined to one place, the soul to
another, without shifting or removing, till the time come that they be removed
to the Bar, and brought before the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus, to receive
secundum opera, according to their works.

I confess, we are Sheep, apt to wander, but we shall not if we keep our
Shepherd; We are Chickens apt to stray, but we may be secure under the wings of
our Hen. God is our Shepherd, let us keep close to him, never any trusted in
him, and did miscarry. The Holy Catholic Church, she is the Hen, under whose
Wings we have been hatched up hitherto, let us carefully brood our selves under
the same, from the danger of the Kite. Let us keep in the one, and depend upon
the other by our Faith and Prayers; and all the forces of Satan shall not
remove us from the Truth. Which God of his mercy Grant we may to his Glory, our
own Comfort, and the good Example of others. Amen.

There is an Excellent Piece of the same Authors Extant, against the Socinians,
with an History of their Lives and Deaths.

FINIS.

