THE MAN OF HONOR, DESCRIBED In a SERMON, Preached before the Lords of
Parliament, In the Abbey Church at Westminster, March 26. 1645. The Solemn day
of the Public Monethly-Fast.

By FRANCIS CHEYNELL, Minister of Gods Word.

Die Jovis, 27. Martii, 1645.

IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this House does hereby
give thanks to Master Cheynell for his great pains, taken in the Sermon, he
Preached on the 26. of this instant March, in the Abbey Church Westminster,
before the Lords of Parliament, it being the day of the Public Fast.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament.

PROVE. 27. 5, 6. Open rebuke is better then secret love: Faithful are the
wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.

PROVE. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man, shall find more favor afterward, then
he that flatters with his tongue.

London, Printed by J. R. for Samuel Gellibrand, dwelling in S. Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Brasen-Serpent, 1645.

To the Right Honorable, the House of PEERS.
Right Honorable,
GOd has given us four Books to study: The Book of Scriptures; The Book of
Conscience: In which, there are so many Errata's, that all Books were Written
to mend that one Book of Conscience. The Book of Creation, and therein the
Treatise of Beasts, deserves our sad consideration: We may read such excellent
things in Beasts, and see such abominable things in men: That I may safely
say, All they who quarrel at the Language of the Holy Ghost, in my Text, think
too highly of themselves, and too cheaply of the Beasts. Wise men may go to
School to Ants, Bees, Elephants, Serpents, etc. And most men to the Ox, and
Ass, Isai. 1. 3, 4. What strange things have Beasts done by fantasy, and
memory helped with experience? Believe it, The providence, wit, do^ilitie,
sagacitie, meekness, temperance, chastity, diligence of Beasts, set forth to
the life by Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Aristotle, Pliny, Atheneus,
Elian, Gesner, and the rest, may put too many Nobles to the blush. The last
Book, is the Book of Providence, and we are compelled to study this Book so
often in these sad times, that some (...) feared our Divines will turn
Statesmen: But you know, my Lords, That he ^ho is to Preach a solemn Sermon,
does not Preach conscionably, unless he Preach seasonably: We must study how
to apply spiritual Remedies to our sick State; and it is our duty to stir up
you, to apply some civil Remedies: But for my part, I had rather be Preaching
of Faith and Love, Christ and Heaven, for I am not cut out for Court-work; yet
s^re I should have more Courtship then Conscience, if I should crave your
pardon, or make any sneaking Apology, for pressing Scripture-notions, and
phra^ or any necessary trueths, home upon your conscience. You did command me
to Preach before you, and I was bold for to Preach to you: Some passages of my
Sermon were sharp, and others bitter; but if Pills be well acuted, they will
purge the better: My roughness is like that of a file, to smooth and polish my
Auditors; and if by that means, you become more bright, and pure, I shall not
repent that I was no smoother. Ministers, especially in times of war, are
instead of Drums and Trumpets, we must not let you sleep in quiet; but some
expressions of mine, may seem too blunt, why, a Whotstone's blunt, yet serves
to sharpen what was dull before, though made of excellent metal. We are
enjoined by the Directory, to give every one his own portion, without
neglecting the meanest, or sparing the greatest in their sins. (...) moved your
Honor's almost in down right terms, to pass that Self-denying Ordinance,
which binds not only Lords, but Commons also, to deny all private interests,
that you and they, may unanimously promote the Public Service: Your Honor
does not depend on Wax and Parchment; and it is clear, that rebus sic
stantibus. You will gain more Honor by laying down your Commissions, then by
keeping them. Your Lordships are pleased to approve, what was delivered, by a
double Order; the first of Thanks, the second for Printing.

My Lords, I understand and obey, only give me leave, to present some humble
requests to you, which being granted, will increase your Honor.

Be pleased to consult how to relieve distressed Ireland, and besieged Taunton:
How to purge the Committtee's (in the Counties near London) in Essex, Sussex,
Surrey, Hampshire: It is proper to give them Physic now at Spring; you will
thereby do your selves, those Counties, and the City right. Consider, how you
may unstop the mouth of the other Fountain: We fight for Learning, as well as
Piety; How to prefer able Divines that have spent their spirits, and lost
their voice, and are by that means disabled for any Preaching Service, but
admirably qualified for Writing, if they had leisure and encouragement to put
Pen to Paper: How to rebuke presumptuous Incendiaries, who occasion the
bloodshed of many hundreds, plunder thousands, and yet hope when they have done
all the mischief they can, to make their peace for 500 l. and get a Warrant
from some Justice of Peace, to receive the Sacrament: Finally, How to relieve
the Orphans and Widows, of them who have lost their lives; and maintain such as
have lost their limbs, in this present Service.

Keep a precise watch, my Lords, over your own souls; They who have the
greatest temptations, must allow themselves the least liberty. Prepare, and
wait for the coming of our Savior, Christ will wait upon* them, that wait for
him: These are Honorable Services, and you cannot desire a more Honorable
reward, then to be Honored, nay, served, by the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Luke 12. 37. That you may never be weary of doing him service, who will
never be weary of doing you good; is the Prayer of your Honors, most humble
Servant

Francis Cheynell.

A Sermon preached to the Right Honorable the House of Lords, At the
Monethly-Fast, March 26. 1645.
PSALM. 49. 20. Man that is in Honor, and understands not, is like the Beasts
that perish.

Tam nati pl^bei^ b^, tu^ ^ati pr^stant^ vi^^. Iunius. Etiam ^il^i Adam, etia^
^il^i Magn^. Musculu^. T^m (...) fil^^ (...). Munster. See the Septuag^ Dute^
and Fre^ Translations, in the second part of the learned S^ld^ Title of H^nour
p. 8^3, 854.

A Sad Text, fit to be considered by men of honor in these sad Times: Hear ye
this, ye sons of Adam, and sons of Ish; ye sons of the earth, and sons of
Nobles: the holy Ghost bespeaks your attention, in the first and second verses
of this Psalm.

My Lords, this is David's Metamorphosis; it is not the Dream of a Poet, but the
Rapture of a Prophet, the Rhetorique of a Psalm: Most men in Honor, are, to
their everlasting Dishonor, turnedinto Beasts that perish.

It i^ an hard Saying, as well as a dark Saying; and therefore I will open my
dark saying, (...). 4. ^^rteg^ (...) s^pi^ia Parab^l^, multipli^ pr^a a^.
the Psalmist multiplies expressions, in the foregoing verses, for the
mollifying of this hard Saying, and the opening of this dark Saying: Give me
leave to glance over the Psalm by a smart Paraphrase.

Wherefore should I fear (says David) when, etc. But though he might not,
others may have just cause to fear what will become of them, when the iniquity
o^ their heels shall compass them about, verse. 5. And surely none have more
cause to fear, then the great ones of the world, verse. 6. They that are so
rich, that they trust in their riches, and boast of their riches (which the
wisest of men are forced to leave to others, v 10.) have a deep, though vain
conceit, that their houses shall continue for ever; and therefore call their
lands by their own names, v. 11. But alas, not withstanding this their
Atheistical Dream, they abide not in their Honor; for they are like the
Beasts that perish. And yet though this their way is their folly (undeniable
folly) their Posterity are such fools as to imitate their Practices, and
approve their Sayings. Selah, verse. 13.

Oh look not upon this Censure as a Jerk of Wit, for it is indeed A sad Preface
to a black Sentence full of horror: For mark what follows: When a man is made
rich, and the glory of his house is increased, he is usually so taken up with
his wealth and glory, that he forgets the mortality of his frail body, and the
eternity of his precious soul: He does not consider how he may be ransomed from
the strength of sin, the sting of death, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. Sicut pecudes
morticin^ qu^ proji^, vel pe^es ad (...) destin^. (...) qu^ sive pasca^ sive
(...) ad (...) destina^a s^nt. Vi^^ Iunium and Muscul: Pa^ more. H^ (...) ^all
go: ^o in the original, verse. 19.
the hand of the grave, the power of hell; and therefore his body falls like
the carcass of a Beast; the Grave has victory over him, and Death feeds upon
him. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed upon them, verse.
14. And though whilst he lived he was applauded by others, and he blessed hi^
own soul, verse. 18. yet his soul shall go to the Generation of his fathers, he
shall never see light. Tell me, tell me, is not this (...) black Sentence, full
of Horror? Menglory in their Pedigre^, and are as it were damned ex traduce:
They take a pride in imitating the errors and vanity of their forefathers, who
lived in darker times; and they shall go to the Generation of their fathers,
where they shall never see light; for to such is reserved the blackness^ of
darkness for ever. And then, to close Iu^e verse. 13.
up all, the Prophet warbles over the dark saying of the Text upon his dol^full
Harp: it is the Burden of the Psalm, and the Burden of many a guilty
cons^ience, which will one day swea^, and groan, and sink under the weight of
it: Man that is in Honor, and understands not, falls like the Beasts that
perish.

In the words, be pleased to observe,

1. The Honorable estate, or (in your own Language) the precious Peerage of
great men: A Nobleman is homo in pretio, as Junius has it, a man to be prized
and honored.

2* The wilful and dishonorable Inconsiderateness of men in Honor: Man that
is in Honor, and understands not.

3. The lamentable Downfall and beastlike Ruin of such as fall from their
Order, from their God, and from their Honor: They are like the Beasts that
perish.

First, for your Honorable Estate, without any Courtship or Complement, I must
observe, That a Nobleman is Homo in pretio, one that is prized and honored in
a Civil account. Be pleased, Brethren, to suspend your Censure, till I come to
speak of the Christian account.

They that are truely-Noble, are the Eccles. 10. 7. Blessed, etc.
bl^ssing and Isa. 5. 13. Heb. Their glory. Vide Ar. Mont. (...)
glory of a Kingdom: Their honorable men, or their glory, are men of famine,
Isa. 5. 13. And dignities are called glories, in the eighth verse of the
Epistle of Jude. When men are not honored according to the weight, worth,
dignity of their Places and Persons, they are as it were (...), Jude v. 8.
blasphemed and cursed, in the Scripture Phrase.

But, that I may top the rising Errors of the time, give me leave to
distinguish of a threefold Honor: Civil, Philosophical, (d) See Master Caryl
his learned Observations on Job 3. 1. compared with Genesis 16. 4. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
and Christian.

First, for Civil Honor, we must consider that it was purchased of old by the
worth of renowned Ancestors, who were the glory of their times: and is it not
fit that Posterity should enjoy the Purchase of their Forefathers? Those Titles
of Honor which help to set forth a son of mean parts, and but ordinary
abilities, might cost the Father or Grandfather very dear: he might forsake his
meat, break his sleep, exercise his strong parts, and put forth his eminent
gifts, for the Service of the Commonwealth of England, and Church of God. It
is probable that he did lay out vast sums for the pu^like good, adventured his
life for his Country: and shall a Title of Honor, purchased by gold laid out
in an honorable way, nay, purchased by sweat and blood, be taken away from the
son of this Noble Progenitour? The public Faith of the Kingdom is virtually
engaged for the Ennoblishment of his Posterity: by Justice and Equity, in all
Nations thorowout the world, the child of such noble Ancestors ought to enjoy
with honor what his Progenitors have purchased for him at so dear a Rate.

True it is, that God has made all Nations of men of one blood, Acts 17. 26.
and therefore, as we are descended from Adam, Omnis sang^ is est concolor: ^ti^
comm^ ha^ non vestem.
our blood is of the self-same complexion; but the strength, wisdom, valor,
wealth, virtue of Ancestors in succeeding Generations,, did purchase
transcendent degrees of Honor for themselves and their Posterity. The Titles
of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons, were anciently bestowed on them to
whose Virtue, Prowess, Wisdom, the Kingdom was beholding, both for Counsel
and Assistance, in times of War and Peace, The first Dukes or Vide Cambdens
Britan. p. 164
Duces undertook a great Charge; their Office was full of Care, and Trust, and
Danger. Duke was a Title of Duty, rather then Dignity, as Master Cambden
observes. The Title of Lord Cambden, vide supra, p. 165. Some derive Baron from
the Chaldce; some from Bar in the Germane Language: others say Baron or Baron
comes from (...) Cabed in Kal^ig^^^icat grav^ esse fro^ingra^, in P^ (...)
Honorar^, uia (...) habe^ v^les (...) leves quos ho^, sed authoritate coru^
pondus susp^. Whether Cheva^ or Baron be the true (...) Title of Dien^ty^ the
eye of the Law, I leave it to the Lawyers to dispute. See the Writ, D.
Ch^val^er sal^ Cock Com. ^n L^leton, Lib. 1 c 1. of Fee^le, Sect 9. Qui ab
(...) splendore degenerar^^t N^bs (...) port^^t^ (...).
Marcher was accounted more honorable then that of Marquess, because it was
more ancient, and did import some honorable Service. Barons were men of
Valor, Robora Belli, and therefore are engaged to show their Valor by their
very Title. Why were the Ensigns of Distinction first born upon Shields, but
because they who purchased them at first, did use their own Bodies as a Shield,
to bear off those fatal Blows which would otherwise have lighted upon the
Body of the Commonwealth. This may suffice to show, that noblemen of old did
pay a valuable Consideration for those Titles of Honor which their Posterity
enjoy.

But put the case that the son of noble Progenitors prove degenerate, and has
nothing to ennoble him, but an empty Title.

I answer, that such a man has nothing that should tempt a wise man to envy
him. What, is an empty Title so great a Provocation? Do not envy him that, for
his Forefathers sake, who purchased it of the Commonwealth: Ye ought to stand
to that Bargain by which the Commonwealth is so Prov^^ al^ spes cohibers cert^
est, si success^r non (...) to. Tacitus Annal. 3.
great againer. The Jews took their Kings and their Priests for better for
worse, as they arose by lineall descent. God does not only show mercy to the
fourth Generation, but to some hundreds of men, for the forefathers sake.
Again, consider whether this Heir be desperate; may he not be recovered? If
not, yet the Breed may mend: It may be the weakness came by the mothers side:
And what though true Nobility should hide its head as it were in a Generation
or two? it may, like that River which falls under ground, rise up again.
Ishmael was none of the best, only he was Abraham's son; and God blessed him so
far, as to make him fruitful; he begat twelve Princes, and of them came a
famous Nation, Genesis 17. 20. There are certain generous Ignicles and sparks of
Nobility which lay raked up in ashes, and seem to be extinct in an Heir or two;
and yet these Ignicles do revive and sparkle again, in succeeding Generations.
There is an Heroical Nobilitas Gener^^ non inter b^na exter^^ rec^ns^nd^ venit
quo^ H^. roici quida^ igniculs poster^^ trans^ (...). Pet. Martyr, l^^. C^m.
and Plut. d^ tard. D. vindict.
Impetus in men of highborn spirits; and yet this Impetus may be silent, and
scarce work notably in men of Noble Families, by reason of some great
Obstructions: yet good Education, and good company, may, by Gods blessing,
remove those Obstructions in their Successors, and evidence to the world, that
the old Strein is not decayed. A young Heir may start up, that has as Public
a spirit as his Grandfathers (...). Arist. Polit. Lib. 4. cap. 8.
great-Grandfather: and then the ancient virtue and wealth, so far forth as it
has been an Instrument of virtue in his Noble Family, adds much to the
dignity of such an Heir.

But you will tell me, that the Heir of a Nobleman of England is a Peer of the
Realm, and therefore by his Peerage has a Right to sit in Parliament: And
shall every degenerate Heir, that is but an Inch of a man, and has not one
dram of reason or true Nobleness in him, sit and vote away his own Liberty and
our Safety?

To this I answer, That therefore the Parliament of England, and every
Nobleman in England, should take the greater care for the Education of their
children, especially of their Heirs, that they might be well principled and
rightly qualified for that Service for which they were born: for our Nobles are
Parliament Men born.

2. The Parliament of England can best judge who are fit to sit in Parliament:
and you know how to suspend a person from the exercise of a Power which he is
not fit to manage, without depriving the Noble House or Race of that Native and
Hereditary Power which is settled upon the lineall Heirs of that renowned
Family. I read that in some Sed arm^ sumere non ante cuiquam mor^s* q^ civi^^s
suffecturum pr^baver^t. T^ in ipso Concilio vel principum aliqu^ vel Pater --
Scuto framea^ue ju^enem oruant hic primus, juvent^ honos ant^ h^c ^us pars
viaent^ox Re^p Tacitus de Moribus Germancrum, Vide Cambd. Brit. page 169.
Gentilis Honos ^cc legibus confirmatus nec mo^bus spreto natalium jure
^vanescit. Read the approved Commenter on that place: Consult Master Perkins
his Cases of conscience.
States, young men were reckoned members of a Family, but never parts of the
Commonwealth, till they had that honor as to be avouched fit for Service, by
some approbation from the State. And Master Cambden relates, that in the Reign
of Edward the first, the wise men of ancient Families were called to sit in
Parliament; but some of their Heirs were passed by, because they were unlike
their fathers. I leave it to your Honors, to dispute whether this were an Act
of the Kings Prerogative; for I am not wise enough to determine in what cases,
or how far such severe examples are to be imitated, as long as the Blood of
Nobles remains untainted.

We are commanded to render to all their Dues; Custom to whom Custom, Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13. 7. He who has Honor due unto him
by the dignity of his Office, place, employment, Authority, in the
Commonwealth, by the Nobleness of his Ancestors, by the Laws and Customs of
the Realm, he is to be honored in all these respects with a Civil Honor,
though he has but little personal worth in him, yet we must acknowledge his
outward eminency; for we cannot in reason deny him Civil Honor, until it be
denied him by Civil Authority. This is the common and ordinary Rule; only it
is fit to enquire, how far some Civilities may be prejudicial to Religion,
Tamet^^ vero iniqu^ssimu^ sit hoc hom number genus ad tantam digni t^tem ascendere
ib^tamen col^o (...) hon^^ habe^du^e^^ tan* quam iis, qui non (...) H^ (...) a^
Dei saptentia and j^ststi^, de hominum peccatis supplicium sumentis ad illud
honoris fastigium evecti sunt -- qu^ salva p^ and offi^ in D^ fieri possit.
Cartur, in Prove. 26. 1.
l gall Liberty, and the Kingdoms safety, the highest of Laws: And if any
demand what is to be done in such an extraordinary case, as that which fell out
between Haman and Mordecai? I answer, That these things are of higher
consideration, the points have been sufficiently discussed by ingenious and
pious men; and I must not forget the work of the day: Take it therefore thus in
brief. Extraordinary examples must not be urged as general rules, nor can
ordinary rules give you sufficient direction what to do in extraordinary Cases.
Certain it is, That vile persons are contemned in the eyes, that is, in the
judgment of the godly, Psalm. 15. 4. especially, if they be so vile as to rise
up against the God of Heaven, the King of Kings; for then they are to be hated
with a perfect hatred, as David does farther explain himself, Psalm. 132. 21,
22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? And am I not grieved with those
that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine
enemies; and for this reason as I conceive, Antiochus (whom his flatterers
called the mighty God, and they that write of him, do usually call Antiochus
Epiphanes, that is, Antiochus the famous) is called by the Holy Ghost,
Antiochus the vile. And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom
they shall not give the honor of the Kingdom, Dan. 11. 21. But enough of that.

God is the God of Order, he hates Confusion; and therefore Resp. ^^ne certo
tum in jubendo tum in parendo ord ne nil nis^ onus and praed^ futura est. Vide
Tacit. Liv^^m and Politic^s passim. Opus naturae est opus authoris naturae. Si
p^ssent homines sibi sortem facere ^ascendi nemo esset humil^^, nemo ege^^
unusquisque faelicem domum invade^et -- Natura nos regit. Senec. Rhet. Controv.
6.
does approve, and make great use of those different Dignities, Degrees, and
Orders, which are established by humane policy: According to the light of
nature in several Nations throughout the world, men are not born of Noble
Ancestors, either by chance, or fortune; nor is an act of will or reason left
to the choice of the sons of men. Besides, different degrees of Civil Honor,
are usually conferred upon men in some proportion, at least answerable to the
different bounds of their Habitation. Now God does determine the several
bounds of men's Habitation, Act. 17. 26. Divine providence devides all by an
unerring lot, and appoints who shall be Heir to the Wealth, and Civil Honor of
every Noble Man: If the Heir forfeit his Estate and Honor, yet let him be Homo
in Pretio, a man civilly honored, till God or his Deputies take the
forfeiture: Private men must know their place, and keep their bounds; for if
malcontents may be connived at, they will quickly make as bold with the
Temporal Estate, as Civil Honor of the greatest men.

Finally, the sons of Nobles may have many Honorable and Lordly qualities in
them, though they have not one dram See Davenants Determinations. (...). Inter
c^aros magis qua n inter bonos recen^endus, Tacit. Hist. (...), Ar^st. Po^it.
lib. 2. c. 6.
of saving grace; and Protestant Divines do constantly maintain against
Jesuiticall seducers, that undeniable maxim, Dominium Temporale non fundatur
in gratia: Take one of an ennobled blood endued with the Spirit of Government,
but a mere stranger to the Spirit of Holiness, and this man is Homo in Pretio,
a man highly to be prized and honored; and yet let me deal plainly, as well as
civilly with your Honors, he may fall from all his Civil Honor, and will, if
he repent not, become like the Beasts that perish.

I have done with our Civil Account, and therefore I pass from Civil Honor,
to 2 Ph^losophicall Honor, of which, I shall give you, if not a more
rational, yet a more punctual account. The Philosophers show a necessity of
supporting that Civil Honor which is settled upon Noble Families by the Laws
and Customs of Commonwealths: Aristotle laughes at them, as ignorant
Politicians, who divided a Commonwealth into Soldiers, Husbandmen, and
Artificers, because those Dignities which are necessary for the support of a
Commonwealth, could not be all conferred upon men of that quality, unless you
made all the rest slaves to those Soldiers, whom they themselves maintain, and
then it would be no Commonwealth. I find a great deal Vide sis Senecae
Rhetoris Controvers^am 6. Orat. Marii apud Sal. Cicero Novus homo Nobilitatem
contemplet. Pompeium si Hereditariae extulissent imagines nemo Magnum dixisset.
Sene^a the Philosopher acknowledges that the soul comes (...), and the Poet
could say, (...) Act 17. 28 Non possum fidei caus^ imagines neque triumphos aut
consula^us majorum meorum ostentare: At si res postulet hastas, vexillum,
Phaleras, alia dona militaria praeterea cicatrices adverso corpore. Hae sunt
meae imagines haec Nobilitas -- Salust. vide Aristot. l. 2. Rhet. c. 15. (...),
etc. Jul^ani Imperatoris dictum familiare fuit. Turpe esse sapienti cum animum
hab^at captare lauds ex corpore, Ammian. Marcell lib. 25.

Paulus vel Cossus vel D^usus Moribus esto. Nae ^u Eruci accusator esses
ridiculus si illis temporibus natus esses, cum ab aratro arcessebantur qui
consules fierent. Cicero pro Ros^io. Sordidus Hetruscis abductus consul aratus
Lucan. Vnde Remo sulcoque terens dentalia Quincti. Cum trepida ante boves
Dicta^orem induit uxor. Et tua aratra domum lictor tulit. Quid tibi videntur
illi ab ara^ro citati qui paupertate sua beatam fecere Rempub. Quemcunque
volueris revolve Nobilem ad humilitatem pervenies. -- Inter haec tam effusa
maenia nihil est humili casa Nobilius Se^^ca. Juv. Sat. 8. in Cal^^.


of good Philosophy in Historians, Poets, and Orators, as well as in
professed Philosophers; they all agree, my Lords, that Nobility took its first
rise Ex virtute Nobilitas caepit. Marius apud Salust. Nobilitas sola est atque
unica virtus vide Juvenal. Sat. 8.
from Virtue, and some of them are so strict, as to maintain that sour
principle, Virtue is the only true Nobility; and therefore they take their
novus homo, who can only show a broken spear, a torn Ensign, some Military
Donatives, and famous Skars to be truly noble: Marius and Pompey were such
Noblemen. The soul of every man is, in their judgment, as nobly descended a^
the soul of any man; and they do not attribute much to the body, nor will they
give any man leave to arrogate the virtue of his Ancestors to himself: They
tell him sadly, that unless he has virtue of his own, he does dishonor his
Ancestors, discredit himself, and shame his Posterity, all at once: Though he
may be (...), yet he is not (...): and Philosophers will not count him truly
noble who is welldescended, unless he be well-affected.

It is confidently affirmed, that if Noblemen look far enough back upon
their Progenitors, they will find some of them ignoble: and if the ignoble
look back upon their Progenitors, they will find some of them noble.

The Philosophers conceive it more noble, for a man to give Honor to that
House from which he received none, then to eclipse that Honor which he
received; for this is to make the Sun go down at noon; to make all the glory of
Scilicet quia imagines non habeo, and quia mihi nova nobilitas est, quam certe
peperisse melius est quam acceptam corrupisse. Marius apud Salust.

Quidam avitas paternasque flagitiis obruerunt imagines, quidam ignobiles nati
fecere pest^ris genus, in illis non servasse quod acceperant maximum dedecus,
in his quodnemod derat fecisse, laudabile. Seneca. Vide sis Val. Maxim. Lib. 3.
c. 4, 5. Lib. 5. c. 9, 10. and ^ib 4. c. 4.

In ^o^umento quodam apud Lugdunenses, test Andr. Schotto in Senec. Videre est
Servius Tullius, si nostros sequimur Captiva natus Ocresia: and vide Plin. Lib.
18. cap. 3. (...). Suidas in verbo (...).

(...) Sopocles in Aiace.
(...).

his House fall into the Socket, and die in a loathsome Snuff. The Conclusion of
all therefore does amount to this: He that is born well, must either live well,
or die well; that is, It is far better to die honorably, then live basely, in
sin and slavery, by unworthy Compliances, corrupt Arts, and ignoble Flattery.

So much shall suffice to be said of Philosophical Nobility; I must go higher,
and open the rich treasure of Christian Nobility, which, to your Coronets of
Nobility, superaddes a Crown of glory.

3. Christian Nobility is Nobility in the highest; for never was the Humane
nature so highly honored, as when it was assumed, and hypostatically united
with the Divine nature, in one person, the Person of the Lord Jesus, the second
Person in the holy Trinity: and therefore they are ennobled in the highest
degree (according to the Christian account) who are united unto Jesus Christ by
a lively faith, and made one Spirit with him.

I have done with the Civil account, and speak now of Spiritual Honor and
Christian Nobility.

Be pleased to consider, that we are all Gentiles by nature; and the more we
have of the Gentile in us, the less we have of the Nobleman. We are not Jews
by nature, but poor miserable sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. 15. and, as
Gentiles, we can never be justified: we must therefore turn Christians, and
believe in Christ, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ; as the
Apostle goes on, verse. 16. No man can be truly and justly reputed to be in an
Honorable estate, unless he be in a Justified estate; for all those
Privileges and Immunities whereby a Christian is ennobled, are peculiar to a
justified estate. Noblemen are distinguished from other men, by their long
Robes: and he is no Nobleman as yet, in the true Christian account, who has
not the long white Robe of Christ's Righteousness girt about him by a lively
faith.

If a Nobleman be condemned to a shameful death, for some ignoble and
capital Offense, What privilege or comfort has he by all his Titles of
Honor? none of his Titles can purchase his Pardon, or procure his Release.

My Lords, we are all in a damnable estate, till we are translated into a
justified estate: and the greatest Nobleman Servilibus vit^is nobiles
polluuntur -- malos esse servos ac detestabiles satis certum est, sed hoc
utique ingenui ac nobiles magis exectandi, si in statu honestiore prjores sunt.
Salvian de Gubern. Dei. Lib. 3.
in the world must fall down upon his knees, and cry out, Lord, I am guilty of
base servile sins, most ignoble practices; and I am justly condemned, by thy
Law and my Conscience, to a base and ignoble death, to an accursed and
tormenting death, to an hellish and eternal death: I have forfeited all to
thee; I have forf^ited my Temporal estate, my Civil honor, my precious life,
my more-precious soul: Give m^ Christ; Lord, whatever thou deniest me, give me
Christ; give me Christ, or I perish, and that eternally. This is ingenious,
this is noble.

The greatest Honor that we can attain to, is, To be of the offspring of God.
-- -- (...),

Acts 17. 28.

All men indeed are of the offspring of God by Creation; A^at. (...).
but the special peculiar Honor, and therefore the highest Honor, is to be
his offspring by Regeneration, to be his sons by Adoption, for then we are
truly noble, highly descended indeed, more noble then the proudest of them,
that were termed (...) or (...); for every regenerate man, is born of God, and
bred of God, and therefore it must be granted that he is well bred and born.

My Lords, you may be more ennobled by a new birth, by a second-birth, then you
were by your first birth; for in your second birth ye are born to an heavenly
Kingdom; and ye are born not of blood (mark that) nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man; but of the will of God, Joh. 1. 13.

Be pleased to consider, that you may be noble after the flesh, and the flesh
show its frailty: You may fall from all your Honor, and become like the Beasts
that perish.

The most noble Plants amongst us Gentiles, are but Plants of the wild Olive;
we must be engrafted into Jesus Christ the true Olive, by a lively faith, that
we may partake of the sap and the fatness, the nobleness of Christ, who was
not only the Offspring, but the Root of David, Revel. 22. 16. We are but the
degenerate Plants of a strange Vine; we are Jerem. 2. 21.
not a Noble Vine, wholly a right seed, till we are engrafted into the True and
Noble Vine, Joh. 15. 1. Faith is a noble Psalm. 47. ult.
grace; for it teaches a man to deny himself, to crucify his lusts, to
sacrifice his Estate, Honor, Life, and All, in the Service of Jesus Christ.
Faith does exceedingly raise the Spirit, and ennoble the Soul of man: A
Believer looks upon all the wealth and glory of the world, as dross and dung,
in comparison of Jesus Christ. A Believer is strong in Christ, rich in faith:
because rich in Christ, he is wise in Christ, and noble in Christ: he is
nothing in himself, and all things in Christ; for Christ is all in all unto
him. Believers are the Members of Christ; and the Apostle shows, that the Head
and Members make but one Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and therefore all Believers
must needs be Noble, by their intimate relation Caput and Corpus unus certe
Christus. Aug.
to Christ; this glorious Title of Christ being imposed upon them, as united in
one Body to their Head, the Lord Jesus Christ. This one Title of Honor does
outshine and eclipse all the admired Titles of Honor in the most flourishing
Commonwealths. Once more: Faith i* a noblegrace, if it be faith of the right
strain, the faith of Gods elect; a faith that is not built upon Quicksands,
upon Hearsays and Fancies, upon the Authority of man, much less upon the
Authority of the Man of sin, the Pope, or Church of Rome: nay, the true Church,
the Church of Christ, is not the foundation of our Noble faith; for an
Implicit faith, though grounded upon the Authority of the true Church, is but
an Ignoble faith, because it leads men hood winked to a blind obedience. The
Disciples of Berea were noble Christians, because they were endued with a faith
that was truly Noble, a searching faith, a busy faith, an examining faith;
they were ready to receive any Scripture-truth; but they loved to be sure, and
therefore compared even the Apostles Doctrine with the written word. You may
read the story, Acts 17. 11. These were (...) (better born) more Noble then
those in Thessal^nica: But wherein did their Nobleness consist? Why, in that
they received the Word with all rea lin^ss^ of mind, and searched the
Scriptures d^ly, whether those things were so. They were not slow to believe
what the Apostles taught; for they received the Word with all readiness of
mind: but they made no more haste then good sp^ed; they searched the
Scriptures, and search^d them daily: there is work for Noblemen that know not
how to pass away their time, Search the Scriptures; that is a Noble employment,
On that Noblemen would make it both their business, and their recreation
also; that they might be fitted with the Noble Science of Christ and Heaven
Patience is a Noble grace. Romanus a Noble man that suffered Martyrdom, desired
his tormentors not to spare him, because he was a Nobleman, for he did not
count himself Noble by the blood of his Progenitors, but the blood of his
martyrdom; not by his birth, but by his death.
.

I desire to close up this point in a word, All real Christians are spiritual
Kings; the Prince of the Kings of the earth loved us so well, as to wash us in
his own precious blood, that he might make us Kings unto God, Revel. 1. 5, 6.
We are kings by birth, born to a Kingdom by a new and miraculous birth: We are
kings by purchase, the Kingdom cost Christ dear, but it cost us nothing; and
therefore the Kingdom comes to us by deed of gift also: We are kings by
conquest, our Lord and Master has conquered principalities and powers for us,
he has conquered the World, and t^^ Devil for us, nay, he has conquered even
our own selves for us by mortifying our lusts within us; and therefore, we are
more then conquerours through him that loved us, and overcame our spiritual
enemies for us. Finally, We are kings by marriage, the soul of every believer
is married to the King of Kings, and is attended with a guard of Angels. This
is not only a Noble, but a Royal marriage: If a woman Vide Cooks Comment on
Littleton, p. 16. Hence that rule, si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili definit
essu nobilis.
that was Noble by marriage, marry a second husband that is no Nobleman, she
looses her nobility and becomes ignoble? If our souls fall into a league with
Sin, and Satan, Death, and Hell, our souls are made ignoble; we are servants of
sin, slaves of Satan, the undoubted heirs of Hell and damnation: But if when
Christ makes love to our souls, we do with all humility and thankfulness,
embrace the offer, and take him for our Lord, and our Love, our King, and our
Husband: We have Heaven made over to our souls for ever, not as a Jointure, but
an Inheritance: We are Kings to God, and Heirs, Coheirs with Christ. Such
Honor have all the Saints; for they are the men whom the King of Kings does
delight to honor, and they shall continue in their honor, because they
understand their dependence, and will continue* in their adherence, to the
fountain of honor: They shall not be like the Beasts of the field, but like
the Angels of Heaven, satisfied with honor, and crowned with glory: And so I
pass to my second observation; which is briefly this.

Doctrine. Men that are in Honor do too often behave themselves more like
Beasts then Men: They are Beasts for want of understanding, and Beasts in
regard of perishing, as it is in my Text, Man that is in Honor, and
understands not, is like the Beasts that perish.

1. They are Beasts for want of understanding, or for want of consideration;
for they will not understand, so Arias Montanus renders it: They are so
wilfully inconsiderate, that they become like brute Beasts that have no
understanding.

Men in Honor are very brutish, if they understand nothing concerning the
eternal welfare of their precious soul, nothing concerning Religon, and
Happiness, Heaven and Holiness: Surely, says that ingenuous man, Prove. 30.
2, 3. I am more brutish then any man, I have not the understanding of a man: I
neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy: Though a man has
a deep reach, and be endued with strong and happy parts; though he be an able
Statesman, a profound Politician; yet if he has not the knowledge of the holy,
a spiritual, practical, experimental, saving knowledge; the knowledge of a
Christian, the knowledge of a Saint; he is but a brutish man, he has no
knowledge of that grace and glory of which, the precious soul of a man is
capable; and therefore, if he be a man, he is but a brutish man, nay he has
not the understanding of a man, and therefore may well be compared to the
Beasts that perish. He that knows nothing after the right manner, nothing as he
ought to know it; Is not he a Beast? And does not the Apostle point at such
Beasts, 1 Corinthians. 8. 2. How little is it that great men understand of those
great Things of Eternity? And yet, how many great men of the world who
understand Religion no more then Beasts, being steeled with ignorance,
impudence, and Atheism, do take the boldness to censure what they understand
not: These men should learn the wisdom and modesty of Socrates, who when he
met with an obscure Book, passed his judgment thus, The things in this Book,
says be, as far as I understand, are generous, and truly noble; and for the
rest, I have no reason to censure it, because I do not understand it.

Saint Jude gives two Characters of men that are transformed into Beasts. The
first is this, They speak evil of those 1. 2.
things they know not; the second is this, What they know naturally as bruit
Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.

I have touched upon the former Character, give me leave to point at the latter.

Men in Honor do extremely debase, and dishonor themselves, by sensuality,
by corrupting themselves in those things which they know naturally; that is, in
those things which are discerned by their outward and inward sense: They are
more corrupt then bruit Beasts, by indulging to their Appetite, by pleasing
their Senses, and gratifying their Lusts. What is the reason, that men in
honor are so Fantastical, but because they live like Beasts* by fantasy,
rather then like men by reason? They that feed high, and make it their
business to please their senses, and pamper their lusts, must needs be
brutish at last; for their very reason is incarnate, it grows fat and fleshly,
and therefore, they embrace principles of sensuality, instead of principles of
Morality, or Divinity: They have gross souls, though wanton wits, and all
their wit is but like a flash of lightning, which does not direct, but puzzle,
and dazzle the eye of reason, or else their wit is but a vapouring wit, and
vapors eclipse, and overcloud the rising beauty of the light of nature.

I may well be brief in this Argument, for it will not quit cost to instruct an
Epicure: The Philosopher tells me, That (...)
every sensual man is an impenitent man, and all our Preaching is like that
quick thunder they write of, which strikes through these spungy souls without
any sensible impression. I could heartily wish, that every man that has any
thing of a Christian in him, would consider these two sad Texts, None that go
to the strange woman return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life,
Prove. 2. 19. and Eccles. 7. 26, 27, 28. And I find more bitter then death, the
woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands; who so pleases
God, shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. Behold, this
have I found, says the Preacher, (and the Preacher had good skill) counting
one by one, to find out the account, which yet my soul seeks, but I find not;
one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not
found. In all Solomon's observation, he never knew above one man of a thousand
(and many conceive that was himself) that ever repented of this beastly sin of
sensuality; but for a woman to repent of that base sin, was a thing unknown in
all Solomon's sad experience. Fancy is (...), as Aristo^le, a kind of weak
sense; and therefore, men that live like Beasts by fancy, are unable to judge
of the weight of those spiritual Arguments, which we urge out of Scripture,
against this beastly sin of Sensuality. You know when Arguments are but weakly
apprehended, men are but weakly moved. Now the sensual fancy and carnal
reason of corrupt men, does not discern the strength, or see the beauty of such
Trueths, as are divinely sober, and spiritually chaste; and hence it is, That
they who are Beasts for want of understanding, are likewise,

2. Beasts in regard of perishing. My Lords, it is no wonder at all, if men
that affect beastly pleasures, and dote upon perishing honors, become like the
Beasts that perish. It is no miracle, if he that lives like a Beast, dies like
a Beast: Take a man that has lived like the fool in the Gospel, and tell me
what has this man done for his immortal soul, more then a Beast does for its
perishing soul. Soul, soul, cease from care, eat drink, and take thine ease;
this is the constant ditty of most men in honor: They have studied Clothes and
Victuals, Titles and Offices, ways of gain and pleasure; Am I not yet at
highest? They have it may be studied the Black Art of Flattery and Treachery;
they understand the humor of the times, the compliances and dependances of
this, and the other Statesman, the projects of diverse Princes abroad, and the
main design here at home: Is this all? Why then be it known unto you, That the
men of this strain, have made no better provision for their precious souls,
then if they had the soul, the vanishing soul of a Beast within them; and
certainly, if we were to judge of the substance of men's souls by their
unworthy, and sensual conversation, we might easily fall into that heresy,
that dangerous dream of some who conceive, that their souls are mortal.

Surely, the Wiseman speaks their opinion to the full, who like sensual
disputants argue from none but sensible effects, Eccles. 3. 19. 20. For that
which befalls the sons of men, befalls Beasts; even one thing befalls
them, as the one dies, so dies the other, yea, they have all one breath; so
that a man has no preeminence above a Beast; For all is vanity: True it is,
the soul of a man is different from the Soul of a Beast, but wicked men are not
acquainted with the worth of their immortal souls, Verse. 21. Who knows the
spirit of man that goes upward.

Secondly, This preeminence tends to a greater downfall; If wicked men had not
immortal souls, they could not be eternally tormented after death, in the
angry flames of hellish Brimstone?

Thirdly, This their eternal torment is called an eternal death, and
therefore these wicked men, or as the Apostle calls them, these Natural bruit
Beasts do perish utterly, because they perish eternally; They shall utterly
perish in their own corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 12. This is to perish worse then a
Beast; this is to perish like the Devil and his Angels.

Fourthly, The bodies of wicked men are in worse condition, then the bodies of
Beasts, because their bodies shall be raised at the last day, and made
immortal, that their bodies may be eternally tormented, as well as their
immortal souls: This is to perish positively, to be always perishing, always
feeling themselves to perish, and yet ever repining Application. Let no man
think me a fool: if otherwise, yet (...) a fool receive me (or suffer me) that
I may, etc. Verse. 16. For ye suffer fools gladly, 2 Cor. 11. 19.
and grieving, that they cannot perish: I have studied plainness, nay labored
to be rather Practical then Argumentative in the proof of the point; yet give
me leave to set the point home by a closer Application.

May it please you, my Lords, to give me leave to use the Rhetorique of the
Apostle: The great men of the upper-end of the world, suffer Fools gladly;
suffer me a little, since you your selves are wise. In those Commonwealths
which are governed by a kind of Aristocracy, it has been the custom to lead
the people by the conscience, rather then by the ears, because it is known by
experience, that the people had rather loose their ears, then loose their
liberty, and wound their conscience. Now, the only way for to work upon the
conscience of others, is, for the Nobles themselves to pretend to conscience:
And hence it is, that men in Honor do so often promise upon their Honor, that
they will do the people Right: But when their Honor has been worn even
thredbare, and all their Noble Protestations have lost their credit, they
usually go a strain higher in this dissembling age, and take Religious
Protestations, but most Irreligious Oaths; for when Plebs enim juramento hoc
contenta, and veluti secura, de reliquis non admodum erit sollicita etiamsi
postea magnis injuriis afficiatur, vide Clapmar. de Arcanis imperii. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
they have once engaged their honor, and given their oaths, they hope they may
abuse the Commonwealth without suspicion; for the poor silly people dare not
so much a^ suspect that they are abused, no not when they are most grossly
abused, because it is accounted a most absurd, unmannerly, and uncharitable
conceit, that the Lords will forfeit their honor; or break their oaths.

My Lords, this Sophism passes current at Oxford for a Demonstration, as it did
of old at Athens, where the oath was conceived sub hac specie. Jure populum
nullis injuriis affectum iri; and therefore Aristotle says, it is better
policy Aristot. Polit. lib. 5. cap, 9.
to flatter, in plain English, to cheat the people, then to threaten them; and
thereupon advises the great ones to dissemble and swear, that they will not
wrong the people: Surely, my Lords, by all their proceedings at Oxford, it
appears, that all men in Honor, are not men of Honor; for they have studied
Aristotle's Politiques; more then Solomon's Proverbs, the purest Politiques. But
truly, wh^ ever he be that sails by this compas^e, it is impossible he should
steer aright, especially in a tempest; for though policy sets the compass, yet
pride and vainglory fill the sails, and folly, I mean Atheism, sits at stern.
My Lords, I say, Atheism, a sin which will stain all the pride and glory of
that man who is guilty of it in the sight of the Searcher of hearts: It was
the speech of a good Statesman, and a good Christian; Men says he, talk of the
sins of the Court; but truly, for my part I think the Court is guilty but of
one sin, of Atheism, the fruitful mother of every sin; and my Text is of so
large a compass, that it does certainly comprehend (nay as some Expositours
conceive, directly point at Atheism: Man that is in honor, and understands
not, that there is a God above him, whom he is bound to serve and honor, he it
is that is compared to the beasts that perish: For an Atheist is of all others,
the grossest fool, and the foulest Beast: Give me leave to throw my first dart
at this Beast in an U^e of

Reproof. What need we, my Lords, look out for a stronger Reproof. The
Atheistical Beast. Exsecrantur public quod occulte agunt ac per hoc dum
damnare se c^teros putant ipsos se magis propria animadversione condemnant.
Salvian. lib. 3. de Gubern^.
Argument to prove, That some men in honor do not unstand that there is a God
above them, then this; That they do usually make little or no conscience of
cursing their own practices, and damning their own souls by false
Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants. They who do not understand God to be
omnipotent and omniscient, just and true, they do not understand him to be a
God. But men that make no scruple of violating their Oaths and Covenants, for
the compassing of their designs, do neither judiciously, practically,
understand, or truly believe, God to be omnipotent, and omniscient, just and
true: Therefore they are Atheists and arrant Beasts, who make no conscience of
Oaths and Covenants. In a Promissory Oath or Covenant, be pleased to consider,
that you call God to be your Witness, your Suretic, your Judge.

1. Your Witness, to testify the truth of your intentions and purposes: You
know none can bear witness that the intentions of your heart are sincere and
true, but the Searcher of hearts; and yet how few are there, that look up to
God as a witness when they take a solemn Oath? And therefore Rupere saedus
impius lucri furor and ira praeceps.
men do too often hold correspondence with those Covenant Breaking sins of
malice and ambition, even after they have taken the solemn Covenant. Oh it is a
sad thing, for which the Land mourns, that God is not discerned in an Oath, nor
Christ in the Sacrament, by some that take themselves to be men of discerning
spirits.

2. You call upon God to be your Surety for the performance of those things
which you swear and covenant to perform: If you never intend any real
performance, year^ downright Atheists, or else you would never put such asolemn
jear upon the God of Heaven.

3. You call God to be your Judge, in case you be deceitful in promising, or
unfaithful in performing. I admire how men can profess, that they believe God
to be true, when they do (what, I even tremble to speak) call God to do the
Quanto minori peccato illi per daemonia Pejerant quam nos per Christum^ Nam cum
Deus non sit per quem juratur, non est perjurium cum Pejeratur. Salvian.
Devils office, to bear witness to a lie. It were more proper, because more
suitable to their purposes and principles, for such men to swear by the Devil,
rather then by God; for it is the Devils proper office to bear witness to a
lie, he being a lier from the beginning, and the Father of Lies. Certainly,
these men must conceive, that either God does not love truth, or else, that he
does not know it; and what is this, but to deny him to be God.

Moreover, these bold Atheists cannot believe God to be just and omnipotent,
able, and willing to revenge himself, and his people, upon such Honorable
enemies as they are; for if they did, they would never go about to deceive God,
and the Kingdom, by the pretended religion of an Oath: They would not thus
out-brave God, and dare him to his face, to take vengeance on them, if they did
believe, that there is a God or a Devil, Heaven, or Hell; Certainly, these
religious blasphemers Ad hoe res cecidit ut cum per Christi nomen juraverint
purent, se scelera religi^se facturos, etc. Salvian. (...) Gub. Dei, lib. 4.
will be religiously, I mean, assuredly damned, if they repent not; for their
very pretended Religion will sink them into the bottomlesle pit of fire and
brimstone, nay, into some lower and more tormenting Hell: Hypocrites shall have
their portion with the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. Now great men are
very apt to dissemble, else David (who was well acquain ed with King-craft, as
they call it) would never have acknowledged that great men are a Lie: Observe
it, they are more prone to cogg and lie, then meaner men. Surely (^aith he,
Psalm. 62. 9.) men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degr^e are a Lie;
and if laid in the balance, they are alike, or altogether lighter then
vanity. I need say no more.

2. Moreover, they who understand and believe, that there (...) a God, cannot,
dare not, live in a constant contempt of godliness: And yet how many are
there, who in a Civil account are men of Honor, yet in a Religious account are
so dishonorable, as to contemn Religion, and permit their great and
much-observed families to live in a constant Contempt of pure Religion. I
appeal in this Point, my Lords, to your Honors consciences, whether the Power
of godliness, I say, the Power of godliness, be not usually contemned and
scoffed at in the Families of Noblemen.

3. Consider, That Heathens will rise up in judgment against Vide Ciceronem de
Legibus, de natura deorum. Ut Solum in aquis, sic Deus in operibus intuemur.
(...). Plato in Phaedone. As if he had said, I am that I am.
these Right Honorable Atheists; for an Atheist is a Nabal, the carcass of a
man, or a man of withered principles; one that has no more reason in him, then
there is sap or juice in a withered leaf; for so the word. Nabal imports.
Nabal, or as very a fool as Nabal, is that man, who does but say in his heart,
that there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. though he does but say it in his heart;
though Atheism be rather his wish then his opinion: for I doubt not but the
stoutest Atheist has some characters of a Deity indelibly stamped upon his
Adamant heart; and every time he turns his eyes inward, he cannot but read
them: Besides, the flashes of hellfire in his guilty Conscience, when he is
cast into some trembling fit, does give him light enough to see that there is a
God, and that Scripture is the Word of God, that Impartial Word by which he
must be judged at the Terrible day of God. Now grant me but these two
Principles; That there is a God, and, That Scripture is the Word of God, and my
work is at an end.

I have evidently proved what will be the end of those men who live in Secular
Honor, and Atheistical Security, because they understand not, or believe not
that there is a God above them, whom they ought to serve and honor.

Master Greenham, a Reverend and Practical Divine, conceived, that Atheism was
the most domineering sin in England: And certainly it is a sin of the highest
strain, and deepest tincture: it is the Disease of Courtiers, of Nobles; and it
is a catching Disease.

The second Beast is a compounded Beast, a Chim^ra, a kind of Monster, because
it does borrow the ill qualities of more Beasts then one: for such is the
Beastliness of a wicked man, especially if he have Honor to countenance his
wickedness, that he is more Beastly then any one beast whatsoever, as
Chrysostom observes. And you may see, by sad experience, how the self-same man
is disfigured and deformed with the basest qualities of several Beasts, as if
he were a kind of universal Beast, or had the Quintessence of Bestiality
within him, like the fourth Beast in the seventh of Daniel; or that
Antichristian Beast, Revel. 13. 2. a Leopard, with the feet of a Bear, the
mouth of a Lion, having power from the Dragon; to note unto us, that the
cruelty of all the Persecutours that ever were in the world, is compounded
together and revived in Antichrist, and the Antichristian faction.

One man in honor, may have diverse unworthy and beastly qualities: he may have*

First, the cruelty of Wolves, Bears, and Tigers; he may be, as S. Dominicks
mother dreamed he should be, A Wolf with a firebrand in his mouth, to burn up
all that he is not able to devour. Cruelty is a part of their Pride, their
State, their Recreation; they are even fantastical in their bloody
Butcheries, witty Tragedies; for mark it, and you shall see, that they who
appear (...), think it part of their pomp and state, to be ushered in, like
Comets, with a stream of fire.

Diodorus Siculus (as I remember) reports, that the Irish of old, sailed in
Vessels made of wreathed boughs, covered with the Hides of Beasts; a proper
covering for such savage Beasts: Certainly, the Irish Rebels who rage at this
very day, are of the old strain, too like their bloody and inhumane
Progenitors; who fed upon the paps of women, feasted themselves upon young
children, and offered man's flesh (as the Rebels do now offer Protestants flesh)
to the devil himself, to whom it is, no doubt, an acceptable Service, to
sacrifice the blood of so many thousand Protestants, though he cannot touch
their souls. Certainly these Irish Papists, these pure Roman Catholics, have
(as they say the first Founders of Rome, Romus and Romulus, did) sucked Wolves
milk, they are of such a Wolvish disposition.

All the great Persecutours of the world, though mighty Monarchs, are called
Beasts in Scripture: though their flatterers would have made them more then
men, yet their names declared them to be worse then Beasts. As the savage
Beasts do first hunt after a Prey, then overtake it, catch it, gripe, tear,
devour it; so did these mighty Hunters, and savage Beasts, deal with the Church
of God: they did catch whole Kingdoms, as beasts do their Prey, by Rapine; and
when they gained a Land by Rapine, they enslaved the people by Tyranny.
Diogenes being asked, what Beast was most noisome, returned this sharp answer:
The most noisome of savage Beasts, is the Tyrant; and of tame Beasts, the
Flatterer.

But I leave these cruel Beasts, to the Grace and Mercy, or else to the
Wisdom and justice of the God of Heaven: The dear servants of God have made
their Appeals to God upon many such days as these: and surely, if God regard,
as he has done the Appeal of a blaspheming The Appeal of Amurath the sixth,
against the King of Hungary, November. 10. 1444. Foxes. Serpents.
Turk, he will much more regard the Appeal of his righteous servants.

Secondly. A man in Honor may be transformed into a Fox, not by prudence, but
craft; and into a Serpent, not by wisdom, but subtlety; for subtilty is not
the wisdom, but the poison of the Serpent: the Brazen Serpent which was the
Type of our Savior, who is wisdom it self) had neither sting nor poison. Herod
is called a Fox for his subtlety, Luke 13. 32. because he did subject Religion
to carnal policy; it concerns great men to beware of the Fraude^ profecto in
re esse and Sempronium Comitiis plus Artis habuisse quam fidei. Live. lib. 4.
Art of Sempronius, and the Mar* 8. 15.
leaven of Herod: For that leaven of carnal policy will sour the whole lump.
The enemy does watch for an advantage; and if men in Honor will comply upon
reasons of State, and prostitute their consciences, they shall not want either
a temptation or an opportunity; it may be whilst the bargain is driving, they
may think it good policy to go through with the bargain; but when the heat of
the temptation is over, they may repent too late, as some have done within our
memory. It will be your wisdom, my Lords, to beware of their subtilty, to
beware of such Foxes as destroy the Cornfieldsd and Vineyards; for these Foxes
have plots in their heads, and firebrarnds at their tails; the Philisti^ Foxes
are more mischievous then Sampsons Foxes. I have read of a City called (...), I
hope this City will never deserve that Title; the Lord keep it from being a
City of Foxes, and make it a City of Saints, that it may for ever be a City
of Honor.

Thirdly, Men in honor are too often, to their great dishonor, Beasts of
Burden: I shall make bold to call them Slaves, and they will (when they see
it) call themselves something else, illud quod dieere nolo; for they that have
studied how to be Foxes, will, when they are overreached, and enslaved,
confess that they are Beasts of Burden. A Neuter is like Issachar, a strong
Ass coaching down between two burdens, Genesis 49. 14. But the Royalist is a
strong Ass, he takes Bruta potius quam jumenta utinam Reip. Jumenta sic and
Adjumenta, (...).
up the heaviest burden, enough to load his conscience, break his brains and
his baek, it is well if it break his heart: They are undeniably brutish, and
intolerably base, who betray their Country, and enslave their posterity, that
they may for a while advance themselves; for it will come to their turn to be
enslaved at last; only our fetters may be of Iron, and theirs of Gold; but the
Gold may enter as deep into their souls, as the Iron will into our flesh; what
though, they may be Per magna discrimina ascendun^ Aulici ad majora, per ista
ad summa ^t longius audiatur ruinae sonitus; non est meum ita negare, non est
prudentis inficiari quae experientia probantur. Contz. ^ul^ spec. Ful^ers Holy
State.
Favorites, yet they must be slaves, they do not know how long they shall be
Favorites, but they may easily guess how long they shall be slaves; surely,
all their life long, without a miracle, only I confess, their life may be
shortened; for I remember what Cardinal Pool said, Their heads are nearest
danger who are highest in the Kings favor: But the greatest wonder to me is,
That men should be so stupid, as to mistake Egypt for Ca^^an, slavery for
liberty, and complain that the Parliament goes about to put out their eyes,
when they are blind already, and to take away their liberty, when they have
sold it, or thrown it away already; yet such a wonder I have read of, and you
may read it, Numb. 16. 13. 14. Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up
out of a Land, that flows with milk and honey. O gross mistake, they were
brought up out of Egypt, and were journeying through the Wilderness indeed, but
yet toward Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey. Why do ye use us thus
say they, except thou make thy self altogether a Prince ever us? O Beasts of
burden, will ye go make brick again, that ye may be free and noble? Will ye
make your selves slaves, for fear Moses should make himself a Prince. And in
the 14. verse* Will thou put out the eyes of these men? No sure, might Moses
have said, I need not put out your eyes, ye are blind already: Give me leave to
say as Zophar said, Vain man would be wise, though he be no wiser then when he
was born; and man is born like a wild Asses Colt, Job 11. 12. He is as silly,
and yet as wild and coltish, as the Colt of a wild Ass, even then when he
takes himself to be grave and wise. Hearken to the words of Elihu, and consider
them, Job 32. 9. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
judgment.

I might enlarge my self, by giving several instances in other unworthy, and
beastlike qualities, which do debase and degrade men in honor: But I intend
not to run over Aristotle, or Elians History of Animals; nor will I open
Gesners Library, or tell you any strange stories out of Dresserus, Camerarius,
or Goulartius, of men turned into the shape of Beasts; I might as well turn
Ovid his: Metamorphosis into Prose; nor will I stand to dispute, whether
Nebuchadnezzar was turned into a beastlike shape in respect of his body, as
well as distempered in his mind, by the rage of his passions, and fury of his
lusts; nor will I trouble you with a comment upon the Beasts at Ephesus, only
be pleased to consider these two particulars.

First, That Nebuchadnezzar had but a twelve-moneths time given him to repent
in; Daniel gave him very good counsel, but it was not acceptable to him, he
neglected the breaking off of his sins, by true repentance; and at the twelve
months end, says the Text, Dan. 4. 28, 29. He was turned to grass amongst
the beasts that perish.

Secondly, Consider how dishonorable a thing it is, f^r men in Honor, to be
transformed into Swine, Goats, Dogs, Vipers; I cannot stand to name the
several Beasts, only remember that Dutch drunkenness, Spanish pride, Irish
cruelty, French wantonness, Italian, I had almost said English Atheism, will
transform men into Beasts; and I shall pass from this use of Reproof to an

Use of Examination, to discover every man to himself, Examination.
that he may know whether he be a man indeed, as well as in shape. My Lords,
every scandalous sin is scandalum magnatum, it will cause your Honor, nay,
your very manhood to be called in question; but that we may quit our selves
like men, let us all, noble and ignoble, high and low, rich and poor, put our
selves upon the Trial.

1. Sensual men are Beasts; Homo Animalis vix homo est, i^o merum Animal est.
The soul of a Beast depends wholly upon the temper of the body; and therefore,
that is the Beasts only care to provide for its body, to preserve that in a
good temper; they then that distemper their bodies, to please their sensual
appetite, are more sensual then Beasts; and they who make it their business
to preserve their body in good temper, and neglect their precious souls, are
unreasonable creatures, mere Animals, very Beasts.

2. A Beast cannot reflect upon its own self, or its own acts: He then that
knows not how to reflect upon himself, his own purposes, desires, designs, and
inward acts; he that understands not how to examine his own heart, what
pre-eminence has he above a Beast? (...); (...); Vel ut nonnulli (...).
if he be (...) a Creature that looks upward; if he be a man indeed, let him
examine himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28. It is a shame for Christians, not to be able to
put a difference between themselves and brute Beasts, by those two grand
duties of Self-examination, and Heavenly-meditation. He that cannot examine
himself, knows himself no more then a Beast does, he does not so much as
understand his own ignorance; his reason is besotted, his judgment blinded, he
is led even hood-winked to the very brink of Hell, and knows it not. Sure, such
ignorant persons as are not able to examine themselves, ought to be examined by
others, least they become guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, which they
are not able to discern; for they are scandalously ignorant, who can neither
discern themselves, ^r the Lords Body; If such Brutes be admitted to climb the
sanctified Mount, to receive the pledges of Christian Communion in the highest,
we may even admit natural fools, and mere children; for a child of four or
five years old, can repeat some brief form of words, though it be ignorant of
the sense, and knows not how to examine it self: O^ let bounds be set to that
Mount where Christ does visibly communicate himself to them, who do spiritually
discern him and themselves.

3. We are best distinguished from Beasts by Conscience, If we can only plead,
that we are distinguished from Beasts by reason; and it appear, that some
teachable Beasts and Birds, have strictures of reason, and that we are more
unteachable, because we have corrupted our reason, and indulged to our
fantasy, and to our lust, for want of Conscience; then certainly the Trial
will go against us. Now what conscience has that man, who makes little or no
conscience, either of sin or duty?

4. They are Beasts who cannot foresee, nay, are not moved with future evils,
when they are foretold, and forewarned: Beasts are not affected with any evil,
but what is present; it is in vain you know, either to threaten a Beast with
(or forewarn him of) future evils. Men in Honor are extremely degraded and
debased, when they are made slaves, Jere. 2. 14. Is Israel a servant* is he a
Hom^-born slave, then he has lost all his glory: But consider I beseech you,
That a man of a slavish disposition, is in a far more Honorable condition,
then a man of a brutish disposition; for a slave may be staved off from sin,
for fear of future evils, but a Beast is not affected with things future. Oh
how many such Beasts do we meet with every day: God threatens a man with Hell
and damnation, if they go on in any sinful course; and yet how common is it
for men to practice these sins in the face of Heaven, if they besins in request
and fashion, which God does sentence and damn to the Pit of Hell. Surely, God
will deal with these men according to their brutish disposition, he will power
some drops of his wrath, scalding hot, into their conscience, or sting them to
the quick with some present evil, that they may be restrained by the smart and
anguish of present evils, since they will not be warned by the threatening of
future evils. Observe what a threatening message is sent to the house of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. 14. Moreover, the Lord shall raise him up a King over
Israel, who shall cut of the house of Jeroboam that day; But what? Even now,
very now; As if he had said, ye are not moved with the threats of future
vengeance; therefore, I will spare you no longer, but will cut you of
presently, even now, very now. It is a sad Text, be pleased to think sadly of
it in your cool blood, and morning thoughts.

5. As Beasts are not sensible of future evils, so neither are they sensible of
those traps and snares, which are for the present, laid to entrap and take
them. Men of Honor had need walk circumspectly, there are traps and snares
laid for them at their Tables, in every tempting Dish, nay, in their
Bedchambers, in their very Closet; every Counselor, Companion, Friend,
Servant, is made use of to ensnare them; and how few are there that discover
the snare, before they are caught; how many great men are surprised in this
evil time, and are as unexpectedly caught, as fish in a net, or birds in a
snare, Eccles. 9. 12. Nay, as fish do catch at the bait, and birds haste to the
snare, not knowing, not suspecting, that it is for their life; so do men in
Honor, catch at those temptations, whereby they are ensnared; it is the
comparison of the Wiseman, the master of Similitudes, Prove. 7. 22, 23. Tell me,
are not these men as natural bruit Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed? As
the Apostle presses it home, 2 Pet. 2. 12.

6. He is a Beast who has the mind of a Beast, though he has the shape of a
man: It would be a foul disgrace for a man to be transformed into the shape of
a Beast, though he retained the mind and reason of a man, Quanto miserius est
in hominis figura animo esse efferato, says Lactantius, Lib. 5. cap. ^. It is
far more dishonorable to have the shape of a man, and the mind of a beast,
then the shape of a be, and the mind of a man: Every carnal man minds the
things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5. Minds earthly things, as if he had no other
God then his belly, Phil. 3. 19. And therefore he has the mind of a Beast,
nay, I do the beasts wrong, men that are carnally minded, are enemies to God.
Romans 8. 7. and enemies to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. A sad truth, not
to be spoken without tears. I tell you even weeping, says the Apostle, they
are so far from being Christians, that they are enemies of the Cross of
Christ. They live as if they had been born, ventri and corruptioni inservire,
to serve their paunch and their lusts. I believe you will easily grant, that
drunkards, and unclean persons, are very Beasts, they have not the mind or
heart of a man in them; Whoredom and Wine take away the ^eart, Hos. 4. 11. Oh
ye sons of Nobles, give not your strength to women, nor your heart to that
which destroys Kings; that is, to wine and strong drink, Prove. 30. 3, 4. least
ye loose your reason, forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of the
afflicted, verse 5.

7. They who adhere to the Antichristian faction, in mind and heart, though
they do yet keep company with men, are to be ranked among the Beasts; for their
heart goes after the Beast, and they have a mind to follow him, only they
want a more powerful temptation, and fairer opportunity; upon every
considerable defeat that is given us, these men wonder after the Beast, nay,
are even ready to worship him, and to cry out, Who is like unto the Beast? Who
is able to make war with him, Revel. 13 3, 4. I doubt not, but all of this
temper, will in good time, be discovered and driven from among men, by the
power of them that are truly Noble; For it is not fit, that Beasts should be
suffered amongst men, let them follow the Heard: It is not for Noble Lords and
Counselors, to seek unto them, or comply with them, till they have the heart
of a man, and their reason be returned unto them. My Lords, we live under the
glorious Ministry of the Gospel, and therefore, I dare not put a vail over the
beautiful face of Truth* The face of truth must shine, that it may appear
lovely, and remain glorious; and therefore I use great freedom, plainness,
boldness of speech, as it becomes a Minister of the Gospel of Christ: The
Holy Ghost commands me to be thus faithful by irresistible Arguments, in the
third Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, especially in the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteen Verses, you may read the whole Chapter at your
leisure. My Text is a kind of Paradox, an harsh truth, and therefore I have
labored to clear this truth unto you. I learnt to Preach of the Apostle, who
assures me, that they Preach deceitfully, wh^ do not manifest the truth of God,
to the consciences of men, 2 Cor. 4. 2. I^ my Sermon seem too precise, give me
leave to say, that your conscience is as precise as my Sermon: I have a friend
in your bosom that joins with me; I speak to your conscience, your conscience
will clear, both God and me; for all that I have spoken, tends to this end,
That the saying of God in my Text, may be justified. My design is the same
with the wisest of Kings, Eccles. 3. 18. That the sons of men, might clear God
and see, that they themselves are Beasts: You may see the translation corrected
to that effect, in the Margin of your Bibles. Your conscience bids me proceed,
and so I pass to that which it is high time for us all to come to, and that is
a Use of

Humiliation. When an Ambassador of Rhodes asked a Lacedaemonian, Why Lycurgus
was so strict as to prohibit Stage Plays, which made the people laugh; the
Lacedaemonian did not give him the reason of the State, That they were afraid
their youth would be corrupted, and their Laws derided by Stage Plays, but
returned this answer: Sir, I presume, That we Greeks are better when we are
weeping with our sages, then the Romans when they are laughing at their fo^ls.
My Lords, It is my humble desire to be humbled before God, and to weep with the
Sages of England, upon this happy day of solemn Humiliation. Do ye love God, do
ye hate sin, do ye believe my Text; come then let us mingle tears; my Text,
will supply you with store of weeping matter; and penitent tears, which flow
from the hatred of sin, from the love of God, and faith in him, are NOBLE
TEARS. Nobles use to be proud of their Birth, they are too often puffed up with
the glory of their Progenitors: But ye have not so learned Christ, if ye have
been taught by Christ, as the truth is in Christ. My Lords, we were all
conceived in sin, and born in sin: Nobles are by nature the children of wrath,
even as other common men, and can you be proud of your foul conception, and
foul birth; My father Adam, was he not your father. Oh my father Adam, your
father Adam, was once a man in honor, because a man in innocence, but his
blood was tainted by sin, nay, your blood and mine were tainted by that first
sin in the Garden; it was my sin and yours, for in him we all sinned; it was
the sin of his person, but it was the sin of our nature; do ye not feel the
poison of that sin, burning and boiling in your nature still? do ye not feel
the weight of that sin upon your conscience? Oh it was a sinning sin, the cause
of all the sin and mischief that ever was, or ever will be? do ye not feel the
dregs of that sin, oppressing your nature, and even choking all those generous
and noble Principles, which are written in your Hearts by Nature? And are you
still proud of your birth, and blood, when you are thus polluted in your own
blood with your birth sin? Can you still be proud of your original, when your
original, your blood, your very nature, is stained and tainted with original
corruption, and all corruption is ignoble. Oh base ignoble birth, we are born
slaves of sin, born like the heirs apparent of Hell, with the seeds of
damnation in us. Can you still be proud of your Progenitors, when they derived
a sin upon your highborn soul, which will sink it as low as Hell, unless ye
are born again by the Spirit of Jesus. Come, turn a side, for I must weep:
Come, if you will we^p I will weep with you; if you will not weep, I Will weep for
you: I could even find in my heart to sit down and weep out the rest --. But
your attention does encourage me to go on, and therefore I hope you will be
humbled to day, if not, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride. But you
cannot be proud, if you consider and believe my Text, my Text is Versus
amaebaeus, and answers to the twelfth verse of this 49 Psalm, and there it is,
Man being in Honor, abides not; Arias Montanus renders it, non Pernoctabie,
shall not lodge one night in Honor; some conclude from hence, that Adam fell
the very first day that he was created, he did not stay all night in his
Honor; and the word indeed, does properly signify, to tarry all night, as is
clear, Genesis 28. 11. And ^ertain it is, our first father stayed not long in his
Honor, but was turned forth of the Garden like a Beast; Oh the fall of our
first father, from his honor, from his innocence, is to be bewailed even with
tears of blood. My Lords, ye are men in Honor, but Civil Honor is not
long-lived, and therefore, usually entailed: Are ye sure that any one of you in
your own persons, shall lodge this night in your Civil Honor; ye may be taken
into another world ere morning; and if ye have made no better preparation for
another world, and a better life, then if your souls were to perish after
death, as the soul of a Beast perishes; Be pleased to understand my Text, and
your danger: Sigh out my Text, and weep it over; Weep for your gross neglect,
and carnal security; and let every soul that is guilty, cry out, Oh what a
wretch, what a Beast am I, to suffer my mind and heart to be taken up with the
perishing delights, and fading honor of this vain world: And now I am summoned
to appear in another world, to answer for all the evil I have done, and all the
good I have neglected in this world: My body sinks under natural distempers,
my soul sweats under moral distempers: the sin of my birth, and the sins of my
life torment my wounded conscience. Oh I faint, I fall, I die, I perish, like a
Beast in this world; and the Lord knows what will become of me in the next, it
is a wo^ld, that I am no better acquainted with, then the very Beasts that
perish.

My Lords, This is the sad condition of many a great man, and I am resolved to
deal faithfully with you; for your honor is dear unto me, and your souls are
precious: Consider, oh consider it every hour, that you have more reason to
fast, then feast upon your birth-dayes, that ye may bewail your birth-sin, and
mortify your beastly lust; For some worthy Divines have observed. That none
(for ought we find in Scripture) ever celebrated their birth-dayes, but
Pharaoh, Jeroboam, and Herod.

2. Consider, That great men are mortal. Abner who was Captain of the Guard, a
kind of General to three Princes, Saul, Is bosheth, and David, fell suddenly,
unexpectedly: Some die in the strength of their perfection, with their breasts
full of milk, and bones full of marrow, Job 21. 23, 24. Death does not flatter
Nobles, it will not stay their leisure, it will strike home, even then when
they are in their cups, or at their plots, in the midst of their wanton
embraces, and beastly compliances: Remember the two Zimri's, Prince Zimri Number.
25. 8. 1 King. 16. 9, 10.
struck dead in the wanton Arms of the Lady Co^bi, and Zimri who smote King
Elah, whilst he was drinking himself drunk.

3. Consider, That beastly men are unnatural Beasts: It is no fault for a
beast to be a beast, for it is naturally a beast, and it can be no fault to
obey the Law of nature; but for a creature to degrade it self below that Form
and Species, in which nature has placed it, is unnatural: This is a most
unnatural and accursed self-denial, for a man to depose himself below the
dignity of the humane nature: This is, as if a beast should loose its sense,
take root in the earth, and sprout out into a Plant Animal, a Plant that has
the shape, but not the sense of an Animal; or as if a Tree should cease to
live, and harden it self into a stone: Unnatural sins are punished with
unheard of plagues, with miraculous judgments: Those Heathens, Romans 1. 27. who
left the natural use of the woman, and did burn with unnatural lusts, were
given over to reprobate minds, and seared consciences. Nay, to speak higher
yet, These unnatural Beasts, are as perfect in their beastliness, and
brutishness, as if they were natural brute Beasts, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 12. And they
who are thus perfect in sin, will be perfectly, thoroughly tormented, for these
unnatural perfections.

4. Consider, That beastly men are wilful beasts: They are not Beasts by
nature, but Beasts by choice, and therefore they have as it were fallen from
reason to fantasy, by a kind of fantastical choice; their rational will
is changed into a sensual appetite: And it is all the reason in the world,
That they who have renounced their reason, and chosen to be beasts rather then
men, should be deposed from their honor, and made like the Beasts that perish.

5. Consider, That great men have great advantages and opportunities, to serve
God and his Church: They are even lifted up to Heaven by privileges. Oh what a
misery were it, for such men to be cast down to Hell, for the abuse of their
privileges: Consider, how hard it is for a rich man to be saved; how few noble
men are effectually savingly called: Consider, That the best estate of a wicked
nobleman, is worse then the worst estate of a poor godly man; because, the
poor godly man in his worst estate, is traveling toward Heaven: But the best
estate of a wicked nobleman, leads him to his worst estate, it ripens his sin,
and hastens his damnation. Sure I am, great men cannot plead any exemption at
the day of judgment; if Christ give them leave to be tried by their Peers;
those nobles which sit crowned in glorious Robes, will condemn all impenitent
and unbeleeving Peers. My Lords, I had rather turn your hearts, then overturn
your brains; I had rather drive you out of your sins, then out of your wits:
Yet these terrible considerations are enough to terrify any man out of his
little wits who does ponder them enough to be convinced, if God do not give him
the grace to be converted? My Lords, you are not told often enough of Hell and
damnation; and therefore, I do so often thunder out damnation, that I might
keep you from being damned: Tell me, ye sons of Nobles, Whether your delicate
senses can endure the touch of fire, or smell of brimstone; can your souls
dwell with everlasting burnings; can you wade through a River of brimstone,
kindled with the wrath of God? Oh the diversity and eternity of Hellish
torments, is unutterable, unconceiveable. In Hell death ever lives, the damned
cannot die, but do eternally suffer a kind of living death; and the
consideration of the eternity of their torment is to them, the greatest
torment, and therefore they are ready to complain, that there is a thousand
Hels, and ten thousand Devils in this word, eternity. In Hell there are no
degrees of honor, but there are degrees of torment; there is a black Prince of
flames, and Nobles of darkness; there is weeping and houling, and gnashing of
teeth, out of desperate indignation: The tongue is parched in the mouth, the
marrow fried in the bones, the darkness of the fire affright, them the heat of
the fire torments them; and yet they are more tormented with the curse and
wrath of God, then the fire of Hell; Hell were no Hell, if it were not for the
wrath of God: But oh the loss of Honor, the loss of Heaven, the loss of
Glory, the loss of the Favor of an infinite God, to a soul capable of Grace
and Glory, that is an unspeakable loss, because an infinite loss, an infinite
dishonor, to be thus dishonored to all eternity. Who can sound the depth of
this bottomless Pit? Sure the worst hell is in the conscience, and the
schorching of the fire is more tolerable, then the gnawing of the worm; And yet
I have not done: Hell is not only the Center of torment, but the Sink of sin;
and this consideration is most terrible to a religious soul: To say I would not
be in Hell, because I would not be tormented, that is, the voice of self-love;
but to say, I would not be in Hell, because I would not hear my God blasphemed,
nor blaspheme him my self, that is, the voice of Noble love: Let that
consideration sweeten all the rest, and work upon your Noble spirits, to hate
sin more then Hell and damnation. Come then, and take an holy revenge upon your
selves to day, be grieved in your hearts, and pierced in your reins, for all
your ignoble practices against the God of Heaven, repent with a kind of
indignation, as David did, and cry out: Oh what a fool was I, what a beast was
I to dishonor him, who is the fountain of Honor; Look upon your pattern, Psalm.
73 21, 22. Thus my hears was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. So foolish
was I, and ignorant, I was a beast before thee. My greatest task by far, is yet
behind, and therefore I pass on to an Use of

Direction. My Lords, Honor is a tender fickle thing, it is hard to get it,
and harder to keep it. It may break a man's brains to get it, his back to bear
it, and his heart to loose it: We live in an age full of uncertainties, and
sick of jealousies; I shall therefore adventure (and I may well call it an
adventure) in this jealous age, to give you faithful counsel in some ticklish
points. If your Honor be any whit empaired, I Will show you how to recover it; if
you enjoy your Honor, I Will show you how to preserve, nay, increase it; but if
by an overruling providence, you must part with your worldly honor (and there
is no resisting of providence) I Will show you how you may gain a better honor,
an immortal glorious Honor in the highest Heavens. Truly, My Lords, I am of
no faction at all, and therefore I may speak more freely and impartially in
these weighty points.

First. If your Honor be empaired, I Will do my best to show you how to recover
your Honor. I know I touch upon a jarring string; but consider, that wise men,
and valiant men, men that have done great service to their Country, may
quickly empair their honor in a jealous age. Scipio Africanus had done very
great service for his Country, and yet he was called into Eamus nunc protinus
Jovi opt. M. gratulatum, etc. -- aegre passus quod cui salus Imperii ac Reip.
accepta ferri deberet, etc. A. Gell. Noct. At. lib. 4. cap. 18.
question, more then once. Moreover, in times of civil war Nihil tam capax
malignitatis sermonumque quam bellum Quintil.
, there are so many perplexed cases propounded on the sudden, that even the
wariest man may over-shoot himself; he may be sometimes circumvented, and
sometimes surprised, and by either means dishonored: And in times of civil
war, most men are too censorious; some out of a sober providence and cautelous
circumspection, not looking upon miscarriages, as matters of course and
casualtie, but as a train laid to some farther Design, which may take fire
another time; for men of forecasting heads, cannot but make some sad
conjectures, if not solicitous presages of future evils, by a probable
inference from the bypast miscarriages. But others that are men of working
fantasies, and timorous spirits, are usually suspicious for want of courage or
judgment; and then they cannot but preoccupate evils, never plotted any where,
but in their own brain, because they are commonly led into some finister
interpretation of all miscarriages, by some prejudicate opinion, or ungrounded
fancies: The wisest course therefore for men in honor, is to keep close to
their Rule, and in doubtful cases, to admit none but prudent, faithful, and
well-approved Counselors; that if their prudence or fidel it i^ come to be
disputed, they may have men of Honor to justify them against the most subtle
disputant or bitter enemy: But in case any have failed in this last point, and
being weighed in the balance, have been found too light; if they be true Gold,
they need not be ashamed to desire what in equity cannot be denied, The
ordinary grains of favorable allowance for humane frailty; for such Apologies
pass current in all well-governed States through out the World.

Secondly. Let them be sure to keep themselves pure from justifying their
Delinquent friends or acquaintance; that so they may never be partakers of
other men's sins: It is good counsel, grounded upon that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
5. 22. Neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy self pure. The best men
alive have faults enough of their own, why should any man that thinks himself
innocent, make himself guilty by undertaking to answer for the sins of other
men. Beasts in a tempest, do usually run under great Trees for shelter; it will
be the wisdom of men in honor, to drive away those Beasts who desire to
shelter themselves by their protection; because such foul Beasts cannot but
dishonor all that protect them. Oh what a sad thing would it be, if our Nobles
should be like Cupping-Glasses, which draw none but the malignant humors of
the body to them. It was objected against Socrates, that he was too familiar
with factious Alcibiades, and it was laid to the charge of Themistocles, that
he held correspondence and intelligence with Pausanias a Traitor: Secrets of
State must not be communicated to neuters or doubtful men. When Alexander
imparted a Letter of high concernment to Hephestion, ^e clapped his ring to his
mouth, as if he meant to seal up his lips: If it be so dangerous Apollonius
Tyaneus a Diis poscebat ut honos cognosceret malos vitaret. Alex. ab Alex. lib
4. cap 17. Pectora fell virent lingua est suffusa veneno. Vide Caelin. Rhod.
Ant. lect. lib. 6. c. 35. Anima sicca anima prudens. Vide Aristot. Probl. Sect.
30. and Plut. de Orac. defect.
to trust a friend, take heed of trusting or excusing an enemy; if you have
been so far overseen, as to trust him, be not so far engaged, as to excuse them
whom ye trusted, after they have deceived so great a trust: Some men indeed are
like the Land of Egypt, which though it bring forth multa salubria; yet it
brings forth, multa venena: If you have like the Be, sucked what is wholesome
from them, take heed you do not suck so much poison from them, as to excuse
such practices of theirs, as are full of poison: Our Commonwealth is not of
their temper, who were nourished by poison.

Thirdly. They must look to their Passions, when they come to plead their own
cause, and vindicate themselves. The Melancholy man is the wisest man, as the
temper of his body is driest; so his soul is said to be a dry soul, because
his mind is less steeped in carnal humors, or fluid passions. My Lords, It
is for your Honor to suppress all mutinous perturbations of spirit, whilst
you are pleading for your Honor, and making demands for Reparation: You know
Passions in Beasts follow the tumultuous motions of fantasy; but Passions in
men, should be in some sort reasonable affections, because by the Ordinance of
Heaven, they are subjected to the government of the will and understanding; and
by their dependence upon reason, and an overruling influence from reason, they
are, though not intrinsecally in themselves, yet by way of participation,
reasonable affections, and vigorous instruments, for the improvement of virtue:
Oh then take heed of all unkindly heats, all disorderly motions, and
fantastical impulsions, because they are unreasonable perturbations; which
will be so far yiedling you any assistance in your Vindication, that they will
plunge you the deeper, and dishonor you the more; For unruly passions, do but
kindle a fire, which will warm and cheer your adversaries, and torment your
selves: Let reason, nay, conscience, dart its bright shining beams upon your
burning passions, and they will be ashamed, discouraged, and quenched, Even d^
the fire is ashamed to burn, when the Sun looks upon it.

Fourthly. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time. I speak this, especially to you my Lords; it is faithful
counsel given by the holy Spirit, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Saint Peter was well seen in
Christian Politiques, you may write Probatum est under this remedy: Look upon
the place, Do you not see a kind of Majesty in this Direction: Down great
spirits, down; let not your hearts rise and swell against Jehovah, the God of
glory: Oh, but I am wronged, and I cannot bear it! Has the God of Heaven done
you any wrong; come down upon your knees then, and accept of your punishment,
kiss the rod, or you are like to have the other lash, and God sees where you
lay bare, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou me,
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more: This, this is meet to be said to
God; though you think yourselves innocent, yet God sees more then you see,
entreat him to open your eyes, and show you your iniquity, and then you will
see and know, that God has not done without cause all that he has done, as
you have it, Ezekiel. 14. 23. Strive not with him who will certainly be too strong
for you, for that is not the way to recover what you have lost, but the ready
way to loose more; for God will be sure to get himself Honor upon you, you
will be worsted at last, and so more dishonored.

Fifthly. Lay down all your Honor at the feet of Jesus Christ. If you do not
prize your honor more then your souls, why do you not trust him with your
honor, whom you must trust with your souls? And if you do trust him, cast your
care upon him: It is an Apostolical direction annexed to that humbling
Counsel which I gave you but now, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of
God, casting all your care upon him, for God cares for those that are humble,
when they cast their care upon him, 1 Pet. 5. 6, 7. because, then Faith and
Humility join forces, and work with united strength: The omnipotent God is
even overcome by such wrestlers; for God knows not how to resist an humble
believer. Come then, and cast your care upon God, be not too hasty: He that
believes makes not haste, Isai. 28. 16. Wait Gods leisure, and God will in
due time exalt you to such a degree of honor, as will make most for his glory,
and yours. God will do it in due time, says the Apostle; but remember that God
is the Judge, and therefore that is the due time which he appoints. Your time is
in Gods hand, Psalm. 31. 15. If the time of your pref^rment were in your enemies
hand, it would be deferred too long; if it were in your own hand, it would be
overmuch hastened, and come too soon: Such green fruit would breed worms: It is
well your time is in Gods hand, leave all to him, believe and pray, w^ite and
pray; pray to him that disposes of Honor and Power, Victory and Glory, make
your acknowledgements in the words of David, 1 Chro. 29. 11, 12. Thine, O Lord,
is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty; for all that is in Heaven and Earth, is thine: Thine is the Kingdom,
O Lord, and thou art exalted a^ head above all; both riches and honor come of
thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thy hand is power and might, and in
thy hand it is to make great: We humble our souls before thee, we cast our care
upon thee; Exalt u^ in due time, that we may exalt thee, give us grace to serve
thee, with all our power, wealth, and strength, and honor thee with all our
honor, that thy power, majesty, and glory, may be made known unto men. This,
this is the way to recover all your honor.

Sixthly. It will make exceedingly for your Honor to do most service, when you
have least encouragement, because then it will appear, that you do service upon
Noble principles, and do not intend to serve your selves.

But it will be objected, That the greatest trial to a man of noble
endowments, is to be laid aside; for that does not Object.
only reflect upon his Honor, but deny him opportunity of doing farther
service. This is indeed the saddest objection; but I hope to return a
satisfying answer.

First, then consider, That every man is not laid aside who Sol. Vide Aristot.
Polit. lib. 2. c. (...). Vix per singulos annos offensiones vitari quamvis
repulsam propinqua spes soletur quantum odii fore ab his qui ultra quinquennium
prejiciantur. Tac^us. Quae ubi tumultu majore etiam quam res erat nuntiantur,
Romam Senatus extemplo (quod in repus trepidis ultemum consilium erat)
Dictatorem dici jussit, L^^ius. Consul aberat nec Dictatorem populus creare
poterat quod nunquam ante ^am diem factum erat Prodictatorem populus creavit Q.
Fabium Maximum, and Magistrum Equitum, M. Mi^ium Rufum. Hisque negotium ab
Senatu datum u^ Mu^os ^uresque urbis firmarent, Live. lib. 22. Nec ultra sex
menses ante Syllam Dictaturae munus quempiam exercuisse praeter Furium Cami^,
cui jam exact^ semestri cum consternata Republica laborarent aucipiti metu --
Senatus in annum Dictaturam invito prorogavit, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis lib. 1. cap.
6. Quo tempore illud evenit ut duo simul Dictatores quod nunquam antea factum,
crearentur Marcus scilicet Junius, qui castris Dictator tunc praeerat, and M.
Fabius Buteo qui ordinem Senatorum eo quod multi bello ceciderant sufficeret
legeretque -- Dictator illorum contumaciam cohibebat, qui functis honoribus
Magistratu abire vel Senatus dicto parere nollent. Idem. Sylla fretus exercitu
ac legionibus in urbem admissis Dictatorem si in annos quinque lege Valeria
creari jussit, quam tamen legem M. Tullius negat suisse legem. -- Et Cosmus
Medices post Alexandri caedem Senatum Florenti^^m coegit ut se perpetuum Ducem
crearet. Vide Clapmar. de Arcanis Imp. lib. 2. Dictatores in bellum ituri
legibus ad tempus solvebantur. Libertatis magna custodia est si magna Imperia
diuturna esse non ^inas, and tempori^ modus imponatur quibus Juris non potest,
Livius lib. 4. They did but flatter Julius Caesar, when they said, he deserved
to be Consul in Decennium, Dictator in perpetuum, though Octavius Caesar, and
other Emperors were commonly so called. Triennium and sex menses ultra quam
licet Aemilia lege Censuram geram, hoc quidem jam Regno simile est, Livius lib.
9.
is not constantly employed in Military affairs: In other Commonwealths, it
does not reflect upon any man's Honor, if the date of his employment expire
within an year or two: Such was the wisdom of the Roman State, that they seldom
gave any long leases of Honor unto men, that were deeply entrusted in eminent
places of authority and command. When the State was even surprised by some
unexpected danger, the Senate or Consuls did create a Dictator, or in the
absence of the Consuls, in after times, the people named some Pro-dictator, and
a Magister Equitum; who by the Senates approbation, were to take care of the
Commonwealth: But the same person continued not Dictator above six months,
unless his lease were renewed, and that was rare: But it was more rare, that
there should be two Dictators at once. Sylla would ^ain have been Dictator for
five years, and pleaded that Lex Valeria would justify his desire; but the
Orator denied that there was any such Law. It is safer in places of such great
trust and command, to limit the time, becansc you cannot so well limit their
power.

Secondly. All that have performed considerable service heretofore, have cause
to bless God, who did them the Honor in times past, to make use of them in
any Noble, and renowned achievements: All that are Emeriti, have made the Qui
artem aliquam desinebant ejus Instrumenta Diis suspendebant, Sacrabantque:
Turneb. Adversar. lib. 6. cap. 9.
State, nay, the enemies of the State sensible of their worth; and therefore
they do not lay down their Arms, but hang them up as Ensigns of Victory.

Thirdly. God has an absolute Power and Sovereign Command over the greatest
men in the World, and they owe Absolute subjection to the will, pleasure,
providence of the God of Heaven: Come, acknowledge your subjection. God is not
bound to use the same Instruments still: Instruments are no helps to him, for
he helps his Instruments, and works all i^ them and for them. God loves to show
his Prerogative, and make great ones know, that he is not beholding to them to
do his work; he will let them see, that he can do his work without them. My
Lords, I dare not flatter you, there are enough can do that, who are only men
in black, and no Divines: I speak to you in the name of the mighty God, who
breaks in pieces mighty men without number, and sets others in their stead,
Job 34. 24. God having variety of Instruments, does delight to use them by
turns; If any are unfaithful, they have been used too long; but all that have
faithfully performed their part of the service, will not, or need not, repine,
if men of meaner abilities, take their turn, the meaner they are, the more
should God be glorified, and you humbled.

Fourthly. When God has tried men in the duties of active obedience, he does
usually call them to honor him farther, by passive obedience; and it is no
easy matter to come off with honor in the passive part: Great spirits will
find it task enough for to be patient; they will have work enough to keep
themselves humble in such a case; and therefore they need not complain for want
of work. My Lords, It is a Work indeed, to mortify self-love; it is no easy
matter, for great men to take themselves off from self-confidence,
self-conceitednesse, and self ends, that their hearts may be wrought unto a
self-denial; which is the foundation of Christianity, and at this time, the
only means in sight of our safety: Can you imitate David in one of the most
royal services that ever we read of; it was a self-denying service, a royal
and magnanimous, but sweet submission to the Will of God: If I find favor in
the eyes of God, he will bring me back again, and employ me farther; that was
his meaning: But if he say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let
him do unto me as seems good in his sight, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. My Lords, Suffer
me to deal freely and honestly with you: It may be, God sees that your hearts
are like to be lifted up by too high an opinion, of what God has done by you
in former times, and therefore God would have you breath, and rest a while,
that you may be sufficiently humbled, and so fitted for some higher and nobler
piece of active obedience; and then you will show more bright and glorious, after
this seeming sad eclipse: At low water you have him to tread the banks, whilst
the ship is in the harbor, you may dress it, and trim it, and make it able to
endure storms and tempests. They that are employed, will show themselves men,
they adventure far; and you have a full employment, your votes have an
influence into all affairs of high concernment: Be not displeased, but rest
assured, That your active spirits, and enlarged hearts, will by the blessing of
Heaven, have fairer opportunities, and better satisfaction in future
employments; and then you will acknowledge, That though God did in your
apprehension, chastise you with Scorpions, nay, Serpents also, yet he has
turned these Serpents into Rods, and wrought wonders with them. I hope I have
quitted my first score, I proceed to answer.

The second Quere, How your Honor may be preserved, increased.

By your leave my Lords, if you desire to preserve your Honor, you must
preserve the Fundamentals of Honor, and then let times alter as they will,
you will be sure to preserve all the Realitie of your Honor: He who has learnt
to preserve a just Order, and true Decorum in all things, which concern God,
the Commonwealth, and himself, he will by Gods blessing preserve, nay,
increase his Honor every day more and more. That Honor which is maintained by
vulgar breath, is, But like Lightning, it appears, and vanishes in an instant;
But he who deserves, does in the judgment of good and wisemen, preserve his
Honor, though the people cease to do him Honor. The strongest Foundation of
Honor (which lays a man lowest, and yet raises him highest) is Real Piety:
The Philosophers Piety.
were acquainted with some kind of Piety to order us in those things which
belong to God: They could treat of a certain Reverence and Divine Respect, due
from rational Creatures, to the Creator, Preserver and Governor of all
things: They perceived, by the light of Nature, that Deprecations, Petitions
and Thanks, were to be duly presented by us Mortals, to the God of Heaven: They
were convinced, that God was offended with sin; and concluded, That he was to
be appeased by Sacrifice, for it could not enter into their reasonable minds,
to conceive, That all our prayers, or any of our performances, could give
satisfaction to the Justice of God; and yet they were invincibly ignorant, that
our Emmanuel, our Jesus, and none but our Jesus alone, could give him
all-sufficient satisfaction: And this Piety they laid as the ground and
foundation of all other virtues. They did (poor Pagans*) remember that there
was an omnipresent God, which did overlook them, and a Conscience, a Genius, or
as some were pleased to speak, a (...) within to reprove and check them; and by
these sublimenotions, they did restrain men from running into exorbitant and
dishonorable courses; For if you have (say they) God and conscience within
(...). Hermes. Est profecto Deus qui quae nos gerimus, audi^que and videt.
Plau^us. Capt. Frustra sunt qui Religionis specie in ambitionem del^bunt^^,
Tacit. (...). Vide Epi^te^um. Conscientiam (...) D^is Immortalibus accepimus
quae Divelli a nobis non potest. Cicero pro Cluentio. Tutissimum est in omni
vita transversum ungnem a recta conscientia non discedere. Cic. ad Atticum.
Suus cuique animus ex conscientia spem praebet. Salust. (...). Arl. Eth. ad
Nicom. l. 4. cap. 3. Prudence. Temperance.
you, these have no need of a Candle to see what mischief you do in the dark.
Next to Piety, the Philosophers conceived that Prudence and Moral virtues were
the sure Fundamentals of substantial Honor.

1. Prudence was in their conceit, as a silken string, which runs through all
the Moral virtues, as so many Pearls, knitting them all together, and making a
Bracelet, a Chain of Honor, fit to adorn the Necks, the Souls of Nobles; for
Prudence is that virtue which does order even Reason it self, which being
carnal, is apt to be irregular: The other virtues which they called Moral,
were to regulate our will and affections, indeed our whole life and
conversation. These, these are the Fundamentals of Real Honor: He then that
desires to preserve his Honor, must be a prudent and knowing man, because
Honor is as unseemly for a fool, as Snow is unseasonable in Summer, or Rain in
Harvest, Prove. 26. 1. Honor conferred on such, is not only an Inconvenience,
but an ill Omen, a sad presage; for you know this by experience, That
unseasonable Weather in Harvest, will certainly cause a Famine, and a Famine
will bring a Plague. Honor cannot be secured without knowledge and prudence;
for the highest Tower is easily undermined if its foundation be hollow. Humane
society does consist in communicating prudent notions to one another, for the
preservation of the whole society; and therefore a man cannot be an useful
member of a body Politic, because he cannot be a sociable man; muchlesse
sociable in an high degree, in a way of Honor, without knowledge and prudence.

2. He must be Temperate, else he cannot long be wise, for Intemperance will
exhaust his spirits, weaken his parts, and drown his wisdom. Temperance is by
the Greeks called (...); it is clear and evident, That he who cannot moderate
himself in those pleasures, which are common to us with beasts, will fall from
all his honor, and become like the beasts that perish.

3. He must be valiant, else he is no man, (...) Valor. Euripides nihil sunt
usquam.
(...), and therefore, cowards are said to be (...), An army of cowards is but
as a Table of Ciphers, cast up the total sum, and it will not amount to a
single unite. Give me a man of a compact solid heart, that is full of spirits,
else he will not stand upon his guard, nor keep his watch, no nor the faith
neither; he will not quit himself like a man, but turn Apostate in perilous
times, (...), says the Apostle, play the men, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand
fast in the Faith, quit your selves like men: If the beams of an house, then
certainly the pillars of a State had need be strong Heart of Oak? We use to
say, That Horse is not fit to lead the way who is given to starting. He is a
man of Honor, in whom there is an happy Union between wisdom and boldness:
Boldness will carry them on to charge through in despite of danger; with
convenient courage, and wisdom, will bring them off with sufficient Honor: The
boldness of Hannibal, was not void of In Hannibale plurimum audaciae ad
capessenda pericula plurimum consilii inter ipsa pericula erat, Live. lib. 21.
Counsel; and the boldness of a Christian, must not be void of Religion; For
a valiant man fears nothing but what is dishonorable: And nothing is indeed
dishonorable, but that which is in some respect dishonest. The Ancients
therefore said, That Fortitude was (...), the fear of a dishonorable check;
and as he said well, They who are most fearful to offend against the Law, are
most bold to fight against an enemy. Certainly, that man that is not afraid of
death and judgment, sin and Hell, is not valiant, but mad. He, says
Aristotle, who does not fear what he ought to fear, is not valiant, but
impudent: Fools make a mock at sin, Prove. 14. 9. And Atheists make a mock at
Hell, as if sin and Hell, were Bug-bears to affright children, that are neither
wise nor bold: But there is a secret witness in the heart of man, which does
dictate severe and terrible truths to obstinate Roysters, and curious
Sceptiques, without and above any Humane Tradition, Civil Imposition, or
Scientificall Demonstration.

4. He must be liberal, and in some cases magnificent: Remember Liberality.
Magnificence.
the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said. It is more blessed, and therefore
more honorable, to give then to receive, Acts 20. 35.

5. He must be magnanimous, and then he will be just, not Magnanimity and
Justice. (...), Ar. Eth. l. 4. (...).
only in respect of particular, but universal Justice, Magnamity is (...) the
ornament of all other virtues. The Magnanimous man seems slow, but if you mark
him, you will find him sure. He never ingages his Honor upon a service which may
be performed by meaner men: He does not trouble himself about many things, but
reserves himself for great things, things like himself: When a Kingdom lays at
stake, the magnanimous man will be even prodigal of his blood and honor: He
loves a set battle, but hates a skirmish; for he has learnt to decline all
unnecessary dangers, because he knows he can sell his life dearer, and do the
Commonwealth some better service another time. A man of this heroical spirit,
thinks nothing great but virtue; and if he can epsy that, in an inferior, he
will lend him his hand to life him higher; and if he find his virtues to
transcend his own, he will set him even above himself, and count it an honor
(...), c. 3.
to be his servant; For the magnanimous man does examine his own worth and
other men's defects, according to right reason, and therefore does ever pass a
righteous judgment: (...), cap. (...). (...), Ar. Eth. ub^ supra. Oportet te
nihil facere per injuriam, sed nec omnino facere videri. Na n privatis quidem
hominil us s^tis est nihil delinquere; Principibus ne quidem suspectis esse
licet. Livia ad Auguslum.
In a word, he counts it the greatest dishonor, to affect honor, and
therefore he contemns honor, when he may prejudice the truth by standing upon
terms of honor, because he knows, that Truth and virtue are more honorable,
then honor it self. Hence it is, that he forgives injuries, and goes on with
undaunted Resolution in the ways of virtue, and honor, that he may promote
the common good: No abuses, no jealousies, can divert him from public service;
and he hates the thought of being guilty of any private Design; nay, labors
to be free from suspicion, as well as guilt.

My Lords, If Philosophy carry a man thus high, O let Religion, Christian
Religion, advance you higher: What though men be peevish, and snappish in these
angry times, Will you be sullen, and give up all? Can you forget the public,
your own oath, and Gods righteous cause: What if you should think your selves,
as it were affronted, must the cause of God for that weak reason, be deserted?
Is that the way to preserve your honor? No, no my Lords, the way for you U^
fortasse vere sic satis utiliter ad praesens certamen consopiendum uti olim
nonnemo.
to preserve your honor, is to unite your strength, and join with them whom
you find cordially active for the public good; and secondly, To be not only
cordial, but active your selves.

First, Unite your strength: Look upon Division as an Abomination Tanta tum
gratia tum art praepara verant, quae non modo plebem, sed ipsum etiam
Dictatorem frustrareatur, Livius.
tending to desolation. It is so well known, that I need not whisper it for a
secret; the Master-plot of the enemy at this present, is to work a Division
between the two Houses of Parliament: Take heed my Lords, Division, nay, I had
almost said Jealousy, is a kind of Civil-Gun-Powder (...) Believe it, you are
in as much danger, as if they were at work in the Vault again; For this, if you
look not to it, may prove the blacker Treason, and a more effectual
Powder Plot, to blow up Lords and Commons, both together. I am too young to Quod
scis nescis si sapis, Dromo.
give counsel to a Parliament, but I have studied those that are old enough;
and if you please to consult the Physicians of State, those sage Writers, who
have felt the pulse of most Commonwealths, throughout the world: They will
tell you, That if the breach be never so small, yet the Crisis is sad, for they
conclude, with joint consent, Discordia inter Consuasores est maxim
perniciosa: And Tacitus, a better Statesman, Ta^it. in Agric. Optimum Aulieam
pessimum publicum. Hoc uno bono dissentire claros viros gaudet --. ne in
seipsum conspi^ent ad unum omnes. Julius Clas^. Suetonio discors bon^m publicum
privatis simultatibus impedicbat. Taci^. Annal.
as I conceive, then an Historian, will assure you, Nihil principi adversus
subditos utilius quam si in commune non consulant. I know full well, that I am
touching upon a very ticklish point, but my sincere desire of your Honors
welfare, emboldens me to tell your Lordships one story before we part.

Aristides and Themisto^les, being sent to the same City, as
Fellow-Ambassadours, fell out by the way: Aristides was stout enough and cross
enough; but when he came near the Gates of the City, he condescended so far,
as to be-speak Themistocles much after this manner: Sir, you and I are not at
leisure to squable now, it will be time enough for us to renew our quarrel
when our work is at an end: The story applies it self. Let there be a firm
Union between both Houses of Parliament, that the Rights and Privileges of
both may be preferred against all crafty and Callidas and Malitiosas Juris
interpretationes, Cicero. effic. lib. 1.
malicious Interpretations of wel-meant Laws. It will much conduce to the
preservation of your Honor, to unite with the Neighbor City, and with the
well-affected in every County: Do you not know how the Britons of old were
overcome? Dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur; it was for want of an
Association, Jus concinnatis mendaci^s adumbratum. Ammianus Marcell. Civili
justoque imperio ad voluntatem converso cruentam idem, lib. 15. L. Tarquinius
Regum primus traditum a principibus morem de omnibus Senatum consulendi solvit;
domesticis consiliis Rempub. administravit. Livius lib. 1. Non data Senatus
copia intra^ubiculum auditur, Tacitus. Nam quae alii Scelera hic remedia vocat,
supplicia and contumelias vestras Disciplinam appellat, Idem. Tacitus Agric. In
omni Repub. diversum semper est plebis and Optimatum ingenium diversaque
studia: Et quae leges ad conservandam libertatem condunt^r, eae originem habent
ex eorum discordia. Vide Discurs. de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 4. (...), Aristot.
Polit. lib. 4. cap. 8. Pulsis Tarquiniis maxima videbatur esse Senatus and
populi concordia ipsique Nobiles absque ullo fastu Mites and Populares esse
putabantur sed postquam interiistent Tarquinii, etc. -- Hinc ratio invents est
creandi Tribunos plebis, ut faeliciae esset Resp. ex omnibus tribus (Monarch.
etc.) Politiae fermis rite composita, uti Politici passim. See His Majesty's
Answer to the 19. Propositions. Sacra Consulum, Senatus populique Romani
Majestas. Jam prope erat ut ne Consulum quidem Majestas iras hominum coerceret,
Live. lib. 2. Proditum a Patribus summi Imperii Jus, consulatus autem
Tribunitium auxilium nec non plebis Romanae provocatio arces tuenda libertatis
fuere. Vide Anold. Clap. de Jure Imperii, lib. 1. cap. 9. and 10. Melius
institui posse Remp. sentio ad exemplum Romanorum quam vel Venetorum, vel
Spartanorum: Quod vix p^ssit medius quidam modus inter extrema inveniri, aut
conservari, Disput. de Repub. lib. 1. page 41.
says Tacitus, between the Cities, or as we use to speak, between the
Counties. Where rich and poor, noble and ignoble, are united in one body, with
such proportionable privileges and encouragements, that the poor, as well as
the rich, and the ignoble, as well as the noble, may with all alacrity and
cheerfulness, labor to advance the common good of the whole Society there,
and there only is a Commonwealth; but few Common-weals have been reduced to
that happy temper without a quarrel.

Secondly, Be encouraged to be Active in your own persons for the common good:
Every Lord Lieutenant may have a whole County waiting on him in all those
parts, which are yet within your power; you may learn much by the practices of
your Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum quod contra singulos
utilitate publica rependitur uti Cassius apud Tacitum Annal. 14.
enemies, they are wise in their generations; they are abroad, and at work in
their several Counties; and they will be sure to (...), Arist. Polit. lib. 2.
c. 8. and lib. 3. cap. 5. Romany tutius visum est defendi in ermes Latinos
quam pati r^tractare arma. Livi^s, l. 2. Armis public mulctati, Tacitus,
Histor.
arm none, but such as they can trust: But I know, it is commonly said, That in
these days of mercy, there are many enemies received into favor, and taken
into your protection; but if there be some kind of enemies that must be
pardoned and protected, yet there is no reason that they should be armed. My
Lords, The Sun is mounted very high already, it is the time of the year for
Princes to take the Field, and for Lords to look abroad: Remember that man is
(...) a ^r. stot. Poslit.
Sociable creature; show your selves men: Men indeed, stand for the good of the
whole Society, the Resp. incolumis and provatas res facile salvas praestat:
Publica perdendo tua nequicquam serves, Live. l. 26. Salutis cau^a Rei
familiaris commoda negligenda esse, dixit Vercingetori^ apud Caesa^em, lib. 7.
de bello Gall^co. Bonum publicum est bonum Populicum. (...), Aristophanes.
(...), Aristot. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 8. Res privatae semper offecere
officientque publicis negotiis, Livius. Monent iidem ne occultis consiliis,
Resp. laedatur. Cicero de Arusp. resp. (...). Polybius, lib. 6.
Public good, or else you cannot stand for the good of your own Noble
posterity; for the good of every particular, is bound up in the common good.
Believe it, there is no reasonable means for the preservation of your Honor,
but by showing your valor against your enemies, and uniting with all that are
true Friends to the common cause of Jesus Christ: By activitie against your
enemies, and union with your friends, you may be so happy, that your enemies
will envy you, and your friends rejoice with you. But remember, that by an
unhappy difference at Rome, between the Nobles and Commons; the Nobles, as well
as the Commons lost their liberty: Oh thrice happy England, if by a sweet and
constant correspondence, between both Houses of Parliament, Lords and Commons,
may avoid contention, and preserve Liberty, Honor, Religion, all: And let me
once more remember you, That you had need be quick and nimble, in these Active
times, Cunctatione non opus est, ubi perniciosior sit quies quam temeritas; All
the danger in Civil Wars is, in not being active enough. Tyrants, says the
Politician, do miscarry, because they are not Tyrants enough; let us make an
Antidote of this poison, and conclude, That honest zealots may miscarry,
because they are not zealous enough: He was no fool that said, Inter ancipitia
deterrimum esse Mediasequi. The strength of our Kingdom would be seen in the
Field, if every true hearted man would take the boldness, to declare himself:
Every magnanimous person hates n^^tralitie, and is (as Aristotle has it) (...)
open-breasted in his love, and hatred: If he be your friend, you shall know it,
and if he be your enemy, he will make you feel it: Brave soldiers love to
follow professed Patriots, Qui aperte in causam descendunt tanquam Culpae vel
gloriae socii. Come, come, my Lords, Honesty is the choicest policy. Come
then, and show your Wisdom, your Justice; show your Zeal, your Valor, your
Magnanimity, your Piety, for God and your Country: This, this is the way, to
increase your Honor with more ease, and preserve it with less envy.

But, stay, stay, says some much Honored Silkworm; If I should loose my life
in the quarrel, what becomes of my honor then? Alas, when I am gone, all
the world is gone with me: Why then look after another world, and a better
life; look after it in the first place, though I handle it in the last, and so
I pass to my

Third Quere. How may one gain an immortal glorious Honor Application to all
Estates and Degrees of men.
in the highest Heaven?

This Quere concerns all estates and degrees of men; The poor, and the Noble
may be Peers in Heaven. I have in part answered this Quere already; for I have
shown you clearly, That we must be justified, regenerated, converted, or else
the greatest is not truly noble in our Spiritual and Christian account.

My Lords, If you desire this new honor, you must lead new lives, and you will
never do that, till you have new natures, new-bearts by a new creation. Ye must
be new creatures in Jesus Christ; For God in Christ is the Fountain of all
Christian Nobility and glorious Honor: And if any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Now Christ puts forth his creating power in his
Ordinances, and therefore you must all, high and low, attend upon the quickening
Ordinances of God, that ye may be made new creatures in Christ, by the
effectual working of the Holy Ghost. Oh that this day, might be that happy
working-day, the day of Christ's power, transforming all our deformed souls into
the beauty of holiness, that we might become, the willing subjects of Jesus
Christ, as it is written, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power, in the beauties of holiness. Oh that whilst I am directing, what
ought to be done, our Lord Jesus would put to his Fiat, and say, Let it be
done, it shall be done this very hour.

My Lords, I am affectionately desirous of you, as the Apostles 1 These. 2. 8.
speaks, and willing to impart unto you, not only the Gospel of God, but that
very Character, which the Gospel by the Spirit has stamped upon my own beloved
soul, because your precious souls are dear unto me.

My Lords, Remember your selves, You are not now in your Robes, sitting in
State, to pass sentence upon that Word, whereby you must be judged; But you,
and I, and all here present, are holding up our hands at the bar. Come, open
your bosoms, the Spirit is now about to set the Word home upon your
conscience; the Spirit of God tells you plainly, That notwithstanding your great
birth, you were born in sin; and we have too many of us (nay, too many of you)
lived, as if you, and we, had been born to no other purpose, then to sin.

My Lords, What do you mean, (Brethren, what do you mean,) not only to live in
sin, but to die in sin, O it is a dangerous thing to live in sin, but it is a
desperate thing to die in sin; for he that dies in his sins, perishes in his
sins, and is damned eternally. It is no matter of what strain or complexion,
your sins are, or how they relish when the palate is distempered, be they
sweet or sour, sins of pleasure or malice, nay, ignorance, sins of gain, shall
I say, sins of Honor? Yes, this ignoble age has plotted how to dishonor God
in an honorable way. In a word, Be your sins old, or new, sins received by
Tradition from your forefathers, and therefore, received with honor; as if
they were some noble vices, which ought to be standers to your noble Families;
yet consider, and sadly consider it, He that resolves to live in any sin, but
till to morrow morning, may for ought he knows, die, and perish in his sin; the
Devil may come and fetch away his soul this night, and he may be in Hell ere
morning. The God of Heaven, set that consideration home to your hearts; you
must fall down upon your faces, and acknowledge, That God is in this Meditation
of a truth: The Lord Jesus did press this point home in his powerful
preaching, you may read it thrice in one Chapter, John 8. 21, 24. It is one of
the most fearful threats in Scripture; for it does indeed contain all
threatenings in it.

My Lords, Will nothing touch your hearts; yes, I believe your hearts have been
touched to day, and touched to the quick. Now then, my Lords, what say you now?
Why sure you are come to this resolution, ye would not die in your sins, that
were to die basely, to die dishonourably: Why then, my Lords, If you would not
die in your sins, ye must not live in them; Oh but how shall we be saved from
all our sins, our ignoble sins? Why though Joshuah be called Jesus, Heb. 4. 8.
and the people were wont to bow every time that Text was read, yet) there is
but one Jesus, the Lord Jesus, who can save us from our sins, Matthew. 1. 21. Oh
now your hearts relent, and give a little: Now, now consider, how you have
abused and undervalued; how you have crucified and tormented this Jesus, who
alone can save you from your sins: How you have made a sport and pastime of
those sins which let out the heart blood of Jesus Christ. What, are your hearts
like Nabals, dead within you? Or are you cast into a trembling fit; are you
fainting, and even swowning under the weight of Gods wrath, and your sin: why
now, now you are in this agony and bloody sweat, the Lord Jesus offers himself
to be your Savior upon fair and honorable terms, do you deliberate, whether
you should be saved? Why then take him Jaylour, clap some bolts upon his
conscience, and let the iron enter into his soul; let him taste a cup of
brimstone, and see how he likes it before hand; let the Law thunder curses upon
him, and the spirit of bondage flash some lightning into his soul. Oh base
unworthy wretch do thou capitulate with thy Judge, and scorn thy Savior; is
thy mind preposessed with prejudice against Christ, and are thy affections
preingaged to the flesh, the world, the devil; do love thy sin better then
thy Savior? Why then thou art mad upon thy pleasure, thou art drunk with
honor, and bewitched with gain; enjoy thy sin, and hug thy damnation, the Lord
Jesus will not bestow himself on such a sot: Yet once more I Will ask the
question, for ought thou know, it may be the last time of asking; Will thou
have Jesus Christ for thy antiquity, for thy nobility, for thy husband, thy
King, thy Prophet, thy Priest, thy Savior, thy All? Jesus Christ will bind
Kings in chains, and Nobles in setters of Iron; he will power contempt upon
Princes, if they contemn him. What say you then, my Lords, (and what say you
Brethren) will you submit your necks to the yoke, and your shoulders to the
burden of Jesus Christ? Will you deny your selves, take up your cross daily,
and follow him? Will you believe him, trust him, love him, obey him. Give me
leave to insist a little upon those two special duties of Faith and Love; and
I pitch upon them the rather, because Faith and Love are Radical Graces, and
you can never prove The new creature.
your selves to be new creatures in Christ, but by Faith and Love: Be pleased
to compare two Scriptures together, for the clearing of this truth, the
Scriptures are not far asunder; one is in the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Galathians, the fifteenth Galath. 6. 15.
verse, In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature: Would you know what this new creature is?
Read the fifth Chapter of Galath. 5. 6. Jude. Build up your selves on your most
holy Faith, verse. 20. Keep your selves in the Love of God, verse 21.
the same Epistle, and the sixth verse. In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith working by Love. Mark I
beseech you, it is worth your observation, Nothing avails but a new creature,
in one place, Nothing avails but Faith, working by love, in the other: No man
then is a new creature, but he whose Faith works by Love: There is the sum of
the Gospel, the substance, marrow, power, spirit, quintessence of Christianity.

First. Then examine, whether you have any knowledge I.
of Christ, or Faith in him; any heart and well grounded assent to the Gospel
of Christ: with the heart, man being convinced, believes. Have you any precious
Faith? If you have no true Faith, you cannot understand the Mystery of
Godliness, after a spiritual and saving manner: Now, man that is in honor,
Mir^ simplicit^s est ^cire qu^ ^das ^onym. ^s tenebrarum est quae definitur per
ignorantia^.
and understands not, says my Text, you know what follow^. Faith is the eye
of the soul; Reason is blind without Faith. Except a man be born from above,
(except his reason be raised, elevated by Faith, enlightened by the Spirit) he
cannot see the Kingdom of God; as our Savior told that Ruler of the Jews, when
he catechized him, John 3. 3. Every true believer has so much understanding,
as to assent to the truth, and so much ingenuity, as to consent to the
goodness of all the promises.

Secondly. The precious Faith of Gods elect, is an holy II.
Faith; nay, Saint Jude exhorts Christians to build up themselves on their most
holy Faith, Jude verse. 20. True Faith ayms at the highest degree of holiness,
it is ever laboring to build up the soul one story higher in holiness, that
we may be every day nearer Heaven. He that thinks he is holy enough already,
has neither true Faith, nor Holiness of Truth. They are unbel^eving men that
are afraid, they shall be come too strict in duty, and too precise in
abhorting and declining sin; they say they have holiness enough to carry them
to Heaven, though there are many (that were as holy as themselves) gone to H^ll
already. Remember, that though Jesus Christ be King of all the world, in a
providentiall way, yet he is King of Saints only, in a spiritual and saving
way. Christ will save none but Saints; such honor, immortal honor, have all
his Saints, and none but Saints; none but his Saints, whose consciences, Christ
has purged from the guilt, and allowance of sin, and whose hearts he has
purified from the Love, Heb. 9. 14. Acts 15. 9.
(and their whole man, from the power, and dominion) of sin, by a lively Faith,
that they may serve the living God.

Thirdly. True Faith is a resting and relying grace, Faith III.
does support the feeble soul, the sinking soul, by leaning upon Gods arm, and
Christ's bosom; because thou did rely on 2 Chronicles. 16. 8. 2 Chro. 14. 11.
the Lord, says the Se^^ to Asa: Help us, O Lord, says Asa, to God, for we
rest upon thee. Does thy soul rest upon Christ, not only for pardon of sin,
but power against sin?. Do thou rely upon the free grace of God, the
all-sufficient satisfaction, complete righteousness, and perfect merits of
Christ, for justification? Then it is well, but a believer must likewise live
in a constant dependence upon God, for perseverance in grace, and then he is
right.

Fourthly. Faith is a radical grace; and therefore as the IV.
root of a tree sucks nourishing moisture from the earth, fo a ^^leever, sucks
and draws nourishing virtue, fresh virtue, and new supplies every day, from
Jesus Christ: Faith does not only depend upon Christ, and adhere to him, but
suck from him; it hangs upon the Ordinances of Christ, the Breasts of Christ,
as the Infant hangs upon the Mothers breast.

Fifthly. Faith is a mortifying and quickening grace, Because V.
it draws virtue from Christ, to mortify our lusts, and quicken us to a lively
performance of all duties, in their due place and season: Upon days of
Humiliation, the believer draws much power from the death of Christ, to
mortify his lust, and sets upon all tasks of mortification in the strength of
Christ.

Sixthly. Faith is a victorious grace, it overcomes the world, VI.
and the Devil, and it does both, by purifying our hearts, and mortifying our
lusts: For if our hearts be purified, and our lusts mortified, the world, and
devil, are not able to prevail against us; We shall come of with honor in the
main battle, at the latter end of the day, though we may be foiled now and then
in a skirmish, and give ground a little, when we are too hotly charged, and
over-borne by violence. The devil cannot throw a fiery dart at us, but faith
will quench it: If our lusts do not fire us, the dart cannot wound us: Take the
shield of Faith, says the Apostle, That ye may be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the devil: Above all other pieces of Christian armor, take the shield
of Faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. The least degree of true Faith, does in some measure
overcome the world, because it does persuade the heart (even before the man
has any clear bright evidence of his own election) that there are better
things laid up for the elect, in Christ, then any the world can bestow upon
them; better honor, better riches, better glory. Christ is a precious Christ,
to all true believers, to you, who believe he is an Honor, 1 Pet. 2. 7. The
original will bear it, for (...) is the word. Would ye then my Lords, (and you
dear Christians) gain an immortal glorious Honor; you see the ready way,
believe, believe, and Jesus Christ will be an Honor to you: But remember that
your Faith must be the Faith of Christians, not the faith of Devils; it must be
such a precious faith, as purifies the heart, purges the conscience, assents,
and consents to Christ; such a faith as overcomes the world, and quenches the
fiery darts of the devil, by resting upon Christ, and drawing virtue from him.

But I must not forget in the next place, that your faith ^ides cum Dilectione,
and fides Christiani, fides sine Dilectione est ^ides Diaboli.
must work by love, and therefore as you must have a victorious faith, so you
must have a transcendent, an heroical Love, to the Lords Jesus; you must love
him better then your friends, better then your estates, better then your
honor; for you must lay down all your Coronets, all your Honor, at the feet
of Christ; nay, you must love Christ better, then your lives. Christ turned to
the great multitudes, and said to them, If any man come to me, and hates not
his own life (in comparison of me, for my sake, and the Gospels) he cannot be
my Disciple, Luke 14. 25, 26. And again, Verse 33. Whosoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all he has, he cannot be my Disciple. Our Savior does not mean
such a Disciple as Peter, and the rest, but by Disciple, he means Scholar,
Subject, Member, Servant, Friend, Heir; for he speaks to the multitude, and
therefore the meaning is, That one of the poorest and meanest men, in the
throng, could not have any interest in Christ, or benefit by him, unless he
love the Lord Jesus better then his estate, and life better then all the world;
and can men in Honor think to go to Heaven, upon cheaper and easier terms,
then one of the multitude? No sure, where God gives more, he requires more.
Come then, my Brethren, Let this day of sorrow, be a day of Love, or else it
will not be a day of godly sorrow; for godly sorrow arises from the love of
God, from Faith working by love, from Faith in Christ, and love to him: The
bitterest tears, flow from the sweetest Love. Come you that have any tender
hearts, or rolling bowels, let me this day speak to your hearts and bowels, and
cast you into the melting pangs of a divine, and Christian love: Consider your
want of Christ, and the worth of Christ: Oh consider, the benefits of Christ's
death, the sweetness of Christ's promises, the pleasantness of his commands,
the pretiousnesse of his graces, and above all, the infiniteness of his love:
And you cannot but love him; your hearts must needs be ravished into an
ecstasy, if you consider that soul-ravishing Text, Revel. 1. 5, 6. And you
cannot but cry out with the ardency of affection, with the strength, the zeal
of love: Oh to him, to him, that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father; to him
be glory, and dominion, love and subjection, for ever and ever, Amen.

Come you, that never studied the Art of spiritual love; Consider, that Jesus
Christ saw your distressed souls weltring in blood, and filthiness, and his
bowels were turned, his compassions Ezekiel. 16. 6, 8 etc.
were kindled within him; and he said unto you, even then when you were
polluted in your own blood, live; yea, when you were polluted in your own blood
and filthiness, he said Live, and Live eternally: Was not that a time of love
with him? Why, now turn your eyes inward, and look upon your own souls,
sprinkled with the blood, the heart-blood of Jesus Christ, that they may be
purged, and you may be saved; and tell me, is it not a time of love now with
your beloved souls? Do you not feel your hearts begin to burn within you? Are
you not transported beyond your selves, are you not even mounting up to Heaven,
and flying into the Arms and Bosom of your beloved Lord? Come, give up your
hearts to Christ, for I must prevail; I am sure you are convinced, that Jesus
Christ is the best husband in the world, for your precious souls; for he is the
only All-sufficient Savior, there is no choice, you must have him or none.
Come, be not thus dull of understanding, or affection, be not careless and
peevish in a business, which concerns the happy welfare of your eternal
souls: Away with all prejudicate opinions, and vain conceits; Come, let us be
settled men, and spend some sad thoughts, about the saving excellencies of Jesus
Christ: Be not so impudently presumptuous, as to imagine, That you love Christ
well enough already; if you have not as yet sufficiently known, or judiciously
considered, what reason and equity there i^, that you should love Christ
better then all the World. Come, let me close with you a little, and speak home
to every one of your souls in particular: Friend be not such a sott, as to
doat upon trifles, I Will show thee wonders, The wonder of our redemption, the
most admirable, and most astonishing Plot of the blessed Trinity, sitting in
counsel about the Salvation of thy beloved soul: A mystery which the Angels
stoop down to pry into, an Orient Pearl, that will outshine all the sparkling
Jewels of the whole Creation, if they should be dug out of Natures Cabinet,
and hung up with such advantage, that they might all unite their beams upon
some day of triumph. Hear what a worthy Divine of ours says, Our slighting the
offers of Grace, and not laying to heart what God Master Pink ^is Trial of
Love.
has done for us, is a sin next to wilful apostasy, and malicious blasphemy;
For he who does not see such glorious miracles of love, and inestimable
treasures of grace in Christ, as to take of his mind and heart, from the
glittering vanities of the world, that he may fix his thoughts, and setle his
affections, upon God in Christ, as an all-sufficient Portion and Inheritance;
That man does offer an affront to the majesty of Heaven, he befools the
Wisdom, and scorns the love of the blessed Trinity; for he slights the most
excellent wonder, that ever the Wisdom of God contrived, or his power
compassed, or his goodness bestowed upon the sons of men: And what reason has
such a soft to expect favor from God, mercy from Christ, or comfort from the
Holy Ghost. Do ye believe the Scriptures? Why then tell me, Whether the favor
of God will not comfort the heart, better then corn and wine, Psalm. 4* 6, 7.
Then sheep and oxen, strong sons, and polished daughters, full barns, and full
b^gs. Read and consider the four last verses of the 144. Psalm. Is not the
loving kindness of God, better then life, Psalm. 63. 3. Can a man gain any
thing, though he gain the whole world, if he loose his own soul? Or is there
any thing to be given in exchange for the soul? Can thou set thy heart upon
that which thou beleevest to be dross and dung, Phil. 3. 8. And art thou not
ashamed to prefer the ^asest trash and dung, before Jesus Christ? It is
impossible, that our affections should for any long time together, stand in
aequilibrio, even-ballanced, between Christ and the World. Because every little
trifle would turn the scales, there being so many cases, in which a man must
either renounce Christ, or the World; and if there were but one thing in all
the world, which a man loves, better then Christ; if that come to stand in
competition with Christ, he will as basely deny, and betray Christ, for that
one thing (be it profit, honor, pleasure, be it what it will) as if he
preferred many other things before him. Beloved, I propound these
considerations to you, That you may ponder them well in your cool blood, and
morning thoughts, and so come on to firm purposes, and steadfast resolutions, to
settle your affection upon Jesus Christ; for believe it, such thoughts as
these, must go before purposes, and consultation before resolution, or else all
your good purposes without counsel, will be vain, they will be frustrated and
disappointed, as the Wiseman for^-warns you, Prove. 15. 22. Go home then, and
read, nay, peruse the loveletters of Christ, in his glorious Gospel, and review
all the love tokens which he has sent to thy dear soul, and then fall in love
with him; nay, before thou go home, let me gain a promise from thee, That
thou will have no other Savior, or Husband, for thy soul, but Jesus Christ;
that thou will receive him for thy Lord, with the thankful affections of Love
and Reverence; that thou will take an unmixed delight, and complete content in
him, as thy Treasure, thy Happiness, thy All. Suffer me now then, even now,
whilst thy judgment is convinced, and thy heart warmed, to cast thee into a
lovetrance, into the Seraphicall flames of conjugall affections. Come, art thou
ready, is thy spirit raised, thy heart enlarged, thy mind fixed, thy soul in
tune to say after me. O my blessed Lord, I have been too proud, and pervish
heretofore; but thy free grace, and undeserved love, has beaten me out of all
my pride, and natural enmity; I fall down at thy footstool, and lay my self
flat before thee: At first I wondered to hear* Preachers talk so much of
Christ, and I was bold to ask thy* friends, What their beloved was more then
another beloved: But now I wonder, that I could endure to be so long without
thee; my fervent desires of thee, were at first grounded on a thorough sense of
the extreme misery of all my happiness without thee. But now I have renounced
all my self-love, and abhor all self ends, as base and mercenary, being fully
convinced, that thou have bought me out of my self, and all that I called
mine; and therefore, out of a well-advised, dislike, and disesteem of all
worldly profit, honor, pleasure, or any other admired vanity: I make a full
and absolute Resignation of my self, and make over all that is dear and
precious to me, in the world, to thee, my Lord and Savior; For truly Lord, I
am thine, only thine, ever thine; all that I am, is at thy command, and all I
have is at thy disposing, be pleased to command, both it, and me. With all
humility and thankfulness, I accept thy precious offers of grace and mercy,
and do confess them to be offers worthy of all acceptance; because I know,
that whatsoever I adventure, or loose, for thy sake, I shall receive with
infinite advantage in thy blessed Self: I dare trust my dear Lord with the best
thing, that ever he gave me; my precious soul. Oh my bleeding heart, and broken
spirit, does languish in a thirsty love, panting, and gasping after thee, my
beloved Savior. Oh let me taste how gracious thou art, by some real
experiments in mine own heart; smile upon me from Heaven; answer me with some
assuring whispers of the Spirit of Adoption; Kiss me with the kisses of thy
mouth, for thy love is sweeter then the taste of wine, or the love of women. Oh
let me bathe my soul in the delicious intimacies of a spiritual communion with
thee, my God, and Savior, that I may for ever adhere unto thee, with a sincere
constancy, and rest in thee with a love of complacencie; for I feel, I find my
soul cast into a longing sweat for thee, and nothing can satisfy the
importunate longing of my perplexed soul, but thine only Self; for thou art,
my Lord, my love, my life, and thou art altogether lovely.

And now Lord, I have found thee whom my soul loves, I will let go any thing in
the world, to take better hold of thee: Now I have embraced thee, I will not
let thee go until thou bless me; nay, I will not let thee go then, but hold
thee fast for ever, that thou may for ever bless me; If thou killest me, I
will trust in thee, nay, I will love thee; for thy love is better then life,
therefore my lips shall praise thee; If I live, I will live, serving thee; if I
die, I will die, praising thee: Whether I live or die, let me be ever thine,
and then I know thou will be an advantage to me, both in life and death.

To this effect, the soul that is in love with Christ, does usually express it
self; for such souls are commonly cast into an agony, into pangs of love; and
therefore, the Scripture has described the outgoings of such a soul by
several similitudes, By the gasping of the parched ground, the panting of a
Psalm 63. 1. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 119. 131, 174. Cantic. 5. 8.
chased Heart, the longings of a teening woman, by the fainting and swowning of
one that is in good earnest, sick of Love. What say you then, beloved
Christians, are you willing to live to him who died for you? Will you indeed,
live to him, and if he calls you to it, die for him: Believe it, He dies the
noblest death, who dies a Martyr. And if you talk of Honor, you cannot be
preferred to an higher degree of Honor, then to be esteemed the Friends of
Christ here, and made Coheirs with Christ in glory. Beloved, Such as our
affections are, such are we: It our affections be right set, on things above,
we are Saints; if they be set on the things below, we are Beasts or Devils.
Come then, ye men of Honor, come set your affections upon the noblest and most
honorable object, the highest, chiefest good, God in Christ: If you do not set
your affections upon Christ, you will have no place with Christ in glory, and
in Hell, men loose the sweetest and comfortablest part of their affections, or
at least, the use and exercise of them; there is nothing amiable, or lovely in
Hell, therefore there is, no use of love; there is no joy, or delight, no good
to be hoped for there, only the tormenting affections of grief, shame,
despair, and the rest of that black crew, remain to vex and torture the soul,
though they cannot devour, or consume it: Let us then so place our affections
here, as that we may enjoy the comfort of them, in another world; let our love
and confidence be placed on Christ; let us delight and rejoice in him, and his
service, that our souls may be for ever, satisfied with his goodness, and even
ravished with his love. Remember, that Faith and Love, are both Active, it is
Faith working by Love; you have heard of the obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26.
And if ye Love me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14. 15. Consider, that Jesus
Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation, to all them, and none but them,
that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Beloved in the Lord Jesus, If you will learn to
perform all your duties in faith, and out of love, trusting only upon free
grace, and aiming only at Gods glory. My soul, for yours you will be of the
Christian circumcision, you will worship God in the spirit, Phil. 3. 3.
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and put no confidence in the flesh: You will be
justified by free grace, acted, and lead, by effectual Grace, into all
necessary Trueths, and Holiness of Truth: Faith and love, will find out
their way to Heaven: Faith and love will establish your hearts and minds.
These graces will make you not only patient and constant, but zealous also;
For zeal can never boil high enough, unless it be raised by Faith, and
enflamed by Love. Zeal is the strength of affection, and height of grace; it
is the height of knowledge, the height of prudence, and therefore, not to be
ordered by discretion; as they talk, who mistake policy for wi^dom, and
subject matters of Religion, to reasons of State; nay, zeal is the height of
Faith also: When we read, that something was imputed to Phinehas for
righteousness, Some say it was Justice, others say Zeal, but I say, Faith; for
I know nothing else imputed for righteousness, in any Scripture notion: And
Faith is said to be imputed for righteousness, because the object of Faith,
the Lord Christ, is Jehovah our righteousness. Come then, let your Faith, and
Love, and Zeal, kindle, burn, rise, flame, higher and higher. Believe it, you will
be but useless men without zeal, for your parts and gifts, will be useless:
As a knife without an edge, a ship without sails, sails without wind, a bird
without wings, wheels without oil, an horse without metal; such is a man, any
man, a man in Honor without Zeal.

But a word or two more, my Lords, and I have done: You must show your selves
noble Christians in your places, relations, correspondencies, and improve all
your Interests for the Honor of Jesus Christ; and if you Honor God, he will
Honor you, and your house, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Honor God not only with outward,
but inward worship; honor him with your soul and body, and substance: Perform
Honorable actions, do not disdain to anoint the feet of our Savior; the lower
you do stoop to serve Christ, the higher you will be preferred for your humble
service: You may smell the perfume of that woman's ointment (that anointed the
feet of Christ) even to this very day, wheresoever the Gospel is Preached.
Salvator noster faeminae monnumentum curr^ triumphali vel Statua Imperatoris,
illustrius erexit. Study Honorabilia legis, The great and honorable things of
the Law and Gospel. Consider, that vile affections, base lusts, will dishonor
your bodies, and damn your souls, Romans 1. 24, 26. O possess your vessels in
sanctification and honor, 1 These. 4. 4. It will not be for your honor to be
guilty of those sins which ye ought to punish. Jehu was a murderer in the
sight of God, for slaying of Idolatours, because he was an Idolatour himself.
Mordecai was next to the King, great among the Jews, and accepted of the
people, by doing what was right in the sight of the people, Hester 10. 3. You
shall be near to Jesus Christ, and accepted of God, if ye do what is right in
the sight of God, Glory, and Honor, and Peace, shall rest upon you; for to
them, who by Patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and
immortality, God will give immortal honor, eternal life, Romans 2. 7, 10. You
know, that they are good men, who are good in their places; and they are men of
Honor, who keep a good conscience, in places of honor.

My Lords, I do not desire to deal with you in a full Body, as you make an
House of Peers; but I consider you, as you Tiberius ergo cujus tempore nomen
Christianum in saeculum introivit annunciatum -- detulit ad Senatum cum
Praerogativa suff^agii sui Sena^s quia non in se probaverat, respuit. Tertul.
Apol^ge^. c. 5.
will be considered, and dealt with, at the day of judgment; then Christ will
take you out, every Lord single by himself, one by one, and say: Sir, you had
the honor to sit in the House of Peers, why did you hold correspondence with
my utter enemies, the Antichristian faction, and commonly give your Vote
against me, when the welfare of three Kingdoms, the building up of my Church,
and the making of a new heaven upon earth, did much depend upon your Vote. When
it was put to the Vote in the Senate at Rome, Whether Christ should be
worshipped as God in the Roman Territories? It was carried against him, by a
major part of Votes. But, my Lords, I hope, nay, I know better things of your
House, then of the Roman Senate; for the House of Peers has passed a Vote
lately, much conducing to the Honor of Jesus Christ, and the Reformation of
particular Congregations: Be pleased to proceed, and perfect the Work; let the
ignorant be better instructed, and the scandalous better disciplined; the
Liberties, and Privileges of Gods people, restored, Heretics, Blasphemers,
Seducers, severely punished. Oh that you could form, and new mould, our Armies
into Churches also: Is it not possible, that there should be a spiritual
Militia, a powerful Ministry, and some Ecclesiastical, as well as Military
Discipline, set up, and countenanced amongst them? I must acknowledge, That
when I had the honor to serve the Sat, and attend the Army, I received all
encouragement from His Excellency, the Noble General, in the work of my
Ministry: But I believe, the want of Ministers was one defective cause, or at
least, occasion of many disorders, in that Army; and how highly God was
provoked by those disorders, we have all cause to acknowledge, yet give me
leave to say, That your sins had an influence into that sad defeat, as well as
ours, and notwithstanding all the faults of that Army: Surely, my Lords, That
Army which had borne the heat, and burden, nay, carried away the glory of the
day, in so many set-battles, and solemn victories, should not have been so much
neglected, but timely relieved. You see, my Lords, I know not how to flatter
you, but I beseech you, I beseech you, That since the Kingdom has paid so dear
for our learning, we may learn so much wisdom, by what we have suffered, as to
make better provision for the Army, in both those particulars, another time:
Let faithful, judicious, able, Ministers, and a good Reserve, constantly
attend the main Body of your chief Army, that it may be an Army with Banners, a
Royal, terrible, successful, Army.

My strength is spent, but I must revive my spirits, and entreat you to take
care of your Noble Families. What a dishonorable thing would it be, if it
should be said of any Noble man's Family, as it was of Abimelechs Court: Surely,
the fear of God is not in this place; nay, the contempt of God and godliness,
reigns, and domineers, in this place. Machiavel himself could not but censure,
such gross corruption, and abominable contempt amongst those that call
themselves Christians. Summopere vituperandi sunt Religionis contemptores and
corruptores, Disp. de Repub. l. c. 10. Take heed of such Chaplains which poison
Noble Families with Socinianism, leaven them with Atheism, or corrupt them with
Profaneness: Beware of them that have no more Religion, then is to be found
in that unworthy Book, called Religio Foedumcrimen ^ervit^is est adulatio.
Medici, A Book too much applauded by Noblemen. Be sure your Chaplain claim no
kindred of that tame Beast, we spoke of, The flatterer, Pessimum genus,
laudantes: The Panther by his sweet enticing breath, does first invite men, and
then devour them. And when you have an honest Chaplain, command him to deal
honestly with your precious souls.

My Lords, You will allow your Gardener to weed your Gardens; you will not tell
him, that it is a breach of privilege for him, to pluck up a weed in your
Honors Garden; you will not say, Such a weed stinks, but it grew here in my
Fathers time: Oh spare that weed for antiquities sake. Oh give your Chaplains
as free leave to weed your Souls, and Families, as your Gardener has to weed
your Gardens. Reform your servants likewise; let David a man of honor, be your
pattern: Read the 101. Psalm when you come home, and put it in execution. If
the Liver, Stomach, Spleen, be corrupt, and send up impure vapors to the head,
the brain had need be of a strong constitution to dispell, or expel such
noisome vapors. But above all, take care of your sweet children, the rising
Hope of your Noble Family; Fix, fix your careful eye upon the son of your
first love, your Heir: Make him a man, before you leave him Heir of all: Make
him another Cobham, another Harrington: Observe what company he does affect,
for his companions are his Peers: Pares cum paribus congregantur. Noble men do
too often go to Hell with their Peers. Some Heirs of excellent metal, have
been rung lamentably out of tune, by wicked companions. Augustius was not
acquainted with his two Daughters, till as Su^tonius says, He observed them at
a public show, and then he knew them by their company; for the Senators
discoursed with Livia, and the Revellers with Julia. Be sure to have your Heir
well-catechized, let him learn how to live like a Saint, and how to die like a
Martyr: Quatuor Novissima semper perpendenda sunt: But Noblemen think too
little of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell. Let your Heir know, that the
flesh of Christians must not be pampered, because they are often called on to
be in a readiness, to have their flesh tortured: Tell him, that Protestants
were wont to overcome the torments of fire, and he must learn to do that, and
more, to overcome the temptations of the Court: Tell him, that the glory of the
Christians of old, was to derive their Pedigree from some Noble Martyr: Bid him
prepare for this Christian Ennoblishment; assure him, that if his Honor be not
a spur to virtue, all his Honor will be but vanity in his youth, and vexation
in his latter age. Do your best to make him a Scholar, as well as a Christian.
Lewis the eleventh, desired his son might be no Scholar, because he was afraid,
that the pride of his learning would make him scorn his Council of State, and
adhere to his own private opinion, Ne esset in cons^li^^ capiendis refractior
and tenacior sui sensus: Lewis had his desire in part, his son was ^o Scholar,
I say, his son was no Scholar, and yet despised his Council, and hearkened to
base fellows, who turned him which way they pleased, to the prejudice of the
State, and their own private gain. Let your sons have learning enough, to
balance contrary arguments; settle their minds with some principles of
Rational learning, but be sure, that they neglect not Practical Philosophy;
such as we borrow from fragments of Pythagoras, Socrates, and some pieces of
Plato. Socrates was the Athenian Doctor, Qui Philosophiam primus a c^lo
avocavit, in urbibus collocavit, and in D^mos introduxit: We are beholding to
the School of Socrates, for Plato, Xenophon and Aristotle, and Aristotle (who
heard Socrates three years, and Plato twenty) might if he would, have given us
some more practical notions, then he thought fit to communicate unto us. But
when your Heir has sucked what he can from Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato,
Xenophon, Aristotle, Plutarch, Quintilian, Seneca, Epictetus, and the rest: Let
him know, that he may learn more Wisdom, and Morality, from Solomon's Proverbs,
and the Book of Ecclesiastes, then from all the Philosophers, that ever wrote;
yet that you may know what Philosophers thought of their own sons, when they
proved degenerate: Give me leave to communicate the notion of a Philosopher
unto you, though it be clothed with a very homely comparison; yet because I
have dealt so plainly with you, I will conceal nothing from you. Suppose you
saw Aristippus plucking a Louse out of (...), Diog. La^r^i^, vit. Ari^^ip. p.
142. Vi^e Xenophon* Cyropaed. Ene. Sylv. tract. de liber. educat. Nec non
Epistol. 339. Brisson de Regno Pe^^, de Insti^. lib. Reg. Plat. de Repub. lib.
2.
his h^ad, and be speaking his debauched son much after this manner. Son, I am
as much cried out on for neglecting you, as if I had forgotten, that you are
part of my self; but I do here solemnly acknowledge, that you came out of my
body, so did this ^mine also; and I value you no more. Let your sons be
acquainted with such severe truths: Command them to lay aside their Amorous
Pamphlets, and corrupting Play-Books; but more especially convince the son of
your hopes, and the son of your desires, That those black Books which kindle
the fire of lust, kindle the black fire of Hell within him. Eneas Sylvi^s was
ashamed of his youthful Pamphlets, after he was made Pope, and had the noble
Title of Pius added to the gravitie of his years. S^ni (says he) magis quam
Juveni ^dit^, En^am ^ii cite, Pium suscipite. Command your son to read the
Bible daily, nay, even night and day; for all Arts and Sciences are contained
in the Book of God: This one Book is a Library. Here you may confer with the
Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, and ancient Saints. Ladies look here, and part
with all your Looking-Glasses, as they did, Exodus 38. 8* for this
Looking-glass, this Laver: Here Is a Looking-glass to show you your spots; and
here is a Laver to wash them off, Jam. 1. 23, 25. Titus 3. 5, 6. See here is a
Garden full of Flowers; here is a Casket full of Jewels; here is an Heaven full
of Stars; here is a Book full of GOD.

FINIS.
ERrata. Page 7. l^ne 24. read, nor is it an act of will, p. 7. l. 25. read, or
reason, or left, p. 8. margin, for ara^us, r. aratris; p 13. marg. r. des^ esse
nobilis, p. 13. l. 2 r filled with, p. 23. l. 4. for names, r. manners, marg.
r. ad^ibuisse, p. 24. l. 14. r. stronger Ass, p. 38. l. 12. r. so far from, p.
41. m. r. Dictatoremse, p. 47. m. r. fru^^raren^ur, p 48. l. 1. r. preserved,
in m. faelicior, p. 49. marg. r. (...), p. 53. (...). 35. r. any hearty, p. 56.
marg. r. est for and.


