Anti-Socinianism, OR, A brief Explication of some places of holy Scripture,
for the confutation of cerrain gross Errors, and Socinian Heresies, lately
published by William Pynchion, Gent. in a Dialogue of his, called, The
Meritorious Price of our Redemption, Concerning
1. Christ's suffering the Wrath of God due to the Elect. 2. God's Imputation
of sin to Christ. 3. The nature of the true Mediatorial Obedience of Christ. 4.
The Justification of a sinner.


ALSO A Brief Description of the Lives, and a True Relation of the Death, of
the Authors, Promoters, Propagators, and chief Disseminators of this Socinian
Heresy, How it sprung up, By what means it spread, and When and By whom it was
first brought into England, that so we be not deceived by it.

By N. Chewney, M. A. and Minister of God's Word.

(...). Ignat. ad Trall.

(...). Epiph. Haeres. 74.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Tw^ford, and T. Dring, and are to be sold in
Vine-Court, Middle Temple; and at the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords
Inn. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, And his Ever Honored UNCLE, HENRY CRISPE, Of Queax,
in the Isle of Thannet, Esquire
Sir,
YOur Commands have given Being (especicially in Public) to these Lines; and
did I not believe they would pass by the mercy of a Worshipful Perusal, I
should never have exposed them to the Criticisme and Comment of such a
Censorious Age as this, which under-values most things because they are common;
and many things, because they are good. Though these poor Labors of mine can
lay no Title to the latter, in respect of their Frame and Structure; they may
in respect of their Subject, which is High and Sacred, our very Right and
Interest unto Heaven; and so not only invite acceptance, but enforce it. As
they are good Sir, vouchsafe them entertainment: The Noble encouragements you
have hitherto given, and fair Interpretations you have made of things of this
Nature, have even fully assured me of the same. I have made bold therefore to
stamp your Name upon them, that others in our Age may be the rather induced to
peruse them; and that Posterity also may know, as well as we, that you were one
that durst both countenance and maintain poor, simple, naked Truth, when
flaunting Error and Heresy do almost bear down all before them. I dare assure
you it is no small honor to have a fixed heart in such loose times, and stayed
feet in such slippery places as your Worship has lived in, and waded through:
And it is both a comfort and an honor to, none of the meanest, that I can
shelter these poor lines under the protection of one of your gravity, solidity,
and other great ability, from the malignity of these erroneous days. What shall
I say? God send Truth more such Friends, and they in due time that recompense
which the God of Truth has promised to them, and reserved for them. Constancy
and Perseverance are the way to it, and Faithful is he that has promised it:
To whose merciful Protection I commit and commend your Worship, with Sir
Nicholas Crisp your Son, and the Virtuous Lady, the Lady Thomasin Crisp, his
wife, for whose sake I was the more willing to engage in this quarrel, and to
encounter with this supposed Goliath: Beseeching God to crown your life with
such Blessings here, as may the better adapt and fit you for the Crown of life
hereafter. So praying, rests

SIR, Your humble Servant, and respective Kinsman N. C.

To the Right Worshipful, his once Honored Patron, and his ever Honored
Friend, Robert Hales of Howlets, in the County of Kent, Esquire.
Noble SIR,
JNGATITUDE being a sin, which not only Men, but Devils abhor, I could not,
durst not forbear the publishing of my Thankfulness for former, though Malice
has for present rendered me incapable of future Favors, lest Posterity should
rank me among those ungrateful wretches that are unthankful unto such, as have
been bountiful unto them. Necessity then obliges me to this Public
Manifestation of the Thankfulness of my heart to you, for those many
expressions of Bounty and Goodness, which my hand has received from You. But
what are Verbal Thanks in respect of Real Courtesies? Yet God himself (in whose
place sometimes You sit, and in whose stead You Act) tells us plainly, That a
man is accepted according to what he has, and not according to what he has
not. Accept then I pray You this humble and hearty acknowledgement of your
Worships Real and Ready Favors, and suffer it to lie by You, as a lasting
Monument of Your due deserved Praise, and my just acknowledgements of Your
Worth: And now seeing I can serve You no longer, as I desire, give me leave to
Bless You before I go. The Blessings of the Bed, and of the Board; the
Blessings of the City, and of the Country; the Blessings of the Sea, and of the
Land; the Blessings of the Basket, and of the Store; the Blessings of Heaven
and Earth: in a word, all Blessings that were ever showred down upon Mortals,
be upon You and Yours, Your Virtuous Consort, Your Hopeful Issue, Your
Wellordered and Religious Family: And so Praying rests

Worthy SIR, Yours at Command, in, and for the Lord, N.C.

Anti-Socinianism, OR A Brief Explication of some places of Holy Scripture for
the confutation of certain gross Errors, and Socinian Heresies, lately
published in a Dialogue, called The Meritorious Price of our Redemption, etc.
CONCERNING
1. Christ's suffering the wrath of God due to the Elect for sin. 2. God's
imputation of sin to Christ. 3. The true nature of the Mediatorial obedience of
Christ. 4. The justification of a Sinner.
First, Concerning Christ's suffering the wrath, etc.
I Had verily resolved to have been silent in Polemical matters, but as the
Prophet Jeremiah says, Jer. 20.9.
so may I, the Word of the Lord was in mine heart, and as a fire shut up in my
bones, and I was weary with forbearing, yea I could not stay; For Sions sake
then I cannot hold my peace, especially when I hear that those who pretend much
to Truth, and some who Virtute officii, should be Assertors and Maintainers
thereof, do take a course to betray it, by countenancing and commending such
books as are repugnant thereunto.

I know the weighty doctrine of a sinners justification before God, has been
notably canva^ed and discussed among Divines of all sorts; and is excellently
defined and determined in, and by the word of God; yet partly through the
weakness of humane apprehension, and partly through the deceit and malice of
the devil. There is not any doctrine of our Religion Praecipue in controversiam
vocatur.
that I read of, more impugned, more obscured with errors and absurdities then
this precious point. Doctrinam Christi and Apostolorum de praecipuo salutis
Articulo vocat. Dr. Prideaux. Lect. 5: de Justificat.


To wave the difference between the Papists and us, concerning it, and to speak
the very truth, we are far from agreement among our selves; Some affirming our
justification to be by infusion of righteousness into us, for which we are
accepted; Others take away the imputation of Christ's righteousness from us; A
third sort deny the satisfaction of Christ; A fourth would have the very act of
believing accounted for righteousness; One cries up this; Another that, as
their several humors and affections sway them; So that there are almost found
tot Sententiae, quot capita, as many different minds as men.

Among which, I find one Gentleman (the Author of the Dialogue I mean) who by
the fame and opinion of his learning and piety, has drawn in many professors
of Religion, not only to a liking, but defending of his errors; For with that
tract of his, baited with the glorious Title of the Meritorious price of Man's
redemption, has he hooked in many, and some no small fools in the eye and
judgment of the World. The very Title page Hedera illa, quam in Dialogi sui
vestibulo and front suspensam habet, vinum intus haud vendibile indicat.
whereof is sufficient to declare its contents to be unsound; what then can be
expected from the whole? Indeed nothing but what is exceedingly derogatory both
to the Justice of God, and the Grace of Christ, Nimis extenuatur Christi
gratia, nisi ejus sacrificio, vim expiandi, placandi, and satisfaciendi
concedimus. Call. Inst. lib. 2. cap. 17. Sect. 4.
which being openly published and secretly commended, especially by some of
repute and office in this Commonweal, may contribute much to the heap of those
many errors and heresies, too much abounding already among us.

For reclaiming then of the Ignorant, who are by him seduced, for confounding
of the Impudent, who are by him perverted, and for stopping the mouths of those
his high Admirers, who set themselves against the known Truth, so long
received, so clearly maintained, as a Christian, as a Minister (though the
least and most unworthy of many thousand) I shall discover him to be a
dangerous Socinian Sophister; and his book so highly commended, so much
admired, to be as opposite to Truth as light to darkness, Christ to Belial.

The whole controversy between us is laid down in these four things.

1. Concerning Christ's suffering the wrath of God due to the Elect for sin.

2. Concerning God's imputation of sin to Christ.

3. Concerning the true nature of the Mediatorial obedience of Christ, etc.

Lastly, the Justification of a sinner.

The two former, as they are disposed in the Dialogue are a mere (...), yet we
will not alter their place, but take them up as they lie before us; and write
something briefly concerning each, leaving the more particular handling thereof
to some more worthy, seeing Reverend Mr. Norton cannot be heard; or if God so
please, to a more large and full discourse hereafter.

Zanch. de Attr.
And first concerning Christ's suffering the wrath Ira Dei significat vel
essentiale Dei attributum, vel ejus attributi effectum i. e. poenam.
of God due to the Elect for sin.

I will pass by the impertinent and unsound exposition, which he makes of that
place of Moses, Genesis 2.17. wherein Mr. Norton has clearly evicted him; for
says he, the sum of the sense thereof, according to the Dialogue is this,
Christ could not sin, therefore he could not suffer the punishment due to the
Elect for sin, as their surety; which he calls, and that truly a reasonlesse
and sick consequence, and the contrary thereof true. He could not as a
Mediator and surety have suffered satisfactorily the punishment due to others
for sin, if he had not been himself without sin. Though Christ was not a sinner
inherently, yet was he a sinner imputatively, whereupon the substantial
Execratio quam Christus pro nobis subiit, non fuit ceremonialis, sed realis.
Sibr. Lubbus. lib. 2. cap. 1.
curse of the Law, was justly executed upon him; and what is the substantial
curse of the Law, but the wrath of God, which he for a time endured for us,
that we might be freed from the weight thereof for ever?

That Christ did suffer this is plain from that which follows, for that he
should be so troubled in soul as St. John John 12.27.
declares, in so grievous an Agony as St. Luke Luke 22.44.
in such anguish of mind, and deep distress as St. Mark, Mark 14.35.
have his soul so environed with sorrow, and that sorrow to the death as St.
Matthew Matthew. 26.38.
does set forth: no manner of violence being offered to him in body, no man
touching him, or being near him, in a cold night, For they were fain to have a
fire within doors at that time of the year, as Bishop Andrews observes. And
John 18.25.
being abroad in the air, and upon the cold earth, to be all of a sweat, and
that sweat to be blood, (...), sometime (...) is taken for an adverb of
simitude, and sometime adjuncta certitudinem indicat, Joh. 1.14. Joh. 7.10. i.
e. in secret.
and not as they call it Diaphoreticus, a thin faint sweat; but Grumosus, of
great thick drops, so many, so plenteous, as that they went through all, and
streamed to the ground in great abundance, do all speak aloud the greatness of
his sufferings: And that his most dreadful cry, which at once moved all the
powers of Heaven and Earth; my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? must
needs be the voice of some weighty anguish wherewith his soul was smitten. For
as that learned Prelate Bish. Andrews ser. de passion. page
well observes, derelinqui a Deo, the body cannot feel, or tell what it
means; It is the souls complaint: and therefore without all doubt, Christ's
trouble, anguish, agony, sorrow and deadly sorrow, must needs declare unto us
those spiritual and internal torments, Propter nostram justificationem sic
actum est per Christum. Nos enim peccatoris in ipso infernales poenas, quas
just meremur, exsolvimus. Nicol. de Cusa, exercitationum, lib. 10.
which he suffered in his soul out of the sense of Divine wrath hanging over
him, and inflicted on him, by reason of the guilt of our sins, which lay upon
him, being imputed to him.

Besides this, he being the Son of God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, to be so
terrifyed with the sense of a bodily death only, which he was to suffer, and
the Dialogue endeavors to persuade, as that he should for very fear thereof
sweat blood, want the comfort and support of an Angel, and cry out so bitterly,
when on the contrary we see many others, not only without sorrow and fear; but
even with joy and rejoicing, conflict with as violent a death every deal; it
must necessarily follow, that either Christ the Son of God, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, had less strength, less courage, less confidence, and less
constancy, then the common sort of men, which to say, is impious and
blasphemous, (and yet the Dialogue does in effect affirm so much) or else his
sufferings must be more then others, and so, not only corporal but spiritual
also.

To deny which, as the Dialogue every where does, is, with Socinus and his
followers, to swim against the stream of all the Orthodox both Ancient, Damasus
ad Paulinum, and Cyrillus de incarnatione, etc. Calvini Insti. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Act. 10. etc. Bezae annotat.
and Modern; Aug. cout. Fell.
St. August. reasoning against Felicianus the Arian, proves that Christ took
not only humane flesh, but an humane soul, si totus homo periit, etc. says he,
if man wholly were lost both body and soul, he wholly stood in need of a
Savior; Christ by his coming, wholly redeemed him, therefore Christ took upon
him the whole nature of man, both body and soul. For since the whole man had
sinned, and Christ only had taken our flesh, and not our soul, the soul of man
should still have remained liable to punishment: By the same reason we prove it
necessary that Christ should suffer both in body and soul; he did assume both,
to redeem both: but he redeemed us, not in being born for us, or walking, or
preaching here upon the Earth (though these were preparations to his sacrifice)
but by dying and suffering for us. Therefore he suffered both in body and soul
that very punishment, which was due unto the Elect, or that at least, which was
equivalent thereunto, consisting in the very sense and feeling of Gods wrath;
yea, says Willet, Synopsis, page 1642.
the torments of Hell, [for a season] due unto them, by reason of their
transgressions; So Gerhard Dolorem inferni persen sit, ut nunquam illos
sentiremus, Med. 7.
in his Meditations. So that to deny this, is not only to oppose the Orthodox,
but even to go against the Scriptures themselves, which (being freed from the
corrupt gloss the Dialogue puts upon them) do sufficiently, not only in those
very places formerly quoted, but in many others, prove the same. That the
Prophet David Psalm. 88.
does briefly and emphatically describe those torments, which Christ our
redeemer suffered in his passion, not only the chief, but even al Expositors,
Is enim ante alios omnes sensit iram and judicium Dei, etc. Mollerus in Argu.
Psalmi. F^abritius, Musculus, Calvinus, etc.
yea the substance and circumstances of the Psalm it self, do sufficiently
declare. For verse. 3. My soul is Saturata malis brim full of troubles, Tanta
mole calamitatum obrutam, and far aut sustinere amplius nequeat: Id. Moller.
the Spirit of God choosing rather to express it, by soul then body; because
those Calamities of which he speaks did especially oppress his soul, Sane non
sclum corporis dolores, sed etiam maximos and inenarrabi^es animi angores
persensisse, constat. Joan^^s G^^r. Vossius responsione ad judi^ium Ravenspurgr.
by reason of the weight, which he sustained; as also, Vita inferno
appropinquavit; my life draws nigh to Hell, I know the word here used for
Hell, is translated the grave, yet does it admit of a more deep signification;
for if it were only the grave, why should our blessed Savior, so cry out of
that, and be so terrified with the thought of it, which would put an end to all
his misery, and be an entrance for him into his glory, the very consideration
of which has put Spirit and Vigor into others, even in the midst of as great,
if not greater corporal sufferings, then these of his? Verse. 4. Tanquam vir cui
nulla virtus, says Millarus; destitute of all help and succor as Musculus
Heb. est (...) Grae. (...) Musc. in Psalm. 88.
turns it. His soul was even as scorched heath-ground, without so much as any
drop of dew of Divine comfort: as a naked Tree, no fruit to refresh him within,
no leaf to give him shadow without; The power of darkness let loose to afflict
him; The influence of comfort restrained that should relieve him.

We cannot be barren or banquerupt of testimony for the vindication of this
truth, namely, that Christ suffered the wrath of God due to the Elect for sin,
that they might be freed from the same; This Psalm is able sufficiently to
furnish us, but we must not dwell upon particulars, lest we should swell into a
volumne.

The Prophet Isaiah Isa. 53.4.
speaking of the sufferings of Christ, does thus express himself. He has born
our griefs, and carried our sorrows; understanding and intending hereby those
very sufferings, that were due to the Elect for sin, which Christ himself did
bear for them, and in their steed, as may plainly appear, both by the scope of
the chapter, and also by the two Hebrew words with are used in the same. The
one is (...) he has born; for by that phrase far peccatum, to bear sin, is
inferred the bearing of the punishment of sin; For the Hebrews, that they may
signify that, which the Latins call punishment, have no expression more
common, and more received then this, far peccatum, to bear sin. Answerable
whereunto is that of the Latins, Luere delicta, to bear the offense, that is
the punishment of the offense, as Lev. 5.1. He that hears the voice of
swearing, and is a witness thereof, if he do not utter it; shall bear his
iniquity. The other word is (...) he has carried, vere dolores nostros
bajulavit, he has stood under the burden of our griefs; It has a double
signification in Scripture: it imports either the carrying of some burden on
the shoulder, so Isa. 46.7.
the Prophet speaking concerning their Gods of Gold and Silver, which they
made, they leave them, says he, upon the shoulder; and Genesis 49.15.
Issachar is a very strong Ass, couching down between two burdens, and seeing
that rest was good, he bowed the shoulder to bear. Which manner of expression
is used by God himself, concerning his dealing with his people Isa. 46.4.
yet by an (...), even to hoary hairs will I carry you, I have made and I will
bear etc. Or else the leaving of some grievous punishment, as, Lam. 5.7.
Our Fathers have sinned and are not, and we (...) bear their iniquities, that
is, we do undergo as a great burden, the punishment of their iniquities: for
so by an usual Metongmie it is often taken in Scripture, the verb (...)
retaining the proper signification of bearing an hard and heavy burden.

Whence we conclude, whosoever has born or carried our iniquities, sustaining
and suffering punishment and death for the same, that we might be free from the
guilt and punishment thereof, he has truly and indeed undergone those most
grievous punishments due unto and for the same: But Christ has so born or
carried our iniquities, sustaining and suffering death for the same, that we
might be freed there from; Therefore he has truly and indeed sustained the
most grievous punishments of our iniquities.

Here the Dialogue does endeavor Tenebras inducore rebus, to cast a mist
before our eyes, by telling us, that this very place being cited by St. Matthew
Mat. 8.17.
, is by him applied to bodily sicknesses and diseases, inferring from hence,
that Christ did not bear infirmities or sicknesses from the sick and diseased,
as a Porter bears a burden, by laying them on his own body, but bearing them
away by the power of his Word See how they reason; Far seu portare in
Scripturali quando, ergo Semper.
, after which manner also he bare our sins and our iniquities; One egg cannot
be more like another, then these Words and this gloss are to those, and that
of Socinus, De Christo Servatore.
and his Disciple Crellius, Corporales morbos Christus non sustinuit aut
perculit, sed ab hominibus abstulit, ac verbo Sanavat. Cont. Grot. page 56.
if they may not be said, and that truly to be the same.

To which we, in the name of the Orthodox, do answer, that that place of St.
Matthew is to be read by way of application, not explication; sicknesses and
diseases are the effects and fruits of sin; therefore he declares Christ to be
a Physician, not for the soul only, but for the body also: and in token of
spiritual health and recovery from sin, he did afford and apply corporal, from
maladyes and distempers. So Pareus upon this place in Matthew. It was the end
of Christ's coming to bear our sins, which are the sicknesses of the soul; and
therefore he begins by practicing upon the sicknesses of the body, that so
having cured the one, he might proceed to the Sanation of the other; Thus
honest Ferus the friar; Christi propositum erat ut peccata nostra portaret,
quae vere infirmitates sunt animarum, etc. in Mat. 8.
Also St. Chrisost. says, Homil. 25.
that the corporal health which Christ afforded to the sick, was a type of that
spiritual health which was to be expected from him. Nor is there so much
difference (if any at all) between that in Isaiah, which is (...) and that in
St. Matthew, which is (...), as they would bear us in hand, in regard he may be
truly said to bear both; the one by passion, the other by compassion. Now
seeing the figg-leaf will not serve to cover their nakedness, but that it must
be discovered; for that he bare wounds and bruises for us cannot be denied; He,
that is our Dialogue tells us, that Satan and his instruments did thus bruise
and wound him; True, but not for us. The sufferings, wounds and bruises of
which the Prophet Isaiah does so liberally discourse, and so literally
describe, are not only such, wherein Satan and wicked men were instruments, (as
these Socinians, the Dialogue and the rest We put them together as birds of a
seather.
do fondly fain) but some of them were immediately inflicted by God himself,
without any second means, as instruments of the same; so Verse. 6. the Lord has
laid on him the iniquities of us all; also Verse. 10. It pleased the Lord to
bruise him: Now these sufferings were principally in his soul, which neither
men nor Devils could afflict or terrify: but God could and did, as was
forespoken of him in the same verse. Thou shall make his soul a sacrifice for
sin. Add to these the complaint of Christ himself, Matt. 26.33 (...).
my soul is exceeding heavy, even unto the death. And then the sum of all will
be this, that Christ our Savior did undergo most exquisite torments both in
body and soul, joined with, and lying under the sense of Divine wrath, by
reason of the guilt of sin which lay upon him, and was imputed to him.

For the further confirmation hereof, I might urge (and that with better
authority, then any can refuse it) that place in the book of the Lamentations,
Lam. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me; wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. I know, and according to the
letter, it cannot be denied, but that these words are set down by the Prophet
Jeremiah, in the person of his own people, being then in great misery, and of
the holy City, then laid wast by the Chaldees, their professed Enemies; what
then? says one Bishop Andrews his sermon.
as learned, as the best of those that dare oppose it. I find, says he, there
is not any of the Ancient writers, but do apply, yea, and in a manner
appropriate this speech to our Savior Christ; and wheresoever they treat of
the passion, ever this comes in, to express the bitterness and the horror
thereof. And, to say the truth, taking the words strictly, and as they lie
before us, they cannot agree with, or be verified of any, but of him, and him
only. For though some other, and not altogether unfitly, may say the same
words, yet it must be in a qualified sense: For, in full and perfect propriety
of speech, he, and none but he can say, si fuerit dolor, sicut dolor meus; no
day of wrath like to his day: no grief, no sorrow, no torment to be compared to
his, yea his exceeded them all. Besides, what if it were spoken literally of
this people then? So was that in the Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 11.1.
Ex Aegypto vocavi filium, out of Egypt have I called my Son: yet it is by the
Evangelist Matt. 2.15.
understood of, and applied to our Savior Christ. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? was at first uttered by David Psalm. 22.1.
yet Christ himself makes use of the same words, and that more truly and
properly, then ever David did or could: and of those of David's, and of these of
Jeremies, there is the same reason. Well, though the Ancients all along have
ascribed them unto Christ, and in fitness of terms, and more fullness of truth,
they may be taken to be spoken of him, more, and rather, then of any other
whatsoever, yet because we will give n^ne occasion to cavil, we will freely and
fairly pass them by.

A man that would commend a Spring water, need not drink up the whole Fountain,
one or two draughts is sufficient; We have already had a taste of the truth of
Christ's suffering the wrath of God for us: Yet we will take a sip or two more,
and so will conclude this first part.

And to this purpose, mark how fully the Apostle Paul Gal. 3.13.
expresses himself; Christ, says he, has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, when he was made a curse for us: (For it is written, cursed is every one
that hangs on a Tree) that the blessing of Abraham, etc. Which words we take
as an answer to an objection, occasioned from the 10. verse, thus; If they be
accursed, that continue not in all things written in the Law to do them, then
all men are accursed, and the Gentiles are not partakers of the blessing of
Abraham, as is before declared; To this, the Apostle applies these words,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, that is, to them that
believe, there is full redemption from this curse of the Law, to which they
were liable, Christ himself having undergone the curse for them. For the more
clear illustration of this answer, the Apostle gives us a description of our
Redemption, in these three particulars. 1. The Author, Christ has redeemed
us. 2. The form or manner, being made a curse for us. 3. The end, which is
twofold. 1. More generally, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles. 2. More particularly, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit.

In the first and the last, the Author and the end, we all agree the
difference between us lies in the manner or form of our Redemption, expressed
in these words, Who was made a curse for us. For the better understanding
whereof, these four things are to be enquired after; First, what this curse is?
Secondly, how Christ is said to become a curse? Thirdly, in what nature Christ
was accursed. Lasty how far forth Christ was accursed. First, we will enquire
what this curse is? Here Socinus, Gitichius, Ostorodius, Smalcius, Muscorovius,
Crellius with all the rest, do crowd in, and would fain be heard; But let us
hear the Dialogue, and we hear them all, who now lispeth not, but expressly
uses the same Language, and to the very same intent and purpose with them;
which is, that the Apostle speaks in this Chapter of a twofold curse, of the
eternal curse, verse. 10. of the outward temporary curse, verse. 13. Namely such
a curse as all men do suffer, that are hanged upon a Tree: which curse the
Apostle brings in, speaking in a Rhetorical manner only, thus, Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law; namely, from the eternal curse, at the
very self same time, when he was made, not that Christus non nostram, sed aliam
quandam subiit execrationem Socinus de Christo Servatore.
curse, but a curse for us, according to that in Deuteronomy. 21.23. and thus the
Dialogue with them endeavors fictis illudere verbis, with a shadow to
deprive us of the substance; But to deal truly and uprightly with the Reader,
we are to know, that the Apostle in the 10. verse. Speaks of the eternal or
moral curse, and in the 13. verse. both of the eternal and ceremonial, in
neither of which is there any need of Rhetoric or any Rhetorical expressions.
What a strange, imaginary or illusory curse would these men frame to
themselves, if they might have their own wills, and make others believe our
Savior under-went? When as St. Paul tells us in plain terms, he was made that
very curse that they had deserved, which continued not in all things written in
the book of the Law, to do them. And this does appear by that place forecited,
Deuteronomy. 21.23.
Cursed, even with that moral curse, is every one that hangs upon a Tree.
Besides, this is made more evident, by proving that the person hanged upon a
Tree, and accursed, was a Type of Christ. For, if the type bare the ceremonial,
it is then manifest, that the Antitype bare the moral; that is, the eternal
curse. If not only the curse of every one that is hanged upon a Tree, be
signified, but also Christ's redemption of us from the curse of the Law, by
being made a curse for us, Deus Ideo suscepit carnem ut maledictum carnis
peccatricis ab^lerot, and factus est pro nobis maledictum, ut benedictio
absorberet ma edictionem, integritas peccatum, etc. Abrosius de Fuga seculi.
cap. 7. Maledictionem condemnationem, cui obnoxii eramus, assumpsit Christus,
ultroque in serecepit, quae pati debucramus, illa ipse pertulit. Theodoras
Abucara. disput. 15. c. 5.
be both signified and foretold in that place of Deuteronomie, then that place
has not only a proper, but a typical signification: But not only the curse of
every one that is hanged upon a Tree is signified and foretold in that place.
Therefore that place has not only a proper, but a typical signification; which
typical signification being taken away, namely, Christ's bearing the moral curse
upon the Tree, all the Hebrew Doctors (whose judgment in other things our
Dialogue does so highly esteem and magnify) are now at a nonplus to give a
sufficient, yea probable reason, why hanging upon a Tree, should so much
defame, or fasten this special curse upon the person hanged, above all other
capital sufferings whatsoever.

I suppose Mr. Norton in his answer to the Dialogue has written very fully and
satisfactorily to this purpose, to which I refer the impar^i^l and judicious
Reader, that so we may proceed.

This curse says Abrahamus Callovius, Nihil aliud est, quam damnatoria s
ntentia de subcundis paenis peccatu debitis; vel i^s^ paena a sent nti^ legis
damnaturia dependens, de Satisfact. Christi.
Pastor of the Church of Wittenberg, is nothing else but the condemning
sentence of the Law, whereby a man is adjudged to undergo such punishment, as
is due to the offense committed. Or else, it is the very pun shment it self,
depending upon that condemnatory sentence of the Law. (...), is according to
Aretius, Ar^tius in Gal. 3.13.
the due punishment of sin, that is, the wrath and high displeasure of God,
yea, even eternal death, due to the Elect by reason of their transgressions,
which he in a manner, and in some kind, Qu^ ad acerbitate^, etsi non quoad
durationem. D^. Pride. de redem.
may justly be said to suffer for them.

We come to the second, namely, how Christ is said to be a curse. For answer;
He is not so by nature: for he is the very natural Son of God; but first by
voluntary dispensation. Secondly, by mutual combination between the three
Persons of the Deity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; Thirdly, by manifest and
apparent Ordination, 1 Pet. 1.20.
and that before the foundation of the World was laid; Fourthly, by Divine
obsignation, John. 6.27.
Fifthly, by a seasonable and timely consecration; and that first by his
Baptism, in which, says Mr. Perkins, Perkins on the Gal.
he took upon him our guilt, as we put off the same in ours; and secondly, by
his bitter cross and passion, in which he underwent the punishment of our sin,
and thus he was made a curse.

For the third, in what nature he was made a curse? We have this answer, In his
humane nature, consisting of body and soul, yea in soul rather then in body,
the soul of man being the principal seat, and place of residence for sin.

For says Christ himself, Mat. 15.19.
out of the heart, which in Scripture bears usually the name and title of the
soul, proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. Yet I say in both,
completing and making up the humane nature, sustained and supported by the
Divine, being in Union with it. Here is something to be borne, and meet it is,
Bishop Andrews ser.
that every one should bear his own burden; the nature that had sinned bear
his own sin; Man's nature had sinned, and therefore man's nature ought to suffer.
But that which man's nature should, man's nature could not bear, not the heavy
and insupportable weight of Gods wrath due to sin: but God could; The one
ought, and could not; The other could, but ought not; if he had not bin man, he
could not have suffered; if he had not bin God, he had sunk in his sufferings,
and had never bin able to have gone through with them. God had no shoulders; Man
had, but too weak, God knows, to sustain so great a weight; So that as he was
man, he was liable, and as he was God he was able, says that learned Prelate
Page
to bear the burden in the heat of the day Psalm. 16.
. To the last, how far forth Christ was accursed? We answer thus; There is a
twofold death; a first and a second death; in the first death there are two
degrees, separation of body and soul: and the putrefaction of the body
separated. The first Christ suffered, but not the second: For his body being
deprived of life (according to the dialect of the Psalmist) Psalm. 16.
saw no corruption. Again, in the second there are two degrees, the first is a
separation from God in sense and feeling: The second is an absolute separation
from him for ever, never to be admitted into favor any more. Into this last
degree of death, Christ entered not: for in the midst of his most grievous
sufferings, in the exaltation and height of all his sorrows, he yet cried out,
my God, my God; declaring his trust in, and dependence upon God,
notwithstanding all his misery. Neither could it be otherwise without a
dissolution of the personal Union. But into the first deg^ees of this second
death, we affirm, and that upon plain Scripture grounds, against all
opposition, that Christ did enter; that is, the sense and feeling of Gods wrath
and indignation, Cum ira Dei sit voluntas puniendi recte etiam di^ipotest
Iratus illo quem vice and loco delinquentium punire vult. essen.
due to the Elect in regard of their iniquities, by which they had provoked
him, to be highly displeased with them. Not to muster up any more Instances.
witnesses, we will only take a short survey of that place of the Apostle to
the Hebrews, cap. 5. verse. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; and so
free it, what we may, from the violence done unto it by the Dialogue, who
notwithstanding his profession of reverence to those Authors, who expound the
word (...); fear, yea, the fear of astonishment at the sense and feeling of
Gods wrath for the guilt of our sins; yet labors tooth and nail to overthrow
their exposition; and by one of his own, to carry the meaning of the Text
another way; telling us, that some translate it reverence, others dignity, a
third sort piety, to which, because he himself adheres rather then to any
other, does therefore conclude, that it must be so taken here, and must not,
cannot be otherwise.

But by the Dialogues good leave, there is no such necessity for that, as he
would have us believe; the proper signification of the word being fear;
together with the frequent use of it by all sorts of Greek Authors both holy
Heb. 12.28. (...).
and humane, (...), etc. Plut. in Camille.
declare the contrary; as also the Proposition annexed, (...),
which cannot be bribed or corrupted to comply with the sense and
interpretation of the Dialogue. It was not an ordinary fear, arising from an
ordinary cause, Metus vel solitudo, etc.
that thus constrained our blessed Savior to entreat and supplicate: for he
felt such pains, says Piscator In animo pariter and corpore tales sensit
dolores, quales damnati sensuri sunt in inferno, ut ita satisfaceret pro
peccatis nostris, quae ut Sponsor in se susceperat, etc. In Heb. 5.7.
as the Elect, (if they had bin damned in Hell) should have felt; that so he
might make satisfaction to the Justice of God for their sins, the guilt of
which, as a Pledge or surety, he had freely and voluntarily taken upon him. He
offered up says the Apostle, prayers and supplications, with strong crying and
tears, to him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
feared; If it had bin fear of bodily death only (as the Dialogue would have it)
what need such cries, such strong cries with tears? Surely be would make him
less then a man, and more faint in a good cause, then Malefactors are in a
bad; But the Text is plain, he was heard in that he feared, that is, saved from
the death he feared; but he was not saved from the bodily death: for he dyed,
and gave up the Ghost Mat. 27.58.
therefore it was not the bodily death, but the great horror of soul, Christus
ut plene pro nobis satisfaceret, non tantum corporis, sed etiam summos animi
cruciatus sustinuit and Vicit. B^za. in Mat.
by reason of the wrath of God, which he suffered, that he so feared, and from
which he was in respect of the eternity there of delivered. Nor was it Christ's
deliverance out of these sufferings, much less from a bodily death only, as
the Dialogue (but upon what grounds I know not) does most vainly (to say no
worse) affirm, but the glory of God his Father, in the salvation of the Elect,
which was the Masterpiece of all his prayers.

Well, we have enough for our purpose; He prayed that he might be delivered
from death; True, but this death was the death of the cross, the principal
part whereof was the curse, that is, the wrath of God due to the Elect for sin,
from which he was delivered in respect of duration, but sustained it for a time
for them, that they might for ever be freed from the same. And this we take to
be the very drift and purpose of the Holy Ghost in this place of the Apostle.

Further more, there are some, and those of no small account in the Church of
God, who take that Article in the Creed of Christ's descension into Hell, to
signify those Spiritual and internal passions, which he suffered in his Soul,
out of the sense of Divine wrath hanging over him, and inflicted upon him, by
reason of the guilt of our sins, for which he was to satisfy. Thus U^sinus
Catechism. page 236.
, and Spanhemius Summos cruciatus, angustias and dolores quas Christus
perpossus, etc. de exinatione Christi, page 274.
, also our own Perkins Perkins on the Creed.
upon the Creed, expounding that part of Hannah's song, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord
kills, and the Lord makes alive; He brings down to Hell, and raises up
again, says thus; The Lord makes men feel woe and misery in their Souls, yea
even the pangs of Hell, and afterward restores comfort and refreshment to
them. But we pass this.

What ever uncertainty in this point the Dialogue would fasten on us, and make
the World believe there is among us, shall so he may gain the more credit to
himself, and his Socinian opinion, I leave to the judgment of the indifferent
Reader; in the mean season, let all men know, that in this we all agree, and
this constantly and un^nimously affirm that Christ Jesus suffered that death,
and those very Soul Ipsam poenam infornalem re ipsa tulit, etc. Poliander 1.
concertatione.
torments, to which the Elect were subject, by reason of the curse of the Law,
which lay upon them.

For the further confirmation whereof, we here propound a threefold question.
First, in what manner? Secondly, in what measure? Thirdly, for what time Christ
suffered this death and these torments? Which being resolved, will not be much
unlike Solomon's threefold cord, not easily broken.

Answ. Our sins, and we by reason of our sins, being accursed, hateful and
abominable in the sight of the most pure God, not beholding us in our
filthiness but with indignation toward us; It pleased Jesus Christ, being
himself most holy, by the unspeakable mercy of the Father, and his own free
grace and goodness taking upon him our miserable and forlorn condition, and
undergoing both in body and soul, those torments which we should everlastingly
have suffered, Christus fit pro nobis maledictio in cruce, luens poenam iis
debitam qui voluerunt dificri. Bez. in Luc. 23.
to free us from the same. This I say, he did freely, and of his own accord;
for though according to the Evangelist, Mat. 26.39.
there may seem some reluctance in him, yet (against the Monotholites) we
consider in Christ a double will, the one Divine, the other humane; in respect
of his humane will he may be said, under condition, to eschew death, and desire
to be delivered from it: but his Divine will was, that the will of his Father,
and not his humane will, might be accomplished; which being considered, he did
freely and voluntarily engage himself to suffer what ever his Father in Justice
would, even to his wrath and indignation, to satisfy the same, and free the
Elect from it. Secondly, how Answ. As much in full weight and measure (if we
may use the terms) as did counter-vail all the sins of the Elect, past, present
and to come; and what was wanting in his bodily torments, to make full
satisfaction to Divine Justice, was supplied and made up in his soul
sufferings, Christus cum Satana, cum p^ccatis, cum morte denique horren^a illa
maledictione De^armatis, potenter luctans, etc. Beza in Mar. cap. 13.
the sense of which, both before, and in the time of suffering, did so much
molest and trouble him.

Thirdly, what time and how long did he suffer? Answ. From the very time that
he began to work out the Redemption of the Elect, date it when they will,
until upon the cross he cried out, consummatum est, it is finished. To the
Jews this may be a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness, to the Dialogue
and the rest of the Socinian brood, absurd and ridiculous, but, both to Jews
and Greeks with all that believe, it is the mighty power, wisdom and goodness
Romans 8.32.
(...), non pepercit, he spared not his own Son, but gave him up to death; and
what death? even the cursed death of the cross for our redemption.

Vel ratione quid dicatis, vel ratione durationis, L. V. de satisfactione.
, either in respect of the substance, or in respect of the circumstance, the
being or continual being of a thing; in the former sense, Christ suffered
eternal death, not in the latter; he suffered the essential part of those
torments Ipsissimam maledictionem in lege minacum subierit. Idem.
, which all the Elect should have suffered unto all eternity, though not the
circumstantial in respect of duration. Besides, eternal death in the phrase and
dialect of the Scriptures, does not signify the perpetual dissolution of body
and soul, as the Socinians do understand it, for so, the damned themselves do
not suffer eternal death, Aliud est ceterum in morte manner: aliud est aeternam
mortem sustinere. Illud durationem, hoc virtutem mortis, utrumque vel de animae
and corporis solutione, vel de cruciatibus gehennae intelligitur. Call. de
Satisf. page 466.
but either in the immeasurable greatness of infernal torments, or the
everlasting continuance thereof. The first of which is essential, the other but
accidental; That Christ suffered; This he could not, ought not to undergo.
Could not, because he is eternal life it self, God blessed for ever, Amen.

Ought not, because it was his office to free us from death, by conquering the
power, and taking away the sting thereof. Lastly, Christ may be said to suffer
eternal death potentially (if we may borrow that expression to declare our
intention) though not actually, that is, a death always enduring; though not
by him always to be endured. There is this proportion between that death which
we should have suffered, and that which Christ did suffer for us; the one being
infinite in time, the other infinite in weight and measure. The Son of God then
truly suffered eternal death in respect of the greatness of those miseries,
which he endured, and the sense of Gods wrath in those sufferings, Ex gravitate
dolorum, quos perpessus est filius Dei mortem aeternam subiit, etc.
which he sustained.

Here the Dialogue by an imperfect and impertinent description of Hell
torments, labors to betray and beguile his over-confident and unwary Reader,
inferring from thence, that because Christ suffered not circumstantially, that
is, in all the circumstances of time, place, etc. therefore he can in no sense
be said to suffer any part or degree of the same; as if the Devil, because not
always in the place of torment, cannot be therefore said to be tormented.

The New-English answer hereunto, Mr. Norton, page 29.
has made such a breach in this Fort, that every eye may sufficiently discern
the weakness hereof, and so put no trust to, or confidence in it. But yet again
some may object and say, could temporal death, or the suffering of the curse
for so short a time, counter-vail the suffering and substaining of that eternal
death and destruction to which we by reason of our great impiety and Rebellion
were liable? To which we give this affirmative answer; Etsi enim temporalia
tantum, ac finita fuerint, quae fecit ac perpissus est, a persona tamen
ejusmo^i quatis ipse fuit, praestita, equalis saltem meriti fuerunt and ad
justitiae Divinae cum satisfactionem cum illustrationem, etc. Bradshaw de
Justificat.
For as our sin though not infinite in it self, yet in respect of the object
against whom it is committed, the infinite Majesty of God, may therefore be
said to be infinite: So the passion of Christ may be said to be infinite to, in
respect of the subject, which did endure it, the everlasting Son of the Father,
who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, the least of whole sufferings,
for the least moment of time, was more and of more esteem, then if all the men
in the World had suffered infinite and unspeakable torments unto all eternity;
Therefore the death of Christ, the beloved Son of the Father, both in respect
of the measure of the punishment, as also in respect of the worth and dignity
of the person, does every way counter-vail and fully satisfy for that eternal
death, to which we were liable, and which we should have suffered to all
eternity.

to be considered under a double notion, as the Son of God, and so at all
times, and for ever beloved of him; and as our Pledge and surety, and so liable
to the curse of God, by reason of the guilt of our sins that lay upon him;
Neither is there any such contradiction in this, as the Socinians dream of, to
say that Christ was grievously afflicted, and yet highly beloved of God, both a
curse, and a sacrifice of a sweet Savor unto his Father, at one and the same
time: because it is not spoken in one and the same respect. Christ was
grievously afflicted, Afflictus and execrabilis factus est Christus, quae
nostri locum sustinuit qui irae Dei and maledictioni obnoxii eramus Calovius de
satisfactione Christi.
and made a curse, as he stood in our steed, and took our place and case upon
him, who were our selves Children of wrath, and obnoxious to the curse of God;
yet was he beloved of God, and most dear to him, in respect of his most holy,
and perfect obedience, which he performed to all his commands; likewise, a
sacrifice of a sweet Savor in regard of the Effect, God being thereby pacified
and reconciled to us. So that God inflicted wrath upon him, not as his only
beloved Son, but as our surety, and one that undertook to bear the penalty for
us, that Gods Justice being in him fully satisfied, we might be freed from that
wrath, which otherwise might, and that justly have bin inflicted on us.

I suppose by this time we have sufficiently proved against the Dialogue, and
in him Socinus, and all his followers, that Christ Jesus, as our Pledge and
surety did suffer the wrath of God, Ira Dei peccata nostra in filio sponsore
nostro vindicantis tenebrarum horrore sancitur, Beza in Mar. 15.
being made a curse for us, yea that very curse, which we should have suffered,
or else the Apostles Argument could not hold, there being in it four terms in
respect of the diversity of the signification of the word curse. Hence are two
things to be proved by us; one, that Christ suffered the curse for us, to
declare which, we thus argue, either Christ suffered the curse due to us for
our sins, or we suffer it our selves, or the curse is not executed; But we
suffer it not our selves, neither is the curse not executed; for then the truth
of the commination and Divine Justice should fail. Therefore Christ suffered
the curse due to us for our sins. The other, that he suffered that very curse
to which we were liable: this is plain. 1. From the Rule of interpretation
rightly laid, not having recourse to Tropes or Figures, where there is no
necessity for them. 2. From the Apostles alternation, we are freed from the
curse of the Law, Christ is made the curse of the Law for us, which very
variation or inversion does evidently declare to any ordinary capacity, that
Christ was made the very true curse of the Law for us. For the whole argument
lies thus. As Christ freed us from the curse, so did he suffer the curse; But
Christ did so free us from the curse, that he has (...) truly redeemed us from
the punishment and damnatory Sentence of the Law to which we were liable;
Therefore he has also so suffered the curse, that he has (...) truly bin
obnoxious to the punishment, and damnatory Sentence of the same. 3. From the
quality of the curse; He is made a curse, the word is (...), maledictus, not in
respect of men only, as all the Socinian party would have it, but also in
respect of God; for so we read that place of Moses, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
(...), cursed of God. Now what is it to be cursed of God, but to have the
punishment of the curse inflicted on him both in body and soul? It is no
marvel that the grand Enemy of our Salvation does set men, and they their wits
on work to oppose this wholesome Doctrine, namely the truth of Christ's suffering
the wrath of God for the Elect, considering the great benefit which issues
from, and the good use may be made of the same.

As first, by faith beholding Christ in his Spiritual conflict with the wrath
of God, and seeing him sorrowing, sweating, praying, fainting, crying out unto
and upon his Father, Jesus in inferrarum gurgitem submersus ejulat. Bez. in Mat.
as one utterly forsaken by him, no whit sparing, or one jot regarding him,
standing in the room of sinners, and by reason of our iniquities suffering such
things, should make us loath and abhor our sins, which caused God to be so
displeased with his own Son, by reason of the guilt thereof, which lay upon
him; and to think thus sadly with our selves, Oh how shall we, if we go on now,
and lie down hereafter in our sins and transgressions, be able in the great day
to appear before him? How shall we endure his fury, which made the Son of God,
so groan and cry? Surely we can expect no other, no better, then with Esau to
be sent away empty, though with tears we seek the blessing. We will therefore
resolve thus seriously with our selves, reasonably to break off our sins by
repentance, and our iniquities by turning to our God, from whom so long we have
turned away, to serve our own turns in and upon the vanities of this life,
which by no means the Devil can endure to hear.

Secondly, it begets an exceeding contentment and comfort in us, when the hand
of God by sickness, with other bodily diseases and distempers do lie hard and
heavy upon us, th^n to think with our selves, why? what are these, to those
miseries, that anguish, those horrors of conscience, those eternal and
unutterable torments, which my sins have deserved, or my Savior suffered? As a
poor Prisoner laid up for some capital crime, by reason of which, according to
his desert, and the equity of the Law, he can expect nothing but death, and
that with the severest execution; but being beyond hope pardoned his life, and
only adjudged to the penalty of some few stripes, does rejoice in the midst of
these his petty sufferings, considering what he should have undergone: So we,
though we be in misery here, yet being by the mercy of God, and the sufferings
of Jesus Christ, delivered from those etern^l torments, which were due unto us
by reason of our sins, do rejoice in the midst hereof, with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory, which the Devil cannot endure to see; and therefore stirs up
his instruments with all the slights and tricks that may be, to weaken the
ground thereof; And truly these of all other the most dangerous: for under the
pretense of exalting Christ, they most of all debase him, making him more
infirm then other men, which have suffered as great, if not greater bodily
torments, and yet never expressed so much fear, grief and sorrow under them; or
else (with shame to them be it spoken) to counterfeit what he suffered not; so
while they inconsiderately endeavor to defend his glory, they most of all
darken and obscure it, by calling in question the truth of his sufferings, and
consequently the certainty of our Redemption, leaving us under the
insupportable weight of Gods wrath, which if he has not, none other, either
man or Angel is able to satisfy for us; yet here is our comfort, Truth is
strong, yea so strong, that the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.

Secondly, Concerning Gods imputation of sin to Christ.
WE complained in the beginning of the Dialogues want of order, but know not
how to help our selves; for we resolve in his own way and method, to give him
that answer, and the Reader that satisfaction, which we intend. And for our
more orderly proceeding herein, we shall propose and prove these three things;
First, that sin was imputed to Christ; Secondly, that it was imputed to him by
God himself; Thirdly, that it was imputed by way of satisfaction to Divine
Justice.

For our entrance into the first, we shall enquire what imputation is, and what
is meant thereby, that so it may be the better understood of what, and what we
do affirm. The words (...) or (...) are not to be taken physice, according to
the native and natural signification thereof, as if any sinful quality were
infused into Christ; but relative, as he is considered in relation to us. Nor
is it a naked and bare relation, that must make, or bear out such an
imputation; Christ therefore is termed (and that truly to) our Head, Husband,
Savior, Redeemer, Surety, Voluntarily interposing between God and us,
undertaking our debt, and so becoming liable to the satisfaction thereof.
Imputation then Imputatio est rei unius pro altero acceptatio. Bradshaw de
Justificat.
is, the taking of one for another, nor is there any mistake at all in so
doing, a righteous person is made a sinner, that is, justly esteemed and
accounted a sinner: In this sense the Apostle Paul offers himself to Philemon,
Verse the 8. of that Epistle, desiring that that wrong which Onesimus had done
unto him, and his debt might (...) be imputed to him, that is, put upon his
account, and esteemed as though they were his own, committed and contracted
by him; And thus is the word to be taken here, one standing in the room and
place of others, and so in their steed accounted guilty: He was made sin says
the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.21.
, not in respect of act, but transaction, conveyance, etc.

It is no trouble at all to us, that the Dialogue does so often term it the
common doctrine of Imputation, St. Paul calls faith (...) Tit. 1.4.
, common faith; and St. Jude, Verse 2. our Salvation (...), common salvation;
Now a good thing Bonum quo communius eo melius.
the more common the more commodious. I would to God it it were yet more
common, and then let the Dialogue scoff his belly-full.

But because he knows not what kind of Doctrine it is, nor can his Master
Socinus teach him; therefore he would fain persuade us, there is no such thing;
shall a blind man persuade us there is no Sun, because he cannot see it shine?
Yea, he tells us, because he knows it not, that therefore it may well be
suspected, to be but a device of Satan, to darken the truth of the most
needful Doctrine of a sinners justification; bona verba; but we intend not to
be deluded by them; For we can see light in Goshen, though he and the rest of
his party can see none in Egypt; Does the Dialogue profess he knows not what
kind of imputation it is? and yet does he thus reproach it? We may easily know
then what Spirit he is of, Jude 10. Speaking evil of those things which he
knows not; And it is a sign he knows it not indeed, otherwise he would not so
severely censure it, yea condemn and blaspheme it, as he does; which most
darkens the necessary Doctrine of a sinners justification, let the indifferent
Reader judge. If he desire to know what it is, let him search the Scriptures;
for they do abundantly testify of it; To the Law and to the Testimony Legimus
passim apud Paulum nos justos fieri, and justificari, p^r Christum, per Christi
mortem, sanguinem, redemptionem, obedientiam, and justitiam, and illam
justitiam, imputari nobis a Deo absque operibus. Noster Amesius Bell. enerva.
10.4. page 137.
and they which speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them.

The very term Impute, taken for judicial laying of that to the charge of a
person, which is not properly his, but yet justly laid to him, and put truly
upon his account, is ten times used by the Apostle Paul in the 4th. to the
Romans. In which sense we affirm that sin is imputed to Christ, or else he
could not have suffered. This we take to be, and shall stick by, as, an
infallible truth, No man dies, as death is a privation of the life of the body,
unless it be for his own sin, or the sin of some others imputed to him. The
Scriptures that confirm this are diverse, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, 1 Cor.
15.56. The sting of death is sin. Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the
World, and death by sin; and so death passed over all men, for that all have
sinned; from whence we collect, that every man that dies, dies for sin, that
is, either for his own, or the sin of some other, made his by imputation. Death
is not natural to man, as man: For that which is natural to him, as he is man,
was engraffed into him, and appointed unto him of God, but death is not planted
or engraffed into him by God, neither was he by him made liable to it (...),
etc.
, Man before his fall was free from death, as after the last judgment he shall
be likewise; Besides, death is an enemy to humane nature, threatening the ruin,
and destruction thereof; will any man then say that that is natural to him,
which does destroy him? Is that agreeable to the nature of man, which above all
other he abborreth, being accompanied with that, which brings nothing but
trouble, anguish and vexation to him? whence we see that death is not natural
to man, as man; but to man only as a sinner. Now that Christ dyed, the Devils
themselves have not impudence enough to deny, being themselves instrumentally
engaged for the effecting of his death. But let the Dialogue, or any man else
for him, answer me in good sadness, was it for his own sin or for the sin of
others? None can, none dare openly (though these black mouthed Socinians do
secretly mutter so much) affirm for his own, therefore it must necessarily be
for the sin of others.

Sin may be said to be another properly or improperly, either truly, or after
a certain manner; those sins are truly another, of which in no sort thou have
bin partaker, and for which by no Law thou art bound to suffer: but for those,
whereof thou have bin partaker, no reason can be produced to the contrary, but
thou should suffer. Christ does in a manner partake of our sins Isa. 53.6.
, the Lord has laid on him, or has made to meet on him, the iniquities of us
all; yea Peter in the 2. Chapter of his first Epistle, and the 24. verse. says
plainly, that his own self bare our sins, in his own body on the Tree, etc. and
so cannot, especially offering himself and becoming our surety, undertaking for
us the penalty due to us, but be every way liable to the same.

Christ was not subject to any necessity of dying, being as God, immortal, as
man, holy and immaculate without the least tincture of sin, therefore no
necessity in him, no necessity for him, but in respect of us, and as our pledge
and surety. This is a proposition of an undoubted truth, that where there is no
Original corruption, there is no actual transgression; Christ being free from
the one, must needs be acquit of any suspicion of the other; therefore not for
his own sins, but for ours, the guilt whereof being laid upon him, and imputed
to him, did he suffer that misery those torments, and that death, that accursed
death, of which we have already so fully spoken.

Here the Dialogue, that he may the more closely and covertly beguile the
over-credulous Reader, which I perceive is his great endeavor, does
ignorantly, if not wilfully, corrupt some texts of Scripture; wresting and
wringing them about, to make them speak in his sense, and to his purpose,
namely, that Christ did not bear, as we say by imputation, but did bear away
our sins and our iniquities from us. Having therefore already freed those
places quoted out of the Prophecy of Isaiah Isa. 53.7. etc.
, expounded (as he says) by that of Matt. 8.16. and from which he draws this
false consequence, that Christ bore our sins, as he bore our sicknesses,
whereas indeed there is great difference in the manner of bearing Hos enim
abstulit, non pertulit illa non pertulit illa pertulit and abstulit simul.
Sibran. Lub. lib. 2. cap. 4.
these he did not bear, but bear away, those he bore and bore away together; We
shall now do the best we can by Gods assistance, to clear this of St. Peter
also, and free it from the like corrupt handling. In this 1 Pet. 2.24. the
place before cited, the Apostle says expressly, that Christ did peccata nostra
sursum tulisse, carry our sins up with him upon the cross. If the Spirit of
God by the Apostle had intended herein, a bearing away, he might have used, (as
learned Grotius well observes De Satisfactione Christi. cap. 1.
, and more apt for that purpose) the word (...), which barely signifies to take
away: But for the greater Emphasis, and more clear expressing of his meaning,
he uses the word (...), that is, he took up, which is so far from diminishing,
that it adds something to the signification thereof. Now Socinus, and his Ape,
the Dialogue, that they may weaken (if possible) the strength of this place, do
tell us, that this word (...) does signify abstulit, he bare away: but quite
contrary to the nature and use of the word: For neither the particle (...) will
admit of that signification, nor does any Greek Writer so use it. This Grotius
proves against Socinus (and may serve as well to confute the Dialogue and his
Disciples) by many notable instances out of the word of God, we will take a
survey of some of them; Luke 24.51. (...), and he was carried up into Heaven;
So Mat. 17.1. (...), and he brings them up; also in Mar. 9.2. the same word
is used; and because the Sacrifices were laid, upon the Altar; they are said
Heb. 7.27. (...), to be offered up. Hence Abraham is said to offer up his Son
Isaac, Iam. 2.21. and Christ (...), to offer up himself. One place only is
cited by Socinus, upon which he grounds his mis-interpretation, and by which he
would lead us to the misunderstanding of the word, namely, Heb. 9.28. In which
he would have (...), to signify in his sense, to bear away sins; But how
unfitly, the learned know: without any example, the sense of the place no way
bearing it, agreeing with it, or requiring of it. For the two commings of
Christ, his first and second coming, are there opposed one to another; the
former, in which he shall come laden with our sins; the latter, in which he
shall come (...), without sins, that is, free from the burden and weight
thereof. Now there is no opposition at all between these, namely, to be without
sin, and to bear away sin; but to be without sin, and to be laden with sin: So
that it manifestly appears, even from this place to the Hebrews, which the
Socinians make so much use of, that the word (...), is either to bear up, that
is, upon the cross, as in this place of Peter (and that appositly, because
here also it alludes to a sacrifice, the cross being as it were the Altar) or
simply and plainly to bear or undergo, as apud Thucydidem (...), to suffer
dangers. Therefore (...) is to bear, not to bear away, as the Dialogue and the
rest would have it, but are herein clearly defeated. For the Apostle treats
here, not of every, or of any other grace of Christ, but of his great and
admirable patience only, which is not seen, neither does it evidence it self,
in bearing away, but in bearing and sustaining the guilt or heavy burden
(says the Psalmist) of our sins, which lay upon him, and was imputed to him.

We come to the next thing to be considered, namely, that God himself imputed
our sins to Christ, which is very necessary to be proved, because the Dialogue
seems to admit of a kind, though indeed a strange kind of imputation, an
imputation of men, but not of God; The Jews (says he) laying many crimes to
the charge of Christ, accounted him a most notorious sinner, and therefore
instigated Pilate the Roman Deputy to punish him, not only so, but as an
heinous Malefactor. True, we confess so much; but so to make him a sinner by
the unjust criminations, and false accusations of men, as to deny any
imputation of sin by God unto him, we cannot grant, lest we should sell our
birthright for a mess of pottage. For what are all the slanderous imputations
of men to us? they are neither to us, nor to our behoof: The burden our sins
must be taken from us, and laid upon him, whose only shoulders are able to
undergo so great a weight, or else we are never the better for his coming in
the flesh among us. We will refer our selves to the Holy Scriptures herein, and
stand or fall according to the determination thereof, which are very
conspicuous and clear in this case.

A Prophet Isa. 53.6.
, tells us plainly the Lord has laid upon him, that is Christ, the iniquities
of us all. I wot well how busy Socinus and his brethen in evil are, leaving no
stone unturned, to overthrow (if they could) the strength, and corrupt the
genuine sense of these words, devising a new and uncouth interpretation of
their own, to obscure the radiant beams of the cordial and comfortable truth
herein contained: But all the powers of darkness shall not be able to do it.

For the more full discovery whereof; I shall refer the judicious Reader to
that tract of Grotius; his defense of the Catholic faith De Satisfactione
Christi, cap. 1.
, the words themselves admitting no other sense then this, the Lord (for no
creature whether in Heaven or Earth was able for to do it) has made to meet on
him, that is, has fastened upon him our sins, and our iniquities, so that he
bears the whole weight and burden thereof.

An Apostle 2 Cor. 5.21.
also tells us; He, that is God, has made him sin for us, which knew no sin:
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; the adjunct is here to
be taken for the subject. That the adversaries of the truth, may shift off the
strength and authority of this place: they would persuade us to understand by
sin, a man accounted a sinner among men; First, without any example to that
purpose; for the original word is no where so taken; and then contrary to the
mind of the Apostle, who ascribes this action to God himself, plainly affirming
that he made Christ sin, who knew no sin.

That the Jews did impute many notorions crimes to Christ, accounting him for
one shamefully wicked and dangerously evil, is not to be esteemed as an act of
God, or that he was the Author thereof: for by his voice from Heaven, and his
miracles on Earth, he declared the contrary, and in all does attest the
innocence of his Son; Besides, the Apostle opposes sin and righteousness, we
are made the righteousness of God, that is, we are justified being ungodly, or
freed from Divine Justice, which we had deserved: but Christ, that this might
be so, is made sin, that is, by reason of the guilt of sin imputed to him,
suffered Divine Justice for us. There is also another opposition in these words
of the Apostle, He, which knew no sin, and so had not deserved any punishment,
has God made sin, that is, would have to suffer punishment; even the
punishment of sin, which we had deserved. Christ was innocent, not only in
respect of the Law of man, but also of the Law of God; The force therefore and
strength of the opposition does require, that he should also suffer the
punishment of the Divine Law. The Apostle does not tell it for news (for it is
no new thing) that those who are innocent and harmless, most unblameable in
their conversation Homo quanto voluerit esse Spiritualior, tanto praesens vita
ei sit amarior. Isod.
, are troubled, molested and evilly entreated of evil men; Every story is a
Chronicle of this truth, and the whole World the practice thereof; what age is
not able sufficiently to furnish us? But here the Apostle notes some singular,
eminent and notable matter, and what can this be other, then that God should
inflict punishment upon a person, who considered in, and by himself, did no way
in the least measure ever deserve it? It is God then that imputes the sin, and
himself inflicts the punishment thereof; Not but that men, yea and Devils to,
may be instruments for the execution; but the punishment it self proceeds from
Cod. For the Apostles, when they apply the passion of Christ to us, and would
bring it home to our use and benefit, have no respect at all to the actings of
men in it, or about it; but only of God himself, as Isa. 53.10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him, it is he that has put him to grief; So that all the foul
imputations of the Jews are nothing to this purpose. Thus have we in some
measure heard, what the Scriptures say in this particular; Now whether we
should believe God or Man, Prophet and Apostle, or Socinus and the Dialogue,
judge ye good Readers.

Here the whole Socinian band do fire at once, and to show themselves doughty
champions of the black guard, do discharge a full volley of most horrid
blasphemies, even in the very face of the Almighty: If God, say they, shall
impute sin unto Christ, his own innocent and harmless Son, he is unjust Ille
agit injuste, qui invitum pro altero punit, sed qui illum, qui se sponte pro
altero ad supplicium effort, and habet fui, ipsiusque pro quo se offert,
liberandi potestatem pro altero punit, ille non agit injuste. Sibrandus
Lubbertus, page 376.
; Thus, though Christ have taken our sins upon him, and has engaged for us;
yet if God impute sin to Christ, they will be so bold, as to impute sin to God,
and charge him with injustice: yea, the Dialogue it self, though he appear one
of the last, is none of the least among them; For he confidently affirms, that
God cannot impute sin to our innocent Savior; but if he should do so, he
should be as unjust Deus vere and sum justus in sponsere nostro Bez. in Romans
4.25.
; even as the wicked Jews; what high presumption is it in these poor worms thus
to reproach the living God, and to charge him foolishly? He that reproves him,
let him answer it says Job Job 39.35.
; We may discover the ground of this error, though there be none for their
blasphemy; Here, here is that ignis erraticus, that causes them to wonder,
namely, a vain supposition, that the works of God are no less subject to the
Law of nature, and the Law of Moses, then the works of men: and that the work
of man's redemption, published to us only by the Gospel, is to be squared by,
and proportioned to the Law of nature engraffed in us, or the Law of Moses set
down as a Rule of life unto us.

This they endeavor to maintain by an argument taken from the equal
obligation, as well of God, as of man to the same, prefixed as a rule to both,
and to both a like, beyond which, as man, so God himself cannot pass, but they
do (as it were) pull him by the sleeve, tell him of it, and charge him with
injustice. For, say they, God has not ordained this Law for men only, namely;
The Fathers shall not dye for their Children, nor the Children for their
Fathers, but every one shall bear the punishment of his own sin; But also, did
after a manner impose it upon himself, speaking thus by the Prophet Ezekiel. 18.20.
, the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father
bear the iniquity of the Son, but the righteousness of the righteous, etc.

This Socinian argument is patcht up with very groundless, yea senseless and
fained suppositions, the first of which is, that God by Moses imposed the same
Law upon himself, which he had engraven in the hearts of the Gentiles, and
delivered to the Jews Deuteronomy. 24.16.
, namely, the Fathers shall not be put to death for the Children, nor the
Children for the Fathers. That this is false may appear by the practice of
Amaziah King of Judah, who having respect unto this Law did not understand it,
as to extend it self so far as to God, the most high and supreme Lawgiver, but
to be terminated and limited in his vicegerents, and therefore 2 King. 14.6.
, he slew not the Children of those that had murdered his Father Joash,
according to that which is written in the book of the Law of Moses.

We affirm then, that God was not liable, neither can he possibly be subject to
any external Law whatsoever; the reason is plain, because his own will is the
prime and chiefest Rule of Justice, who receives Laws from none, but
prescribes Laws to all; as being the cause and original of all just Laws
engraven in the hearts of men, or by writing committed to record, and commended
to posterity. Wherefore as God will have no Law prescribed to his will, which
depends not upon the will of any other: So, seeing his will is in it self holy,
and unchangeably just, there is no need at all, that he should prescribe a Law
as a Rule of Justice unto himself.

The second supposition is, that this Evangelical affirmation of God, by which
he declares his willingness, that Christ by his appeasing death should satisfy
the debt of our sins for us, is altogether repugnant to that legal asseveration
of his, that he would not that the innocent Son should dye for the guilty
Father, or the innocent Father for the guilty Son; Both which, though in
several respects are most true and certain.

First, God would have Christ our Brother according to the flesh, being
justified by the Spirit, and declared innocent by Pontius Pilate to be
condemned and executed for us that were guilty: because Christ by joint consent
with God his Father appointed himself Aliud est alterum pro altero puniri
invitum, aliud puniri illum qui se sistit ipro altero vadem seu sposorem.
Christus hic hominem induit, and factum est peccatum and execratio, undejuste
solvit, quod a nobis erat debitum. Prideaux de Redemptione.
a propitiatory sacrifice for us from all eternity; whence he is called Ioh
1.29. Agnus Dei.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. A Lamb indeed without
spot, without blemish, ordained for this very purpose, even before the
Foundations of the World were laid; but in these latter times manifested to us,
whom he has redeemed from sin by his most precious blood as St. Peter
expresses it, 1 Pet. 1.17, 19, 20.

Secondly, God would not that out of mankind either the Father should dye for
the Son, or the Son for the Father; because he knew from all eternity, that no
Father or Son could possibly be guiltless, proceeding from the corrupt mass
of mankind, or out of the loins of sinful and degenerate Adam, and so could
not be a sufficient sacrifice, one for another. Add to this moreover, that
among men there was never any yet found, which out of an absolute purpose of
mind and immutable constancy could be contented to offer up himself a sacrifice
unto death, unto such a death, for the sins of those which were his Enemies,
with the like reason and resolution, as our Savior Christ did; Though Moses
and Paul wished that they might dye for the Israelites their Countrymen, yet
it was not so simply and absolutely for them, as Christ did for his Elect, but
conditionally that is to say, upon such terms as stood not with the liking, nor
were agreeable to the good will and pleasure of God. Whereas Christ, not
conditionally, but simply and absolutely according to the decree of his Father,
laid down his life, as willing to suffer what men or Devils could do against
him, and was accepted of him. We might multiply reasons for this, why God
should free us, who deserved to be punished unto all eternity, and should lay
that punishment, which was due to us (though in respect of time, not unto
eternity) upon his own most innocent harmless and beloved Son, without any,
the least suspicion of wrong or injustice in God Iustus est Deus, and omni a
just disponit, and eum tamen qui non debet puniri, condemnat. Mediator enim
noster quia nullum culpae cont^gium perpetravit, puniri pro se ipso non debuit.
Sed si ipse indebitam mortem non susciperet, nunquam non a debita morte
liberaret. Gregorius Mag. lib 3. Mor.
, as being our Pledge, Surety and Undertaker for us, willingly and of his own
accord laying down the full prise of our redemption. But I suppose we have
already done sufficient to this purpose. Let God be just and true, and not only
all Socinians, but even the whole World be false and liars. For though man be
so dimsighted, that he cannot see, or so weak in his intellects that he cannot
understand how it is, or which way it should be so Scio quod ita, sed non cur
ita, Bern. Epist. 190.
, for there is defatigatio in intellectualibus says one of the saddest, and the
soundest of the Hebrew Rabbis Rabbi Solomon in Eccl.
, the understanding may be dazzled as well as the eye; even in the best, and
they which think themselves wisest, and would make the World believe they know
most: yet though we cannot always discern it, God is always just in all his
ways, and holy in all his works; Where we understand not, let us admire,
crying out with St. Chrysostom in an holy ecstasy (...). Oh the hight and the
depth of the love of God, etc. This, this is the Lords own doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes, and in the eyes of all that see it.

But least the Dialogue should think we had quite forgotten him, we return
again unto him, finding him in the very same place where we left him, who tells
us, that if Christ had stood a guilty person before God, by his imputing our
sins unto him, he could not have bin a fit person in Gods esteem to perform the
office of a Mediator for our redemption. We answer? Qui been distinguit, etc.
and so distinguish between the guilt of commission, and the guilt of
obligation; If he had in the least measure bin guilty in respect of commission,
he had not bin a fit person in relation to God; if he had not bin guilty
Oblatus est pro peccatis non immerito, peccatum factus dicitur, etc. Ambrosius
in 2 Cor. 5.
in respect of obligation, he had not bin fit in relation to us. God best knew
what condition might render him most meet, and most fitly qualify him for the
undertaking and performing of his Mediatorial office, and therefore puts him
into that capacity and condition, by imputing the guilt of our sins unto him.

Before we pass any further, who can forbid us, that we may not marry these
two together, and make one entire proposition of them, namely this, That God
did impute the guilt of our sins unto our innocent Savior, as unto our Pledge,
and Surety, which indeed was the impulsive cause of all his sufferings; being
then thus joined together by us, and that without the help of a Justice of
Peace. We will by Gods assistance descend to a more particular confirmation
hereof.

First, from the passion and suffering of Christ, being considered in himself
as a most innocent and unblamable person, without any, the least tincture of
sin or pollution, from whence we argue thus, whosoever is free from sin, and
yet nevertheless is punished as one obnoxious to sin, must needs have the
guilt of others sins imputed to him Christus peccatum quidem non fecit,
peccatum tamen pro nobis factus est, -- Ipse eti^m qui in similitudinem hominum
factus est, and habitu repertus est homo, sine dubio pro peccato, quod ex nobis
susceperat quia peccata nostra portavit, viculum immaculatum, hoc est, carnem
in contaminatum obtulit hostiam Deo. Origin homil. 3. in Leviticum.
; whereas, saving Divine Justice, no man can be molested, afflicted or
punished, unless it be for his own proper sin, or for the sin of some other
imputed to him.

But the first is true of Christ our Savior, as we have plentifully proved
already out of these several place, Is. 53. verse. 4.5. also, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Therefore the latter: The iniquities of us all did God make to meet upon him,
and by the reason thereof, laid upon him also the punishment of those
iniquities; What other consequence can proceed from hence, but that Christ,
seeing he could not be liable to punishment for his own sin, being free from
all sin, and every appearance of evil, neither was there guile found in his
lips; for our sins being made subject to the same, had the sins of others truly
and indeed imputed to him? The cause also of this imputation is just; because
Christ having taken the Mediatorital office upon himself, by the joint
concurrence of his Father, being willing, freely and of his own accord to be
deputed in our place and steed, hence our sins were by right imputed to him,
after he became a Surety for us Naemo qua innocens puniri potest, sed innocens
quatenus reorum vas factus est, omnino puniri potest docentum nomine pro quiby
se sistit. Essenius, lib. 2. sect. 3. cap. 1. de Satisfactione Christi.
. In an obligation, the debtor and the bonds-man or Surety are reckoned and
considered but as one person; neither is it any injustice at all to require the
debt of the one, as well as the other, seeing the one would freely and
voluntarily engage for the other; Yea more especially of the Surety, when it
manifestly appears, as in our case it does, that the debtor himself is no way
able to make satisfaction; Christ therefore paid that which we did we, as David
himself speaking in the person of our Savior Psalm. 69.4.
, says, I restored that which I took not away, or I paid that, which I did
not owe.

Secondly, from the manner of Gods dealing with Christ: He, which knew no sin
says St. Paul 2 Cor. 5.21.
, did God make sin, yea a curse Gal. 3.13.
, for us; So then the argument will lie thus, He which was made sin and a curse
for others, must needs have the sins and guilt of others imputed to him; But
Christ was made sin and a curse for others; Therefore must he of necessity have
the sin and guilt of others imputed to him.

For the first, namely, that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, we shall a
little more fully express our selves concerning it;

For the latter, we have no more at this time to say to it, though much more
might be spoken of it. He was made sin, says the Apostle; by sin, whether we
understand a sinner, as some, or a sacrifice for sin, as others do earnestly
contend to have it, it is all to one purpose, and come both to one pass; For
from both the Doctrine of imputation is inferred; If a sacrifice for sin, it is
to free us; If a sinner, it was by reason of our guilt imputed to him, and by
God his Father laid upon him. And therefore Chrysostom, Theophilact, and
Oecumenius affirm, that Christ was made sin, not only in respect of those
afflictions and that punishment, which he suffered for our sins; but also, and
especially in regard of imputation, the guilt of our sins being charged on him.
Likewise St. Augustine Enchiridion ad Laurentium. Ipse peccatum and nos
justitia, non nostra sed Dei, non in nobis, sed in ipso, sicut ipse peccatum,
etc.
says, as we are made righteousness, not ours, but of God, not in us, but in
him: So he was made sin, not his, but ours, not in him, but in us; and yet laid
upon him by just imputation. Hence it is that Christ is pleased to charge
himself with our sins, even after such a manner, and upon such terms, as if
they were his own, for so he calls them Psalm. 69.5.
, my sins are not hid from thee; So that Christ is made sin for us Et si
peccatum victima ex Hebraeorum idiotismo, etc. Tamen ratio Antithesis possit ut
potius Christus dicatur factus esse peccatum pro nobis, i. e. peccator, non in
se, sed ex omnium peccatorum nostrorum reatu ipsi imputato. Bez. in 2 Cor. 5.
ult.
, not only ratione nocumenti, in regard of punishment, undergoing those things,
which we should have suffered; but principally and especially ratione culpae
and reatus, in regard both of sin and guilt, devolving them upon himself,
bearing them for us, and in our steed.

Thirdly, from the designation of the meritorious cause of Christ our Saviors
passion; for if our sins were the meritorious cause of his sufferings, and he
dyed by the merit thereof, it must necessarily follow, that our sins were
imputed to him; But the first is true, because he dyed for sins and for
iniquities. Therefore the latter. For the further confirmation whereof, besides
those places of Scripture formerly quoted by us, the Reader may please to
peruse those following, Romans 4.25. also cap. 8.3. with 1 Cor. 15.3. Heb. 10.25.
all which necessarily conclude the same. The Socinians do attempt to blow up
this truth, by laying their mine, and making their assault against the
Proposition (...), for; telling us our sins may be an occasion, but not a
cause, not the impulsive cause of our Saviors sufferings. But it is so
apparent, that (...) joined with an Accusative case, as they who have not
outlived the memory of their rudiments know, is by all Greek Authors both
sacred and profane, a most usual note of the impulsive cause, that the
chiefest of them are ashamed to be seen in it, or to appear against it; only
some few underlings and Novices in this Socinian heresy, that they may seem to
be some body among the ignorant, have raised this dust on purpose: which I am
the rather induced to believe, because the Dialogue does pass it over in
silence, without taking the least notice at all of it.

Fourthly, from the attribution of sin; for whereas our sins and foolishnesses
are ascribed to Christ, that is, those sins which proceed from folly and
blindness of mind in us, it cannot otherwise be, but that all our other
iniquities should be imputed to him also; For these (...).
really (...), Christ by himself considered, are no way suitable unto, nor
agreeable with him, he being exempted from all sin; Therefore our sins, all our
sins must needs be imputative ascribed to him Despectus erat and ignobilis
quando pendebat in cruce, and factus pronobis maledictum, peccata nostra
portabat. Chrysostom. in Isa. cap. 53.
, and (...) as our Pledge and Surety take them upon himself; For so in the
Psalm before cited, Christ thus expresses himself to his Father, Lord thou
know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee. That the Messiah, our
Mediator does speak in this Psalm, the boldest and most daring Socinian has
not the front to deny, if any of them should, the greatness of the punishments,
verse. 2. etc. as also the cause and description of his reproach, verse. 8. etc.
would easily convince them; which can truly be spoken of, or safely applied to
none other but him; together with drinking of Gall and Vinegar, not a dose of
Oximel sweet and sour, but things sharp and bitter, verse. 22. the ensuing
judgments upon the hard and obdurate Jews, verse. 23. Lastly, the explication
hereof in distinct parts in the New Testament, do all stand forth and give a
clear evidence of the same; and is with one consent allowed by Hilarious,
Athanasius, Augustinus, Cossiodorus, Euthymius, and all the Orthodox Fathers of
the Church; Hence therefore we conclude, whosoever paying for, or restoring
that, which another violently took away does subject himself to most grievous
pains, complaining of his sins and foolishness, being himself free from all
manner of iniquity and transgression, must needs have the sins, foolishness,
and violence of others imputed to him, which as his own, he ascribes and
appropriateth to himself. But Christ paying for that, which others had
violently taken away, that is, the honor due to the Majesty of God, in
disobeying his holy and just commands, subjected himself to most grievous
pains, and does miserably complain of his sins and offenses, being himself free
from all sin and iniquity; Therefore the sins of others, that is, of the Elect,
and their violence is imputed to him, etc.

Lastly, from the prefiguration of types clearly manifested in the Levitical
services; For as the sins of the Israelites were imputed unto their legal
sacrifices, for which they were offered Levit. 4. and 5. cap.
: So by the force and strength of the Analogy of type and Antitype, the sins
of all Gods people must in the new Testament, and service of the Gospel, be
imputed to Christ, as our only Evangelical and propitiatory sacrifice. Not to
try the Reader with one instance upon the neck of another Frustra fit per
plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.
, when as one only may be as good as a thousand; which shall be of that Goat
(...) or (...).
, of which we read in the 16. cap. of Leviticus, and will sufficiently confirm
the truth hereof: for upon his head did Aaron impose all the sins of the
Children of Israel, verse. 21. and he did bear all their iniquities into a place
not inhabited, verse. 22. This type does show, that all our sins were laid upon
Jesus Christ, who was by this goat plainly prefigured Sola mors Christi sangui
nolenta, ignomini osa atque maledicta olim hircorum quibus peccata totius
populi Israelitici imponebantur morte cruenta typice praefigurabatur.
Polyander. disput. 10.
, that he should bear them, that is, the punishment of them, which we had
deserved. Nor was this a vain ceremony, or an idle and unprofitable custom
among them; but both for matter and manner commanded and prescribed by God
himself. Besides, whoever happened to touch this Goat was unclean, till he had
cleansed himself by washing, Levit. 16.26. Whereby was signified that Christ
the Antitype hereof, was an imputed sinner, and so made a curse for us. He then
that would persuade us, that Christ did not bear our sins by imputation, did
never truly consider, or well understand the Anagoly between this type and the
Antitype; for if he had, he could not but be convinced hereby. Yet let me tell
you, there is some, and that no small difference in the manner of bearing,
though the Dialogue, with other Socinians, will admit of none. Christ, I say,
did bear our sins after another manner, then this goat did bear the sins of the
Israelites; For this goat did bear them typically or Sacramentally, but Christ
did bear them really and substantial, he was wounded for our transgressions,
he was bruised for our iniquities, and so was not this goat for theirs. He that
will undertake to prove the contrary, had need take even ad Graecas Calendas,
to do the same.

All this while we have but chaffed the wax, we come now to set on the seal;
for what are all these sufferings of Christ to us, or the imputation of our
sins to him, if Gods Justice be not hereby satisfied, and we freed from the
wrath to come? Who are yet in our sins, and so liable to suffer the eternal
punishment due unto us for the same. We shall now therefore prove, that all
this was done by way of satisfaction to Divine Justice, and so conclude this
part also with some necessary caution, and sound advice to the conscientious
Reader.

The sweet Singer of Israel Ps. 85.10.11.
tells it for news, and joyful news it is indeed; and therefore composes a
song, this very song for the solemnity thereof; That Mercy and Truth are met
together, that righteousness and peace have kissed each other, etc. It would be
worth our while, to make some enquiry, how, and for what cause they came at
first asunder, seeing of themselves they are no strangers, all four in the
bosom of God from all Eternity; Attributes all four of his undivided essence?
Not of themselves then, nor by reason of any cause of theirs, were they thus
divided, and set at such a distance, that it was news to see them meet, and
greet thus kindly and affectionately; but the quarrel was ours, and about us
did they at first part company.

And a sweet Singer of our Israel to Bish. Andrew. in his Sermon.
lays it forth thus; If at the coming of Christ in the flesh (in consideration
where of this Psalm was pend) these Attributes of God did meet; sure, says he,
at Adams fall, they might be said to part; It was Adams cause then, and so
ours, that first divided Heaven, yea the very Attributes in God, and so in a
manner God himself; And thus they parted first. Nor could it otherwise be said
by the Apostle Col. 1.20.
, that Christ reconciled all things in Heaven and Earth, if there had not bin
in Heaven some what to be taken up.

Mercy and Truth had met before, but no comfort to us at that meeting, they met
indeed, but instead of Osculatae sunt, as here, kissing; it was altercatae
sunt, in respect of us killing, that that meeting did bring forth. While Mercy
and Peace would have Adams, and so our case relieved, Righteousness and Truth
would by no means consent unto it. The Plea between them at this meeting is
excellently and eligantly drawn up by St. Bernard Ber. in Annunt. sermon. 1.
. In which Mercy thus began, for out of her propensity and readiness to do
good, she is here, she is there, she is every where most forward; therefore he
brings her in as the first Speaker; Her inclination is, or rather she her self
is, an inclination to pity such as are in misery, and if she can, relieve
them too, though in themselves they deserve it not. And her plea is Psalm. 89.47.
, nunquid in vanum? What has God made all men for naught? What profit Psalm.
30.9.
is in this blood? Has God forgotten to be gracious, and will he be no more
entreated? His pris su surris, with these and the like holy whisperings, as he
terms them, did she enter into the very bowels of God, making them yearn and
melt into compassion toward the works of his own hands. And certainly, if
there had bin none to stand up against us, there might have bin some hope, that
Mercy would have prevailed for us. But Truth must be heard to, and she lays in
just matter of exception, pleading thus, Deus erat verbum, what is God, but his
word? his word was to Adam, morte morteris, thou shall dye the death; So to the
Sons of Adam, anima quae peccaverit, the soul that sins, that soul shall
dye. God may not falsify his word, that may not, must not be. Then steps up
righteousness and seconds her, and her plea is, that God, as he is true of his
word, so is he righteous in his works, reddere suum cuique, to give to each his
own, and so to the sinner stipendium peccati, the wages that he has earned,
that is, death. God forbid, says she, the Judge of all the World should do,
or Judge un^ustly; that be far from thee, O God! that were as before to make
Truth, false: So here to do right, wrong; which must needs be, if Mercy should
have her mind, and man, sinful man be spared, and relieved.

The contention stays not here, but every one begins to make it their own
case, and see themselves highly concerned in it. For says righteousness, what
shall become of me, or what use at all of Justice, if God spare sinners, that
have thus offended? And what use of me, says Mercy, the sweetest Attribute of
the Deity, if God spare them not? Here is hard hold indeed, insomuch as Perij,
nisi homo moriatur, says Justice, I dye, if he dye not; and Perij, nisi
misericordiam consequatur, says Mercy, if he dye, I dye to; To this pass it
came, and upon these terms brak up their meeting, and so they parted each from
other. Terras Astraea reliquit, away flings Justice up to Heaven; Mercy stays
behind, and keeps poor distressed man company.

For where should Mercy be Ubi enim misericordia esset, si cum misero non
esset? Hugo?
, if with misery she should not be? Peace being grieved to see this
difference, plyes her hard between both, and doubles her endeavor to get (if
possible) a meeting upon some better terms, to reconcile these two great and
glorious Attributes of God, set them at rights, or else we might be sure it
would go wrong with us. Our Salvation all this while does, as it were, lie a
bleeding.

The Plea hangs, and we stand, but as Prisoners at the bar, not knowing what to
do, or what in the end will become of us.

Fain would Peace procure a meeting; Mercy longs to see that day; Justice she
is willing to; where then lies the fault? only she stands upon terms of
satisfaction.

Justice else should be no Justice, and righteousness should not be righteous.
If she remain unsatisfyed, there is no hope at all for us: but if she be once
satisfied, all is well.

The whole matter then rests upon her satisfaction, and hic labor, hoc opus,
here is the work indeed; how to satisfy her to her mind, that so she may be
content, content to save us, and to set us free. All the World cannot do this,
not render unto Justice such, and so complete a satisfaction, as may procure
this from her. But behold, there is one that undertaketh for us, and speaks
thus to Justice in our behalf Psalm. 40.6.
, Sacrifice and offerings thou would not have, therefore lo I come, of whom
it is, written in the volumne of thy Book, that I should do this thing; He
then, the only Son of God, by taking our nature upon him, and laying down both
soul and body an offering for sin, must needs give Justice full and condign
satisfaction. For what Justice either in Heaven or Earth could require more?
men or Angels could not expect so much; If we speak of an expiation, a ransom,
an (...) (Christ's own word Matt. 16.26.
) here it is, and no where else, and this will do it to the full.

But here the Socinians are so sottish, as to object and Aut Deus non voluit,
aut non potuit nobis nostra peccata nisi satisfactione interveniente condenare;
si non voluit non est misericors, etc.
We will answer these; Solomon tells us) they should seem wise in their own
eyes, though otherwise we esteem it not worth the while. If God (who can do all
things, that make for his own glory, and the good and benefit of his people)
would quit his Justice and wave his Truth, he could indeed; But his Justice and
Truth are in him as essential, as intrinsically essential as his Mercy, of
equal regard, and every way as dear unto him; and so he cannot. Justice
otherwise remains unsatisfied, and satisfied it must be, either on our Surety,
or us; not on us, alas poor wretches we are never able in the least measure to
give her that satisfaction, which she requires; Therefore the Son of the most
high God, the Lord Paramont of Heaven and Earth took our nature on him; Our
nature, that in our nature, for our nature, he might make to God his Father
even (as the schools express it Stando interminis Justitia.
, standing on the terms of his most exact and strict Justice) a complete, full,
and every way sufficient satisfaction.

upon so slight and sandy a foundation; Not words, but things are the matter
upon which we rest, and such things, as neither Socinus, Gitichius, Ostorodius,
etc. with all their accomplices abroad; Nor Biddle Some of whose black
blasphemous lines I have seen more fit to be burnt by the hands of the Common
Hangman, then to go abroad so uncontrouled, to the prejudice of others.
, Dialogue or Devil at home, shall be able to move us, much less remove us
from our holy profession, with all their sly and subtle whisperings, by which
they closely endeavor to seduce some, or those fearful and horrible
blasphemies which they thunder out, and by which they endeavor to bear down
all before them.

We grant, the word Satisfaction is not to be found in Scripture; yet that
there is not any such thing couched in, and intended by the Scripture, none but
Sicinians dare deny; For, though the word be not there, the thing it self
signified by the word, is not only extant in it, but is the very subject matter
of it; as he that has any spiritual insight into the Scriptures, may easily
discern by terms and expressions equivalent and correspondent to the same.

Hugo Grotius De satisfactione Christi.
, a man well skilled in this kind of Militia, musters up many testimonies to
evidence and confirm the truth hereof, ranking them into these several files;

First, such as speak of Gods aversion, and turning away of his anger from us,
being in Jesus Christ his Son, our Savior freely and fully reconciled to us.
Now anger in God (to speak after the manner of men) is nothing else but a will
or disposition to punish, which the Apostle says Romans 1.18.
, is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
who hold the truth in unrighteousness; from which, none out of the State of
Grace, and communion with Christ, are exempted, being all by nature the
Children of wrath, and so liable to Divine indignation. This anger abides upon
some Joh. 3.36.
, and upon whom it abides not, from them it is turned away, Christ having
obtained this favor by his sufferings, from the hand of his Father. Here we
would not be mistaken, as if we made God liable to passions and affections, so
that he should be one while angry and provoked against us, and by and by that
anger should be mitigated, and he himself pacified toward us. God is not,
neither indeed can be subject in the least to such mutations; But this we
believe and affirm, that Divine wrath or punitive Justice, being irritated and
incensed by us, has cause enough (as well as power) to take vengance on us,
but Christ by his sufferings, has purchased our impunity, and quenched those
flames, by taking away the cause thereof, which otherwise would utterly have
consumed us, and therefore is most fitly styled, and that twice by the Apostle
Joh. 2.1, 2. and Joh. 4.10.
, a Propitiation. Add to these, that of St. Paul Romans 3.24, 25.
, whom, namely Christ, God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith
in his blood: Christ then is made (...) or (...), a reconciliation by his
blood, dying for us, that so we might be freed from the wrath to come.

Secondly, such as declare our redemption by a prise or valuable consideration
paid to the Justice of God for our deliverance, which words, with the like,
which we meet with in holy Scriptures, are, as it were fitted to that freedom,
that we enjoy, from the punishment that we deserved. That this is so, appears
plainly by the Apostle Paul in two several places, using one and the same
expression y and z, in whom we have redemption through his blood; In which
words we consider these particulars. 1. The matter what. 2. The manner how. 3.
The means whereby. The matter what, that is, Redemption (...) est liberatio ali
cujus ab incommodo, (...) intercedente.
, which is a delivering of one from m^sery or slavery, by paying a price or
ransom for him; It is that deliverance, which we enjoy from the bondage and
slavery of sin and death, to which we were subject, so long as we remained in
the Kingdom of darkness, in which none are free, but all under the same
vassalage.

The manner how fully expressed in the word (...), which signifies such a
deliverance as a man enjoys, the price of his redemption being paid; For, as
before, the Justice of God will not sign our discharge, nor give us our
manumission, till she be fully satisfied and contented. Nor is this any
disparagement to, or diminution of the mercy of God Quam multae est Deus ergo
nos clementiae. Filio non pepercit, ut parceret servo. Unigenitum tra^^dit, ut
r^dim ret serv^^ planae ingratos, etc. Chrysostom. in Isa.
, as the Socinians do cunningly insinuate and pretend, that his Justice must be
satisfied, before we can be delivered, seeing he himself does afford the means,
the whole means, (which is our next consideration) whereby it is accomplished,
the (...), the very prise of our redemption, not gold, not silver, not any
corruptible thing; but the most precious blood of Jesus Christ, has redeemed
us from that misery, into which, by reason of our rebellion we had plunged our
selves.

Thirdly, such as denote a surrogation, or the setting and appointing one in
the place, or room of another; as when Christ is said to have tasted of death
for all, Heb. 2.9. that he should dye for the people Joh 11.50.
, when we were sinners Christ dyed for us Romans 5.8.
; This is a common expression in every Speech and Language, when one does or
suffers any thing in the steed and place of another, he is said to do or
suffer that for him. Neither is this phrase, or manner of speaking appropriated
to persons only, but also to things; For in the like propriety of speech, this
is said to be given, put or accounted for that, which is given, put or
accounted in the place or steed of that; The Socinians would willingly decline
this interpretation, by supposing some ambiguity in the Preposition pro, for;
which oftentimes, say they, is found to signify a thing done for the profit
and commodity of another; and therefore do keep no small a do to have it so
here; But they had as good be quiet; for it will not be; and indeed it seems
they are very ill provided, that are beholding to such poor shifts. I wonder
none of their great Admirers and Abetters will take the pains to help the lame
Dog over the style. I have often found my observation true, Ignorance and
Impudence are the first begetters of error and heresy, and after, the chief
maintainers and propagators of the same begotten. Indeed among the Latins they
may seem to find some shelter, and among the Greeks too, if we had to deal with
the Preposition (...), for; But never with the Preposition (...), for; which is
here used, and with which we have here to do.

This may appear by the Evangelist St. Matthew Matt. 20.28.
, he came to give his life (...), a ransom for many, that is, to give his life
in the place of many, and to dye in their steed; Utterly rejecting the Socinian
interpretation; Also the same Evangelist Matt. 5.38.
, (...), etc. an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; one in the steed and
room of another; And the Apostle Peter Pet. 1.3, 9.
, not rendering (...) (...), evil for evil, or railing for railing, as he
expresses it. Moreover, when ^t is applied to persons, it denotes the
succession of one, in the room and place of another; as St. Matthew Matt. 2.22.
speaking of Archelaus, says, he reigned (...), in the room of his Father
Herod, not their interpretation then, being too much derogatory to the grace of
Christ, but ours, as most agreeable to the mind of the Holy Ghost, not for our
good, benefit and profit only, as they would have it, but in our room and
steed, as we expound it; for so it must be here.

Lastly, such as speak of the death of Christ, as an holy expiatory, or
sacrifice for sin, which the Epistle to the Hebrews, especially the 9th
Chapter, sets forth most clearly. So then, though the Socinians cannot find
this word Satisfaction in their Bibles, yet they may find that which is
equivalent to it, and is put for it, as when the hurt or damage done to any
one, either by sin, or other trespass, is truly and fully recompensed, this is
satisfaction See Grotius de Satisfact. Christi, cap. 7.8, 9, 10.
That this was performed by Christ, and the Justice of God hereby appeased,
which we had provoked by our transgressions, is manifest by those Testimonies
formerly recited, and by such expressions as are in Scripture frequently used;
Yet, lest any should go away unsatisfied in this point of satisfaction, as it
is impossible to satisfy all; God in his just judgment having sent abroad a
Spirit of delusion, there being multitudes, that will sooner comply with an
upstart and erroneous opinion, upon the appearance of one single, and single
sole argument, then embrace and cleave to a truth, though confirmed by many
strong and sinewy demonstrations, evident and apparent probations out of the
holy Scriptures; even as one stroke will carry a man farther with the tide,
then five against it; And therefore I have the less hope to prevail with many;
yet to satisfy the ingenuous, and leave the rest without excuse, I shall
propose these ensuing arguments to the serious consideration of the unbiassed
Reader.

The first, of which we take from the meritorious cause of Christ his death;
Christ suffered and dyed for our sins whence we argue thus, He, that taking
upon him our nature, has therein undergone all the sufferings, which were due
to the offenders, and such as were guilty, whose persons he represents: So that
his chastisements have ceased in the pacification of the Imponent, his
Sacrifice bin the expiation of all the offenses, his stripes have brought
health and deliverance to the delinquent; He has truly and fully made
satisfaction for them; But Christ Jesus, (...), God-Man ha^h suffered and
undergone all these things, as has bin sufficiently proved already by many
texts of holy Scripture; Therefore he has made full and perfect satisfaction.

Secondly, from the expiation of our sins, and that reconciliation, he has
wrought between God and us, who were as the Prophet speaks Isa. 59.2.
, separated the one from the other, so that from hence we thus argue. If Christ
has pacifyed the wrath of God toward us, which was exceedingly incensed
against us, by reason of those sins and transgressions which were committed by
us, so that now (though before we stood condemned) there is no condemnation at
all to us; He must needs satisfy Divine Justice, which otherwise could not be
appeased toward us; But the former is true, as we have already proved:
Therefore the latter.

Thirdly and lastly from that redemption which we have by Christ; Christ has
redeemed us by his death; So that we thus conclude, wheresoever there is true
redemption Heb. 9.15. (...).
, in which a certain price is paid Matt. 10.28. and Mar. 10.45. 1 Timothy 2.6.
, so that they for whom the price is paid, by reason and in consideration
thereof, be freed and discharged from deserved bonds or punishment; there also
is true satisfaction; But such is our redemption by Christ, the true prise
(...) interveniente, being laid down and accepted. Therefore there is true and
real satisfaction. Besides, he that was made sin for us 2 Cor. 5.21.
, that we might be made the righteousness of God, yea was made a curse for us
Gal. 3.13.
, thereby freeing us from the same, has truly and fully satisfied for us; But
this was performed by Christ our Surety in our steed; Therefore he has fully
satisfied the Justice of his Father for us. Otherwise the Law was published to
no purpose, and sentence denounced in vain against the violaters Genesis 2.17.
morte morieris.
thereof, contrary to the immutability and unchangableness of God, yea and sin
would also remain unpunished, contrary to his essential Justice.

Thus thou see, good Reader, whether these blind guides would lead thee, and
to what a miserable estate they endeavor to bring thee, robbing thee of the
means and hopes of thy Salvation, and leaving thee burdened with the heavy
weight of thy sins, which thou can not bear, and liable to the full measure
of Gods wrath, which thou art not able to undergo. If this be so, we are of all
men most miserable, and farewell all happiness after this life; Men may sing
(if they have any heart to it, in this sad and desperate condition) that old
Epicurean ditty, ede, bibe, lude, etc. Oh what madness does possess the souls
of these men! were they not as good deny the very death of Christ, as deny the
virtue, power and efficacy of his death? May they not as well say he dyed not,
as say he dyed thus, thus to no purpose, leaving us in our sins, and the
Justice of God altogether unsatisfied for us? These men, men said I? Yea
monsters rather, sub specie veritatis veritatem vulnerant, wound Truth in her
own coat: under pretense of defending the Mercy of God, they deny his Justice.
But let these stand or fall to their own Master, and seeing that we have proved,
that Christ has done and suffered these things for us, let not the good and
benefit thereof fall beside us; Let us look at that with thankful admiration,
which these heretical Blasphemers do load with scorn and derision. Christ
suffered for us, not only nostra causa, for our sake, or nostro bono, for our
good, but also nostra vice, in our steed, and nostro loco in our place; He
representing our persons in the similitude of sinful flesh, stood in our room,
taking those stripes upon him, which would have dashed us to pieces, by the
virtue whereof we have our healing; The curse of St. Paul will surely light
upon such as preach to the people any other Doctrine, nor can they expect a
blessing, that are reduced by it, when (as in these days) they shall attempt
it.

Thirdly, concerning the nature of the Mediatorial obedience of Christ, or the
meritorious price of our redemption.
THE Dialogue having hitherto denied Christ's suffering the wrath of God, due to
the Elect for their sins by way of satisfaction to Divine Justice, as also the
imputation of their sin unto Christ, as their Surety, though very
immethodically, and out of place, preferring the effect before the cause; lest
he should fall into another foul absurdity in his reasoning, that is, to deny
the subject of the question, does present us with a new thing of nothing in the
steed thereof: And because he has prevailed with some, and they perhaps such
as will not give their heads for the washing, it may be Masters in Israel, to
comply with him, he expects the l^ke of all; and therefore would have us
follovv all that he proposes to us, making no question for conscience sake. But
should we be thus persuaded by him, we might unhappily choke our selves
with bones instead of meat.

If he would have men neither stop nor stumble at his Doctrine, he must carry
the matter more clearly, or more cleanly at the least, then hitherto he has
done, in that which has already past our hands, or is vvilling to do, for
ought we see, in that which yet remains to be surveighed by us: not forsaking
the ordinary phrase of Scr^pture, such as has bin in use in all ages with the
Church of God, and by coining new and unusual expressions, thereby, as much as
in him lies, to ob cure the Truth, and obtrude and confirm in the room thereof,
his own devices; yet he hovers about so long in generals, as that, me thinks,
he seems desirous, that his Reader should understand more, then he is willing
to express. And seeing he is so loath to tell us, what this new knack is, which
he has bin so long a hammering on the Socinian anvile, and what he means by
his Mediatorial obedience, we will take the pains to sift him a little, and see
if we can bolt it out; and here at last it comes, and this it is, Christ's
Mediatorial obedience, says he, is made up of certain actions, performed by
him (not in way of obedience to the Moral Law; for all such actions he
performed as a godly Jew, and as man only Rank Socinianisme. The Dialogue
denies the hypostical Union of the two natures in Christ, which must not,
cannot be severed one from the other.
, but) as God-Man, Mediator unto the Law of Mediatour-ship, especially after
thirty years of age, the Masterpiece whereof was his yielding himself up, to
suffer a bodily death. Monstrum horrendum, inform! What a piece of stuff is
here? yet all this thrust upon our belief (if we were so mad as to receive it)
without any other authority to back it, then a bare ipse dixit, the Dialogue
himself affirms it. But fair play and above board will do well, especially in
matters of such consequence. And we would have him know, that in matters of
faith we must embrace nothing, but what we are persuaded is firmly and surely
grounded on the Word of God, by which, when he has proved this Mediatorial
obedience, which he has here proposed to us, his work is done, and it shall go
hard, but we will get him leave to play.

In opposition then to this new no obedience, we will put into the other scale,
that which we understand by the true Mediatorial obedience of Christ, that so
the Reader, whose judgment is free, may plainly discover the van^ty of the one,
by the reality of the other. It is then the whole conformity of Christ, God-Man
in both Natures Divine and humane, to the will of his Father, doing and
suffering all things needful and necessary for the satisfaction of Divine
Justice; freeing also thereby the Elect in whose room and steed he dyed and
suffered, from those eternal miseries and Calamities to which they were liable.
This is called the active and passive obedience of Christ; which division is
not allowed in respect of the several causes, but the circumstances only; for
no obedience in respect of the cause can be said to be passive, but active
only. Christ therefore taking upon him our person, as well by doing as
suffering; subjected himself to the Law of God for us, fulfilling the same by
his most perfect obedience, even to the death of the cross, by which he
completed and perfected al his other sufferings. That this is so, does
manifestly appear by the Apostle Romans 3.31.
by faith says he, we establish the Law; Now faith does establish the Law
these two ways; It was the first voice of the Law, in the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death; after that it spoke thus, cursed is every
one that continues not in all things, that are written in the Law to do them;
These threatenings of the Law, we establish by faith, because by faith we
testify that they are not in vain, and to no purpose, seeing it was necessary
that Christ should dye, and endure the curse of the Law for us, that we might
be redeemed from the same. Therefore first of all, by faith we confirm and
establish the truth of the threatenings of the Law. The other voice of the Law
is, he that does these things shall live in them, this also we establish by
faith, because we believe we are justified freely without the performance of
the Law in respect of our selves, but not so in respect of Christ, who that he
might satisfy the Law for us, was liable to the fulfilling and accomplishing
thereof with most exact and perfect obedience, as every way most necessary and
convenient.

In the second place therefore we are truly said to establish the Law by faith,
because we believe that in Christ we have perfectly fulfilled it, even with
that very obedience that the Law required. Also the same Apostle Romans 8.3.
seeing, we could not perform the things contained in, and commanded by the
Law, in or by our selves, we have performed them in the person of our
Mediator, who has taken off the threatenings of the Law, by satisfying the
penalty of it, and suffering the utmost that by the rigor thereof could be
inflicted on him; as also has fulfilled the precepts of the Law, by his most
entire and perfect obedience to the same.

We stood engaged unto God by a double debt, one was the str^ct and rigid
observance of the Law, every moment to fulfill the same, even from that first
instant, wherein it pleased the Lord to kindle the light of knowledge in our
hearts, until the last minute, when he should be so pleased to put it out
again, the whole course of man's life, and that both in regard of purity of
nature, and purity of action.

This debt being laid upon us in the Creation, was severely exacted from us by
the Law; The other, having failed in this, is to give full and ample
satisfaction to the Justice of God for the nonperformance hereof; Having
broken this Law of God, holy in it self, and easy to be performed by us, in
regard of the holiness of our Creation, in both these being obliged, and yet
neither performed, what can be expected by us, but that we should suffer the
greatest penalty that could be inflicted? But Christ Jesus the beloved Son of
his Father becomes our Surety, and by Gods acceptance of his obedience for us,
made full and complete satisfaction even to the rigor of the Law, both doing
and suffering what was, or could be, according to the Justice thereof,
required by it.

For the better and more clear concerving of this Answ. David, what? not a
godly Jew? such is the Dialogues esteem of him, but a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord; Besides at eight days circumcised; at twelve years of age si^ing
among the Doctors in the Temple, hearing them, disputing with them, and asking
them questions, somewhat tartly reproving his Mother for her inquisitive and
un-necessary, searching for him, and seeking after him; what wist you not, that
I must go about my Fathers business? Calvin in his Evangelical Harmony tells us
Hoc verbo significat se aliquid habaere homine majus, etc. Call. Har.
, that those very words declare and speak him more then a man, and therefore
more then our Dialogue would have him, a godly Jew. Christ himself shows,
that the principal end of his coming into the World, was to perform the office,
which was enjoined him of his Father, and therefore seemed to neglect the duty
due by nature to Mary his Mother, that he might truly declare himself in the
duty which he was to perform to God his Father. That Christ then should be for
thirty years together unmindful of this great and only business, which was his
meat and drink to perfect and accomplish, is something unlikely, and very
uncertain; neither the Scripture say it, nor do the Fathers say it, nor any
Orthodox Divines ancient or modern say it; only the Dialogue says it, who, for
ought we see, dare say any thing, without any more or other authority, then his
own bare word; But let him take heed, vae soli, woe to him that goes alone in
his sense and exposition of the holy Scripture, and yet is so forward to
obtrude his own conceit with confidence upon others.

This has made so many schisms, and founded so many confounding Heresies, as
are among us at this day.

Christ without doubt was, as we say early and late about his business; early,
even from his incarnation, for then he began; late, even to his suspension upon
the cross, and that consummatum est, which he pronounced a little and but a
very little before his expiration on the same; for then he ended this great
undertaking. But because Christ shall not be idle, with reverence be it spoken,
they have found him some work to do, namely, to fulfill the Law of the Creator
for himself Christus filius Dei, qui immunis jure fuisset ab omnia subjectione,
legi fuit subjectus, ut libertatem nobis acquireret, Quemadmodum enim qui liber
erat captivum se and vadem conspituendo redemit and induendo vincula exuit: Ita
Christus Legi servandae ob noxius esse voluit, ut nobis immunitatem acquireret;
alioquin frustra jugum legis subijsset, cum sua certe causa non fecit. Call. in
Gal. 4.
, to which he was engaged as a Creature; Otherwise, say they, he had not bin an
high Priest without blame; Nor could his sufferings have steeded us, till he
had perfected this for himself. A very hard task sure, have these taskmasters
put upon him, that he should be so long, even thirty years about it, before he
could accomplish it; For the better clearing hereof, and our more orderly
proceeding herein, we shall prove these two things;

First, that Christ was not bound to fulfill the Law for himself;

Secondly, that he did fulfill the Law for us, and in our steed.

To the first, reverend Dr. Featly has contributed a threefold answer; First,
that Christ in regard of his Hypostatical Union, was freed from all obligation
of the Law, which otherwise had layen upon him; if he had bin mere man and no
more; Christ was not only the Son of man, as he is pleased to style himself,
but also the Son of God, yea, God blessed for ever Amen Romans 9.5. and Joh. 5.26.
and so Lord both of the Law Christus Dominus Legis fuit. Tossanus in Gal. 4.
, and of the Sabbath, Matt. 12.8. and Matt. 2.8. Not bound by himself to
fulfill the Law, being above the reach and pitch of any, of all Laws whatsoever.

Secondly, admit that Christ as man, after he had taken our nature upon him,
was bound to fulfill the Law for himself, which cannot be granted Christus
nihil pro se aut fecit, aut passus est, sed propter salutem omnium. Primasius
in Romans
yet, because he freely Non nisi voluntary Christus ses^ legi subjecit
^xnecess^tate eidem obnoxious ^^^ime fuit, Calorius. ^^.
took upon him our nature, and consequently this obligation for us, his
discharging of it must needs accrue to us: As if one freely enter into bond for
another man's debt, if he discharge the bond, he does thereby release both
himself, and his friend for whom he stand engaged.

Thirdly, we must distinguish between a public person and a private; what a
man does as a private person, belongs only to himself; but what as a public
person both to himself and to others. Thus far the Dr. with some addition, not
to mend, but to make plain what was intended by him. We urge also that Aphorism
of St. John Joh. 1.17.
, the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; for how
could the Law be given to Christ, by whom grace and truth were conveyed to
men, to whom the Law only was prescribed? Take a few arguments the more to
strengthen this, and we will pass unto the next.

First, as Christ laid down his life, not by constraint, but freely for us:
even so also did he freely subject himself unto the Law, being no small degree
of that obedience which he performed; But the former is true Joh. 10.18.
, no man takes my life from me, but I lay it down my self. Also he, that is
Christ, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised
the shame. And therefore the latter must needs be so.

Secondly, if Christ being in the form of God, freely took upon him the form of
a Servant, that he might manifest his obedience to his Father; then of himself
he was not a Servant of the Law, nor in this condition liable to the Law. But
the former is true Phil. 2.7, 8.
, he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
and was found in the likeness of men, and became obedient, etc. Therefore the
latter.

Lastly, that which was only our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ Gal. 3.24.
, cannot also be said to be a Schoolmaster unto Christ; for what should it
teach him? or whether should it bring him? But the former is true; Therefore
the latter.

The second thing is now to be considered by us, namely, that Christ fulfilled
the Law for us, and in our steed Pro nobis eam in carne nostra implevit.
Jossanus. Romans 8. page 26.
, This the Socinians do stiffly deny, loading us with many bitter reproaches,
for believing, and maintaining of the same, but all in vain: for they cannot
shake us from our assured confidence herein, being so strongly confirmed and
maintained by the Scriptures, as we find it is; and that first, partly by that
which has bin said already; if Christ were not liable to the Law in respect of
himself, which notwithstanding he truly fulfilled, it is then most certain that
he fulfilled the Law for others. See what he spoke to John the Baptist Matt.
3.15.
, it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; So Matt. 5.17.
I am not come, says he, to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

Secondly, also partly by the opinion of the Apostle Romans 8.3.
, for what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh. God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned
sin in the flesh; where the fulfilling of the Law is ascribed to the Son of
God, which was impossible to be performed by us, that the righteousness of the
Law should be fulfilled in us by faith, that is, in Christ Jesus. Moreover we
may peruse that of the Apostle Romans 5.18.
, and that to the Philipians, cap. 3. verse. 9.

Thirdly, from that Axiom of St. Paul to the Romans, Christ says he, is the
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes; for what else is
that (...), the end of the Law, but the complement, and perfect fulfilling of
the same? But for whom has he fulfilled the Law? Not for himself; but for us,
that believing in him, who has done this for us, we might be justified.

Fourthly, from the imputation of righteousness Phil. 3 5.
, that I may be found in him, says the Apostle, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ Quam quia non habemus in nobis, Deus nobis gratuito donat. Calvin. in
Gal. 3.6.
, the righteousness which is of God by faith; Hence we argue; If the
righteousness of Christ be truly imputed to us, it is necessary also that it
should be employed and improved, yea performed for us, that is in our steed;
But it is truly imputed to us Romans 5.18.
; Therefore it is necessary it should be employed, improved and performed for
us.

Lastly, from the very end of Christ's being subject to the Law; from whence
also we conclude; If Christ of his own accord subjected himself to the Law,
that he might redeem us from the Law, and that we might obtain the adoption of
Sons, it were requisite that Christ should complete and fulfill the Law for us.
But the former is true; Therefore the latter.

Thus then we see, not for himself did Christ fulfill the Law of God, as
Socinus and our Dialogue (considering him only as a godly Jew) would have it,
but for us Christus pro nobis est in carnatus pro nobis obedivit patri: pro
nobis baptizatus, passus, mortuus, resuscitatus, glorificatus. Symphonia Cathol.
, and in our steed, did he complete the same, though they never so much oppose
it.

And so we come to our question again; Christ was either doing or suffering,
suffering or doing Christus in vita habuit actionem passivam, aut passionem
activam.
, even during the whole course of his life; his triumph was upon the cross, a
little before his death, when he had procured deliverance from Hell, and right
and interest to Heaven, then was the perfect consummation of his obedience:
For, says the Apostle Heb. 9.15.
, by the death of the Mediator, (not his bodily death only, as the Dialogue
falsely and fainedly would have it, but his whole sufferings both in soul and
body, the close and conclusion whereof was death) do we receive the promise of
an everlasting inheritance; and notwithstanding he was about it and all things
in the way of obedience, which he either did or suffered, conduced to it; yet
with one Heb. 10.14.
oblation upon the cross, did he perfect them that are sanctified; Nor can
they possibly be perfected; but by the perfect obedience of Christ imputed to
them; And so we pass unto the other two Questions, which are yet to be handled.

Secondly, how Christ could obey, being God, and Answ. junctae juvant, both
together will do well, but either alone will not serve the turn. It is a gross
absurdity, to say no more, of which the Dialogue is guilty in this particular;
conceiving him no other, no better for thirty years together, then any other
common, though Godly Jew, notwithstanding he had then the work and office of a
Mediator imposed on him. The two distinct natures of Christ Hypostatically
united, must not, cannot be separated or divided, without wrong or in ury to
the person of the Mediator, and his high and holy undertaking herein; That the
truth of this sacred mystery, which seems folly unto some, may the more clearly
be manifested unto all, who desire to be instructed in it, we will lay down
these few ensuing arguments.

The first, of which is taken from the Names and Apellations, which are usually
ascribed and given unto Christ, being not only God, or Man, or the Son of God,
or the Son of man, but also (...), Godman, as 2 Samuel 7.19.
Homo, qui Deus Dominus est; So according to the Original, The Man, which is
the Lord God; also Isa. 9.6.
the Prophet tells us of a Child, puer natus, a Child is born, and yet in the
same verse, he is called the mighty God, the everlasting Father; Likewise the
Prophet Jeremiah Jer. 23.5, 6.
calls him the Branch of David, and yet the Lord our Righteousness.

The second from the Prophesies of the old Testament concerning the Messiah, in
which, as true God he is set before us, and proposed to us, as also his coming
in the flesh, as true man, is described to us, for the working out of our
redemption.

The Psalmist notes him as true God in these words Psalm. 45.6.
, Thy Throne O God, is for ever and ever, and verse. 7. as true man in these
words, Thou art anointed with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows. Also
Psalm. 68.18.
, where is described his Ascension according to his humanity, who is said as
God, verse. 7. to go forth in his divinity before the people; In like manner the
Prophet Isaiah brings him in Isa. 49.16.
, as Jehova in respect of his Divine, and yet sent by the Holy Ghost in respect
of his humane nature.

The third, from the most plain and evident Testimonies of the new Testament,
in which also as God and Man he is delivered and descyphered out unto us; So
the Evangelist St. John Joh. 1. verse. 1. 2, 3, 4. and 15.
, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, etc. Moreover in the same Gospel Joh. 5.17. and 27.
, where Christ does both assert his equality with the Father, as God, and
testify all judgment to be committed to him as man; and yet further the same
Evangelist Joh. 10.30.
, brings in Christ thus expressing himself, I and my Father are one; where he
professes himself to be true man, and yet attesteth himself to be one with the
Father; confer with this verse the 33. and 38. of the same Chapter. St. Paul
Act. 20, ^8.
advises those that have the charge of souls, to look to them, and provide
well for them, by feeding the flock of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood; So to the Colossians Col. 2.9.
, in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, attributing and
ascribing unto the Lord Jesus both a Deity and a body at one and the same time.

See also the Apostle in the same Epistle Col. 1.18. and 15.
, where he sets him before us not only as the first born from the dead, but
even the first born to, of every Creature. One glorious description there is of
him, concerning which, setting the rest aside, we cannot choose but speak Heb.
1.1, 2. (...).
, God has in these last days spoken by his Son, who being the brightness of
his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things, by
the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on high; where the Apostle prefers the preaching of
the new Testament, before that of the old; for then God spoke to the Fathers by
his Prophets, mere men, and such as were liable to infirmities as well as
others; but now by his Son, his only begotten Son, manifested in the flesh;
Man, true man, and yet not mere man, but true God also, whose excellency he
describes by many transcendent expressions, and glorious demonstrations.

The fourth from plain and distinct words, such as make evident and apparent
the two natures of Christ; by which he is proposed to our consideration, both
according to the flesh, that is, his humane, and according to the Spirit, which
is his Divine nature. To this purpose is that of the Apostle Romans 1.3.
, concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh; Christ our Lord declaring his Divine, made of the seed
of David expressing his humane nature, both Hypostatically United in one and
the same person. And the same Apostle speaking of the precious privileges of
the Saints, says Romans 9.5.
whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is
over all, God blessed for ever, conferred with that place in St. John Joh. 1.14.
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld the glory, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth; with
that to the Hebrews also Heb. 2.14.
, for as much as Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
took part of the same, that through death, he might destroy him, who had the
power of death, that is the Devil.

The fifth, from those sayings of Scripture which do maintain, partly the
Divine, partly the humane qualities and operations in Christ, which, if he had
not bin both, true God and true Man, could never have suited with him; So the
Wiseman does describe him by his Divine Attributes and works Prove. 8.22.
, The Lord possessed me, speaking of Christ, the wisdom of the Father, in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old. So the Prophet Micah Mic. 5.2.
, and thou Beth-leem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is, to be Ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth have bin from old, even from everlasting. Thus also
the Apostle Paul Gal. 4.4, 5.
, by his humane workings as he was man, and by his Divine workings as he was
God; you have killed the Prince of Peace, working peace and reconciliation both
in Heaven and Earth; To which purpose especially do tend these classical
places, describing, as it were a posteriori, both his Divine and humane nature
united together Joh. 3.23.
, ye are from beneath, says Christ, I am from above Joh. 17.5.
, Father glorify me with that glory, which I had with thee before the World
was. The Apostle exhorts the Philippians Phil. 2.5, 6.
; that they would have the same mind, that was in Christ Jesus, who being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself
of no account, and took, etc. and to the Hebrews Heb. 7.3. (...) ratione
humanae, (...) ratione Divinae nuturae.
, without Father in respect of his humane, without Mother in respect of his
Divine nature, without beginning of time or end of days, in respect of his
eternal Being and Godhead.

The sixth from those Testimonies of Scripture, which describe the Mediatorial
office of Christ; for seeing this office cannot be convenient for one that is a
mere man by nature; because it is in it self truly Divine, and imports Divine
actions, agreeable only to the true God, such as are forgiving of sins,
redemption of mankind, communication of righteousness, and eternal Salvation,
it is necessary; tha^ Christ the Mediator, be not only true man, but true God
also. The chief Testimonies to confirm this, are as I take it, these that
follow; The Spirit of God speaking by Isaiah Isa. 35.4.
, says, behold your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense,
he will come and save you. Also in the same Prophesy Isa. 43.13, 14, 15.
, before the day was, I am he, and there is none that can deliver out of mine
hand; I work, and who shall let it? Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy
one of Israel, etc. and yet the farther Isa. 45.21, 22.
, I the Lord have told it, and there is none beside me, a just God, and a
Savior, there is none beside me. Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of
the Earth: for I am God, and there is none else. The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son says St. John 1 John 1.7.
, cleanses us from all sin.

The last even from a supposition of one of their own, and he none of the least
of the Socinian worthies Smalcius de Divinitate Christi. cap. 10. page 49.
If Christ, says he, had Divine power, which was proper and peculiar to him,
and always residing in him, it must necessarily follow, that there must be in
him, not only a bare humane, but also a Divine nature; and his reason is,
because the Divine power cannot be separated from the Divine Essence. But
Christ had Divine power, which was always proper to him, and resident with
him; Therefore he has not a bare humane, but also a Divine nature. Indeed,
they cannot possibly be severed; For the Godhead does not redeem us without
the Manhood, nor the Manhood without the Godhead; yet, to keep to our
question. Christ as God and man, may both obey and satisfy: For as there are
in Christ, as we have proved, two distinct natures; So there are two distinct
operations of the said natures; And as the said natures united, make one
Mediator: So the operations concurring and being united in one make out, and
complete the compound work of this Mediator, Therefore the obedience of Christ,
being the work of a Mediator, has in it the operations of both natures; The
support, strength and sufficiency is from the Godhead, the practice, exercise
or execution of obedience is from the Manhood.

Obedience is properly a subjection of the will, in reasonable creatures, to
the will of God, now the will of the Godhead is one and the same in all the
persons; Christ therefore becomes obedient, and yields subjection only in
respect of the will of the Manhood, in which he performs obedience, and the
operation of the Godhead, in this great and mysterious work, is to make the
said obedience meritorious; So that it is not only the thing done, but the
Person by whom, namely, God-Man, that has procured the Fathers merciful
Atonement, of which the Diologue makes so much mention, and in which he is so
mistaken; In this respect do I understand those expressions, of the Apostle 2
Cor. 5.18.
, God was in Christ reconciling, the World unto himself. Also speaking
concerning the Church of God Act. 20.28.
, says, it was purchased with the blood of God. That is to say, in that nature
which the Son of God assumed.

Hence then, say we, arises the true value, price and dignity of the obedience
of Christ, being such a person, who did, and suffered these things for us and
our redemption. I have bin somewhat longer about this question, then at first I
intended, because I perceive they have all gotten more or less a tang of this,
instead of magnifying, as they pretend, to debase as much as may, be the Lord
Jesus Christ, both in his person and sufferings for us.

Our third question then for the further clearing Jossanus Tenenda igitur sunt
hac Axiomata, Christum non sibi sed nobis factum logi obnoxiunt. Sibi non natus
sed nobis natuus and datus. Junius de Just. sect. 4.
, these Axioms are to be held by us, Christ was not made subject to the Law for
himself, but for us; And that the whole obedience of Christ is ours, as being
truly imputed to us. Now Christ, says Mr. Perkins, is really given to us in
the Word and Sacraments, and so consequently what is Christ's, yea his whole
obedience is made ours; Even as when a parcel of Land is made ours, all the
profits and emoluments arising and accrewing thereof are ours also. More might
be said to this purpose, but I refer it to its proper place.

We have now seen what the Mediatorial obedience of Christ is, and which his
Father as our Surety (a term of relation which the Dialogue and his party are
not willing to apprehend) strictly exacted of him without any injustice or
tyranny at all; and therefore his passionate blasphemy might well have bin
forborne; But quo semet est imbuta, etc. Socinians I see cannot forbear it.



Heb. 9.12.
we have entrance into the holy place? Answ. to show him his mistake; for by
the blood of Christ we are Synechdochically to understand his passion, which
cannot be severed from his active and voluntary obedience; The reason is plain,
because Christ in suffering obeyed and in obeying suffered; in his life he
performed a passive action, in his death he sustained an active passion. That
distinction, which he makes of Christ's obedience into Legal and Mediatoriall is
by no means to be admitted by us: for Christ did not perform two sorts of
obedience, as the Dialogue, and the rest of the Socinian party would persuade
us, the one Legal for himself, and to which, as being man he was bound, and for
which they jointly urge, but much amiss, that place of the Apostle Gal. 4.4.
, in the fullness of time God sent his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law,
to redeem those that were under the Law; we read not here, that Christ was born
under the Law, the Words are distinctly set down, the Son of God, made of a
Woman, and afterward made under the Law, not for himself, or his own cause, but
for those that were under the Law, that he might redeem them. He himself is
distinguished from them that were under the Law, as a Redeemer, from those that
are redeemed; Therefore he was not under the Law for himself Cum non esset
proprie Legis debtor in se, neque respectu humanae naturae (alias enim propter
identitatem (...) logos ipse pro se ad legis ob sequium teneretur, quod in
legis authorem foret contumeliosum) nec respectu personae: sed respectu
dispositionis v^luntariae, omni tamen, ex part legi satisfecit, ut exuberans
infiniti plane meriti plenitude nobis in Christo parata, etc. Junius de Iusti.
Sect. 7:
, least in so subjecting him to the Law, we should be driven to conceive that
he stood in need of a Redeemer as much as others, which is no small derogation
to the Son of God, the Redeemer of the World. The other Mediatorial, for us and
in our behoof; but these are but one and the same obedience; Christ performed
nothing in way of obedience to the will of his Father, but for us, as our
Surety, and in our steed; The whole work whereof, may be called, if you will,
Mediatorial from the office of the Person obeying; Legal, from the Rule which
was obeyed This obedience, as we have said, is but one, which y^^ is
constituted of these two parts;

First, the perfect fulfilling of the Law;

Secondly, the suffering of that punishment, which the breaking thereof
deserved.

The fulfilling of the Law is the first part of Christ^ obedience, by which he
performed throughout t^^ whole course of his life perfect obedience to the Law
of God for us; The enduring the punishment, for our sins is the other part of
his obedience, taking upon him in our room that which we had justly merited by
reason of our transgressions; that so satisfying the severity of Gods Justice
for us, we might be freed from that obligation and penalty which was upon us,
so that Ursinus joining both together says Quicquid fecit aut passus est
Christus, ad quod ipse tanquam justus and Dei filius non fuit obligatus, est
satisfactio ejus quam nobis praestitit, and justitia quae nobis credentibus
adeo gratis imputatur; ea enim satisfactio aequiposset vel impletioni Legis per
obedientiam, velaeternae paenae propter peccatum, ad quorum alterutrum Legi
obligamur, page 394.
.

Here the Dialogue takes an occasion, to what purpose I know not, to quarrel
with the Lutherans, for an error of theirs on the one hand, unless it be,
that he may the better and sooner prevail with his over-confident Reader, and
so carry him into an error on the other, cunningly casting out one Devil by
another, and yet the latter more dangerous, if not more desperate then the
former. For neither one drop of blood, as he charge them, nor all the bodily
sufferings of Christ, as we charge him to say, but the perfect fulfilling of
the Law for us, and the satisfying Divine Justice incensed against us, even the
whole obedience of Christ; is that by which we are redeemed from, and
discharged of that debt and penalty, to which we were liable, and for which we
stood accountable.

The Dialogue, auribum lupum tenet, finding it too hard a matter to prove what
he had undertaken, that is, That Christ's natural, or bodily death only, is the
meritorious price of our redemption, falls strangly off, and betakes himself
unto an other matter; For not being able to confirm by argument, he will
perplex with amazement, his less attentive Reader, telling him, that the Jews
and Romans did not put Christ to death, but that he himself separated his soul
from his body, shed his own blood, and did (as he expresses it) actuate his own
death, contrary to the very letter of the Scriptures Act. 2.23.
where Peter in his Sermon charge them home with the cruel killing of Christ
the Lord, saying, him have yea taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. Again Act. 3.15.
, and have killed the Prince of life, What our blessed Savior, speaks in John
Joh. 10.17, 18.
, that he laid down his life, no man taking it away from him, shows his
willingness to yield himself up into their hands, who by the determinate
council and foreknowledge of God, were to be instruments of his death; We know,
that in respect of humane power, no man could take away his life, till he was
willing to lay it down, which he did by submitting to them, when his hour was
come, for that very purpose. We say, Christ dyed willingly, we cannot, dare not
say wilfully, which he must needs do, if the Language of the Dialogue may pass
for current, that he shed his own blood, and did actuate his own death. Christ
offered himself to God his Father, yet did he not kill himself; The Jews killed
him, yet did they not offer him; for indeed they could not: The Priest is more
worthy then the sacrifice, yet here is one, who was Priest, Sacrifice and Altar
too; He was a Priest, but not in respect of his Divine nature alone, as the
Dialogue labors to persuade: For whatsoever Christ did or suffered, in a
Mediatorial way, was done and suffered by the two natures In exequendo
Mediatoris officio utraque natura operatur rum communione alterius Leo ad
Flavianum, cap. 4.
, in him Hypostatically united, and not by either alone. Whole Christ is our
Mediator, Redeemer, Priest and Prophet in both natures, according to his Deity
and humanity.

What the Dialogue would force upon our belief from that place of John Joh.
6.63.
, namely, that the humanity of Christ, which he understands by the word flesh,
does not profit us, is in the first place a mere contradiction to himself,
having altogether pleaded for the bodily sufferings of Christ hitherto; then we
aver, that it is not to be found in, or gathered from the words: for the best
Expositors tell us, that by flesh there is meant any natural food, and not the
flesh of Christ, giving this reason for it; wheresoever say they, Christ
speaks of his own flesh, there is the Pronoune My, added to it; or else he
expresses it thus, the flesh of the Son of man; but there is neither the one,
nor the other; and therefore cannot be meant of the flesh of Christ. They are
exceedingly mistaken, says Scharpius Errant qui hoc loco percarnis vocem
humanitatem Christi distinct consideratam, and Spiritum, Deitate significari
volunt. Syphonia.
, in the sense and meaning of our Saviors Words, who by flesh would have his
humanity, by Spirit, his Deity to be signified or understood. But should we let
this pass for granted; which must not be, that the humanity of Christ does not
profit us; must it therefore follow, that his obedience to the Law does not
profit us, nor his fulfilling of the same for us? Did ever any that pretended
the least knowledge in the Rudiments of Art, fetch a conclusion so far wide of
the premises? But what shall we say to these Socinians, whom no rules of Art
are able to keep within compass of sound Reason, nor texts of Scripture,
within the bounds of true Religion, but that they break through, and run over
all to beguile us in the one, and betray us in the other? Plutarch makes report
of a certain Woman named Phea, who robbed all passengers that came by her
Palace. These, these Socinians, the Dialogue and his fellows, are like unto
her; For none can escape their hands; They rob God of his Justice, mercy and
wisdom; Christ of his merit and satisfaction; man of all sound and solid means
of Salvation, leaving him in a worse condition, then the thieves left that poor
man, that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, not half, but stark dead,
without any help or hope of recovery. I shall bestow upon the Dialogue and his
high admirers, with the rest of the Socinian Brethren, but this one argument,
and so I will conclude this part also with a friendly advice to all Christian
Readers.

That opinion which takes away the means, by which God is revealed to be
infinitely just, merciful and wise, making also the satisfaction of Christ, and
his perfect fulfilling of the Law, a vain and needless thing, is most
heretical, impious and blasphemons; But this opinion takes away the means by
which Gods Justice, mercy and wisdom are revealed to be infinite, makes
Christ's full and perfect satisfaction a vain, superfluous and needless thing.
Therefore it is a most heretical, impious and blasphemous opinion.

You will say this is a hard and a heavy charge; but if I make it not plain and
evident, let me bear the blame, among all judicious and understanding men for
ever; for which purpose, and the better accomplishing hereof, we will descend
unto particulars.

First, that which reveals God to be infinitely just is, that he cannot be
reconciled to men, that have sinned against him, and provoked his displeasure
toward them, without execution of his Justice Ita offensi Patris sempiternam
justi^ am absolutissimae perfectionis (...) miseris hominibus reconciliavit ut
Deus Justitiae laudem in media misericordia non amitteret.
, and a full satisfaction made according to the justness of his Law, which he
imposed on them; If not by men in their own persons, which is altogether
impossible, yet by their Mediator and Surety for them, and in their behalf, and
so by him communicated to them, and made theirs, as truly, and really, as if
they in their own persons had done, fulfilled, and satisfied the same. This is
that means, by which God is known to be infinitely just.

Secondly, when Gods infinite Justice was so strict, that nothing could satisfy
it, or redeem man from the power of it, but a price of infinite value laid down
for him; and when all the World was not able to find out such an unvaluable
price or consideration, Gods infinite wisdom having in her hand from all
eternity, for this very purpose, this transcendent treasure, this great and
inestimable price, did in due time, shadowing it in the similitude of frail
and sinful flesh, deposite it for us, making hereby full and real satisfaction
for every one that shall by the hand of faith lay hold upon it, and make a
right application of it; and this is that, which reveals Gods infinite wisdom.

Thirdly, in that God the Father would in this case, and for this purpose, give
his own only begotten Son, out of his bosom, to be humbled in our nature, to
obey, suffer, and make full satisfaction for poor miserable men; and in that
the Son would willingly and of his own accord take this, all this upon him, to
do and suffer whatsoever strict Justice should require to condign
satisfaction: and that when all this could not otherwise bring any profit or
commodity to men, that the holy Spirit of God should not disdain to take up his
constant and continued habitation with men; yea, reside and dwell in them,
working in their hearts all grace needful and necessary for them, this is a
plain and evident demonstration of Gods mercy, infinite mercy manifested to
those that were in the greatest misery; yet all these means clearly manifested
and maintained by the Scriptures, does this wicked opinion of our Socinian
Dialogue utterly overthrow, if it were possible, and take away, leaving poor
souls quite destitute of the principal means of their Salvation, and therefore
must needs be most heretical impious and blasphemous. Having thus briefly, yet
faithfully, and fully (I hope) performed my undertaking, I admonish all men in
the fear of God, as they tender his glory, and the dear Salvation of their
precious souls, to take heed of this dangerous opinion, least they be unawares
deceived by it: and the rather, because Satan has this advantage of us, that
he can transform himself into an Angel of light, that thereby he may bring many
into his Kingdom of darkness; and many Emissaries of his are now abroad,
factoring in all places to enlarge that his hellish dominion, clothing and
triming strange Doctrines, with strange words and expression an unusual dialect,
whereby those, who are affected with novelties may be the easier allured and
ensnared. And therefore let every one take heed, praemonitus praemunitus, thou
have bin often told of these things, so that I say unto thee, again, take heed,
least through th^^r subtility, and thine own weakness or willfulness, thou be
deceived, to thy shame and sorrow here, and thine eternal torment hereafter.

Fourthly, concerning a sinners justification before God.
WE are now to have do with the great and weighty business of a sinners
justification before God, then which nothing is more necessary to be known, or
more comfortable to be believed, and therefore, the blessed Spirit, by the Word
and Ordinances, does teach every faithful soul to believe and know, that he,
being a sinner in himself, and by sin obnoxious to eternal damnation, is by the
mercies of God in the merits of Christ, by faith apprehended and applied to his
own soul, not only freed from the guilt of his sins, and the punishment due
unto the same, but also accepted as righteous before God in Christ, and made
heir of everlasting salvation. This Doctrine so necessary, and so full of
comfort, is strangly and strongly opposed, by the Papists on the one side, with
whom our controversy is not at present, by the Socinians on the other
Justificationem and salutem per observantiam Legis, and praeceptorum Dei
somniant. Calovius de Socinianis. Extra Christum ejusque mortem nos Salvari
potuisse, ideoque absolute necessariam non esse mortem Christi ad nostram
justificationem affirmat. Smalcius, libro de satisfactione. c. 10. p. 28.
, from whose calumnies; and foul aspersions, we shall endeavor to clear it,
with the best abilities God has afforded us. Being then a controversy of such
importance, that it concerns our very title to Heaven and everlasting
happiness, it is to be handled with all diligence, and not without a more then
ordinary invocation of the Spirit of Truth, that he would lead us into all
truth, and guide us in setting down the same, that God may have glory, and poor
souls may find comfort; as also assist and strengthen us against all the
Enemies hereof, confirming and establishing us in the profession of the same.

For our more orderly proceeding herein, we intend (God willing) to pass by
these several steps, or particulars.

First, we shall show, what Justification is;

Secondly, we shall declare the cause of it;

Thirdly, we shall descend to the fruits and effects of it; in some, if not in
the most of which, we shall ever and anon have some skirmishing with the Enemy;

And lastly, we shall conclude the whole, and yet all with as much brevity, as
possibly we may.

We come to the first, namely, to show the nature of Justification: for the
right understanding of the Word will very much help and further us, that we may
the better know, what it is, of which we are to speak; for which purpose,
neither Cicero, Terence, Caesar, nor any of those, who were the first and
purest Authors of the Latin tongue, were ever acquainted with this word
Justificare, which is now in use among us, and with which at this time we have
to do, We must therefore seek farther, and look higher, if we mean to be truly
certified hereof, and fully satisfied herein; Omitting then all others, we will
only pitch upon two places, the one in the Old, the other in the New Testament,
as the aptest in my judgment, of all other for this purpose; The one that of
the Wiseman Prove. 17.15.
, He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are an abomination to the Lord: Here is the Word it self, and its
opposite; the Word it self (...) signifying Absolvere;
to absolve, or free: the opposite (...) importing Improbificare (si ita
liceret loqui) i. e. condemnare and ad supplicum tradere.
to condemn, or to deliver over to just and condign punishment; They are both
Judicial terms, exercised or used in judgment, holden on such weighty matters,
as touch the life or death of the person concerned or engaged; The other
answerable hereunto, is that of St. Paul Romans 8.33.
, where he propounds the question, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? and rather then we shall go away without an answer, he himself, as
best able for to do it, will furnish us; Surely none; None indeed can justly do
it, to which he adds a reason to the purpose; For it is God that justifies.
The Apostle in this place makes a bold challenge in the behalf of all the
Elect, (...)? Who can accuse them, or call them into question, or, is there any
thing that can be laid against them? And yet we see they do not want accusers,
the Devil is ready at hand to do it, the Law of Moses will do it, yea, rather
then fail, their own consciences will do it; But what says the Apostle? all this
is to no purpose; For (...), it is God that justifies, that is, frees them from
all these accusers, and their accusations too; yea absolves them from the guilt
of sin, not imputing it to them, but imputing the righteousness which is by
faith; For the Apostle opposes justification to condemnation here, as Solomon
also did before; Even here also are two actions of judgment set before us; The
one charging a man with guilt, or crime, of which being justly convicted, does
pronounce the sentence of the Law against him; The other opposite to both
these, absolving and acquitting him from guilt and punishment, does declare and
publish him to be just and righteous. This is a matter of high concernment, and
to speak the very truth, there cannot but be a great deal of difficulty in
defining things of this nature; We will not therefore trust to our selves, or
any abilities in us, as thinking it sufficient to trade with our own stock, in
a business of so much consequence; but will rather; as the man of Macedonia,
call for help, and see where or how we may best supply our selves; And behold
here is one at hand, that is both able and willing to furnish us, (of whom we
will make use at present; for I suppose we cannot mend our selves look where we
will) with such a definition of Justification, as may be justified in all the
parts thereof, which is this, it is, says he, an act of God whereby he
acquitteth every penitent and believing sinner, not imputing to him his sins,
but imputing to him the perfect satisfaction and righteousness of Christ; There
is not any part of this definition but is Scripture proof, as we shall see (God
willing) by degrees hereafter: In the mean time, having seen what is meant by
the word Justification, as also the nature and definition thereof, we pass on
to the next thing proposed by us, namely, the causes, which (as in all other
things, so in this) are four, to wit, the Efficient, Material, Formal and Final.

The Efficient causes of a sinners Justification are of two sorts, either
principal or instrumental; the principal is God, both essentially, the whole
Trinity Isa. 43.25. Romans 3.26.
, I, even I am he that blot out thy transgressions; and also personally; The
Father Romans 8.33.
, That He, namely, God the Father might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus; The Son also testifies this of himself Matt. 9.6.
, saying, the Son of man has power to forgive sins, and so to justify these
that were ungodly.

The Holy Ghost performs this too 1 Cor. 6.11.
, And such wretches by reason of iniquity were some of you, even guilty of the
same impieties, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the name of our lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: For seeing this
work is of that kind, which by the Schools is termed ad extra, an outward
action of God, it is common to all the three Persons; And yet it is distinct
too, in regard of the order and manner of working, as also the terms and limits
of operation; whence the Act of justifying is antonomastically ascribed to the
Father, the merit thereof to the Son, and the application of this merit to the
Holy Ghost; So that God the Father justifies as the primary cause, and as
being the Author thereof; God the Son as the meritorious cause; and God the
Holy Ghost as the cause applicatory, and brought home to the justified persons
conscience, in the comfortable assurance thereof; So that the whole amounts to
thus much, God the Father through the Son, does justify us by the Holy Ghost:
The Father, I say, as the principal cause, and that in two respects.

1. In that he gave his only begotten Son for us, and set him forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, that all that believe in him should be
justified, as the Apostle witnesses Romans 3.25.
.

2. In that he absolveth those that so believe, and pronounces them just in
Christ. The Son, as the Mediator and meritorious cause, and that also in two
respects.

1. As he his our Surety, who paid our debt, our Redeemer, who laid down the
price of our redemption for us Isa. 53.11.
, affording unto us both the matter and the merit of our justification.

2. As he is our Intercessor and Advocate to plead for us, that his merits may
be imputed to us; For, though the sufferings of Christ be a precious salve to
cure our Souls, yet we cannot look for healing by them, unless they be
applied; and though his righteousness be a wedding garment sufficient in it
self to cover all our Spiritual nakedness, yet will it not clothe us, unless
it be put on; Therefore in the third place the Holy Ghost is said to justify
us, because he brings home, and applies unto our Souls the righteousness of
Christ for our justification, both as he is the Spirit of regeneration, working
in us the grace of faith by which we receive Christ for our justification in
foro Caelesti, before God, and also as he is the Spirit of adoption confirming
this faith in us, together with the assurance of our justification, by which we
are freed and acquitted in foro conscientiae, within our selves, that is, by
the testimony of an upright, sincere and rectified conscience.

The instrumental causes of justification are either external or internal;
external, such is the Word of God, the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, and is
therefore called Romans 1.16.
, the very power of God to salvation; in which respect, Ministers are said to
justify, because as Daniel tells us Dan. 12.3.
, they convert many to righteousness, being instruments (though poor and weak
in themselves Media perfecta ad quae ordinantur.
) that God is pleased to make use of for this purpose, and by whom, those that
are ordained unto life, are brought to believe 1 Cor. 3.5.
; For by the preaching of the Gospel; seconded and made powerful by the
operation of the Holy Ghost, the sentence of justification and remission of
sins, and so consequently of eternal life and salvation is pronounced and
concluded in the conscience of the faithful; such the Sacraments also Tit. 3.5.
, not by works of righteousness, which we have done, says St. Paul, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost;

For first, in them the benefit of the Messiah is presented before us, and by
those outward signs discerned by us; in which respect the Sacrament is called
Verbum visibile, a word which is visible;

Secondly, such is the Sacramental Union between the sign and the thing
signified, which is Christ, together with all the train and quire of his
graces, as also all his merits offered to us.

Thirdly, this transcendent benefit of the Messiah is not only offered in the
Lawful and commendable use of the Sacraments, but is also given to, and
conferred upon every faithful partaker thereof; In this sense the Sacrament of
Baptism is said to be the seal of that righteousness which is by faith, as the
Apostle calls circumcision Romans 4.11.
. The internal cause of justification is, not hope, though hope makes not
ashamed; not charity, though it be faiths almoner, and shall be rewarded of God
Prove. 19.17.
; not fear, though it restrain us from sin; not repentance, though it be the
gift of God, by which we wipe out the old score of our sins past, and resolve
to glorify God for the time to come; but faith, and faith only, by which we
overcome the World; and that not in respect of its existency, as Socinus would
fain have it, and does earnestly plead for it Imputatur nobis fides a Deo pro
Justitia, etc. in Dialog. de Iustif.
, but in respect of apprehension, and the faculty of application, as that which
is alone (though it never be found alone, without the company and attendance of
other graces) a convenient instrument, fitted for the laying hold upon the
righteousness of Christ; And yet for all this, faith is not to be considered in
the Act of justification, either dispositively, or habitually, or formally, or
meritoriously, or in the kind and nature of a work, but in part organically, in
regard of its Act, and in part correlatively in regard of its object. Whence
the Apostle wisely disposing his words, as being directed by the Spirit of
Wisdom, it self, which cannot miscarry, says, (...) Romans 5.1.
, we are justified through faith, and (...) by faith, but never (...) for
faith. Hitherto the Dialogue and we walk together, passilus aequis, as it were
hand in hand, neither of us stepping aside with Socinus in the place
fore-quoted, and some other of his followers Non innocentiam aut justiam
Christi credentibus imputat Deus, sed fidem illorum imputat illis pro justitia.
Smalcius in disputat contr. Fran.
, to take up this ball which they have cast in our way, that (...), faith it
self, or the very Act of believing does properly justify; yet if he be
acquainted with Socinian John (as I believe he is) a^mighty stickler in this
case, he may soon be drawn away, and easily perverted, to comply with him and
his party even in this matter also. But now, parts locus est ubi se via findit
in ambas, we come to the pinch indeed, in which we shall discover, where, and
upon what terms, we are constrained to part company.

The matter or meritorious cause of our justification, is the next thing, that
is to be considered by us, which is neither the habit of charity, or the
exercise thereof; but only the righteousness of Jesus Christ our Mediator; And
here, here it is that we must part, and not so fairly as may be expected; For
though the distance be small at the Center, yet it is many times found to be
wide enough by that time it come to the circumference: So the difference at
first may seem small, that is between us, but being duly considered, is so
great, that we can by no means give our consent of compliance: For the Dialogue
using that faculty here, which in many other places he shows his dexterity in,
namely, disputandi de non concessis, charge us with that which we never held,
and which is more, never mean to do, if it please God to keep us in our right
mind, that so he may take occasion, without occasion, to quarrel with us,
thinking thereby to show his valor in the eyes of his great admirers,
fighting, though it be but with his own shadow, and yet now and then giving a
slanting blow even at the Justice of God himself. Who ever heard any of us,
(whom God has established in his truth, and made and constituted faithful
dispensers of the same) so much as whisper among our selves, much less publish
it abroad, that the active righteousness of Christ alone Justitia Jesu Christi,
per quam justificamur coram Deo, est perfectissimato tius Legis Divinae
obedientia. Polani Syntag.
, that is, that obedience which he performed to the Law, does justify a sinner
before God? We never said it, we never thought it; and therefore all the pains
he has herein taken to confute us, or rather to blast us, and the truth in us,
under the pretense of confutation, might very well have bin spared, and the
time better spent; but some will be doing though it be to no purpose; and how
can we keep company with those, that charge us with such assertions which we
utterly disclaim, and cast such aspersions on us which we did never deserve?

Again, God cannot do this, God cannot in Justice do that Deus justo judicio
suo a nobis omnia exigebat, quae in (...) Scripta (...) ^uae cum solven^ non
essemus, pro nobis Dominus noster illa persolvit, and ab illo pater debitum
nostrum exigebat. Theodorus Alucara. disput. 15. lib. 5.
, is the common language of the Dialogue, without any reverence or respect had
to the Majesty of the person, of whom he speaks, taking that for granted, which
we absolutely deny, and which was never intended by God, namely, to justify a
sinner by Christ's active obedience only; God has made over to us in Christ,
that which he expects from us, and is sufficient for our justification, the
matter whereof is the righteousness wherein we stand perfectly just and
righteous before him. This, in many places, says a reverend Divine of ours,
and not long since with us, but now departed Downame de Justific.
, by the communication of properties, is called, the righteousness of God,
because it is the righteousness of that person which is God, as the Apostle
shows, Romans 1.17. For therein, speaking of the Gospel, is the righteousness of
God revealed; Also the same Apostle bemoaning the condition of the people of
his nation, says Romans 3.21. and Romans 10.3.
, that they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, went about to establish their
own in the steed thereof, which could do them no good at all. Not our
righteousness then, but his, not infused into us, but inherent in his person
and imputed to us, is that by which we are made and constituted just before
God. Now whether this righteousness of God, be the righteousness of Christ, as
he is God, or as he is a Mediator betwixt God and Man is to be considered.

The righteousness of Christ, as he is God is the essential righteousness of
the Godhead, which is his essence, and therefore himself, and so cannot be the
righteousness of any, who is not God, by which if we should be justified we
should also be deified; Moreover the essential righteousness of God, being the
essence of God, and so the very Godhead, cannot be communicated to any
creature, much less can it become the accidental righteousness of the
creature; It is not therefore the righteousness of the Godhead, no nor the
righteousness of the Man hood, but the righteousness of Christ our Mediator,
which he, being both God and Man, in the days of his flesh, performed for us.
And this is to be understood, not of a part (as the Dialogue does cunningly
insinuate, and would make the World believe we do affirm) but of the whole
righteousness of Christ perfomed by him, e^ther in fulfilling the commandments
of his Father, or in satisfying the curse of the Law for us, as we have already
fully declared.

If there be any jarring among Divines about the right stating of this matter,
I am sure the Dialogue takes no course to reconcile them, that so God may be
glorified, in the Spirit of Peace and Unity among such as make Profession of
the truth: he does rather slighly and subtly (as a learned Civilian expresses
it) capture tempora impacata and inquieta, fish for advantage to himself in
their troubled waters, making for that purpose, the breach far wider then
indeed it is; None ever affirming that God the Father does impute Christ's
legal obedience to sinners, as their obedience, for their full and perfect
justification. We say it, and say it again In hoc convenimus omnes. Si justitia
Christi satisfacientis nostra fiat per imputationem, cur non etiam justitia
Christi Legis implentis?
, that the whole obedience of Christ both active and passive is the matter of a
sinners justification before God.

Neither is there any absurdity that follows this Doctrine as he would fain
persuade; If he would know where an absurdity is, let him look into that
passage of his own, immediately before, the like to which he finds not among
all those who maintain that which he calls the Common Doctrine of imputation,
which is this Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
, that if Christ's passive obedience should be imputed to sinners for their
justification, then should sinners be their own Mediators, which by his leave
(who so highly charge us) is most absurd; For this righteousness of Christ
being truly imputed to us, by it we are accounted just, not because this
righteousness is inherent in us, but because we are inseparably joined to him,
who has this righteousness inherent in him, which through faith is made ours
by the benefit of communication, and not by the manner of inhaesion. One whose
memory is yet precious (I hope) in the once famous University of Cambridge
Davenant de Justitia habituali.
as well worthy of that honor conferred upon him, calls this ridiculam
illacionem, a foolish inference, for which he gives this reason; he can never
be said, says he, to be a Mediator or Savior, who receives redemption and
salvation by the benefit and merit of another imputed to him; but he who by the
power and efficacy of his undertaking performs it for another; by this means he
may truly be said to be redeemed and saved, but no man in his right mind will
say he is a Mediator or Redeemer Yet the Papists and the Dialogue are both in a
mind. Thus Bellar. Si vere impucaretur nobis Justitia Christi, profecto non
minus justi haberi, censerique deheremus, quam ipse Christus, proinde
redemptores, and Salvatores mundi, quod est absurdum.

But let Chameir determine, fieri non potest, ut qui imputative justus est, sit
redemptor mundi and Servator, sed tantum servatus and redemptus, de Just. c.
20. p. 23. 24. Si veritatem justitiae nobis imputatae spectes, non minus justi
censemur coram Deo, ac Christus, nec tamen Redemptor es. Trelcat. page 94.


. For the Dialogues argument we pass it by, not as unanswerable, but because
we have sufficiently proved the one already, namely, that the guilt of our sins
was made Christ's by Gods imputation thereof unto him, and we shall by Gods
assistance in due time make good the other also, that is to say, that Christ's
obedience and satisfaction is made ours, by Gods imputation thereof unto us.

That Christ did not perform perfect obedience to the Law of God, because he
was not a married man, is more then the Dialogue is willing plainly to affirm,
and yet in effect he says as much, because he did not perform all manner of
acts of obedience, which God in that condition requires of us. Our answer
hereunto is, in as much as Christ being himself an infinite person and our
Surety, performed all that was required of him, and more then ever in our best
condition could be expected from us, he performed full and perfect obedience
for us; He fulfilled all righteousness, and by it all are perfectly righteous
that believe, whether men or Women, married or unmarried. And therefore this
silly shift is to no purpose; Would the Dialogue bu undresse his brames, take
off, and lay a side, these and such like phanatick toys, that gingle about his
understanding, God might receive more glory, the Church more peace, himself
more comfort, others more benefit, by, or from the study and practice of those
Truths, which lend directly and necessarily to edification and salvation.

For fear this will not be, we will leave wishing and woulding, and return to
the prosecution of the matter we have in hand; We are justified by the perfect
and complete righteousness of Christ, by which the Law is fulfilled, the
justice of God satisfied, and we delivered from that wrath which we had
deserved Communis omnium nostrorum sententia, neque quod ad rem attinet,
quisquam e nostris aliter scripsit aut sensit.
; all which we will wind up upon this one bottom, and comprehend in this one
argument; By that righteousness we are justified, by which the Law is fully
satisfied; By the righteousness of Christ the Law is fully satisfied; Therefore
by the righteousness of Christ are we justified.

For the proof of the Proposition, three things are to be granted; First, that
whosoever is justified, is made just by some righteousness: For to think that a
man should be justified without any Justice, is as absurd, as to imagine a man
to be clothed without raiment: Secondly, that all true righteousness is a
conformity to the Law of God, which is the perfect Rule of righteousness,
insomuch, that what is not conformable to that Law, is called, and that justly
to, (...), sin: Thirdly, that there can be no justification without the Law be
fulfilled Christus induens nostram carnem nostro nomine perfect praestitit
legem.
, either by our selves, or some other for us; For our Savior Christ protested
when he came to justify and redeem us, that he came not to break, but to
fulfill the Law Tum demum redderetur inanis, si illi non satisficeret, vel per
nos, vel nostro nominae per alium, atqui id per Christum est satisfactum qui
non venit solvere sed implere. Tossa. page 26.
, and that not one jot or title of the Law should pass away, without its due
and true accomplishment.

These things thus premised, being taken for granted, the proposition is firm
and undeniable. The assumption is, that by the righteousness of Christ the Law
is fully satisfied.

For the clearing whereof we are to understand, that to the full satisfying of
the Law, since the fall of Adam, two things are necessarily required, the one
has respect to the penalty, to the suffering whereof, sin has made us
liable, the other to the precept it self, to the performing and completing
whereof the Law it self does oblige us; The former to free us from Hell and
damnation, the other to entitle us to Heaven and eternal salvation: according
to the Sanction of the Law, if thou do not that which is commanded, thou art
thereby accursed; but if thou do, then thou shall be saved: In respect of the
former, the Law cannot be satisfied in the behalf of him, who has once
transgressed it, but by eternal punishment, or that at least which is
equivalent thereunto; in respect of the latter, it is not satisfied, but by a
total perfect and perpetual obedience.

Now our Savior Christ has fully satisfied the Law for all them that truly
believe in him in both respects; For he has super-abundantly satisfied the
penalty of the Law for us, by his sufferings and death: he has likewise
perfectly fulfilled the Law for us, by performing all r ghteousness, that it,
even to the uttermost, either did or could require: So that by them both, we
are freely and fully justified, being freed from Hell, that place of torment,
by the one, and entitled to Heaven that place of happiness by the other. God in
Christ esteeming and accounting a sinner as just Deus in Christo peccatorem
estimat acsi ipse omnia and singula peregisset and perpessus esset, quae
Christus utraque illa obedientia sua and peregit and perpessus est. Bradshaw de
Justific.
, as if he had performed, and endured, all and every thing, which Christ
himself, both by his active and passive obedience performed and endured.

The form of a sinners justification is the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ; because by imputing it, the Lord does justify, which was also
expressed in the definition; And this does necessarily follow upon that which
has bin already said of the matter; For it cannot be imagined, that we should
be justified by that righteousness of Christ which is out of us, and in him,
otherwise then by imputation; For, as we were made sinners by Adams personal
disobedience Romans 5.19.
; So are we made righteous by the obedience of Christ; But how could we either
be made sinners by Adams disobedience, or justified by the obedience of Christ,
either active or passive, unless they were communicated to us? And how could
that be, but by imputation? Downame De Justific. lib. 1. cap. 3.
makes it clear by another action not unlike unto it; As when Rebeccah clothed
her Son Jacob in the raiment of Esau her elder Son, the matter of this action
was that which did cloth him, that is, Esau's garment, the form of that action
was the applying of it unto him, and the putting of it upon him: So the Lord
justifies us, by putting upon us the precious raiment of our elder brother
Christ, his righteousness, in which we obtain the blessing. Thus does St.
Ambrose De Jacob and vita beata.
also use this action for illustration of the form of our justification, with
diverse others.

It is not unknown how stiffly Socinus and his followers oppose this, namely,
that imputation is the formal cause of a sinners justification, and how
directly they conclude against it, that no imputation whatsoever form of
justification, and they give this for a reason, because it is no righteousness;
whereas a form of justification must of necessity be a righteousness;
Righteousness imputed, say they, (and our Dialogue is not much behind them) is
a righteousness, but the imputation of righteousness cannot be righteousness;
To which we answer.

1. It is true; imputation of it, or it imputed is the form, the introduction
of this, which is imputation, has the place of a form:

And 2. this introduction gives denomination, it is the constitution of a man
righteous, by applying to him, that which he has not in, or of himself, that
is, the righteousness of another.

Again, say they, if the righteousness of Christ be matter (as we have
declared) and imputation thereof the form (as we do affirm) then one
righteousness must be the form of another, because the form must needs be a
righteousness; if the matter and form be a righteousness, then one
righteousness enforms another; and hereupon they set themselves against this
Doctrine of imputation, and cry out of a great absurdity in it. We answer; We
still have Peliadae stomachum cedere nescij.
, that here is vox and praeterea nihil, nothing but clamor and noise, words
without matter, For we deny the consequence, we deny what ever they say, or can
say against it, there is no such necessity for that, that the form must needs
be a righteousness; We affirm and that openly without juggling or imposture,
for we care not who know it, for any absurdity there is to be found in it, that
the application of that righteousness is the form: And therefore to set the
saddle upon the right Horse, it is they that make, and it is they must bear the
absurdity, with the shame and reproach that follows thereupon. What need we
any more words? How slightly soever the Dialogue and his Socinians think, or
speak of this comfortable Doctrine of imputation, we would have them know, it
was a truth before any of their cradles were made, and will be a truth, whether
they will or no, when their coffins shall be rotten; yet if any indifferently
disposed to truth do desire further satisfaction herein, I shall refer them to
Bishop Downames treatise of Justification Lib. 4. and 5.
, and to Bishop Davenants, prelections de Justitia habituali Quaest. 3. genesis de
formiali causa justif.
, which will sufficiently confirm them in this high and excellent truth.

We find in Scripture that Michael David's Wife, by the just judgment of God
upon her, for deriding the holy zeal of her Husband, was made barren; yet, if
we observe the course of the World, she may be said to have many Children,
among whom our Dialogue for one, with the rest of his Socinian brethren, who
scorn and deride this necessary Nullos pro justis approbat Deus, nisi quos
prius vere ac sum (non in ipsis, sed) in Christo suo, seu imputata Christi,
justitia justificat. Bek in Romans 4.25.
and comfortable Doctrine of a sinners justification, by the imputation of his
Redeemers righteousness unto him, having none of his own to trust to, throwing
dirt in the faces of those, that to Gods glory, and the comfort of poor souls,
who were otherwise utterly undone, do assert and maintain the same; But with
what advantage to themselves, or prejudice to us, let the World judge by these
ensuing arguments, which me thinks make it so plain to every understanding
Christian, as if it were described and discovered by a ray of the Sun, that
there is none, but may even run and read it.

The first argument then we take from the Words of the Apostle Romans 4.6.
, Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works; Here is righteousness, and righteousness
in express terms said to be imputed; What righteousness can in this place be
understood other, then the righteousness of Christ? For either our own proper
righteousness is imputed to us, or else the righteousness of some other; But
not our own righteousness, because works are wholly excluded from
justification; besides, he which is justified, is said to be ungodly, in whom,
before justification, there is no proper righteousness at all. Therefore it
must necessarily be understood of the righteousness of another, that is, Christ.

Secondly, from the imputation of faith as the same Apostle in the same Epistle
Romans 4.5.
; speaking concerning him that believes, expresses it thus, his faith is
counted to him for righteousness, not as it is a work; for as we said but now,
all works are here excluded, and faith imputed (...) without works, and as it
apprehends Christ and his righteousness, by which alone we are constituted
and made just; as is further proved, Romans 5.19. concerning which, we shall by
Gods leave speak more annon.

Thirdly, from that place of our Apostle to the Galatians Gal. 3.6. etc.
, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; Know ye
therefore says our Apostle, that they which are of faith, the same are the
Children of Abraham, etc. where is clearly expressed, what kind of faith it was
Quae habetur Christo, vel quae Christo nititur. Hoc enim addendum fuit, ne quis
existimaret fidem esse illud quod justificat, quam sit duntaxat instrumentam
quo Christum justitiam nostram apprehendimus. Bez.
, that was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, namely, such a faith as had
respect unto Christ as verse. 13. is manifest, Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, apprehending and applying his obedience, even unto the death
of the cross, by which he became a curse for us.

Fourthly, from the Philippians, 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless says St. Paul, I
account all things but loss and dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the ^aw, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; Where
to our righteousness is opposed the righteousness of ^aith in Christ, which is
no other way to be made ours, but by imputation, and is in the act of
justification imputed to us: So that we are justified, not as having any proper
righteousness of our own, but as having by faith the righteousness of Christ,
by which we are found righteous in him; Whence it is clear, that the
righteousness of Christ, which is apprehended by faith, and applied to our own
particular interest, is by the Apostles testimony, that righteousness, that
very righteousness, which is imputed to us.

Fifthly, from that classick place Romans 5.18.19.
, As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: Even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gifts came upon all men unto
justification of life; For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners:
So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; Whence we briefly
argue thus, If by the obedience of Christ only, we are made just, it is
necessary, not that our righteousness, but the righteousness, or obedience of
Christ should be imputed to us, for our justification; But we are justified by
the righteousness of Christ only; Therefore it is necessary that it should be
imputed to us.

Sixthly, from those words of the Apostle Romans 8.3, 4.
, for what the Law could not do in that it was weak, through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law, might be fulfilled in us,
etc. Whence the argument is this, If the righteousness of the Law be fulfilled
in us, as Christ performed it, which was impossible for us, in like manner the
fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ, is imputed to us also; But the
former is true; And therefore the latter.

Seventhly, from another place in the same Epistle Romans 10.4.
, before we pass away from it, in which the Apostle tells us, that Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes; From whence
the argument may be thus framed, If Christ be the end of the Law, and the
complement thereof for righteousness unto all that believe in him, we ought
assuredly to persuade our selves, that the fulfilling of the Law performed by
Christ, is our righteousness by which we are justified before God: But the
Antecedent is true, And therefore the consequent.

Eighthly, from the words of St. Paul 1 Cor. 1.30.
, who, says he, meaning as is before expressed. Christ Jesus, of God is made
to us, wisdom, righteousness, etc. Whence we argue, If Christ be made of God
righteousness to us, then is the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, because
he was so made righteousness, as that we might be made in him the righteousness
which is by faith through him, as the Prophet Jeremiah Ier. 23.6.
, the Lord our Righteousness. But the former is true; Therefore so must be the
latter.

Ninethly, from another place in the other Epistle to the Corinthians 2 Cor.
5.21.
, He, that is, God, made him, namely Christ to be sin for us, who himself knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, who otherwise of
our selves knew not what righteousness was; Here then, as Christ was made sin
for us, which knew no sin: So are we made the righteousness of God, who knew
not what righteousness meant, in respect of any thing in us: But Christ was
made sin for us, our sins by Divine Justice, and his own submission thereunto,
being imputed to him, and he suffering death for the some; Therefore we are
also made, (yet without any work of ours) ^n Christ the righteousness of God,
Christ's righteousness being imputed to us.

Tenthly and lastly, from another place of St. Paul to the Galatians Gal. 4.4.
, when the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son made of a Woman, made
under the Law, etc. Whence we conclude, that if Christ were subject to the Law,
that he might redeem us from the Law, verily the fulfilling of the Lawby Christ
performed for us, is truly imputed to us for our justification and salvation;
But Christ was subject to the Law, for no other cause Finis enim ostenditur ab
Apostolo, quod videlicet non sibi ipsi, sed nobis talis est factus. Tossanus in
Gal. 4. page 212.
, but that he might redeem us from under the power and curse thereof; Therefore
the fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ for us, is truly and really
imputed to us for our justification and eternal salvation.

Thus we have proved the common Doctrine of imputation, as the Dialogue
scoffingly terms it, that we might, if God see good, to give a blessing to
these poor, yet well intended endeavors, make it more common; And herein we
appeable to the judicious and understanding Reader, whether he find the least
shadow or appearance of that absurd^ty in it, which he imputes to it; I hope
then none will believe that lies are true. We have now done with the Efficient,
Material and Formal cause of a sinners justification before God; We come now to
the last, namely, the F^nal cause, which we conceive to be twofold; Supreme,
ex part justificantis, in respect of the person justifying; Subordinate, ex
part justificati, in respect of the person justified.

The Supreme is, the mani^estation of the glory both of the mercy of God, and
also of his justice, which as they do concur in all the works of God, if we
will g^ve any credit to the P^almist Psalm. 145.17.
, as well we may, who there says, The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, and espec^ally in the work of redemption and
justification; For therein God does so exceedingly mani^est, yea magnify the
glorious attribute of his mercy, that rather th^n he would suffer such wretches
as we had made our selves, utterly to perish in our sins, he sent his own only
begotten Son out of h^s bosom, that we might, as the blessed Apostle St. Paul
excellently sets ^t forth Romans 3.24.
be freely justified by his grace, though the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus; and mark the end, to the praise of the glory of his grace; Wherein as
the same Apostle in another place expresses it Ephesians. 1.6.
, He has made us accepted in his beloved. His Justice also is made man^fest to
the wonder and amazement of all the World; For rather then he would suffer the
sins and transgressions of his own Elect Children to go unpunished, and so his
Justice be unsatisfied, he punished them in the person of his own Son, exacting
from him a full, entire and perfect satisfaction for them, having set him forth
as St. Paul testifies Romans 3.25, 26.
, for this very purpose, to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness, that he might be just and the justifier of him, who
believes in Jesus.

The Subordinate end of just^fication, is our eternal salvation, this is indeed
the end, both of our justification and sanctification: For being made free from
sin Romans 6.22.
, and become servants of God, we have, says the Apostle, in the person of the
Elect, our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life: So St. Peter 1
Pet. 1.9.
, the very end of our faith, by which instrumentally we are justified, is the
salvation of our souls.

These are the causes, We come now, according to our promise, to the fruits or
effects of this excellent Doctrine of a sinners justification before God, which
we take to be these, Remission of sins Remissio peccatorum fit per justitiam
imputatam perfectam. Pareus castique Bell. de justif.
, Reconciliation with God, An effectual vocation, An actual adoption, Peace of
conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, and other such like gifts of the Spirit,
which it works in the hearts of those that are just^fied. We shall not have to
do with all these, they are somewhat too many, and too far off from our purpose
in hand; the two first only fall within the compass of our present intendment;
and first of Remission of sins.

Remission of sins we conceive to be the free absolution of the person
offending, both from the guilt and punishment which by an irregular
conversation he has contracted and deserved; If it were not in some measure
free, it could not properly be called remission or condonation; If it were from
the guilt of sin only, and not from the punishment also, it were foolish and
ridiculous: for we may as well and truly affirm, that a man is discharged of a
debt, without being freed or acquitted from the payment of the same, as to say,
a m^n ^s fre^d from the one, and yet not discharged o^ the other. Some of the
Socinian tribe do plead hard to have remission of sins the formal cause of a
sinners justification; but non been convenit, it fadges ill in their hands; For
dissolution of sins guilt by Chr^sts blood, before imputation, is an uncouth
dissolution, it is a dissolution before application, that which puts the
effect before the cause Causalitate imputatio praecedit remissionem and
necessario prae-requiritur. Polan. in Daniel pa. 324.
; But hear their arguments, and our answers, compare them together, and then
judge indifferently.

First, say they, Remission of sins gives denomination of justification;
therefore it must be the form; Grant this, say we, (though the illustration be
not by whiteness and whitening, whereby they make whiteness the form, which,
among unbiassed men, is the effect, the form being whitning or application) yet
they must prove, that it gives denomination, which they do thus, and that
worthily to; If a sinner, say they, may therefore and thereby be justified,
because he has his sins remitted unto him, then remission of sins gives
denomination of being justified to that person, whose sins are remitted; This
is a mere begg^ng of the question, which is to be proved, and we deny a sinner
therefore justified, till it shall be better proved, which will not be while
this man is Major, I see by the manner of their working. For, say they, it is a
vindication or an exemption from punishment; We join issue here, and say it is
so indeed, but after another manner then they take it, it is so in effect, that
is, that follows something necessarily preceding, which is just making, or
being just; or else we run our selves upon a rock, it will be justification of
a wicked person, which God himself tells us, is ah Abomination to him.

Secondly, remission of sins, say they, is the formal cause of a sinners
justification, because it is that alteration and change, which is wrought in
the person justified by that act of God. To which we answer; 1. By denying the
consequence, every change or alteration in the person cnanged or altered, is
not the form; if that act of God were the form, then peace of conscience should
be so; for it is an alteration, which supposes pardon, grounded upon
imputation of righteousness, whence justification, and then pardon, etc. 2. By
affirming that justification it self is so, in that change which made, and yet
it is not the form of it self; yea, it is an effect of the form.

Thirdly, their th^rd reason is vvound up thus; That which makes a justified
person completely righteous before God, is the formal cause of justification;
But remission of sins makes a justified person completely righteous before
God, because, say they, he is as clear from sin, and the guilt thereof, as if
he had fulfilled the whole Law, and never transgressed any part or particle of
the same.

We reply, 1. That making is an ambiguous term, and cannot without more light,
then they afford us, be fully discerned or discovered; For every cause makes,
the Efficient, the Material, the Formal, etc.

2. Remission of sins makes not a person formally righteous, and therefore we
deny the reason: For though he be free from the guilt of sin, yea, so righteous
as here they speak of; yet the cause is the righteousness of Christ imputed, by
whose obedience he is constituted just; Again, they argue, for the proof of
this, thus, That righteousness which needs not fear the presence of a most
strict judge, is a complete and perfect righteousness; But remission of sins is
such; And now they think themselves cock sure; for this, say they, will hold
weight and measure. But let them take our answer with them for all their have,
which will, we suppose, take them off their confidence, and it is this; That
which these socinians are to prove, they often shift their hands of, and would
have us take for granted, which we cannot do, without prejudice to the truth;
They are here to prove, that remission of sins is a complete righteousness, but
that which they endeavor to prove it by (as the ingenuous Reader may plainly
perceive) beggeth the question; namely, that it is righteousness: For every
thing that will abide the presence of God, is not by and by righteousness, much
less complete righteousness, as they would have us believe, upon their bare
word: As for example to the contrary, in love there is no fear, for perfect
love casts out fear 1 John 4.17, 18.
, yet it is not righteousness, not that righteousness, by which we are
justified.

Lastly, say they, remission of sins reaches home, and is given to men by God
for their justification; Therefore it is the formal cause thereof; This they
tell us is evident, because by the formal cause, they mean nothing else but
pass^ve justification. To which we return this answer;

1. That many things may be, and are given by God for justification in some way
or other, which are not the formal cause thereof; for instance, the Word of
God, and Faith, are given by God for justification, yet will any man therefore
in his right wits conclude, that they are the formal cause of a sinners
justification?

2. We do absolutely deny remission of sins to be given for justification; we
assert the contrary, justification given for pardon and remission, as being the
effect and consequent thereof; So the Apostle Romans 5.16.
, where mention is made of remission, a gift, as also, of the gift of
righteousness; Whence we see, ordine quidque suo, first justification, and then
remission, made good in the 18. and 19. verse. of the same Chapter. Moreover, to
put all out of doubt, if remission of sins be justification passive, as they
said but now, that is, the effect of Gods justifying, it cannot possibly be the
formal cause thereof also; For one and the same cannot be both the cause and
the effect, before and after it self; the whole, and yet but a part; how ever
they seem to jumble them together.

I have bin somewhat longer about this, then at first I intended, there being
not wanting, and that even among us, that take upon them to maintain, that
remission of sins is the formal cause of a sinners justification before God,
that seeing how poorly it is defended by those that are champions for it, the
honest, and well minded Reader, may not be gulled by any Socinian (...) bettor
whatsoever.

The Dialogue is very much concerned herein, he does not lag behind the rest,
setting remission of sins in its wrong place, and then ascribing too much unto
it; For he makes it even our justification it self, which cannot be; for they
are distinct in themselves, and in order of time, and manner of conferring to
be distinguished by us: which being well and wisely considered, will plainly
appear to be neither the whole, nor a part as he, nor the cause, as others
would have it, of our justification; but only the contingent effect thereof.

Reconciliation with God, arising from true justification, without which, man
must necessarily, even unto all eternity, have remained under, and at all times
bin liable to the wrath of God, is that, whereby God for the Satisfaction of
Christ, pardoning all his sins, does freely admit and receive him into favor:
Or else more plainly Emphasis vocis reconciliationem dissidentium per empta
mutua dissentione importat.
, It is a setting at one, those who by reason of some discord between, or
hatred toward one another, were exceedingly divided and separated one from the
other. This, and the word Atonement, which the Dialogue does so often make use
of, are mere Synonima's, no more but two several expressions of one and the
same thing, yet admitting of, not different, but diverse denominations; For
being referred to wrath, it is called a pacification, or an appeasing, either
with a gift prepared, as Jacob did his brother Esau Genesis 32.20.
; or by compensation made for some wrong or injury done, as David did the
Gibeonites 2 Samuel 21.3.
; and having reference to sin, it signifies to expiate or purge with Sacrifice,
whence the day of Atonement is called Lev. 16.30.
a day of expiation; and sometimes it is used for pardon and remission of sins,
as Psalm. 78.38.
he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, in which sense the
Dialogue takes it, and spends it self in the most part of that which remains,
to make his Reader believe it, namely, that this very atonement or
reconciliation is our very righteousness and justification. But this cannot be;
for this likewise were to confound the effect with the cause, as before in
remission of sins, Atonement or Reconciliation being but the necessary, effect
or consequent of a sinners justification before God: Thus you see, being driven
to their shifts, they fly from one thing to another, and are at no certainty
among themselves, into what a labyrinth then would they bring their perplexed
Readers!

In this work of reconciliation or atonement Christ is to be considered after a
twofold manner, or under a double notion, either in respect of his essential
Deity and Divinity or in respect of his Mediatorial office and Priestly
performance; in respect of his essential Deity common to himself with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, he, by the same right, whereby the Father and the
Holy Ghost, was exceedingly offended with, and highly provoked to indignation
against us, by reason of our sins; in respect of his Mediatorial offic^, by the
common consent and council of the whole Trinity, receding from his most just
right, took upon him our flesh, that he might fully perform the part of a
merciful Mediator between God and man.

In the transaction of this great husiness of mediation, reconciliation or
atonement, (for they are one in effect, though they differ in terms) there are
six distinct things to be performed by Christ; The first is Discretion o^
Dijudication of the cause, he takes notice of the state and condition of his
Church and chosen;

Secondly, he does report the will of his Father, the covenant and agreement
with God unto them;

Thirdly, he makes intercession to God for them:

Fourthly, he fully satisfies the wrath and Justice of God provoked against
them, and freely delivers them from the eternal punishment, which they had
justly deserved should be inflicted on them:

Fifthly, he mercifully applies that satisfaction to them:

And finally, he everlastingly conserves them in this state of reconciliation
into which he has brought them.

And thus we dispose of these things thus wonderfully and mercifully performed
by him. Discretion and Relation pertain properly to the Prophetical office of
Christ; Intercession and Satisfaction to his Priesthood; Application and
Conservation to his Regal office, and that Kingly power, which he exercises
in, and over his beloved ones: So that whole Christ, God-man in both natures,
in all his offices, is employed in, and for the effecting this high and
glorious work of the Fathers merciful atonement and reconciliation which is no
small comfort, being brought home, and seasonably applied to the heart of a
Christian.

Thus have we set down the true nature, of Atonement or Reconciliation with
God; But as for the Dialogues Atonement, it is nothing else, but a vain, idle,
imaginary and illusory thing, a mere fiction, which he having fancied and
framed out to himself, would fain obtrude upon others, without the least color
of testimony from the Word of God; For that which the Scripture presents, unto
us under the name and notio^ of the word Atonement is an effect of our
righteousness and not a part, much less the whole, as he would have it;
concerning which ne speaks much, as being perhaps delighted in, and affected
with his own expressions, but proves nothing of what is expected from him, many
times crossing and confounding himself, much more his unwary and over-confident
Reader.

To conclude then, for I hope by this time the good and intelligent Reader does
plainly discover what the drift and purpose of the Dialogue is, together with
the rest of the Socinian faction, namely, to raze, if they could, the very
foundation of our Religion, which we have built upon the Rock, that so we might
erect a new structure on the sand; but they shall not prevail, yet let every
one of us take heed, that we build not thereon; For other foundation can no man
lay, and expect comfort in, or continuance of the building, then that is laid,
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

These under specious pretenses, and new coined phrases, endeavor to betray
us, that they may have whereby, as they think, to glory over us; We know that
offenses to, and oppositions against the Truth, especially in these latter
times, must needs come, that those which are firm and constant may be made
manifest; But woe unto them by whom such offenses, and oppositions do come. From
henc it comes to pass, that such things as were never handled by the
Scriptures, are now hand over head urged and maintained from the Scriptures;
and such questions as were never dreamed of among the Apostles, are stoutly,
yet strangely defended by the Apostles, By these means our Pulpits ring, our
Presses groan, and our ears are filled with the confused noise thereof; such
loud lies, such lawless arguments, such naked collections, such backward
conclusions, such an Ocean of tempestuous sequels, such a legend of unsound,
and unseasoned Non-sequitur's, such upstart heresies, and such high strained
blasphemies, that the common Adversary scorneth at our follies, and all the
Devils in Hell, as it were keeping holy day, do rejoice at our forwardness to
run and destroy, not only the bodies, but even the souls too, one of another;
bringing hereby our selves into derision abroad, an the Scriptures themselves
into suspicion at home.

Thus are many, too many, God knows, poor, single hearted men misled, although
by a contrary course, yet to the same gulf: running their Barques upon the
sands and shallows of deceit, yet deeply dissembled, even where they least
suspected them, and thought themselves most free from them; For indeed, who
would look for so foul error and heresy to proceed from so great and fair
pretenders to Truth? Or who could imagine that they who seem to advance Christ
and his Gospel, and do so much outwardly glory therein, should so much
dishonor, yea so horribly blaspheme both the one, and the other, as the
Dialogue and these Socinians commonly do? I shall lay down but one argument
more, to prove this opinion of theirs, for which, as for their Helena, the
Dialogue and the rest, do so earnestly contend, to be both horribly impious,
and notoriously blasphemous, that so all good Christians may look on it, and
them too, as Seamen do on Rocks and Shelves, on purpose to avoid them, and
with an holy resolution set themselves against them; which argument is briefly
this.

That opinion which is built upon an heritical and blasphemous ground, and is
supported and maintained by wresting, wronging, and putting false and unsavory
glosses upon the Scriptures, whereby the very sound actions of true Religion,
are not only shaken, but even razed and overthrown, must needs be most wicked
and blasphemous; And such is this opinion It is built upon this blasphemous
ground, that God saves sinners by such a righteousness, as is no where to be
found in Scripture, without wresting and wringing of the same; contrary to the
sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost therein; such a righteousness, which indeed
is no righteousness at all, but an idle and fictitious thing and so
consequently that sinners are not justified at all, but left in a sad, forlorn
and desperate condition.

It blasphemously maintains, that our sins are not imputed unto Christ, and
that he did not in any measure suffer the wrath of God to free the Elect from
the same, which by reason of their sins they had deserved: and so tacitly
charge God with injustice toward him, by inflicting so grievous punishments,
especially in his soul sufferings, upon him without a cause: leaving by this
means poor souls yet in the state of damnation, and liable to eternal torments,
for whom Christ made full and perfect satisfaction. It denies that Christ's
righteousness is imputed to true believers, affirming, that it cannot be
accounted theirs by God, because Christ's righteousness is the righteousness of
one far different from them, and God cannot in justice, justify one, by the
righteousness of another: So denying under this, the spiritual Union of the
faithful with Christ: For if he be one with us, and we with him, as we
confidently believe and teach, then are our sins, that is, the guilt of our
sins transferred unto him, and so made his by this Communion, and in him fully
satisfied: as also his righteousness and satisfaction is not only made over to
us, but is made ours, and we thereby justified, pardoned and reconciled to him,
whom we had offended: for it is not the righteousness of a stranger, as they
persuade, who maintain this destructive and damnable opinion, nor of another so
different from us, but that he and we are one Spiritual body, by which Union
and Communion with him, which may not, must not be destroyed, all his benefits
are made ours, we have right and title to them, and an interest in them.

If for all this that has bin declared, there be any to whom this poor
endeavor shall come, that shall yet give heed to this opinion, and to these
Spirits of error, which broach, and set out such opinions, so as to follow or
be led by them, being thus forewarned, they cannot be excused: For who has
bewitched them that they should believe lies? These are accessory to their own
destruction. But good Reader, be not thou deceived with vain words.

All is not gold that glistereth; Many times we see that under the greenest
Grass does lurk the soulest Serpent: Great is the mystery of Hypocrisy.

The Be, that has Honey in her mouth, has a sting in her tail; Lo, here is
Christ; Lo, there is Christ, but what says Christ himself? Believe them not.

If we go all by the ear, the empty Barrel has a deeper sound, then the full
vessel; If by the eye, the sour crab has as smooth a Coat, as the sweet
Pippin;

The search therefore, just examination, and strict trial is all in all. But
yet, this exquisite search, this sound and substantial trial, is not in every
man's power, neither is it for every man's trade. Every man may pull at a rope,
but the Pilot only directs the course of the ship. There be some that can
grease a scabbed sheep in hand, that cannot judge of a great rot to ensue; The
Butcher, that has skill to open an Ox, is to seek in the curious anatomizing
and desecting of a man; So that though many think themselves able enough to
judge and determine of these matters; yet St. Paul's question may fit every one
of our mouths, Q^is ad haec idoneus; who is indeed fit for these things? We had
need then, even such as pretend most to knowledge, to be ever suspicious of our
own judgment, and earnest with God in prayer for our further and future
illumination and instruction, that we be not seduced in these dregs of time,
these last and worst days, to which we are reserved.

And now O England, England! where is the glory of thy Church become? those
precious ornaments of piety and purity wherewith she was so richly adorned?
Oh! thou once beloved spouse, how have thou turned thy self from? how have thou
turned thy back upon thine own dear Lord and Husband, who chose thee; and made
thee glorious, above all others round about thee, to follow after, and
prostitute thy self unto thy fond, thy fained lovers? What distemper does
possess thee, that thou should so willingly retum to thine own, so eagerly
pursue, so greedily lick up the vomit of other Churches?

To the eternal praise and glory of God above, and to the high commendation of
thy little Daughter The Church of New England.
abroad, be it spoken, more sound in her vitalls, more sincere in her
profession of the ancient and honorable Truth, then thy self; she has cast
out the Bondwoman and her Son, the Author and his Dialogue, as gendering to
bondage worse then Egyptian; whom thou have received into thy bosom, hugging
herein, with the many errors and heresies of the times, thine own confusion.
Thou! even thou art become a cage of unclean birds, Zum and Ochim have taken up
their habitation in thee, which are the very forerunners of thy destruction
and desolation.

Be zealous therefore and repent; for behold, thy beloved yet stands at the
door and knocks: Cast off, and cast out, the unfruitful works of darkness, and
give seasonable entertainment to the living Lord; Consider, Oh! consider in
time, the things that pertain unto thy peace, before they be hidden from thine
eyes; which God of his mercy grant may never be, and let all the people say,
AMEN.

FINIS.
(...), OR A CAGE OF Unclean Birds.

Containing the Authors, Promoters, Propagators, and chief Disseminators of
this damnable Socinian Heresy. Together with a brief description of their
Lives, and a true relation of their deaths.

Collected Composed, and Published for the Glory of God, and the convincing of
those that are in any measure Infected herewith.

By NICH. CHEVVNEY, M.A. and M^nister of the Word of God.

(...). Tit. 2.10.

(...). Joan. 1.1.

Aeque peccarunt, qui blasphemarunt Christum regnantem in Coelis, quam qui eum
crucifixerunt ambulantem in terris.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Tw^ford, and T. Dring, and are to be sold in
Vine-Court, Middle Temple; and at the George in Fleetstreet near Cliffords Inn.
1656.

To the Right Worshipful Sr Nicholas Crisp Knt of Queax, in the Isle of Thannet.
SIR,
WHere I stand engaged in a Just Service, and would Publish it; I less fear the
censure of Vainglory then of Ingratitude. I know the Age is very severe in her
Paraphrase on those who appear for Truth, when as others pass uncensured; Yet I
am resolved rather to hazard the imputation of a Weak-man, then to be accounted
one Unthankful. He that does but Tacitly acknowledge the Favors of a Noble
Friend does in a manner Bury them; when as he that Proclaims them, has in a
part requited; he has repaid His Honor, and therefore Him, and so has
satisfied, though not restored. I desire not so much to expose my Labors to
the World, as to express my acknowledgements of your Worth and Goodness. The
Ancient of Days multiply your Days here upon Earth, and at last take you to
that place where there shall be no Night: So Praying, rests,

Sir, Yours to be commanded in the Lord. N. C.

To my once Beloved Charge, the Inhabitants of St nicholas at Wade, in the Isle
of Thannet.
Beloved,
IT is not unknown to you, that I voluntarily left a very loving people, and a
more beneficial place, to come among you, and reside with you, expecting (and
not without reason) a more then ordinary success of my poor labors, with a
retaliation of affection from you: But through the malicious subtilty of some
abroad, and the notorious hypocrisy of others at home, I have been strangely
frustrate in my expectation: Yet (I hope) there are among you some, who will
give me cause to say, I have not labored in vain. God (the Searcher of all
hearts) shall witness for me, that I have not ceased to declare unto you, while
I was with you, even the whole counsel of God, especially by those Doctrines
which I conceived to be most needful and necessary for you: And being now
departing from you, I commend this poor Piece as a lasting monument of my
Affection to you; Therefore ( I pray) accept this free will Offering with the
same hand and heart it is tendered to you. I have not wrote any thing to the
prejudice of the person of the Author of the D^alogue, whose Christian
Moderation in many things, is kn^wn to many; whose holy conversation may be a
pattern to most; yet I am not willing that Truth should suffer by the hand of
any whatsoever, much less be wounded by those that pretend to be her best
friends, and make an escape in a crowd, without any notice taken of it. I do
not, cannot look to escape censures abroad, no more then St Paul did perils,
and among the rest, especially by false Brethren, who are possessed with such a
spirit of Pride and Bitterness, that scorning and reviling the works of others,
how painful and elaborate soever, they think nothing well done, but what they
do themselves: Let me therefore (my good friends) find kindness and courtesy
from you at home, lest it repent me, not that I undertook, and by Gods mercy
finished, but that ever I published these weak endeavors of mine. I have here
unmasked Error and Heresy, that you may the better see them, and seeing, know
them, and knowing, avoid them, when you shall meet them in what ever Paint or
Dress of Piety and Purity they shall seek to shroud or shelter themselves, so
that you be not deceived by them.

I have made use of such Authors in the managing of this high and holy
business, as have gone before me, and were needful for me: They (I suppose) may
pass current without any prejudice, or prejudicial censure: But my self, and
what is mine, do importune your favor, which, I presume, will be the easier
attained, in regard we both intend nothing but good unto you.

We are they (my friends) upon whom the very Ends of the World are come; in
which, not only homo homini Lupus, one man is a Wolf to another, preying upon
the Body, Name, and Estate; but homo homini Demon, one man is a Devil to
another, laboring to ensnare and betray the Souls, the precious Souls one of
another. It is very necessary then that we take heed unto our selves, that we
be not slightly carried on to our own destruction. What caution the Apostle
gave his Colossians, the same do I give to you; Let no man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit: And further give me leave to say, let no man spoil
you through Divinity and vain deceit: For no doubt, but the Serpent has his
poison in his head, as well as his tail; and the Devil has his baits as
cunningly set on, and as covertly laid in the depths of Divinity, as in the
shallows of Philosophy: yea rather did he attempt to have spoiled the great
Commander of Divines with the Theorems of Divinity, then with the Rudiments of
Philosophy; he can frame either, or both, according to the times, places, or
persons with whom he has to deal, to serve his purpose, and make for his
advantage.

Let us then consider, what is, or ought to be the credit, countenance, and
authority of him that writes any thing in public; not his Person, though it
be Comely; nor his Deportment, though it be Demure; nor his Name, though it be
Famous; nor his Learning, though it be Profound, nor his Language, though it be
Pleasing; nor his Style, though it be Smooth. But rather the Spirit (if not
only the Spirit) by which he is guided. For otherwise were he as grave and
ancient as Melchisedech, as wise and well learned as Solomon, as eloquent and
well-spoken as Aaron, were he brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, or might he
sit in the Gates of the City for his Judgment and great ability, yet if in
these the Spirit of Truth accompany him not, we are so far from receiving any
good from him, that there is the more danger to be infected by him.

And though the only or special credit of him that writes, be the Spirit by
which he does it; yet we must not believe every one that pretends he has the
Spirit. There are many false Prophets gone out into the world, and many times
(such are the unseasoned and unsavory judgments of men) they are taken,
though mistaken, to have the Spirit of Truth, which indeed are but Spirits of
Error: And again, they are esteemed as Spirits of Error, in whom the spirit of
Truth does reside, and has taken up his Habitation. We had need therefore be
the more careful, to what and whom we do give heed, so as to follow, or be led
by it; and how we judge, lest we be judged for it. Now the very God of Truth,
by his spirit, the spirit of Truth, guide us into all Truth, and keep us
blameless therein, that we waver not our selves, nor give occasion to others to
reproach it, by our disorderly walking in the Profession of it; which is the
earnest Prayer, and has been the careful endeavor of

May the 13. 1656. Your once well-wishing Pastor, and your ever well-wishing
friend N.C.

(...) Or a Cage of Unclean Birds. Containing the Authors Promoters,
Propagators and chief Disseminators of this damnable Socinian, heresy.
Together with a brief description of their Lives, and a true relation of their
Deaths.
I Am persuaded that it has bin one of Satan's greatest designs either to br^ng
Religion into scorn and contempt, Satan's project to overthrow the practice and
profession of all true Religion.
by prostituting it to every base and unworthy enterprise: For there has not
bin any rebellion so horrid, nor any stratagem so hideous, which he has not
shrouded under the cloak and covert of Religion: Or else to confound it, by so
great variety, every one pretending his own to be the truest, that men might
not be able to discern truth from falsehood, a fond feigned, and counterfeit
religion; the result of some Enthusiastic brain, from that which is commanded
and commended to us in the Word of God.

Indeed variety in any thing distracts the mind, Variety though pl^asing yet
troublesome, in Religion dangerous.
and leaves it in a waving, and wavering condition, and ^n a dubious trouble:
insomuch that it is then no hard matter to sway the mind to either side: But
among all diversities that we meet with, none troubles us more, and puts us to
more anxious perplexity, then those that are in Religion. This stumbles the
unsettled soul, that not knowing which way to take, without the danger of
erring, sticks to none: so dies he, ere he can set himself with any assurance
or comfort about that, for which he was made to live; the service of God,
advancing his glory, and working not with fear and trembling his own salvation,
and then the Devil rejoices, as having so far, as concerns this one poor soul,
brought his design to a desired issue. And for this purpose he has select and
chosen instruments, The Devils white boys.
his own white boys, ready pressed to raise up new, or to revive some old
heresies against the most absolute and substantial Articles of true Religion,
about which at this time, and in these latter days, they are busily employed.
Who can reckon up (for I believe it would puzzle a good Arithmetician to number
them) what and how many portentous opinions he has foisted into the World
against God, his Nature, and Religion? What horrid errors concerning God,
concerning Christ, concerning man's redemption, justification, salvation, and
other articles of our faith, are spread abroad among men, and so handed from
one to another, that they are continued and propagated even to admiration?
Among the ancients, we may read that Irenaeus. Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Philastrius, Augustine, Damascene, Leontius Byzantinus, with Harmenopolus, and
diverse others, have bin all occupied in confuting the several sects and
heresies of their age; nor have we bin (by reason of the great increase and
grows of heresies ^n our t^me, without our modern heretic hunters, which
have traced them out, and pursued them to the purpose. And yet for all this a
man would be amazed at the multiplicity, and monstrority of the blasphemous
Doctrine and diabolical suggestions, which are still broached by these
heretics, to obscure the bright face of Religion, and are delivered over for
Doctrines of truth to their Disciples; yea there has not b n any thing
devised, be it never so enormous and detestable, never so void of reason and
Religion which has not, by one heretic or other, bin caught up, published
abroad maintained and defended, as some notable and transcendent truth.

Now heresy ^s variously described, Heresy described.
sometimes more largly, sometimes more strictly; Rightly to define heresy is,
as I think, impossible, there being so many faces, as it were under one hood,
all mak^ng for it, yet every one disclaining it; or at least, very difficult;
so though Augustine, and yet in the first cap. to Honoratus he g^ves us his
judgment concerning it, in his description of an ^eretick; which is, says he,
one, who for some temporal commodity or vainglory and desire of rule over the
consciences of others does either fondly, beget or perversely and obstinately
follow and maintain some strange and false Doctrines.

But this is somewhat to full and large: That desciption of St. Hierome is more
strict. Whosoever understands and applies the Holy Scriptures for the
maintenance of any Doctrine, otherwise then the sense of the Spirit of God does
require or admit, by the special direction and inspiration of whom it was first
penned, not withstanding he have the judgment of the Church in which he is, and
of which he professes himself a member, on his side, yet as to be accounted an
heretic especially, if that Doctrine which he defends be known to be false and
erroneous.

Papists mistake it.
The Papists do give us but an ill definition of heresy, when they tell us, that
he is an heretic who in matters of Faith goes against the tenure and practice
of the Church of Rome. But we would teach them better, could they be won to
learn of us, namely; that it is an error which is stiffely maintained contrary
to the Articles of the Faith, which are necessary to be held and defended by
us. I call it an error, not that every error is a heresy, though there can be
no heresy without error; for error persisted in, constitutes an heresy. The
word being simply considered in it self has no bad signification, how Use; The
great Master of words does alter and change them, is another matter, for
according to the primitive use of it in the Schools, from whence it came into
the Church, it did but serve to distinguish one sort or Sect of Philosophers
from another; or to speak more proper, it signified the Election or choice or
some one Sect, being so distinguished; in the business of Religion we now use
it as an error in matters of faith, as when it is contrary to some, or some
one chief article of the faith, then it is properly called heresy; when it sets
it self in opposition to all the Articles of our belief, it is Apostasy.

Heresy and Sect near related.
Heresy and Sect are so near related, that in diverse places, and by such as
know the signification of words, they are taken for one and the same thing, and
the one translated by the other; but yet we may conceive them to differ thus;
Wherein they differ.
Heresy has relation to Doctrine, Sect to men, or a Company of men separating
themselves from others, and observing one and the same customs practiced, and
following the same opinion professed among themselves. So then, they are
heretics, who under the name and profession of Christian Religion, do wilfully
hold some opinions contrary to the Christian verity, and the chief heads and
foundations thereof. Infidels, they fight against the truth, But it is not
under the banner of a Christian profession, and therefore not so dangerous;
Heretics fight under her banner, and yet against her, they wound truth in her
own coat. Those are without, Turks, Jews and Gentiles, the Lord in due time
bring them in; the other are within, too many in conscience, the Lord in his
good time drive them out; against both these must Christians, defend their
Religion, and quit themselves like men; against those, that they openly cut it
not off; against these, that they secretly root it not up. These are many
indeed, No heresy more dangerous and desperate then Socinianism.
but none more dangerous and de^perate, as being farther gone from
Christianism, and nearer to Gentilism, then this Sect of the Socinians whose
Spseudo-Divinity arises from no other fountain, then the abuse of the
principles of reason, the corrupting of the words and sense of the Scriptures,
and the pretense of Divine revelation; So that they first determine by the rule
and judgment of their own reason, what is, and what is not to be bel^eved, and
then they wrest and wring the Scriptures to make them, if possible, speak to
their purpose; if any of these fail; then they fly to their last refuge, they
have a revelat^on for it, and therefore it must needs be so, and cannot be
otherwise, which being taken ^or granted, what old heresies may not be revived?
what new ones invented and published for Doctrines of the Gospel, needful and
necessary for all men to observe, and by all means be obedient to? But this
must not be granted; For if our dim understanding should search into those
sacred mysteries, which the Word of God does publish to us, we should certainly
lose our selves in their turnings and windings; there being in every one of
them someth^ng to believe, above that reason, which leads us to the search.
Reason commands and shows the causes why; Religion bids and shows not wherefore.
Reason gives us the Anatomy of things, and illustrates to us, with a great
deal of plainness, all the ways that she takes, and all the business that
she undergoes, but her line is too short, to reach the depths of Religion.
Reason commands, and shows the causes thereof; Religion bids do a thing,
without any enquiry, either why or wherefore; and therefore procures, and that
justly, the greater reverence.

For what we know not we reverently admire; what we do know, in in some sort,
subject to the triumphs of the soul, because she has made a discovery of it;
besides, this not knowing, makes us not able to judge; and so, for the present,
have lost the use of reason; and so are forced to cry out with St. Paul, as in
an Holy Ecstasy, O altitudo and profunditas! should Reason be our purveyor in
matters of Religion, we might quickly find we had a fat Reason, but I am sure
we should have but a lean Religion. Besides, I should more then suspect his
knavery, that should set the Scripture on the tenters to make it any wider,
then the genuine sense will admit, or should suborne it to attest any desperate
opinions or heretical blasphemies, which it utterly abhors. As for their
pretended revelations, they are not to be regarded, Revelation mere pretenses.
for if they get it not by Hook, they shall never have it by Crook; if neither
Reason can persuade it, nor Religion laid down in the Scriptures, prove it, or
allow it: pretended Revelation shall never obtain it at our hands, to believe
their opinions so far, as to be guided and ordered by them; unless we shall,
by Gods permission, be so much deprived of our understanding, as that we shall
not be able to descern between the right hand and the left, in matters of
Religion. Nor is there a plainer presage of ruin and destruction, then when God
so takes away the understanding, that refusing the true sense of the
Scriptures, and the good council that by them is given, men betake themselves
to their own inventions and imaginations, or follow the brainlesse advice of
others, and thereby led aside after seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils.
When men are once at this point, we may say, that God is rearing of a scaffold,
whereon to take some exemplary punishment of them.

If the strict Justice of Almighty God,
Does sometimes draw the wicked to the rod,
It first bereaves them of their understanding,
Then blinds them, that furious they may run then,
By steep down ways devoied of stay or standing,
Unto that death, which their lewd courses won them.
This appears plain by these men, whose head long courses in their heretical
ways, brought them to finish their course with ignominy and reproach; For the
manifestation of the just judgment of God, upon such as forsake the known
truth, and make it their whole employment to seduce others from the same. We
will not trouble our selves with any of those famous, or rather infamous
heretics of former ages, we have monsters enough nearer hand, and of our own
times, to deal with, nor shall we encounter with all of them, but only such as
have bin the chief Ringleaders of, and grand Factors for this heresy of
Socinianism, with which we have had to do in the former tract. In which
discovery we shall observe the names, manners, places, where, and means by
which they have dispersed and spread abroad their desperate and damnable
opinions, together with a short description of the lives, and a sad, yet true
relation of the deaths of many, yea the most of them; that the Reader may know
what, and what manner of persons they were, by whom this cursed heresy was
first invented, after propagated and promoted, that so he may be the less
moved by, or affected with those sly and subtle Doctrines, which they thrust
upon the consciences of their disciples, as absolutely necessary, on all hands,
and in all points to be believed, to salvation; the contrary whereunto being
very prejudicial, and ready at all times to bring unto eternal damnation.

Petrus Abailardus Parisiens. Professor. En Abilardus ego sum primus in ordine
turmae,
Dogmatis inferni Dux and Origo fui.

IN the year of Christ's incarnation, 1540. 1540.
in France was famous Petrus Abailardus, Professor at Paris, a Philosopher and
Divine of great name, of whom Bernard in he cxc. Epistle writes thus: We have
here in France a new Divine of an old Master, who in his youth did wantonize in
the rules of Logic, and now is mad, in the interpretation of the Scriptures:
who bearing himself up upon the wings of his supposed great ability, and
trusting too much to his own sufficiency, does earnestly content to have all,
yea, the most deep mysteries of Faith and Religion, to be measured and squared
out by the rule of his reason: and when as he seems to be ready to render a
reason of all, he himself (says Bernard) presumes above reasons, contrary to
reason, yea contrary to faith it self; For what is more contrary to reason,
they by reason to endeavor to transced reason? and what more contrary to
faith, then to be unwilling to believe, what ever cannot be comprehended within
the narrow bounds and strait limits of humane reason? So that the Court must
have the attribute of the Queen that dwells in it, the Queen the name of her
Court. Reason has got the attribute of Religion, and Religion in exchange the
attribute and property of Reason. But who can tell when this exchange was made?
What a lamentable weakness is this in man, that he should build his eternal
welfare on so sandy a foundation, as the approbation of weak and pur-blind
reason? Likewise expounding that saying of the Wiseman Pro.
, He that believes makes not have, says thus, lightly to believe is to make
use of faith before, or without reason; Whereas Solomon in that place intends
no such thing: for he speaks not of faith in God, but of that mutual-credulity
and trust which we have in our dealings among our selves, and one with another;
Thus we see, they err, not knowing the Scriptures: He wrote a book of the
blessed Trinity, in which he manifestly discovers that itch of wit with which
he was so much troubled, and with the very conceit of which he was many times
so far transported out of, or beyond himself, and the limits of all true
Christianity that he knew not, either what he did, or said. Hear St. Bernard,
what he says concerning that work, so highly commended by his Disciples and
followers; he makes degrees in the Trinity, measures in Majesty, numbers in
eternity: He allows God the Father all power, the Son a certain kind of power,
limited and circumscribed according to his fancy, but as for the Holy Ghost,
there is none to spare for him, he has no power at all. This is to be a Son to
a Father, as one power is subordinate to another, as the Species to the Genus,
as homo to animal: herein he scarce shows himself to be animal rationale, to be
able to judge o^ heretics that went before him, but even following such blind
guides must needs fall into the dirty ditch with them; for is there not more
then Arius here? That book of h^s was found to be so sound and entire that it
was condemned by the Belgic council, and according to order committed to the
fire by the hands of the Author himself; afterward he was forced, not for his
goodness, to retire himself into some solitary place, where he lived, solitary
enough in respect of it self, and yet sufficiently freguented by the continual
concourse of Students, (and wise ones I warrant you) who flocked thirther from
all parts, being drawn, or rather seduced, by the fame of his great learning;
Parturiunt montes, etc. but being come found no such great matter of admiration
in him, as Fame reported; This place of his abode he first called the Trinity,
but for what reason I could never learn; then changing the name he called it
the Comforter, for which he gives this reason, because says he, after all my
trouble and molestation, I have found quiet and comfort here; which name
continues unto this very day; the place being called the Abbey of the Comforter;
and indeed there cannot but be a great deal of comfort found in the place,
there was so much in the Master of it, and in the Doctrine which he professed;
for what true comfort can be expected, but by, or from the Comforter himself?
which he could not have, being under-valued and un-Goded by him.

He enveighed bitterly in many of his writings against the Doctrine of our
redemption by Christ, and that Satisfaction, which was made and performed by
him in our place and steed, openly denying it, and often protesting against it:
declaring the death of Christ to be to no other purpose, then an example of
constancy, and an argument to move us, to lone and honor Christ so much the
more, who was pleased to go before us in so uncouth a way, leaving us the print
of his footsteps, that we by the same way might follow after, to the same
glory, where he sits ready to receive us. This opinion of his concerning the
end of Christ's coming into the World, together with his death and passion, he
expresses in his own words thus, that the Lord of glory should wholly empty
himself, that he should become less then the Angels, that he should vouchsafe
to be borne of a Woman, that be should be conversant in the World, that he
should become weak in himself, should suffer many indinities and reproaches
from others, and lastly by that base and ignominious death of the cross,
should pass from this vale of misery to his ancient seat of glory, is for no
other end, but to deliver unto men, by so living and teaching, such a form of
life as may be acceptable unto God, by suffering and dying to bequeath unto
them an example of love and charity, which we ought to practice, if need so
require, one toward another. Sure he never attained to so much charity from
this great example, as to practice it in himself toward any other whatsoever;
he thought it better, as most in the World do, to sleep quietly (if it were
possible) in a whole skin; But if this be all the cause for which Christ dyed,
then are we yet in our sins, and the Lord have mercy upon us, there is less
comfort in this, then, if he had given us a thump on the back with a stone.
Bernard in his cxc 11. Epistle gives us this description of him, when he
speaks of the Trinity, says he, you would judge him to be an Arian, when of
grace a Pelagian, when a the person of Christ a Nestorian; to which we add,
when he speaks of the redemption which Christ wrought, and satisfaction he
made for us, we may well take him to be a Socinian, though this kind of
denomination had not then a being. So that we see he was a mere composition of
heresies, a man made up of dangerous and Devilish opinions, which he
endeavored with all the art he had to publish, with all the dexterity he could
to set forth, for his greatest advantage, namely, to court others to a liking
and embracing of them.

He set forth many books, by which he sowed abroad many heresies, and got many
followers, among which was Arnold of Brixia as chief, whom Bernard calls
Abailardus, his standard bearer, and does much condesmne him for his opinions,
yet commends him for his good conversation, and austerity of life, utinam tam
sanae esset Doctrinae, quam districta est vitae, no bad wish I assure you;
would to God, says he, he had bin as sound in his Doctrine, as he was strict
in his life. Epist. c x c v. Cujus conversatio mel and doctrina venenum, whose
course of life was as Honey, but his Doctrine as poison. Epist. cxv I. Cui
caput columbae, cauda Scorpionis, who had the head of a dove, but the tail of
a Scorpion; whom Brixia spewed out, Rome abhorred, France refused, Germany
abominated, and Italy would not entertain.

This purity of life in the Scholar; does much condemn the loose and
licentious conversation of the Master: for without question he was it boon
companion, and one that loved his belly well, otherwise he had not bin taken
and overtaken with such libidinous crimes of which he was accused; For
according to the old rule sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, concupiscence
waxes could, where it is not heightened with wine, and pampered with lusty and
lustful meats; which being as fuel abstracted, the fire either goes out of
it self, or is quickly extinguished; But this filthy wretch, it seems, took not
this course; for giving way to his untamed lust, he defloured and defiled a
May'd, for which he was taken and guelded; in so much as that he that for all
his high intendments would not make himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of God's
sake, must, by others, be made an Eunuch for his beastly lust sake, and by
reason of his blasphemons heresies which he maintained and published to the
subversion of many others, he was by the means of Bernard, and the Bishops of
France condemned for an heretic, himself excommunicate, and his books to be
openly burned in the sight of all those that would behold them. It is no marvel
he took him to a solitary place, as one that might well be ashamed to see, or
to be seen by others. Now these are the chief heads of that corrupt doctrine,
which were noted to be in this perverse and blasphemons heretic, and which he
being full of the Spirit of pride and error did in disputing, and by writing
principally endeavor to maintain.

1. That Reason was to be Judge of the Articles of faith, affirming, that he
could comprehend within the bounds of humane reason, that whole immense, which
is God himself.

2. That the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, as the reformed Churches did
believe and hold it, was not to be credited; For he made degrees in the
Trinity, he denied the Holy Ghost to be of the essence of the Father, and
called it the soul of the World.

3. That Original sin was nothing else, but that very debt of damnation, in
which we were bound, when we were made obnoxions to eternal punishment for the
fault of our Original, that is of our first parents from whom we took our
original; referring it rather to the punishment for, then to the guilt of sin,
and he gives this reason for it; but what reason there is in it, let any
indifferent Reader judge; because, says he, he who could not as yet make any
use of free will, nor had as yet any exercise of his reason, could have no
transgression or negligence imputed to him.

4. That Christ did not satisfy the Justice of God for our sins; For after a
tedeons dispute which he had against the Satisfaction of Christ, he says, that
Christ dyed nostro bono, for our good, and nostro exemplo, for our example, but
as our surety and nostro loco in our place, or nostra vice, in our steed, are
words which neither he, nor any of his followers can abide.

5. That the Law contains not any promise of life in it; and that it did
consist of imperfect precepts, because our blessed Savior, Matt. 5. gives a
clear and full exposition of it; he publishes likewise many figments
concerning it.

This is the Author, and these the chief heads of those, vile and direful
opinions which he maintained, and though he have gone far, and done much for
the furtherance of this graceless babe, which he had begotten; yet there are
some that come after him, that are in this matter to be preferred before him,
both for addition hereunto, and propagation hereof, using such execrable and
damnable expressions, that are far unbeseeming the ears of a Christian; but
Ordine quisq suo, every one in his own place, and according to his own order;
And therefore this Abailardus challenges, the first place, as the revier of
the old heresies of Arius, Ebion, Photinus, and Samosatenus, with others of the
like sort, who out of these, as also the Turkish Alcaron and Jewish Talmude,
patched up a new one of his own, as they that came after him, did revive his,
with their additions and augmentations also: For the Devil will loose nothing
by lying still for a time, but makes a gain of his loss, and that to his very
great advantage.

Michael Servetus Hispanus Medicus Tarraconensis. Ignibus errorurm Ecclesiam
vastasse triumphas
Servate? ex meritis ignibus ipse peris.

THE next instrument of the Devil after him, mentioned in former Histories, is
Michael Servetus, a Spaniard of Tarracon, by profession at first a Physician,
Honest and Honorable in respect of it self, but growing weary of this, (a
notable argument of the inconstancy, or self conceit of the man) he betook
himself to the study and profession of Divinity. Plato sets it down for a rule,
that the beginnings of all councels are in our Will, but the performance in the
destinies, so may we make the first choice of the pitch, which we mean to fly,
but after we begin to mount and soar above the common sight, Nullum medium
inter summa and praecipitia, there is mean or middle course, between the
breaking of our necks, and the satisfying of our humors; Thus fared it with
this unhappy man: For soaring a loft, and having now pitched upon the best
profession, became worse in it then he was before; and by the just judgment of
God, falls upon those tookes by which he was ruined. A the black fly called the
Beetle passing over all thy pleasant and fragrant flowers of choice and comely
garden, does light upon an heap of dung: So this man passing by the many
glorious truths of Divinity, in the study and practice of which he might have
found much comfort, pitcheth upon such contagious errors, and such damnable
heresies, the pursuit and publishing of which could effect no less then the
destruction both of body and soul. Thus men overborne with the strength of a
self conceit, are so precipitated and drawn on with the swindge of an unruly
fancy, that leaving the beaten road, and more usual way of truth, they run into
by-pathes of error, and so at length lose both their judgment and their faith,
so that then no way comes amiss to them, how foul or beastly soever it be.

Servetus being now a Divine in repute, but a Devil in practice raketh up and
reviveth many wicked and desperate opinions; among the rest that damnable
heresy against the blessed Trinity in which he was so deeply rooted, that he
left no stone unturned whither by preaching or writing to overthrow the Article
of the Christian faith concerning, the same; invading it with many execrable
blasphemies, thereby endeavoring to corrupt the faith of others, and divert
them from the the truth. The fire of dissension, which had some time now lain
raked up in the embers of oblivion, began to break out again, and to flame
about the ears of the Churches in those parts, which for the present was
somewhat smothered, but could never be wholly quenched, unto this day, For this
Factor for Hell being taken, had deserved punishment inflicted on him, being,
publicly burnt at Geneva, to the example of all those that were seduced by
him. But this fact was heynously token of those that were his friends, and
adversaries to Calvin, who to work him a Spite, did publish it abroad for
truth, that that slaughter, as they called it, was long before plotted and
contrived by him, and at last cruelty effected by his only means; when as
indeed the Council of Geneva did nothing in the business without the judgment
and approbation of the Senates of Bernen, Zuring, Basil and Schaffuse, the advice also of many Cities and Churches of Christ being required and received;
How ever these friends of his, and adversaries of the truth have censured the
fact, and opened their mouths wide to condemn it; yet other un-by assed men of
as great ability, and more integrity then they, have highly approved of it.
Melancthon in his Ep^stle to Bullenger writes thus concerning it; I have read,
says he, your answers to the blasphemies of Servetus, and I Commonly your
piety and judgment. Also I suppose the Senate of Geneva has done w^ll, and
performed a noble act, in taking away that obstinate wretch, who was resolved
never to cease blaspheming, so long as he had here a being. But I wonder that
any should accuse them of severity in inflicting just vengeance on a person
guilty of so much impiety. Also famous Rivet, Alexander More, Jacob Trigland,
with diverse others, do commend the zeal of that Senate in this very matter.

Yet farther to clear Calvin from this false imputation, that it was not his
malice, but Servetus just desert that brought him to that shameful and painful
end, may evidently appear by that great endeavor which he used to reduce this
blasphemous monster to a better mind; but when he saw it would not do, nor any
gentle and fair persuasions prevail with him, he sought to mitigate the rigor
(as he then thought) of that Sentence which was past upon him; And sure there
was something more then ordinary in it, that he, (who was always severe
toward other offenders of a far lower form) should be so courteous and gentle
toward such a monster of mankind, so blasphemous an heretic, and such a
disturber of the peace, both of Church and Commonweal, as he declared himself
to be.

He wrote some books, but so stuffed with impiety, and detestable blasphemy, that
they are not without danger, and horror to be received, and read among us.
Beza writing to Andrew Dudithius (of whom we shall speak hereafter) does thus
expostulate with him, Who has bewitched thee, my dear Brother, that thou
should take so desperate a course, and be led away by such damnable
opinions, what has Servetus, that Archheretick done it? Who makes the very
substance of God to be mutable, and teaches that he is part of all things, who
denies the eternity of the Son of God, and takes away the Hypostatical Union
of the two natures in him, who gain says the substance and Divinity of the
blessed Spirit of God, who often terms, [obstupui, steteranque comae, etc. I
tremble to rehearse it,] the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the three-headed
Cerberus of Hell, who affirms the Soul to be mortal, calling Moses a
ridiculous Imposter, the Ancient Church of the Jews, an heard of Swine,
maintaining Cata-baptisme, denying redemption by Christ, and thirty years and
more, has never ceased to blaspheme the living God? What will thou be ruled
and overruled, b^ such an one as he? Can any Christian say, (yet some there
are that do affirm) that he was burnt for Religion, and not rather for his
horrible impiety and execrable blasphemy?

By the good opinion which they had of this man, his piety and holiness, they
would fain make a Martyr of him; but it will be but a stinking one, when all
his done. Well, neither better nor worse, burnt he is, but indeed too late,
who, if it had bin the good pleasure of God, I would had never b^n borne, to
poison the Church, and seduce so many poor Souls from the truth with his
pestoferous and damnable Doctrines. Calvin, then whom no man was more diligent
in the perusal of his blasphemous writings, which he published and commended to
his seduced Disciples, in the confutation hereof, does testify, that in more
th^n an 100 several places, he impiously calls the Holy and ever blessed
Trinity, the three headed Cerberus, a Diabolical fancy, the monstrous Geryon,
of whom the Poets of old had strange fictions, and by some strange mystery of
Philos^^hy they feigned to have three bodies. Good God! what pains did this man
take to out-doe all the heretics that went before him, and to un-doe both
himself and all those, who by his strange delusious should follow after him, or
be led by him? But what shall we say, negamus? potius hor^emus vocem. Errors,
that are so insolent are to be exploded, not di^puted, to be spit at, rather
then con^r^u'd. Confutat^on bears no rule, no sway here, it is Authority that
must do it; And therefore the State, did well to rid the Church of such a
violent enemy to the truth of her profession. Melanchion wrote an excellent,
and pithy admonition to the States of Venice, wherein he advises them to take
special heed, and beware of the blasp^mous errors and heresies of Servetus,
which (to omit those which he had drawn out of the works of others) are
briefly, these:

1. He denied and opposed the eternity of the Son of God, affirming that he
might be the Son of the eternal God, but not the eternal Son of God.

2. He denied the power of Original sin, that we are not liable to it, nor to
be punished for it, with diverse others of the same kind.

Thus this wretched Man having consulted with Jews, Turks, with all manner of
Heretics his Predecessors, was taken with their heresies, and justly punished
for them.

Valentinus Gentilis Campanus Csentinus. Gentili, falso, nulli impietate
secundo,
Supplicie capitis digna ruina fuit.

THE Church of God having, by those excellent instruments of Gods glory the
Senators of Geneva, rid her hands of blasphemous Servetus, could not rid her
self of those blasphemies which were broached by him, and were left behind him;
Insomuch that that which proved his ruin, proved likewise to be the ruin of
many others, that did adhere unto the same. These cursed opinions did
exceedingly molest and trouble the whole Church of God, especially that at
Geneva, to which there was at this time great resort, partly for Religion sake,
which there was professed, in its pristine purity, and partly to avoid the
Papal persecution, which was then very sore and raging. Insomuch that many
strangers, from several quarters, did frequent that place, and had there taken
up their habitation; among whom, first closely and privily, then more apertly
and openly the Doctrine of Servetus began to be broached afresh. For the timely
and seasonable prevention of that mischief which might hence ensue, it seemed
good to that Church to draw up and publish a certain form of faith and
confession, to which they required a general consent and subscription; Against
which Joannes Paulus Alciatus, a man of as much religion as a Horse has in
him, a long time opposed and stood out, but Valentinus Gentilis at last
overcame him by importunity, and brought him in; so that at length all of them
suscribing, did mutually engage themselves that whosoever should do, or
dispute, otherwise then was contained in this confession, should be accursed of
God, and accounted false, and fore-sworn among men. But the Religion of an oath
has no prevalency with those, who only use it for to promote their own base
designs, and to further their wicked purposes; They must needs go, that the
Devil drives, he having designed some of these for principal instruments, to
^ow and disperse abroad the seeds of this damnable heresy; first in the Church
of Geneva, and from thence through all the parts of Europe, which they
industriously perfornmed, and their black Master had a crop accordingly: For in
less then thirty years space from their first dissemination, this Socinian
faction could reckon up some hundreds of Churches that were fallen to them; So
readily and really did they go about their Masters business, and such an one was
this Valentine of whom we are now to speak, as the next Champion of the
Socinian band.

This Valentinus Gentilis of ^osentine in Campania, with his confederates, made
have to then old trade of life and manners. Now begins ^e to publish his
errors, to hold disputations, used other machinations to tempt the faith, and
try the constancy of others, to see whether he could bring them to has bent or
no; He did much trouble the peace and quiet of the Church by teaching, that the
essence of the Son, and Holy Ghost was diff^rent from that of the Father; That
the Father only had a Divinee essence, and that the Son was essentiated and
deified by propgation of essence from him; That there could not be more persons
in one essence, but there must needs be diverse essences, and they different in
degrees of deity, with many more such vile and devilish opinions, by which he
waxed great in the eyes of his admirers But at length both for his perfidious
baseness, and also for publishing such heretical blasphemies, by which both
Church and Commonwealth was sorely disquieted, he was taken by the command of
the Magistrates of Geneva and cast into prison. Where being examined concerning
what he had done, and said, of first he stood stoutly to the maintenance
thereof, but such was his levity, and hypocrisy, that he sudainly relented,
condemned his errors, and once more made a public profession of the true
faith.

The Magistrates, yea the whole City having (as (as they thought a rare and
eminent testimony of his repentance, gave him his enlargement; his recantation
out of prison he thus testified and deelarcd, by which we may be able to judge
of his opinions.

First, I have offended in that, I have affirmed, that only God of Israel to be
the Father of Jesus Christ, not considering that the Divinity of the Son was
closely excluded, by those oppostions, of only God the Father, and of Christ.

Secondly, when I considered the essence without the persons, enforcing thereby
a Quaternity, or a necessity of a fourth person: which I did very unadvisedly,
because the essence is no where to be considered, bu^ in the three persons,
every one of which, being wholly the whole essence.

My third crime is, that I maintained the person of the Father to be
sophisticate, seeming to be what indeed it is not, which among the rest I
profess to be most false, as is now plainly showed to me.

In brief there are many false consequences, built upon these putrid and
ruinous foundations, which I here detest and abominate, professing my self to
take and understand these things no otherwise then the Consistory has
explained them to me in their writ^ng.

The penance which, according to the sentence of the Judges he performed was
this: First, that being stripped to his shirt (they are the very words of the
sentence denounced against him) bare footed, and his head uncovered, holding a
lighted candle or taper in his hand, and kneeling down upon the ground before
the Judges, he should ask pardon for those blasphemies which he had published,
and those writings of his, contaning so much heresy, and such horrible
btlsphemy, a fire being made before them, he should with his own hands cast
into the same, therein to be wholly consumed; afterward in the same fashion, a
trumpet sounding before him, he was led through the most eminent streets of the
City, where he manifested, or rather handsomely counterfeited his repentance
before all the people: for this fair and specious show of repentance soon
vanished away, and came to nothing, the Dog returning to his vomit, and the
Sow, that was supposed to be washed, to wallowing in the mire; he had no sooner
got leave to be enlarged out of prison, upon condition not to depart the City
without the pleasure of the Council first known, and their favor procured,
contemning his oath by which he had engaged himself unto them; and slighting
the grave authority of those, that might have taken away his life, yet dealt so
gen^ly with him, he secretly steals out of the City and runs away.

Being thus unworthily fled from Geneva; he first took sanctuary at the house
of his old comrade and associate Gribaldus, who lived in a Village, whereof he
was Lord, and is on the confines of the jurisdiction of Geneva, but is under
the rule and government of Guyen or Bernen, where he lived obscurely, as one
banished from all company, but what did belong to the family; yet even there
met he with Alciatus, who was much endeared to him, who with another in the
house, which was the Master of Gribaldus his children, did often treat of, and
discuss their affairs with many, and various disputations. Hence he went to
Lions, which place finding not fit for his purpose, he soon got on his back,
and then went to Grationopolis, Camarack, and so wandering through diverse
Regions, taking great pain^ in all places wheresoever he came to make
Pros^lires, he returned again to Gribaldus his place. Where he had not long
remained, securely enough as he thought, he was taken, and cast into prison by
the Governor of Guyen, being advertised of the Doctrine and disposition of the
man, but after a few days indurance, he is freely dismissed, having given his
faith to live peaceably and quietly, so long as he stayed in their
jurisdiction. But he leaving them and their power to themselves, and those that
should have occasion to use it, returned to Lions, where he was for his
pestilential Doctrine which he had preached therein, apprehended by the Viceroy
of the City, and was about fifty days in prison, from whence he had not bin
released, had he not closely and cuttingly tampered with the Pontificians
there, to whom he promised, that he would immediately enter into the lists
against Calvin, and would confute that Doctrine which was mainta^ned by him;
which they verily believed; and so by reason of the inveterate hatred they had
to Calvin, without any farther scanning of the matter, were easily persuaded to
set the man at liberty; From thence he event into Poland, after he had filled
Italy and France, with the poisonous contagion of his damnable Doctrines,
whether he was sent for by Blandrata and Alciatus, who had there received him
before, that by their joint labors and Devil^sh endeavors, they might trouble
and infest the Churches of Poland, being as yet but in their infancy, with
those detestable heresies, which they were now ready to publish abroad a fresh,
under the shadow of new truths, or new lights lately discovered to them, and
they, (good men) being loath the World should sit any longer in ignorance and
darkness, were willing to discover and impart unto others. He abode here two
whole years and upwards, where he did, having time enough to do, much mischief;
and without question they had not removed their camp so soon, had they not
fallen out among themselves., Blandrata turning perfect Arian, of whose
opinions they were ashamed, and whose name they abhorred, yet secretly
cherished his Doctrines, and embraced his heresies; Alciatus becoming a
Mohammedan, they were all, by the Kings speeial proclamation, commanded
forthwith under the penalty of their heads, to depart his Torritories; whence
they were forced to trudge with bag and bagage; Gentilis stricks over to
Moravia, where he consorted with the assembly of the Anabaptists, as one who
sided with them in their dirty opinion, and with whom for some time he drove a
great trade, and might no question have longer resided with them, but that
there was some secret work of the Almighties hand in it. From Moravia then he
passed to Austria, and last of all to Sabaudia. And here is to be observed,
that which before was secret, namely, the just judgment of God inflicted on
these heretics. For although they go from place to place, and pass from Region
to Region, yet vengeance all the while Dogs them at the heels, Ultio peccatum
sequitur, and are at length, by a certain secret instinct brought back again to
that very place where incensed justice which sleeps not, has already
prepared, deserved judgment to wait for them. Thus it fared with this Gentilis,
who having ranged thorrow whole Countries and serveral Regions, does at length
hasten to that very place, where some years past for his heresy and blasphemy,
under the power of the Commonwealth of Bernen, he was cast into prison by the
Governor of Gayen, who now would make sure work, and not suffer himself to be
deluded by another escape, the second time, as he was before; he was therefore
with a sufficient guard conveyed thence to the council of Bernen, and many
times by the Senate and Judges, publicly examined concerning those abominable
Doctrines which he had there delivered, which with all the arguments could be
produced by him, he endeavored to maintain, but how weakly he came off, and
with what disadvantage, you may perceive by the sequel; being also demanded by
the Judges, what was become of his two companions in mischief Blandrata, and
Alciatus, answered, that one was fallen away to Arianisme, the other to
Mahomitanisme. Lastly, being convicted of many notorious, heresies,
blasphemies, perjuries, and seditious tumults and commotions, he was condemned
to loose his head, that head, which had plotted the ruin of many others, must
now stoop to the strock of Justice, and so the sentence of condemnation
pronounced by the Council, being put in execution, he puts a period to his
life, and his blasphemies both together; but yet witthout the least show or
visible appearance of any remorse for his sin, or repentance for so foul a
fact; But it was just with God, to deny it to him now, who had so deeply
dissembled with it, in the counterfeiting of it before. It is ill mocking
either God or men, Specie virtutis and umbra, with a shadow instead of
substance; God will one day cry quit with such an one, to his greater shame,
and more public confusion.

Laelius Socinus Italus Sinensis. Articulos fidei, and divini Oracula verbi,
Laelius humana volt ratione regi.

AS Africa is ever producing some new monster: So Italy is ever bringing
forth, and bringing up some strange heresy; hence sprung Socinus, both Laelius
and Faustus Italians of Sienna, of a family famous for their experience in the
Law, and as infamous for heretics, which have perverted the truth of the
Gospel. Marianus Socinus had two Sons, Alexander and Laelius, this the Uncle,
that the Father of Faustus Socinus, whose story follows, after; This Laelius
was a great favourer of the admired Doctrines of Servetus, and took his death
very heavily; he was a man merely made up of contradictions, and one, wvho
wholly bent his studies, to foment and advance those controverses in Religion,
which were then in question; like the Salamder, taking a delight to live in the
fire of contention, and for that purpose started such questions, and held such
disputes as brought great trouble, and disquiet among the Professors of the
truth; yet all this so closely and covertly, that he was not suspected to be so
soul an heretic living, as he was found to be, when he was dead. For he
secretly laid the first foundations of that work, whereon afterward his Nephew
Faustus reared up his glorious, or rather, inglorious structure. Yet as it
appears by an Epistle of Calvin's written to him, he was then somewhat high
flown, endeavoring to bring all the mysteries of Religion, and the Articles of
our faith, within the graspe of natural reason; whereas in secrets without
bottom, and such are they, of which we are speaking, except faith hold us up,
like Children, we swim without bladders, and must either dabble to the shore,
or sink, Reason has not so much as an hand to lend us. Can this Reason of
theirs, which they would put upon so high an enterprise, comprehend matters of
less consequence, then I shall believe them in the greater? Can they by the
strength of their reason show me the height of Heaven, and the depth of Hell,
can they number the sands of the Sea, the drops of rain that fall from the
sky, or the hayrs that are upon their own head? Could they plane me out by
some perfect demonstration the truth of these things here below, I should then
think their reason were able to aspire to those things which are above; but
they have no power of compassing the one, nor any possibility to atchieve the
other. And therefore their rational Divinity is nothing worth: But to return to
our purpose, as this Laelius did magnify reason, on the one hand: So did he
vilify and deprave true religion, on the other, even the most substantial and
fundamental Articles thereof, as the Satisfaction of Christ, his death and
merit, our justification, faith, etc. which depravation, to what purpose it
tended, namely, to the utter subversion and destruction of all true, sound and
saving Religion; that holy man Calvin saw, and wisely foresaw, when as by a
more then ordinary severe admonition, or rather increpation, he endeavored at
first to restrain him from this exorbitancy, to which he was violently tending,
and to keep him within the bounds of modesty and true religion, which he was
heedlesly passing; There is, says he, no cause that you should expect an
answer from me, to those prodigious questions which you put forth; If it be
your pleasure to soar aloft through those aerie speculations, suffer me, I pray
you, an humble Disciple of Jesus Christ, low and submisse in mine endeavors,
to meditate those things, which conduce to the edification of my faith, and the
increase and growth of true religion. And (I hope) shall get that by my
silence, which I desire, namely, that you trouble me no more hereafter; Yet I
cannot but be grieved, that you should employ that liberal wit, which God has
bestowed on you, not only in things of no moment, and to no purpose, but should
take a course, utterly to overthrow it and your self to, by deadly and
destructive figments, which mischief I have openly declared before, and now,
(if not too late) do admonish you of again; unless therefore, you do timely
prevent this extraordinary desire, and itch of searching and diving into those
things, which are not necessary, it is to be feared, that you will provoke God
to hasten some judgment on you, to your own misery, and the example of others,
deterring them thereby from the like vanity. If by indulgency I should nourish
vice, which I know to be very abnoxious to those that are addicted to it, I
should be false and injurious to you, yea I should thereby contract a guilt
upon mine own Soul, which would not easily be washed off. Wherefore I had
rather you should now be offended a little with my austerity, then being caught
in an evil not by the enticing baits of curiosity, be carried away past
recovery; There will be a time, I hope, wherein you w^ll have cause to rejoice,
that ever you were so violently roused up. Thus Calvin to him; Hear we now what
Beza says of him, He was, says he, descended of an ancient and noble family,
sufficiently instructed b^th in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, with other
additaments of Arts, necessary for his p^ofession, and correspondent to his
condition: And, (which is much to be desired, and very commendable in all,
especially such, whose employment it is, to instruct others) outw^rdly of an
unblamable life and conversition; for which cause, says he, I contracted with
him a more then ordinary friendship and familiarily; but he was a man full of
errors, and compacted of heresies, wh ch yet for all that (so artificially did
he cover them, and so politickly discover the judgment of others concerning
them, and what propensity or inclination they had toward them) that he seemed
never to propose any of them to me, but by way of conference, and only for
disputation sake, and often propounding questions, as if he earnestly coveted
instruction and satisfaction. I believe that for many years together he
favored the Samosatenian heresy, and persuaded many to a liking and embracing
of the same; he assayed me also, with diverse arguments, and if he could have
prevailed, to have overwhelmed me in error and destruction both together; But
through Gods mercy, I did so often foil him, that many times he had not a word
to say for himself. Learned he was and very studious; but alas, learning in
many is a disease; not a perfection, yea a mere surfeit. A greedy knowledge
feeds not our understanding, but oppresses it, and like a ravenous appetite
chews more to poison, then to nourishment. Were I to drink freely of what is
sacred; I should desire that which flows of it self, rather then that which is
pumped for; waters that are troubled yield mud, and are oftentimes as well the
bane, as the comfort of the receiver. A. Pioner, or bold myner, which diggs too
far for his rich vein of Ore, meets many times with a damp, which choaks him;
And we may find some dispositions, of which this man's may justly be one, rather
desperate then venturous, discerned more by a heady resolution, then a wise
cautelousnesse, whom we may resemble to that silly, and shipwrackt Seaman, who
dived so long for a piece of his sunken treasure, that he was at once deprived
both of life and fortune: So Laelius digging so deep, and diving so far into
these sacred mysteries, by the strength of his natural reason only, by which he
was wholly guided, that at once he lost both himself, and his Religion, if he
ever had any to loose: He has bin so long conversant in the School of
Philosophy, that he has forgotten that it is Religion, with which he has to
do, insomuch that turning the World upside down, he makes that the Mistress
of, which before was but the handmaid to Divinity. And therefore (might I be
thought worthy of hearing or determining this matter) I should count it no
less a policy, then right in such sad learning, and deep mysteries, to give
Divinity the chair; for if Arts themselves with their subtle retinue, do but
once invade it, Sense and Reason will quickly hiss faith, and Religion out of
doors; As we may see by woeful experience in these times, and among these men
it is already come to pass. He that trades only with the stock of reason, in
such weighty matters, is like to make but a sorry market. Those enterprises are
temerarious and over-headstrong, which put on, where there is not only danger,
but a despair of conquest. How can reasonable man, but lie buried under the
weight of such a mystery, at which the very grand Pillars of the Church have
not only shook, but shrunk? All reason then (whatever, Laelius and his sect do
think) is tongue-tied, all apprehension non-plust, all understanding darkened,
when we come to speak of the high and mysterious things of faith and Religion;
For these carry with them such an awe, do bear such a Majestic port, as if
they looked to be obeyed, not disputed, and freely assented to, not
preposterously controverst. He seems to me to be Master of little or no reason
at all, who would have Reason a competent judge of those things which are
above, and beyond reason, and all finite apprehension whatsoever.

For his good conversation, it deserves commendation, if it were real; I would
be loath to be, (what ever the World, and some ill biased men think of me) an
Advocate for debauchery, I here openly protest against it; in the sight of God
and man; yet to speak my mind freely, I believe, the Devil, that has many
ways to catch men, has in'd a greater harvest by the means of such austerity,
and seeming purity (I judge no man,) then ever he did by those, that are too
much addicted to company; To decline offenses, to be careful and conscionable
in our several actions, is a perfection, which every man ought to labor for,
and to attain unto, which we may well do, without a sullen segregation of our
selves from all society, or at least from all society that are not of our
opinion. The Donatists were pure in their lives, but desperate in their
Doctrines; What Saints did the Anabaptists seem at their first rise and
Original to be? Insomuch that Luther himself wrote to the Duke of Saxony in
their behalf; desiring him not to be too severe to those innocent and
harmless persons; yet afterward when they had gotten the staff into their
own hands, what Monsters they discovered themselves to be, what horrible
outrages were acted, what horrid impieties perpetrated by them, poor Germany
can yet remember, and declare to her long lasting sorrow, and their everlasting
infamy. An affected austerity a supercilious gravity; a starch't deportment,
instead of reverence, which is looked for, beget scorn and contempt.

If there be any privileges, they are surely granted to the Children of the
Kingdom, to which, many without warrant, entitle themselves, If mirth and
recreations be lawful, surely such as desire to keep faith and a good
conscience may lawfully use them; Let us not then judge one another, but every
one of us, labor to build up one another in our most holy faith, that God may
have the glory, his Church the peace, his Servants the comfort, that is to be
desired. Well, having considered this Laelius in his life and Doctrine, we now
come to his end, having attained to the middle of his age, being about seven
and thirty years old, and at that very time, when being moved by the
importunity of his friends, he had determined, yea had already begun, to bring
to light, and publish to the World, some fru^t of his laborious and industrious
studies in Divinity, he was cut off by the sudain stroke of death; insomuch
that all his endeavor, which was wholly bent, (if possible) to the ruin of
Orthodox Doctrine, and their great expectation for the present dyed with him,
and came to nothing. How did death cosen both the living and dead? This
intended now out of hand to publish, Those to enjoy the result of many years
hard and painful studies; yet both are prevented by one sudain and unexpected
blow; We are here, even in our best condition, but as a flower, that lasts some
days, we last some years, at a certain period both fade; It should be our
care, to be always well doing, and then let death come when, where, and how it
will; We may then with comfort sing that Swan-like song of good old Simeon,
Nunc dimittis, etc. Lord now le^ thy Servant depart in peace.

Mattheus Gribaldus Iurisconsultus Patavinus. Jam Patavinus adest Gribaldus
jure peritus
At verae legis cognitione caret.

MAttheus Gribaldus, to whom that runagate Galentinus Gentilis, flying out of
Geneva, first betook himself, was a Lawyer of Patavia, as able in his
profession, as any in that School, one that lived well, and in good repute,
t^ll he was drawn away by the sly and subtle persuasion of Laelius Socinus,
that broker for the Devil, who cunningly wrought the downfall of this man and
many others. He was familiarly present with Francis Spira, in that desperate
conflict which he had by reason of his Apostasy, and ab^egation of the faith,
contrary to his conscience and his former pro^ession of the truth; He also
wrote the History of the same, the whole matter whereof in his preface he
terms, (and that very truly) a great wonderful example of Divine Justice upon
the man, to the terror and astonishment of all beholders; For he, together
with Paulus Vergerius Bishop ^f Justinopolitanus, (who unless he had seen
Spira in that Agony, had never come over to Basil to us, as himself was wont
often to say) did very often visit Spira, and give him what comfort he could,
at that time in a better cond^tion then himself, who having forsaken the faith,
and abandoned his profession, he betook himself secretly to his village in the
Country, where he lay close and obscure for a time, at length he joined himself
a companion to these Italian heretics, who took him off clearly from the
foundations of his Religion; So that by degrees, for, nemo repent fit
turpissimus, he became as Arch an heretic as any in the company. No enemy like
to bad company, it destroys both our bodies and souls, it gives us
immedicabile vulnus, such a wound as will admit of no cure.

How many have lived ignominiously, and dyed miserably, who have used their
last breath, only to complain of this, as the witch that has enchanted them to
the commiting of those evils which now they must smart for, and that for ever?
Many a man had bin good, which is not, had he not fallen into ill company;
This, this wrought such an unhappy change in Gribaldus, that the sad example of
Spira, which before had made some impression in him, was now quite gone, and
that terror, which it had wrought, was removed. Quantum mutatus ab illo, what
can we think of him, when as Beza writing concerning him says, that he had
denied with open and apparent perjurie that Religion, which in his conscience
he thought to contain the very truth? This made Calvin refuse to take, or give
a hand, when he met him, unless they first might know each others minds, and
what agreement was between them in the prime Article of the Christian faith,
that is, the sacred Trinity, and the Deity of Jesus Christ. But the difference
proved so wide, that Calvin, and he were never at amity, many times at enmity,
during his abode at Geneva. After this, we find that he returned to his
profession of the Law, but never to the profession of the truth: And therefore
it is not for nothing, that this saying came in use, to convince an heretic is
next to a miracle, that is, so to convince him, as to bring him to acknowledge
his errors, to be sorry for them, and utterly to relinquish and forsake them.
By the favor of Vergerius, (who either knew not, or winked at his errors, and
heresies) he was called to Tubinga, where he set up his profession, practiced
the Law, and in a very eminent and public auditory read Lectures thereof, for
the instruction of others; but at length by the prudence of Hieronymus
Gerh^^dus, one of the privy council to the Prince of Wertenberge, he was
detected of heresy, but secretly made an escape; being after this taken at
Bernen, he was again enlarged by virtue of a counterfeit abnegation which he
made: for he presently turned to his old byasse again; so that being
imprisoned, he was swept away by the pestilence, and so saved the Hangman a
labor, preventing the execution, which was prepared otherwise for him.

Georgius Blandrata Saluciensis Medicus. Hic Medicus Blandrata fuit, dum
corpora curat,
Haereseos virus mentibus ille parat.

GEorge Blandrata of Salucia, by profession a Physician, who not long after
followed his companion Gentilis, flying from Geneva for fear of the Magistrate,
who is not a terror, but to those that do evil, and who (as he supposed) laid
out for him, to take him if possible, conscius ipse sibi, as one conscious of
his own baseness; but by a slight escaped, he fled away, no man so much as
pursuing him: For while he, among the rest, was hearing Calvin in a public
Auditory, by chance espying the Magistrate or chief Judge coming in, whom to
avoid, he cunningly clapped his hand-kerchief to his nose, as if he had bin taken
with a sudden bleeding, and so fled out of the Church and out of the City,
being never afterward seen therein. During his abode at Geneva he often
disputed with Calvin, in whose works we may find the answers to Blandrata's
questions; He ingennously confesses that he received great satisfaction from
Calvin by his public disputations, and consented with him, but never held to
any thing so close, as his pernicious errors, and damnable heresies, of the
foulness of which, notwithstanding he were convinced in his conscience by his
own confession, yet such power had the Devil over him, that he was never
able, or willing to retract, and wholly forsake them: Insomuch that Calvin told
him to his face, thy countenance bewrayes that all is not well, thou have some
detestable monster within thee, which thou make much of, and lies lurking in
thy very heart. Ill actions are perpetual perturbations: his countenance cannot
be serene, whose conscience is over cast with the guilt of his impiety.

At Ticinus escaping the hands of the Inquisitors, who would willingly have
gotten him into their power, he went into Helvetia, and so to Germany. He
passes from thence to Polonia and Transylvania, where he practices Physic,
and under the notion of that profession, wherein he proved happy, either by his
ability or success, did the better obscure that heresy which he mainta^ned,
and endeavored so much to advance by his wily whisperings, and crafty
dist^lling it into the ears of those eminent persons, who by reason of his
practice he had to be his patients. To him Faustus Socinus, (being now grown
up) write an Epistle bearing this title or Dedication, To George Blandrata
chief Physician to Stephen the most renowned King of Poland, and one of the
privy Council, his Lord and Patron most worthy to be honored, etc. This man
was a very great favourer and promoter of the Socinian faction, and stood them
in great steed, both in the Court of Polonia and Transylvania, where his word
did bear some weight by reason of his profession and power, by which also he
attained to a very rich and plentiful estate; But it seems toward his end, he
grew somewhat lukewarm in his affections to them, and not so indulgent toward
their affairs as they expected or desired, which made them much to compla^n of
him, and instead of titles of honor, to lade him with terms of infamy and
reproach. However he dealt with them at the last, yet sure they had never
gotten so much footing in those parts, had it not bin for him: his secret
endeavors, his open and apparent writings, may evidence the good will he bare
unto them; and therefore shall not go unpunished, sometimes private punishments
gripe a man within; while others looking in their face discern not their hurt;
sometimes God punishes openly, and the offenses of men meet with a Market
lash; thus dealt he with Blandrata, he was strangled in his bed by his own
Brothers Son, whom he had appointed and constituted his heyr. Non haec sine
numine, etc. This was not done in a corner, nor without Gods just revenge upon
this wicked and ungodly wretch, whom he thought fit to hurry out of the World,
by such an unwonted and cursed kind of death, being a prime Author, of many
execrable heresies in the Churches of Christ, many horrible blasphemies against
God and his truth, many filthy and abominable books, many terrible rufflings
among the Professors of the same truth of God, which can never be wholly
vanquished; Error and heresy may blow on it, and shake it to, but not
overthrow it; for it is founded on such Basis, and has such a sure
groundwork, as is subject neither, to battery, nor undermining, The rock
Christ Jesus.

This Blandrata, with the counsel and assistance of Francis Davidis, wrote a
book against the blessed Trinity, opposing one (to whom the Church of God in
those parts was very much beholding, as being a notable Assertor of the
Orthodox Religion, that is, George Major,) whose very Title does declare both
the Author and the matter of the same, (being a certain Refutation of a
writing of George Major's) to be unsound and heretical, wherein he endeavors
to prove, but out of the pit of Antichrist, that there are not three distinct
Persons, and but one Essence in the Godhead; We will not trouble our selves
with the blasphemies against God, the Calumnies and Slanders vomited out
against the maintainers of the truth, which are therein contained; it is
sufficiently known, that their whole Religion consists in nothing else, which
being (if it were possible) taken from them, they would not have a figleaf left
them to cover themselves withal. By this book of Blandrata's, we come to know
who were the Authors of that most cursed pamphlet published 1567. in the name
of the Ministers of the Churches agreeing together in Sarmatia and
Transylvania, that is to say, this wicked Blandrata, Francis Davidis, and some
others of the same stamp; It is no marvel, that he who labored to stifle the
honor of God in the Churches, should be stifled by the hands of him, who
should have done honor to him. We see though the ways of vice be smooth, yet
are they slippery, inviting by the eye, but tripping up the heels, to the
wounding or drowning of those that take a delight to walk on them.

Paulus Alciatus Miles Mediolanensis. Alciatus miles Blandratae fidus Achates,
Ecclesiam contra militat ante mala.

PAulus Alciatus of Mediolanum a City in Milla^ a Soldier, and an intimate
friend and Comp^nion of B^adrata's, marketh up next, to fire against the truth;
But Q^is militis usus? no need of Soldiers here. I shall ever suspect that
Religion, which needs the hands of Soldiers to support it, and is cemented
with blood. In the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, no Axe, no hammer, nor
any too^ of iron (while it was in building) was heard in it; and why swords
n^w? Did this Soldier think to make his Religion the more passable, by cutting
a way for it with his Sword? or to worst the truth with his weapon? The Sword
may force Nature, and destroy the Body, b^t cannon work upon the mind so, as o
perswa^e it to believe that good, which is ill begun; It suits well w th Turks
and Pagans; and may do as well (for ought we see) with the ^ocinians. Yet hear
what Lucan ^aith, concerning such; certainly either they must be very bad, or
el^e he was much out of cha^i^y with them.

Nulla sides, Pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur,
Venalesque manus: ibi fas, ubi maxima mer^es.
Nor faith, nor conscience common Soldiers carry;
Best pay, be^^ cause: their hands are Mercenary.
And such an one, neither better, nor worse, was this Alicatus, while he
followed the camp: but forsaking that kind of life, he did associate himself
with these professed enemies of the truth; whereby he wrought much mischief
among the Professors of the same. He was a special means of calling over
Valentinus Gentilis into Poland, to trouble and molest the Churches there with
their execrable and abominable Doctrines, contrary to the truth contained in
the Scriptures, and delivered to us by the Prophets and Apostles, and therefore
has justly merited that curse, which afterward he was an inheritour of, and
is denounced by St. Paul, whosoever teaches any other Gospel, then what ye
have received, let him be accursed. Calvin makes mention of him in an Epistle,
which he wrote concerning Blandrata, but it is for no good you may be sure; For
he reported of us, that we worshipped three Devils, (did we ever think that
impudency or madness would have attained to such an height of blasphemy, as to
belch forth such horrid expressions?) because we worship one God in three
persons: yea, says he, they a^e worse then all the Idols of the Church of
R^me. O horrible impiety! O damnable blasphemy! Sure the gallows must needs
groan for such a wicked wretch as this. But Laesa patientia fit furor. Delayed
vengeance is severe in the execution. And God takes a course with him, whereby
he exceedingly mani^ests his indignation toward him, gives him up to hardness
of heart, and searedness o^ conscience, the greatest judgment, on this side
^ell. So that being led away with strong delusions, he did believe one o^ the
grossest lies in the World, namely, th t the Turkish Alcaron was th^^ very,
that only rule, which God had laid before us, according to which he would be
worshipped, and served by us. And therefore turned Turk, was circumcised,
thereby denying the Lord that bought him, and so brought upon himself swift
destruction; For having lived for some time among them, and after their manner,
he dyed most wretchedly, and desperately, his very name being more vile and
stinking in the nostrils of God, and al good men, then his corrupt and rotten
carcass. We may here see the issue of a man's deserting his calling; be the
intent never so good, it will little avail us; for it is the Cannon of the
Apostle, let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. It is
no thinking that the wise and Holy God will be pleased with a well meant
confusion; for it is not our abilities, be they never so great, but our vocation,
that must bear us out in our undertaking.

Faustus Socinus Laelij nepos. Fauste, Redemptoris vadimonia, diraque mortis
Tormina, peccantes absoluisse negas?

THat mischief, which was intended by Laelius Socinus the Uncle, to be brought
upon the Churches of God, being the result of many years study, but was
prevented by a sudden and unexpected death, was fully accomplished by Faustus
Socinus his Nephew, as a man cut out of purpose for such a desperate design,
and that to the wonder and astonishment of diverse; and by the secret working of
God, according to that prediction of his Uncle concerning him. He having
recited an express of Laelius death, hastens with all the speed that might be
principally to Tigurum, to sequester the movable Library of his Uncle Laelius,
which he had left behind him; But being possessed with a panick fear, lest the
Tigurians should deal with Laelius, as the Basilians had dealt with that arch
Heretic David George, as he himself confesses in a letter to Dudithius, he
privately dispatched that business, and so departed. Faustus or rather
infaustus Socinus being now, according to his hearts desire, made Master of his
Uncles Library, did afterward become his Scholar, and a true heyr of his
opinions, which he improved to the purpose. He was at this time a young man, of
three and twenty years of age, and books, though exceedingly coveted by him,
were as yet of little use, or benefit to him: for returning to Italy, he spent
twelve whole years as a Courtier under Francis the great Duke of Hetruria;
Being now five and thirty years old, and it seems, growing weary of his
attendance at Court, he leaves Italy, and betakes himself to Germany, and in
Basil makes his abode, where he spent three years, not in hearing the Doctors,
not in frequenting the Schools, not in consulting Authors, and other
authentic Writers, which were sound and Orthodox, but in diligent searching of
his Uncles books, having wholly addicted himself to the study thereof, and
fully given himself up to be guided and governed by them, as Oracles, which
could not be mistaken; And now disdaining the name of a disciple, he took upon
him to be a Doctor in Divinity: whence it came to pass that he, which never
learned, becomes now a teacher, and takes upon him to be a great Master, in
Israel, supposing no less, then one whole Province committed to him to be
instructed, does vainly arrogate it to himself. But what good could be expected
from this light, courtly, and immature kind of studies, the master-ship of
which, he grasped and encompassed only, by poring into the writings and
opinions, of one only man, who sees not? Now Faustus begins to look big, and
to adventure abroad, trading with his Uncles stock. He forthwith began a book
de Christo Servatore, of Christ our Savior, disputing in it against James
Covet, Minister of Paris, who going to Franckford, by chance met together in
the same Inn; Wherein he shows more of h^s wit, then of his honesty, and yet
not much of either; stoutly denying the satisfaction of Christ; nor is this
all, though this be very much, but as the title of the book declares, he
opposes many other things, which by the professors of the truth, and partly by
others also, who do not wholly assent with us, in other matters, are believed
and esteemed to be the saving axioms of Christian Religion: which he
presumptuously takes upon him to demonstrate, to be, very dangerous and
pernicious errors, and would fain shape us out a form of Religion according to
his own fancy, as if, the Doctrine of Christ, and the true Religion, stood in
need of such a tricker and trimmer of it, to make it saleable. This disputation
was after printed and published by a friend and follower of Socinus, Elias
Arcissevius a Polonian, with the Authors name to it, which was never done
before, in any of his other writings; which is so magnified by this beastly
merchant, on purpose to prostitute it to every customer, and of which he does
so exceedingly boast, that he is not ashamed to say, that there is so much
knowledge of Christ, and his office contained in it, as could possible be
desired; when as on the contrary, it may be more truly said of it, that there
is so much perversion of the Doctrine of Christ, and his offices as could be
imagined, and more then ever was before published.

Before Socinus could fi^^sh his book de Servatore, he was interrupted with
sickness, and by his absence from the City, for all his treasure, namely, the
writings of his uncle Laelius, out of which (as himself confesses) he was
principally instructed, concerning the matter in controversy, was contained
within the Walls of Basil; from whence he was constrained to absent himself by
reason of the plague, which was there begun, so that he could make no
progress in his intended purpose; That God which d^d for a time retard, could
have wholly hindered, and prevented the coming forth of this pestiferous book;
but he often permits such things to be, for the glory of h^s name, in
bringing good out of evil, and that those which are steadfast might be made
manifest; Besides, we see what a Doctor Faustus was who was able to do nothing
of h^mself without the help and directions, of his Uncles writings: h^s
confidence was more, then his ab^lity; otherwise he had never waded so far into
these great, and mysterious matters, by which he has cast away himself, and
all that follow him. While he remained at Tigurum, he had another disputat^o^
with Francis Puccius a Florentine, (concerning whom more hereafter) of the
state of the first man, wherein it was debated, whether Adam in his first
estate were mortal, or no? What, and how necessary, such questions as these are
to salvation, let any man judge; yet such curious questions as these, were
commonly the subject of all his disputations; whereas indeed, matters of a far
lower stra^n, would better have sorted with the indifferency, both of his arts,
and parts, to discuss them. Q^aeries that are too nice, rather torment the
understanding then inform it, and are more apt to puzzle our judgment, then to
rectify it. Subtilty of questions, I know not whether, it has more convinced,
or begotten error, or improved us in our knowledge, or staggered us. And
hence, I suppose, was the substance of the Apostles advice to the Romans, cap.
14.1. He that is weak in faith receive you; but not to doubtful disputations.
Curiosity, of questions have ever b n the very engines, and stales to heresy;
and therefore to be avoyed by us. He wrote many and diverse things, and so far
he went, that at last he brought this heresy into a more perfect form, and
raised (as he thought) a goodly structure on that foundation, which was laid by
Laelius; following that rule, which Architecture lays before us, the higher we
build the deeper to lay our foundation; laying the foundation, of t^is his
monstrous religion, even in the depth of Hell, that he might raise (if
possible) this his Babylonical structure up to Heaven.

What others have done, or attempted to do by peece-meale, he has effected, as
it were, at once, upon the very body of religion. For there is almost no
article of our religion, to which he has not offered some violence, and has,
as much as ^n him lay, endeavored, either utterly to overthrow it, or to pluck
it up by the very roots: thinking it worth the while, by defacing, or turning
off the old, to bring in another form of religion under his own name, and
according to his own liking. He was a man of a crafty and quick wit, but
insufferably audacious and petulant, specie and forma magis, quam virtute
religiosus, sed gloriae and novitatis improbe cupidus, as Ruffinus says of
Arius, In virtue not so much refined, as in the depor^ment of the outward man,
which promised some gravity, though no truth of religion; violently th^rsting,
and pursuing after honor and novelty. He was guilty o^ very much levity, being
drawn partly from the nature of the Country, where he was borne, partly from
the family, out of which he sprung, and partly from the Court in which he was
bred; Insomuch that he was constant in nothing, but inconstancy; which yet was
not in any thing so pernicious, as in those sacred mysteries, with which he
above measure desired to be tampering, and into which diving, though he drowned
himself therein: For he had but a light tincture of learning, as the writer of
his life affirms, and he himself is not ashamed to confess, what exquisite
judgment, says he, or deep understanding in these kind of Philosophical,
Theological and hard disputes could be expected from me, a man, who neither
learned Philosophy, nor at any time could attain to the knowledge and
understanding of that Divinity, which they call Scholastic, nor tasted, but
only of the rudiments of Logic, and that very late to? And ^n his Epistles,
page 587. he complains, that he spent a great part of his time in Italy, his
native country, but yet the very seat of idleness and va^ity; and therefore it
was no wonder, if he came short in the knowledge both of humane and Divine
mat^ers: So that he ^oared up to those sacred mysteries, merely upon the
confidence or his own wit, having not had time for the laying of any solid
f^undation; That height of Spirit, which he had either gotten, or augmented,
while he was a Courtier, he ever afterward retained, and often declared in
overturning, and demollishing the very foundations of all Catholic Antiquity,
and Christian Religion: As also in curbing and subduing those, which were his
companions, or had yielded themselves up to be guided by his crooked direction.

He must be chief among them, and Lord over them, or else it is no bargain. He
was indeed very proud and high minded, scorning to receive ^nstruction from
any, being, in his own judgment, inferior to none; Trimness and court-like
gaudiness was strongly riveted, to him, and deeply rooted in him, his apparel
and deportment much unbeseeming such a man, as he professed himself to be, like
unto those ancient Arians, of whom Hilarie speaks, that were rather Bishops of
the Court, then of the Church. Of all those books which he wrote (and truly
there are many under his name, and the names of others, whom he borrowed, the
better to vend his false and deceitful ware, by which the Church of God
sustained much detriment) none pleased him more then that which he wrote
against Eutropius, as Hieronymus Muscorovius, a bird of the same feather,
reports of him, as from his own mouth, and l^kewise adds this of his own unto
it, that Socinus, in that very work had much outdone himself; But how much to
be esteemed that book is, or what account is to be made of his judgment, who so
much cries it up may appear by the d sputation of the Trinity, which is the
argument of that transcendent piece of work. We will not spend time to reckon
up these writ^ngs in order, or to set down the number, I would they had bin
fewer, but if any of them shall happen to come to our hands, as it is much if
some of h^s, or other such Doctors do not, in the perusal thereof, it is very
necessary to employ our greatest judgm^nt, and utmost diligence, lest when we
think we are tak^ng meat to nourish us, we take in poison to destroy us: we
cannot expect two contrary effects from one and the same thing: So Tertullian,
no man can be built up by that by which he is destroy^d, no man can be
illuminated, by that by which he is darkened and obscured.

This man now is Haereticorum Patriarcha, the support of he^eticks, and ^he
prop of heresies, and therefore gives denomina^ion to the whole Sect; Of
Socinus then are they called Socinians, who profess any of those heresies,
which were either collected or broached by him. And how should it be otherwise,
if we look upon Laelius Soci^us as the first Author, and Faustus Socinus, his
Nephew as the chief amplifier and propugnator of this wretched heresy? To the
one is rightly referred the original of th^s pseudo divinity, if it be
considered materially: to the other, if we look upon it formally: from him in
respect of invention, from this, in respect of disposition, from both by Divine
permission. To pass by all other arguments, let this be sufficient, that
Socinus, with the utmost endeavor that he could, did first propagate this his
heresy in Sarmatia, and Transylvania, where the seeds were sown partly by
Laelius, who about the year 1555. is said to disperse his errors in Polonia,
partly by his accomplices in Transylvania: but after that of Faustus the whole
heresy being compacted, and neatly made up, as it is at this day, maintained
among them, was planted in these and in diverse other places beside, whose
Doctrine, although it were for sometime opposed, and that in the chief heads and
f^ndamentals, as concerning the satisfaction, which was made by Christ, unto
the Justice of God for our sins, which he strongly opposed; as also his
sacrifice completed in Heaven and not on Earth, of the Kingdom of Christ, of
Justification, of Baptism and the like, which at first suffered diverse
contradict^ons, yet at last were embraced, and accounted as the Oracles of
God; Insomuch, that whole Churches, and they of no small number, and
concernment, were not only fallen to this heresy, but were ready vi and armis
to maintain it against all opposition.

Neither was he sparing of any labor or toil, so that he might disseminate,
and disperse abroad this heresy thus composed and compounded by him; Witness
his so many vvritings, his frequen^ letters of solicitation, his private and
public disputations, so many informations of those, whom he had as
interpreters of his mind and meaning, his so long and tedeous journeyes, from
the utm^st confines of Silesia, even into the heart of Lituania; compassing Sea
and Land, as our blessed Savior speaks of the Pharisees, to make proselytes,
and to gain others to embrace their dangerous and deadly Doctrines. Hence forth
then we know them no more by the distinct name of Arian, Ebionite, Photinian,
Samosatenian, Abaila^dian or Servetian, but by this compound de^ominati^n of
Socinian, as including and comprehending all the rest.

I know that there are diverse causes of heresy, the ambition of some, the
contention of others may be, and many times are, causes of the springing and
growing up, of m^st damnable heresies; In Socinus both these did concur, being
both ambitious to get a name by, and to give a name to, this lovely babe o^
innovation and contagion; And also contentious, never g^ving over quarrelling,
and contending with those, that held any thing contrary to his mind or liking,
till he had brought them to that pass, that he would have them, and his own
wicked and desperate designs, to that issue which he desired. Thus l ved he to
be a trouble and vexation to all the Churches in Italy, his own Country,
Germany, Polonia, the great D^kedome of Lituania, Trans^lvania, (and where
not?) by setting up, and setting forth his deadly and destructive Doctrines,
and qualis vita, finis ita; as he oppos d Christ in his li^e, Christ must needs
deny him that comfort at his death, which perhaps he might expect; for, faith
Christ, he that denies me before men, him will I al^o deny before my father
which is in Heaven; and if Christ den us, who will own us; but own we him, and
he will own and honor us, before God and his Holy Angels.

Franciscus Davidis Superintendens. Audet Franciscus superis indicere bellum:
De summa Christum trudere sede sua.

THE next firebrand of sedition and broacher of this blasphemous Doctrine,
which the Devil cast into the Church of God by which it was enflamed, and which
he set on work, by which it was molested, is this Francis Davidis
Superintendent, one as it were, fitted, on all hands to do mischief, but to do
good he had little knowledge, and less will. He was Author with Blandrata of
that hellish confutation, which was written against George Major, fraught full
of blasphemy against the sacred Trinity: For although he agreed with them of
the Socinian party, in opposing the Trinity of the persons in the Unity of the
essence, as the Orthodox profess, and the Deity of Jesus Christ; Yet he
dissented from them, and went beyond them, in his opinion concerning the
invocation of Christ: Est illud mirabile (says Athanasius) cum omnes haereses
invicem pugnent, in falsitate omnes consentire -- It is greatly to be wondered
at, that notwithstanding all heresies jar among themselves, yet they agree well
enough on opposition of the truth. He was with them in all the rest, he
out-went them in this, affirming, that Christ ought not to be worshipped,
because he was not God, not true God of the same essence with his Father. Hence
much contention, and diverse hot disputations arose among them; in which they
seem at once both bountiful and injurious to the Lord Jesus, willing to invest
him with the title (...), but d sr^be him of that glorious, and his own (...),
granting him a like essence with the Father, but not the same, equal to him in
power, but not eternity. By way of digression a little, for satisfaction to
others, and confutation of this audacious Arian, who dares thus undervalue the
Lord of Glory, might we have leave to strip one heretic to clothe another, and
put on this, what Tertullian did on Marcion, we should quickly and quietly
discover the truth. Quid dimidi^s mendacio Christu^? Why do thou thus
peece-meal a Deity, and half God (as it were) the Son of the Almigh^y? Totus
veritas, he is the Spirit of truth, and Oracle o^ his Father, the brightness of
his glory, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, by whom
God made the World: So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. styles Christ, the power and
wisdom of God: If the Son of God, be the power and wisdom of God, and that
God was never without power and wisdom, how can we scant the Son of a
co-eternity with the Father? For either we must grant, that there was always a
Son, or that God had sometimes no wisdom, which this Socinian, in the height of
his madness will be loath to affirm. Ego and pater unum sumus, says Christ,
Joh. 10. I and the Father are one; u^um, to show he was the same thing, in
respect of essence, and to manifest a consent both in power and eternity. I
often find that those of the shallowest capacities, are ever most prone to dive
into the deepest mysteries; but I know not the reason, unless to verify the
Proverb, There Is none so bold as blind Bayard. In sacred matters, the most
nimble Criticisms are as obnoxious to desperateness, as danger to be curious
here, is to be quaintly mad, and thus to thrust (as these poor sneaks presume)
into the bed Chamber of the Almighty is a frantic sawciness; who can unlock
those coffers of omnipotency, but he that breaks in pieces the gates of brass,
and cuts in sunder the bars of Iron? Who those Cabinets of abstruf^r knowledge,
but he, that gives thee the treasure of darkness, and hidden riches of secret
places? How can our low built apprehensi^ns but flagg, in the expression of
those hidden mysteries, which have transported Prophets and Apostles with
wonderful admiration? yet some will venture to untwist them, though to their own
wrong, and the confusion both of themselves and others: So this Davidis, never
dispu^ing, but about such questions as were ^ar better to be let al^ne, then to
trouble and stagger many thousands, by the starting of them: He disputed much
concerning this matter with Socinus, who had always a party of that company
with whom he was, ready to counter-porse him, and those that stood on his side,
of whom was Simo^ Budnaeus, Christianus Francken, and diverse others; There is
extant an Epistle of Socinus to him, wherein he answers him to those arguments,
by which he endeavored to prove from that place of John 20.28. where Thomas
cries out, my Lord and my God, that Christ was not there called God: but he had
better have taken a Wolf by the ears: Besides a fragment, of a more smooth and
placide style, being an answer to the writing of Franciscus Davidis concerning
praying to, or calling upon Christ in our needs and necessities, remains
among the works of Socinus, where also are some of his nice and needless
questions, with the others answers thereunto. He published diverse Theses, by
which may be easily discovered what a dangerous and desperate heretic he was;
we find them in order thus.

1. That invocation, being a part of Divine worship, is not any where found in
Scripture to be attributed unto Christ.

2. That if Christ at any time confer Grace and Peace, it is so to be
understood, as that he shows the way and means to attain them, and not that he
truly and effectually confers them on us.

3. That if we read in Scripture of any power ascribed unto Christ, it is no
otherwise to be understood, then of that power which he shall assume hereafter,
when he shall be constituted Judge both of the quick and dead, and is not to be
interpreted of, or applied to any present power, which he exercises, or does
execute.

4. That Christ when he was on earth, was careful of his Church; but being
departed hence, he has committed and commended that care to the Father, who
shall exercise the same till the appointed time.

5. That wheresoever we find any thing in Scripture concerning the Government of
Christ, and the care which he takes of the Church, it is either to be referred
to the power of the ministry; or is to relat to the time to come

6. That it is contrary to the truth of the Holy Scriptures, that Christ can
hear our prayers, and knows our works.

7. That when the word Savior is appropriated to Christ, it signifies, that he
shows us the way, which leads to salvation, and does truly and carefully
instruct us therein.

8. That if we worship God in Christ, we may as well worship the Sun, the Moon
and the Stars, and so all Idolaters are hereby excused, who pretend they
worship God in their images.

9. That that is a truth which is in the Turkish Alcaron concerning Christ,
that he is not able to help and succor those, who bestow Divine worship on
him; with such others.

Horresco referens! What a strange Gospel is here? What monstrous positions are
these? What Devil could more b^aspheme the Lord of life and glory, God blessed
for ever, Amen; then this wretched caitiff has done? Who^e ears do not tingle,
and whose hayr not stand an end, to he^r these horrid and execrable
blasphemies? But opinion once seeded in error, shoots out into heresies, and
after some growth of time, into blasphemy: So that men once entered, are still
going on a malo ad peju^, from bad to wor^e, till sudden destruction seize upon
them, and stop their course.

These hell-hatcht Doctrines, were opposed by Socinus himself, but he that has
but half an eye, may discern, that he had a mind to let the matter cool in
his hands: For there is neither that solidity nor integrity manifested in it,
which was fitting and requisite for so great and weigh^y a business. And indeed
how could i^ be otherwise? Could any imagine that he could with a good stomach
confute those opinions ^n another, which he was known to justify in himself?
For though they seemed to be different in some, yet were they linked last
t^gether in many of the same opinions, e^pecially concerning the person of
Christ, which did much weaken, if not quite overthrow the true and proper
ground of giving Divine adoration to him. If Christ be inferior to his Father,
as ^ocinus ^eld; It is rank idolatry to give him the same worship, which we
give to the Father, as Davidis held. I cannot better compare them then to
Sampsons foxes, whose heads may be different, but I am sure their tails meet,
and with those firebrands, which are between them, do set the whole Church of
God in an open combustion. Is this the way think you to convert the Jews to
Christianisme? Is it not rather a surer course to harden them in their old and
unprofitable Religion, and to pervert such as profess the Christian Religion
to Judaisme, and to bring all to confusion? yet for all this our Socinian is in
his pomp, and flourishes like a green bay tree, but look for him anon, and his
place shall not be found; For like the proud man in the Psalms, he stands in
slippery places, and with him is suddenly destroyed, perished, and brought to
an unexpected and fearful end.

The sore-mentioned positions being questioned and examined, the matter
debated, and the obstinacy of this wicked wretch observed, he was by the most
Illustrious and Renowned Prince of Transylvania Christophorus Bathoraeus, cast
into prison, where by the just judgment of God, he who was mad for so many
years before published, maintained and defended against, even all reason and
Religion, such heady and hayr-braind positions, fell into a phrenzy, and there
and there n^, miserably finished the course of this mortal life. Anno 1580.
Raemundus reports of him, that being in prison, distracted of his wits, the
Devils in horrid, and dreadful shapes appeared to him; at the sight of which,
be cried out to some that were there, lo, says he, these are they which wait
upon me, as companions of my journey.

If God will not suffer his own Children, sinning against him, to go
unpunished, was it likely that such a desperate blasphemous wretch as this
should escape? Gods judgments are for the most part slow, but they are sure;
and his hand, when it strikes, will give a blow to the purpose. He was a man
altogether unlearned, obstinate, foolish, and besotted by the Devil in his
impious and blasphemous opinions; so that he neither cared for God, nor man,
nor himself; but wholly bent his purpose, and made it his utmost endeavor to
overthrow, and exterminate all true and sincere Religion, and to set up in the
room thereof, that which he vainly called his own, which was either none at
all, or a Devilish one, as may be gathered out of his positions of which while
he lived he so much boasted, that among many, that had any understanding, he
was and that justly, made ridiculous; But there are some that will down with
any thing, be it never so gross, heinous or diabolical; Otherwise, it could
not be expected, that his damnable positions should have passed for new, and
undoubted Truths.

Franciscus Stancarus Mantuanus. Mantua te genuit, sed tu, Stancare, venenum
Ex Orco petitum, Spargis ubique tuum.

WE had to do even now with a downright madman, and if we look well about us,
we would think every head frantic with a strange opinion, and that some
wild-fancy does possess all we meet with; For behold here is another this
Frano scus Stancarus a Mantuan cannot be quiet, if the Churches of God newly
settled in Polonia enjoy any peace and tranqu^llity, but must needs busy himself
to supplant them, i. possible, even in the^r first planting, by an upstart
opinion of his own, namely, that Christ was our Mediator only in, or according
to his humane nature, and not (as the reformed Churches do hold and profess)
according ^o both, his humane and Divine, hypostatically united in one person;
Which he urged upon this ground, but God knows it is but sand, that if Christ
were a Mediator according to his Divine nature, then he should be less then
the Father, which seemed to him to be mere Arianisme, and therefore he durst
not hold otherwise; Thus poor man, being ignorant of the truth, he drove out
one Devil by or with another, the Devil of Arianisme, with the Devil of
Socinianisme, and the latter may prove the worser: This opinion Blandrata liked
well, and did both defend it, and confirm it; But reverend Calvin took great
pa^ns to stifle it, if it could have bin, as very obnoxious to the truth, by
sending over a timely admonition to the Churches, wherein also he advised them,
as well how they might prevent, and turn off the cavillations of Stancarus, as
also how they should avoid another error into which they might run themselves,
namely, to imagine a threefold essence in God, by being distinguished into
three persons; which was taken kindly by the Churches, and for a time did some
good among them. But the folly of Stancarus rested not here, but besides this
corrupt opinion of his, he labored to confound the Doctrine of the Trinity,
imagining or framing out to himself, which he would press upon the belief of
others, that there is one God in a confused Trinity, among whom the man Christ
performs the office of a Mediator. He traduced all persons and Churches,
which were not of his judgment, as Arian, as appears by the letters of the
Ministers of Polonia, written from the Pincovian Synod to the Divines at
Strasburge, to which they added an Orthodox confession of the faith, fully
clearing the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Deity of Christ against the
Arians, as they were then called, subscribed among others by Georgius Paulus,
superintendent of the Churches in the Diocese of Cracovia, and Francis
Lismanninus, whom this very heresy, not long after, diverted from the truth.
Stancarus did many times offer a disputation before the Synod, and was very
importunate to have the grant thereof, refusing none, that would undertake to
oppose him; such was his delight in, and confidence of his own abilities: But
the Synod, wisely refused it, not thinking it fit to call in question by
public disputation, the common received faith of the Church, to please the
fancy, or satisfy the humor of one turbulent and arrogant person. I would al
men, that profess the truth, would take the same course, and we should quickly
see error and heresy dye of the sullen; because none will trouble themselves
to meddle with, or take notice of them, that make it their business to broach
the same. This Synod took rather another course with him, censured him for an
heretic, condemned his books, and committed them to the fire, there to be
consumed as they justly deserved. He wrote something, but very vainly, as our
Socinians use to do, of the Doctrine of Justification; That you may see what an
arrogant Spirit he had, and how highly he thought of himself, as all heretics
do, hear the proud vaunt he makes in his wonted manner. One Doctor, says he,
brought up in my school, is of more account or worth, then an hundred Luthers,
then two hundred Melanchtons, three hundred Bullingers, four hundred Peter
Martyrs, and five hundred Calvin's; all which, quoth he, if any one would take
the pains to beat in a mortar, there could scarce begotten one ounce of
Divinity from them all. But that stone which slander casts at another, ever in
the end lights on herself; and wounds herself instead of another.

So Stancarus, overvaluing himself, and his Disciples, was justly undervalued
by the Professors of the Truth, and lived and dyed without that reputation
which he expected; yea went out like the snuff of a Candle, leaving an
horrible stench behend him.

Bernardinus Ochinus Senensis Monachus. Papicolas fugiens, verum profitetur
Ochinus:
Cord tamen simulat; Namque Arianus erat.

GOD, as he is one, so he loves singleness and simplicity in the inward parts;
As therefore he has bin pleased to give us those senses double, whereby we
might let in our selves, as our eyes and ears; and those limbs double, whereby
we might act for our selves, as our hands and feet: So those, which he would
appropriate to himself, as our hearts for belief, and our tongues for
confession, he has given us single; Neither did he ever ordain, or can abide
two hearts in a bosom, two tongues in one mouth; It is the hateful style,
which he Spirit of God gives to an Hypocrite, that he is double minded; In the
Language of Gods Spirit, a fool is said to have no heart, and a dissembler has
an heart, and a heart; And surely, as a man that has two heads is a monster in
nature: So he that has two hearts, is no less a spiritual monster to God; And
such an one was this Bernardine Ochinus, first a Monk of Siema, after that a
Professor, I would I had had occasion to say, a true professor of the true
Religion. But making a show thereof, (as Hypocrites are the Saints Apes, and
can counterfeit to the life) he was therefore cited to Rome, to make answer for
that, which he then was thought really to profess, that is, manner of worship
which they corruptly, call heresy. By the advice of his friends, especially of
Peter Martyr, who loved him entirely, for his profession sake, and those good
parts that were in him; he openly defied both Rome and the Pope, with all their
abominable trash and trumpery: So that forsaking Italy, he was much furthered
in his flight by the excellent and godly Duchess of Ferrara; For he was
accounted a most exquisite and famous preacher; Dulcis erat in colloquio,
suavis in Sermon, persuadens animas and blandiens; His discourse no less
sweet, then powerful; and where he gains no conquest by persuasion, there he
undermines by a secret kind of insinuation, which could not be with stood.
Peter Martyr first brought him to Geneva, where he often preached, and was
approved and applauded by all; Alter that he went to Tigurum, where for a while
they were exceedingly taken, both with the matter, and manner of his preaching;
but not long after, he was disgracefully put from his Ministry, and deservedly
expelled the City; when they perceived he did not (...), foot it right in the
way, and course of Religion, but did secretly bear a good will and affection to
the damnable Doctrine, of that heretic Arius defended polygamie, as being
desirous to get another, his own wife, yet living but poorly, and in a servile
condition, at a great distance from him, without either regard or relief to
support and maintain her: He brought in question also, (that he might thereby
the sooner, and the better overthrow,) the chief foundations of the Christian
Religion. All is not manhood that looks bigg, and spits fire as it speaks; Nor
is all beauty, that the curious art of trimming does set forth; There is a
paint, a dress of holiness, which God shall wash away with a flood of
brimston, and consume with the fire of the same. What is an eye glotted up to
Heaven, a hand martyring the breast, a knee kissing the Earth, a Talent of
fine, nimble and running discourse of true Religion, the parts and properties
thereof, without a mite of pure sincerity, and sound integrity? This, this must
carry us, not only into, but through our profession, or else with Ochinus here,
we shall surely be discovered, when we least expect it, and so our faces be
covered with shame and confusion both here, and hereafter:

Being banished from thence, he came to Basil, but stayed not there, either
finding the place unfit for him, or he unfit for the place. Belike he could not
put off his bad wares to such an advantage here as he desired; and therefore
speedily quit the place; of whom we say according to our Proverb, A fair
riddance without a sessions. He wandered about from one Town to another, from
one City, to another Kingdom, but could do no good to the purpose that he
principally intended; The expectation of the wicked perishes; and their high
thoughts come to nothing. But cum nemini obtrudi potest, when neither one place
nor another would receive him, nor give heed unto him, he betook himself to the
Trithecta's, Arians and Samosatenians, which to make shorter work of it, are
our Socinian brood, choosing rather to feed upon husks with Swine, then to
enjoy the wholesome and plentiful food of his Fathers Table. As he out-stript
Socinus in that article concerning God: So also he went beyond him in another
concerning the office of Christ, his satisfaction for our sins, and that merit,
which by his suffering for us, and in our steed, is imputed to us; Insomuch
that Gregorius Zarnovecius a Polonian in the preface of his book, wherein he
treats of the satisfaction of Christ, does prefer Ochinus before Socinus,
calling one the Master of the other; But in time Socinus caught up this also,
and made as much of it, as any that went before him, or (as I believe) will
come after him. Ochinus coming from Basil, met by chance, with the Cardinal of
Loraine returning into Italy, with whom, to curry favor, he profferd to make
known to him, if he pleased to hear him, the many gross errors, which the
reformists maintained, and which he had discovered while he had his residence
among us: intimating hereby, that he went over to us for no other purpose, but
by strictly observing us, to get the better advantage against us: But the
Cardinal utterly refused to give him any admittance into his presence, or to
have any thing to do with so sordid and sottish a fellow. And thus he, that was
uncertain in himself, found a great deal of incertainty from others: being
repudiated, and cast off on all hands, both of his own, whom he voluntarily
forsook, and of the Churches of God, whom he deceived by an outward profession
only, like a vagrant he wandered from one place to another, with little heed and
less comfort from any, and so miserably concluded the days of his pilgrimage.

Adamus Neuserus Pastor Heidelbergae. Neuserus recto de tramite aherrat, and
inter
Fines Numedicos carpere tentat iter.

IT is a common saying among us, give the Devil his due: And surely it is
possible for us to wrong, even that malignant Spirit, in casting upon him those
evils of which he is not guilty, not can properly be called his: It is true,
he is the tempter, and both injects evil motions, and draws them forth into
act: but yet all ill is not immediately his; We have enough, and too much of
our own, to stand fast long in a good profession, unless the Lord be pleased
to afford us the grace and favor of his assistance, if he do but withdraw
himself, or his support from us, we fall away from the truth, and wander up and
down in the by-pathes of error, till at length we become a prey to that
roaring Lion. Thus did it happen to this Adam Neuserus, once one of our own,
(as we supposed) a painful and industrious preacher of the Gospel, Pastor of
the Church at Heidelberg, and outwardly a great stickler for the truth; but one
that secretly harbored Arianisme in his heart: as he evidently afterward
declared. The gloss of profession without sincerity will not last. What St.
Hierome said of the Scriptures, we may say of Religion: It is not in superficie
and verborum folijs, sed in medulla cordis, not read in superficial leaves and
letters, but in the marrow, and substance of the heart. Christian religion is
more practical, then theorical, rather an occupation, then a mere profession,
which is like the Artificers wit, at his fingers ends. But can we tax
heretics of idleness? Me thinks they are busy enough, both to their own, and
the ruin of those that are bewitched by them; they work indeed, but it is
secretly and closly, like Moles under ground; So Neuserus, having ordered all
things, as he thought close enough, for his passage over to the Turks, with
whom he had before bin tampering, but was taken as it were in the very act by
Prince Palatine Frederick III. and cast into prison; From whence by sleight or
connivence, he secretly stole away, and went into Poland, after that into
Transylvania, sowing still as he went, the seeds of his desperate and damnable
Doctrine against the blessed Trinity; which became the subject of opposition,
to every idle and fantastic brain; against the nature, office, and merit of
Christ, his satisfaction made to the justice of his Father for us, together
with our redemption, justification, etc. But all this while Neuserus was not
where he would be, and therefore he never rested, till he got over to
Constantinople among those, whose religion he esteemed, and whose Society he
affected above all other: The wicked cannot be quiet, till their vicious
desires be accomplished; they have oculos inquietos ad peccandum, as Calvin
renders it, their meat and drink is to do their Fathers will, that is, Satan's.

Ahab is sick till have Naboths Vineyard; and Neuserus is ill at ease, till he
be with his desired companions: Well among them, he is; But what does he there?
that which would make a Christians heart to tremble, renounce that religion,
whereof he made profession, while he was among us, turned Turk, and after their
manner was circumcised, and so lived among them; But breve sui sceleris
gaudium. For God struck him with an incurable disease, of which he shortly
dyed, and that with such horrid clamours, and dreadful yellings, that the very
Turks themselves were astonished at it, and openly confessed, that they never
saw any man expire, in a more tragical manner, than he; whom therefore they
called in their language Satan ogli, the very Child of the Devil. And this was
the unhappy end of this miserable caitiffe, this grand Apostate, first from the
true-faith to Arianisme, from thence to flat Turcisme. Let the fall of others
be a warning to us.

Ioannes Sylvanus Inspector Ladenburgensis. Sylvanus socius remanens in carcere
vinctus.
Praetium persolvit proditionis ejus.

IT is a strange thing to see, how many are taken with mere Novelties, and
specious pretenses, and how eagerly they pursue them, and how madly they run
after them: forfeiting both reason and religion, for the pleasing of a foolish
humor, in the enjoying of them, and gaining others to bear like affection to
them; When we consider this, we may very well doubt whom we may account free
from a touch, or, (at least) the danger of this indisposition to, and
opposition of, that which is good, yea best: and a promptitude and proclivity,
to that which is evil, yea worst, the blaspheming of Gods Holy name, the
trampling upon the blood of the covenant, and counting it an unholy thing. How
many opinions do we see raised every day, which argue no less, then a mere
Spiritual madness? such as if they should have been but mentioned, some years
ago, which now pass uncontroverted, or at least wise uncontrouled, as if the
sacred truth of religion, could admit of change and alteration, according to
the times and seasons, to which in mercy or judgment, we are reserved; the
question would be, out of what Bedlam they had broken loose? This appears by
the Story of Sylvanus, which we have now in hand, who was crossed and troubled
with such variety of distempers, that he was always in a doubting; many times
in a bad, at last in a lost condition. All that we can do, is but to pity and
bewail such as are living, and pray for their recovery; and sadly lament those
that are dead and gone. Among which, this Joannes Sylvanus may be one, whose
religion was like adulterated Wine, you may call it what you will, who loved to
prey upon Novelties and absurdities, as Atalanta on the golden apples, though
he lost the prize. He was Inspector or Controuler of Ladenberge, a great friend
and associate with Neuserus, his fellow Renegado, if he had not been prevented:
for intending to take flight with him over to the Turks, he was likewise
apprehended with him, and cast into prison: but being not so light heeld as his
fellow, he was forced to abide by it to his cost; Of whose Apostacy from the
truth, his execrable opinions against the blessed Trinity, the Deity, office
and merit of Christ, of his conspiracy and rebellion against the State, Prince
Palatine Frederick, being by letters from the Imperial Majesty certainly
^nformed, he was publicly convented, legally convicted, and justly adjudged to
be beheaded, which execution was worthily done upon him; For they sin no less,
qui blasphemant Christum regnantem in caelis, quam quic rucifixerunt ambulantem
in terris; that revile Christ reigning in Heaven, then they that crucified him
living on earth. To hear a man blaspheme God, or his truth, was a kind of
prodigy among the Jews; This man blaspemeth, say they, and presently, they
rent their cloths; should every one of us, when we hear God, and the Gospel
blasphemed, do the like, we should have more rents, then whole cloths, and
scarce a whole garment would be found among us. But we are little or nothing
affected herewith. Gods Holy name is blasphemed, his truth traduced, the hearer
says, let the Magistrate look to it: the Magistrate says, let the Minister
reprove it: the Minister says, let the hearers reform it, they say, let the
offender himself answer it, the offender says, curet nemo, let no man mind;
Thus we thrust it from one to another. The Sea breaks in, all the borders
contend, whose right it is to mend the damme, but while they strive much, and
do nothing, the Sea breaks farther in, and drowns the Country. That we may
escape the like misery, from an inundation of all false Doctrine and heresy;
Good Lord deliver us.

Franciscus Lismanninus. Claudiopolitani caetus Pastor. Se Lismanninus puteum
conjecit in altum:
Triste erat exemplum Justitiae Domini.

MEn do commonly wrong themselves with a groundless expectation of good;
fore-promising to themselves all fair terms in their proceedings, and all happy
success in the issue; and indeed they may go on with a prosperous gale, and
full sail for a time, but at last they fall into unexpected trouble and
danger, so that their former misreckoning makes their present dis-appointment,
so much the more grievous to them, and drives them into the greater
desperation. This we shall find verified in Lismanninus, who encouraged himself
with a hope of gaining many to the embracing, and following of his wicked, and
abominable opinions, and for this purpose, he thought no pains to much,
traveling from place to place, to propagate the same. It were to be desired,
that we that profess the truth, would be but half so industrious, for the
converting of some, and the confirming of others in the profession thereof, as
these instruments of the Devil, these Factors for Hell, are for the subverting
them in, or seducing them from their holy profession, to their diabolical
tenets, and hellish devices. He was one of those, which that runagate
Blandrata, (having insinuated into the favor of the most illustrious and
excellent Prince of Transylvania) sent for thither, to unsettle the newly
settled Churches of God in those parts, by sowing tares among their good corn,
his most pernicious heresies, even then, when they least suspected it. But he
could not go over to them, as yet for having so much of the devils business to
do in other places, he could not at present intend to wait upon them there. His
expectat on was high, and soaring, thinking to overrun all the Churches in
Italy: first, with his damnable Doctrines, and that in a moment, ere he could
perform the desire of Blandrata in going into Transylvania. Hear what he wrote
back unto him, and you see his aim. Before he returned, he must constitute the
Churches of Bernen, Lausanna and Geneva, formerly visited by him, and to which
he was again taking his journey, to observe the form of doctrine, discipline,
and ceremonies, together with the administration of the Sacraments, which were
in each of them, and to confer and reason with the Ministers, by whose help and
council, he should come the better instructed and informed to their Church,
when time and opportunity served; Which he performed according to his promise,
and by which he did very much retarde the blessed reformation, which Calvin so
much endeavored to promote among those Churches. For he did so exceedingly
fascinate the minds of diverse, that they could not be restrained by the
faithful admonit ons, no not of Calvin himself, whom they once highly esteemed,
and who much labored in the business; but would needs rush headlong into
the dangerous pit of Arianisme, or Tritheitarisme, to their own ruin and
destruction. This man was Pastor of the conventicle at Claudiopolis, to which
he openly preached the Doctrine of Arius, and held that Christ was a certain
spiritual substance, being before all others created of God, who afterward
took unto him an humane body, in which he performed many things for our
example. At last being openly confuted, plainly detected, and too late (if God
had not otherwise permitted it) for the Churches good, convicted, either for
shame of what he had done, or for fear of what he was to suffer, he threvv
himself headlong into a well, and so perished; He that wilfully cast many
others away, does now desperately cast away himself both body and soul.

Andraeas Dudithius Episcopus Quinquecclesiensis. Dudithius doctus cupiens
vitare Charybdim
Incidit in Scyllam, fata dolenda sua.

THis Andraeas Dudithius by nation a Hungarian, Bishop of Quinquecclesiae a
City in Panonia, was a very learned and famous man, employed in diverse
Embassies to Ferdinand and Maximilian, Caesar's; being present as a Bishop in
the name of the Hungarians at the Council of Trent, he there made two elegant
Orations; the one, of the necessity of the Cummunion under both kinds; the
other, of the lawfulness of Priests marriage, both composed very eloquently,
and full of excellent variety, yet home to the purpose, for which they were
intended: For he was an exquisite Orator himself, a great admirer and follower
of the Tullian eloquence; insomuch that (as Thuan reports of him) he thrice
copyed out Tullies works with his own hands. After all this, bidding the Pope,
with all his shavelings adieu, he married a wife, a noble young Lady Sophia
Gonicella, whom he light upon by chance in the Court of the Polonian King, when
he was sent thither Ambassador from Maximilian the Emperor; For she being
extremely taken with his discretion, judgment, and other good parts; he with
her beauty, piety and perfection, they mutually combined each to other in holy
matrimony. As for religion, he was better seen in the leaving, then the taking
part. For having forsaken popery, and not having joined himself to the reformed
Churches, he was a long time disquieted in mind, not knowing what course to
take, or which way to turn himself in matters of religion; He knew the Church
of Rome was full of errors, he saw the Churches professing the Protestant
Religion, to be full of dissentions and divisions, which caused him to doubt,
and (as we use to say) to look before he leapt. Have makes wast, is a true
Proverb, in the precipitant carriage of business: Fair and soft goes far: Not
too fast for falling: Stay a little, and we shall have done the sooner. These
be the sayings of Moderation, to correct, and qualify the rashness, of our
terrene and sublunary undertakings. But in our spiritual proceedings, when our
journey is Heaven, and the end eternal salvation, Delay is more dangerous then
Celerity: it proved so here; for while he was uncertain, what to do, and so did
nothing at all; he was artificially drawn aside, by Socinus and his fellows,
under the specious allurement of vain, and doting reason, he is sudainly
hurryed into their mischi^vous heresy, of denying the Trinity, the merit and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ for sinners; with all the rest of their
blasphemous opinions. In defense whereof he wrote a letter to John Lasius a
Polonian Knt. and an intimate friend of his, which was lately published, with
the answer of Maresuis, annexed to it. As in dark nights, pirates use to kindle
fires, and make great lights upon the rocks, and maritime coasts, whether poor,
weather beaten Seamen do steer, in hope of harbor, and there meet with wrack
and ruin: So these heretics, with their flourish of the Scriptures, or at
least, with some flashes of them, like false fires, and deceitful lights, did
entice this poor soul to repair for succor, but found nothing being come, but
pernicious, and deadly error? And it is a common thing to see, that dead
errors are the snares, which the Devil lays by his instruments, to catch
living souls.

How much Beza made of this Dudithius, with what a Christian affection he loved
him, how solicitous he was to draw him from error, and to persuade him to, and
confirm him in the truth, against those doubtings, and distractions, by which
he was much molested, between the profession of the Papists, on the one side,
and the Socinian on the other, does appear by a large and elegant letter
written to him, and is to be found among the letters of Beza.

Zanchie also, wrote to Dudithius a letter, concerning the true Church, being
the same argument about which he had written to Beza, and Wolphius a little
before, proposing this question to them; How comes it to pass, that in your
Church, (if it be the true Church,) there be so many dissentions, and divisions
among you, and that in, and about the chief articles of religion? This is one
stone of stumbling, which the Devil has cast in the way to the profession of
the truth, by which he has hindered many, from walking in it, or giving any
credit to it. But to this, that good man Zanchy gives a full, and a solid
answer; First, that there are not so many, nor so great contentions among us,
who profess the true faith, as the Devil, and his accomplices would make the
World believe, thereby to bring the truth into suspicion: And then, that those,
which are among us, are no argument of doubting of the truth of the Church, but
rather of approving it: For the continued, and common condition of the Church
of God here is militant, and subject to infirmity, only in Heaven it is already
in part, and shall be hereafter, wholly triumphant. Christ himself gives the
Church a caution hereof, Matt. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to
you; Not to Turks, not to Infidels, and yet to these, but not to these only,
but to you also, to you principally and especially, who have the Gospel, and to
whom God affords the means of Salvation. The Devil is let loose for a season,
Rev. 20. For a season, to try the faith and patience of the Church. And but for
a season, to fortify the courage of the Church. Had it not bin, that Satan
has bin busy in the obtruding of error, the Church of God had not bin so
busy, in searching out the truth. Therefore the Church is on the getting hand
hereby. Had not those Arians and Sabellians, at the first, vexed the Church of
God with their heresies, which are but branches and lims of this of
Socinianism; the deep mysteries of the sacred Trinity, had not bin so
accurately cleared, so strongly fortifyed to the faith and belief of men, as by
the Ancient Doctors then it was, and this day it is among us. Heresy makes men
sharpen their wits, the better to confute it; That Absynthium, that smarts the
eye, cleers it, and we thank that pain that gives us sight. Dudithius then, had
no reason to douht of, but rather to join issue with that, as the true Church,
who by the contentions, that were among them, got the more knowledge of, and
laid the faster hold upon, the truth of the Gospel. But he was not so happy.

He wrote diverse Orations, and political admonitions. In the Bodlejan library
at Oxford, are to be seen, diverse works of his, as the signification of Comets;
diverse, and they very pithy speeches, which he made in the council of Trent. An
Apology to Maximilian the II. An Epistle concerning the inflicting of capital
punishment upon heretics. The life of Cardinal Pool was drawn out by his
artificial hand, and flourished by his pen. There are diverse letters also of
Socinus to him, by which at first he solicited and and as is to be believed,
gained him to his party. Raemundus reports of him, that being invited by a
certain friend of his to dinner, who earnestly requested his company, at that
time in good health, free from all sense, or the least suspicion of sickness,
much less of death, gave the Messenger this answer; his friend must have him
excused, for that he was at that very time to go another way, and had some
other business, of greater consequence to do; Namely, to pay the last debt
which he owed to nature, which accordingly, at that very time he did, and so
departed. Truly this man was much to be pitied, who having forsaken a bad, yet
chose no better, a religion, then which a worse, could not be raked out of
Hell: giving himself over to the Socinian faction, in whose destructive
opinions, as he lived: So he dyed, without comfort. That old saying, may stand
us in some steed, if we list to make use of it, Optimum est alina, frui
insania, to take heed by other men's harms, is experience bought at a very cheap
rate; and whom they teach not, may want, not grief, but pity:

Franciscus Puccius Florentinus. Ecclesiae Christi membrum se Puccius instat,
Scilicet egreg^um; Relligionis inops.

IF our souls were as sensible of sin, as our bodies are of pain, we would be
m^re careful of our selves for ^ear of a relapse. We would not willingly fall
again into the same sicknesses, under which we have a long time groaned, and
from which we are for the present delivered; and yet we take no care of falling
into the same sins, or running into the same ways of error, out of which God
by his mercy has luckt us, like brands out of the fire; when we were ready to
be consumed.

This was verily the fault of Francis Puccius a Florentine, of the noble and
renowned family of the Puccij of Florence, who, so journing at Lions, being
there about some necessary affair, when as disputations about religion waxed
hot, and matters of moment were freely debated therein, was convinced in his
conscience of the vanity of the Popish religion, in which he was at that time
very Zealous, after some debatement thereof with himself, and some conference
concerning it, with others, he utterly renounced it, as tend^ng to the
destruction both of body and soul. Hereupon, he came into England, and first to
Oxford, where for some time he studied Divinity, after that, to London; and so
over to B^sil, where he had that disputation with Socinus, which was formerly
mentioned by us; But where, or from whom he got those whimsies, and fancies of
dotage with which he was possessed, those wild, and mad opinions, which he
broached, and by which the Churches were very much troubled, we cannot learn,
nor do we greatly care to know. For besides those opinions, which he held in
common with the Socinians, he maintained a certain kind of natural faith, by
which we might attain to salvation, as also universal redemption and other
stuff, ejusdem f^rmae, of the same batch. By reason of which, he was
constrained to leave Basil, from whence he took his course directly for
England, and so up to London; where he began to publish his paradoxical
opinions; and that with such confidence, as if, Orpheus like, he meant to charm
all to follow him, that did but once vouchsafe to hear him. Spiritual
arrogance, is so much more mischievous, as the soul is beyond all earthly pelf.
For when we are once come to advance, and admire our own judgments, we are at
first apt to hug our own inventions, then to esteem them too precious to be
smothered within our own closets, the World must know of how happy an issue we
are delivered, and must applaud it to, or else abide a contestation: So that
the Wiseman well notes, Prove. 13.10. only by Pride comes contention: So
Puccius grew so high in the in-step, by reason of this new-light, which only he
had discovered, and these new opinions, which he broaching defended, that there
grew some trouble thereby in the City, of London; for which, he (as the
ringleader) was clapped up into prison; Out of which being again delivered, and
perceiving that this was not a place for his purpose, he again crossed the
Seas, being before crossed by Land, and betook himself to Bavau; From hence he
sent diverse times to solicit Socinus to a conference, about their mutual
opinions, certain conditions were agreed upon, and Moderators appointed to that
end; Socinus returns answer, that he was in a readiness to make his appearance
there, and to accomplish whatsoever should in reason be requested or required
of him; But Puccius, either in confidence of his own ability, or else induced
by some other weighty argument, takes a journey on purpose by way of
prevention: For he, which for Socinus his sake, came to Basil to meet him,
comes now for his sake also, to Cracovia in Polonia; where after they had met,
and had had diverse disputations between them, and could not agree, for it is
next to a wonder to see heretics, though never so nearly linkt together, to
agree in all things unless it be in the opposition of truth; he returning from
thence became a companion of some that studied magic, with whom he came to
Prague, and there like an Apostate as he was, fell to his old superstitious
devotion again, of cringing and crouching to every stock, and joined in
Communion with the Church of Rome, whom he had openly renounced and defied, as
the whore of Babylon. We see here the inconstancy of man's nature, even in that,
wherein he should be most constant, and that is religion. Apostasy of manners
cannot but be dangerous, of faith deadly: together with truth it loses shame;
and not seldom swells up to the sin against the Holy Ghost, for which there is
no forgiveness in Heaven, because there can be no remorse on earth. This is a
most perilous effect of spiritual pride, which bears such sway in the heart of
man, that neither he himself is, nor shall the Church of God be, if he can help
it, at any quiet, through his misgrounded novelty, and most dangerous heresy,
to which he stands extremely affected.

Can it be any other then an height of pride, for a man to think himself wiser
then the whole Church of God upon earth? wiser then the Church of God that has
bin upon earth, ever since the Apostles of Christ inclusively in all
successions to this present time? It was this pride that undid Puccius, and
brought him back with shame to that religion, which he had disclaimed. And many
such examples have we of diverse, who have strayed from the truth, to the
Samosatenian or Socinian assemblies, ye tat length have foully miscarryed,
either returning back to Popery, from whence at first they took their flight,
or else to Iudaisme or Turcisme, which is worst of all; That Spirit which
bears rule in the hearts of the Children of disobedience, brings them about
with, such a giddiness of mind, that without, Gods special preventing grace,
there is no help for them. And no marvel they are so ready to turn Turcks or
Jews, that are once entered into the Socinian Doctrines, For they are so like,
that there is not a pin to choose.

Christophorus Ostorrodus, Smiglensis caetus Minister Ecclesiae pacem quis
conturbavit amaenam?
Ostorrodus erat, Daemonis art potens.

CHristopher Ostorrodus a Germane, Minister of the Socinian congregation at
Smiglen, is another of this heretical crew, who did mightily infest the
Churches (of God in diverse parts: And sure the trouble that befell his Master
Socinus in the University of Cracovia, where by the rising of the Students, for
the suppressing of his heresies, he was hardly entreated, insomuch that he
scarce escaped from thence with life) was the cause of the travail, and
dispersing abroad, of many of his most intimate disciples and followers, and
the coming of Ostorrodus into Holland and Friesland, Who with Andraeas
Voivodius a companion of his, and fellow-Socinian, brought thither their
Masters book, de Christo Servatore printed, and diverse others of the same kind,
both manuscripts, and printed books, prepared and provided for that very
purpose, to propagate the Socinian heresy in those parts also, hoping to build
their nest there, and to settle themselves, with more quiet and advantage, then
they could in Polonia; But their project being discovered, and their close
underminings of the peace and tranquillity of the Churches, by Gods good
providence timely detected, diverse copyes of their pestiferous books were
taken, and brought before the States General of the United Provinces, by whose
especial command they were exhibited to the faculty of Divines in the
University of Leyden, whose Rescript; together with the States decree, which I
conceived both necessary, and worthy to be inserted, I have here presented to
the Reader.

A true Copy of the Rescript.
REnowned Lords, the Copies of those books which ye commanded to be sent unto
us, we have now thorrowly perused; some part whereof we have seen before, and
have found out by diligent search, diverse others of the same argument.

That we may not be tedeous to your Lordships, we judge those writings to come
near to Turcisme, endeavoring to overthrow the true, and eternal Deity of
Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, and also of the Holy Ghost, the office
of Christ, his saving benefits, satisfaction, redemption, justification, etc.
the institution of Holy Baptism, and our religious duty to Christ, consisting
in prayer and invocation, which they deny to be due unto him, not being God,
and true Creator of the World; with many other gross errors. As for example,
in the book de Servatore are these very words; That the Justice of God could
not require, that our sins should be punished. Also, that Christ by his death
and sufferings did not satisfy the Justice of God for our sins; yea, that
Christ could not satisfy Divine Justice for us, by undergoing those
punishments, in our place, and steed, which by the Law of God, we were liable
to have undergone. Lastly, though there be many more to this purpose, that
Christ could not satisfy the Justice of God for us, by performing those things
in our place, and stead, which we by the Law were enjoined to perform. Such
execrable blasphemies are therein contained, which without inevitable danger of
contagion, may not be suffered to pass among Christians, being no small
disparagement to their holy profession, and an high measure of despite done to
the Spirit of Grace. Which things being so, we are in hope your Honors will
wisely and speedily take a course, that these men which have brought in, and
dispersed abroad, these cursed writings and books, may not long abide with you,
or remain within your coasts, and also that the writings and books themselves
may not come into the hands of any, to whom they may be a snare either through
simplicity, or curiosity.

Renowned Lords, we beseech God; that he would bestow upon you more and more
the Spirit of truth and wisdom; and would be present with you from Heaven in
all your affairs, and especially in this great and weighty cause, which
pertains so much to establishing of the truth of God, and the common salvation
of his people: that those things, which are pious, holy and just, may be
seasonably provided for by you, and perfected in the Lord; That those things
also, which have any tincture of error or heresy, may be wholly extirpated by
you. Dated at Leyden the 12. of August. 1598.

An extract of the Resolution of the Lords States General of the United Princes
March and September 1598. taken out of the Registry.
THE States General of the United Provinces, being informed that there are
certain books found with, and in the possession of two Persons here present at
the Hague, which came lately from the Kingdom of Polonia, into these united
Provinces, the one, named Christopher Ostorrodus, the other, Andraeas
Voidovius, which books, being examined in Leyden by the faculty of Divines,
there are diverse things therein found, to agree with the Doctrine or religion
of the Turks, denying the Divinity, both of the Son of God, and of the Holy
Ghost. And that the foresaid persons openly professing the same Doctrine, came
purposely into these Provinces, that they might publish the same herein, and so
disturb the present State, and quiet of the Church hereby. We therefore, being
willing to prevent ^n time the ensuing mischief hereof, for the maintaining of
the honor of God, together with the profit and commodity of the United
Provinces, (which like Democritus Twins, do laugh and cry, l^ve and dye
together) have decreed, that the foresaid books, in the presence of the
foresaid persons, shall openly be burnt to morrow before noon, opposite to our
Chamber of General meeting. After that, the aforesaid two persons shall be
charged, and straightly commanded, as by these presen^s they are charged and
commanded, that within the space of ten days next to come, they shall depart
out of these united Provinces, under the penalty of such punishment as shall be
inflicted on them according to discretion, if afterward they be found or taken
herein; All which we thought fit to ordain for the peace and quiet of the
Church of Christ, and for the benefit and commodity of the united Provinces:
Conceiving it also very necessary, for the better and more due accomplishing
hereof, that all the Provinces should be admonished of th^s, and a Copy of this
Attestation be conveyed to them, which is above written, and subscribed by the
faculty of Divines at Leyden, concerning the foresaid books; that the foresaid
persons be not suffered to tarry or abide longer in these Provinces, then the
time limited for them; and that their abominable Doctrine, may be expelled
hence also, Mar. 1599.

What better course could have been taken for the dispatch of these Brethren in
evil, with all their trumpery with them, out of these parts? But what are good
and wholesome Laws without execution? even like a body without a soul: for as a
body without a soul does quickly perish, and come to nothing: So the best Laws
that can be made, without due execution do dye in the very letter; For
notwithstanding this decree made, and published with so much strictness, and
good intention on the States part, there was some connivence in the matter, by
which these persons thus proscribed, were yet retained and secured. If it be
true which John Uytenbogardus says, who wrote the story, they remained still
in Friesland, and there privily drew up an Apology, to the decree of the
States General, which they printed and published both in the Latin and high
Dutch tongues.

I cannot but wonder at the mad folly, or foolish madness of those, that
profess either reason or religion, that they should be so far transported with
the novell Doctrines of the^e half- Lunatic Teachers, that they should keep
them, and secure them within their own bosoms, who watch all opportunities to
destroy them. Yet a new fashion does not more take a proud Lady; nor a new
Tavern a drunkard, nor a new drug an Emperick, then a new opinion does those,
that are affected to heresy, be it never so divelish and blasphemous. And I
believe they made a great (I cannot say a good) reurn of them; For I have heard
of above thirty Sects, and sorts of Religion in one Town in those parts: so
that come will you be of our Church? was a solicitation as frequent as the
ordinary salutation one to another, of good morrow, or good even. To be w^lling
to be seduced, has given occasion to diverse to attempt it, which otherwise,
had never been attempted, so did these Heretics play with, and play upon those
that gave them entertainment. This Ostorrodus was a notable factour for the
Devil, deceiving many with his cousening trash: For besides that disputation
against Tradelius which he had,, concerning the Deity of Christ, which was the
mark they all shot at, the Deity also of the blessed Spirit, to deny which, I
take to be an high degree of the sin against the holy Ghost; the expiation of
our sins, the imputatio^ of sin to Christ, the satisfaction he made to Divine
Justice, paying the (...) of our redemption, that it stood not with the
freeness of Gods mercy in pardoning sin, to require satisfaction for it, by
which, and many other damnable opinions, destructive to the very essence of
Religion, he drew many away after him, to the liking and embracing of his
Socinian tenets. He wrote also certain institutions of the chief Articles, and
principal points of Christian, (he would, he should have said) Socinian
Religion, which have perverted diverse; yet are learnedly opposed and confuted
by Iacobus ad Portum, that excellent instrument of Gods glory, and painful
labourer in his vineyard.

Jacobus Palaeologus Graius. Si quaeras, cur iste Pal'ologus igne crematur,
In promptu causa est, haeresiarcha fuit.

TO be loose in the main joints of Religion is very bad, and gives the Devil
and his instruments great advantage against us; we may see the truth of this in
the example here set before us; Jacob Palaeologus of the ancient and Jmperial
family of the Grecian Palaeologi, came from his own country to Rome, where
having spent some time, in observing the several sorts of Orders which were
there, he chose (as being most, and best affected with their manner and
Discipline) the order of the Friar Dominickes, according to whose rule he lived
and conformed himself. Yet did he not carry the matter so close, nor live so
regularly therein, but that he gave to some (it seems) that had an eye over
him, a shrewd suspicion, and jealousy of his wavering, and incertainty in the
faith, In so much that he is delivered over to the Inquisitors, and by them (as
who ever escaped their talons, being once suspected and taken by them?)
committed to prison, out of which escaping, he fled away secretly, first into
Germany to the Protestants, with whom he lived for a time, but like^ng not the
way of truth, as children of darkness love not the light, he forsook them, and
went into Poland to the Arians, as they were then called, to whose heresy he
was so closely rivetted, that he was never loosed from them to his dying day.
He that has strayed into these thickets, is so amazed with intricate
circumnolutions, that he can very hardly unwind himself ever after. Now he
passes from thence to Moravia, where he manifests his affection to these
desperate opinions, which he formerly entertained and digested; Here he makes
all ring again, so that neither Scriptures, Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists,
Apostles, no nor Christ himself can be heard for him, and his Socinians. Pope
Pius V. did his utmost endeavor to catch him in his traps, which he had laid
in several places, and by several persons for him, but while he lived, he kept
out of his clutches. But Gregory the 13. by the means of Maximilian the 2.
brought it to pass, that being at dinner with some other company, he was
suddenly apprehended, clapped up into a coach, which stood ready provided for
him, was brought first to Vienna, from thence to Rome, where he was made sure
enough for ever escaping again. He was often examined by the Jesuits Magius
and Bellarmine, and being convicted of Arianisme, which it seems stuck closer
to him then any other profession, he was for the present doomed to the deep
dungeon of the tower of Nonnana, into which, his hands, feet, and neck being
laden with gyves and fetters, he was miserably thrust down, there to remain til
farther order should be taken with him. Where in the mean time, he had diverse
exhortations and admonitions to forsake those damnable heresies, into which he
was fallen. But continuing, or rather increasing in his former obstinacy, being
brought forth to the Chapel of St. John de Lateran, according to the
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, was first degraded, then delivered over to
the Secular Power, and so condemned to the fire. When he came to the place of
execution, and beheld the fire prepared for him, with certain Sorcerers
standing ready bound to their stakes, which were to be burned with him, he was
so exceedingly terrified, and wholly aghast, that he gave public testimony of
his will^ngness to retract and recant his errors if he might have liberty so
to do; Which being signified to the Pope, he is repreived from the fire, and
brought back again; In a place appointed for that purpose he makes his
recantation, renounces and forswears his errors and damnable heresies,
confessing, that Jesus Christ is the very true and eternal Son of God. We see
that fire could extract from him a confession of that truth, which before he
denied. The fear of death strikes us into such a dump, that we are contented
to do any thing, rather then dye. By the way, what is it, should make us so
unwilling to dye, seeing it is a debt we owe to nature, and the payment thereof
cannot be avoided? Is it the horror of the pain that does affright us? Is if
the fear and doubt of what shall become of us hereafter that does terrify us?
Or, is it the guilt of our misguided souls, already condemning us, by the
preapprehension of a future punishment, which waits upon us? If death were
alike terrible to all, we might think there were something more in it, then we
can imagine: But some men can look upon it, when it comes, without any terror
at all, though ^t set out in all it is pomp for to destroy them; yea they long
for it before it comes, and sing St. Paul's cupio dissolvi, desire to pass
hence, though it be in Elias fiery Chariot: whereas others are stroke into
such a tripidation, with the very sight of it, that they are at their wits end,
know not which way to turn themselves. The cause of this difference is not in
death, but in our selves; for death comes alike to all, but finds not all alike
when it comes. Guilt of sin, and fear of punishment here, and hereafter, may be
cause why many labor to avoid it; which might for the present, as not being
fully hardened in impiety, move Palaeologus to desire mercy: But now he comes
to act his last part upon the Stage of this world, and it is a deadly one; for
remaining as yet in prison, till he had given a further confirmation of his
former recantation, he most wretchedly hardens his heart, insomuch as that God
hardens it also; and the Devil driving him on to a relapse into his former
herisie; which being openly manifested, he is ipso facto condemned, and by the
fury of the flames wholly consumed. This, says Raemundus, is briefly the
History of the unhappy life, the heretical Religion, and the deserved death of
miserable Palaeologus: I^ any man shall think the better of him, or his
Doctrine, because he was condemned by the Church of Rome for an Heretic by
whom all true Religion ^s accounted Heresy: let him know it is the cause and
not the sufferings, that make the Martyr, though some are unjustly condemned by
them; yet this man for Heresy, and that justly.

Iacobus Arminius Leydensis Professor, Sampsonis vulpes Arminius atque Socinus,
Juncti per caudas, ora diversa sua.

Heresy creeps in at a little hole, but infects, infests the whole house, l ke
a plague that comes in at the windows, and then propagates it self, beyond all
measure. And for that purpose the Devil raises up instruments in all places,
such who are so over-wise, that the very curdle of their wit, procures a
breaking out into faction, then grows to error, and at last to some notorious
and blasphemous Heresy: Cum discipuli veritatis non erunt, magistri erroris
sunt: Refusing to be scholars of Truth, they become Masters of errors. They
must be Masters, though it be of the black Art: And such an one was this James
Arminius, once Divinity Reader in the University of Leyden, who having had some
familiarity, either with the men, of whom we have already spoken, or their
works, did very much favor this Socinian heresy: He did first secretly teach
and subtly instill it into the ears and hearts of many of his Disc^ples, and
afterward did op^nly p^ofess it; as we may read in his Epistle ad Hypolytum de
collibus, and other of his writings. And although those errors which he held
and maintained, were justly condemned in the late Synod of Dort: Yet his
Disciples the Remonstrants, do obst^nately persist in them, though they would
m^ke the world believe they decline and disclaim them.

Let Ancient and Reverend P^reus stand forth, and hear we him in this matter:
Anno 1613. writing from Heidelberg, to those o^ Leyden, he says, The Socinians
of Poland have lately taken, and acknowledge your Arminians for their own,
together with Arminius himself, as their chief Dictator; and one Bonfinius,
Acontius, with the rest that are clandestine waiters on him. And because
Arminius will not be behind in courtesy; he and his accomplices do mutually and
expressly declare, that they can entertain fraternity with all sects; yea even
with the Socinians themselves, the Reformed Churches only excepted. We will
compare their opinions, and by that means we may the better judge of them,
especially in this point, the satisfaction of Divine justice, which is at this
day so much controverted among us. It is no where extant, say the Remonstrants,
That Divine justice is satisfied for our sins, by the sufferings of Christ; yea
it is manifestly repugnant to that free grace of Go^ in remission of sins,
which he offers to us by Jesus Christ. Now hear the Socinians in this matter,
who say, Christians commonly think, that Christ by his death, has made full
satisfaction for our sins, and merited salvation for us; but this opinion is
false and erroneous, yea very dangerous and pernicious. Again, they both
affirm, that the righteousness of Christ is not ours, nor accounted as our
Righteousness before God: It cannot be, says the one, That God should impute
Christ or his Righteousness to us; This Doctrine say the other, has no footing
in the word of God, nor common reason. We might follow them by the foot, and
see how they walk together in many, if not most of one another Heresies. But
we need not any further witness, then their own confession, one egg is no
^iker another, neither does milk more resemble milk, then the Remonstrants do
the Socinians, in their Doctrine and manners: So that Arminius did but play
Socinus his game, or act his part for him in Leyden, which he, and his wretched
adherents had done in Italy, Germany, Poland, Transylvania, the great Dukedom
of Lituania; and diverse other parts and places besides: by which the peace and
tranquillity of the Churches has been much disturbed: the progress of the
Gospel impeded, many poor souls seduced, the Kingdom of Satan enlarged, and
their own condemnation hastened; as may appear by the sudden and violent deaths
of many, yea the most of the Professors and propagators of the same.

Antonius VVotonus Anglus. Anglia quid de te meruit, Wotto^e, quod illam,
Haeresibus divis perdere tute velis?

SIngularity in conceit concerning matters of Religion, is as perilous, as to
follow a plurality or multitude in the custom of evil: Yet Wotton blinded
therewith, was led aside himself, and endeavored to misguid others. This is
the last perverse Publisher of this damnable Heresy, that we shall think fit
to name; and who first openly professed it in England, and by manuscript
Pamphlets, and Printed books, dispersed it in London; a place as much adicted
to, and taken with novelty, as any other whatsoever: For let the Doctrine be
what it will, if it smell not of novelty, it has there, for the most part, no
better enterta^nment then Christ among the Gadarens, they regard it not; from
thence it was carried as a discovery of some new truth, into several places of
the Country; and this about forty years ago. But being detected, hotly pursued,
and strenuo^sly opposed, by that stout Champ^on for the Truth, Mr George
Walker, Pastor of St John the Evangeli^t, London; and by his Zeal, together
with the industry of some other Ministers in that City, he was quickly quelled;
and his opinion seemingly suppressed: But yet, because he would still uphold a
secret faction: He wrote a Book in Latin, wherein he seemed to retract, or
rather to run from some desparate opinions, which he formerly maintained, and
wild speeches and expressions, which he had uttered, which are to be seen in
his private Manuscripts, given by him to those of his party, and so delivered
over from hand to hand, and formerly dispersed: But the Plaster was nothing
near so broad as the sore. For his retraction, if any, was clandestine and
secret, whereas his endeavors to propagate this pernicious heresy, were
notoriously manifest by his writings, wherein he professes in plain words his
desent from all our Orthodox Divines, which had before written any thing
concerning the necessary Doctrine of a sinners justification before God;
saying, I am forced to dissent from them all: In that very Book he shows, how
skilful he is in the art of dissimulation, which is able to deceive thousands:
For therein he makes a show of consent with them, and endeavors to persuade
them to believe it, whereas he wrests their doubtful speeches to countenance,
and to cover his error and socinianism, which he would have his seduced
Disciples to embrace and follow. This Book, some of them, h^ving more Zeal then
knowledge, more faction then Religion, with much difficulty; after it was
rejected at L^y^en, and (which is wonderful to tell) at Amsterdam, procured
privately to be Printed at their own cost elsewhere brought over the Copies and
sold them in London, where they thought they might make the best market of such
wicked and deceitful ware: But by the blessing of God upon the careful
endeavors of those that stood up in the gap against it, it was utterly
extirpate, and might have lain rotting with the carcass of him, that first
brought it over, and brought it into England, to get him a name, though but an
evil one, by poisoning his country with the contagious infection of this
damnable heresy: but that our Dialogue by the New-English Gentleman revived
some, John Biddle others, of these diabolical doctrines: The one having the
very words, the other the opinions of Socinus, and his followers. And are not
we all beholding to these, and such as these that go before, for raising the
dust to put out the eyes, or at least for the present to blind the sight of all
those, that follow after? He that has an eye left to see, let him see, and he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear, and the Lord touch his heart that he
may understand, what God is yet doing, and speaking to the Churches,

Quod scripsi, scripsi; was Pilates answer to the Jews, that that I have
written; I have written, and so say I, What I have written, I have written, for
the good of my poor seduced Countrymen that are taken, but mistaken with these
upstart, revived heresies, instead of new lights, or new discoveries of truth,
which these seducers pretend, they meet with, and are misled by the errors and
erroneous doctrines of Socinus, and his followers: so that they may see, out of
what puddles they were raked, and by whom they had their first rise and
publication; and may not give credit any longer unto those seducers, which vent
them as their own.

The bondage of this land was lamentable, under the tyranny of Antichrist;
when we were driven to eat the bread of superstition, and to drink the wine of
fornication, or fast. But God has delivered us and confirmed our deliverance
for many years together: if we shall now apostate, and revolt from the
integrity of his service, our latter end will be worse then our beginning;
Instead of Popery we shall find error, and heresy, Turcisme and Devilisme,
til we can only say, Here was once the Church of God; No surer way, no speedier
course for the effecting of this, then to be carried away with the desperate,
and damnable opinions of the Socinians, whom some have thought not worthy of
the name of Christians, and so not fit to live among us, who profess the faith
of the Lord Jesus Christ; We will bring the matter into further question, and
see what may be said concerning it, whether the Socinian Religion be the
Christian Religion, and so Socinians true Christians, yea or no?

Socinians above others pretend to the name of Christ and boast of it; for that
purpose they entitle their Catechises, The Institutions of Christian religion,
as is manifest by those of Socinus and Ostorrodus, they only will have their
denomination from Christ; Smalcius against Franc: reasons thus; If those,
which do not confess Christ, are not Christians; then it must needs follow,
that those which do confess Christ, are Christians; We both by word of mouth,
writings and endeavor, do profess Christ before the whole Christian world,
witness so many books that are written, and so many confessions that have bin
made by us, (says Muscorovius), another of the same train. Yea we are not only
Christians, but the only true Christians, if they may be Judges in their own
cause; and for that purpose they argue thus, Every Spirit that confesses that
Jesus is the Christ, is of God; But our Churches, and they alone do confess
that Jesus is the Christ; Therefore are they of God: Seducers will say or do
any thing, so they may deceive; Absalom, what expensive bravery does he put
himself unto, what liberal promises does he make, what courtly policy does he
use, that he might seduce the hearts of the people, from their due and true
obedience. Insomuch that the common acclamation must needs be this, O
courteous, beau^eous, bounteous Absalom! So who can be by and hear the outside
profession, the seeming Christian confession, which is made by these Socinians,
and forbear to cry out, O Virtuous, Pious, Religious, Socinian, who would not
take part with thee, and be on thy side? But, O this heart of man! how
deceitful is it upon the weights? how apt to be deceived, and to dece^ve? for
do but search them, sift them, sound them, and you shall find it is no such
matter, their pure oar is but dross; their sweet fruits but bitter to the
taste, and all this glorious boasting, nothing but dissembling.

To stop their mouths, and the mouths of all their adherents and accomplices, we
shall consider the name and appellation of Christian under this twofold Notion.
First, (...) generally or improperly. Secondly, (...) specially or properly. We
do not deny the Socinians to be called Christians, in the first sense, that is,
the general or improper signification of the word; for whosoever does
acknowledge that Jesus is that promised Messiah, and that his Doctrine is only
to be embraced and obeyed by us, are such Christians, making a difference
between them and Jews, who deny that the Messiah is already come; and Turks who
profess and follow the Doctrine of Mahomet contained in their Alchoran: We
give them this to distinguish them from Infidels which know not Christ, and
from Jews which deny Christ; but we cannot give them the title of Christians in
that special sense, in which the Scriptures use it; nor may they proudly
arrogate it to themselves, for they are not worthy of it: And this we make good
by these ensuing Arguments.

First, Because Christians are the peculiar Disciples of Christ and his
Apostles, Act. 11.26. But the Socinians are not the peculiar Disciples of
Christ and his Apostles, seeing they dissent from the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, in very many mysteries and principal foundations of the Christian
faith, and do their utmost endeavor by their subtilties, to overthrow them:
Therefore the Socinians, notwithstanding their glorious outside profession, are
not Christians.

Secondly, There is required to the completing, and making up of a true
Christian, a true and lively faith, or an acknowledging, and sincere profession
of the true faith, Romans 10.9. 1 Pet. 3.15. But they whose faith and profession
concerning God and Christ, is not true, but false, erroneous and heretical, are
not to be accounted for true Christians: But the faith and profession of the
Socinians, both concerning God and Christ, is false and erroneous, yea and
heretical too, as we shall show out of the Scriptures, and shall set forth to
the judgment of the whole Christian world: Therefore the Socinians are not to
be accounted or esteemed as true Christians.

Thirdly, They which worship any other, then the only true God, are not true
Christians. But the Socinians worship another, and not the true God; for they
adore not, neither do they worship the holy and ever blessed Trinity, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, one God in Essence, in three distinct persons, whom
the whole Christian world does acknowledge and adore; but frame another God to
themselves, who is only one in person and essence, who is not the eternal
Father; nor has he an eternal Son, of the same essence with himself, and so
they worship an Idol devised by themselves, far different from the true God of
the Christians, but the true God of the Christians in whom we are baptized; the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Holy Trinity, blessed for ever, they provoke,
and revile, with horrid and most execrable blasphemies: Therefore they are not
true Christians.

Fourthly, They which deny the proper Essence of Christ, are not to be counted
Christians: For as he which denies the Essence of Man, takes away man; so he
which denies the proper Essence of Christ, takes away Christ, and so is not
truly a Christian. But the Socinians deny the proper Essence of Christ, because
they deny the Divine Nature of Christ, which is his proper Essence, being
Jehovah, Jer. 23.6. God blessed for ever, Amen, Romans 9.5. For he can no more be
true God, without the Divine Nature, then man without his humane nature:
Therefore they cannot be true Christians.

Fifthly, he which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, or
denies, that Jesus is the Christ, is not truly a Christian, but is to be
accounted as an Antichrist. 1 John 2.22.23. 1 Ioh 5.7. But the Socinians deny
that Christ is come in the flesh, because they deny the incarnation of the Son
of God, which is urged by St. John 1. Epistle. 4.2. and 1. of his Gospel, 14.
against Ebion and Cerinthus, as predecessors of the Socinian heresy. And
although in words they confess that Jesus is the Son of God, and the Christ;
yet in deed they deny it, both because they take away his filiation or
Sonship, whereby he is the Son of God by generation of the substance of the
Father; and also because they overthrow the office principally designed to him
by his name Christ, whereby he is anointed a Priest, and is the Savior of the
world, when as they make void the satisfaction of Christ, without which, he is
not properly either a Priest or Redeemer, or Savior to us, but is so made or
conceived metaphorically by them: Therefore they are not truly Christians.

Lastly, They which serve the creature besides God the Creator, and do
Religiously worship him, which is not God, they as such, are rather Pagans and
Infidels then Christians: But the Socinians do serve the creature, besides God
the Creator, and adore him with Religious worship, who by nature is not God,
namely their false, and fained Christ, who they themselves say, is not God, yet
give him divine adoration. Therefore the Socinians are rather Pagans and
Infidels, then true Christians; and are so to be accounted by us.

Thus my dear Country men, You have seen what these men are; whose damnable
opinions do mislead us, what in their lives, what in their Doctrines: why
should we rake the Sinks of Italy, or drain the Puddles of Germany, for those
Heresies which have both infested, and infected the Churches of God in those
parts, and in diverse other places beside? Let them keep their damnable
opinions to themselves, so we may walk the plain way to Heaven; what need we
seek out bypath to our selves, to bring our selves in danger thereby? Let
them Mahomatize, Judaize, or what they will; it behoovs us to look well to our
selves that we follow not or be seduced by them. Let us keep our selves in that
Station wherein God has set us; and perform that duty which he therein
requires of us. Let us seriously consider what infinite mischief has ari^en to
the Church of God, from the presumption of ignorant and unletterd men, that
have taken upon them to interpret the most obscure places of Scripture, and
pertenaciously defended their own sense, when they have done, though there be
neither sense in it, nor reason for it. How contrary is this to all practice in
other vocations? In the Tailors trade, every man can stitch a seam; yet every
man cannot cut out a garment. In the Sailers Art, every one may be able to pull
at a cable, when they are wheighing, but every one cannot guide the helm, or
direct the course; when they are sailing; In the Physicians profession, every
gossip can give some ordinary receipts upon common experience; but to find the
nature of the disease, and to prescribe proper remedies from the just grounds
of Art, pertains only to the professors of that science; and we think it, and
that justly to, absurd and dangerous to allow every ignorant Mountebank to
practice therein: And shall we think it safe, that in Divinity which is the
Mistress of all Sciences, and in matters, which concern the eternal safety of
the soul, every man should take upon him to shape his own Coat, to steer his
own Course, or to prescribe his own Dose? It was an old saying among us, but it
seems that it is quite worn out of use, That Artists were worthy to be trusted
in their own Trade. Wherefore has God given men skill in Arts and Tongues?
Wherefore do the aptest wits spend their time and studies, even from their
Infancy, upon these sacred Employments, if men altogether in expert in all the
grounds both of Art and Language, can be able to pass as sound a judgment, in
the depths of Theological truths as they? How happy were it, if we could all
learn (according to that word of the Apostle) To keep our selves within our own
lines; As Christians, the Scriptures are ours, but to use, to enjoy, to read,
to hear, to learn, to meditate, to practice; not to wrest to our fancy, or to
interpret according to our private conceit, for this faculty we must look out
of our selves, expect it some where else, and from some others; and the Lord
himself has taught us where we shall seek and find it too. Mal. 2.7. The
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Let us then ever suspect
our own abilities, and look unto those whom God has set as watchmen over us;
yet not so, as that this whole work were theirs; and that God required nothing
at all of us, but being instructed by them, let us do what is required of us,
in those places wherein he has set us, and leave the rest to them, and Gods
blessing upon them, and their endeavors. Let us but abate our pride, that
spiritual pride, which lies lurking in us, and our contentions and quarrels in
Religion will dye alone. Now the most Omnipotent and most glorious Lord God,
for his ineffable mercy and goodness, more and more illuminate our minds with
the light of his Heavenly truth; increase the gifts and graces of his holy and
blessed Spirit in us, recall the wandering into the way of righteousness and
Salvation; and confirm them and us, in the true and saving knowledge of Christ;
disperse and bring to naught the crafty sleights and wily delusions of Errors
and Sophistications; root out of the Church (the Spouse of thy dear Son Jesus)
those most destructive and hurtful divisions, which do so much infest it, and
all the seeds of false Doctrine and Heresy, which the envious man, by his
wicked Instruments, has sown therein, and


