THE EVENING-STAR Appearing to the SAINTS, Directing them to celebrate their
Holy Rest, even the Sabbath Day, (not from Morning to Morning nor from Midnight
to Midnight; but) from Even to Even, according to the Word of God.

First written in a Letter at the earnest Request of a Friend for his
satisfaction, concerning the beginning of the Sabbath Day: And here published
for the general good of all that profess Christianity; and in order to the
rectifying of some things in the late Act, concerning the observation of the
Lords Day.

There is an Epistle to the Parliament in the Conclusion, tending also to the
taking away of the Popish Prelaticall, and Antichristian
Presbyterian-Penalties, contained in sevrall Acts and Ordinances of Parliament
which have been, and still are put in execution against the best sort of
religious Protestants.

Unto which is also anexed, A new Christian Creed built upon the old foundation
of the holy Apostles, and Prophets Jesus Christ being the cheef Corner Stone.

By SAMUEL CHIDLEY, Cler.

London; Printed by John Clowes. 1650.

The Preface, and Epistle Dedicatory. To the Saints on earth, Grace, Mercy and
Peace be multiplied.
Beloved,
AS Jehovah has chosen you to be his holy, special and peculiar People above
all the people that are upon the face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2. Exodus
19.5. Isa. 56. Romans 10.12.
so he has given unto you signs and Sacraments, amongst which the Sabbath is a
sign between him and you, to testify, That he is Jehovah which sanctifies
you; Exodus 31.13, 17.
Therefore ye are commanded to Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. Ex.
20.8.


From the Creation of the world, God did appoint one day of seven to be a
Sabbath, not only because he had rested on the seventh day from all his Works
which he had created and made; Deuteronomy. 31.17. Genesis 2.2.
But that both man and beast might have rest and resreshment also, Deuteronomy. 5.14.
which thing remains substantially unto this day, as sure as God is merciful
who has not left it to the wills of men; but has established this Liberty,
upon the grounds of certainty.

In old time God did institute the seventh day for a Ex. 20.^0. See ^r.
Ans^orth's ^ransla^ion.
Sabbath, but there was not that desirable perfection in it for acception as
was upon the first day of the wick the morrow after the Jews Sabbath; which was
higher, and more honorable because of the Wavesheaf, Lev. 23.10.11. -- 1^
and first fruits ver^ 15 -- 21
then presented before the LORD, those lively Types of Jesus Christ, who is the
first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Co^ 15.20.23.
who rose from the dead on the morrow after the Sabbath; As therefore the Jews
were to observe it as a Sabbath, and a holy convocation by solemn Proclamaion
it was to be unto them, And they were to do no servile work therein Lev. 23.21.
: So must the Christians now in the days of Christ our Lord Psa. 110.31
, who honored this day by his presence, in the midst of his Disciples after
his Resurection, upon the first day of the Week, Joh. 20 19.
and eight days after that er. 26.
even upon the second first day Lev. 23.15.16.
he came again and gave them more fuller manifestations, and confirmations of
his Resurrection, breathing on them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, and
after his Ascension into Heaven, sent down the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples on
the fiftieth day, which was the morrow after the Jews Sabbath Acts 2.1.
, And on the Lords day also, he ravished with his spirit, that Disciple John,
whom he so dearly loved before his death; And then and there in the Isle of
Pathmos, he im, parted that great Revelation which is called The Revelation of
Jesus Christ, which he had received from the bosom of the Father Rev. 1.1, 10.
. This first day of the week, is the day of Christ's power Psalm^ 110.2.
, on which day the disciples met together to break bread, and to practice the
other Ordinances of God, for the setting forth of Jesus Christ, who holds his
Ministers in his right hand, and walks in the midst of his Churches Acts
20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.12, 13, -- 20. and 2.1. and 7.16.
. This is the day of our holy solemnity to be kept in Sion, the City of the
Saints solemnities, upon which day our Lord Christ was made perfect, Luke
13.32. Heb. 5.9.
an High Priest for ever, not after the Law of a carna^ commandment, but after
the power of an endless life and 7.16.
; then the stone which the Builders refused became the head of the Corner; ^
Ps. 118.
Then the right hand of Jehovah was exalted and did valiantly; Then Christ
said, I shall not dye but live and declare the works of Jehovah Ps. 118.18.19.
; For although for a little while as precious seed he lay in the heart of the
earth, yet through the quickening Spirit of God, which came upon him as the dew
of Heaven he arose, and sang, and Jehovah was then his strength and song, and
also became his Salvation v. 14.
.

This day is a joyful and good day; This Sabbath is a delight, holy of Jehovah,
honorable Isa. 58.13. Ps. 118.22.
it is the day of his marvelous doings; This is the day which Jehovah has made
ver. 24.
, our God has entered into Covenant with us this day, Isa. 54 9, 10.
to give us the sure mercies of David Acts 13.34.
;

This is the wedding day of Jesus Christ with his beloved spouse Isa. 54.5.
, it is his Coronation-day the day of his espousals, and the day of the gladness
of his heart Cant. 2.11.
O come then and let us be glad and rejoice in it with him, and let the voice
of joy and rejoicing be heard in the Tabernacles of the righteous.

Is not this the great Market day of our souls, wherein there is Proclamation
made, Ho every one that thirsts, come unto the waters of life? And he says
moreover, Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let
your soul delight it self in fatness, incline your ear, come unto me, hear and
your souls shall live; And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even
the sure Mercies of David Isa. 55.1, -- 3.
. And the spirit and the Bride say come, and he that hears says come, and
let him that is a thirst come; And whosoever will, let him take of the Well of
the water of life freely Rev. 22.17.
. O how sweet are the Crystal streams of the Christian Brooks, which proceed
from the Throne of God and of the Lamb! And how pleasant and precious is the
Tree of Life on either side the River of Righteousness, the meat where of is
good for food, and the leaves thereof for Medicine!

Blessed are those that keep his Commandments, that they may have right to the
Tree of life, and enter in through the Gates into the Holy City.

Remember therefore the Sabbath day to keep it holy, as the Lord has
Commanded, particularly to consider the time of celebration thereof, which is
from even to even.

Now that you may not forget duly to prepare your selves against the night of
our holy solemnity, I have published this following Epistle, to prove that the
Evening and the Morning is the first day from the Creation, and that the
Sabbath or Lords day, is to be kept (not from Morning to Morning, nor from
Midnight to Midnight but) from Even to Even.

Thus says Jehovah, If you can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of
the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season; then may
also my Covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a Son
to Reign upon his Throne, and with the Levitos the Priests my Ministers. Jer.
33.20.21.


Now here follows the Letter, which was Written at the earnest request of a
friend, for his satisfaction concerning the beginning of the Sabbath Day
Loving friend,
I Understand by an old acquaintance, and loving friend of mine, that you have
a great desire to receive some Grounds from me in Writing, wherefore I keep the
Lords Day from Evening to Evening; and not hold it from Midnight to Midnight.
Truly at the first I thought it most meet, that seeing we are both in one Town,
and can freely and frequently come to talk face to face, it were better so to
do, then to write unto you with ink and pen; but further considering, what my
friend had told me, that you could better declare your mind in writing, then by
speech (though I doubt not, but that in discourse you are able to give reason,
and to receive reason) I therefore have thought it not amiss, to spare some
time from my pressing urgent occasions, to satisfy your desire by writing,
considering the smallness of your request, and how that if this writing satisfy
you, you may send it unto your friends in the Country for their satisfaction,
seeing we cannot speak with them by word of mouth; but if these lines which I
shall here present you withal, satisfy you not, nevertheless it will serve as
an entrance into more fuller discourse between us upon this subject.

And now to the matter in hand.

It is good to mind, what we are to understand by [a] day in this present
controversy, and that will lead us to the day.

By a day in the Scriptures we are to understand, either a day of twelve hours,
or a large day of twenty four hours.

A day of twelve hours Christ speaks of when he says, John 11.9.
Are there not twelve hours in the day? And so he shows by the Parable of the
vineyard, Matt. 20. v. 1. to the 13.
where those that were hired at the eleventh hour, wrought one hour, and then
the day was at an end; therefore as there are twelve hours in the day: so
likewise- there are twelve hours in the night. And so it appears, that the
day and night are both of an equal length: and so it was when there was neither
Sun nor Moon; for the week consists of seven parts, and every of those parts
is twenty-four hours a piece, none being longer or shorter then other, and this
may appear by Exodus Exodus 20.9.10.11.
where it is said, Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do:
and the seventh day is a Sabbath, etc. And when the seventh day ended then the
week began again, as may appear by Leviticus, Levit. 23.15.16.
where it is written, And ye shall Count unto you from the morrow after the
Sabbath from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the Wave-Offering. Seven
Sabbaths shall be complete, even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath
shall ye number fifty days, etc? And in Deuteronomy, these are called seven
weeks, Devt. 16.9.10.


The night (in the Scriptures) as it consists of twelve hours equal with the
day, so it is divided into four equal parts, See
which parts are called four watches, Luke 12.38. and Matt. 14.25.
In the fourth watch of the night Jesus walked on the Sea.

The first watch of the night begins when the first hour of the night
begins (even at the time which is commonly called six a clock at night) and
is the evening-watch, and lasts three hours.

The second watch is from the end of the first watch, and lasts till
midnight, or the sixth hour of the night, (which is commonly called twelve a
clock.

The third watch of the night is from the end of the second watch, and lasts
also three hours, even till the ninth hour of the night.

And then at the end thereof begins the fourth watch, and lasts three
hours, even till the first hour of the day, (which is commonly called six a
clock in the morning) and is called the morning watch. In the morning watch it
is said, Exodus 13.24.
The Lord looked unto the Host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of fire,
and of the Cloud, and troubled the Host of the Egyptians: now the Pillar of
fire was to lead them by night. Therefore at this time when God looked through
the Pillar of fire, though it was the morning watch, yet it was part of the
night, even of the twelve hours. See also in Mark Mark 13.35.36.
where Jesus Christ divides the night into four watches, saying thus: Watch ye
therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house comes, at even, or at
Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the (dawning some Translations say in
the dawning, Other says, in the morning.
or) morning: least coming suddenly he find you sleeping. Now in a temporal
respect, the night is made for Man to sleep in, and those that sleep, sleep in
the night; But in extraordinary cases, men are to watch, unto which Jesus
Christ alludeth when he says watch -- lest when he comes he find you sleeping.

Moreover I conceive, that as the latter part of the Night (or Evening) is
called Morning, so the latter part of the Day, (or Morning) is called Evening,
because it is next to it, and next before it. So it was Commanded, that the
Passe-over should be slain between the two Evenings, Exodus 12.6.
That is to say in the lesser Evening, before the twelfth hour of the day,
which was the beginning of the Evening for the next day, and they were to roast
it, and eat it at night, and not to let ought of it remain until the morning;
but that which remained till morning they were to burn it with fire, v. 10
So that there is two Evenings to one day, there is the greater Evening, and
the lesser Evening. The greater Evening is the night, Job. 7.3.4.
before the day it self. The lesser Evening is the latter part of the day it
self. As for morning, there is the morning watch, and the morning it self, And
the large day consists of twenty four hours, even a night and a day, (as has
been showed) or a night day as Paul speaks. 2 Cor. 11.25.


Now these things being considered as a preparation whereby you may understand
how I reckon the day, branching it out in the several parts thereof: I come now
to give you several grounds for my practice of keeping the Lords day from
Evening to Evening.

THe first is, because that God from the Creation, ordered the Evening to go
before the Morning, before ever the Sun or Moon were Created. Its said the
Evening and the Morning was the f^rst day, Genesis 1.5.
The Evening and the Morning was the second day. v.
The Evening and the Morning was the third day. v.
And the same Order follows throughout the whole Week.

After the Sun was made to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night, the
Evening and the Morning was the fourth day, v. 19
where we see, The Evening is placed before the Morning, as it followed the
fifth and sixth day, v. 23.1.
And the Prophet David setting forth the Order of Gods Creation, says in the
hundred and fourth Psalm, Psalm. ^04.19. -- 24.
He appointed the Moon for seasons, the Sun knows his going down, Thou make
darkness, and it is night, wherein all the Beasts of the Forest do creep
forth. The young Lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God The
Sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their Dens.
Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the Evening. Wherein we
may see, he places the night before the day, in respect of time, for the
darkness which was called night was before the light, which was, called day:
And God caused the light to shine out of darkness: unto which the Apostle
alludeth orderly in his spiritual applications to the Corinthians, saying, God
who Commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts,
giving the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.


MY second ground, why I keep the day which God has made, Psa. 118.24
holy from Even to Even, is from Gods institution and Commandment unto Israel,
saying in Leviticus, Levit 23.32.
From Even to Even shall ye rest your Sabbath. And that Sabbath which God
Commands to be sanctified, is a large day of twenty four hours, (the night
going before the day of twelve hours, as is n^ted before) which time is the
seventh part of the week: And as we are not to take part of one day, to make up
another day: so we are not to take part of one week, to make up another week:
for the days and weeks remain as from the Creation. The beginning of the day
begins with the Evening: therefore the beginning of the week begins with the
Evening also, and so from Even to Even the Jews were Commanded to celebrate
their Sabbath. And this was well known to the Jews, which made them, when
Christ was crucified upon the preparation day before their Sabbath, to make
such have, because that the Sabbath was coming on; for the ninth hour was come,
before Jesus bowed the Head, and gave up the Ghost. John. 9.30. -- 34.
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not
remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath Day, (for that Sabbath Day was a high
day) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken away. Then came the Soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other that was crucified with him; But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs, etc.

Now if the Sabbath, had not begun at Evening, but at Midnight, or Morning, in
all probability they would not have made such haste to break the legs of them
that were crucified, whereby they might die speedily, and so be taken away
immediately, seeing that then they would have had a long time, even till
midnight, or day to bury them in, and especially considering, that Jesus was
dead already, and it was probable, that the other two would not have lived long
after him; but that there might have been time enough to have buried them
before midnight. And another reason which confirms it, that the Jews then
began their Sabbath at Evening, appears from John's Testimony which says, v.
41.42.
That in the place where he was crucified, there was a Garden, and in the
Garden a new Sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus
therefore, because of the Jews preparation day, for the Sepulcher was nigh at
hand. Now the Lords day began when the Jews Sabbath ended: But the seventh day
Sabbath began at Even, and ended at even, therefor the Lords day Sabbath
begins at even, and is to be celebrated from Even to Even.

MY third ground, why I begin this Honorable day, at Even, and so keep it from
Even to Even, is from the practice of the Godly, and particularly of Nehemiah,
Neh. 13.19.
which testifies saying, and it came to pass, that when the Gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I Commanded that the Gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath, and some of
my Servants, set I at the Gates, that there should no burden be brought in on
the Sabbath Day, So the Merchants and sellers of all kinds of Wares lodged
without Jerusalem, v. 20.21.
once or twice, then I testified against them, and said unto them, why lodge ye
before the Walls, etc.

MY fourth ground, why I keep the day from Even to Even, is from the
consideration of the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who
declared, that as Jonas was 3 days and 3 nights in the Whales Belly, so should
the Sun of man be 3 days and 3. nights in the heart of the Earth. Mat. 12.40.
Now Jesus Christ was crucified on the sixth day of the week, and died after
the ninth hour was come, and was buried before the twelfth hour of the day, and
lay all night, and the next day, and the next night, so that of nights, there
is but two at the utmost. And if he should have layn another night, he could
not have risen the third day, for then it would have been the fourth day. But
the Scripture declares, and we are bound to believe, that he rose again the
third day, which was the first day of the week; and therefore in the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, we are to account the days, as it was from the
Creation, the Evening and the Morning, is a large day of twenty four hours,
which being considered together, a part of that twenty four hours, is to be
taken for the whole twenty four hours; but if they should be severed, and
reckoned by the twelve hours, then there must be six times twelve hours
considered, and out of every one of the twelve hours, we are to take a part,
or else we cannot make up the number of three distinct days, and three distinct
nights. And though we should take a part of one distinct day, and of one
distinct night, for the whole day and night to make up the number: yet it must
of necessity, be above four times twelve hours: that is, forty eight hours, or
else a day and a night of the time will be wholly excluded: But Christ did not
lie in the grave forty hours, he lay but a small time on the first day of his
Burial, which was the sixth day of the week; for presently the Evening came,
which night he lay in the grave, and all the next day, which was the Jews
Sabbath. And Mark says, Mark 16.1.3.
That when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James,
and Solome had brought sweet pices, that they might come and anoint him. And
very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the
Sepulcher, at the rising of the Sun: and Christ was risen before, v. 6.
and appeared first to Mary Magdalen. v. 9.
And Luke says, it was very early in the morning that they came to the
Sepulcher, and Christ was risen before. Luke. 24.1.6.
And Matthew says, Mat. 28.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
That as it began to dawn [towards] the first day of the week, came Mary
Magdalen and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher, and behold, there had been a
great Earthquake: for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, and came
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was
like lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow, and for fear of him the Keepers
did shake, and became as dead men. And the Angel answered and said unto the
Women, fear not ye; for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified, He is
not here: for he is risen, as he said. And as they went to tell his Disciples,
behold Jesus met them, saying, All Hayle, and they came, and held him by the
feet, and worshipped him. v. 9.
Now when he was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to
Mary Magdalen, and she went out and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept. Mark 16.9. -- 11.
And they when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her,
believed not. Now John shows the manner how he appeared to Mary Magdalen,
saying, Ioh. 20.1. -- 17.
The first day of the week comes Mary Magdalen early, when it was yet dark
unto the Sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the Sepulcher, then she
runs and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other Disciple, whom Jesus loved,
and says unto them, they have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we
know not where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that other
Disciple, and came to the Sepulcher, so they ran both together, and the other
Disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And he stooping
down, and looking in, saw the linen Clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then
comes Simon Peter, following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and sees the
linen Clothes lie. And the Napkin that was about his head, not lying with the
linen Clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also
that other Disciple, which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and
believed: for as yet they knew not the Scriptures, that he must rise again from
the Dead. Then the Disciples went away again unto their own home: but Mary
stood without at the Sepulcher weeping. And as she wept, she stooped down, and
looked into the Sepulcher; and sees two Angels in white, sitting the one at
the head, and the other at the feet, where the Body of Jesus had layn, and they
say unto her, woman, why weepest thou? she says unto them, because they have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. And when she had
thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that
it was Jesus. Jesus says unto her, woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou?
she supposing him to be the Gardner, says unto him, Sir, if thou have born him
hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says
unto her, Mary, she turned her self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to
say Master. Jesus says unto her touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my
Father; but go to my Brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and
your Father, and to my God, and your God.

Now all these things, were before he met the women, and that they caught him
by the feet. And before Mary Magdalen was at the Sepulcher. Jesus Christ was
risen, while it was yet dark, even [towards] day: And therefore seeing Jesus
Christ rose the third day, and not the second day. The night before the
daylight, must be concluded to be part of the large natural day, else we shall
destroy our Article of our Faith, That Christ rose again the third Day.

Diverse other scriptures might be alleged, as that of Pilates wifes Dream
about Christ, the first (Day) of the three, Mat. 27.19. compared with Job
33.14. -- 17.
and from that which the chief Priests and the Pharisees did upon the
preparation day, when they came to Pilate, and would have the Sepulcher kept
until the third day, Job least his Disciples should come by night, and steal
him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from the Dead Mat. 27.62. -- 64.
And also how they gave larg money unto the Soldiers -- Mat. 18.11. -- 14.
saying, say ye, His Disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.
And if this come to the Governors ears we will persuade him, and secure you.
But this is sufficient, not only to overthrow the opinion of those that would
exclude the night, as if it were no part of the Lords day or Sabbath, as if
they might follow their Trades in the night of our holy solemnity, so they do
but keep the fourteenth part of the week not minding, that the night is part of
the large natural day of 24. hours, which is the seventh part of the week. As
also it reproves those, that begin not to rest till the morning, and hold it
from morning to morning, thereby altering from the Creation; for from the
Creation, the Evening was before the Morning. And God said not, from morning to
morning, but from Even to Even * shall you rest your Sabbath.

(...) tell what songs and sounds will best please the company to draw their
minds from better exercise, and having no purpose to cure any, but rather to
kill all, he will not work by contraries, he has an intention to gain by his
Trade, and therefore he will not cross the expectation of any which do suit
to his purpose, but rather so sounds, that he may seem sweet to all:
Therefore to the proud he brings some harmonious sounds of popular praise,
which like a lodestone draws the vainglorious to hunt so much more
earnestly to augment the echo of such vain windy reputation.

Thus he befooleth the foolish with the voice of flatterers; to the greedy he
has the cry of great abundance, the words of wealth, and the glory of gain,
which as the under-song of all their intentions, spurreth them forward to
forget their true tranquillity; for musical minds he has the pleasure of
artificial concord, and for carnal quarrellers and rangling Lawyers, he has
that mad music of discord. And thus has he a string and a strain for every
sinful and sensual sinners ear.

Our third sense is smelling, the object whereof is savor, and although Satan
does not gain so much [in my opinion] by abusing this sense, nor so much
prevail by the variety of this object, yet does he exercise the minds of many
in this perfumed airy object of smelling, the truth whereof appears in this
stinking state of many perfumed fools, lechers, and luxurious, for the most
part, of both Sexes. Cato would dismiss Publius of his allie, and not suffer
him to be any longer Captain of the Pannomian war, because [quoth he] I never
saw him return wounded from the war, but I have seen him walk up and down the
City of Rome perfumed. Licurgus King of Lacedemonia, saw well the evil of such
perfuming, when he banished from Lacedemonia all strange wares. It is true,
that odo^^ferous smells are wholesome, and sometimes to purify the ^^^e, is to
preserve health, and thus to relieve nature by our sense were not to live
sensual: this were to use our sense, and to make it serviceable to soul and
body.

But the Church of God has an Allegorical savor in the nostril of her soul,
which makes her love her beloved, and seek him sincerely, which sent is cold
in the nostrills of sensual sinners.

Fourthly, let us consider how Satan does exercise his skill in our tasting,
the object whereof is sweet or sour, the Organ of which is our tongue, and
surely if he prevail less by the object of our smelling, he doubleth, yea, he
trebleth his advantage in this of our tasting; for of all man's five senses none
does more deceive him, and as it were twitch him more to a sensual and sinful
life, then this of his tasting; the reason whereof is partly in respect of the
common exercise of tasting, and partly in respect of the [almost] infiniteness
of the objects of our taste; nor are the objects of our taste so many in the
simple quality thereof, as it is variable in the manner of compounding; for it
is hard to find any dainty dish which our dainty Dames have not several and
different manners of preparing for, thereby to make it more pleasant to the
palate, and as it were to ravish our tasting so much the more; neither is the
enemy negligent to take the advantage of this our tasting, thereby to hinder
our happiness: in so much, that whereas in the Scriptures we read of a
certain man that fared deliciously every day, as though there had been no more
but one so ill disposed: in our times, lamentable experience gives us cause to
relate certain men, yea, certain women, yea, certain hundreds, yea, certain
thousands of both Sexes, that fare deliciously every day, yea, voluptuously and
superlatively, superfluously, every day, yea, twice every day, if no more. We
read of one Esau, which sold his birthright for to please his palate with the
taste of Jacobs pottage: But our age may record millions of such monsters, which
sell their Patrimony to maintain their taste, neither can they be satisfied
when they have wasted their own estates, and then humbly [with the Prodigall]
go eat husks with the Swine. But having wasted their wealth, they make trial
of their wits; some like Aristippus, flatter and feign Dionisius or any great
man like Parasites, till they justly merit that Surname, or worse, which
Diogenes gave to Aristippus, calling him the Kings dog. Some [whose tongues are
not so pleasant] choose rather to use the strength of arm, and so by violence
supply their wants with other men's wealth: Others use the sleight of hand by
base picking and cutting of purses and other unutterable crafty shifts.

But as this curiosity of the taste is, for the most part, predominant with the
female sex, whose crooked fingers are accustomed so well to carving, that it is
the best faculty both of their body and mind, and whose chief glory stands
in gormandizing, till they secretly consume their husbands estates, so have
they a way of wickedness more proper to their Sex, to relieve their palate,
and sensual appetite, even the base prostituting of their bodies to the
pleasure of each luxurious lecher, till they have brought their companions to a
morsel of bread, which being done, they [inlarged like hell] cry for new
acquaintance, to maintain the pleasures of their pallates, so that this sin is
neither hic mulier, nor haec vir, but it is the Common of two Genders, and is
but too common in all both men and women.

We read of one Heraclitus, a great Philosopher, how that he always wept to
consider the vanity of the times, in which he lived, notwithstanding he once
found leisure to preach a silent Sermon against this pallate-pleasure, and
pleasing of our taste; for being requested by his Contrymen to give his
advice in a public oration, how they might avoid the private sedition and
contention that was amongst them, he goes into the Pulpit, where their
orations were usually made, and saying nothing did in the presence of all the
congregation, eat a morsel of brown bread, and drink a draught of cold water,
thereby showing unto his Contrymen that excess of eating and drinking was
the cause of their ruin, and that moderation and temperance therein was the
only way to preserve peace and love amongst them; for to speak as the truth
is, this superfluity of many procures want in the most, and want procures
much mischief, where grace is not present to sustain the needy condition of the
empty-handed.

The last of our senses is touching; which is not so confined in the Organ as
the other four; for all the parts of man's body are organicall in touching or
feeling: A man may sensibly touch any object of touching, with any member from
the head to the foot: the object of this sense is soft or hard, heavy or light;
now in the exercise of our touching the craft of Satan much appears, for to
the jolly and luxurious companion he offers the soft pleasures of fine
raiment and curious linen, the habit of those which live in Kings houses, as
our Savior says, and by continuance of time, he so affects their minds and
so tendereth their skins, that they neither can nor will endure the hardness
of harden, no lin is leath weak enough for their silken [yet sinfull] skins;
it is to be doubted whether the sending of a second Jonas would bring these
Harlots to a shirt of hair, and these peoples silk and satin to sackcloath.

Thus their sense affecting softness, it comes to pass, that all labor is
terrible and hard, most uneasy and unpleasant; so idleness becomes the
habit both of body and mind, and now is this party fit for the Devils
purpose.

To conclude, this deceit of our senses, the Devil like a cunning fisher,
labors to hang us with a hook baited with sensual objects, and having
gotten his hook in our jaws, he does not, like some unskilful Angler, by and
by strike, to the hazard of hook, line, rod, fish and all; but rather draggeth
and draws us up and down in the Sea of our sensual contentment, or water of
our wickedness, till at the last he has drowned us in our own element, that
so the rest of our hearts may be forgotten, and the peace of our minds buried
in perpetual oblivion.

The second engine whereby the peace of our heart is hindered [through the craft
of the Devill] is the exercise of our fantasy upon its object, which fantasy
or imagination of ours Satan feeds with a thousand fancies and and foolish
imaginations of imperfect shapes; sometimes he deceives with the conceit of
learning, either this art or that language, in the perfection whereof he
persuades us lies much contentment.

But if humane speculation be not able to satisfy the mind, then he has a
more deceitful invention to deceive us, and that is the propounding of some
form of religious exercise: And hence it is, that he has begotten so many new
inventions in the Sect-makers of our times, as in old times he has done
heretofore: This is a Sea, and a Labyrinth of distraction, here the poor soul
finds a beginning, but hardly any end; for this religious knowledge is so
variable, through the multiplicity of curious wits and contentious spirits,
[Sect-makers for the most part] that the life of man is too short to take a
view of this variety. Moreover, this exercise savoreth so of duty and
obedience, that men are afraid to neglect the earnest exercise thereof. But
well does Satan see how to puff up the mind in the acquiring of such religious
knowledge, and so to keep the mind in the acquiring of such reasonable forms
of service, that the poor soul may never pass further then the outward court
of bodily performance, nor once look within the most holy place.

Thus has he blown and puffed up many which in their external performance
and knowledge, do even feed and feast themselves as men in dreams, supposing
themselves to have all things, and yet indeed have nothing but only a bladder
full, or rather a brain full of windy and wordy conceptions: So fruitless is
all speculation and knowledge, in respect of quieting the soul or heart; for,
[as shall be shewed] the soul cannot communicate with any such comprehensible
thing, but only with God which is a Spirit, and able to fill the Soul with
his presence, and so quieteth the restlesnesse thereof, as it remains to be
showed in the eleventh place, where we shall speak of the Harbor or Haven of
the Hearts Happiness, and show it to be God himself.

CHAP. V. Of the hearts deceit in the conceit of happiness.
IT is the conclusion of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 17. Verse. 9. that man's
heart is deceitful above all things; and true it is, that man's heart is not
more cunning either in simulation of good, or in dissimulation of evil toward
others, then it is in this selfe-deceiving, in seeming to it self happy in a
most hapless condition: but because S. John says, chapter 20. v. 21 that every
man's condition is such as his heart does assure him of,

Object. Here may some object, that our hearts cannot deceive our selves,
though it may deceive others, and this objection is strengthened by that place
in the Corinthians, know ye not your own selves that Christ is in you except
you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. by which two places it seems that every man's
own heart can truly tell him what his estate and condition is, whether good or
ill. Moreover, if we should deny this, that man's heart is able to give him true
testimony, then should we cross this truth, that the conscience is a thousand
witnesses, and so should we be forced to run into this absurdity of proving our
inward condition and estate between God and us, from and by some mark and note
from without in the outward of our conversation; whereas to say as the truth
is, all is in the outward of our conversation, according as it is in the
inward of our hearts, and all man's testimony to himself must be drawn from
within, as we must give the Church and the world testimony from without.

This being granted, that the heart does give found testimony of a man's estate
and condition between God and him, how is it then said, that the heart is
deceived in the conceit of happiness? To which I thus answer, by a comparison.

A Merchant, or any other man that tradeth in the world, has good skill in
Arithmetic, or the art of numbering, by virtue whereof he is very able (no man
better) to cast up the account of his estate, and so to know truly what he
owes, and what is due to him from others, notwithstanding he partly through
carelessness, and partly through fear of beholding the ruin of his condition,
foreseeing that he is not so rich as he could wish, and as the world does
judge, he does neglect the precise examination of his estate, and so esteems
his estate [though bad] yet much better then it is; for whereas he judges
himself worth little, it proves in the conclusion that he is ten times more
in debt then all that he has is worth. Where now is the fault? is it want of
skill in numbering? No, it is the want of the exercise of that skill; even so it
is with our hearts, they are able to give us true testimony of our estate with
God, but most neglect to take a true trial of themselves, for the reasons
aforesaid. And so it comes to pass, that the heart is deceived in the conceit
of happiness. Now that the danger of this rock may be avoided, let us consider
how this deceit is framed, where we will observe two things.

First, what is the ground of this deceit.

And secondly, the manner how it works.

The ground of this deceit is an incredulity concerning this hearts happiness;
for it is hard to find a man that believes historically the quietness and
happiness of the heart as it is to be considered; to tell men that there is a
rest and peace in God passing understanding, seems a strange thing to most
men; to persuade men that a man may be rich without wealth, honorable in
disgrace, joyful in adversity, strong in weakness, and lively in the very
point of death; this to persuade men to, were to make the world wonder: So that
it is clear, that the most part of men are incredulous in this matter of the
hearts happiness. There be many that will confess that there is but God, and
that the Father is the Creator of the world, that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer,
and the holy Ghost the Sanctifier, which notwithstanding will affirm it to be
a great presumption for any man to be assured of any happiness in God or in
Christ, which is all one as to deny both God and Christ; for no man truly and
experimentally knows God, but he which is established in him as the only good
of his heart and soul.

But to let such pass, which in opinion deny such assurance, let us consider
how grossly they fail, which do in opinion allow of the possibility of this
assurance: for though many may be found which do confess that it is possible
to come to such an assurance and happiness in God, yet will they not believe,
but that this assurance is up and down according to their working, better or
worse; neither will they believe that the peace of the heart stands in the
souls communion with God, but that it depends upon such evidences as they
have drawn from the conformity of their wills, affections and actions, to
their literal knowledge; so that it comes to pass that none are so
unbelieving in this point of the hearts happiness, as those which have
acquired a brain full of verbal knowledge, with which they are puffed up.
Infidelity being the ground of this deceit, let us consider how it works; the
manner how it works is by a proud puffing up the heart in a very high conceit
of what it has acquired, and this pride is supported by two deceitful props.

The first is conceit of things future and to come.

The second is neglect of things present, which we thus declare.

Infidelity possessing the heart, hence proceeds pride, stoutly opposing the
hearts happiness, with one of these two arguments following. That is, either
like Corah and that company, they tell the sons of Levi they take too much upon
them, to discourse of so high and transcendent a subject as the Peace and
Happiness of the Heart, or else in a Scripture-learnednesse, and a verbal
knowledge they labor to maintain as the only happiness of the heart, that
estate and condition in which they stand, for not having grace to humble
themselves to the true annihilating of their acquired and put on forms of
knowledge, it must of necessity follow, that they must defend that estate in
which they stand; the props or supports of this condition, and bold
maintaining, are as before is said.

First, a conceit of future things, for when a man does truly look into his
spiritual estate, and so examineth the fullness of his heart, he presently
finds a want and an emptiness of contentment, yea, in the midst of all
external fullness; but now he in this estate of emptiness, does befool
himself, persuading himself that it shall be well with him, when he shall
have accomplished such and such projects as his mind intends: And thus he
puts off this present time in expectation of future good, which is nothing
else but the malice of Satan against our Hearts happiness.

The second prop upholding the infidelity and pride of our Hearts, is neglect
of examination of our present condition and estate, for the most part of men
are seldom drawn to enter into a true examination of their own condition,
and so it comes to pass, that they conceit themselves happy in a hapless
condition.

Thus we see the hearts deceit in the conceit of happiness, the ground of it
Infidelity, the manner how it works, by pride, the props of its support,
conceit of things future, and neglect of things present.

CHAP. VI. The mystical cloak or covering wherewith the heart is most
strongly deluded concerning this happiness.
HAving showed in the former Chapter, that the Heart is deceived in the conceit
of Happiness, (and that most commonly by one of these two deceits, either a
vain confidence in things to come, or by a careless neglect of the present
condition) it shall be necessary that we now come to show a third and a more
mystical manner of deceit, then yet we have touched. And this I the rather
signify in a Chapter by it self; partly because it requires a large dilation,
and would have the former Chapter overlong; and partly because it is more
proper to some people then the former deceits, being spun in a small thread, and
so very mystically deceiving, as shall be showed.

We read in Holy Writ of a mystery of godliness, and that is Christ
manifested in the flesh: we read also of a mystery of iniquity, and that is a
fleshly manifestation of Christ; for, as the true manifestation of Christ in
the flesh is a godly and a great mystery, so a fained and a false manifestation
of Christ is a great yet a fleshly mystery; and if there be a mystery of
iniquity, no marvel if Satan mystically cloak the minds and hearts of men,
that they should not perceive the truth of true happiness.

But in short, to tell what this mystical cloak and covering is, which so
strongly deludeth our hearts happiness, it is a fair, yet a false flourish of
religious exercises. Many things there be with which the heart of man is
deceived, but none may be compared to this, in respect of the close and crafty
deceiving, which in it is contained. In the declaring whereof, let us observe
three things.

First, the truth of the assertion, that a flourish of religious exercise is a
special deceiver of man's heart of the true happiness.

Secondly, let us consider the reason of this religious deceit.

Thirdly, we shall note the manner how it works to deceive the Hearts
happiness. That religious exercise do deceive men of their hearts happiness,
seems at the first a very strange position; for it rather seems that
sensuality, and fleshly pleasures and profits do deceive men, then religious
exercises, for too few, God knows, will some say, are religiously exercised.

To which I answer: It is true, that very few are rel^giously exercised, if we
speak of Religion, and religious exercises, as they are in truth and indeed in
the account of Almighty God, who is that true Kardiognostes, and searcher of
the heart. Nor are any deceived with the truth of Religion, for it is nothing
else but God in Man, conforming man to his own Image of righteousness and true
holiness. Now God cannot deceive: but that there is an exercise of Religion
seeming true, which becomes the strong deceiver, and most mystical deluder of
our happiness, is the Proposition that is affirmed, and remains to be proved.

Let us now come to the proof of this point, considering it first in the rude
and sensual multitude, and then in the more seeming religious, and we shall
evidently perceive that the religious exercises of men do most strongly deceive
and delude the Heart of happiness; the rude multitude of sensual livers,
whose belly is their best god, and which in truth of heart do no sacrifice but
to Bacchus, Apollo, or Venus, etc. these I say, are not so much deceived of
hearts happiness by their sensual exercises (though by them they be hindered)
as they are by the exercises of their Religion, such as it is, better or worse;
for in that they have the name of Christians put upon them in Baptism, and for
as much as they do often repeat the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed and the
ten Commandments, and in that they come sometimes to divine Service, and to
hear a preaching upon Gods good Sunday (as they say:) and seeing that at
Easter they do receive their Riteings or the Lords Supper: Hence it is that
these people will not be persuaded, but that their condition is most happy, and
he that goes about to discover their hapless estate, undertaketh a most
fruitless undertaking.

Now, did not these men perform any exercise of Religion, it were much more
easy in the eye of reason, to persuade such men that their case were miserable
and wretched; but now when any man reprehendeth their vain condition, and
bewrays their vanity, they by and by fly to the Castle of their religious
exercise, and in it they shroud themselves, as being equal in profession with
the best of Christians, and quid ultra, what needs any more? But God forgive
me, or the like abrupt ejaculations: and if such men as these have after some
drunken fit, or after some fearful blasphemous Oaths, any inward dejection of
spirit, though far short of Ahab, both in nature and time, then they conclude
themselves very penitent persons; and thus they set up themselves in their
religious condition: As well may a man persuade these men that they are not
men, as persuade them that they are not true believers, and in a most happy
condition: if it were possible to persuade these men that they are irreligious
and unbelieving, and that they were of their father the Devil, whose work they
do, then were they in the way toward happiness: but the first is not likely,
therefore not the second.

Thus in the very rude multitude we see that religious exercise does most
strongly deceive; it was the too much confidence the Ephesians had of their
Diana, that kept them from the receiving the faith of Christ, even so it is at
this day with many, they have a form of believing, and of serving God, which
secretly they do adore and worship, accounting it so good, and so great a
Diana, or God-service, that they neither can nor will receive any light of
truth. It is strange to consider how contrary men are to themselves, for it is
every man's opinion, and conceit, that faith without works is a dead faith, and
no faith, and this is most true, notwithstanding these men themselves living
most ungodlily and wickedly, will not acknowledge that they want faith, nor
hear that they are unbelievers; so strongly are they conceited of their Faith
and Religion. It was a good saying of Alexander Severus, and some others, that
the best learning was to unlearne what was learned amiss; so I say, that it
were the best lesson for all seeming religious men, to unlearn their faith and
religion, and to acknowledge it for no faith, and no Religion.

But to pass from this demonstration drawn from the profane multitude, in
whom this truth is least apparent, let us come to consider it in the more
precisely religious, and it will appear that by how much more men have been
strictly exercised to the view of the world, by so much more they have been
deceived. Of all the people in the world the Jews were most religiously
exercised, and amongst them the Pharisees were most devout; yet Christ tells
the Jews, that they did not know the things which concerned their peace. The
Pharisees had a good opinion of their Religion, as is plain in him that would
give God thanks, that he was not as other men were, and yet for all this they
received not Christ the Son of Peace, without which no true peace can be
established. And as of old so in these our days, those that are most devout and
forward in the exercises of Religion, are in that their performance most
mystically deceived in this point of true peace. The Papists, and the most
devour amongst them, the Jesuits, plainly show, that they have no inward
peace, in that they daily plot so many policies to augment their degrees of
preferment, whereas if they were at peace in the inwards of their hearts, then
had they preferment enough, though in never so low a condition.

Hence it is, that they as we, and we as they, run from opinion to opinion, and
can abide in no condition with any content, because we have not this inward
peace of the heart: Hence spring all Sects and all divisions amongst both
Papists and Protestants.

And to conclude this point, it is most apparent, even amongst us both
Preachers and Professors, (which to our selves, and to the eye of the world,
seem most religiously exercised) that we have no peace; for though we in the
secrets of our hearts praise God, that he has called us from our vanities; and
that he has made us to abhor those vices, in the which our neighbors do
wallow and tumble, and so bless our selves in a conceit of a better estate;
notwithstanding it is most clear, that the true peace of the heart we have not
known, in so much, that every one of us (for the most part) do seek our selves,
and our own ends in all our courses: and are glad to patch and piece out our
contentments with gain and glory, and vain boasting of our own praises,
oftentimes opening our mouths against others, secretly begging commendations to
our selves.

And more then all this, we must have our dishes, our dainties, and our sweet
morsells to support our empty hearts, yea, our possessions must be enlarged,
our buildings must be beautified, and too little to satisfy our restless
souls, and which do clearly show, that though we have a Religion that speaks
of peace, yet our Hearts are not established in the God of peace; for were the
soul once at rest, and so the heart made truly happy in God, then as we did
enjoy one thing above all, so should we enjoy all things in one, and in that
one thing would all other things be contemned as dung, and as things of no
esteem; but this earthly hungering shows the Hearts emptiness in all.

Now what has deceived us? even our conceit of the goodness of our Religion.

Quest. But some will demand a reason, why religious exercises do so mystically
deceive?

Answ. To which question I thus answer: The Lord according to his divine
wisdom, has seated in all men a certain Character of his divine power, which
divine power seated in man's soul, does hinder man's heart from contentment in
any created good, and does cause the soul to re-aspire to that summum bonum,
the chief good in God himself.

Hence it comes to pass, that man is easily persuaded, that his chief good
does not consist in any natural or bodily parts, or sensual exercises, though
through strength of sensuality man be wholly, for the most part, sensually
exercised.

The truth of this is plain, in the confession of most profane and ungodly,
who in words do express that their hope is in God above all, unto which they
are forced by the power aforesaid. Now when man in the power of the natural
conscience, and by virtue of this divine Character is forced to fly from all
its sensual pleasures, as unable to give it any contentment, then he leans
upon the reed of his Religion, such as it is, better or worse; if his religious
exercises be more cold or neuterly, then his conceit, and so his decit is so
much the less; if his religious exercise be more devout and zealous, then his
conceit and deceit is more strong, for as much pride does always attend such
verbal knowledge, and bodily exercises.

But lest some should stagger at this doctrine, as though the overthrow of all
religious exercises were intended; and as if all religious exercises may
deceive; I will therefore show how this false flourish of religious exercise
does deceive, and so conclude, how that the body and truth of Religion, neither
does nor can deceive.

The manner how this religious flourish does deceive, is by reason of that
sympathy and agreement; which is in part between such bodily exercises, and the
true Religion: But more especially in respect of that sympathy, which is
between such bodily services, and that natural disposition to Religion, which
is in every man's heart; for, (as before was said) there is by reason of the
divine Character in man's soul, a disposition to adore, or worship somewhat, as
more supreme or excellent then it self.

Now man's understanding being dark, yea, darkness it self, man does
entertain such a form of religious exercise, as it seems best to the dark
and blind reason, being spurred on by that spark of Divinity which remains
in the Soul, or Conscience; notwithstanding this reason (which is dark) being
set a work by the instinct of nature, is never able to reach any sound or
supernatural truth, although it should by literal learning, and Clerklike
cunning, dive never so deep into Scripture-learnednesse; but contrariwise it
reaches a form of knowledge, and a form of bodily working, and worship,
ship, either this way or that way, as it seems best to every man's reason and
judgment, to understand the Scripture learning: For, though all Sects say, they
will be guided by the Word of Truth, yet is the Word of Truth one as God is
one, and they may according to their several constructions of Scriptures, and
conceits of their own wisdom, seem to make good their opinion; all which
forms of religious exercises of knowing and obeying (being comprehensible to
man's reason) do carry in them a certain likeness unto that natural
disposition which is in man, to be religious: so man in this estate and
condition is still in the outward Court of bodily Service, having more or less
zeal of GOD, but not according to knowledge, that is, not according to that
supernatural knowledge which comes from above, called by S. James wisdom:
neither do any such bodily works know God according to the very truth.

It is life eternal, to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; But this
knowledge is not in speculation, or verbal discourse; but it is the power of
God making known to the soul, that power of love which passes understanding;
for God is love, and he that knows God, knows love, and he which loves
not, knows not God. 1 John 4.8. This knowledge of God, is wrought by the
finger of God in the emptying of the soul, of putten-on forms of knowledge,
which are according to the darkness of natural understanding; and by making
high things low, and the soul that is rich poor, in the best of her
performance; so that now the soul is naked and stripped of all her natural
power; is brought to the carkas and body of truth; God himself without figure
or form, not knowable to the understanding; (which judges only of species)
but by act of communion made known to the soul, in the experimental
acquaintance; which the understanding perceives not by discoursing of it, but
by being subdued in it. This man having acquaintance with God, his heart is
established with grace, not with meats: he knows the secrets of the Kingdom
of God; which are to many Clerks great parables: and so is this man truly
resolved, that the Kingdom of God comes not by observation, nor consists in
meat, or drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
This is that Body of Religion, which deceives none; and is received but of
some.

CHAP. 7. Showing the Symptoms of the conceited happiness.
But that the conceit, and deceit of the heart, may more fully appear; let us
consider, what be the signs of such supposed peace. The signs of this
supposed happiness, are no less diverse, then are the degrees of such false
persuasions: for as men are more or less in the degrees of this false
persuasion (according to the degrees of their literal knowledge and bodily
working) so do they give several signs and Symptoms, of their hearts deceit:
all which (respecting bre^ity) I shall comprehend under four heads. First, a
more gross sensual life. Secondly, a more close sensual life. Thirdly, a
verbal vain boasting of Religion. Fourthly, a most excessive exercise, and
bodily performance, in things religious, together with mutation, in the forms
of such services.

The first sign to be conceived, (which is the gross sensual life) is most
proper to the vain and profane multitude; for albeit, they have (as has been
showed) a form of religious Exercise, wherein nuterly and coldly (at certain
times) they exercise themselves; and in which performance, they place their
hope of happiness: yet it is most plain, that the way of peace they never knew,
seeing their more then bruitlesse life, is so visible to all men. Some of them
prosecuting their humors with most fearful and blasphemous Oaths, calling
into their carnal minds, the parts and passions of our Savior Christ, as his
body, blood, wounds, etc, together, with a most ^rophane using of he name of
the most high God; nor being satisfied with this blasphemy, they dare proceed
to higher impiety, in swear^ng by the Creatures, and most commonly by which is
least known of men, namely the soul, a fearful sin, yet very common in
these Northern parts; and that which does aggravate this their sin, is the
carnal occasion them hereunto moving, (meeting them amongst their pots, and
pot-Companions) which to name, were needles, and endless. To this we may add
that worldly wollowing of the common worldlings in all sensual pleasures;
eating till gluttony, and drinking till drunkenness. Others in their apparel,
braving it, and out-braving it; not only according to, but much exceeding their
means, though still short, of their ambitious minds. Others there be, which
persecute their luxurious and beastly pleasures, in which they manifest the
emptiness of their hearts. Thus in short, the common profaneness of the rude
multitude, does plainly show that there is no peace established in the heart,
seeing that (notwithstanding their religious exercises) they lie drowned in
sensuality; in which secretly, their hearts seek, and (for a while) find
peace, And here let us note by the way that the emptiness of man's heart, in the
want of God, is the spur to all profaneness, and ungodliness whatsoever;
whether more gross, or more close. The second Symptom or sign, of the hearts
emptiness; is a more close sensual life, and this is to be applied to the
civil honest man, and to the most part of the verbal professors of Religion;
for it is true, that some men, partly for fear, and partly for shame, do take
the bit of reason into their mouths; and with the reins of discretion, they
bridle, and refrain the grosser part of sensuality: so that the world can not
tax them of whordoms, drunkenness, blasphemies, etc. notwithstanding, those
which have eyes enlightened by the light of grace, may plainly see and
perceive, that these men live in a very sensual life: But it is more closely
and covertly, then the profane man does; for some are wise to do evil says
the Prophet, and such are all close sensual livers, who by crafty wyles work
their wickedness. These close sensual livers declare the love of their hearts,
to the sensual objects by secret selfseeking, in all matters of moment and
high consequence; for (if we mark them) they do cunningly steal praise and
commendations to themselves, and underneath communicate with increase of
riches, sumptuous buildings, and curious diet; in all which the peace of their
heart stands, and not in God: and but that these things are maintained to the
contentment of their sensual appetites; their hearts would break with grief
and sorrow, through the emptines thereof. And though these (wise men) carry
their sensual life so close, that they are not so commonly perceived as the
gross sensualls are: yet does it so far appear (to the godly wise) as to
bewray the emptiness of their hearts, in God and in Christ; and often times,
God does discover these Hypocrites, that they shall drink either to
drunkenness, or to fullness; and some times their close-carried luxury, breaks
out to a public decl^ring; wherein the contentment and peace of their hearts
did stand when they seemed to the world to be at rest in God. This close
sensual life is a manifest sign of the hearts emptiness. The third sign, is
a vain glorious b^asting in religious performances; such as are public
prayer, and Thanksgiving, reasoning and disputing of Religion, framing of a
sorrowful countenance, pitiful forms of speech, abrupt eiaculations,
smiting of the breast, rolling of the eyes upward toward Heaven, with a
passionate moving of the hand; to which is annexed many a sigh and groan, Romans
8.26. which are not those inutterable ones, proceeding from the spirit; But
those Pharisaicall ones, proceeding from vain glory.

Thus, the body being artificially framed, and all the members and motions
thereof, fitly composed to a (seeming-holy) declaring of a very zealous
condition: Now the corruptions of the time are blamed, the Antichristian
Government of the Church is condemned, the condition of the profane is highly
adjudged, and in all this, himself secretly justified.

Now though such things (as I have named) do (in the nature thereof) arise and
proceed from true zeal, yet do they carry the party into his private Chamber
or closet, or other secret place, where the soul does inwardly mourn, for the
corruptions of it self and others, Jer. 13.17. as witnesses the Prophet in a
phrase worth the noting.

Our Savior Christ does in express words, forbid the sad countenance, and the
disfiguring of the face, and does appoint secrecy as the upper place of all
religious performance. Mat. 6.16. For well knew our Savior Christ, that, that
heart, which was full in God, needed not the echo of vain glory to supply its
want. But the truth is, that all such frothy, and windy foolishness, is a plain
declaring of the hearts emptiness. For then do Hogsheads sound lowdest, when
they have least within them. The fourth and last sign, is an excessive
exercise of religious performance; together, with the mutation of such
exercises.

And this St. Paul did perceive to be the very God of some men in his time, and
therefore tells Tymothy, (that he might instruct others) that bodily exercise
profits little, and as some read nothing, and does oppose thereunto
godliness; 1 Timothy 4.8. as being another thing then bodily exercise, and says
that it is profitable, etc.

But such is the mystery of iniquity at this day, that many men know no other
godliness, but bodily exercises, and can hardly admit of any distinction between
them.

These bodily exercises, and the exces thereof is manifest to be manifold, in
all sects and sorts; such as is their often fasting, often seeming to pray, (I
say) seeming, for many pray, and pray not, because prayer is nothing else but
the conference of the soul with God (as well says St. Augustine.) To this we
may add the bareing of the knees, the putting on a shirt of hair, whipping,
scourging, much preaching to the wasting of the spirits, and consuming of the
body, and this is called a constant performance of duties.

These exercises are mutable and variable, according to men's knowledge, and the
stream and strain of that Ministry under which they live, so that all sorts
have their several services, yet all bodily, and for the most part only bodily.

And it must needs be so, for men having no rest nor peace in God, do labor to
establish a peace to themselves in the multiplicity of bodily exercises: hence
it is, that if they omit their service, they have no peace all that day, and if
they perform their devotions, then they have peace, whereby it is plain, that
their peace is only in bodily working.

And it comes to pass, that so many gawdies must be run over, so many prayers
and repetitions must be used, so many Chapters must be read, so many Psalms
sung, etc. or otherwise the heart is unquiet.

Now these men hearing of any new way of worship, (which comes in the cloak of
Scripture-learning, and has a show of truth founded from the letter of the
bible) which worship seems more devout and zealous, then that in which they
are established, as it will easily so appear, to a zealous and devout bodily
worker; especially if the teacher of that new way, can but frame a sad and
demure countenance, and with a grace lift his hand, and his eye toward Heaven,
with some strong groan in the declaring of his newly conceived opinion, and
that he frequently used this phrase, of the glory of God, etc. these men I say
are by and by of another opinion, supposing to themselves; that God has made
known some further truth unto them; for they are unestablished in any way, and
are constrained to taste of all waters, if they be zealous in the bodily
workings: for of such I speak, and not of profane worldlings, nor of lukewarm
professors, but of devout zealousnes; such as have a zeal of God, but not
conform to knowledge.

Now all this excessive bodily working, and the varieties thereof, do plainly
show and declare the emptiness of the heart: for as much as the true worship of
God is more inward and spiritual, as God himself is a spirit. The true service
of God, is in a profound silence, and inward intention toward God, declared
(to God) by groans which partly the soul cannot, and partly it will not
express.

And if this truly devout soul fall into any bodily exercise, (as often it
does) such as is the uttering of the mind to God, by vocal terms; then is he
in his Chamber or place of most private repose, and his door shut, or at least
himself hid from the eyes of men, as much as may be.

And if by his place or degree in the Church, or Family, he be urged to
perform duties Religious, either more or less public; then in such
performance, be labors more to forget such affected gestures and actions (as
is the sadness of the countenance, etc.) then any way to frame his body
thereunto, and so serves God in more depth of spirit, and heart-cleaving to
the love of truth.

Hence it comes to pass, that when the bodily performers behold this man's
service, they by and by judge him weak, or cold in religious exercises: but
the wise in heart perceive that he is inward with God.

CHAP. 8. The hearts progression toward true happiness.
NOw in the eight place, we are to consider the progression, or going forward
of the heart to true happiness: in the handling whereof, we are to observe a
very special and peculiar difference, between this eight Chapter and all the
former; for all the former parts have their use and exercise in a natural man;
but this (and consequently all that follow) is proper to the elect Children of
God; for thus the case stands, that the natural motion of the heart
(declared in the second Chapter) does press mainly toward rest: but it is so
violently interrupted, and hindered by the enemy Satan, (in the subtle use of
those Engines (the objects of our senses, and fantasies spoken of in the fifth
Chapter) that the heart (of the natural man) can never find any out-gate from
his sensualities, and formalities, or make any progression to any properly
called supernatural good: but sticks still in one created good or another;
either more grossly or more closely to a sensual life, or at least stands
inlived in the bodily performance of some religious exercise, according as it
has been declared in the Symptoms of the conceited happiness, Chap: 7. but
contrariwise the heart moved by the finger of God, though for a time it may be
hindered by created contentments (as was Solomon) yet at the last, it breaks
out (as a prisoner from the prison) from all those things wherein it was
ensnared. And as a Ship, having a fair wind, waigheth Anchor, and delayeth
not; so the soul, in feeling a sweet gayle of grace, filling her sail (which
is desire) does put forward for a more happy Haven, then yet she has been
acquainted withal.

And this is the progression of the heart toward true happiness. In handling
whereof let us consider 4. things.

First, the truth of the assertion, that there is such a progression.

Secondly, in the nature of it, and wherein it does consist.

Thirdly, the consimilitude that is between this man and a natural man, before
this Progression.

Fourthly, the dissimilitude that is between this man, and all such as have not
entered their foot into this progression. For the first, that there is such a
progression, and out-going of the heart from sensuality, etc. it is most clear
in Solomon, who for a time did wallow and sport himself in all sensual
delights, and in them expected a rest to his soul; but at the last was forced
to confess, that all is but vexation of the spirit; he makes progression
toward the fear and love of God, as his book of retractions does declare.

The prodigal Son did for a time seek contentments in vanity, at the last
set sail toward his Fathers house: St. Paul does not unaptly point at such a
progression, when in the Philipians he says, Phil. 3.13. he did forget those
things which were behind, and did reach forth unto those things which were
before.

And though in special manner he has respect in that place to the degrees of
Christianity, and in the further conforming of the man to the Image of Christ:
yet cannot Paul have forgotten, that out-going of his heart from all that
fleshly and worldly glory, wherein (according to the flesh) he had cause to
rejoice, verse 4. of that third Chapter: does that place give a slender
confirmation of this truth, where Paul says, that when he was a Child, he
spoke as a Child, etc. But when he came to be a Man, he put away Childishness?

The truth of this expression is so well known (to the soul experienced in the
truth of Godliness) that it needs no proof: and the Mystery of it is so
great and so far above the natural ^an, that it is altogether hyper^olicall
and incredible.

The second point is to show the nature of this progression, what (...) is, and
it stands in two things.

First, the putting off of all ^onceipts, and comprehensible ^ood.

Secondly, in putting on pure ^esire toward the unknown and ^omprehensible
good.

For the first. The Child of God is brought to a true dissilence, and distract
in all his carnal, and created confidence, whether ^hey were sensual
pleasures, or external religious exercises, or ^oth.

And as we read of the Snake, that creeping through a hedge, she leaves her
skin behind her: even so the Christian heart i^ truly stripped of all putten-on
contentments, either in this thing, or in that thing; and so is become truly
poor, miserable, and naked; so that notwithstanding, he could say, a^ St. Paul;
If any man have caus^ to rejoice in the flesh, much more l^ yet will this man
glory in nothing save only in infirmities, and that to the shame and confusion
of his own face: And thus will the Kings Daughter he forsakes his Fathers
house, and with Abraham leaves his native Country, to seek dwelling in a
Land, as yet unknown.

The second point is putting on of desire. The poor soul beaten, (by the
ministry of Christ) out of its contentments; is now dissolved into desire, and
is nothing else in sensuality, but pure intention, and as the heart brayeth for
the River of water, so longs this soul for God, and to be known of him, whom
she knows not. And thus (as the spouse) sick with love, and ravished with
desire, she ^eeketh him whom her soul ^oveth.

In this strength of desire, all other desires and intentions are ^rowned; so
that this soul has ^o entertainment for carnal and ^eshly desires, but such
as in cold and careless, as being much more ^illing to be freed of them, then
(...) be exercised in them.

And as it is with natural men, ^eir religious desires are cold, ^d the
desires of profits and, ^easures, do drown all divine ^tentions: so is it on
the other side with the soul of the Christian where he enters his foot into
his heavenly progression. But some will say, what does this soul desire? I
answer, that which is unknowable, even God himself.

Thirdly, we are to consider the equality that is between this man (in this
progression, that is to say, before he undertaketh it) and a mere natural man.

Now to speak, as the truth is, he is as like to a natural (before this
progression) as one egg is like another; for, the souls of al^ men, both
elect and reprobate^ are in the same condition, empt^ of the true good, and
natural^ moving toward true happine^^ as was showed in the seco^ Chapter; so
that till the Arme^ of the Lord be revealed, (brin^ing the souls of his people
out of all created contentment) the Children of God and the Children of the
world, do answer each other in a true sympathy, and consimilitude of like
condition.

Fourthly and lastly, we are to note the dissimilitude and difference, that is
between the Child of God (after he is entered into this progression) and the
natural man.

There was not more consimilitude then contrariety; for the Child of God in
this Estate, surpasses the natural man, in the object of his desire, seeing
he aspireth to nothing under God himself, so transcendent is his desire.

This man labors to know that which passes knowledge; and his chief care
is, to beat down the working of his wit, and to keep his understanding from
curiosity of speculation, as knowing it to be a great hinderance to the act of
his souls Communion with God.

Hence it comes to pass, that this man is a wonder to the world and to all
Sectaries, for they have all their knowledge, such as they can in reason
comprehend, which makes them such apt disputers and cunning cavillers, and
causes so much division, and accomplisheth so many Sects. Also in the degree
of desire, the man in this Progression, differs much from a natural man; for
this man's desire is most strong, yea stronger then death, and most constant
without variety of objects; and so is his understanding drowned in this one
thing whereunto hi^ heart presses: so that variety of particular questions are
most grievous and burdensome unto him. But tontrarily all natural men, yea,
the greatest of our litterall professors, they are occupied in and about so
many particulars of knowledge, that, that Ministry which is exercised about
this one thing, and terminateth all in one, is unto them as ridiculous, as the
song of the Cuckoe.

Notwithstanding he which is the truth, said, there is one thing needful. And
as the natural man's intentions are variable, so are they weak (in comparison
of the godly man's desire;) for according to that opinion of Philosophy,
^trength united is more strong. So then it must of necessity fol^ow, that that
man which is with^rawn from many things, and has his desires bent wholly in
one thing, has a more forcible and strong intention; as in our English
Proverb, he that has many Irons in the fire, must cool some of them; so those
men which mind many things, have less fervor in all their intentions, and also
less constancy. But the Child of God (once entered into this out-going and
progression) marches valiantly in the degree^ thereof; till at the last he
come to that happy Haven, God himself, as it is to be showed in the 11. Chapter.

CHAP. 9. The hearts farewell to all false flattery.
THe heart resolving such a progression toward true happiness, (in this
out-going from ^t self, and all comprehensible good) does now take her optimum
and ultimum vale, her last and best farewell, of all those flattering de^eits,
wherewith she was detained and kept from this aspiring toward ^he true good.
And here (as in the eight Chap:) and in the rest which ^ollow, we must
remember that we speak of things proper, and peculiar to the people of God,
who (as Eagles) do follow the ^arkase of Christ himself, in whom dwells
that Soul of truth, God himself bodily. A man resolved to go into some
strange Country (and that with purpose never to return) cannot but have
(within himself) a great conflict in this resolution, to forsake friends,
acquaintance, etc. But at the last (being strong in resolution) he bids them
all farewell: Even so it is with the Child of God, intending this progession;
For to his flesh it is grievous to part with profits, and pleasures, natural
wisdom, and humane speculations; so dear unto nature are all sensull and
rational acquaintance, till at the last, (as Theologically says that Divine
poet Dubartas of Abraham in the forsaking of his Country) he concludes, it
must be so, for so the Lord commands; A carnal man or carnal stands; But for
all reason, faith suffices me; who lodges with God, shall never houselesse
be. But that this farewell may more plainly appear, we will particularly
consider in it three things.

First, the things whereof he takes his leave or farewell.

Secondly, the manner how he takes his leave.

Thirdly, the arguments where upon he groundeth this his resolution.

The first is twofold, that is, first from sensual things; Secondly rational
contentments. The sensual contentments do for a long time detain and retain
the heart of man; And that by reason of the variety of that vanity, in our
subtle and diabolical invention: So that our heart as a ball is tossed to and
fro from vanity to vanity, through our manifold inventions, as with so many
several rackets, and can find no rest. Thus was it with Solomon, in the time of
his vanities, till at last he found all vanity to be vexation of this spirit;
then did he take his farewell of such Sensuality. And this was the case of the
prodigal Son; but at the last he did take his farewell and went toward his
Fathers house. This forsakeing of Sensuality, is called a mortifying of the
Members, and a killing the deeds of the body. And though this forsaking of
sensuallity, and sinful pleasure, be a thing grievous to flesh and blood, yet
is all such contentments, contemned of the man in this progression, and he
casts them of^ as dung, or as dogs meat: and in the resolution of his heart,
voweth to have no more cohabitation with such Companions. And having taken his
leave of this false friend sensuality, it may be, he does for a while stay in
the Wilderness, of mortality, civility, or religious formality, in some or all
of them, as to his reason seems best.

This man while he here stays, may be said to be come from Egypt, of beastly
and brutish sensuality; but yet this man is far remote from Canaan the land
of rest.

Now while man is established in any of these ways, I judge him to be as it
were in the Wilderness of rational contentment. I call it rational, because
the reason of man does conduct hjm in^o this way, of what kind soever ^t be, if
it be past sensual; but in ^he sensual reason is no guide, but only blind
affection, pricked forward by the organicall power of the sensual exercise.
And this rational condition, I the rather call a Wilderness, because, as in a
Wilderness, men often loose themselves, and can find no way out; but supposing
(after long travel) that they are near the place where they intend, are in
truth further off; so it fares with many, yea with all such as walk in the way
of reason and humane understanding, they loose themselves in the woods and
bushes of their deep and learned speculations, so that the longer they travel,
the further they are from God and rest in him.

This rational Habitation is also twofold, in respect of the subject matter,
in and about which it is occupied, viz. humane or divine. And in taking a
farewell of both these parts of the rational contentment; in this especially
does the Child of God outstrip the natural and verbal professor. For the
natural prefessor (for so I call all brainsick disputers) takes a cold
farewell of the sensual life only, or rather he exchangeth his gross sensual
life into a more close sensual life; and communing partly in conceit, and
partly in truth, out of the fleshly and sensual life, he now ariveth in the
Haven of some speculation or knowledge, either in things humane or divine, or in
both: So that this man (by virtue of his knowledge) can dispute and reason of
the outward and bodily part of Gods worship: he can discourse of white and
black, round and square, of kneeling and subscribing, and run an infinite
discourse against Antichristian Government: and this rational discourse he
calls the language of Canaan; Indeed so it is the language of Canaan: for
other land of rest his heart knows not, then what arises from these things
wherein he is established. This speculation is his summum bonum, and from this
his knowledge and his working, he deducteth notes and marks of his unfit faith
(and real fidelity) supposing and imagining, that he believes, which faith
never fails him, till he stand in need of it.

But the true Christian takes his farewell, as of the sensuality, so of all
rational contentments, and bids all comprehensibleness farewell, as being
too weak and unworthy for his soul to have society withal. And so becomes
more strong in desire, then curious in speculation, and longs more to feel
communion with God, then to be able to dispute of the genus or species of any
question humane or divine, and thus in depth of desire, is humbled in the
highest degree of knowledge, and presses to know God in powerful experience.

This man does no longer commit sacriledg or spiritual whotedome in the secret
of his heart, either with knowing or doing, (though his knowledge be great, and
his obedience surpassing many) but is truly nullifyed and made nothing, and so
is become a fool in all fleshly wisdom, having nothing to glory in, but only
the Lord.

Secondly, we are to consider, the manner how the heart takes this farewell,
from the sensual and rational life.

It is not by going out of either, but metaphorically; that is, the heart
denies to receive any contentment from either of them. We are to know that the
Christian can use the Objects of his senses, as though he used them not; and so
the world, and the things in the world; he being in the inwards of his heart,
truly gone, and separated (in his affections) from all created good. So that
this man does not Stoically refuse the lawful liberty of any Creature that God
has made; but whereas before they were as Lords over him, and as Gods to him,
now he is Lord over all Creatures, which God has given him for his use, and
himself truly subject to God in Christ. Nor does he madly despise the use of
reason, or contemn the exercise of the understanding (as some would infer) but
now he uses reason, and art as only handmaids and attendants to Divinity and
Divine knowledge; and so keeps reason under, that if (with Hagar) it will be
bearing rule, he in the wisdom of God like Sarah will cast it out from having
any Dominion. So that this man does use his reason to confute, and confound the
Arguments of them, that would have reason Lord over our faith, and such as
would establish reason as the chief good.

And now (this man's reason being subdued) he is ten times more reasonable then
he was before, for now his reason does keep her true lists and limits. So has
reason her true use in all species, and comprehensible things, in which she
sits in man as Lord; and also (in respect of her subjection) there is a free
pass^ge for the soul in pure a^t, to breath unto God in strength of desire,
and so to communicate with him as he shall be pleased to reveal in his own
time.

This humble use of reason has St. Paul respect unto, when he confounds
faith and reason, making them both as one, 2 These. 3.2. for then is reason one
with faith, when it is subjugated to faith; otherwise faith is a thing above
reason.

We see then that the Christian farewell to the sensual and rational life is
not absolutely to be considered, but respectively. It is not a shortning of a
man's life, to avoid the world, nor a refusing the use of means, to rectify
reason.

The 3. and last point to be considered, is the Arguments whe^eupon the heart
resolves this farewell. The Arguments are deducted from privation; for the
heart considers what it has lost, and it finds that the lost is no
Creature, nor any comprehensible thing, but a Creator most incomprehensible; so
that the heart must needs pass from every other thing, and re-aspire to that
which it has lost.

Secondly, the want of comfort in all other things wherein the heart has been
established; for thus the heart or soul reasons against her. 2. Enemies:
sensuality, and rational formality. You never could give me any stable
contentment, etc. ergo, I must needs bid you farewell, etc. So that the
Arguments moving this farewell, are very forcible, as may be showed in the
amplification of them; but I Will leave it to be understood: But least we should
deceive our selves in the conceit of this farewell, (remaining still on our old
condition) I shall in the next Chapter declare the signs and Symptoms of this
farewell.

CHAP. 10. Showing the signs of the Christian farewell.
HAving declared this farewell, it remains in the tenth place, to show the
signs and symptoms thereof. For such is the nature of man, that he no sooner
hears that such a farewell should be undertaken; but by and by he conceiteth,
that it is in him accomplished; although he be more firmly, and unmoveably
settled, (in these things which he should forsake) then formerly he has been.
That the signs may better appear, we are to remember three things which are
forsaken, viz. the sensual and the rational life, as in the former Chapter:
for the Symptoms of the forsaking, have reference and ^greement to things that
are forsaken.

First, let us speak of the signs of the sensual forsaking, and ^hey are in
number three. The first is the withdrawing of our hearts, from the exercise. I
say the withdrawing of the heart; for though man's senses be still exercised in
and upon their proper objects, yet is not the life sensual; for the heart
takes no contentment from any such exercise; but is still (for the most part)
exercised in a more transcendent Communion, even with God and Christ; whereas
the sensual ever has his hearts contentment from his sensual and sinful
exercises, and other contentment has he none, insomuch, that when such
pleasure and profits fail him; his very heart does fail, and his soul is
filled with heaviness But the man which has taken his farewell from the
sensual life, receives no cordial content from any sensual exercises
whatsoever.

This withdrawing of the heart is not unaptly pointed at in the speech of the
spouse, Cant. 5.2. I (says she) sleep, but my heart waketh: so it may be said
of the true Christian; he is sleeping, looking, hearing, tasting, eating,
drinking, feasting, etc. but his heart is withdrawn, and is rejoicing in God
his Savior, and his soul is magnifying the Lord. Contrariwise, those men,
whose hearts are not thus withdrawn, they are so drowned in their sensual
exercises; that they forget both God and his people, as the Prophet Amos does
signify unto us at large, Amos 6. verse. 3.4.5.6. but the man whose heart has
entered into the forsaking of sensuality, has his only content in God, as is
aforesaid.

The second sign of this farewell, is the true content, that this man takes
in hearing his sensual life reproved in every particular, yea, though he knew
himself particularly spoken to; this man loves the rod of correction, and can
most kindly kiss both the reproof and the reprover, and that not with the
hypocritical kiss of Judas, as some who will seem to kiss reprehension,
till they see opportunity, to be revenged of the reprover, to whom they
secretly say in heart, as Ahab did, have I found thee oh mine enemy. I need not
stand to amplify, how unwillingly sensual sinners entertain reproof; the
common unkindness which all faithful reprovers find at their hands; as also
the usual advancement and preferment of flatterers, and time-servers, is a
sufficient demonstration, how ill they brook reprehension. But it is far
otherwise with them which have forsaken their sinful and sensual life, for
they love to be smit^en with a righteous hand, etc. The ^xample of Fragan the
Emp. is worth the remembering; who desi^ed nothing else of old Mr. Plu^arke, but
only this, that he would ^lainly reprove his failings, and ^ithall told him,
that when he see^ed angry, he would not have him ^o think that it was at him
for his ^eproofe, but at himself for the fault ^equiring such reproof; but
alas! we ^ave few such Fragans, and as few ^lutarkes.

The third symptom, is a quiet ac^uittance from the Court of our ^wn
Conscience, in the day when ^eason holds her sessions, by the ^vidence of
moral truth, which is ^us to be conceived; there is in an a power of reason
and understanding, and this reason of man is sometimes more free and fit,
(being freed from the encumbrances of the unruly affections to judge and
determine according to evidence, that is according to the light of moral truth
made known, either by reading, or hearing, or by depth of solid meditation: now
if in this day and hour (when thy reason shall be awakened) thy Conscience do
not torment the^ but speak peace and quiet unto thee this is an Argument that
thou ha^ taken thy farewell of the sensua^^ life. For of this be sure, that
either thou have taken thy farewell of the sensual life, or else thy
Conscienc^ does torment thee, or else thy reason is a sleep, and cannot hear
the voice of moral truth.

Now come we to show the sign^ of forsaking the rational conten^ment, which is
that where in the true Christian does outgoe the moral honest man. And these
be in number 4. First, an undoubted resolution of a negative condition; that is
to say, the soul or heart of this man is fully resolved, that all
comprehensible acts and things, men and means, are no way able to give it
peace, and that not only of those things wherein it has had experience; but
also in whatsoever new invention it may hear of in time to come.

The second sign is a firm persuasion affirmative concerning the true
happiness to consist in God, and only in him: which firm persuasion begets
such a patient waiting as shows forth the very seeds of faith to be in the
heart: and this soul will rather chu^e to dye in this desire (if God refer its
request) then be brought to re^y upon any comprehensible good, by any humane
persuasion.

A third sign is a great and unspeakable admiration, which is wrought in the
soul, to conside^ the passages of all opinions, and the termination of all
difficulties: together with that sweet beholding (with the eye of faith) all
thing extracted out of one thing, and i^ one to see all. As most divinel^ says
this Akempis, he to whom the eternal word speaks is freed from many
opinions, which freedom begets a great admiration in the heart in which it
dwells. The 4. and last note, is a most profoun^ silence, concerning all
curious inquisition and discourse; this man pondereth much in his heart, bu^
prateth little with his tongue, he (...) now swift to hear, and slow t^ speak.
And this is that by which in a most special manner, he differs from the
wordie and windy professor. And this is a sure testimony, that this man has
taken his farewell of his deceitful and deceiving reason.

CHAP. 11. Showing the true Harbor, or Haven of the Hearts Anchorage.
HAving declared the hearts progre^sion toward happiness, her farewell to all
false flattery, and the Symptoms of it it remains that we show, what is the
haven or harbor of the heart. This has been negatively signified, and
affirmatively insinuated in all our former ^assages, in that we have labored
^he bringing of the heart from all and every comprehensible thing: The which
now I intend more punctually to resolve (with as much brevity as may be.) The
haven or harbor of man's heart is God. And nothing under God, nor nothing
besides God, nor any joined with God; but purely God nakedly revealing his
Fatherly face in Christ unto the believing soul, uniting himself unto the
soul, and the soul unto him, in pure act of hyperbolicall, and incredible
Communion which is rather felt by experience then known by discourse, and i^
more real then verbal. This beholding the beauty of the, Lord i^ that one
thing which David desires above all things. Psalm. 27.5. It is the pleasant
face of God, an^ it only which can put gladness into his heart Psalm 4. and
again, he hat^ nothing in Heaven or in earth bu^ only God, Psalm. 73.25. He
whos^ name is the Lord of Hosts is the Po^tion of Jacob, Ier. 10.16. to him the
righteous fly for safety, Prove. 18.10 these are the people which are kept in
perfect peace; whose minds are stayed in the Lord, as says the Prophet Isaiah,
26, 3. nor set any question, whether any thing save only God, can be the stay
of the heart; for the reasons declaring this truth are invincible. And first
God only can be the haven of man's heart, because he only is that infiniteness
which the heart desires. For this we are to know, that man's desires are
infinite and endless, not triangle, as is the figure of the heart, but infinite
according to that goodness which it once lost, in loosing God; and hence it is,
that all Creatures are unable to give it any stable contentment, because all
comprehensible things are of a finite condition, God only can accomplish this
rest, because the longing of the heart is only in him.

A second reason is this, God is a spirit, and therefore most fit for the soul
of man (which is spiritual) to ^^st anchorin^all other things are too sh^low
waters for the shi^ of m^^ near ^^^ide in; for the soul must ne^de^ (...)
which is (...) And (...) by (...); an^ (...) God h^^self m^st (...) ^s harbor.
The (...) of, does teach us these u^es. F^st, it does decl^re the natural
^^^^^ness and Idolatry of man's heart, in that its earnest seeking of rest in a
created subject or object. Alas! man seeks nothing more then rest, as was
^hewed in the second Chapter: but how, some in wine, some in women, some in
with, wealth learning, religious exercises, etc. as the blindness of the
understanding does direct; whereas all these are but so many whorish inventions
of man's Idolatrous heart, which secretly places a Godhead and deity in these
comprehensible things; but we see that God will not give his glory to another,
and therefore denies the heart, rest and peace, till it come out of all such.

A second use of this is, to declare the reason why the professors of Religion
are so covetous and so close-handed; namely because that knowledge which has
filled their brains, has not power to satisfy their hearts, and that because
it is not God, but a speculation of God, so that though they seem full, yet
are as empty-hearted as the vainest man that lives, and are as apt to
entertain every way of gain or glory, ^n hope to satisfy their restles souls.
For what this peace of God which passes understanding is, they never knew, nor
can know, because ^hey are so busied in their witty working, and understand not
what it is to become fools. Lastly, this should teach all to enquire what is
the Haven or harbor for their souls, and not to set down their rest, till
they be certainly arrived in the God of peace, and are made one with him, in
experimental acquaintance through Christ. But when thy soul shall cast Anchor
in God, thou shall feel and find many sweet and heavenly fruits following,
such as is peace in God and joy in the Holy Ghost; together with sweet
comfortable and constant contempt of the world; as I will briefly touch in the
next and last Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Containing the Symptoms or signs of this true happiness.
THe last member of this hearts happiness remains to be showed, in declaring
the signs of the anchorage of the hearts anchorage. And they are in number 4.
First, the hearts real rest. I say real rest, to distinguish it from all
verbal and Imaginary rest, which man supposes to have obtained, in created
and comprehensible things, of one sort or another. For, as things real and in
true being, do differ from things Imaginary, and as true natural acts do
differ from dreams, so does the peace of that heart (which is established in
God) surpass all the peace of natural men, in their sensualities: and all
verbal professors, in their several forms of religious exercises. The truth
of this real peace appearerh, in that it adds j^y in tribulation, as St.
Paul shows, Romans 5.3. and in that it is able to stay the heart and mind,
Phil. 4.7. Such is this peace, that it has enabled the godly to contend with,
and to overcome many potent adversaries: for proof of this peace, see Prove.
18.10. Isa. 26.1.2.3. verse. Psa. 116.7. And that this is a real peace, will
further appear in that it recalleth all the worldly wanderings of the heart,
and setleth the mind: as will be showed, in the restrainr of the appetites, The
consideration of this first Symptom, does serve to teach all restless, and
wandering hearts, that they are not arrived in the H^ven of true being. Let us
profess what we will, know what we can, practice in religious exercises, till
nature be spent; yet if there be a restless heart, coveting and longing for
more gain, more glory, etc. this man has not known the peace of God; but the
peace which he has (if he have any) is a peace of his own framing, and is
attended with continual ins^tiety.

The second Symptom of the hearts arrival, is the joy which it possesses.
Mary's heart dorh magnify the Lord, and her spirit does rejoice in God her
Savior; the Kingdom^ of God is joy, and how can they but rejoice, in whom it
dwells? yea, such is this joy as it wipeth away all sorrow (in respect of
that fear and torment which was in the conscience, arising from Gods wrath)
from the believers eye. I say not all sorrow, for now this slavish sorrow
(arising from fear) being done away, there is begotten another kind of grief
in the soul, viz. a grief because the soul sins, and not because it shall be
punished; For the love of God has cast out this fear. So that this joy is a
joy most unspeakable and glorious. And this joy is that which Reverend Ward (in
his book called the life of Faith) does so extort (as it were) from a
Christian: for he says plainly, that he will not believe, that Faith can be
without joy.

And certainly, that joy must needs be great, which is no other thing, but God
in power, making glad the heart of man. We see how greatly our affection of joy
is moved and stirred; with almost unspeakable delight, in the real partaking
of some earthly endowme^t. Judge then, how much more are they enlarged with
joy: which not verbally, but really, communicate with God; and have by faith a
true taste, and sure earnest of all heavenly preferments; which St. Peter
calls an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and this is administered (says he) abundantly. And some Divines
(setting forth this happiness) say, that the believer has one foot in Heaven,
as old men have one foot in the grave; and wicked men one foot in hell.

The use of this point, is to add sorrow to the sorrowful, but not to such as
are filled with godly sorrow, (because they sin against their loving Father)
but this augmenteth the sorrow of such as are filled either with worldly
sorrow, or with slavish and distrustful sorrow; For all such sorrow bewrays
the want of faith, for (as Mr. Ward says, such before alleged) such as is
our Faith such is our joy: and by consequence, such as is our sorrow, such is
our unbelief. That is, if our sorrow be worldly, or slavish, and distrustful.
Such men as so sorrow, may well be told that they have Faith, and so they may
rest (as a man in a dream) and suppose they have Faith; but God gives his
children such a Faith, which brings forth such true testimony with it, that
men, nor devils cannnot prevail against it: and such a faith as justifies the
sinner before God, and gives him inwatd peace toward God in Christ. And to
speak more plainly, though the degrees of peace and joy may be extenuated, yet
the testimony of its being in nature still remains so strong, that the child
of God can ever say (yea when he feels God to be withdrawing himself) my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me. And in this might of Gods absence. he
remains confident, that though sorrow be over night, yet joy will come in the
morning: So that, though the Lord should seem to kill him with unkindnes, yet
will he put his trust in him, knowing that (for all this) his Redeemer lives.
yea, in spite of infidelity, his Redeemer lives; and my God has hid his
face, and such like phrases are most frequent with the faithful,

The 3. Sign is a general restraint of all man's appetites. And here we are
carefully to mark two things.

First, how manifold man's appetites are.

Secondly, how far they are rest^^ined.

The appetites of man may be (...) ^^^ehended in 3. Heads, That is, (...)
^ppetites, cordial, rational, (...). The cordial appetites are most of all
restrained, the rational ^ppetites are less restrained, and the ^en^u^^ are
least of all restrained, yet ^^l re^t^ained in some degree.

To enlarge these three points a ^^ttle.

The cordial appetites, or the natural longings of the heart, though they
move in man most strongly, yet are they most hidden from man, and where a man
does sensibly perceive the appetite of his heart once; he perceives the
rational ten times, and the sensual ten hundred times.

This appetite of the heart, is nothing else but a silent mourning of the
Spirit, for its proper good, which is God, as it was showed in the second Chap.

Now then it must needs follow, that when the heart has met with God, and is
arrived in him, it must follow, that this appetite of the heart, must be very
much restrained; being in a manner full, through the fullness of God; in which
it is established.

The second appetite is the rational, that is, the wandering of man's mind, in
desire of the comprehensible goods, according to the determination of the
understanding. This appetite is more discerned then the former, though it move
not so strongly, and the reason why it is more discerned, is, because the
object of our understanding (upon which this appetite works) is
comprehensible: so that the mind no sooner moves, but the whole man is for the
most part always acquainted with it, except only at such times as the sensual
appetites work more strongly, in eodem puncto temporis, in the same instant.
Now this rational appetite, being variably, and often exercised by reason of
the strong cry of the heart, (expressing its coffeehouse to the
understanding, in a perpetual cry of emptiness) must needs be very much
restrained, because that moving of this appetite, (the hearts emptiness) is now
supplied.

The mind of man has a natural motion, for its own delight and recreation as
it were, and this appetite still remains in the mind of man; but that motion
which was violent, from the cry of the heart, is now restrained, so that the
appetites of man's mind, are nothing so unruly, nor so forceable as before; for
all the unrulines of this appetite is subjugated and subdued, in the peace of
the heart.

The 3. and last appetite, is the sensual, and this is least bridled, because
it is most exercised in relieving of the outward man; notwithstanding the
inordinateness of this appetite is brought into a very comely decorum and order.

So that now the sensual appetite can with much more easiness, and
contentedness be denied the object of its desire; yea, the sensual appetite
can in a good measure be content, with what is most repugnant to its desire; as
with hunger, cold, nakedness, yea and with death it self, such is the
wonderful working of the hearts quietness, it requires a volumn to express,
how it rectifieth and orders the whole man.

The use of this lets us see, that whereas all the appetites are unrestrained,
the peace of the heart is not attained.

The fourth and last Symptom is, such Eucharisticall love; love arising from a
thankful heart, extended first to God, then toward men.

and it is to be noted, that it is love arising from thankfulness, that is,
from a thankful heart to God, because that his everlasting love in his Christ,
is made known to the heart.

This man does not frame him-self to love, and to do good duties, that so he
may have somewhat to thank God for, vain-gloriously, as did the Pharisee: But
being assured of Gods love, does stand bound over again to God in love; and
thus out of (...) thankful heart, stands knit to God, and to the obedience
of his Commandments, saying in his heart, O how I love thy Law, and every
particular of it.

This love of God shed abroad i^ his soul, does cut down self-love so that now
this man is for God and his Neighbor, to all and every such services, wherein
he may glorify God, and do good unto men; so that it is as his meat and drink
to be doing of the will of God.

FINIS.

