NEW-ENGLANDS JONAS Cast up at LONDON: OR, A RELATION of the Proceedings of the
Court at Boston in New England against diverse honest and godly persons, for
Petitioning for Government in the Commonwealth, according to the Laws of
England, and for admittance of themselves and children to the Sacraments in
their Churches; and in case that should not be granted, for leave to have
Ministers and Church Government according to the best Reformation of England
and Scotland.

Together with a Confutation of some Reports of a fained Miracle upon the
foresaid Petition, being thrown overboard at Sea; As also a brief Answer to
some passages in a late Book (entitled Hypocrisy unmasked) set out by Mr.
Winslowe, concerning the Independent Churches holding communion with the
Reformed Churches.

By Major John Child.

London, Printed for T. R. and E. M. 1647.

The Preface.
Courteous Reader,
THE occasion of Printing this following Relation, are the sufferings that not
only my Brother Robert Child Doctor of Physic, with some Gentlemen and others
have suffered in New England in their persons and estates by Fines and
imprisonments there, but here in England in their repute by false reports and
fained Miracles invented and spread on purpose by some lately come from thence,
and fomented by some others here to color their unjust proceedings.

First, they give out of my Brother and others, that they desire a Toleration
of all Religions.

Secondly, that they are troublesome persons, and against all government both
in Church and Commonwealth.

Thirdly, that some of them are come from thence to Petition the Parliament for
that purpose.

4ly, that their Petition brought from thence to be presented to the Parliam.
(which they had named Jonas) in a Ship called the Supply, being in a storm
near Silly, out of horror of conscience, the Petition was come and thrown over
board, and that then the storm immediately ceased, and they miraculously saved.

Now for satisfaction, I present to the Reader these following particulars.

First, the Petition of the greater part of the Inhabitants of Hingham and the
proceedings therein.

Secondly, a Petition of Doctor Child and others delivered to the general
Court at Boston with some passages thereupon,

Thirdly, the Capital Laws of the Massachusetts Bay, with the Free-mans Oath as
they are printed there by themselves.

Fourthly, a Relation of that story of Jonas verbatim, as it was delivered to
me in writing by a Gentleman that was then a passenger in the Ship.

The Petition of the greater part of the Inhabitants of Hingham, as it was
taken out of the Records of the Court at Boston.
To the Honored, the General Court, consisting of the Magistrates and
Deputies of the Country now assembled in Court at Boston: The humble Petition
of the greater part of the Inhabitants of the Township of Hingham.
WHereas there has fallen out some agitations amongst us concerning the choice
of our chief Military Officers, which by Order of the Court we have power to
choose (as we conceive) So it is that we did elect, and present to the General
Court for their confirmation, Mr. Bozoune Allin for our Chieftain: but the
Court not having time to finish that business at that time, some other things
and overtures have happened since, whereby it has so fallen out that some of
us have been compelled to appear before some of the Magistrates, and to give
Bonds for appearance at a Quarter-Court which is to be holden after this
General Court; and some for not giving Bond to answer there, are committed to
prison, and remain there at present; the matters of accusation (as we conceive)
is for certain words spoken by some, concerning the liberty and power of the
General Court, and our own liberty granted to us by the said Courts, and to
the Country in general; and also it does concern the Liberty of an English
freeborn Member of that State, and further it has occasioned such
disturbance and schism in our Church, and trouble to some of our Members for
witnessing against a Delinquent: whereby the power of the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ in his Church is slighted, and the free passage thereof stopped, to the
endangering of the liberty of the Churches amongst us, if timely remedy be not
by your Wisdoms provided. Now seeing the matters in hand does concern the
general liberty of the whole Couuntry, and the peace of the Churches, and
glory of God, as we are ready upon the hearing of the Court to make it appear;
We humbly sue to this honored Court to be pleased to grant us an honorable
and free hearing, and that we may have liberty to plead our common Liberties in
this Court, together with the liberties of the Churches of Christ maintained.
And we shall ever pray for your peace and prosperity long to continue.

For which Petition being fined 100. l. and the Marshal sent to Hingham to levy
the said Fine: Mr. Hubbard the Minister of that town being one of them that was
fined, the Marshal coming to his house to levy part thereof, produced this
effect as follows taken out of their Records.

THE RELATION.
THe 18. of the first Month, 1645. the Marshall going to gather 100. l. in
Fines of diverse Inhabitants of Hingham, as they were set by the General Court,
in the 3. or 4. month past; came to Mr. Peter Hubbard, who desiring to see his
Warrant, which the Marshall showing him, upon a sight of it Mr. Hubbard said
the Warrant was insufficient, being not sent out in his Majesty's name, he
being sworn to the Crown of England; and said that they had sent into England
unto his Friends the business, and expected shortly an answer and advice from
thence: And that our Government here was not more then a Corporation in
England, and that we had not power to put men to death by virtue of the Patent,
nor to do some other things we did; and that for himself, he had neither horn
nor hoose of his own, nor any thing wherewith to buy his children clothes, And
he wished that the Magistrates would take some course that the Ministers might
be better provided for, and he wondered by what order or rule the Ministers
were deprived of their Tithes: but if he must pay it, he would pay it in Books,
but that he knew not for what they were fined, unless it were for Petitioning;
and if they were so waspish they might not be Petitioned, then he could not
tell what to say, (about thirty or forty being present.) And further, that he
had seriously considered what they had done, and he could not see any thing
they had done amiss, for which they should be Fined.

Increase Nowel, Secret.

THE TRIAL BY THE COURT.
THe names of the Jurymen at the Quarter-Court, the 2. of the 4. Month, 1646.

Tho. Marshal Tho. Boutle John Clough Edward Dykes Tho. Bartlet Edward Pason
Edward Breck John Button Charles Chedwick Richard Good Fra. Smith Edward
Clapp.
The Return of this Jury.
WE do find, that Mr. Peter Hubbard of Hingham, being a Freeman of this
Jurisdiction, and having taken the Oath of fidelity thereunto: seeming
notwithstanding to be evil-affected to the Government here established; In and
upon the 18. day of the first Month last past, at Hingham aforesaid, in the
presence of about thirty persons, did utter diverse speeches which are upon
record, tending to sedition and contempt of the said Government, contrary to
the law of God, and peace and welfare of the Country.

Upon which Return of the Jury, the Court fined him Twenty pounds, and bound
him in Forty pounds to be of good behavior and to appear at next
Quarter-Court; and Mr. Peck bound himself in twenty pounds, for the good
behavior and appearance of Mr. Peter Hubbard at the next Quarter-Court.

Increase Nowel, Secret.
The Court on this Trial was kept by these persons -- Mr. Winthrop Governor,
Mr. Dudley Deputy Governor, Mr. Pe^^im, Mr. F^m, Mr. Hibbins, Mr. Nowel, Mr.
Bellingham, Mr. Broadstreet. Only Mr. Bellingham and Mr. Broadstreet required
their Dissent to be recorded.



To the Worshipful, the GOVERNOR, the Deputy Governor, and the rest of the
Assistance of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, together with the Deputies
of the general Court now assembled in Boston.
The Remonstrance and humble Petition of us whose Names are here underwritten,
in the behalf of our selves and diverse within this Jurisdiction.
HUmbly shows, That we cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge your
indefatigable pains, continual care, and constant vigilancie, which (by the
blessing of the Almighty) has procured unto this Wilderness the much desired
fruits of Peace and Plenty; while our native Land, ye^ the Christian world is
sharply afflicted with the devouring Sword, and the sad consequents of
Intestine wars. And further, That you whom the Lord has placed at the helm of
these Plantations, and endowed with eminent gifts fit for such honorable
callings, are best able to foresee the clouds which hang over our heads, the
(...) and tempests which threaten this poor Handful here planted; and timously
to amend them. Notwithstanding, those who are under (...), being at present
unfit for higher employments, may perceive those Leaks which will inevitably
sink this weak and ill compacted Vessel, if not by your Wisdoms opportunely
prevented.

We therefore in the behalf of our selves and diverse of our Countrymen, laying
our hands on our breasts, and seriously considering, That the hand of our good
God who through his goodness has safely brought us and ours through the great
Ocean, and planted us here, seems not now to be with us, nay rather against us,
blasting all our designs, though contrived with much deliberation, undertaken
with great care, and proceeding with more then ordinary probability of
succesfull events; by which many of good estates are brought to the brinks of
extreme poverty; yea, at this time laying His just hand upon our families,
taking many away to himself, striking others with unwonted malignant sicknesses
and noisome shameful diseases: Have thought it convenient, with all
respectivenesse, to present these our sincere requests and Remonstrance to this
honored Court, hoping we have found out the special Leaks, which concurring
with the many and great Sins of this place, (which our Consciences know, and
our Brethren of England are not ignorant of) are the special causes of the
Lords turning his face from us, leaving us to our selves, and consequently to
strife, contention, unfaithfulness, idleness, and other lamentable failings,
not blessing us in any of our endeavors, so as to give us any great hopes of
Staple-commodities, and consequently of comfortable subsistence; though we to
the utmost of our powers these many years, even to the exhausting of our
estates and spirits, have endeavored the same: but contrariwise all things
grow worse and worse, even to the threatening (in our apprehensions) of no less
then final ruin. Not doubting but you will receive these our Requests and
Remonstrance with the same candor of mind, which we, not aiming at novelty and
disturbance but at the glory of God, our allegiance to the State of England,
and good of these poor Plantations, (if our hearts deceive us not) present them
unto you; though for want of skill and other necessary helps roughly drawn up;
and hope that you will be more diligent in an ending then we in the searching
out the causes of these our present calamities, (...) Not to trouble you (who
are employed in the most serious affairs of these Plantations) with many
wor^^, we shall briefly refer them to those Heads --

1. Whereas this place has been planted by the encouragements (next under God)
of Letters Patents given and granted by His Majesty of England to the
Inhabitants hereof, with many privileges and immunities, viz. Incorporation
into a Company, liberty of choosing Governors, settling Government, making Laws
not repugnant to the Laws of England, power of administering the Oath of
Allegiance to all, etc. as by the said Letters Patents more largely appears.
Notwithstanding we cannot according to our judgments clearly discern a settled
form of Government according to the Fundamental laws of England; which may
seem strange to our Countrymen, yea to the whole World, especially considering
we are all English. Neither do we so understand or perceive our own Laws or
Liberties, or any Body of Laws here so established, as that thereby there may
be a sure and comfortable enjoyment of our Lives, Liberties and Estates,
according to our due Natural rights, as Freeborn subjects of the English
nation. By which many inconveniences flow into these Plantations, viz.
Jealousies of introducing Arbitrary Government, (which many are prone to
believe) construing the procrastination of such settled Laws, to proceed from
an overgreedy spirit of Arbitrary power (which it may be is their weakness)
such proceedings being most detestable to our English Nation, and to all good
men, and at present a chief cause of the intestine War in our dear Country.
Further it gives cause to many, to think themselves hardly dealt with, others
too much favored, and the scale of Justice too much bowed and unequally
balanced: From whence also proceeds fears and jealousies of illegal
Commitments, unjust Imprisonments, Taxes, Rates, Customs, Levies, of
ungrounded and undoing Assesments, unjustifiable Presses, undue Fines,
unmeasurable Expenses and Charges, of unconceivable dangers through a Negative
or destructive Vote unduly placed, or not well regulated; in a word, of a
Non-certainty of all things we enjoy, whether lives, liberties or estates; as
also of undue Oaths, being subject to exposition according to the will of him
or them that gives them, and not according to a due and unbowed rule of Law,
which is the true Interpreter of all Oaths to all men, whether Judge, on Judged.

Wherefore our humble desire and requesti^^. That you would be pleased to
consider of our present condition, and upon what foundation we stand; and
unanimously concur to establish the Fundamental and wholesome Laws of our
native Country, and such others as are no way repugnant to them, unto which all
of us are most accustomed, and we suppose them best agreeable to our English
tempers, and your selves obliged thereunto by the General Charter, and your
Oaths of Allegiance: neither can we tell whether the Lord has blessed many in
these Parts with such eminent Political gifts, so as to contrive better Laws
and Customs, than the Wisest of our Nation have with great consideration
composed, and by many hundred years experience have found most equal and just;
which have procured to the Nation much honor and renown amongst strangers, and
long peace and tranquillity amongst themselves. And for the more strict and due
observation and execution of the said Laws by all Ministers of Justice, that
there may be a settled Rule for them to walk by in cases of Judicature, from
which if they swerve, there may be some Power settled, according to the Laws of
England, that may call them to account for their Delinquencie, which may be a
good means to prevent diverse unnecessary Appeals into England.

2. Whereas there are many thousands in these Plantations of the English Nation
freeborn, quiet peaceable men, righteous in their dealings forward with hand,
heart and purse to advance the public good, known friends to the honorable
and victorious Houses of Parliament, lovers of the Nation, etc. Who are
debarred from all Civil employment (without any just cause that we know) not
being permitted to bear the least office (though it cannot be denied but some
are well qualified) No not so much as to have any Vote in choosing Magistrates,
Captains, or other Civil or Military Officers; notwithstanding they have here
expended their youth, born the burden of the day, wasted much of their estates
for the subsistence of these poor Plantations, paid all assesments taxes,
rates, at least equal, if not exceeding others: Yea, when the late War was
denounced against the Naragauset Indians, without their consent; their goods
were seized on for the service, themselves and servants especially forced and
impressed to serve in that was, to the hazarding of the things most near and dear
unto them. Whence issue forth many great inconveniences, secret discontents,
murmurings, rents in the Plantations, discouragements in their callings,
unsetlednesse of mind, strife, contention, (and the Lord only knows to what a
name in time it may kindle) also jealousies of too much unwarranted power and
dominion on the one side, and of perpetual slavery and bondage to them and
their posterity on the other, and which is intolerable, even by them who ought
to love and respect them as brethren, etc.

We therefore desire, that Civil liberty and freedom be forthwith granted to
all truly English, equal to the rest of their Countrymen, as in all
Plantations is accustomed to be done, and as all Freeborn enjoy in our native
Country; we hoping here in some things to enjoy greater liberties then
elsewhere, counting it no small loss of liberty to be as it were banished from
our native home, and enforced to lay our bones in a strange wilderness.
Without imposing any Oaths or Covenants on them, which we suppose cannot be
warranted by the Letters Patents, and seem not to concur with the Oath of
Allegiance formerly enforced on all, and later Covenants lately imposed on many
here present by the honorable Houses of Parliament; or at least to detract
from our native Country, and Laws, (which by some are styled Foraign, and this
Place termed rather a Free State, then a Colony or Corporation of England) All
of us being very willing to take such Oaths and Covenants; as are expressions
of our desires of advancing the glory of God and good of this place, of our
duties to the State of England and love to our Nation, being composed according
to the laws and customs of other Corporations of England. But all of us are
exceedingly unwilling, by any policies whatsoever, to be rent from our Native
country, though far distant from it; valuing our free Denizations, the
Immunities and Privileges which we and our posterity do, and we hope shall
always enjoy, above the greatest Honors of this Country not cemented to the
State of England; and glory to be accounted though but as Rushes of that Land,
and yet that we may to (...) to write, that we and ours are English. Or at
least we entreat, that the Bodies of us and ours (English subjects possesing
here no privileges) may not be impressed, nor Goods forcibly taken away; lest we
not knowing the justness of the war, may be ignorantly and unwillingly
enforced upon our own destructions. And that all Assesments, Taxes,
Impositions, (which are many and grievous) if Civil liberty be not granted) may
be taken off, that in all things we may be Strangers: otherwise we suppose our
selves in a worse case here, and less free, then, the Natives amongst whom we
live, or any Aliens. Further, that none of the English nation (who at this time
are too forward to be gone, and very backward to come hither) be banished,
unless they break the known Laws of England in so high a manner, as to
deserve so high a punishment. And that those few that come over, may settle
here without having two Magistrates hands, which sometime not being possible to
obtain, has procured a kind of banishment to some, who might have been
serviceable to this place, as they have been to the State of England, etc.

3. Whereas there are diverse sober, righteous, and godly men, eminent for
knowledge, and other gracious gifts of the Holy Spirit, no ways scandalous in
their lives and conversations, Members of the Churches of England (in all Ages
famous for piety and learning,) not dissenting from the late and best
Reformation of England, Scotland, etc. Yet they and their posterity are
detained from the Seals of the Covenant of Free Grace, because (as it is
supposed) they will not take these Churches Covenants, for which as yet they
se^ no light in Gods word, neither can they clearly perceive what they are,
every Church having their Covenant differing from another, at least in words,
yea some Churches sometime adding, sometimes detracting, calling it sometime
the Covenant of Grace, sometime a Branch of it, sometime a Profession of the
Free-Covenant, etc. Notwithstanding they are compelled, under a severe Fine,
every Lords day to appear at the Congregation, and notice is taken of such who
stay not till Baptism be administered to other men's children, though denied to
their own: And in some places forced to contribute the maintenance of those
Ministers, who vouchsafe not to take them into their Flock, though desirous of
the Ordinances of God, etc. yet they are not accounted so much as Brethren, nor
publicly so called; nor is Christian vigilancie (commanded to all) any way
exercised to them. Whence (as we conceive) abound an ocean of inconveniences;
Dishonor to God and his Ordinances, little profit by the Ministry, increase
of Anabaptism, and of those that totally contemn all Ordinances as vain, fading
of Christian graces, decrease of Brotherly love, Heresies, Schisms, etc. The
whole body of the Members of the Churches of England, like sheep scattered in
the wilderness without a shepherd, in a forlorn sad condition. We therefore
humbly entreat you, in whose hands it is to help, and whose judicious eyes
discern these great inconveniences; for the glory of God, and the comfort of
your Brethren and Countrymen, to give liberty to the Members of the Churches of
England not scandalous in their lives and conversations (as Members of those
Churches) to be taken into your Congregations, and to enjoy with you all those
liberties and ordinances Christ has purchased for them, and into whose Name
they are baptized; That the Lord may be one, and his Name one amongst us in
this place; That the Seals of the Covenant may be applied to them and their
posterity, as we conceive they ought to be, till inconveniences hereby be found
prejudicial to the Churches, or Colonie (which we hope shall never be.) Not
doubting but the same Christian favor will be showed to all the Members of
these Churches, when they shall retire to our dear native Country, (if their
conversations be righteous and holy); Or otherwise to grant liberty to settle
themselves here in a Church Way according to the best Reformations of England
and Scotland. If not, we and they shall be necessitated to apply our humble
desires to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, who we hope will take our sad
conditions into their serious considerations, to provide able Ministers for us,
(this place being not so well provided as to spare any); Or else out of their
charity (many estates being washed) to transport us to some other place, where
we may live like Christians, and not be accounted burdens, but serviceable
both to Church and State.

These things granted, by the blessing of God to us in Christ, we hope to see
the now contemned Ordinances of God; highly prized; the Gospel much darkened,
break forth as the sun at noonday; Christian charity and brotherly love almost
frozen, wax warm; Zeal and holy emulation, more fervent; Jealousies of
Arbitrary Government, the bane of all Commonwealths, quite banished; The
wicked, if any such be found, in their courses disheartened; The righteous
actors, in their ways, encouraged; Secret discontents fretting like cankers,
remedied; Merchandising, shipping by special Providence wasted, speedily
increased; Mines undertaken with more cheerfulness, Fishing with more
forwardness; Husbandry, now withering* forthwith flourishing; Villages and
Plantations, much deserted, presently more populous; All mechanical Trades,
the great enrichers of all Commonwealths, bravely going on; Staple-commodities,
the life of States, presently raised; Our almost lost credit regained; Our
brethren of England's just indignation, and therefore as from a pest flying
from us, turned to embraces; The honorable Houses of Parliament, Patrons of
Piety, under their wings, in these dangerous times, with all alacrity shrowding
us; The Privileges and Immunities which we and ours enjoy in our native Land,
more firmly settled; Foraign enemies daily threatening, totally discouraged;
Unsettled men now abounding, firmly planted, that the prosperity of England may
not be the ruin of this Plantation, but the contrary; Hands, hearts, and
purses now straightned, freely opened for public and honorable services;
Strife and contention now rife, abated; Taxes and sesses, lightened; The
burdens of the State, but pleasure. To conclude, all businesses in Church and
Common wealth which for many years have seemed to go backward, beyond our
desert, yea expectation, the good hand of our God going along with us,
succesfully thriving.

And shall always pray the Almighty the only wise God, to guide you with his
wisdom, strengthen you with his power, in all your undertakings, that all may
be to his glory and good of his people; and that he would bless your Wisdoms
with the blessings of peace, plenty, and long days, etc.

Robert Child, Tho. Foul, Samuel Maverick, Thoma^ Burton, David Yale, John
Smith, John Dund.

This Petition was presented to the General Court held at Boston, May 19,
1646.
A Relation of the effects this Petition produced.
THough this Petition of Dr. Child was in a peaceable way presented, only by
two of the Subscribers; yet it produced these effects, and thus it wrought --

First, the Elders (not all, some few being silent) in their Congregations
publicly using several Expressions, but to one and the self-same end; as,
That it was a seditions Petition full of malignancie, subvertive both to Church
and Commonwealth in their foundations; Some calling these that so Petitioned,
or comparing them to Sons of Belial, Judasses, Sons of Corah with sundry
appellations of that nature, with some such applications, which seemed not to
arise from a Gospel spirit; usually ekeing out their Sermons in large and
defamatory declamations both against their Persons and Petition, yea sometimes
a whole Sermon, and that not very short neither being spent in enlarged
sentences to denote the destructivenesse thereof to Church and Commonwealth;
yea publicly exhorting Authority to lay hold upon those Petitioners, which the
same night they did.

Nor were the Magistrates in the mean season altogether silent, but spoke in
the same key; yea, One publicly in open Court gave charge to the Jury to take
notice of such of a Petition, and of such as were that way affected, for they
were both Presentable and punishable by their Law; for he said it was a wicked
Petition, full of malignancie, subverting the very foundations both of Church
and Commonwealth, or words to that effect; And how far it reached, he knew not,
pointing (as was apprehended) at a Capital Law there made, here reprinted.

Now at the next sitting of the General Court, six of the seven that
Petitioned, were sent for by the Marshall to come to the Court, where they were
charged ore temus, with great offenses contained in their Petition and
Remonstrance, against the Court and Government, and that such of them as were
bound out of the Jurisdiction, should enter into Bond with security, to stand
and abide the Judgment of the Court, and the rest were confined, and charged
to attend the Court to the same end. The Petitioners desired to have their
Charge in writing, which was then denied; and some added, That was but a trick
of them that they might carry it and show it in England: They replied, If the
offenses were contained in the Petition, they then must needs be such as
concerned Government; and that the Parliament, now sitting in England, were
competent Judges, and could best discern such errors; and therefore they did
appeal to that High Court, and did tender sufficient Security therefore. For
which two of them were presently committed, and forced thereby to give Bond to
stand to the Order of that Court therein. And the Cause afterward came to
Hearing, notwithstanding they did appeal to the high Court of Parliament, and
would have given Security; they were Fined, as appears by this their Censure.
And since, two of them, Dr. Child and another, had their Trunks and Studies
broke up, and their Papers taken away, and imprisoned close prisoners, and are
in danger of their lives by reason of that Capital Law here recited.

BY THE COURT: In the Years, 1641. 1642. Capital Laws, established within the
Jurisdiction of MASSACHUSETTS.
IF any man, after legal conviction, shall have or worship any other god, but
the Lord God, he shall be put to death. Deuteronomy. 3.6, etc. and 17.2, etc. Exodus
22.20.

2. IF any man or woman be a Witch, (that is) has, or consulteth with a
Familiar spirit, they shall be put to death. Exodus 22.18. Lev. 20.27. Deuteronomy.
18.10, 11.

3. IF any person shall blaspheme the Name of God the Father, Son, or Holy
Ghost, with direct, express, presumptuous, or high-handed blasphemy, or shall
curse God in the like manner, he shall be put to death. Lev. 24.15, 16.

4. IF any person shall commit any wilful murder, which is Manslaughter,
committed upon prnmeditate malice, hatred or cruelty, not in a man's necessary
and just defense, nor by mere casualty against his will, he shall be put to
death. Exodus 21.12, 13, 14. Number. 35.30, 31.

.5 IF any person flayeth another suddenly in his anger, or cruelty of passion,
he shall be put to death. Number. 35.20, 21. Lev. 24.17.

6. IF any person shall slay another through guile, either by poysonings, or
other such devilish practice he shall be put to death. Exodus 21.14.

7. IF a man or woman shall lie with any (...) by carnal copulation, they
shall sure (...) the beast shall be slain and buried. Lev. (...)

8. IF a man lies with mankinee, as (...) both of them have committed abo^
(...) surely be put to death. Lev. 20.^^.

9. IF any person commits adultery v^ (...) ^sed wife, the Adulterer and
Adulte (...) to death. Lev. 20.10. and 18.20. De (...)

10. IF any man shall unlawfully have carnal ^^peration w^^ any woman child
under ten years old, either with or without her consent, he shall be put to
death.

11. IF any man shall forcibly and without consent ravish any maid, or woman
that is lawfully married or contracted, he shall be put to death. Deuteronomy. 22.25,
etc.

12. IF any man shall ravish any maid or single woman, (committing carnal
copulation with her by force, against he will) that is above the age of ten
years; he shall be either punished with death, or with some other grievous
punishment, according to circumstances, at the discretion of the Jvdges: and
this Law to continue till the Court take further order.

13. JF any man steals a man, or mankind, he shall surely be put to death.
Exodus 21.16.

14. JF any man rise up by false witness, wittingly, and of purpose to take
away any man's life, he shall be put to death, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 18, 19.

15. JF any man shall conspire or attempt any invasion, insurrection, or
public rebellion against our Commonwealth, or shall endeavor to surprise any
Town or Towns, Fort or Forts therein; or shall treacherously or perfidiously
attempt the alteration and subversion of our frame of Polity or Government
fundamentally, he shall be put to death. Number. 16. 2 Samuel 3. and 18. and 20.

Per exemplar. Incre. Nowel, Secret.

THE OATH OF A FREEMAN.
I (A. B.) being by Gods providence, an Inhabitant, and (...) within the
Jurisdiction of this Common^^ (...) ^nowledge my self to be subject to (...)
^fe And therefore do here swear (...) ^ful Name of the Ever-living God, (...)
faithful to the same, and will ac^ (...) ^ce and support thereunto, with my
(...) equity I am bound; and will also (...) ^aintain and preserve all the
liberties (...) of, submitting my self to the whole^ (...) ^inde and
established by the same. And further, that I will not plot or practice any
evil against it, or consent to any that shall so do; but will timely discover
and reveal the same to lawful Authority now here established, for the speedy
preventing thereof.

Moreover, I do solemnly bind my self in the sight of God, that when I shall be
called to give my voice touching any such matter of this State, in which
Freemen are to deal, I will give my vote and suffrage as I shall judge in mine
own conscience may best conduce and tend to the public weal of the body,
without respect of persons, or favor of any man. So help me God in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Concerning the throwing the Petition overboard as a Jonas, it was as
follows.
WHen the first ship that came this Year 1646. from New England, was almost
ready to come from thence; Mr. Cotton, in his Thursday-Lecture at Boston,
preached out of that Scripture, Cant. 2.15. Take us the little Foxes, etc. In
his Uses took occasion to say, That if any shall carry any Writings, Complaints
against the People of GOD in that Country, it would be as Jonas in the ship,
with many words to persuade from such Complaints in England, saying that they
should seek for remedy of those things that were amiss, in that place, and
tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in Askelon. He also advised the
Ship-Master, that if storms did arise, to search if they had not in any chest
or Trunk any such Jonas aboard, which if you find (said he) I do not advise you
to throw the Persons overboard, but the Writings; or words to that effect.

Whereupon, having great In the winter-season all passages from N. England are
tempestuous.
storms (as could not be otherwise expected) some of the Passengers remembering
Mr. Cottons Sermon, it seems were much affected with what he had said; and a
woman amongst them came up from between the Decks about midnight, or after, in
a distracted passionate manner, to Mr. William Vassal who lay in the great
Cabin, but for the present was in the Sterage-door-way looking abroad: she
earnestly desired him, if there were any Jonas in the ship, that as Mr. Cotton
had directed, it might be thrown overboard, with many broken expressions to
that purpose. He asked her why she came to him? and she said, because it was
thought that he had some Writings against the people of God: but he answered
her, He had nothing but a Petition to the Parliament that they might enjoy the
liberty of English subjects, and that could be no Jonas; and that if the best
of New-Englands friends could show him any evil in that, he would not prefer
it. After this she went into the great Cabin to Mr. Tho. Foul in like
distracted manner; who told her he had nothing but the Copy of the Petition
which himself and others had presented to the Court at Boston; and showed, and
read it to her, and then told her, That if she and others thought that to be
the Cause of the storm, she and they might do what they would with it; but he
professed that he saw no evil in it, neither was his Conscience troubled with
it. So she took it and carried it between Decks to them from whom she came, and
they agreed to throw it overboard, and it was thrown overboard: but the storm
did not leave us upon the throwing of this Paper overboard, as it is reported;
for they had many great storms after that; much less was the great and
wonderful deliverance which by Gods mercy he gave unto them from shipwreck and
drowning at the Isles of Silly, upon the throwing of that Writing overboard;
for that was thrown over long before, at least 14 days. Also the error is the
more in this, That the report is that it was the petition to the Parliament
that was thrown overboard; and it was only a Copy of a Petition to their own
Court at Boston, and the Petition to the Parliament was still in the ship,
together with another Copy of that which was thrown overboard, and other
Writings of that nature, some of which are printed in this book, and were as
well saved as their lives and other goods, and are here in London to be seen
and made use of in convenient time.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere is a book lately set-forth by Mr. Edward Winslow of New England, against
Samuel Gorton, entitled [Hypocrisie unmasked] in which there is a deep and
subtle Plot against the Laws of England, and Liberties of English Subjects,
and the Gentlemen that are now suffering in New England. This man being a
principal opposer of the Laws of England, in New England; One who is usually
in place of Government in New Plymouth there. Now in N. England there are many
several Governments distinct and independent one from and on the other, and
none of them have, ever since they came into that Country, governed by the
Laws of England, but by an Arbitrary government of their own, nor indeed can
they endure the Laws of Eng. This New Plymouth, where M. Winslow is a
Magistrate, was the first Plantation in New England; and as the rest that came
after them thither, followed them in their Church-ways, so they follow them in
their Arbitrary government. And now he is come over hither, being sent as an
Agent for the rest, that the may get strength from the Parliament here, to
maintain what they have begun, and made so great a progress in. They have made
a Law, that it shall be death for any there to attempt the alteration and
subversion of their Frame of Polity or Government, as it is apparent by those
Laws in Print set forth by themselves, the Copy whereof is in page 16. of this
Book set forth; and also proceeded to the Fining and Imprisoning of some
well-affected English, whom they fear will complain of this their Arbitrary
government, that so none may dare to seek for a remedy from the Parliament. We
have cause heartily to pray, That (as Mr. Baily sets forth in his book of
Disswasive from the Errors of the times) as from New England came Independencie
of Churches hither, which has spread over all parts here; that from thence
also (in time) Arbitrary Government in the Commonwealth may not come hither.

Now if any man ask how it is evident there is such a Plot laid down in that
Book? I answer, (to be very brief) I shall give the Reader this light into
this design. In his Epistle before the book which he dedicates to the
Honorable Commissioners for Foreign Plantations, he makes five Requests to
them, the fourth of which is, That they will take into consideration, how
destructive it will be to their Plantations, and proceedings there, (which
says he are growing into a Nation) to answer to complaints here. See and
observe (Reader) how he seeks to stop all Appeals from all their unjust
Sentences, whatsoever they may be contrary to the Laws of England. Secondly,
he would make their Honors to be the Instruments to stop the Current of the
greatest Liberty of English subjects there; he would engage the Parliament in
it; and what a desperate business this would prove, every wise man may easily
see: For being begun at this Plantation, by the same rule others might seek it
should extend to all other Plantations, and then why not to Ireland? and why
shall not example, custom, and fair pretenses bring it into Wales and Cornwall,
so over England? And by the way (Reader) mark his great boasting that they are
growing into a Nation; high concel^s of a Nation breeds high thoughts of
themselves; which makes them usually term themselves a State, call the people
there Subjects, (...) four Governments together without any authority from the
King and Parliament, and then term themselves the United Colonies, are
publicly prayed for by that title; not giving forth their Warrants in his
Majesty's name, no not in time of his most peaceable government, neither taking
the Oath of Allegiance before they take upon them their Government, nor ever
giving it to any of his Majesty's subjects, etc. Now (Reader) observe their
policy, they take the advantage of promoting this design, by beginning to
write against Gorton, a man whom they know is notorious for heresy, that so
behind him they may creep and get a shot at a better game, may beget a good
opinion in the Honorable Comissioners by writing against such a evil man; as
also that they may wash away the opinion that good men heretofore have had of
them, that they are Separatists and Schismatics, Mr. Winslow their Agent
insinuates several things of the good agreement and communion that the
Independents in New England hold with Presbyterians and the Reformed Churches,
of which he had discoursed with some godly Presbyterians since his coming over
into England, and says he was earnestly requested by some of the Presbyterian
party to publish to the world as much, page 97. and thereupon tells a long
story of the Church of New-Plymouth belonging to Mr. Robinson of Leyden,
holding communion with French and Dutch churches, yea tendering it to the Scots;
as also ( page 93.) how the rest of the Churches in New England do suffer
Presbyterians, and have offered all liberty and privileges to Presbyterians,
p. 99. 100. But for answer, I say there is a great deal of fallacy in this
discourse, and the contrary is too well known and daily practiced among the
Independents both there and here, not admitting the most godly men into
communion among them, not to the acts wherein they hold communion stands
properly; keeping Communion with them in Word and Prayer, which they admit to
their Indians too. And let them instance, if they can, among many hundreds, yea
some thousands of Independents that have come from New England and Holland,
that have come to the Lords supper in our Churches, or done any act among us,
in which they hold Church Communion properly stands? 2. Rather then Mr. Winslow
will fail of his purpose, he will make the world believe that the Reformed
Churches are as much Separatists as themselves are, by describing them with the
same description that the Separatists describe themselves, p. 96. That they are
a People distinct from the World, and gathered into a holy Communion (he should
have said Covenant, which is his sense) and not National churches, and that the
sixth person is not of the Church (meaning amongst them) which falsehood of his
he boldly affirms, thinking that many will believe because he says it, but the
contrary is well known to those that know them; for in Holland they refuse not
to baptize any of their Country-mens-children who bring them to be baptized,
else would their unbaptized be seen amongst them as well as they are to be seen
in New England; besides it is well known the Church of Scotland holds themselves
a National church, and has a National Assembly, and so the Church of Holland
and France hold themselves National churches against the Independents. 3. As to
the great love he insinuates they of New England bear to Presbyterian churches,
by the example of Profering certain Scots a Plantation amongst them, where they
should share with them in their lands, and enjoy their liberty of Presbyterial
government, p. 100. I answer, that passage is strange, and I can hardly believe
it, that they who denied so many godly Ministers well known to them, Mr. Ball,
Mr. Rathband, etc. English men, the liberty of enjoying Presbyteriall
government, should grant it to strangers of the Scottish nation. Now that they
denied them, is apparent; besides Mr. Rathband and other Ministers testimonies
(now with God) and Mr. Ash of the Assembly and others testifying so much,
themselves in Print, in the book entitled Church Government and Church
covenant discussed, in ans. to the 31 quest. p. 83, 84. confess it, and give
reason of their denial. But if it be true there were any such promise to the
Scots (which I much question) I am confident they had some design of their own
in it, some worldly end or other; as namely, That in those dangerous times,
when it was likely that the time in England would soon be so bad that they
could not be supplied of necessaries from England, they might then be supplied
from Scotland with cloth as leather, and ot^^r commodities; which Plot a very
dull Statesman might easily have contriv^^. 4. As for that he says, that Mr.
Noyce, Mr. Parker, and Mr. Hubard, have their liberties in New England, who yet
are Presbyterian; I answer, the Church of the two first was founded in the
Church way of the Independent manner, which is not anew constituted, though
they in their judgments are somewhat different, and still they hold many
Independent principles, as may be seen by Mr. Noyse's Book lately printed,
though some Presbyterian principles. 5. For Mr. Hubard, dares Mr. Winslow says
that Mr. Hubard was not punished neither directly nor indirectly, for baptizing
some children whose parents were not members of their Churches, and that his
sharp fines and disgraceful being bound to the good behavior, had an
influence from the baptism of those children? 6. Can any man think that the
despitefull passages vented in Pulpits against the Church of England there, by
some of their chief Elders, calling England Egypt and Babylon, and saying, that
out of their Church-waies we cannot go to Heaven, denying the Scales of the
Covenant to some, because they would not confess that there was no way of God
lawful to govern the Church by, but the Independent way; and for no other
cause as it is ready to be proved, when ever Mr. VVinslow or any other
Independents will desired meeting, in London, before indifferent Judges; and
much more then I will here relate) is a sign of love to the Presbyterian
brethren, and of keeping communion with them. 7. Concerning the offer that Mr
VVinslow says was made not long before he came away, by the Court, to certain
discontented persons demanding liberty for Presbyterial government, that it was
freely is openly tendered to them; this is strange news to us here, for we hear
not one word of that offer from those Petitioners, although here are letters
from some of them dated since M. VVinflows coming from thence, that relates
that Dr. Child and others of them remained still in prison, save that D. Child
has the liberty to be confined to M. Laeders house upon security of 800. l.
bond being given for his abiding there. For a conclusion of this Postscript, I
shall desire the Reader by all that has been said, to observe how Independents
are all of a piece, for subtilltie, designs, fallacies, both in New England and
in Old.

FINIS.

