Church-Levellers, OR, VANITY OF VANITIES AND Certainty of Delusion: DISCOVERED
In the PAMPHLET, called The Vanity of the present Churches, AND Uncertainty of
their Preaching.

By a Friend to both true Churches and Preachers.

2 PETER 2.18. When they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, these that were clean
escaped from them who live in error.

2 ^IMOTHY 3.9. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
made manifest to all men.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Wood-street. 1649.

To the READER.
THe little ingenuous Licenser, Theodore Jennings, professing his dissent in
some things (few things, it is thought) in the Treatise mentioned; and some
other (few) things seeming dark and doubtful to him; yet, at a venture, passes
his Imprimatur upon it (twice for failing, once at the beginning, and once at
the end) for the many, plain, clear, evident truths in it, of great use: I
believe, to the present designs, to destroy the Ministry, and to ruin
Religion. He seems to me, to be near allied to John Bacheler his brother
Licenser, who sometime Licensed License to M. Tombs Treat against Infan. Bapt.
Heteredox Books, with such a caution as this. Just (both of them) like
Mountebanks, who give poison to show their skill to Antidote it; or rather, as
those that lay Rats-bane, to destroy vermin, lay a little Sugar to allure them
to eat their own bane: Had they been Physicians of any valu^ or skill, they
would have separated the poison from wholesome ingredients, or have given some
characters, asterisks or spits, to distinguish the one from the other: But to
pass all at a venture to the Press, without any notice what it is they
dislike, what seems dark or doubtful, is (considering men's inclinations to
suck in poysin soonest, as most sugarlike to nature) no better then spiritual
murder of souls; and the issue will be so far from making the Saints of one
mind, and edifying the whole body in love, that the liberty here granted (not
disliked by this Quacksalver) is like to make as many minds, as men, and as
many divisions in the body, as there are members. One thing I cannot but
observe, and that a main one, wherein he seems to dissent from his Author: He
speaks in his License of Churches of the Saints, and yet at the same time,
passes his License to a Book that is throwing down and destroying all Churches;
his very Title being, The Vanity of the present Churches: And as for
uncertainty of preaching or Preachers (which is the other design of his Author)
he seems at least to comply with him; when he uses his very words, or at least
his sense; saying, That (one necessary thing) faith, which is in Jesus Christ,
which is by the Gospel^ (the power of God to salvation) preached unto us; so
his Author speaks, page 28. That new in our times we have no Preacher of the
Gospel but the Scriptures: Their meaning seems to be the same, That the Gospel
(as the Licenser) or the Scriptures (as the Author) are the only Preachers, and
we have no other: and sure if we have no other Preacher but the Scripture, we
have no Churches at all; If then the Licenser and the Author agree in these two
(the main business of the Book) I know not wherein they need to dissent. But
seeing he conceals his opinion, and jumbles truth and error together, we shall
endeavor to separate them, that the credulous or unlearned Reader, may not be
infected instead of being edified.

Farewell.
VANITY OF VANITIES AND Certainty of Delusion, DISCOVERED In the PAMPHLET,
called The Vanity of the present Churches, etc.
THe Author begins well in words, That there ought to be a true correspondence
between the heart, tongue and hands: An agreement between conscience,
profession and practice: But it is to be feared, these are at a great distance
in himself, if he be (as is not without probable grounds supposed) a Jesuit
disguised; for such men's hearts, tongues and hands, consience, profession and
practice, do seldom agree in any thing that is good, to the peace of Church or
State. But because he adds: When the discord (of those) is continued (as well
as declared) to the reproach of Christianity, or humane society, then certainly
a reproof is not only requisite, but the neglect thereof a sin of an high
nature. Therefore I thought it good to discover a little this discord of his,
from himself, and from the truth it self, to the great reproach of both the
particulars mentioned.

1. The scope and intention of his whole discourse is evidently this; 1. To
destroy all Churches (except perhaps the Church of Rome.) 2. To decry all
faithful preachers of the Gospel. 3. To cry up Liberty of conscience for all
sects and heresies; so to bring all into confusion, to make them all at last
concenter in the Sea of Rome. This seems to be the design; his only virtue
seems to be his impartiality; for he spares neither Presbyterian nor
Independent (by which we may suspect him to be a Jesuit or Jesuited; for all
sectaries are Independents, though all Independents be not properly sectaries)
and yet himself is holding out the largest Independency that ever was heard of;
that every man and woman shall have no dependence upon any Church (he cries
down all Churches) but be his own Minister, hearer, officer, all; as more
hereafter.

2. And now let us see what he blames them for: viz. For receding from their
former judgments and declarations, ^ag. 2, etc.
for a full, complete and utmost liberty of conscience, in the exercise of
religion. This (says he) the Presbyterians, whilst persecuted by the Bishops,
did clearly hold forth, but since practiced the contrary, for which the
Independents did sharply reprove them; accounting nothing more base and
unbeseeming a Christian, then to question or vex or reproach any man for his
judgment and practice touching matters of religion: and yet the Independents
themselves have done the same thing, etc. This is the sum of the charge, but
this is a slander, and deserves a sharp reproof. For as for the Presbyterians,
they never held out any such principles of an universal liberty of conscience,
in the exercise of religion? (the difference between them and the Prelates
being, not in doctrinals, but ceremonials) they ever detested it, nor have they
ever persecuted any for his conscience, as never having had power, if they had
a mind to do it. And if the Independents did so hold forth, or dissembled so
far (as some think they did) to gain themselves love and respect, and to
multiply their Congregations, and get countenance from authority; they are old
enough to answer for themselves; they are justly to be reproved, and justly
rewarded, in that they have taught their party to desert themselves, who
deserted their own pretended principles.

3. He now comes to prove his first proposition, The vanity of all the present
Churches; ^^g. 5.
affirming it to be most palpably evident, that they of the Independent
Congregationall, or of any Church Way whatsoever, have not that true essential
mark of a true Church to be found amongst them, etc. viz. A true Church, in the
Scripture sense, being such only, as wherein the Scripture, the very word of
God, is purely and infallibly preached; that is the mark. But let it be observed
first, This man destroies his own discourse by a contradiction: For he is
laboring to show the vanity of all and any Church way whatsoever, which is to
deny that there is any Church at all (but mock churches, as page 27.) and yet
here he gives us the definition of a true Church, which yet is not to be found
in this world: He would prove also the vanity of Preachers, and yet here he
speaks of the word of God, purely preached, as a mark of a true Church: If
there be no Preachers then no preaching, if preaching, then Preachers: How
shall they hear without a Preacher? How preach, except they be sent? How sent,
if no body, no Church to send them to? to preach unto? Secondly, If any shall
say, he means it of the present Churches (as his Title imports) that none of
them are true, but that there may be a true Church, according to his
definition: I answer His scope is to persuade every man and woman privately to
read the Scriptures, and to be the sole judge of the sense thereof, for
themselves, deeding neither Preacher to instruct, nor officer to order them;
and where is then his true Church? unless every particular man and woman make
his new Church, which is a Bull, and another contradiction; for a Church is
caetus, a company called out and met together for the public and common
service of God. Thirdly, If he mean, that in a true Church there is not one
word preached (praying or Sacraments it seems are no mark of his Church, no
part of his new Church Service) but purely and infallibly the very Word of God;
that is, no interpretation used, besides the very words of Scripture; to what
purpose is that meeting of his Church, for debate and conserence of the Saints
(spoken of afterward) for they may read the word at home, the pure and
infallible word of God, and so be their own preachers; the sense whereof if
they impart in any other words to others at their meeting and conference, they
make his Church to be false and none; because the very word of God is not
purely and infallibly preached there. Fourthly, But, Readers, what will you
say, if the design be (besides other desperate consequences, of which anon) to
set up reading instead of preaching, as the Prelaticall party of late cried it
up for preaching? They do justify their dumb idol ministers, that could not
for ignorance, or would not for negligence^ preach the word: He perhaps, wholly
to level (it seems there are Church-levellers as well as State) the Ministry in
the Church, and to make all the people Preachers: Or what if the design be in
crying down all Churches and Preachers amongst us, to cry up the boly marker
Church of Rome, where they will tell you, there is the only preaching of the
very word of God, purely and infallibly read; where little or no preaching to
be found? I leave you to consider it.

4. He has quickly done with the Churches; his next and greatest work is, to
declaim against preaching, and the Preachert: Page 6, etc.
Who (says he) usually pray to God, that their word may be heard, as the word
of the everliving God. This he calls, a gross imposture, impiety, belying and
despiting the Spirit of God, to pray that their erroneous, doubtful, uncertain
conceptions, the word of man, may be heard as the word of God, etc. 1. Here let
it be observed, that he does not directly deny that there are such officers as
Preachers in the Scriptures (he acknowledges such creatures found in the word,
page 34.) but only questions the infallibility of our preaching: which none of
us ever arrogated to our selves, further then we preach that pure, infallible
word, in Scripture sense ever, though not always in the very words. 2. Who
ever (of ours) said, his Sermons were the very word of God, for words and
syllables? But having prayed that God would clear up their understandings and
judgments, in the scope and sense of the holy Ghost, then they pray, that
people may hear it, as the word of the living God: And his reproach of such
Sermonk, that they are erroneous, doubtful, uncertain conceptions (for what
other are your Sermons, says he) is little less then blasphemy, imposture and
impiety: Whereas, while they expound and apply the Scripture in its own native
sense, according to the analogy of faith, it is, interpremtively, the word of
God, Every true, proper consequence from the word, is by all godly learned, and
judicious men, counted as the word of God, and of divine authority, though not
so immediately as the Scripture it self.

5. But his meaning is, that as there are no true Churches, so no true
Preachers in these times, so he says, expressly, page 18. That now in our
times, we have no Preachers of the Gospel, but the Scriptures; which how absurd
an assertion it is, we shall show hereafter: At present we hold to the point in
hand, to vindicate our preaching; which he examines by the word we preach: ^ag.
7.
You shall find (says he) that neither they nor your selves have any
understanding at all of such divine or heavenly things, as bring peace of
conscience, etc. but only and solely by the Scriptures, and that neither they
nor your selves are taught by the spirit, etc. What Is this I hear? Taught only
and solely by the Scriptures, without the spirit? What understanding is that,
that is gotten by the Scripture only and solely, more then historical? more or
better then that which reprobates and devils have thereof? This he speaks
again, page 49. They must acknowledge that they have no other infallible
teacher of divine things, but the Scriptures; and that they partake no more of
the spirit, then what that blessed word of the spirit planteth in them. How
comes this opposition between things sweetly subordinated? the spirit and the
Scriptures? the Scriptures outwardly, the spirit inwardly? says not the
Scripture, They shall be all taught of God? and that the spirit reveals the
mysteries of the Gospel to his people, writing the law in their minds and
hearts? etc. I had thought be had meant, there needed no other preachers to
teach us, but the spirit it self speaking in the Scriptures, so some fanatic
spirits say; and some are gotten above the Scripture, to the immediate teaching
of the spirit. But it seems this Wildman is run as wild to the other extreme
(the Socinions recta rati^) that the spirit is needless, and that the
Scriptures only and solely, are sufficient to teach us. Oh the wiles of Satan!
How subtle is this old serpent! One while the spirit without the Scriptures,
that snare is discovered as a mere delusion; another while the Scripture only
and solely, without the spirit, and this is the last and newest device of
Satan: Any thing, either vilifying, or over magnifying the Scripture, to
stupifie men into confusions, that so he may both ways prey upon them. And I
pray Sir, if your private persons may have this infallible teaching by the
Scriptures, and partake of the spirit, by the word of the spirit (as you seem
to yield, page 49.) why may not our preachers, in reading and studying the
Scriptures, have the like privilege, and be as able to hold it out at the
public meetings, as your private men and women? and so we shall find
preachers infallible, either some in office, or all in common.

6. But let us hear his reason, why our preachers have not the spirit: Had they
the spirit of God, as they pretend, would the need, Page 7.
as they do, to go sit in their studies three or four days together, turning
over their Authors to find out the meaning? etc. no certainly, the spirit
could in an instant inform them the meaning of his own writings, etc. 1. May
not this be as well applied to his disciples, in their readings, debates and
conferences, to which he advises and exhorts so often? Had they the spirit at
once reading, what need they study the Scripture, debate or confer about it, to
get or increase knowledge? The spirit could in an instant inform them in the
meaning of it: Nay, what need they the spirit to that end, if the Scriptures
only and solely, and so easily and speedily, can give them the understanding of
them? so that either he must (as indeed he does) deny the spirit to be needful
for his disciples to understand the Scriptures: but then, it is hoped our
preachers (having learning and tongues besides) may understand them as well as
they; or if the spirit be needful for them, why may not the blessed spirit be
pleased to give understanding to preachers as well as to them? 2. There is
(which he conceals or confounds) a two fold administration of the spirit, the
one immediate, without the Scripture; thus it was imparted to the Prophets and
Apostles: The other mediate, by the Scriptures, or by illumination of the
Scriptures upon the heart; and this is common to all Gods people. Again, there
is a double understanding of the Scripture; one of the letter or history,
common to reprobates; another spiritual, of the mystery and power of the
Gospel; and this is peculiar to Gods elect: To you it is given to know the
mysteries etc. Paul bids Timothy (a preacher) give attendance to reading, for
to save himself and them that hear him. But Paul himself had his without
reading, by immediate revelation; but the same spirit.

7. ^^g. 8.
Observe (says he) that when they have for some years, preached up a doctrine,
they are many times forced to preach it down again, as most of them have done,
and that in very material points, etc. We say to this reproachful aspersion;
first, either it is not in material points, especially not in necessary
points, for they (he says) are clear and plain, not at all hard to be
understood, nor require long time to learn them, page 21. and that to his
unlearned ones, then much more to preachers: or else if in material things any
are thus inconstant, they are not our preachers which do so, but his own giddy
sectaries, and some perhaps Independents: They indeed preach one while baptism
of all infants; of infants of Believers only, another while; and at last, of no
infants, or of any others of years, for want of a true Ministry: And hither I
believe himself is fallen, through all these opinions; for if there be no true
Church nor true preachers, there is no Minister of Baptism to be found, and so
no Baptism. Again, the sectaries have their Pastors and Churches divided, in
election and reprobation, in universal redemption, free will, etc. up and
down, down and up: But so do not the Presbyterian Preachers: Befides, Who has
brought these planets to this uncertain motion? but only those Cam^lian-like
Jesuits, who insinuate these delusions and false doctrines into the unstable
Pastors and Churches, and then make these outcries of divisions and
inconstancy, as he now does. Oh the damnable subtilties of Jesuiticall
seducers! They unsettle people and Pastors, and set them on building of
Churches on these uncertain doctrines, and then cry out, How can they affirm
their word to be the word of God? Is not a Church founded on such
uncertainties, (...) 9.
founded on the sands?

8. And now he lets fly at all: The Pope and his Clergy, belly themselves and
blaspheme God, in saying they have the true spirit of God, whilst by their
lying miracles, (...) 10.
art and sophistry, they lead the poor deluded people into greatest errors,
etc. The Bishops discover their faults: The Presbyters they come, and cry out
of studied Sermons, and common prayer, as stinters and suppressors of the
Spirit of God: Then comes the Independent and pretends to erect a pure, holy
and undefiled worship, etc. and a great deal more of such stuff: For our parts
we say, Let Baal plead for himself: Only, if we mistake not the man, we think
he is too saucy with his father the Pope; but any thing is tolerated for the
Catholic cause: As for the Presbyters, we must tell him plainly, he flanders
them: They never cried out of studied Sermons or set prayers, as stinters and
suppressors of the spirit; nor do they differ at all in materials, or mind
their own honor and profit, and least of all are they possessed with a
persecuting spirit. The Lord rebuke thee, thou false tongue? prosecution of or
preaching against damnable heresies, is no persecution, That is only for truth
and the Gospels sake. But I pray Sir tell us, Is not the world full of
Atheists, Antiscripturists (your self complain of such in this book)
Antinomists, Seekers, Antispiritists ((...), they were called of old) and may
not we call a spade a spade? are not you your self an Antispiritist, in part,
denying the necessity of the spirit, in the understanding of the Scriptures?
and will you complain of us for calling you so? These, these are they that have
brought those infinite evils into the world which you cry out of, Page 13.
doubtings and sadness in some, in others wrangling, envy, malice, wild notions
and opinions, not examining their opinions by the text, but interpreting the
text by their opinions and experiences, and the rest of that rabble mentioned,
of heresies, blasphemies, etc. none of which, blessed be God, are found among
the Presbyterians, but all preached against by them, so far, that they are
called persecuter: without a cause. And who are they, that say, the letter
kills, and call the Scripture a dead letter, but his sectaries, who plead the
immediate teaching of the spirit, which the Presbyterians renounce as a
delusion of Satan: but is not he himself in the other extreme, saying as much
of the word without the spirit, Page 19.
that it forces it self into our dead natural understandings, plants it self
there, makes us one with it, and forms us new, etc. If he say in the same place
he calls it the sword of the spirit; I answer, then it can do no more of it
self, to those effects specified, then a sword without an arm to wield it,
which whether it be not a contradiction to what he said before, that men have
their understanding only and solely by the Scriptures, Page 7.
and are not taught by the spirit, let him at leisure consider.

9. And now again, page 18. he asserts it peremptorily, that now in our times
we have no preacher of the Gospel, but the Scripture the infallible word of
God, etc. This is another piece of nonsense: Is the Gospel and the preacher of
the Gospel one and the same? When Christ seat his Apostles and Paul, and they
sent others to preach the Gospel; did they send the Gospel or the Scriptures to
preach themselves? Are not the Scripture^ and the preachers of the Gospel
subordinate helps of understanding to the people? Does not the Apostle clearly
distinguish the Gospel from the preachers of it, Romans 10.14, etc. How shall
they hear (the Gospel of peace, verse. 15.) without a preacher? And how shall
they preach except they be sent? How beautiful are the flee of them (mark
that, the feet of them) that preach the Gospel of peace ((...). twice,
Evangelizing, bringing glad tidings of good things) Has the Gospel any feet,
to be sent to preach it self? and do the preachers make people firsake those
living fountains, etc. when as they call them to them, and open those Wels of
salvation for them, and draw Waters thence for them, which they cannot (some at
least) draw forth for themselves? Suppose the people be such as cannot read,
must they not have some to read the the Scriptures for them? to expound them
to them? These are preachers in this man's opinion, reading is preaching with
him: If they have no Scripture but in Hebrew, Greek or Latin, though they can
read, how shall they understand them, unless there be some learned to
interpret them? But is not that with the iniquity of learning (so he calls it,
page 19.) to make a gain of godliness? ^^g. 19.
etc. And though he seem to magnify the word, the precious word translated
into English, yet what certainty will there be in such translations, especially
if the Interpreters shall (as the Church of Rome has done) make use of the
iniquity, not of learning, but of their own sedueing hearts and designs, to
cheat and abuse the people? And who, I pray, are the men, "arrived at so much
impudence, as to make a gain of godliness, etc. and to become rich by
pretended, not preaching, but reading the Scripture, and saying of Masle in
Latin; telling men they had the spirit at Rome, and that the Scriptures were a
dead letter, a nose of wax, etc. These blasphemous aspersions, some disguised
Jesuits, have cast upon the Scriptures again, and now cry out of the same.

10. But that there are both Churches and Preachers now, according to the
Scripture rules, might easily be manifested from the Scripture it self: and by
his own confessions. First, The Scripture is most clear, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has
set in his Church not only Apostles and Prophets, extraordinary Ministers, but
Pastors and Teachers: Where there are implied both Churches and Preachers, and
lest he should say, those were in the Apostles times, Churches planted by
Apostolical men, and the Preachers extraordinarily inspired: but we have none
such now, let him then consider another Scripture, Ephesians. 4.1^, 22. He gave to
his Church some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, etc. How long to continue? Tell we all come in the unity
of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, etc.
That is, till the day of Christ to the worlds end. Now hence it follows, either
that these Preachers and Churches were ordinary: or if extraordinary, that the
Church of Christ has failed, ever since the Apostles decease (for we have had
no such extraordinary infallible Preachers, for many ages) which is contrary to
Christ's promise, and the intoution of this Scripture. Again, if there be
Preachers continued (that there may be Churches) either they must only read
the word written by the Prophets and Apostles which is needless, seeing every
man and woman may, yea, must (by his way) read it themselves, and by reading
only understand it, as he after speaks: Or else they must interpret the word,
expound and apply it, according to the rules of Scripture; and that is nothing
else but preaching, and so we have found other preachers, beside the Scripture;
I might add many texts more, I name but one, Act. 20.28. where he shall find,
both a Church, yea, several Churches and Preachers, many Elders set over those
Churches by the holy Ghost to feed them, not surely by extraordinary
Revelations besides the Scripture: None such were found at that, or in after
times: and himself disclaims the immediate tanching of the spirit, in people or
Preachers: Nor yet by bare reading of the word, the infallible word of God:
there need no officers for such a work only, the people could do that
themselves: Therefore there was an office of Preachers to continue to the
worlds end, according to Scripture. Secondly, His own acknowledgements import
as much, hear him speak: Page 34.
We read of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, and of the
order and regulating of Churches, and of gifts given to all these from on high,
etc. Where (say I) do we read of these, but in those and the like places to
those before named? And the reasons before are constringent to prove them to
continue still: extraordinary we find none, Therefore it must be meant of
ordinary both Churches and Preachers, All he excepts to this is, either That
these are not so plainly expressed, as to leave the conscientious without
dispute, etc. or that these Churches and Pastors are short of, and not to be
compared with those we read of: To which we answer first, That there are
Churches and Preachere to be continued, is clearly expressed in the word: their
order and qualifications plainly delivered, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 1 Cor. 14. etc.
(where note, that there is not one word for such a qualification of a Preacher,
that he must have an infallible spirit,) 2. That they are not to be compared
with the Apostles and Prophers, we easily grant, but that they are not to be
compared with the Pastors and Teachers, is miserably begged: It Is evinced then,
that there are both Churches and Preachers now: and all he says against it is
less then vanity.

11. But he makes very short work of Religion: Page 21.
How long a wo^^ soever pretended Preachers make of it to maintain themselves
and ^amilies in wealth, honor, etc. necessary doctrines are not at all hand,
nor require long time to learn them, etc. for the word of God having once
planted this truth in the understanding, viz. That it is the blond of Christ
which cleanses us from all sins: This Evangelicall truth of it is own nature
would instantly set man on work to do the will of him that so loved him, ^re p.
30.
etc. I am forced once more to cry out, Oh the depths of Satan! Oh the subtlety
of his eldest sons the Jesuits! Time was when they loaded the Scripture, as
with uncertainties, so with obscurity, even in necessary things: thereupon
debarring people from meddling with them, pleading the simplicity of believing,
as the Church believed: And now they are inviting people to read the
Scriptures, and tell them, necessary doctrines are not at all hard, etc. Why
this? but to cry down Preachers now, as they did the Scriptures before: that
when the Preachers are gone, (...) 48.
they may again cry up he obscurity of Scriptures, and so bring the people to
hang upon the lips of the man in Peter's infallible chair (as he calls the Pope)
and to that easy and short way to heaven, to believe as the Church believes,
which is not at all hard, nor requires long time to learn it. The Cobbler was
able in one hours, yea minutes learning to confute the devil with this
Argument. And 2. with this very short lesson here prescribed by this Tutour,
That it is the blood of Jesus Christ, etc. That Christ died for sinners, our
common people are able to confute, that is, despise not only preachers but all
preaching to: as knowing as much as any of them all can teach them. But as for
his work of this Evangelicall truth upon their hearts and lives, That of its
own nature it instantly sets them on work to do the will of him that so loved
them: We see nothing less, but the clean contrary, they sin the more because
grace abounds, And if this truth so planted be so powerful, what is the reason,
that not only some Sectaries of this man's way, but even so many Romish Priests
live so wickedly? Indeed if men come to learn That this short lesson is
sufficient, what will they regard, either printed discourses or Sermons? This
is truly spoken: and this truth being known to all that profess Christianiny:
what then need those debates and conferences at meetings (of which anon) a way
far more excellent then Preaching (as he says) when every one will be ready to
say, as Elisha to the sons of the Prophets, Knew thou this, etc. yea, I know
it, hold you your peace, 2 Kin. 2 3. I have heard of an Antinomian Lady, that
said, She would undertake to make all her maids Believers in half a year: This
man will do it in half an hour, he will make true Christians with this one
sentence, The blood of Josus Christ cleanses us from all sin: This of it is own
nature without the Spirit will do it: and that instantly: I confess, our
Preachers cannot find their work so short or easy: but if there be some
Surgions that for gain prolong their cure: (I think there are no such Preachers
amongst us) There are also some and more Mountebanks which do their work too
soon to do it well, and such I fear this Teacher is.

12. But he is very careful to make his Disciples as full of good works, as
they are of knowledge: Page 23. and 3^
whereas our preachers make men at best but fantastic Christians: talking
upon some hard texts, etc. when they should be employed to feed the hungry,
cloth the naked, etc. But sorely our Preachers preach so much for good works,
that some of h^s Sectaries, cry them down for legal Preachers: and those works
are very good, to adorn a Christians profession: but who knows not that many
blind ignorant Papists had abundance of these good works, but little to their
comfort or advantage: seeing without knowledge the mind is not good, and
without faith it is impossible to please God: The Solifidians and Antinomians
preached up faith, an I cried down works: Papists tried up good works, but
cried out of knowledge and faith. To which of these this man most inclines is
not hard to conjecture.

13. Having said thus much (to little purpose) against Churches and Preachers,
Page 28.
he now comes to exhort his Disciples to reading the Scripeures, and
frequenting of meetings for debate and conference, so they do but take heed of
Preachers and preaching: And for the first, to encourage them to Reading and
only reading, Page 36.
giving no ear to those charmers, those doubtful expositors, those mock
preachers with their trumperie Sermons, etc. he tells them, They may be certain
of this, that they themselves, may as soon come to a good and right
understanding therein, as their pretended Preachers. Yet he either forgets or
rather purposely and Jesuitically hides from them diverse scruples which may
arise: As

1. The Scriptures are originally in Hebrew and greek, which his good people
understand not, If they be not by learned men, Preachers or others, translated,
how shall they understand them?

2. If they be translated, how shall they know they are truly translated? He
knows (if he be a Jesuit) how many gross errors there are confessed to be in
his Vulgar Latin: But suppose it truly done, are there not many things hard to
be understood, which unlearned and unstable men wrest to their own destruction
and others with them, 2 Pet. 3.16. And we have sad experience of this at this
day, when every man is suffered not only to be a Reader of the Scripture (that
we allow and require as well as he) but a Teacher of himself and others.

3. How many of his good people cannot read at all, must not they necessarily
take up their Religion on trust, from their as ignorant neighbors, to far
greater danger of error, then if they took it from learned and godly Preachers?

Secondly, Page 36. and 42.
Forgetting himself what he had said before, More happy are they, who read
with honest and good hearts, and only read and considerately lay to heart,
etc. he gives another direction for frequent and full meetings: Page 45.
and affirms as much or more of that: Doubtless the best way to perfect
knowledge, is and will be by endeavoring after meetings of people, to confer
and discourse together upon necessary points only (far excelling that of
preaching, as it is called, page 22.) To this we say, 1. Are not these meetings
of people so fully, so frequently, Churches? or may they not be so called? and
will he bring those under the censure of his Title, the Vanity of the present
Churches? 2. When these his good neighbors are met together, will there not be
as many minds as men? through many more, worse, uncertain, doubtful,
erroneous conceptions and mistakes at one meeting, upon one text of Scripture,
then are to be found in many Sermons? Those that have gone to some such
meetings have told us what nonsense, what confusion, wranglings, blasphemies
they have heard amongst them: and some that have been members of such meetings
(Churches we must not call them) have told us: That they meet and wrangle, and
quarrel, and rail, and revile one another, about a sense of Scripture very
shamefully, and then a gossips meeting is appointed to make them friends: and
so they commonly do Sabbath after Sabbath: And this I fear is that which this
Author would have in all their meetings; that so when they have wearied
themselves with wrangling, then a subtle Jesuit may start up and say, You see,
good people, how dangerous a thing it is, for every one of you, unlearned ones,
to take upon you to expound the Scriptures: The way to make you all of one
mind is, for you all to return into the bosom of that unerring mother Church
of Rome, which has the Spirit infallibly tied to the man in Peter's chair, page
48. etc. That this is his design appears by that we have dropped out in page
33. Notwithstanding his commending the Scripture as not hard for common people
to understand, yet mark his words, When we have all do^^ we must acknowledge,
that very many things exceed our understandings: not so plainly expressed, as to
leave the conscentious without dispute and difference thereupon, page 34.
Whereupon it will be fairly consequent, that we must look out for some
infallible Judge, to ^^pire all our differntes, or else we shall wrangle
eternally: who is that? So Page ^. No others ^^fallible Teacher but the
Scriptures.
The Scripture (he said before) the only Preacher of the Gospel, as being the
infallible word of God, page 18. True (says our Jesuit) but they you see
cannot be understood alike by all, but several men take them several ways,
even those plainest necessary doctrince are controverted; That Jesus Christ is
God, That he is the propitiation for our sins, etc. therefore you see how
expedient, yea, necessary it is, for preservation of love and unity, in all
your meetings, that there be one infallible spirit, inspired Judge, who may
determine the sense of Scripture, and that is the man in Peter's chair: Such
Agitators as these are abroad at every of these meetings, Page 36.
and these (I am confident are the men that pretend (as our Author says) To
expound Scripture, ever raising and starting new questions, and new opinions,
and darken the Scriptures; whereby men are ever learning, but never at rest in
knowledge, tossed too and fro with every wind of doctrine; till at last one
wind carry them all to Rome. Page 37.
Nor need any man henceforth wonder whence so many several and strange
opinions, should arise, by which our English world becomes even rent and torn
in pieces: It is from this Jesuiticall preaching and false exposition of the
holy Scriptures, on purpose to put all into confusion, to prepare the way for
Romish union. And he says most truly, page 38. Page 39.
In the absence (of those faithful forsaken Preachers) are crept in swarms of
locusts, false teachers, men of corrupt minds, etc. by which the innocent Dove
is become the game of these birds of prey, these Ravens, Vultures and Harpies.
This witness is true; therefore reprove them sharply.

14. After all this, he draws to a conclusion thus: Page 42.
It were much better for the Commonwealth, that all men's minds were set at
liberty from these entanglements, from this Church-bondage; for then men would
by reading the Scriptures, etc. soon come to be able to understand the intent
and substantial scope thereof, and become substantial Christians, etc. But, I
pray Sir, if there were not this Church-bondage (as you call it) but that all
men were set at liberty from the public Ordinances, the word read and
preached, how many do you think would read the Scripture at all, or hear it
read? whenas we find that most common people make bold to take this liberty
you grant them; never come into Church-bondage, never read them from one end
of the year to another: This is the way to bring in liberty of conscience (one
main * thing intended in this discourse) and liberty of error, Page 48. that
all men ^^ing in their ^^verall ways ^^serving God ^hether pub^^ck or private,
etc.
heresy, profanesse: And if this be your design in all your undertakings, I
shall say no more, but The Lord rebuke thee, even the Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem rebuke thee: Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire of hell? If
otherwise, you are misled and seduced by cheating Jesuits, my prayer shall be,
The Lord would discover your errout to your self first, and then to all such as
by that your discourse, or otherwise, you have seduced.

FINIS.

