THE Church Catechism, Analyzed, Explained, and Improved. The First Part.
WHEREIN, I. The Text is set down whole, and entire. II. It is broken into
Questions, and Answers in the very Words of the Catechism. III. The Terms of it
are explained, and such short Questions and Answers added, as are occasioned by
it, and seem needful to the discovery of its true meaning, and use.
At the end is added Matter, and Direction for all Acts of DEVOTION for Morning
and Evening, mostly in the Words of the Catechism. The whole accommodated to
the capacity, and use of them, that are yet to learn it, and recommended to the
Rich, to bestow among the Poor.

Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it, Prove. 22.6.

Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. And ye Fathers
provoke not your Children, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1,4.

Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me more than these?
-- Feed my Lambs, John 21.15.

Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account, Hebr. 13.17.

London, Printed for Robert Gifford, 1683.

CONSIDERATIONS Proposed to those that use this Book.
TRain up a Child (says the wisest of men, by the direction of the Spirit of
wisdom) in his way that he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart
from it: where I. The life of man in this world is represented as a Way, which,
when walked in, assuredly brings the Traveller t^ and lodges him in the Place,
to which it leads. II. A Charge is laid upon every one, whom it concerns, to
train up those under their care, even while Children, in the right Way, wherein
they should go. III. Assurance is given, to encourage so needful a Practice,
that he, that is indeed trained up in the right way, will not depart from it,
but follow it, till he arrive at the desired end.


Let it then in the fear of God be duly considered.

1. That all and every one, in whom we are concerned, are passing apace on,
each in his way, to a certain fixed end, and unrepealable state, being immortal
Spirits that must never die.

2. That according as the way they walk in, and the course of life they pursue,
is right or wrong; so will they infallibly be brought to an end, either of full
perfection, and entire happiness with God, in the most happy Place, among the
most happy Society, in the most felicitating enjoyments and employments to all
eternity; or of deplorable wretchedness, and misery with Devils, in endless,
easeless and remediless torments: which in other words is called, a being
judged according to their works; a receiving the things done in the Body,
whether good or evil; a saying to the Righteous, come ye Blessed, and to the
Wicked, go ye Cursed.

3. That there is a tremendous danger of missing the right way, or departing
from it. Which will quickly appear, when we have observed, that the
uninstructed faculties are so prone to act, that Children begin to walk, and
take some way, before they are able to know, choose, or walk in the right. That
they are depraved by Nature, ill Nurture, and worse Education; inclined to take
the wrong ways, into which they are misled by unexperienced Sense, fo^lish
Informations, and bad Examples; and strongly habituated to these they have been
used to. That they are apt to mistake, or forget, or reject true Directions,
and obnoxious to abundance of false. That there are thousands of By-ways, and
turnings to the right hand and to the left. That our Travelers companions will
often be his seducers, many going the Broad-way that leads to destruction, who
will early prejudice him against the narrow Way, and the few that find it, or
pursue him with Scoffs and Affronts, which he must persevereingly encounter;
that he will be daily exposed to a thousand Solicitations of the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh: That there are many stumbling Blocks in the way, and even
his Fellow-travellers will often be a scandal, and a discouragement to him. All
which, and much more, evidence the mighty hazard of being seduced, and make it
no marvel that God should concern himself, and the wisest Man, to warn us to
train him up in the way, wherein he should go.

4. That therefore, if we have not divested our selves of common humanity,
natural affection, and Christian compassion toward those lovely Images of God,
the dear purchase of the Blood of Christ, and the peculiar charge of the
Sanctifying Spirit, sacred to the Holy Trinity in Baptism, the Children of God,
the Members of Christ, and the Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, the hopeful
Members of our Church, our State, and our Families, which are entrusted to our
care, and be not resolved persidiously to leave them to apparent ruin and
perdition, we will bestir our selves for them, and conscientiously obey the
Charge, training every one of them up in the way that he should go: no care, no
pains, surely, can be thought here too much.

5. That to train up, imports no less than these three necessary things. I. To
present to them a full and fair prospect of the designed Place, and the way to
it, keep open their eyes to view it, and carry a Light before them, a Lamp to
their feet, furnish them with true and never-failing directions to find the
right, and shun the wrong way, and acquaint them with all the dangers in their
Travel; that a Voice may ever accompany them, saying, this is the way, walk in
it. II. To conciliate their Affections to the blessed end, and the way to it,
to get within them, reach their hearts, and possess them with a vigorous sense
of their concernment therein, to enamour them, and make them in love with the
way of life, to excite their fears of missing it, to enkindle their desires,
confirm their hopes of certain success, and to ascertain their consent to walk;
yea, to run with patience the race that is set before them, and To hate every
false way. III. Actually to engage them to walk in the way, excite and assist
their powers, anticipate their straying, form their steps, and early enter them
into the way, appoint them such easy Stages as they are able to travel;
furnish them with all the helps and provisions necessary to the Journey, remove
the affrightments and Stumbling-stones out of it, see that they constantly
follow their directions, and the footsteps of the great and good that have gone
before them; so recall them when gone astray, raise them when fallen, encourage
them when desponding, refresh them when spent, strengthen them against
difficulties: in a word, so hedge, in their Paths by a constant, strict but
gentle discipline, so conduct them, go before them and inure them to the
Journey, that their feet may certainly be guided into the ways of peace, and
that they may walk and not faint, run and not be weary, yea, run not as at
uncertainty, but so that they may infallibly obtain, and finish their course
with joy.


Till these three things are jointly done, the man is not trained up in his
way; to the neglect of these, especially the two last, we ought to impute the
may miscarriages in our education and teaching; few having skill and patience
to engage their Will, and assure their Practice; and some good men have been
deterred from the last, by a very bad Opinion; that to assist those, that
otherwise cannot proceed, with written forms of sound words, though taken even
from the Scriptures themselves, is to quench the Spirit, and prevent his holy
Operations; when indeed, to refuse his inspired helps given for that very
purpose, is the only thing that does so.

6. That they are thus to be trained up, while Children, while flexible, and
governable, and conscious of their inability to direct their own way, and of
their dependence on their Guides; before they are prejudiced, or otherwise
employed; before they are seduced, vitiated, and accustomed to evil courses;
before they have cast themselves out of the conduct of their Teachers,
forfeited the aids of Gods Spirit, and made their return impossible, or next to
it.

7. That the Text not only asserts, that God would have those under our care to
be, but supposes them by grace, put into a capacity of being so trained up in
the right way, that they shall never depart from it; and indeed God has not,
nor will be wanting for his part, having done, and being ready to do all that,
that can be expected from the greatest power and goodness, guided by the most
comprehensive wisdom, toward the bringing such Creatures to an happy end. None
are neglected in the daily administration of grace, and to him that hears,
more shall be given, and whosoever has the entrusted Talents, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance: so that nothing can make them
miscarry, but the wilful neglect of the Guides, or the guided, receiving the
Grace of God in vain, and not duly applying that which is the Power of God, to
the Salvation of men's Souls.

8. That therefore it depends upon us that have the charge of Children,
Pastors, Parents, Masters and Sureties, and upon our skill and fidelity, what
they shall be, what further grace or hardness shall be their lot; what benefit
or harm the Church, the State, and our Families, shall have by them; what
comfort they shall have here, what assurance of heart, and where they shall be
to all eternity.

When you have thoroughly weighed these things, try if you can remain unaffected
with the Case, indifferent or neglectful of the welfare of those whom God has
trusted to your care, and the Church returned from Baptism into your hands to
train up; but if through your perfidiousness or carelessness they perish,
remember that they indeed shall die in their sins, but their blood, their blood
I say, God will require at your hands. But O how happy are they, that meet with
wise and faithful Guides! and how shall they that turn many to righteousness,
shine as the Stars, for ever and ever.

These considerations prevailed with me, to endeavor, among other things
tending this way, the making this Catechism, (which I am obliged to teach upon
more accounts than one.) as useful to the ends of it, as I was able, and first,
to fit it to the capacity of the meanest, with all the plainness and
condescension I could; designing to add a Second Part, and then a Third, each
adapted to the case of Proficients, keeping in both to this Groundwork; in all
which, I submit my self to the wiser judgments of those above me; in the mean
time, leaving this to the candor and conscientious use of those Pastors,
Teachers, Masters and Parents, who have not a better at hand; I turn to God, to
implore his Pardon for what is amiss, and his Blessing upon what may be useful
in it.

March 10. 1682/3.
THE Church Catechism, Analyzed, Explained, and Improved.
. I. An Occasion taken to bring in a Discourse of Baptism.
Qu. WHat is your Name?

1. Ans. N. or M.

Qu. Who gave you this Name?

2. Ans. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
Member of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. What persons gave you your Name?

3. Ans. My Godfathers and Godmothers gave me my Name.

Q. What are Godfathers and Godmothers?

4. Ans. My Godfathers and Godmothers are those that presented me to God in
Baptism, and were Sureties for me, promising that I should be taught, and
engaged to perform the Covenant made at my Baptism.

Q. When gave they you this Name?

5. Ans. They gave me this Name in my Baptism: when I was Baptized.

. II. What the Benefits of Baptism are.
Q. What were you made in your Baptism?

6. Ans. In my Baptism I was made, First, a Member of Christ. Secondly, The
Child of God. And thirdly, An Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.


Q. Were you not a Member of Christ, before you were Baptized?

7. A. No, but in my Baptism I was made a Member of Christ.

Q. Were you not a Child of God, before you were Baptized?

8. A. No, but I was made a Child of God in my Baptism.

Q. Were not you an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, before you were Baptized?

9. A. No, but in my Baptism I was made an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven?

. III. The Vow and Covenant made at Baptism.
Q. Was there not a Promise made for you, in your Name, before you were
received to Baptism.

10. A. Yes, there was a Promise made then for me, and in my Name.

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then promise for you?

11. A. They did promise and vow three things in my Name. First, that I should
renounce the Devil, and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.


Q. How many things did your Sureties promise for you, at your Baptism?

12. A. They did promise and vow three things.

Q. Did they promise those three things in their own name, and for themselves,
or in your name, and for you?

13. A. They did promise and vow them in my Name, for me, not for themselves.

Q. Which is the first thing that they promised and vowed in your Name?

14. A. First, they promised and vowed in my Name, that I should renounce the
Devil and all his Works, and that I should renounce all the pomps and vanity of
this wicked world; and that I should renounce all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Q. Which is the second thing that they promised in your Name?

15. A. Secondly, they did promise and vow in my Name, that I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Q. Which is the third thing, that they promised for you, at your Baptism?

16. A. Thirdly, They did promise for me, and vow, that I should keep Gods holy
Will and Commandments, and that I should walk in the same Commandments of God,
all the days of my life.

Q. How long did they promise that you should do these three things.

17. A. They promised that I should do thus, all the days of my life, from my
Baptism to my Death.

. IV. Of our owning and promising to perform the Baptismal Vow.
Q. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they have
promised for thee?

18. A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so I will; and I heartily thank our
heavenly Father, that hehath called me to this state of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior; and I pray unto God to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.

Q. You think then, that as they have promised for you, so you are bound to
believe, and to do?

19. A. Yes verily, I do think, that I am bound to believe, and to do, as they
then promised for me, And by Gods help so I will.

Q. What will you by Gods help do?

20. A. First, by Gods help, I will renounce the Devil, and all his works, I
will renounce the pomps and the vanities of this wicked world, and I will
renounce all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, by Gods help, I will
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, I will by Gods
help, keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and I will walk in the same
Commandments of God, all the days of my life.


Q. Do you promise to do these things without Gods help, or with it, and by it?

21. An. I said, that by Gods help I will believe, and do these things.

Q. If then you were duly Baptized upon such Promises and Vows, and if you do
truly take upon you to believe, and do, as was then promised for you; into what
state are you thereby brought?

22. A. I am thereby brought into a state of Salvation, wherein I may be saved.

Q. Ought you not to be thankful from your heart to God, who has brought you
into this happy estate of Salvation?

23. A. Yes, and I heartily thank our heavenly Father, that he has called me
to this state of Salvation.

Q. Through whom, for whose sake, and by whose means, has God called us to
this state of Salvation.

24. A. Through Jesus Christ our Savior, for his sake and by his means.

Q. Do you not need Gods Grace to enable you to continue in this happy state?
and will you not pray unto God, to give it you?

25. A. Yes, and I pray unto God, to give me his grace, that I may continue in
the same state of Salvation to my lives end.

. V. The twelve Articles of the Creed.
Q. You told me, that by Gods help, you would believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith? Therefore Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.

26. A. I. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth:
II. And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord.
III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary.
IV. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he
descended into Hell.
V. The third day he rose again from the Dead.
VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right right hand of God the
Father Almighty,
VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the Dead.
VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
IX. The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
X. The forgiveness of Sins.
XI. The resurrection of the Body.
XII. And the life everlasting. Amen.


Q. Which is the first Article of our Belief?

27. A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

Q. What do you profess to believe in this first Article?

28 A. In the first Article I profess, 1. That God is. 2. That he is the Father
Almighty. 3. That he is the maker of Heaven and Earth.
And that I believe in him as such.

Q. Which is the second Article of the Christian Faith, set down in the Creed?

29. A. And I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the second Article?

30. A. In the second Article I profess, 1. That Jesus is the Christ. 2. That
Jesus Christ is the only Son of God the Father. 3. That he is our Lord.


And that I believe in him as such.

Q. Which is the third Article of the Creed?

31. A. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the third Article?

32. A. In the third Article, I profess to believe, 1. That Jesus Christ was
conceived by the Holy Spirit. 2. That he was born of Mary. 3. That Mary his
Mother, was a Virgin at his Birth.


Q. Which is the fourth Article of the Belief?

33. A. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he
descended into Hell.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the fourth Article?

34. A. In the fourth Article I profess to believe, 1. That Jesus Christ
suffered (dreadful Sufferings) under Pontius Pilate, when Pontius Pilate was
Governor of Judaea, and by his order. 2. That he was then crucified, nailed to
a Cross. 3. That he was dead, that he died on that Cross. 4. That he was
buried. 5. That he descended into Hell, that his Soul went into the invisible
state, where Souls departed were.


Q. Which is the fifth Article of our Creed?

35. A. The third day he rose again from the dead.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the fifth Article?

36. A. In the fifth Article, I profess to believe, 1. That Jesus Christ arose
again, from among the dead. 2. That he arose again upon the third day, after
his death and burial.


Q. Which is the sixth Article of the Creed?

37. A. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the sixth Article?

38. A. In this sixth Article, I profess to believe, 1. That our Lord Jesus
Christ did, after his rising from the Dead, ascend, and go up into Heaven. 2.
That he has his seat and abode now there. 3. That he sits at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty, that he is in highest Place, Power, and Authority,
next unto God the Father.


Q. Which is the seventh Article?

39. A. From thence he shall come, to judge the quick, and the dead.

Q. What do you profess to believe in this seventh Article?

40. A. In this seventh Article I profess to believe, 1. That Jesus Christ
shall come again from thence, that is, out of Heaven. 2. That he shall come
thence to judge men. 3. That he shall judge all men, both the quick, and the
dead, that is, both those that then shall be alive, and those that shall then
be dead.


Q. Which is the eighth Article of your Creed?

41. A. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the eighth Article?

42. A. In the eighth Article I profess, 1. That there is an Holy Ghost or
Spirit. 2. That this Spirit is Holy, halloweth, and sanctifies the elect
people of God. 3. That I do believe in him, as the Holy sanctifying Spirit.


Q. Which is the ninth Article in the Creed?

43. A. I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the ninth Article?

44. A. In the ninth Article, I profess to believe, 1. That there is one Church
of Christ. 2. That this Church is Holy, made up of Saints, separated and
consecrated to God in Baptism. 3. That this Holy Church is Catholic,
comprehending all Christians, in all Nations, Times, and Places. 4. That there
is, and ought to be a Communion of these Saints (or Christians sacred to God)
in Christian fellowship, in mutual love, and all good offices toward one
another.


Q. Which is the tenth Article of the Creed?

45. A. I believe The forgiveness of Sins.

Q. What do you profess to believe in this tenth Article?

46. A. In this tenth Article I profess to believe, 1. That the sins of men
stand in need of forgiveness. 2. That there is forgiveness of the sins of all
those, that truly repent, and believe.


Q. Which is the eleventh Article of the Creed?

47. A. I believe The Resurrection of the Body.

Q. What do you profess to believe in the eleventh Article?

48. A. in the eleventh Article I profess to believe, That the bodies of all
men that die, shall be raised again to life at the last day.

Q. Which is the Twelfth Article?

49 A. And the Life Everlasting.

Q. What do you profess to believe in this Twelfth and last Article of your
Creed?

50 A. In this Twelfth Article I profess to believe, That there is and shall be
an Everlasting Life of the Righteous in Heaven, and of the Wicked in Hell for
ever.

Q. What means Amen at the End?

51 A. Amen signifies So be it, and, So it is.
And therefore I say Amen, So it is. All these things are certainly true, and I
believe them to be so. And so let it be, they are excellently good, and I am
duly affected toward them, and will live and act, suitably to them.

Q. What do thou chiefty learn in these Articles of thy Belief?

52 A. First, I learn to believe in God the Father who has made me, and all
the world. Secondly, In God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.
Thirdly, In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the Elect People of
God.


Q. Why say you, That by the Articles of your Belief, you chiefly learn these
three things?

53 A. I say chiefly, because there are other things besides these that I learn
and profess in the Creed, but these three are the chief.

Q. First, Whom do you profess to believe in?

54 A. First, I profess to believe in God the Father.

Q. What has God the Father done?

55 A. He has made me, and all the world.

Q. Secondly, Whom do you learn to believe in?

56 A. Secondly, I learn and profess to believe in God the Son.

Q. Who is meant by God the Son?

57 A. Jesus Christ is God the Son.

Q. What has God the Son done, has he not redeemed all the world?

58 A. God the Son has redeemed me, and all mankind, not Angels, nor Devils,
nor Beasts.

Q. Thirdly, In whom do you learn to believe?

59 A. Thirdly, I learn and profess to believe in God the Holy Ghost.

Q. What does God the Holy Ghost do? Does he not sanctify all the World, or at
least all Mankind?

60 A. No; but he sanctifies me, and all the Elect People of God, and no other.

Q. If then you learn to believe in God the Father, and in God the Son, and in
God the Holy Ghost, do you not learn to believe in three Gods?

61 A. No; but I believe in the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, and these
three are one God.

. VI. The Ten Commandments.
Q. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, That you
should keep Gods Commandments; Tell me how many there be?

62 A. Ten.

Q. Which be they?

63 A. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I
am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
House of Bondage.

Q. Who spoke these Ten Commandments?

64 A. God spoke these Ten Commandments.

Q. Where are these Ten Commandments written down?

65 A. They are written in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus.

Q. What did God say, before he spoke the Ten Commandments?

66 A. God spoke to the Nation of Israel, saying, I am the Lord thy God, who
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage and slavery.
And therefore keep thou all the Commandments of him, who is the Lord, thy God,
and has redeemed thee from Egyptian slavery.

Q. Which is the First Commandment?

67 A. I. Com. Thou shall have none other Gods, but me.

Q. What does God require in this First Commandment?

68 A. In the First Commandment God requires, That his redeemed People have
him for their God.

Q. What does God forbid in the S^ Commandment?

69 A. In the First Commandment, God forbids them to have any other God but
him.

Q. Which is the Second Commandment?

70 A. II. Com. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in
the water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.
For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon
the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
show mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

Q. What does God forbid his People in the Second Commandment?

71 A. In the Second Commandment God forbids his People, To make any graven
image, or any likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath,
or in the water below the earth, to bow down to them, or worship them.

Q. What does God say to afrighten them from bowing down, and worshipping the
image or likeness of any thing?

72 A. He says, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me, and worship images.

Q. What does he say, to encourage them to keep this Commandment?

73 A. To encourage his People to keep this Commandment, he says, And I show
mercy to thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments;
particularly, who keep this Commandment, and do not worship Images.

Q. Which is the Third Commandment?

74 A. III. Com. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for
the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.

Q. What does God forbid in the Third Commandment?

75 A. In the Third Commandment, God forbids to take the Name of the Lord
our God in vain.

Q. What is it to take the Name of God in vain?

76 A. To take the Name of the Lord God in vain, is to use his Name, vainly,
rashly, irreverently, falsely, or maliciously; without just cause, without a
good end, and without due reverence.

Q. What says he, to afrighten men from taking his Name thus in vain?

77 A. To afrighten men from taking his Name in vain, he says, For the Lord
will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain, but will certainly
punish him as a guilty Wretch.

Q. Which is the Fourth Commandment?

78 A. IV. Com. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days shall
thou labor, and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle,
and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day;
wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Q. What did God command the Children of Israel in the Fourth Commandment?

79 A. In the Fourth Commandment, God required the Children of Israel to
remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days (says he) thou shall labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath (the rest)
of the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work.

Q. Who were they that were to do no manner of work, but to rest on the
Sabbath Day?

80 A. Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy
maidservant, and thy cattle, and the stranger that is within thy gates.

Q. What Reason does God give, why he blessed, hallowed, and set apart the
seventh day of the week for a day of holy rest?

81 A. Because in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day; therefore (and upon that account)
he blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it; making it an holy day of rest.

Q. Which day of the week did God then bless, and hallow, for a weekly Sabbath?

82 A. God blessed the seventh day of the week, which is our Saturday, and
hallowed it, to be the weekly Sabbath.

Q. Why then do not we keep the seventh day of the week, Saturday, as an holy
Sabbath?

83 A. Because our Lord Jesus Christ did at his death abolish the Seventh-day
Sabbath: And his Apostles, and Disciples, directed by the Holy Ghost, did make
the first day of the week (which is the Lord's day on which the Lord rose from
the dead) to be the day of Christians meeting for the Public Worship of God.

Q. Which is the Fifth Commandment?

84 A. V. Com. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. What does God require in this Fifth Commandment?

85 A. In the Fifth Commandment God requires, That we honor our Father and
Mother.

Q. What says he, to encourage us to do so?

86 A. That so thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee.

Q. Which is the Sixth Commandment?

87 A. VI. Com. is, Thou shall do no Murder.

Q. What does God forbid in this his Sixth Commandment?

88 A. In the Sixth Commandment God forbids, To do ought that tends to take
away any man's Life unjustly.

Q. Which is the Seventh Commandment?

89 A. VII. Com. is, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Q. What does God forbid in the Seventh Commandment?

90 A. In the Seventh Commandment God forbids us, To be unchaste in our
Thoughts, Words, and Deeds.

Q. Which is the Eighth Commandment?

91 A. VIII. Com. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What does God forbid in this Eighth Commandment?

92 A. In the Eighth Commandment God forbids, To take away, or keep from any
man unjustly, any good thing that belongs to him.

Q. Which is the Ninth Commandment?

93 A. The IX. Com. is, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. What does God forbid in the Ninth Commandment?

94 A. In the Ninth Commandment God forbids, To slander our Neighbor, and
to speak or swear falsely of him.

Q. Which is the Tenth Commandment?

95 A. X. Com. Thou shall not cover thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is his.

Q. What does God forbid in the Tenth Commandment?

96 A. In the Tenth Commandment God forbids, To grudge our Neighbor any
good thing that he justly enjoys, and to covet, or desire to have it from him.

. VII. The Sum of the Ten Commandments.
Q. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

97 A. By these Commandments, I learn two things. I. I learn my duty toward
God. II. I learn my ducy toward my Neighbor.


Q. Which of these Commandments teach you your duty toward God?

98 A. The first four Commandments teach me my duty toward God.

Q. Which Commandments teach you your duty toward your Neighbor?

99 A. The six last Commandments teach me my duty toward my Neighbor.

Q. What is your duty toward God?

100 A. My duty toward God is, 1. To believe in him. 2. To fear him. 3. To
love him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength.
4. To worship him. 5. To give him thanks. 6. To put my whole trust in him. 7.
To call upon him. 8. To honor his holy Name, and his Word. 9. And to serve him
truly all the days of my life.


Q. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?

101 A. My duty toward my Neighbor is, 1. To love him as [I love] my self. 2.
And to do to all men, as I would they should do unto me. 3. To love, honor,
and succor my Father and Mother. 4. To honor and obey the King, and all that
are put in Authority under Him. 5. To submit my self to all my Governors,
Teachers, spiritual Pastors, and Masters. 6. To order my self lowly and
reverently to all my Betters. 7. To hurt no body by word or deed. 8. To be true
and just in all my dealing. 9. To bear no malice, nor hatred, in my heart. 10.
To keep my hands from picking and stealing. 11. And [to keep] my tongue from
evil speaking, lying, and slandering. 12. To keep my body in temperance,
soberness, and chastity. 13. Not to cover nor desire other men's Goods. 14. But
to learn, and labor truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that
state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.


. VIII. Of the Lords Prayer.
Q. My good Child, do thou know whether thou art able of thy self to do
these things, to renounce the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the Flesh, and to believe all
the Articles of the Christian Faith, and to walk in the Commandments of God,
and serve him without his special grace and help?

102 A. I know this, That I am not able to do these things of my self, nor to
walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his special grace.

Q. What if you should not perform your Covenant made at Baptism, and which you
have engaged your self to perform.

103 A. He that refuses or neglects to do, as he is engaged to do at Baptism,
continues not in the estate of salvation to which God had called him by Jesus
Christ our Savior. Nor is he a true Member of Christ, nor a Child of God, nor
an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. Must you not then learn at all times to call for God's special grace, by
diligent Prayer to enable you to keep your promise?

104 A. Yes, I must call for God's special grace, by diligent Prayer at all
times, to enable me to do these things which I am not able to do of my self.

Q. What Prayer are you to use to call for God's special grace by?

105 A. The Lord's Prayer is both a Form for us to use, and a Pattern by which
we ought to make all our other Prayers.

Q. Let me then hear you say the Lord's Prayer.

106 A. Our Father which art in Heaven!
1. Hallowed be thy Name.
2. Thy Kingdom come.
3. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
4. Give us this day our daily Bread.
5. And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
6. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


Q. To whom do you pray in the Lord's Prayer?

107 A. In the Lord's Prayer, we pray only to God who is our Father which is in
Heaven.

Q. Which is the first thing you pray for in the Lord's Prayer?

108 A. The first thing that we pray in the Lord's Prayer, is, Hallowed be thy
Name.

Q. What mean you when you say, Hallowed be thy Name?

109 A. When we say, Hallowed be thy Name, we pray that God may be honored,
feared, and worshipped; and his holy Name had in all holy Reverence, by us and
all men.

Q. Which is the second thing we pray for in the Lord's Prayer?

110 A. The second thing we pray in the Lord's Prayer, is, Thy Kingdom come.

Q. What do you mean, when you say, Thy Kingdom come?

111 A. When we say, Thy Kingdom come, we pray that God may be owned, and
served by all, as the great King of Heaven, and Earth; and his Laws kept; and
that we, and all others, may ever be his dutiful Subjects.

Q. Which is the third thing that we pray in the Lord's Prayer?

112 A. The third thing, which we pray in the Lord's Prayer, is, Thy Will be
done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What do you pray for, when you say, Thy Will be done in earth as it is in
heaven?

113 A. When we say, Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven, we pray that
God's Will may be obeyed, and done here on earth by us, and all men, so as it
is done in heaven by the holy Angels, and Saints there.

Q. Which is the fourth thing we pray for, in the Prayer of our Lord?

114 A. The fourth thing that we pray in the Lord's Prayer, is, Give us this
day our daily Bread.

Q. What do we beg of our heavenly Father, in these words?

115 A. When we say, Give us this day our daily Bread, we pray that God our
heavenly Father would bestow upon us his Children every day all those things,
that are needful to the good either of our Souls, or of our Bodies.

Q. What is the fifth thing that we are taught by our Lord to pray for, in the
Lord's Prayer?

116 A. The fifth thing that we pray in the Lord's Prayer, is, And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Q. What do we pray for, when we say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us.

117 A. When we say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, we pray that God, our Father, would mercifully forgive us
all the sins, and offenses, that we have committed against him, even as we do
forgive men all the offenses, they have committed against us.

Q. Which is the sixth thing, that we are taught in this Prayer to beg of our
heavenly Father?

118 A. The sixth thing that we beg of God in this Prayer, is, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Q. What mean we by these words?

119 A. When we say, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, we
pray that our heavenly Father would by his care and grace keep us from all
those temptations, whereby we may be brought to sin against him: And that he
would save us from the Devil, the evil one, who tempts us; and from sin, the
evil act, to which he tempts us; and from punishment, the evil misery, which he
would bring us to.

Q. What reason is there added at the end, why we beg these six Petitions of
God?

120 A. The reason why we make this Prayer unto God, is added in these words,
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. That is,
because we know and acknowledge that in God alone is the Kingdom and
Sovereignty over all, all Power and glorious Wisdom, and Goodness, for ever and
ever; therefore we do thus pray unto him.

Q. Why say we Amen after this Prayer?

121 A. After this Prayer, we say Amen, So be it, O that it may so be, and so
it shall be, to declare that we heartily desire, and assuredly trust, that our
heavenly Father for Christ Jesus his sake will grant these things to them, that
thus pray unto him aright.

Q. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?

122 A. In this Prayer, I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the
giver of all goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people. 1. That we
may worship him. 2. Serve him. 3. And obey him as we ought to do.


And I pray unto God, 4. That he will send us all things that be needful both
for our Souls and Bodies. And 5. That he will be merciful unto us, and forgive
us our sins. And 6. That it will please him to save and defend us in all
dangers ghostly and bodily, and keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from
our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death.


And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore I say Amen, so be it.

Q. Whom do you desire to grant these things?

123 A. I desire God to grant these things.

Q. What is God to you?

124 A. He is my Lord God, our heavenly Father, and the giver of all goodness,
every good thing.

Q. What do you desire your heavenly Father to do?

125 A. I desire him to send his grace to me, and to all people.

Q. What do you desire God to send his grace for?

126 A. To enable us that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him, as we
ought to do.

Q. How ought you to worship, serve and obey him?

127 A. We ought to worship, serve and obey God with the same Reverence, Fear,
Love, and Zeal; as readily, willingly, and cheerfully; as faithfully,
sincerely, and constantly; as the happy people in Heaven do.

Q. What do you pray for else?

128 A. And I pray unto God, that he will send us all things that be needful
both for our Souls and Bodies.

Q. Which are the things that are needful for our Souls?

129 A. The things that are daily needful for our Souls, are, All that power,
and ability; all those means, and helps; all that grace of God that is needful
to make us to understand our duty, to love it, and to do it, aright.

Q. What are the things that are needful to our Bodies?

130 A. The things daily needful for our Bodies, are Life, Health, and
Strength, Meat, Drink, and Clothing, and other needful conveniences.

Q. You said, that we pray to God that he will be merciful unto us, and forgive
us our sins. How far are we taught to pray, and hope, that God will forgive us
our Trespasses?

131 A. We are taught to pray, and hope that God will forgive us our sins and
trespasses, so far as we do truly forgive all them that trespass against us,
and no farther.

Q. You said, that you prayed God that it would please him to save and defend
us in all dangers ghostly and bodily: which are the bodily dangers, in and from
which you pray God to save, and defend us?

132 A. The bodily dangers from which I pray God to defend us, are all those
things that may endanger the Life, Health, or Welfare of our bodies; such are,
Maims, Diseases, want of Food and Raiment, and such like.

Q. Which are the ghostly or spiritual dangers against which we pray God to
defend us?

133 A. Ghostly dangers are all those by which our Souls are endangered, as,
when the Devil, wicked Men, or any thing in the world tempts us to sin against
God, or when our own flesh inclines us to it, then our Souls are in danger to
be ruined by that sin; and therefore we pray, that God will keep us from all
sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and so from everlasting death.

Q. Who is our ghostly enemy?

134 A. Our spiritual enemy is our adversary the Devil, who, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

Q. Have you any hope, that God will grant you these Petitions?

135 A. All this I trust he will do, of his mercy and goodness, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore I say Amen, so be it.

Q. Who are they that have good ground to trust, that God of his mercy and
goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ, will grant these Petitions to them?

136 A. All those that are faithful to God in the Covenant made at their
Baptism, and do truly make conscience of keeping it in all Points, and who make
a diligent use of all the means that God has appointed, for to obtain the good
they pray for, may be sure, that God of his mercy and goodness, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, and for his sake, will grant them all these Petitions.

Q. Who are they that ought not to hope so?

137 A. All those that make no conscience to keep their Baptismal Covenant, but
are false and perfidious Breakers of it, and do not diligently use the means
that God has appointed, to obtain the good things that they need, should not
trust that God of his mercy, through Christ, will grant their Prayers; seeing
such rather tempt, and affront Almighty God, than pray to him.

Q. Which are those means which God has appointed, to obtain the good things
that we pray for?

138 A. The means that God has appointed for our obtaining the good things
that we pray for, are, 1. That we apply our minds by diligent study of his
Word, and harkening to the good instructions of his Ministers, to learn all
that concerns us. 2. That we bring our Wills to love what is good, and to hate
all that is evil. 3. That we conscientiously employ all our helps and
abilities, in discharging our duty, submitting our selves to the discipline of
Christ, and to the wise directions of our Superiors, watching against the
occasions, and resisting temptations to sin, mortifying the lusts and sinful
desires of our flesh, and duly using the Sacraments which Christ has ordained
in his Church.


. IX. Of the Two Sacraments.
Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

139 A. Christ has ordained in his Church only Two Sacraments, as generally
necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Q. Which are those Two only Sacraments which Christ has ordained in his
Church?

140 A. Baptism is one, and the Lord's Supper is the other, and these Two are
the only Sacraments that Christ has ordained in his Church.

Q. Are both these Sacraments so necessary to the salvation of any man, that no
man can be saved, unless he be baptized, and receive the Lord's Supper?

141 A. Both Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, are generally necessary to the
salvation of every man.

Q. What mean you to say, they are generally necessary?

142 A. The meaning is, That these two Sacraments are so necessary to the
salvation of men, that he that wilfully neglects or refuses to be baptized, and
partake of the Lord's Supper when he might, as generally men might if they
would, cannot be saved.

Q. When may any be saved without them?

143 A. He that is fit and desirous to be baptized, and to receive the Lord's
Supper, but is against his will forced to want them, may be saved without them.

Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

144 A. By a Sacrament, I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace given unto us; which outward sign was ordained by Christ
himself, as a means whereby we receive that same spiritual grace, and a pledge
to assure us thereof.

Q. By whom are these two outward signs of inward and spiritual grace ordained?

145 A. They are both ordained by Christ himself.

Q. What is the outward and visible sign ordained for?

146 A. The outward sign is ordained to be a means whereby we receive the
inward grace, and to be a pledge to assure us of it, that as sure as we duly
receive the outward sign, so sure shall we receive the inward and spiritual
grace.

Q. So then, How many parts are there in each Sacrament?

147 A. In each Sacrament there are two parts. 1. The outward visible sign. 2.
And the inward spiritual grace.


Q. What is the outward visible sign in Baptism?

148 A. In Baptism, the outward visible sign is water, wherein the person is
baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace signified by our being washed with
water, and given to us thereby?

149 A. The inward and spiritual grace signified and given in Baptism, is, A
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness; for being by nature born in
sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of grace.

Q. What are we by nature?

150 A. By nature we are born in sin, and are the children of wrath.

Q. What are we made, by being duly and rightly baptized?

151 A. By being duly and rightly baptized, we are made the children of grace.

Q. What does that grace engage and enable us to do?

152 A. The grace given at Baptism, does engage and enable us to dye unto sin,
and to be born anew, to live a new life unto righteousness.

Q. What is required of persons to be baptized?

153 A. There is required of persons to be baptized, First, Repentance, whereby
they forsake sin. And, secondly, Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the
promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.


Q. Here then are two things required of all persons before they are to be
baptized, which is the first?

154 A. Repentance is the first thing required.

Q. What sort of Repentance is it that is required?

155 A. Not that Repentance only whereby a man acknowledges his sins, nor that
only whereby he is grieved and sorry for his sin; but that Repentance is
required whereby men forsake sin, and all sin.

Q. Which is the second thing required of persons to be baptized?

156 A. Faith is the second thing.

Q. What Faith is it that is required?

157 A. That Faith is required of persons to be baptized, whereby they
steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament of
Baptism.

Q. What Promises has God made to men that come truly to the Sacrament of
Baptism?

158 A. The chief Promise is set down in the 16th Chapter of Mark, in the 15
and 16 verses, thus: Jesus said unto his Disciples, Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature: He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved.

Q. Who are they that do indeed thus believe?

159 A. They, and they only do thus believe, who are so satisfied of the truth
and goodness of the Gospel, that they are persuaded to undertake the Baptismal
Vow, and to be baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and to live according to their Promise, Vow, and Engagement.

Q. Can Infants, in their tender Age, repent and believe?

160 A. No: Infants, by reason of their tender Age, cannot perform Repentance
and Faith. They cannot forsake sin, nor steadfastly believe the Promises and
Word of God.

Q. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender Age, they
cannot perform them?

161 A. Because they promise them both by their Sureties, which Promise when
they come to Age, themselves are bound to perform.

Q. You say Infants promise them both, both what?

162 A. They promise by their Sureties both Repentance, and Faith; both to
forsake Sin, and to believe the Promises of God.

Q. What are they hereupon bound to?

163 A. They are bound themselves to perform this Promise, and themselves to
repent and believe.

Q. When are they bound to perform this themselves?

164 A. When they come of Age to do it.

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?

165 A. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was ordained for the continual
remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of the benefits which
we receive thereby.

Q. When Jesus Christ so loved us, that he dyed on a Cross for us, what was his
death?

166 A. The death of Christ was a Sacrifice offered to God for us, and accepted
by him.

Q. Do not we receive some benefits by the Sacrifice of the death of Christ?

167 A. We receive many and great benefits thereby, the pardon of our sins, the
help of his grace, and Spirit, and the promised hopes of eternal glory, etc.

Q. May we forget the Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and the benefits which
we get by it, or should we keep them in continual remembrance?

168 A. The Sacrifice of Christ's death, and the benefits that we receive
thereby, should be had in continual remembrance to the worlds end, and
therefore Christ ordained the Lord's Supper, to keep up the continual
remembrance thereof.

Q. What do they then do, who refuse to celebrate the Lord's Supper?

169 A. They that refuse and neglect to celebrate, and partake of the Lord's
Supper, 1. Do refuse to do that which is to keep up the continual remembrance
of Christ's love, in dying a Sacrifice for us. 2. They refuse to do that, which
is, to keep up the continual remembrance of the many and great benefits we
Christians receive by the sacrifice of his death. 3. They refuse to do that,
which their Lord Christ has ordained to keep up the continual remembrance of
these things to the worlds end.


Q. Which is the outward part or sign in the Lord's Supper?

170 A. The outward part and visible sign in the Lord's Supper, is, Bread and
Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Q. Is it not enough, that only Bread, or only Wine, be received in the Lord's
Supper?

171 A. The Lord has commanded that both Bread and Wine be received, by all
that eat the Lord's Supper.

Q. Which is the inward part, or the thing signified by the Bread and Wine?

172 A. The thing signified by the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, is, The
Body and the Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by
the Faithful in the Lord's Supper.

Q. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby, by faithfully
receiving the Lord's Supper?

173 A. The benefits that we are partakers of thereby, are, The strengthening
and refreshing our souls by the body and blood of Christ, as our bodies are
(strengthened and refreshed) by the bread and wine.

Q. Is there nothing required of persons before they come to the Lord's Supper,
that they may be strengthened and refreshed thereby?

174 A. Yes, some things are required of persons before they come to the Lord's
Supper, that so they may be strengthened and refreshed thereby.

Q. What is required of them that come to the Lords Supper?

175 A. It is required of them that come to the Lords Supper, To examine
themselves whether they truly repent of their former sins, steadfastly purposing
to lead a new life; have a lively faith in Gods mercy through Christ, with a
thankful remembrance of his death; and be in charity with all men.

Q. You say, That they that come to partake of the Lords Supper, are required
to examine themselves, What must they examine themselves of?

176 A. They must examine themselves of three things. 1. Whether, or no, they
truly repent of their former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life. 2.
Whether, or no, they have a lively Faith in Gods mercy through Christ, together
with a thankful remembrance of Christ's death. 3. Whether, or no, they be in
Charity with all men.


Q. How may a man know whether he truly repent of his former sins?

177 A. Then does a man truly repent of his former sins, when he not only sees,
owns, and confesses all his sins, nor only is grieved and sorry for them, but
also abhors and forsakes them, and does not willingly sin any more.

Q. How may it be known, Whether a man do steadfastly purpose to lead a new life?

178 A. Then does a man steadfastly purpose to lead a new life, when his
purposes are so strong, that nothing prevails with him to return to his former
sins, but he is brought over to lead a new, holy, and obedient life.

Q. How may a man know, Whether he has a lively Faith in God's mercy through
Christ?

179 A. Then has a man a lively Faith in Gods mercy, when he so believes the
mercifulness of God, as that he sincerely uses the means, and performs the
conditions of obtaining the mercies of God.

Q. Which are those mercies of God through Christ?

180 A. The chief mercies that God gives through Christ, are, 1. Pardon of all
our sins. 2. The assistance and grace of his holy Spirit. 3. Eternal glory and
happiness in Heaven.


Q. Why are these called the mercies of God through Christ?

181 A. They are said to be through Christ, 1. Because the mercies of God are
bestowed on us for the sake of Christ, and of what he was, did, and suffered
for us. 2. Because they are conveyed to us by Christ. 3. Because they are
bestowed in Christ's way, by those means, and upon those conditions that Christ
has appointed.


Q. How may a man know whether he be in Charity with all men?

182 A. He that is in Charity with all men, neither designeth, nor wishes, nor
furthereth the harm of any man, but designeth, wishes, and furthereth the good
of all men to his power.

Q. What if upon Examination we find, that we truly repent, have a lively
Faith, and are in Charity with all?

183 A. If, when we have examined our selves, we find that we truly repent, and
have a lively Faith, and are in Charity with all men, then we may safely, and
will cheerfully and comfortably partake of the Lord's Supper.

Q. What if upon strict Examination we find, that we do not truly repent of our
former sins, have not a lively Faith, or are not in Charity with all men?

184 A. Such a man is in a most wretched condition, unprepared to live well,
unprepared to dye well, unfit to partake of the Lord's Holy Supper, which he
must abstain from, until he be duly qualified for it.

Q. What ought such an one to do?

185 A. He ought immediately to make himself sensible of his miserable estate,
and to pray earnestly for the grace and aid of God's holy Spirit, and to
sincerely endeavor by all God's appointed means, to bring his mind to a true
Repentance, to a lively Faith, and to universal Charity, and then to come and
partake of the Lord's Supper, for the strengthening and refreshing of his soul.

FINIS.
Daily Acts of DEVOTION.
REmember, my good Child, that as ever you would be happy, as ever you would
keep the love of God and men, as ever you would save your Soul from Sin, Satan,
and Hell, you must not only know, and own your duty to God, and your Neighbor,
but you must actually do it all the days of your life.

. I. MORNING DEVOTIONS.
THerefore when thou first awakest in the morning, look up to Heaven, and say,
I thank thee, O Lord, my heavenly Father! that by thy great mercy thou have
defended me from all the perils and dangers of this Night, through thy only
Son, our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.



After sufficient sleep, immediately quit thy Bed; and give no way to sloth,
nor occasion to bad thoughts.

As thou art dressing, suffer no vain talk, nor worldly matters to prepossess
thy mind; but cast thy thoughts round the World, consider the Heaven, the Sky,
the Air, the Waters, the Earth, and Hell, and the Creatures in them:
particularly think on thy self, and the excellent estate that Adam and Eve were
made in, and say, How Mighty! How Wise! How good is that God, that thus made
all these things!

Blessed be God the Father, who has made me, and all the World!



Then think into how sad an estate Adam and Eve by their sin brought
themselves, and all their Children, and how much worse it would have been, if
God had not sent his Son to save men from it, and say, How wretched are men,
who are spoiled by Sin, enslaved to the Devil, and liable to Hell!

Blessed be God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all Mankind!



Then think of the aids of the Holy Ghost, and the many ways and means he uses
to sanctify Christians, and say, Blessed be God the Holy Ghost, who
sanctifies me, and all the elect people of God.



Next you may think how great a mercy it is, that you are made a Member of
Christ, a Child of God, and an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, and say, I
heartily thank my Lord God our heavenly Father, that he has called me to this
estate of salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.



When you are ready, venture not out, till you have withdrawn into the
privatest place you can, and there think how far you have broken your promise
at Baptism, and what faults you have committed, and then with all humility of
soul, and sorrow of heart, cast your self on your knees or face, and say with
reverence, as in God's presence: O Great Creator, Sovereign Lord, and Just
Judge of Men! I have been baptized into the Name, and service of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and have promised and vowed, that by
God's help I would renounce the Devil, and all his Works; the pomps and vanity
of this wicked World; and all the sinful lusts of the Flesh.

Thou, O God! have not refused me thy help. But, to my shame I confess, I have
too often yielded to the Temptations of the Devil, and done his Works, in
Pride, in Malice, in Lying, etc.

I have been foolishly taken with the pomps and vanities of this wicked World,
and with covetous desires after its needless Braveries, Riches, Pleasures and
Honors.

I have beastlily followed the sinful Lusts, and been led away by the carnal
desires of the Flesh, in slothfulness, intemperance, uncleanness, etc.

O God! be merciful to me a Sinner.

I then also promised to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

But O how shamefully have I neglected duly to consider them,

Openly to own and profess them,

And Conscientiously to live suitably to them.

Yea, farther, I vowed to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in
the same Commandments of God, not now and then, but all the days of my life,
from my Baptism to my death.

But, O my God, I confess with sorrow and shame, that I have too often resisted
thy Holy Will, and disobeyed thy Commandments, and have not made Conscience to
keep them, nor walk in them all the days of my past life.

Dispose my mind, O my God! to true Repentance, and so for Jesus Christ's sake,
graciously forgive the sin of thy servant. Enable me Conscientiously to renew
my Covenant with God, and give me grace sincerely to keep it.



Then lift up thy Heart, thy Eyes, and thy Hands toward Heaven, and say, I do
verily think that I am bound To renounce the Devil, and all his Works; The
Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World; And all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.


And here before God, and his Angels, I renounce them all.

And that I am bound to believe, and profess all the Articles of the Christian
Faith.

And to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the
days of my life.

And by thy help, O God, so I will.

And because I know that I am not able to do these things of my self, nor to
walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him without his special grace,
therefore I now will call for it by diligent Prayer:

Then say, Our Father which art in Heaven.
Hallowed be thy Name.
Thy Kingdom come.
Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into Temptation.
But deliver us from Evil.
For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for Ever and Ever.
Amen.
Then add, O my Lord God, our heavenly Father, the Giver of all Goodness, I
beseech thee to send thy Grace to me, and to all People, that we may worship
thee, serve thee, and obey thee, as we ought to do.

And I pray unto thee, that thou would send us all things that be needful
for our Souls and Bodies.

And that thou would be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins.

And that it would please thee to save and defend us in all dangers, ghostly
and bodily, that neither our souls nor bodies be harmed.

And that thou would keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our
ghostly Enemy, the Devil, and his Instruments, and from everlasting Death.

And this I trust, O Lord, thou will do of thy mercy and goodness, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore I say Amen, so be it.



Then rising up, you may consider with your self thus: How patient! how good
and gracious is my Lord! Who has prolonged my life and good estate to this
day. Who has provided me plenty of good things; and yet allow me the means of
grace, and aids of his Spirit. Who has entrusted me with one day more to
strengthen my faith, to repent of my sins, to serve my God, to do good to my
Neighbor, and to work out my own salvation in, with fear and trembling. What
manner of person ought I to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness. Satan is
malicious, and cunning. The World tempting, evil Company enticing. My flesh
weak, and deceitful. But God's Eye is upon me. The love of Christ constrains
me. I am under the Promises and Vows of Baptism. My Soul, and its eternal
state, lies at stake. God's glory, my Neighbor's good, and my own welfare, are
deeply concerned in my carriage this day. I shall be judged according to this
days works. Hell is open, and gapes for the unfaithful, and wicked breakers of
God's Covenant. Eternal Glory is before me, the assured reward of faithful
perseverance in well-doing.


Grant, O Lord, that I may this day truly do my duty in that state of life unto
which thou have called me.

Then read a Psalm and a Chapter in your course, and when you have thought what
work you have to do that day, sit down on your knees, and say, O Lord my
heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who have safely brought me to
the beginning of this day, defend me in the same by thy mighty power; and grant
that this day I may fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger, but that
all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, and I may do always that which
is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



. II. EVENING DEVOTIONS.
I Advise thee, my dear Child, as ever thou would be truly Religious and
happy, when the day is done, before thou art drowzy, and unfit for such a work,
to get alone, and having composed thy thoughts, with reverence fall down on thy
knees, and say, O Lord my heavenly Father, thou have safely brought me to the
latter end of this day, and have defended me in the same by thy mighty power;
and have kept me, by thy grace, from falling into many sins, and from running
into many kinds of danger, and have sent me all things needful for Soul or
Body; for all which I humbly and heartily thank thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And I beseech thee to give me thy grace, to help me to consider what I
have done this day; and to praise thee for what I have well done; and to see,
confess and repent of what I have done amiss therein. Amen.



Then take a view of all thou have done that day, and consider what duty to
God, to men, or to thy self, thou have omitted, and what thou have thought, or
said, or done amiss, and say, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us; but if we confess our sins, (with a due sense of
them, hearty sorrow for them, and utter detestation of them, and so forsake
them.) God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

Then fall again on thy knees, and say, O God the Father! Who have made me, and
all the World, have mercy on me a miserable sinner!

O God the Son! Who have redeemed me, and all mankind, have mercy upon me a
miserable sinner!

O God the Holy Ghost! Who do sanctify me, and all the elect People of God,
have mercy upon me a miserable sinner!

I confess before thee, O Lord, that I have been too negligent of my duty
toward thee, in not believing in thee, not fearing thee, not loving thee with
all my heart, and with all my mind, and with all my soul, and with all my
strength; but have over-loved other things besides thee.

O how have I neglected to worship thee the great God, in Spirit and Truth! To
give thee thanks for all thy mercies, to put my whole trust in thee, to call
upon thee, to honor thy holy Name, and thy Word, and to serve thee truly this,
and other days of my life.

Convert me, O my God, more to thee, and forgive me.

I have, also uncharitably and unjustly neglected my duty to others, not loving
my Neighbor as my self, not doing to all men as I would they should do unto me.

I am bound to love, honor, and succor my Father and Mother; to honor and
obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under Him.

I should have submitted my self to all my Governors, Teachers, spiritual
Pastors, and Masters.

I should have ordered my self lowly and reverently to all my Betters: But the
Lord knows I have failed in these Duties. How often have I hurt others by word or
deed! How often have I been untrue and unjust in my Dealing! How often have I,
wretched sinner, born malice and hatred in my heart!

I promised to keep my hands from picking and stealing; and my tongue from evil
speaking, lying, and slandering others; and to keep my body in temperance,
soberness and chastity: But God and my Conscience witness, that I have failed
in these things. Too often have I coveted, and desired other men's Goods; and
through sloth have neglected to learn, and labor truly to do my duty in that
state of life, unto which it has pleased God to call me.

Prevail with me, O my God, to amend, and forgive my sin for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.



Then rising up, read a Psalm, or Chapter, or both, taking good heed, as to the
Word of God, and pray God you may be bettered by it. Then fall again on thy
knees, and say, Be merciful to me, O Lord, take the care of me, refresh me with
good rest, and by thy great mercy defend me from all perils and dangers of this
Night, for the love of thy only Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whose I am, and whom I serve, into whose
Name I was baptized; and to whose Faith, Fear and Love I am devoted, direct,
sanctify, and govern my heart and body; enlighten my mind, engage my will, and
enliven all my powers in the ways of my duty, and in the works of his
commandments; guide, bless, and prosper me here, and bring me to the heavenly
Kingdom. Amen.

Bless O Lord God, I beseech thee, my Sovereign Lord the King, and all that are
put in Authority under Him. Bless the Pastors of thy Church, the Ministers of
thy Word and Sacraments. Bless my honored Parents, my Brothers and Sisters,
and all the rest of my Kindred, my Teachers, spiritual Pastor, and Master; all
my Benefactors, and good Friends, yea, mine Enemies. Bless this Family, and all
in it; all my Neighbors, and Companions, with all Blessings bodily and
spiritual, temporal and eternal, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Grace of my Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God my Father, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with me now, henceforth, and for ever. Amen.



Grace before Meat.

O God, in whom I live, and move, and have my being, bless thy good Creatures,
I beseech thee, to my use, and me to thy service, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace after Meat.

The God of all Power, Grace and Glory, who has created me, redeemed me,
sanctifies me, and has at this time graciously fed me, his holy Name be
blessed and praised for ever and ever. Amen.

Page 4. lin. 20. for truly baptized, read duly.

THE END.

