A Compendious ENCHIRIDION Touching most Distempers Incident to the body of
Man, With the best and easiest Cures thereof.

Wherein the Author desires the Reader seriously to consider the Particulars
before Censure be passed.

^n all my Travels with Salvator Winter, and many years after with that famous
Physician and Surgeon John Ponteus; I never exacted on, or denied the Poor
my skill and Medicines Gratis, but still my house to them was as free as an
Hospital; the like never has been performed but by your Friend and Neighbor
JOHN CHVRCH.

^^ntlemen take notice, that besides the old Tract I gave you; I have now added
for the good and benefit of my Countrymen, a true way of making some cheap and
necessary Medicines; As Balsomes, Plasters. Ointments, Diascordium and
Mithridate.

^th the number of all the Bones, Veins, Muscles and Arteries in the Body of
Man.

Printed for the Author in the year 1682.

The Prologue.
Gent. ALthough I have not time to give you a Catalogue of all the Famous and
admirable Cures performed by me in mine own Country, and other places of this
Kingdom, by reason it would be tedious for your reading, and too large for the
Press; yet I am will^ng to give a touch in short of some Cures performed by me
amongst your neighcors, who were left uncured by some Surgeons, counted ^ble
men. Nevertheless you may see that Gods blessing daily attends my endeavors.
For when I am at work for the poor, my delight is ^o perform their cures
Charitably, believing that God will crown my endeavors with success. Blessed
be his glorious name for ever,

Gentlemen, we are not unsensible that there are too many Pretenders in our
time, who promising to perform great cures, have taken ^our money, and left you
worse than they found you. But my way is to ^erform your cures before you part
with your money. Some few Cures I shall instance in for brevities sake.

I shall not stand on curious delivery, nor on high quaint terms of Art,
although I am a great lover thereof: but in a low and plain way, ^o that the
meanest capacity may understand, what with Gods bles^ng I can do for them. As
follows.

A Declaration of some Cures performed by J. C.
^irs, I will begin with the Eyes, being seated in the most noble and principal
part, and are as Crystal Windows to let light ^o all manual operations, For
God has hollowed out in the Scull ^wo Windows, into which the outmost
Membranes of the Brain ^end two things filled like bags, with the Humors that
come from ^he brain. In the midst of which there is a Pipe interwoven of an
O^acous thin Membrane, yet full of a most pure and Christaline Hu^our, called
the Apple of the Eye, in the which vision is made. This ^s compassed with a
Network full of a watery or glassie humor. And last of all that Membrane which
is commonly called the White of the Eye: but Philosophers (because it is hard
and polished over li^ horn) call it cornea; and this is transparent over
against the Apple ^ the Network. Elsewhere it retains its whiteness. Now under
the Root of the Apple lies the Optic Nerve, by which the image of the thing
perceived passes straight to the center of the Brain. For sig^ is only the
resiliencie of the species from the object to the eye, etc.

I couched Cataract's for Richard Smart a Hempdresser living ^ Cow lane near
Smithfield, and many others to their comfort and m^ credit.

I cured Mary Millard liveing within two miles of Chealtenham i^ Gloster-shire
of the Falling sickness (who had been afflicted 14 years by anointing the
Spundles of her back with my Balsom, and givin^ her my Essentia Mercurialis,
etc.

I Cured Humphry Blackwel living in Eastwell in Stockly Parish i^ Oxfordshire
(being shot through part of his head with a Rammer ^ a Gun) with Linnimentum
Archei, and Emplastrum magistpale cu^ Bitum.

I Cured Margaret Carter living within three Miles of Bracklie i^
Buckingham-shire, who had been Blind for the space of 15 year^ With many too
long to nominate.

Also in the Diseases of the Eyes I commonly use Medicamen siv^ Collirium
nostrum, made of Tutta Magistralis; wherewith I do not only cure watery eyes,
but also the great pain of the Eyelids: and als^ where there is flesh growing
over the sight; that it seems to b^ past the cure of common Physicians and
Chirurgions that profes^ themselves to be very skilful in Occulism, or griefs
of the Eyes.

I cured John Ball of Bloxom near Banburie. He was a Baker, wh^ did suck his
meat through a Quill two years, by reason of a Cancer i^ his face. I gave him
Flores Veneris, and did use Oleum Vitrioli; an^ with my Balsom and Plasters
finished the cure. I Cut and cured Martha William of Michael Deane on my Stage
in Gloster-shire, a Broom man's Daughter of a Hare or cloven Lip, who had been
cut and much abused by one endeavoring to cure it before; but left her very
deformed. With many others, whom I have perfectly cured which for brevities
sake omit.

I Cured James Fisher, a Scholar of Oxford of a Fistula in his side between
the Ribs and the intercostle Muscles, giving him inwardl^ my Golden Balm, and
using Flos unguentorum about the said wound; with Emplastrum Stipticum, and
injections with Mel Rosarum, and Tents dipped sometimes in Egiptiacum.

I Cured a Fistula in Ano for John Rogers living in Stratford on Avon. I Cured
Robert Clements, living in a Village within a mile of Banbu^ie of an Ulcer in
his Leg.

I Cured Anthony Michel living in Easom, who had 27 Ulcers or ^oles. Insomuch
that it was threatened and doomed to be taken off. Who I did perfectly cure, and
others with the foresaid Remedy.

I Cured a Wry-neck for John Scot living in Sadbury in Glostershire. I Cut and
cured David Harris living in Dounings Allie in Bishops^ate street, of a Wen
being on the side of his neck, weighing above a ^ound and a half. And many
others.

Also I cure all Ruptures, or burstings, commonly called broken-^ellies, either
with, or without cutting, which are curable. And also ^l those tumors or
startings out of the Navil.

Cut and cured Samuel West of the Stone in the bladder, Malmsbury

In the Dropsy, Ascites, I do sometimes use Tapping with good suc^ess. I
Tap't, and did extract from one Joan Gamble at times, 2, or 3 ^d 20 Quarts of
undigested Urine, or water. Also I do often cure the ^ropsie, Tinpanies and
Anasarca, with my Balsom, Fomentations, and ^ataplasms, giving Elaterium: I use
Sudorificks, according to the age, ^rength, and constitution of the diseased
parties.

Cancers cut and cured 6 this year 1681 at Chippingnorton. I Cured John Prat of
Keynton, Robert Savage of Long-compton, ^eorge Roberts of Shipton upon Stover,
all of Cancers in the Lip.

I Cured John Cox of Uffington, near Farringdon of a Cancer in the ^ugh of his
Mouth which had by its continuance eaten through his ^w.

Cured Richard Shirborn of Ascott near Burford, of a Cancer in his ^ongue left
uncured by able Chyrurgions.

I Cut and Cured the Tongue of a woman of Chippingnorton which ^d a latge Stone
in the middle, weighing half an Ounce, to the ^miration of all spectators: who
is now alive and ready to justify ^e truth of it.

Directions for the Composing of that incomparable Medcine called the Golden
Balm.
Take Olei Terebinth. lb. 4. Mirrhae 2 ss. Mastices 1. arcocllo 2. Gum. Elemi
6. Gum. vel pinguedinis Palmae 7. Spirit. Vi^ Opt. lb. 2. Mix them together in
a strong Glass, and infuse them i^ Balreo Mariae, 10 days. Afterward put to
it Olei Hypper. lb. 1 ^ Tereb. purissim. 4. Cerae albae 6. ellis 3. Misc. fiot
Unguent. v^ alme.

This Golden Balm or Unguent, is of so great virtue, that it ^ to be admired,
for it is wonderful efficacy and operations, both inwardly and outwardly; for
all great Squats, Bruses, Falls, give half dram, or safely a whole dram in
Sack, or any convenient drink anointing the greived place outwardly.

For all wounds, new or old, make pledget of fine Tow or Lin^ the bigness of
the wound, and lay on any common plaster; as Dia^ chilon, or Deminio, and if
the wound be deep, you may make Tent of the same.

Also anointing any greived part, or painful swelling, it givet^ speedy ease,
and asswageth.

And for all Sinews that are contracted, or shrunken. For Cramp^ and
Convulsions, anointing the Spundles of the back. Truly it would require a wise
Pen, and a large Volume to set down all it is healin^ Virtues, and curious
Operations.

Of Physic, Surgery, and Anatomy.
Also I am bold to give you a touch of Physic and Chyrurg^ry: For I am much
streigthned for want of time.

The moving principle in a living man, is the vital soul, which nothing else
but the spirit of life, thick and strong, mightily fillin^ and powerfully
governing the bodies which it inhabiteth.

For the body of man is Compound, and consists of Spirit, Fles^ Blood,
Membranes, Veins, Nerves, Gristles, and Lastly Ton^ being as it were the props
and pillars, least the frame should f^ Which are in number as follows.

The Head has 8. The upper jaw 2. The lower jaw 1. The Tee^ are 32, sometimes
but 28. The Spina has 24. The Os sacrum 5. T^ Ribs are 24. The Breast bone 1.
but composed of 3. The Cannenl bon^ 2. Th Shoulder-blades 2. The Ischium 3. In
the Arms 6 In t^ Feet 64. The great seedlike bones of the great Toes 4. If
with some Anatomists you reckon 24 seed-like bones in the two hands, and so
many in the two Feet, and two in each Ham, and the 8 bones in each Hand between
the Carpus and the Metacarpus; and the bony sustance ^nexed to the Cuboides in
both the feet. In old persons you shall have ^4 more, which being joined to
246, make up 302 bones expressed ^hus.

Ter centum binis compactum est ossibus istud,
Quod gerimus corpus, non est quod plura requiras.
If you 302 bones chance to find,
Few, or none, are left behind.
The principle transmutation of the nourishment in man is by Pro^eneration of
the Four Vital humors, Blood, Phlegm, Yellow and ^lack Choler. For the
nourishment received being tempered (as in^eed all bodies of the world are) of
the Four Elements, is resolved in ^he body of a living creature into four
again. The fattest part of it is ^rned into Blood: a part into Spittle or
Phlegm: a part into Yellow Choler, and a part into Black Choler, or Melancholy.
For Melancho^^ by its terrene grossness, represents the Earth. Phlegm, Water,
blood, Air. Choler, Fire. But they differ in color and relish. For ^elancholy
is black, and something bitter. Phlegm, white, and without taste. Blood, red,
and sweet. Choler, yellow, and very bitter.

Note that amongst those Four, Blood is most copiously generated, ^ontaining
the very substance of our nourishment, to which yellow ^holer only adds a more
easy penitration through all. Black Choler ^xes it again; and applies it to
the members. Lastly Phlegm tem^ers the Acrimonies of them both, (least they
should Corode) ^ith penetrating and fixing: and gently agglutinates the blood
to the ^embers. Hence it is that Physicians also, with the Vulgar, speak of the
blood, as if it were the only food of life. Now the principle concocti^n in a
living creature is threefold. 1. Chilification. 2. Sanguification. ^.
Membrification. The First is made in the Stomach. The Second in ^e Liver. And
the Last in all the members. Now the Stomach is ^e common Sink-port, or
receptacle of all maladies. Crudity is the ^ed of all diseases. From thence
gross vapors arise, causing in^ations: the same condensed in the head, causes
distillation 1. ^he other member, of the body it causes obstructions, whence
follows rottenness or inflammation. Therefore let it be taken for gra^ed,
that he takes the best course for his bodily health, that ende^vours to
prevent Crudities. Now the best ways to prevent them Temperateness: as in
food, sleep, and daily exercises. O the stran^ virtue of Labor! whereby our
ever to be adored God ordered o^ first Parents to get their bread and health in
the sweat of their brow^ intimating that they should get their bread and health
togethe^ which mystery, if the debauched and slothful Gentry of this Kingdom
would rightly weigh, and seriously consider, they would not was^ their lives in
idleness etc.

I must beg your pardon, and break off abruptly, as touching the^ things: or I
shall walk into so pleasant a field, that I shall not be ^ble to get forth; I
must therefore but only hint at things.

Of the Quantities of Weights which are at this day in use in preparing, and
composing Medicines,
For as much as the perfect knowledge of Medicines cannot be atai^ed unto,
without the knowledge of the quantities of Weights, which are at this present
day most commonly used in making and preparin^ Medicines. I thought good to
declare them, as follows.

A Grain, is a Barley corn, taken out of the middle of the ear Granum. ^ A
Scruple, is twenty Barley corns. Scrupulus. Three Scruples contains a Drachme.
Dram. Eight Drachmes contain one Ounce. Unicia. Quart; signifies a quart of
any thing. Quar. q Libra, is a pound And has this Note. Libra. lb Semis is the
half of every weight. Semis. ss Manipulus, is a great handful. Manipulus. M
Pugilus is a small handful. Pugilus. P Ana, is of every one a like much. Ana. ^

Ne parva averseris, inest sua gratia parvis.

FINIS.
1. Artemisia Mugwort.
GRows by the borders of Fields and High-way-sides, and it flowreth in August,
and it is somewhat Astringent, and not ^o hot, pound it with Oil of Sweet
Almonds, and lay it as a Plas^r, eases the pain of the Stomach, also it cures
the Ach and ^aking and drawing together of Sinews

2. Tussilago Coltsfoot,
It grows in Watry-places, and moist fields, is of a drying na^re; pounded
with Honey, it cures hot Inflammations, and St. An^ony's fire being laid
thereon, it is good for any Impostumations of ^e stomach.

3. Petasites: Butter Burre.
^t grows in moist places: it flowereth in March, and it is ^ry in the third
degree, being dried to powder and drunk in Wine, ^rovokes Sweat, it kills
Worms, and is of great force against the ^uffocations or Fits of the Mother,
it cures all Ulcers or old ^thy Sores.

4. Britannica Bistort,
They be of two sorts and flowereth in May, cold and dry in ^e third degree,
being boiled in red wine and drunken stopeth ^e Bloody Flux, it also stopeth
the overmuch flowing of Women's ^urgations and all other Issues of blood

5. Fumaria Fumitory.
It grows amongst Wheat and Barley, hot and dry in the second ^egree, flowers
in June, the decoction is good in all hot Col^ectick humors, also against the
fowl scurf or old sores butifying ^he skin and purging the body.

6. Chamaedrys Germainder.
It grows in stony Hills and Gardens flowereth in July, hot and dry in the
third degree, opens all obstructions of the Liver and Spleen it brings down
Women's natural purgations, it pur^eth the body.

7. Bitonica St. Paul's Bitony.
Male and Foemale, the Male Veronica, it grows in sandy places about Woods,
the Foemale grows in low moist places, they fl^er in July, it is dry and
something hot, it is very good for s^pings and pains of the Kidneyes, i^ is
good in old Coughs and ^rupted Longs and Ulcers.

8. Ajugo Ground Pine.
Grows in stony ground slowers in August; it is hot in second degree and dry in
the third, it is good to apply to the Sti^ings of any Venomous Beast, boiled in
Vinegar and drunken d^vereth the dead Child, dissolves congealed blood,
anointing body with the Juice provokes sweating.

9. Chamaesiparissus Lavender-Cotten.
Grows in Gardens if Planted, or else not in this Country flowers in August, it
is hot and very dry; the Herb drunke^ Wine is good against Serpents Scorpions,
and any other kin^ poisons both to Man and Beast.

10. Steophularia Celandine,
Grows about old rotten walls; flowers in May, hot and di^ the third degree,
the Juice in Wine is good to wash fretting sor^ opens the stopping of the
Liver, it helps the Jaundice, very good in the Hemorhoids, the Juice of it
mingled with W^ and wash therewith.

11. Pervinca Pervincle.
Grows in moist shadow places; flowers in April, it is very and Astringent, the
herb sodd in Wine and drunken stops the b^dy flux, it stays the immoderate
course of the flowers, an^ other fluxes of blood.

12. Crocus Saracenicus Bastard Saffron,
They use to plant it in Gardens, it flowreth in August, hot i^ first degree
dry in the second, the Juice of the Seed taken Broth helps the stopping of
the Bowels and Guts, it is also ^ry good for dropsys; the flowers drunk with
honied water o^eth the Liver and are very good against the Jaundice.

13. Tanacetum Tansie.
Two so^ts, the one yellow, the other asmnald white, both f^ (...) in August,
it is hot in the second degree and dry in the third; ^ seeds are very good to
kill the Worms, the same drunken in ^ine is for pain in the Bladder, and them
that cannot piss but by ^ops, the Juice of the Herb is good for fits of the
Ague.

14. Parthenum Fetherfew.
It grows in dry places by old walls; it flowreth in August, ^s hot in the
third degree and dry in the second, Feverfew dry^^ and made into powder, and
two drams of it taken in honey, very ^ll purges Melancholy and purges the
Stone.

15. Abrotonum Sothenwood.
It grows in Gardens flowers in August, it is hot in the third ^ree, it is good
against the Scatica and stoppings of Urirne and ^^mans natural Purgations the
Seeds being steeped in Wine and ^^nken.

16. Absynthium Wormwood.
Hot in the first degree dry in the third, comfort the Sto^ck from hot
Collerick humors, the decoction.

17. Buglossa Bugloss.
There be five sorts, they all flower in June July and August, to grow in
barren Soil, the decoction of the Roots with Hysop Cresses being drunk every
Morning drives out all manner of Worms engendered in the Body of Man.

18. Lingua Canis Dogs Tongue.
Grows about highways and Path sides, flowreth in June, the ^t roasted in hot
Imbers and laid to the Fundament helps the ^ard Hemerhoids, pounded with
Barley Meal and laid to any In^tations or Wild fire is a Sovereign Remedy.

19. Barago Borage.
^is hot and moist, it is good against Roughness and Harshness ^e Throat, being
boiled with water and honey is good also ^st Mellancholly

20. Anthillis A^^hillon.
Hot and dry in the first degree, flowreth in June it grows in the Axen of
this Herb is used in making Glasses; the decoc^ of it drunk is good against the
Strangury and pain in the Re^ also very good for green wounds to heal them up.

21. Bardana The Clote Burre.
Grows by highways and dry Ditches, their season is in A^^ being very good
steeped in Wine to provoke Urine and brea^ Stone in the Reigns or Bladder, also
for such as spet blood or ^rupted matter, and in Ointments good for hot
swellings.

22. Ranunculus Crowfoot.
Grows in Ditches and standing waters, flowers in April, (...) against Tetters
and Ringworms. The Powder of the Root o^ causes Sneesing.

23. Poligranthemum Gouldenknobs.
Grows on Grassy Downs and in Gardens, if planted flowe^ April, and almost all
the Summer is hot and dry, seldom us^ Physic, the Roots are good to draw
Blisters being outwardl^ ^plyed.

24. Dipsacum or Virga pastoris, Teasel.
It flowers in June, and is planted in this Country, is dry i^ Second degree,
an Ointment made with it is good for chops i^ Fundament.

25. Succisa Morsus Diaboli, Devils-bit
Hot and dry in the Second degree: inwardly taken it ease^ Fits of the Mother,
and breaks Wind, very good to stop Swellin^ the Jaws being outwardly applied.

26. Trisolium Trefoil.
There be several sorts, and are hot and dry in the Third d^ and flowers in
August, good to purge Worms, Natural Pu^ons, and against the Strangury provokes
Urine.

27. Alleluga and Oxys Wood Sorrel.
Grows in shaddowed Woods, flowreth in April, is cold an^ it is good for them
that have a cold feeble Stomach, the decoc^^ goo^ for sore Mouths.

28. Gramen Couch-crass.
Is cold and dry, it grows in Corn Fields and in low places, it (...) good to
boil in Wine for Gnawings of the Belly, very much pro^okes Urine, and brings
forth the Stone and Gravel.

29. Phaenix Way-bennet.
Grows in the Borders of Fields, of nature dry and warm, stops ^he Flux of the
Belly, and women's Natural Purgations.

30. Bromos Oatgrass.
Grows on Borders of Fields, and by way sides may be found in ^ar, all the
Summer is dry of complexion: the decocton is good ^or stinking Breaths, or
stinking smells, or corrupt sores in the Nose ^eing washed therewith.

31. Crataeogonum Stichwort.
Grows under Hedges and Bushes, flowers in April, the Seed ^eateth and dries:
Some write that if a Woman drinks the decocton of the Seed three days after her
Natural Purgations she may conceive of a man child if she conceive within Forty
days.

32. Junci Rushes, there be Five sorts.
Grows in low watery places, of dry complexion, they flowrer ^n July, it purges
very much by Urine, the Seeds steeped and drunken in Wine stops any Flux in the
Belly.

33. Arundo Reeds, there be Nine sorts.
All hot and dry, they grow in standing Waters and by Brook sides, it is good in
Dropsies, it provokes Urine and breaks the Stone the Ashes are good for Scald
heads.

34. Hydropiper Water Pepperwort.
Hot and dry in the Third degree, flowreth in August, grows in Pools and
Ditches, it washes all cold Swellings, it scatters congealed Blood being
laid thereto; the dry Leaves being powdered may serve instead of Pepper.

35. Persicaria Arsemart.
Grows in watery places, is cold and dry, is good to lay to fresh wounds the
Juice being droped in; good against Impostumation and Inflammations and such hot
Swellings.

36. Staphisagria Stavisaker.
Grows in shadow places and in Gardens, flowreth in June, is hot almost in
the Fourth degree: Fifteen of the Seeds is strong Vomit taken in any convenient
Liquor, carries of gross flam^ and slimy matter, it is also good with Vinegar
to rub on Lousie Apparel to kill Lice.

37. Cucumis Wild Cucumber.
Grows in Gardens if Set there, flowreth in August, is hot an^ dry in the
Second degree, is good against Dropsies, good for Squi^nancy and the Swellings
in the Throat.

38. Colocinihis Coloquintida.
It grows in Spain and Italy and brings forth fruit in Septembe^ like unto
great Apples being very full of Seeds; it is hot and dr^ in the Third degree:
it purges Choleric humors; a Scruple i^ enough at a time, for it opens the
Belly mightily, not fitin^ nor safe for the Vulgar to meddle with.

39. Sena Seen.
It grows in Italy, it flowreth in June, hot in the Second degree and dry in
First: the Codds and Leaves in the quantity of ^ Dram gently purges the Belly
especially Choler and Melancholy a very safe and harmless Purge.

40. Sambucus Eldar.
Hot and dry in the Third degree, especially the Bark grows it shadow moist
places; flowreth in May, it is profitable in the Dropsey, the green Leaves
pounded are good to aswage hot Swellings and to ease the pain of the Gout.

41. Humilis Sambucus Deanwort.
Grows near Highways, especially in good ground, flowreth it July, it is hot
and dry. The Root boiled in Wine and drank is good against the Dropsey and
purges watery humors.

42. Vitis alba Brion.
Grows at the bottom of Hedges and Ditches, flowreth in May, ^ot and dry in the
Third degree. The Root purges very well, ^rovokes Urine, good against Falling
Sickness; very good against old Coughs and Pains in the fides being outwardly
applied.

33. Polytrichon Maidenhair.
Grows in moist shadow places, the Herb between hot and cold ^^n degree keeps
always green; good in all inflammations of the Liv^r and Reins.

44. Lichen or Hepatica Liverwort.
Grows on Stones in shadow places, and flowers in July, is ^old and dry: good
for inflammations of the Liver and foul spread^ng Scabs.

45. Bursa Pastoris Shephards Purse.
Cold and dry, binding stops blood and cools Inflammations, stops ^omens
Purgation,.

46. Buphihalmum Ox-Eye.
This is good against Melancholy and Madness.

47. Buxas Box Tree Leaves.
Is hot, dry and binding, good against Tenams, or bitings of ^y Venomous
Beasts, taken inwardly.

48. Calaminta Montana Mountain Calamint.
Hot and dry in the third degree, provokes Urine, hastens ^irth, and brings the
after Birth and terms.

49. Calendula Marigolds.
The Leaves are hot in the second degree, loose the Belly with ^inigar it Cools
greatly.

50. Carduncellas Groundsel.
Cold and Moist, it Purges Urine and Gravill.

51. Carduus B. Marie Lady Thistle.
Far more temperat; the Cardus good against the Jaundice, ^ovoks Urine and
breaks the stone.

52. Carduus Benedictus Cardus.
Hot and dry in the second degree, a great Clenser good to the Stomach and
Belly, resists Poison, provokes Sweat.

53. Cataria Nepela Nep or Cat Mint.
The Verme is like Calemint, only Genteeler.

54. Cauda Epuina Horse-tail.
Is of a Binding, Drying Quality, very good to stop ble^ at the Nose or any
other part,

55. Caulis Brassica Collworts.
They are Cool and binding in Quality.

56. Ceniaurium Centauri.
They Purge the Liver and Spleen very well, good for Wounds and green Sickness.

57. Centinodium Knot Grase.
Cold in the second degree, binding stops any fluxes ^ Reins in Man or Woman.

58. Cerefolium Cherail.
Being taken inward provokes Lust in old People.

59. Caepaea Anagalis Aquatica Brook-Lime.
Hot and dry good for Scurvey and Maingy Horses.

60. Ceterachus Spleen-wort.
Good for Mellancholy People, and Purges the Reins

61. Chamamelum Garden Chamomel.
Helps Gripings in the Belly, and Purges the Reins.

62. Chamadvis Garmander.
It opens the Liver and spleen and provokes Terms.

63. Cinara etc. Artichokes.
They Provoke Lust and Purge Urine and Fluxes

64. Cicuta Hemlock.
Cold in the fourth degree, good in all hot humors outwar^ ^plied.

65. Consolida Regales Delphinum Larks Heels
^ resists Poisons and Venomous Beasts.

66. Contonaria Chaffweed.
^oyled in lie it kills Nits in the head, smoked in a Pipe it ^ good for old
Coughs of the Lungs.

67. Cruciata Cross-wort.
^ry and binding good for wounds Inward or outward.

68 Crassila Orpine.
^ is good for Bloody-fluxes being inwardly taken.

69. Crythamus Samphier.
^ opens the Liver and Spleen, good for yellow Jaundice.

70. Cianus Blew-bottles.
^ is good for broken Veins and inflammations.

71. Dictamnus Dittany of Creet.
^ ^rings away dead Children, and hastens Birth.

72. Eruca Rocket.
^reatly provokes Lust being taken inwardly.

73. Euphragia Eybright.
^ry comfortable Herb for the dim sighted Eye.

74. Malabathrum Indean-leaf.
Comforts the Stomach, helps Digestion and Apetite.

75. Foeniculum Fennes.
^easeth Milk in Nurses and Purges the Reins.

76. Fragerica Strawberry Leaves.
^s Inflammations in the Lungs, inwardly taken.

77. Fraxinus Aish Tree Leaves.
^s Rickets in Children and stoping of the Liver.

78. Galega Goats Rue.
^d against Pestilence, Fevers and the Falling Sickness.

79. Galion Ladys Bead Straw.
Dry and Binding, good to stop Blood and Fluxes.

80 Genista Broom.
It breaks the Stone, good in dropsies etc.

81 Geraium Doves Foot.
Good for Colic, Breaks the Stone.

82. Gratiola Hedge Hyssop.
It Purges Phlegm and Dropsies very well.

83. Hedara Arborea Terrestries Ground Ivy
Helps Burning and Scalding and old Ulcers etc.

84. Primula Teris Cowslips.
The Leaves are good for pains in the Head and Joints.

85. Herba Paris Herb True Love.
Good for Aposthumes and Inflammations in the privities.

86. Herba Tenti Anemone Windflower.
It helps to Milk in Nurses, in Ointment cures Leprosies.

87. Helxine Pellitory of the Wall.
A cool moist cleansing Herb good for Inflammations.

88. Hippoglossum Horsetongue.
It eases hard Labor in women, and women's Purgations

89. Hipposelinum Alixander.
It purges Urine and brings away the after birth.

90. Hysopus Hysop
Helps old Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs.

91. Hyosciamus etc. Henbane.
A cold Herb, not to be taken inwardly but in cooling O^

92. Hypericon St. John's wort.
Good for spitting of Blood, or to cure fresh wounds.

93. Inguinalis Aster Sharewort.
It helps Inflammations in the Grine and Fundament.

94. Isatis Glastum Woad.
The Side being bathed with it eases the pains of the Spleen.

95. Lactuca Lettice.
It provokes Sleep, and rest Drunkenness and Heart burnings.

96. Marvum the Herb Mastick.
Hot and dry in the Third degree; good against Cramps.

97. Mellilotus Melilot.
Inwardly taken it purges the Urine and Reins.

98. Melissa Bawm.
A fine comfortable Herb for a cold Stomach.

99. Mentha Sativa Spear Mints
It is very good Herb for to stop Vomiting.

100. Mentha Aquatica Water Mints.
It eases pains in the Belly and Reins.

101. Mercurialis Mercury.
It purges watery humors and further conception.

102. Mezerion Spurg Olive.
A dangerous Purge not fit for every one to meddle with.

103. Millefolium Yarrow.
A healing Herb in wounds, and stops Bleeding.

104. Muscus Moss
Of the Oak is useful for stoping women's Fluxes.

105. Myrtus Myrtle tree.
The Leaves stop Vomiting and pissing of Blood.

106. Nasturtium Aquaticum Water Cress.
It cleanses the Blood, good for Scurvies and the Terms.

107. Nicotiana Tobacco.
A famous Herb in Ointments for cold Gouty humors.

108 Lavendula Lavinder.
Very good for Swimmings, Palsies and Coldness of Brain.

109 Laureola. Laurel.
It Purges upwards and downwards (I mean the Leaves.)

110. Lentisseus Mastick Tree.
The Leaves and Bark stop Fluxes and spitting Blood.

111. Lens Palustris Ducks-meat.
It cools Inflammations and hot Swellings in any Part.

112. Levisticum Lovage.
It Clears the Sight, takes away Redness and Freckles.

113 Linaria Toad Flax.
It opens the Liver and spleen, and Purges the Reins.

114. Lingua Cericenae Hearts Tongue.
It stops all manner of Fluxes in Man or Woman.

115. Lupulus Hops.
A Clensing Herb Purging the Liver and Spleen.

116. Malva Mallows.
A fine Cooling Herb good to assuage hot Swellings.

117. Mandragora Mandrakes.
Not fit for any inward use but in Cool Ointments.

118. Marubium Why Hore-hound.
It is a very good Herb for the Lungs and Consumptions.

119. Ophioglosson Adderstongue.
A very good Herb for Bruises inward or outward.

120. Origanum Organy.
It helps old Coughs: in Ointments it helps Itch.

121. Persicorum folia Peach leaves.
A fine gentle Purge for Choler and Phlegm etc.

122. Plantage Plantain.
A very cooling Herb, good in all hot Gouts and Pains.

123. Portulaca Purslain.
It cools the Blood and Liver, stops Fluxes and Terms.

124. Pulegium Pennyroyal.
^^ovokes Urine and helps Virgins to their Purgations.

125. Quercus Oak leaves.
^hey stay the Whits in women and dry up old Ulcers.

126. Rosemarinum Rosemary.
(...) helps Stuffings in the Head, Palsies and Jaundice.

127. Rumex Docks.
^e of a cool and drying Nature; stops Fluxes.

128. Ruta Rue or Herb of Grace.
^esisteth Poisons, kills Worms, good against Smallpox.

129. Sabina Savin.
^xpells both Birth and after Birth and Terms.

130. Salvia Sage.
^rengthens the Senses, stops Vomiting, spitting Blood.

131. Salix Willow Leaves.
^ery good in Fluxes and spitting of Blood.

132 Sanicula Sanicle.
^very good to clens old Wounds and Ulcers.

133. Saponaria Soap Wort.
^erb much used in the Disease called the French Pox.

134. Saluria Savory.
^y good Herb to Expel Wind in the Body.

135. Saxifraga Saxafrag.
^aks Wind helps the Colic and Stone.

136. Scabiosa Scabious.
^y clensing Herb to the breast and Lungs.

137. Serpillum Mother Time.
It is a very good Herb to bring down Women's Terms.

138. Salanum Night Shade.
It is a very Cooling Herb in Ointments outwardly,

139. Soldanelle Bindweed.
It Purges Dropsies and all watery Humors.

140. Sonchus Sowthistle.
Good for Frenzies, Cools Heat of the Fundament.

141 Tamariscus Tamaris.
It is good for Rickets in Children, and very Hot.

142. Thymum Time.
It Cleanses the Breast, Lungs, Reins and Matrix.

143. Trenitalis Harts-Ease.
They are good for Falling-Sickneses etc.

144. Verbascum, Thapsus, Barbatus Mullin.
It stops Fluxes and the Hemorrhoides and Horses Cough.

145. Verbena Vervain.
It is a very good remedy to cleanse after Child bearing.

146. Violaria Violet leaves.
A fine harmless Herb, inwardly or outwardly cooling.

147. Vitis Binifera the Vine Tree.
The Leaves are binding, cooling, stops Vomiting.

148. Vincitoxicum Swallowwort.
A Poultice made of the Herb cures women's Breasts.

149. Urtica Nettles.
They stopbleeding at the Nose, helps Plewrsies.

150. Umbilicus Veneris Navil Wort.
A cooling Herb, helps Kiby heels, Burnings and Sca^ any hot Swellings
outwardly.

151. Rosa Alba Rubra Damasena White, Red, Dam^
White good for sore Eyes. Red cheateth the heart. (...) purges.

Diascordium 106.
^ake of Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, of each half an ounce, Scordi^n ounce: Dittany
of Creet, Tormentil, Bistort, Galbanum, ^n Arabic, of each half an ounce:
Opium one dram and a half: ^el Seeds one dram and a half: Gentian half an
ounce; Bole^enick an ounce and an half; Earth of Lemons half an ounce; ^g
Pepper, Ginger, of each two drams; clarified Honey two and and an half; Sugar
of Roses one pound; Canary Wine ten ^ces: make them into an Electuary according
to art.

It is a well composed Electuary, something appropriated to the ^ture of women,
for it provokes the terms, hastens their labor, ^ps their usual sickness at
the time of their lying in, I know thing better; it stops fluxes, mightily
strengthens the heart ^d stomach; neither is so hot but it may safely be
given to weak ^ople; and besides provokes sleep. It may safely be given to ^ung
children ten grains at a time; ancient people may take a ^m or more: It is
given as an excellent cordial in such fevers as ^e accompanied with want of
sleep.

Mithridate 106.
Take of Mirrh, Saffron, Agrick, Ginger, Cinnamon, Spick^ard, Frankincense,
Treacle, Mustard Seeds, of each ten drams; ^^e Seeds of Hartwort, Opobalsamum,
or Oil of Nutmegs by ex^ression, Schenanth, Stoechas, Costus, Galbanum,
Turpentine ^ong Pepper, Castorium, Juice of Hypocistis Styrax calamitis,
Opopanax Indian leaf, or for want of it, Mace, of each one ounce: Cassia
lignea, Poley mountain, white Pepper, Scordium, the Seeds of carrots of Creet,
carpobalsamum or cubebs, Troch, cypheos, ^Bdelium, of each seven drams:
Celtick, Spicknard, Gum Ara^oick, Macedonian Parsley Seeds, Opium cardamoms the
less, Fennel Seeds, Gentian, red Rose Leaves, Dittany of Creet, of each five
drams; Annis seeds, Asarabacca, Orris, Acorus, the greater Valerian, Sagapen,
of each three drams: Meum Acacia, the bellies of Scinks, the tops of St. John's
wort, of each two drams and an half; Mallego wine so much as is sufficient to
dissolve the Juices and Gums, clarified Honey the treble weight of all, the win
^cepted: make them into an Electuary according to art.

It is good against poison and such as have done themselves w^ by taking filthy
Medicines; it provokes sweat, it helps conti^ watrings of the Stomach, ulcers
in the body, consumptions, w^ness of the limbs, rids the body of cold humors,
and dise^ coming of cold, it remedies cold infirmities of the brain, stopping
of the passage of the senses ( viz. hearing, seeing, sm^ing, etc.) by cold, it
expels wind, helps the chollick, prove appetite to ones victuals, it helps
ulcers in the bladder, if G^ say true; as also difficulty of Urine, it casts
out the dead chi^ and helps such women as cannot conceive by reason of cold, i^
an admirable remedy for melancholy, and all diseases of the b^ coming through
cold, it would fill a whole sheet of Paper to rec^ them all up particularly.
You may take a scruple or half a d^ in the morning, and follow your buisiness;
two drams will m^ you sweat, yea one dram if your body be weak, for then two
dr^ may be dangerous because of its heat.

Reader in my first sheet I told you the number of the Bones, being 3 according
to the Latin Dictick, Thus Englished If you 302 Bones chance to find
Few or none are left behind.


The Muscles are according to the Best Anatomists 270: A for the Veins and
Arteries they so disagree in their judgments the I think it needless to trouble
my self or thee with setting here t^ number it being Little Material, unless
their Names and Plac^ were given an account of which will be too long for this,
and (...) design.

FINIS.

