TWO LETTERS THE ONE Being Intercepted by the Parliaments Forces, which was
sent from Sir Hugh Cholmley to captain Gotherick, employed in the Parliaments
service; Advising him to quit Wrestle-Castle, or else to secure captain Carter,
and to make himself master of it, and keep it for His Majesty's service.

THE OTHER Captain Gothericks honest advice, in answer to the said Sir Hugh,
detesting so treacherous and unworthy an act.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these two Letters be forthwith
printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D: Com.



Printed for Edw. Husbands. July 12. 1643.

SIR,
I Am here at Weiton, where I am entertained with strange nevvs, which is
that Captain Hotham is prisoner in Hull; Sir John Hotham driven out by the
Townsmen, and coming this day to Beverley was first stopped by Boynton, then
beaten from his horse, wounded and sent prisoner to Hull: your father and his
other Officers are in the same condition; I thought fit, out of the
acquaintance I have with you, and love I bear to your Family, to give you this
Advertisement, that you might the better think for your own safety, which to my
understanding cannot be, but either by quitting Wrestle Castle, and drawing as
many men as you can after you, or else seizing on Carter, and making your self
Master of that place, which if you do not one of these, assure your self you
will be made a prisoner by Carter: you may think this a Stratagem; but upon my
Faith I write nothing but what is averred by persons of credit, which comes now
purposely from Beverley to give me this Advertisement: you have an opportunity
both to secure your self and perform the duty you owe to His Majesty as a
Subject; and if in the mannaging of it I can do you any service, you shall find
me most really; Sir,

Your affectionate Friend, Hu: Cholmley.
I Am now here at VVeighton, but purpose this night to march (God permitting)
with my Forces toward Beverley: Jf you can certainly make your self Master of
the Castle, it will be the better course: What you resolve on, do presently,
for J am confident else Carter will have Jnstructions to seize on you.

To his much respected Friend, Captain Gothericke at Wrestle Castle, These.



Captain Gothericks honest advice, in answer to Sir Hugh Cholmley.
SIR,
I am at Wrestle-Castle, where I received your Letter; I am so far from
entertaining your Motion, as I am thereby incensed to imagine you (upon just
grounds) nothing my friend: Sir, my affection to you makes me acquaint you with
our passage, in my late observations; which is, that your fame in the rendering
up your trust in Scarbrough has left so ill a sent behind, in the opinion of
the County, as were able to deter any honest man from treading your steps;
neither have I (praised be God) so little of a Gentleman an honest man, or a
good subject, as to be invited to treachery. For your news from HULL, my
Father and the rest of the Officers are in the same station they formerly were
in; Sir JOHN HOTHAM by report is fled the Town, no man knowing of it: For your
advice to me, I am (assure your self sir) more honest then to rescent it: For
Captain CARTER he has approved himself so real to me, in every thing as it
would render me odious, even to my self to entertain your motion; for the
oppertunity to secure my self* I am confident a good cause, and a good
conscience, is the chiefest security; both which, if your advice (or rather
device) were prosecuted, I should be deprived of.

Give me leave J beseech you sir to certify my advice, by way of answer to
you; there can be no way more happy for you, as J conceive, more secure to your
person, estate, or render you more a friend to your Country, then to draw away
with you those Protestants, whom you misled by fair and specious pretenses of
being the KINGS friends, when indeed it is to be the popish parties friends;
(with whom as this, so all treacherous plots are hatched) and return to that
cause which you have deserted, and which J am confident your conscience tells
you is honest, (to wit) the KINGS and Countries cause; for which you have
experience, we did and still do fight, hereby you shall engage him (that
really wishes your conversion) to profess himself continually,

Sir, your Servant in Gods Cause, William Gordricke.
Wrestle Castle, 28. of June; 1643. Sir, I beseech you remember me to Captain
Br: Bushel, who knows my Resolutions to be as real, as I have above
specified.



FJNJS.

