Nathans Parable. SINS DISCOVERY, With it is Filthy Secret Lurking in the breast
of Men.

OR, Some few Discoveries what the sinfulness of Sin is, and spoil it has
made on man, in nine particulars.

With The Sad experience of it on the Author: written, if it may be, to warn
all men, especially, the Saints, to take heed and to beware of Sin.

WITH A Letter written to his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL.

By Edmund Chillenden.

Lam. 3.1. I am the man that (have sinned, and for that) have seen affliction
by the rod of his wrath.

Heb. 4.12, 13. Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of Sin.

Printed at London, 1653

To all the Congregations of Saints walking in the faith and Order of the
Gospel in England, Ireland and Scotland.
Precious hearts,
I Have a sad theme to present you with, it is of sin, and the sad effects it
has produced in the world, especially on man, and in particular on my self, so
that I may say in the words of the Prophet, Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from
my head, woe unto me that I have sinned: for nothing but mischief has attended
me; yea destruction and ruin in all things that can be thought of here below:
and were it not but that God who I have so offended had appeared to me indeed,
as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.4 Rich in mercy and in great love, infinite and
beyond all expression, I had for ever perished, and been punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his
power, These. 1.5. for I deserved no less, so that truly I have experienced
that good saying of the Apostle, That where sin has abounded, grace has much
more (yea exceeding much more) abounded, Romans 5.20. Oh rich grace, rich grace,
and great mercies, and loving kindness, they are past finding out, they cannot
be fathomed, they are high, they are deep, they are long, and they are broad,
so that I cannot but stand and admire, what manner of love it is that he has
bestowed on me, 1 John 2.1.

I have therefore sent to you these few lines, that you may take heed and
beware of sin, for it is a most deceitful, yea a most deadly cruel enemy, for
it makes such spoil on a man where it gets footing, that if mercy, yea rich
mercy and love from God do not step in to help, it destroys soul and body,
good name, relations, and all that is near and dear: therefore take heed and
beware of sin, and take that good counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch
ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. for if you do not, sin will break in upon
you, and make grievous spoil and havocke.

For want of keeping this guard, it has broken in on me, like an inundation of
water, and yet I thought once my mountain was so set, and so strongly founded,
that it was not possible it could be moved, Psalm. 30.7. when I was in my
Tranquillity, and the candle of the Lord shone upon my head, I said I would dye
in my nest, and multiply days as the sand, I would spread my root by the
waters, I should flourish, Job 29.3, 18, 19, 20. all went well, I had attained
to some good progress in the knowledge of God, and the practice of the things
of God, and I was now safe, and my heart spoke a great deal of peace, but
behold when I thus slept, the enemy sin came and stole in upon me, and I will
tell you how.

1. First I grew a little cold and careless in the matters of God, in those
cold, mad, and distempered years 1647. and 1648. and then sin took occasion,
and by my base heart deceived me, presently runs and lays hold on me,
tempts me, and draws me away, Jon. 1.14, 15, compare Romans 7.11. and so has
slain, wounded, and destroyed me.

2. After that I was thus enticed, my heart being by sin deceived, then I
became it is slave to serve it; and this will be the case of every one that sin
lays hold of. Now I must provide to lay always for the carrying of it close
and secret; and here comes vows, oaths, wishes, execrations, and all to save,
cover, and hide this ugly companion sin.

3. Then sin will seem very fair, and smile on you, flatter your heart, and if
he comes once to be touched, to be discovered, and fears he shall be
dislodged, he now will come with the help of his firstborn the devil, and
belay you on every side. First, on the right hand, and on the left, under
pretense of good toward God, toward his ways, to thy self and relations. For
so have I found it, that when I had some years since abandoned all the thoughts
of any such thing; and in July 1650. had earnestly besought the Lord for his
favor and peace for my former evils, and that he would now pardon and pass by
my sin, and hide his face from my sin; the which he did, and spoke much peace
to me, and did deliver my soul from the jaws of destruction; when death had
surrounded me, I then did vow to the Lord to honor him and serve him all my
days, but there was more snares beset me. For when in the year 1652. I was
charged with evil by Master Thomas Halhead and his wife, now behold how sin
beset me, and what alurements it laid before me, to hide it, keep it close and
secret.

1. Says my base heart, You are known to be a great professor of religion, and
if you make it known, you are utterly lost in the hearts of all that are godly,
for a brother offended is harder to be won, then a strong City, Prove. 18.19.
you shall never be in their affections again.

2. The name of God will be much dishonored, you must n t tell it in Gath, nor
publish it in Askelon, lest the uncircumcised blaspheme: you need not do it, it
is enough you have done it to God.

3. The ways of God that you profess, which every man (especially the Clergy,
which are great enemies to it, and of you in particular) watches to have
somewhat to speak against it, and dishonor it.

4. Your own honor, reputation and good name will utterly be lost and gone,
which as the wise man says, Eccl. 7.1. Is better then a precious ointment,
better then gold and silver, Prove. 15.15.

5. You are now in a capacity to do the poor people of God some good, but that
will utterly spoil you for ever.

6. You will lose your place, which is your livelihood. These and many more
was my soul beset with; and I was taken captive, and so ensnared, consulting
only with my base heart, that now I set my self with all my might to pursue
these instructions, that sin, my base heart, the devil and the world had laid
before me, but they all proved thorns in my sides, and pricks in my eyes, Number.
33.55. this covering was too narrow, it would not serve, Isa. 28.20. and so I
have sadly found to the wounding of my soul, and by reason of sin, and made a
sad spectacle to men. Oh then I pray precious souls beware of sin!

Content not your selves with the knowledge of Gods ways, to make some outward
porfession; that will not go through, that will not hold out to the end, and
then you will not receive the crown. You will fall short of your desired haven
of rest, the salvation of your souls, which is the end of your faith, 1 Pet.
1.9. Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 7.8. Therefore take our Saviors counsel, Mat. 12.33.
Make the tree good, look at home into your hearts, and Purge away all your
dross purely, and throw away all your Tin, Isa. 1.25. for Saints after they
come to be Saints, have much dross in them left, they had reed always be
washing and purging, to cleanse their hearts, and to purify their inward
parts, Jam. 4.8. Isa. 1.17. from an evil conscience, H^b. 10.22. and it from
dead works, Heb. 9.14. and if you so do, then you shall know how to possess
your vessels in sanctification and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. and be meet sanctified
to your masters use, prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. this
heart-work, this home-work, is the business that I have wanted, and I have more
wandered abroad, then kept at home: therefore in the first place sweep all
clean at home before your own doors, set all things right there, or else you
were even as good sit still and do nothing, therefore I pray begin there first.

2. Crush sin in the very beginnings of it, when it comes but darting into thy
thoughts, for they are evil continually, Genesis 6.5. suffer it not to abide, Jer.
4.14.
give it no space, no not a minute, but withstand it, when it appears abstain
from it, for there does evil begin to appear and take place; therefore do you
now avoid it by all means, with all seed, spare it not, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. for if
once your thoughts give but a little harbor to its enticing, you are by it
presently deceived and drawn aside; and sin being thus conceived, it brings
forth. See our first parents, and in David, 2 Samuel 11.2. comp. Genesis 3.5. What
sad work did sin make there, which if at first it had been narrowly looked
into, had been prevented, and therefore Job, he will make a covenant with his
eyes, Job 31.1. and David he would take heed to his ways that he offend not
with his tongue, Psalm. 29.12. He would keep the door of his lips, lest his
heart should be inclined to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with them
that work iniquity, Psalm. 14.14. For the hearr is deceitful above all, and most
desperately wicked, and who can know? therefore have a very great care there,
and narrowly watch, Jer. 17.9.

3. Take heed of being deceived by the world, let not riches, honors, good
name, reputation amongst men, lead ye to any evil, no not to tell the leastly,
though you may gain a world by it, for God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. but
all things that are done in secret he sees, and there is nothing but he
knows it, and will also bring it to light: for all things are naked and open
to him that we have to do with, Heb. 4.13. and this I know by experience, for
all the ways of darkness that I walked in, he did see, and all my deeds of
darkeness he has brought to light. And I tell you, the world with all it is
baits and allurements are very great snares to your holy, upright, and sincere
walking with God, and they will if you be not aware steal in upon your hearts,
swell and puff you up, so that you come to be surfited and overwhelmed with
the cares thereof, and the thoughts of it pierces you through with many
cruelties, 1 Timothy 6.10. for from that root springs many sorrows and evils:
how many have made a very fair and large progress toward heaven, but this snare
has hindered them and quite spoiled them? therefore dearly beloved have a care
of this great snare the world; this was the last, therefore the greatest and
strongest argument the devil used to Christ, Mat. 4.9. Mat. 19.20, 21. Mark
10.21, 22. Luke 18.22. Mat. 12.21. Mat. 19.23. Luke 21.34.36. also was one of
my great snares.

I will say little more to yoa, for I know you are already, very well taught,
only know it is your duty of all other to walk circumspectly, not as fools but
as wise, Ephesians. 5.15. that you are of all others to be holy, harmeless,
undefiled, to be separate from sin and sinners, for holiness becomes the house
of God for ever, Psalm. 93.4. For he has taken you to be his people, and you
have taken him to be your God, and your God he is holy, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 Pet.
1.15, 16. Levit. 11.4. and 19.2.20. You know God is not wanting to us, But has
given us all things appertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. all means
to help us forward in our journey toward heaven: he has given his word,
spirit, his holy and good ordinances, Nehem. 9.13, 20. Psalm. 141.19, 20. and
68.11. and now if we be not wanting to our selves, what is it not but we may do?

But we must be doers as well as sayers and hearers, for there lies all the
happiness, blessed and happy, says Christ, are you that know these things and
do them. Therefore let us mind to do all the will of God: and this David he
was resolved to do, I will have respect to all thy commandments, and then I am
sure I shall not need to fear any shame, Psalm. 119.6. he would as well be holy
at home in his secret closet, as abroad in the public assembly, and if you do
not keep a strict eye there, all will not, nay all cannot be well. O then I
pray take these few things.

1. Be often with God by prayer in secret, keep your private watches with your
God, Ephesians. 6.18. Phil. 3.6. Luke 21.36. Mat. 6.5. Study the word of God,
meditate on that, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Psalm. 1.2. and 119.97, 98,
99, 100.

Ephesians. 4.29.
3. Avoid all profane or idle talk and discourse, as foolish jesting which is
not seemly, but rather giving of thanks.

1 Cor. 9.27 2 Cor. 10.5
4. Watch over your inbred lust, and beat down and keep under your bodies, and
labor to bring under subjection to the obedience of Christ every thought.

5. Forsake not, but be diligent to frequent the assembly of the Saints of God,
Heb. 10.25. Act. 2.42.

6. Take it kindly and lovingly when the brethren tell or warn any one of you
of your faults, let it be balm to your heads, Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 9.8. but be
sure if you do tell your brethren of their faults or sins, Levit. 19.17. Mat.
18.15, 16, 17, ^8. 1 Cor. 16.14. Jam. 5.19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.2.2. and 4.8.
do it in love, debate and reason the case with thy neighbor, and deal with
him as with thine own heart, plainly and sincerely, and by this means you will
and may save a soul from death.

And last of all, have fervent charity, for that is the bond of perfection, and
all is worth nothing, where this business of love and charity is wanting,
therefore Holy and beloved, as the Elect of God, put on (be you clothed with)
bowels of love, mercy, and pity, for love will cover and hide a multitude of
sins, and so let all your things be done in love, Col. 3.12.
1 Cor. 16.14. And now, The God of all grace, who has called you into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, Jam. 5.20.
after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen
and settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Pet.
10.10.

Yours, not worthy because of my sins to be reckoned amongst the godly, Edmund
Chillenden.
Fom my house in Coleman- street London, this this 29 of Nov. 1643.
Numb. 32.23. But if you will not do so, ye have sinned against the Lord, and
be sure your sin will find you out.
Romans 7.13. Sin is exceeding sinful.


SIN is of it self an evil sickness, or disease, that has crept into all
mankind, since the fall, Romans 5.18, 19. and it may very fitly be called, the
evil of evils, for the devils by reason of sin, 2 Pet. 2.4. Job. 8.44. Jude 6.
verse.
fell (from being Angels of light, keeping not their first station, or
habitation) to utter darkness, debarred of that light, liberty, and happiness,
which they enjoyed, being by reason of it thrust down to hell; there being kept
in everlasting chains under darkness of damnation, in that day he will judge
the world, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.

Sin filled them full of all deadly poison and malice, and so they became
adversaries and enemies to God and his creatures men, Joh. 8.44. Genesis 3.1, 2.
therefore he is called Satan, Job 1.6. Rev. 20.2. 1 Pet. 5.8. Zech. 3.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Devil, Deuteronomy. 32.17. with 1 Pet. 5.8. for your adversary the Devil,
as a rouring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour; he is very malicious,
full of envy, John 8.44.
Mat. 4.1. he is called the Tempter, laboring to draw men to sin, endeavoring
man's ruin and destruction, Mat. 4.3. A Serpent, and Dragon, Mat. 10.8. 1 Pet.
5.8. Ephesians. 6.12. Mat 4.3, 9. and 12.46.
Rev. 12.19. he and all his Angels, full of malicious venom and envy, against
God and his people, Mat. 10.1. Ephesians. 6.12. and all this sin has done, for it
made him a devil, and has filled him full of all manner of wicked filthiness.

Therefore sin is that deadly poison that contains, and from whence all other
poisons flow and proceed. The Apostle Jam. 1.21. very fitly sets it forth,
where he calls it, filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness (or abundance)
of naughtiness; the very excrements, or dung of all other filthiness; the
dreggs of it, worse then all, fit for no use, stinking, and loathsome: it is
sin, and out of measure sinful Sin, most abominable, detestable, and vile, to
be abhorred. Now as it is thus in its own nature, vile and poisonous, so it
causes men, that it gets harbor in, to be filthy and poisonous, they thereby
become unprofitable, useless, fit for nothing, Psalm. 14.3. They are all gone
aside, they are altogether become filthy, unprofitable, of no use, Job 15.16.
says, man is become abominable filthy (horrible loathsome) by reason of
drinking in this poisonous sin, and iniquity like water, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. with
Romans 3.11. to 19. it has so filled them with the poisonous venom, that the
holy Ghost compares it to the (...) of Aspes, or Serpents; and men that are so
poisoned, are called Serpents, Mat. 23.33. Ye Serpents, and generation of
vipers, Psalm. 58 4. speaking of wicked men, says, They are estranged from
their mothers womb, they go astray, as soon as they be born they speak lies,
and they are of that venomous nature, that he says, Their poison is the poison
of a Serpent, Psalm. 140.3. it is called vomit, that which is loathsome, Job
20.15. and men that swallow it down are called dogs, Prove. 26.11. 2 Pet. 2.22.
Phil. 3.2. Psalm. 22.16, 20. and 59, 6. and 68, 23. For dogs (says the
Prophet) have compassed me about, base and vile persons, filthy men, so made by
sin; ravenously disposed wretches, Rev. 22.15. Mat. 7.6. it is called mire, and
men are called Sows or Swine, 2 Pet. 2.23. for it is of that poisonous nature
that it presently disperses it self all over the body, that it all bespots and
besmears the creature; and as the Prophet Isaiah. 1.4, 5. The whole-heart is
sick, the whole heart is faint, there is no part free, from the crown of the
head to the sole of the foot, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, bruises,
and putrefying soars. What shall or can be said more? it is called darkness,
Joh. 1.5. and 3.15. 1 John 1.4, 5, 6, and 2.9, 11. Blindness, Ephesians. 4.18. Shame,
Jud. ^3. nakedness, Rev. 3.18. folly, Genesis 34.7. madness. Psalm. 85.8. Act.
26.11. Luke 6.7. whatsoever is filthy, naught, detestable, or vile, and
paineful, sin is the author and cause of.

1. It will appear to be out of measure sinful by the spoil it has brought
and made on man; What a breach did it make at the first on our first parents,
Genesis 2.25. compared with Genesis 1.27. Eccles. 7.29. Genesis 5.1. who were created
righteous, and good, Yea very good, Genesis 1.31. in the very Image or likeness of
God, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. and this made good David in Psalm. 8.4, 5.6. say, He
had made him little lower then the Angels, thou have crowned him with honor and
glory, and of the very creation and form of his body, he was a glorious
creature, Psalm. 139.14. I will praise thee, for I am wonderfully and fearfully
made, curiously wrought of the earthly mould; in rare and admirable comeliness,
beauty, and proportion, with all sufficient furniture; so clad with skin and
flesh, and joined with bones and sinews, Job 10.11. that of all his creatures,
man was his most glorious on the earth, for to him he subjected, all other
creatures, and gave him the rule and dominion over the earth and sea, and all
things therein, Genesis 1.28. for all the world was made for him, even the
glorious Sun, Moon, and Stars, all for his use and service, Deuteronomy. 4.19.

And as he was thus created and made, so he had singular wisdom, and
endowments, Will, Understanding, and many faculties, all good, Genesis 1.21. he
had Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, for performance of all holy duties
to his Creator, Genesis 1.27. Col. 3.10. Eccles. 7.29, 31. Ephesians. 4.24.

But now comes sin and devests and spoils all the glory of this admirable
creature in his first and prime excellencies; as it said of Reuben, he was
Jacobs first born, his might, the beginning of his strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power, Deuteronomy. 21.17. all this by sin, excellent
Reuben becomes weak as water, and should not excel, because he sinned in going
up to his fathers bed; so our first parents were by sin spoiled, for whereas
they were glorious creatures, fit companions for God, with whom there was sweet
fellowship and communion, Prove. 8.30. Job 17.5. Job 5.23. yet by it man
becomes an enemy to God, Romans 8.7. and is filled full of all villainy and
wickedness, yea the very thoughts of his heart (Genesis 6 5.) are evil; and
desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. the mind is without the knowledge of God, the
very consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 4.2. so that now they are
become vile, filthy, and abominable beasts, having vile affections, being
fraught with all unrighteousness, wickedness, maliciousness, wrath, envy,
covetousness, inordinate lust, being empty and void of all that is good, but
full of all poisonous evils, Psalm. 81.11. Prove. 1.25, 30. Isa. 28.12. Romans 1.2,
9. Mat. 12.44. Psalm. 36.1. fit companions for none but the devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25.41. Go ye cursed in (...) everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels; for dogs, swine, and such like creatures, Rev. 22.15.
for as sin made the Angels devils, so it has made men of the nature of devils,
therefore our Savior says to the Jews, You are of your father the devil,
whose children you are, Joh. 8.44. and he called Judas a devil, Joh. 6.70. have
not I chosen twelve of you, and one of you is a devil? This havoc has sin
made.

2. Sin makes a man a servant, yea a slave not only to it self, Romans 6.20.
servants of sin, but ver. 19. to uncleanness, unto iniquity, Tit 3.3 to be
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in
malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. What a slave was Sampson to
his Dalilah, Judges 19.4, 15. How did he serve her? he was her very slave, he
parted with his great and glorious strength, and excellency; he discovered to
her his very heart, Judges 16.17. And it came to pass when she pressed him
daily with her words, and urged him, that his soul was vexed unto death, and
told her all his heart, which was his ruin. What is it that man will not do,
to be a servant and slave to sin, to serve one base lust or other? what a slave
was David to his Bathsheba? how did he travel to serve, and be a slave to his
lust, that he might obtain it, and to carry it secretly? 2 Samuel 11.2. to 18.

3. Sin brings shame, Romans 6.21. For it is a shame (says the Apostle) to
speak of those things that are done of them in secret, Ephesians. 5.12. but before
sin came, man could look God in the face with boldness, and not be ashamed,
Genesis 2.25. And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed, but so soon as sin had taken hold on him, he sees his nakedness, and
so is ashamed. Exodus 22.25. the people commit a sin in worshipping the molten
calfe, Moses sees their nakedness; for Aaron hade had made them naked unto
their shame amongst their enemies, Hos. 2.3. Rev. 3.17. and 16.15. this was the
cause, that poor Laodicea was so poor, miserable, blind, and naked, because
she had sinned, was lukewarm in the matters of God, neither hot nor cold, sin
had so spoiled her, and made her miserable shameful. God he threatens Israel
for their sins, Deuteronomy. 28.48. that they should serve their enemies in hunger,
thirst, and nakedness to their shame, for indeed shame and confusion is the
fruit of sin, Isa. 65.13. where such as were not sinful should rejoice, but
sinners they should be ashamed, even all that trust in graven Images, they
shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, Isa. 42.17. Dan. 9.7, 8,
9. A wound and dishonor, a shame, such as shall not be wiped away; such a
reproach as will stick, for they do not know whither to cause their shame to
go, 2 Samuel 13.13. compared Prove. 6.33.

4. Sin makes man accursed, yea it has caused a curse to come on all
creatures, for they are all brought under bondage, curse and slavery, Genesis
3.17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thorns and thistles shall it bring
forth; in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the
dust, Romans 8.20. For the creature was made subject to vanity, and the whole
creation groaneth and travelleth in pain until now. It is sin only that has
caused this, and where it is entertained, there is no blessing to be expected,
but a cursing; for he that hides, huggeth, and loves sin, shall not prosper,
Prove. ^8.13. but he shall be cursed in his very blessings, Mal. 2.2. for God
and sin is at mortal enmity, Romans 8.7. To be carnally (sinfully) minded is
death, for it is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither can it; for it will always be like the devil, opposing of God, and
striving to be above, and therefore where this enemy sin is entertained, God
most and will set his face against that man, Levit. 17.10, 20, 3. Ezekiel. 14.8.
as his mortal enemy, that harbors so arch a rebel to his crown and dignity as
sin is, for God hates it, loathes it, and cannot endure it, Rev. 2.25. He there
speaking to the Church of Pergamos, though he did love her, and commended her
for many good things that were found in her, but her sins he could not endure,
and says, Thou have them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate; his Soul did abhor such a people, Deuteronomy. 32.19. Levit. 26.30.
Psalm. 78.59. He was wrath and greatly abhorred Israel, for they had provoked
him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their
graven Images: therefore he was wrath, and greatly abhorred Israel, that were
before his beloved people under blessings and mercies, but their sins brought
all these curses on them, as may appear by these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 11.26, 28.
and 29, 19, 30.1. Joshua 6.18. Deuteronomy. 28.15. and 29, 20, 21, 27. 2 Chronicles. 34 24.
Heb 6.8. Deuteronomy. 27.15. to 26. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the
wicked, Pro. 3.33. and nothing shall prosper he undertaketh, Psalm. 1.4, 6. and
35.5. Prove. 11.7. the very hope of the unjust man perishes, Hos. 13.3. and
this is the state of a sinner, that while sin rules and reigns in their mortal
bodies, they do nothing else but delight in the cursed works of darkeness,
which they are ashamed to bring to light, that let him turn which way he will,
still curses and plagues attend him, Deuteronomy. 27.15. to 26. it makes a man a
horror and an abomination, or hated of his neighbor, Prove. 29.27. compared
Prove. 14.17. A man of wicked devices is hated, 2 Samuel 13.22. for Absalom hated
Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar, he had wrought a wicked device,
and therefore was abhorred by him.

5. Sin it robs and spoileth a man of God, Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you.
This people in the 58 Chapter had been a fasting and humbling their souls, Isa.
58.3. and they ask a reason why God was not found of them, and that he did not
answer them, they expostulate the case with God: Wherefore have we afflicted
our souls, and thou take no knowledge? wherefare have we fasted, and thou
see not? God gives them the reason in the fourth verse, it was their sins
and their iniquities that had robbed and deprived them of the good things that
they might have enjoyed, so says the Lord by the Prophet, Jer. 5.25. Your
iniquities have turned away (put by, robbed, deprived you of) these things, and
your sins have withholden (by force and violence, as a company of robbers do)
good things from you; for behold you fast for strife and debate, to smite with
the fist of wickedness, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. it was to
feed, support, and to make provision for sin, to spend it on their lust,
therefore they asked and did not receive, because they asked amiss, Jam. 4.3.
it was to take care for the Arch-rebell and traitorous enemy to God, and while
sin is nigh and is nourished, succored and harbored, God he will be far off,
for God is far from the wicked and ungodly sinners, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. who are said
to be without God in the world, far off, being enemies, aliens, or strangers to
God, and by sins made to be at enmity in their minds by wicked works, Col.
1.21. quite robbed and spoiled of God and all that was God-like, and filled
full of all deadly poison; so that his heart is so swollen with it, that he says
there is no god, Psalm. 14.1. He is not once in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.
but abound in all villainy and mischiefs, Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of
envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, backbiters, haters of good, without
understanding, Romans 1.29, 30, 31. compared with Gal. 5.21. Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.2,
3. So that we may see by this what spoil sin has made, quite robbed and
spoiled us of God; what spoil did it make on our parents, as is partly before
minded? How did the Lord rejoice in the works be had made, Genesis 1.31. compare
verse. 4. both with Psalm. 104.31. and Prove. 8.31. seeing the order, comeliness,
and beauty that was in all his works, they were good, agreeable to his will,
they pleased him, 1 Timothy 4.4. for every creature of God is good, pleasant,
sweet, profitable, causing joy, Song 1.2. and 4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.11. 1 Samuel 9.2.
Genesis 24.16. compare Mark. 9.42. and Luke 17.2. And the Lord did rejoice in the
habitable part of his earth, Prove. 8.31. great peace was between God and man,
yea and all the creatures, all the works that God had made, they did praise
him, and gave him honor, Psalm. 45.10. When the morning stars sang togather, and
all the sons of God shouted for joy, Psalm. 148.3. Job 1.6. there was no
division or variance, no hateful spirits against God or man to work or do him
any mischief; no death or diseases, no fear of guilt to torment and afflict the
soul of man, nor any noisome poisonous lust to rebel in their bodies.

But now comes sin and robs us of all this, and fills the whole creation with
mischief, strife, and debate, lays or turns the whole world into, or in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19.

6. Sin causes sorrow in God, and it grieveth his spirit, Genesis 6.3, 5. The
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and the very imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart were wholly evil, every, or all the day, that they
carefully minded their hearts for evil always, therefore It repented God that
he had made man, and it grieved him at the very heart.

To see that man, that he had made so goodly and comely a creature, created him
after his own Image, or likeness, Genesis 1.27. and 15.1. should so sin against
him, and provoke him, not only at the first in Edens garden, for which he
might for ever have left them in misery, and utterly have cast them off, Psalm.
75.3. was pleased now in the midst of Judgment, to remember mercy, Hab. 3.2.
and to provide a Savior for them, and to lay their help upon one that was
mighty, Psalm. 89.19. Yea then when they were all turned aside, and gone out of
the way, Psalm. 14.2, 3, 4. compare Isa. 59.15, 16, 17. and 63.5. He then looked
down from heaven, to see if any understood God, if there were any judgment,
but he saw no intercessor; there was none to uphold, therefore his own arm of
righteousness that upheld, and wrought salvation, and put all things in a right
and orderly frame, bringing us back to Christ, the Shepherd and keeper of our
souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. this now does grieve God, that after so much love and
mercy, man that he had so done by, taken so much pains withal, that had
spared no cost, no not his own Son, Romans 8 32. but gave him to dye, and shed
his blood to redeem them from their vain conversations they had received from
the tradition of their fathers, Genesis 3.15 compare 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and all,
that man might become obedient and subject to God to do his will as he has
commanded us, 1 Ioh. 3.23.

To this end he gave them his word and oracles, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Psalm. 2.7.
Exo. 21.1. Romans 9.4, 5. to instruct them how they should walk toward him, In
all well-pleasingness, Heb. 13.21. he gave them right judgments and true Laws,
good Statutes and Commandments, he had so great a desire after their good, that
he himself comes down upon the mount, and speaks to them from heaven, Nehe.
9.13. Psalm. 68.11. Nevertheless such prevalency had sin in them, That they
disobyed him, and rebelled against him, and cast all his good Laws behind
their backs, 1 King. 9.10. hated God, and to be reformed, Psalm. 50.17. Ezekiel.
23.35. show his prophets, that testified against them to return, wrought great
provocation, Neh. 9.26. Jer. 32.31, 32. compare 1 Kings 23.26. though he gave
them his good spirit to instruct them, guide and lead them, Genesis 6.3. compare
Nehem. 9.20. Number. 11.17. in the good, old, and holy way, wherein they should
find rest for their souls, wooing and contending with them, disputing and
convincing them, by the mouths of his Prophets and servants, in and by the word
of his grace; also by inward motions, and checks of conscience;

Yet nothing would do, for the strong man kept the house, sin had got
possession, Luke 11.21, 22. Mat. 12.29. Mark 3.37. that they rebelled against
him, and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and
fought against them, Exodus 15.24. Numb. 14.11. Acts 7.15. Job 30.21. Jer.
30.14. Judges 14.15. compare Ephesians. 4.29, 30. and 5.11, 12.

7. Sin hinders and cloggs prayer, though they be never so long, and be uttered
never so loud, they go not upward toward heaven, they ascend not, but do
remain here below, they are rejected of God, as Caines sacrifice was, Genesis
4.3, 4, 5. he will not hear in heaven; for he is deaf, and his ear is by sin
made heavy, Isa. 59.1. compare Prove. 1.28, 29, 30, 31. though they call upon
him, he will not hear them, though they seek him early, yet they shall not
find him; and the reason is rendered, For they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of his council, they despised all
his reproofs, Psalm. 81.11, 12. therefore it shall and will be ill with them
that are wicked, for the reward of their hands shall be given unto them, Isa.
3.11.

This David knew very well, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me, as if the Prophet should have said, If I regard, hug,
and make much of my sin, delight and take pleasure in it, God will not regard
me, says he. This the Jews, as wicked as they were, knew well enough, Ioh.
9.31. Now we know God hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of
God and do his will, him be hears, Jam. 5.15, 16. 1 John 5.14. the prayer of
the wicked is sin, his sacrifice is a great abomination to the Lord; he cannot
endure it, he loathes both it and them, Prove. 15.8, 29. with Prove. 21.27. How
much more when he brings it with an evil, wicked sinful mind, being alienated
and made strangers from God in their minds, by wicked and sinful works, Ephesians.
2.12. Col. 1.21. Tit. 3.3. for what hope has the hypocrite? will the Lord hear
his cry? Job. 27.8, 9. No, he is far from the wicked, Prove. 15.29. When they
spread forth their hands, God he will not hear them, he will hide his eyes from
them, and when they make many prayers, God will not have regard, their hands
are full of blood, Isa. 1.15. therefore he loatheth their new Moons and their
Sabbaths, their solemn assemblies; his soul hated them, they were a trouble to
him, he was weary of bearing them, Isa. 66.3. This the Church cries out of,
and sadly bewaileth, Lam. 4.44. that because of her sins, God he hod covered
himself with a cloud, that her prayers should not pass through. O what a loss is
the poor Church in now! God he has hid his face, and she is much troubled,
Psalm. 30.7. Whereas she was wont by prayer to ride and soar aloft; they were
her Chariots and horses, by which she pierced the heavens, and went with
boldness to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. and received blessings from thence
both spiritual and temporal, but now she is debarred all by sin; that puts a
stop to every good thing, 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6. Jer. 5.25.

8. It breaks the peace and blessed communion of the Church of God.

The Churches of Christ are a holy people called out of the world by the good
word of his grace, they being begotten again, purged and cleansed from all
uncleanness and unholiness, made pure by the washing of water by the word, Ephesians.
5.26, 27. of his own will, Jam. 1.18. not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible by the word of God, 1 Pet. 1.23. called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2.
to walk together in a holy communion amongst themselves, for the worship and
service of God, and they are called A spiritual house, a holy priesthood to
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5. and therefore are called a holy nation, a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a peculiar people, that they should show forth the praises of him
who has called them out of darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2.8. and
they may not suffer any unclean or unholy person to come in and be of
fellowship with them, Isa. 52.11. Rev. 21.27. 2 Cor. 6.17. for all that are to
draw near to God, and bear his vessel, are to be clean and holy, for holiness
becomes his house for ever, Psalm. 93.5. for his way is holy, and the polluted
sinners may not enter into it, they will defile his Sanctuary and holy things,
Isa. 35.8. compare Numb. 19.20, 22. Ezekiel. 28.22. for sin is a contagious
leprosy, that will presently diffuse it self through the whole body, as the
Apostle says, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7.
therefore when sin does appear, they are presently to labor to purge
themselves of it according to the rule and command of Jesus Christ, that they
may be a holy lump; and this must be done in love, with all meekness and
lowliness of spirit, Gal. 6.1, 2. with all faithfulness, without any
partiality, favor, or affection, but where sin is, there tell the sinner
plainly of it, Levit. 19.17. that so they may come to see their sins, and bring
their sacrifice, that by repentance and forsaking they may find mercy and so
prosper, Levit. 4.23.28. the Church being careful of this, they walk sweetly,
and there is a very comely order amongst them, they are, Song. 6.4, comely as
Jerusalem, Psalm. 4.1, 2, 3. Fair in situation, the joy of the whole earth, the
City of the great King. Now sin has in the night crept in, and there having
got footing, has and does mar all this glory, and utterly dissipates all the
peace and loveliness which was once theirs, what by false teachers who do
arise in and amongst the Churches, speaking perverse things, Act. 20.30.
bringing in damnable errors, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet.
2.1. 1 Timothy 4.1. and also often times the frailties of the Saints defiles their
bodies and souls, by reason of sin, This my sin has caused.
that the enemies without take occasion to blaspheme, and the brethren within
are often scandalized and grieved: The Churches in the Apostles days had woeful
experience of the sad work and spoil sin did make amongst them; look on Corinth
how they were infested, and Galatia, Philippi, that they were removed to
another Gospel; see in the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2.3. chap. and there
you shall find sin eating out the very heart and life of God amongst the
Churches, for amongst them were bitter envyings, strife, and reproach; that as
the Prophet says, Every man hunted his brother with a net, Philip. 1.15.16. 1
Cor. 1.11.12.13.
Mich. 7.1.2. those that were their guides they became vain talkers, and
deceivers of the minds of the simple, even to the subverting of whole houses,
Tit. 2.10.11. teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucre sake, so
that nothing but rottenness and putrefaction did appear, Isay 1.2.3.4.5. the
grace of God turned into wantonness, the holy liberty of the Gospel made a
cloak of maliciousness, Jude 4. 1 Pet. 2.16. and all manner of filthiness, so
that iniquity was established amongst them by a Law, Rev.
2.4.5.14.15.20.21.22.23. Rev. 3.15. to 20. Psalm 94.20. and so come to have
their faces made harder then a stone, Ier. 5.3. hated, to be rebuked and
reformed, Psalm 50.16.17. and admit of no reproof, but harden their necks
against it, Pro. 29.1.

Now the godly, whose hearts are upright, and who have kept their garments
clean, and have not been led aside to run in their pernicious ways, 2 Pet.
2.2. that have not known the depths of Satan, they cannot endure such things,
but must testify and bear their witness against them, and avoid them, having
no fellowship with the works of darkness, but to reprove them, But still
according to rule in love and pity, Mat. 18.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 16.14.
Ephesians. 5.11. Rev. 2.24. and now by this means the peace, quiet, and sweet
Communion of the Church comes to be broken, This my sin also has caused.
for there cannot be any fellowship with light and darkness, Christ and Belial,
the believer and the Infidel, or unbeliever, 2 Cor. 6.15.

Sin wounds the heart, soul, and conscience, it makes great spoil there, 2 Samuel
24.10. David he had committed sin in numbering the people, and as soon as he had
done, his soul was wounded, his heart smote him, and he cries out, Lord I have
sinned greatly in this that I have done, for I have done very foolishly, 1
Chro. 21.9. That upon this there comes a great cloud, and dismal darkness is
drawn over the soul, Psalm 38.6. great trouble bowing down and crushing, that
so all the day long there is nothing but sadness, and gloominess, heaviness,
and mourning, Psalm 35.14. bowing down heavily: Now the arrows of the Almighty
take hold, and they stick fast, Job 6.4. the terrors of God do now set
themselves in array, and drink up the very spirit, and make it like a parched
and dried Heath, and the face of God now comes to be withdrawn, and he hides
his loving kindness, Psalm 88.14. compared with Jer. 16.5. that makes them cry
out, Lord where are thy loving kindnesses, Psalm 89.49. the horror of the Lords
wrath possesses them, and is as fire in their bones that consumes them, that
they have no rest, for their iniquities do daily go over their heads, Psalm 38:
4. they are heavier then they are able to bear, the curses of the Law they now
begin to terrify, Dan. 9.11. because of transgression, and not obeying his
voice, now they cry for grief of heart, their soul is sad; we look for
Judgment, yea for Salvation, but it is far from us, because our sins are many,
and our transgressions are without number, Psalm 32.4, Isay 59.11.12. so we
become a burden to our selves, and we speak in the anguish of our spirit, Job
7.11. and complain in the bitterness of our souls; left comfortless, desolate,
and cast down, our salvation passed away, and clean gone, Job 30.15.16. the
days of affliction have ceased and taken hold on us, we become a reproach to
the wicked and ungodly, because of our wickedness they laugh and blaspheme; the
Devil he triumphs and does insult, 2 Samuel 12.14. Rev. 18.10. ceases not to
accuse us night and day before God in heaven; our former acquaintance, our
familiar friends, yea our natural kindred, and our brethren, they withdraw, and
are ashamed of us; this spoil does sin make on a soul, Psalm 38.11.

I have here said somewhat of sin, and the spoil it makes, and has made on
man, yet not the hundredth part that might be said, I shall now show you what
spoil it has made on my self.

For what has been said, sin has wrath in me, and much more, for as the
Apostle says, I have been carnal, and sold under sin, Romans 7.14. that as the
wise man says, In the days of my vanity I have not withheld the desire of
mine eyes, nor my heart from any joy, Eccles. 2.10. And I have been compassed
about with the iniquities of my heels, Psalm 49.5. For in me, that is in my
flesh, there dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death. I bless God I can say with our
good Apostle, ver. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that by him,
and through the riches of Gods love, I had gotten in some measure the victory
of the sins of my youth, Ephesians. 2.4.5. Romans 8.37. Psalm 25.7. and with all my
might endeavored after the ways of God, but happily I looked in the first
place too soon to the outward holiness, and like Jehu, pursued it very eagerly,
so that in my heart I said, Come see my zeal; for God, for Christ, his ways
and people, 2 Kings 10.16. and had not quite mortified those inbred lusts and
evil concupiscense, which sin had wrought in me, Romans 8. according to the
Apostles counsel, Col. 3.5. I should have then known how to have possessed my
vessel in sanctification and honor, but because of this the Lord has been
pleased to write many bitter things against me, and has made me to possess the
iniquities of my youth, Job. 13.26. to lie down in shame, and confusion to
cover me, because I have sinned against the Lord, Jer. 3.25. the dregs of the
old man were still alive, and not put off, there was the remainder of sin kept
and spared, which have been like as the Philistines were to Israel, pricks in
my eyes, and thorns in my side, to be a continual plague to me, Numb. 33.55. 1 Samuel 15.19.20. which if the old man, concerning my former conversation, which
was corrupt, according to the deceiptful lust, Ephesians. 4.22. had been quite
subdued, and all destroyed, they had not now scourged me like the pricking
brier, and grieving thorn, Ezec. 28.24. compared with Josh. 23.13.

There were spots that were left in my garments, which wanted washing out,
which some labor would have soon dispatched; but they being but spots they
were not minded, and my false heart flattering me all was well, so long as it
was secret and unknown, though with my heart I uttered perverse things; Pro.
23.33. I was stricken, and yet not sick, they beat me, and I felt it not, I lay
very secure in the midst of my great danger, and have been drawn away with the
wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, and yet it has spoken peace to me,
as to its neighbor, but it brought forth mischief, Psalm 48.3. For as with a
dart it has stricken me through the liver, casting me down wounded, and have
been slain, Prove. 7.23.26. and knew not that it was for my life, by which I
have gotten a wound and a dishonor, yea a reproach that cannot be wiped away,
Pro. 6.33. knowing not whither to cause my shame to go, for I have been as one
of the fools in Israel, 2 Samuel 13.13. Thus sin compassed me about, and got my
feet entangled in its net; after I was thus wounded, and cast down, then I did
endeavor to get out of the jaws of death, and to ascend from the chambers of
the dead, that I might take hold on the paths of life, Pro. 2.18.19. and to
this I made some good progress, and set my self to the work in good earnest,
and some years sithence, abandoned the thoughts of any such wickedness, and did
reform some things that were amiss, as to a more close walking with God, in
public and private, in the Congregation and in my family, where I had been a
little, yea too too much remiss and careless, I labored to make my peace
within, for the terrors of the Lord had taken hold on me, Job 6.4. and had set
themselves in array against me, and the arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in
me, the wrathful fire from above was within me, I could have no rest, Psalm
38.2.3.4. for when I said I would forget my complaint, I would leave off my
heaviness, and comfort my self, I knew that the Lord would not hold me
innocent, and I was afraid of all my sorrows, Job 9.27.28. compared with Exodus
34.7. Exodus 20.5. for he would, I was sure, visit for all my sins and
iniquities, to the third and fourth generation of them that did hate him.

The consideration of this made me in secret weep bitterly, and I powered out my
complaint to the Lord, John 242.2. I laid before him my trouble, my spirit was
overwhelmed within me, I could not tell what to do, I was now to look death in
the face; the Sword now might put an end to my days; Scotland July 1650.
I looked on my right hand and beheld, but refuge failed me, and my hope was as
the giving up the Ghost, Psalm 142.4. compared with Joh. 11.20. and then I
cried unto the Lord, I powered out my soul before him, I confessed my sins in
his sight, and acknowledge I had done evil, and desired he would purge me, and
cleanse me from mine iniquities thoroughly, and make me to hear joy and
gladness; and that he would hide his face from my sins, Psalm 51.23.7.8.9. and
deliver me, and not to take me away in his wrath, Psalm 16.1. but to be
merciful to me, and heal my soul, for I had sinned against him, 2 Chro. 30.20.
Psalm 41.5. and the Lord heard the voice of my supplication, and gave me my
hearts desire; he delivered me and saved me, Psalm 6.8. and healed the bones
that were broken, and gave peace to the troubled spirit, Psalm 30.2. and upon
this it came into my heart what I should now do for God, and that saying of
that good man Daniel came to my remembrance, Dan. 42. Wherefore O King let my
counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thy iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthning to thy
tranquillity: This Scripture did (I confess) much affect my heart, and I did vow
to the Lord solemnly, I would lay out my self for his glory, obey every truth,
and break off every yoke: For the former, the seeking Gods glory, and obeying
every truth in pursuance of my vow, I appeal to the Saints and faithful
brethren that are in that Troop that was not long sithence mine, and to all the
Congregations where I have been conversant, and in particular to the
Congregation that now meets in Stone-chappel in Paul's London, where my most
constant residency has been.

Yet for all this there were some of the Idols in the high places left standing
still, 2 Chro. 33.17. untaken away, which I should have been as careful to have
lain aside, and have broken off from, as any else, and have known this to have
been my duty, to have Ephesians. 4.31. Col. 3.8. had a grave, sober, and an humble
carriage in the things of the Gospel, that thereby I might have adorned the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in all things, Tit. 2.10. and thus
my spots continued, when I thought I had washed my self clean, as with snow
water, and had made my hands very clean, now the Lord Suffered me to fall thus,
that I might make a clear and thorough work, and wash and make all clean, to do
away the small spot as well as the great.
he took me and threw me into the ditch, and my own clothes they abhorred me,
Job 9.30.31. and my spot has not been the spot of his sons or people; but of
one that has been perverse, Deuteronomy. 32.5. consulting only with my own heart,
which as the Prophets says, Is desperately wicked, and who can know it, Jer.
17.9. it being some years past: Thus was my soul deceived, and my heart did
plead and hug me with peace; and like Lot, I thought in my self that to deny
it, being so long sithence, it was but a little one, Genesis 19.20. but this now I
have found, that on no one sin goes alone, but may well be called as that evil
Spirit was which our Savior cast out of that man, who said, being asked, his
name was Legion, because many devils, Mark 5.9.15. Luke 8, 30. so I may say of
this my sin, it was Legion, that is, it was a sin that brought many sins with
it; for after I had once denied it, then I was fast bound and engaged to stand
to, and confirm my denial, that it was true.

Now do but see how foolish and vain a thing it is, to forsake our own mercies,
and to choose lying vanities, Jonah 2.8. to speak wickedly for God, or to talk
deceiptfully for him, Job 13.7. as if the truth of God, the glory and honor of
his name, and ways, stood in need of my lie, so to sin that grace might
abound, that good might come thereof, Romans 3.7.8. this now has been my sin,
and this has been my iniquity, in denying truth, and speaking falsely, not
sparing horrible wishes, bitter cursings and execrations on my self, nor any
means for the confirmation of what I had affirmed, (for which the Congregation
did deal with me) though I did manifest by a large Declaration my sorrow, true
and hearty repentance, and that with tears; but the case was in their judgments
difficult, (because I had so greatly sinned) whether my repentance was true or
no; (which I say was) so that after a large debate, they were pleased by the
greater number to declare me excluded; that truly I stand and tremble with the
very thoughts of it, that God should spare, and should exercise any forbearance
toward me, but might, and I admire at his grace, he did not strike me dead, or
show some visible judgment on me, to make me an example. But here is the great
riches of his grace to be admired, that where sin has abounded (yea
superabounded) there grace has much more abounded, Romans 5.20, 21. that he did
give me grace and time for repentance, yea has also given repentance it self,
and blessed, and for ever blessed be his great name, though I must say with the
Prophet, Lam 3.1. I am the man that have seen affliction, by the rod of his
wrath, he has builded against me, and compassed me with gall and gravel, Lam.
3.4. his loving kindness that could not prevail with me, to break off my
iniquities, therefore his correcting hand, that has taught me, though it has
been very sore, yet I can say with the Prophet, Jeremiah 30.11. it has been in
measure, he has not always chid, neither has he kept his anger, he has not
dealt with me after my sins, neither rewarded me according to my iniquities,
Psalm. 9.10. for he is and has been to my soul exceeding plenteous in mercy.

But this (friends) sin has done to me, and brought upon me; 1. A stain and a
blot, Prove. 6.33. and whither to cause my shame to go, I know not, 2 Samuel 13.13.

2. It has caused my familiars and my friends, my companions with whom I have
taken sweet counsel together, and walked into the house of God in company, to
reproach me, Psalm. 55.12.

3. It has put my brethren far from me, and my acquaintance are verily
estranged from me; my kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me, Job 19.13, 14.

4. It has buried me in my good name, which is better then precious ointment,
Eccles. 7.1. and rather to be chosen then great riches, Pro. 22.1. what is it
that it has not brought upon me? all manner of mischief, that as I have said,
sin is the mother, yea the father also of all mischief and evil, that I may
truly say, that sin is exceeding, or out of measure sinful.

And now I do testify to all the world, that through grace, and of the rich
love of God, Christ has turned and cast his gracious looks upon me, and darted
his blessed rays into my heart, as has wrought unfeigned sorrow and true
repentance for my sins never to be repented of, Lu. 22.61. for that sorrow
which is after a godly manner, works repentance to salvation not to be
repented of, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. and this I manifested to the Saints and faithful
Brethren of the Congregation meeting in Stone Chapel Paul's London with many
tears: November. 6. 1653.
and I do by this crave pardon of all men that I have any ways by lying lips
in this matter abused, and do pray all the Saints and faithful brethren of all
the Congregations in the world, that I have any ways offended, to forgive me,
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven them, Ephesians. 4.32.

And now what shall I say, my grief is sore, and my calamity great, I would it
were by the godly wise thoroughly weighed, and that they were laid in the
balance together, Job 6.2. I am persuaded they would say, that in this age
there has not appeared any sorrow like my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in this his day of fierce anger, Lamen. 1.12. for it is to me so
sad and heavy, that truly I could wish, and oh that I might have my request,
that God would grant the thing that I long for, even that it would please God
to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand and cut me off, Job 6.8.9. for
I confess I am not worthy to be reckoned amongst them that are living, but far
better it would be for me to be where I should be quiet, sleep, and be at rest,
Job 3.13. and be no longer such a burden to my self, Job 7.20. It is true I
have sinned against the Lord, who is the preserver of men, and for that he has
made me to my neighbors a reproach, Psalm 34.13. and 74.4. yea it is so, as
there was never any like it, that I, who not many months sithence had the
candle of the Lord shining on my head, and my steps were washed with butter,
and the rock powered out rivers of oil, Job 29.23.6. that had my hands
strengthened to do the young men, yea the aged some right, and break the jaws
of some wicked men, and deliver some poor souls from their spoils, that was
able in some small measure to help the poor and needy, Job 29.8.17. and send
them away with a blessing; But now what is befallen me, shame and contempt,
Mark it, and take heed of sin, beware of sin.
and they that are younger then my self, they have me in derision; I am their
song and their byword, Job 30.1.9.10. they abhor me, and spare not to spit in
my face; What is there, or can there be in this life a greater affliction then
this, that my very enemies should have their desire on me, that before stood in
fear of me, should now boast themselves and triumph, this has befallen the man
that was so righteous; now the hand and judgment of God is against him for his
actings against the King, and his Party; others they cry out, and rejoice, and
say, this is he that was so much against the Clergy, and they belch out their
blasphemy now against the ways of God, the young children they despise me, all
my familiar friends and my old acquaintance are verily estranged from me, Job
19.13.14.18. they whom with all my heart I loved, are turned against me, though
I have filled their bellies, and have clothed their backs, have fed at my
table, for whom I have been willing to spare no pains, but to lay out my self
to do them good, that they and theirs might receive refreshment and comfort,
these, O these! are turned against me, and reproach me bitterly, See what sin
does bring to men.
so that my affliction is such as it cannot be imagined, it is that cannot by
any mortal be born, Psalm 55.12. all indeed that have had any esteem of me
despise me, Lament. 1.8. because I have sinned grievously; and yet this is
nothing, and not considered, no not by some of my mothers children, for they
are angry with me, and have put off all bowels of pity, Cant. 1.6. they have
forsaken me as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they have passed away, Job
6.15. for they bind the yoke of my iniquities fast on me with their hands till
my strength fails me, and will not ease me, though it be but with the touch
of one of their fingers, Mat. 23.4. Luke 11.46. as if no pity were to be shown
to him that is afflicted, Ioh 6.14. for in the house of my friends I have been
wounded, Zech. 13.6. no love, patience; long-sufferance, or forbearance, no
brotherly kindness, or gentleness thought on, I acknowledge it the just judgment
of God against me, thus to punish me for my sins by my dear friends, who truly
I do think did it out of zeal to God, and detestation against my sin, by which
I had much abused them; yet I think there was some slip and weakness in their
proceeding against me, but I do heartily forgive them.
that so by meekness I might be taught and recovered out of the snare of the
devil, 2 Timothy 2.25.29. Gal. 6.12. so that I may say, where was the sounding of
bowels, where was mercy, it was restrained from me, Isay 63.15. O Lord, I am
oppressed, undertake for me, Isay 28.14. for thou have spoken once, yea twice,
yet I perceived not, Job 33.14. but, now thou have spoken terribly, and have
broken all my bones; thou have cut me down like the grass, thou have blown me
away as chaff before the wind, Psalm 1.4. so that I have known what and how
fearful a thing it is to fall into the hand of God, and for him to enter into
judgment with man, Heb. 10.30.31. yet he has not retained his anger, nor
continued chiding, but has in the midst of wrath remembered mercy, Psalm
103.8.9.10. Mica. 7.18. Heb. 3.10. for with him is mercy and plenteous
redemption; therefore let none rejoice that I have fallen, I shall arise, yea
the Lord has raised me up, Mica. 7.8. and lifted up the light of his
countenance upon me, having cheered the bones that were broken, and made me
hear joy and gladness, Psalm 4.6. and 51.8. he having fulfilled his promise,
not to suffer me to be tempted above what I was able, but has made a way to
escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. for the snare is broken, and my soul is escaped, my help
is in the name of the Lord, Psalm 124.6.7.

And now what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me, I
will take the cup of salvation and call upon his name, I will pay my vows unto
the Lord now in the presence of all his people, Psalm 116.12.13.14. and I and
my house will serve the Lord, Nehe. 24.15. truly and sincerely in righteousness
and true holiness all the days of my poor pilgrimage, Luke 1.17. keeping under
my body, and bringing it under subjection, mortifying all corruptions that are
in my members that are upon the earth, Col. 35. 1 Cor. 9.27. laying aside every
weight, and those sins that do so easily beset me, and run with patience the
race that is set before me, Heb. 12.1. cleansing my self from all filthiness of
the flesh, as well as spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2
Cor. 7.1. and this I will do (through his grace) for the Gospel sake, that if
it be possible by all or any means, I may bring glory to God, and honor, and
adorn the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in all things, Tit. 2.10.

And I will arm my self to bear the reproaches of my mothers children in the
house of my friends, Cant. 1.6. compared with Zech. 13.7. and all the scoffings
of the Michals and Ismaels, Genesis 21.4. 1 Chro. 15.29. and if any Shemeis shall
now curse me, I will say, let him alone, for the Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel
16.11. and the Lord I know will requite me good for their evil; and I will
conclude with that saying, Mica. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him.

FINIS.
May it please your Excellency;
I Confess my self very much unworthy thus to trouble you, but a necessity
lies upon me, that I may now at last discharge a good conscience, and be plain
with God, my own heart, and your Excellency, that with the same mouth and lips
by which I have lied and abused your ears, and with the same hand and pen
acknowledge that I have dealt falsely and wickedly with your Excellency, and the
rest of your Officers, with whom I have had any thing to do about my business,
especially with those Officers that were appointed by your Excellency to
examine my business, I do hereby declare to my great shame, and acknowledge,
that I did deal very falsely, hypocritically and wickedly, and all the means
that possible my own base wicked heart could devise, I made use of, to cover
and hide my sins; I did not refrain from lies, vows, protestations, wishes, and
execrations on my self; also laboring by all the art I could to draw others
into the same sin with me, not sparing the poor Church of God, amongst whom I
walked, to the great reproach and blasphemy of the good name of God they
profess; but the party whom it principally concerned, I did frame words, and
contrive matter, what should be said, and how the business should go, so that
truly I confess my sin in that has been very great; I do acknowledge, and I do
bless God for his good grace to me, that after all my hardness and impenitency
of heart, that he stirred up some of my brethren to deal with me, bringing me
to a sight of my great evils, and thereby also to great repentance, for God
has spoken peace, and remembered mercy, for the which I do bless him, and shall
all the days of my life, love, honor and obey him, by a holy, humble and
righteous walking with him in the ways of the Gospel; and now I do humbly beg
at your Excellencies hands, and all other your godly Officers hands pardon and
forgiveness, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you: And my Lord, I have too
too sadly experienced your Excellencies words to me, or rather the Apostles,
that God will not be mocked, Numb 32.23. Gal. 6.5.
but will make our sins find us out; and truly I have found it true to purpose,
though I knew it before, but sin deceived me, the world had possessed my heart,
the honor and profits of the same were snares to me, I pray God all may take
warning by me, and not to love riches, honor, good name, more then the truth,
and the honor of God, to beware that they be not deceived by their hearts, to
think that God stands in need of our lies to honor and advantage his name, or
ways of his Gospel, to sin, that grace may abound.

I do think it very meet to vindicate Col. Goffe, Col. Cooper, Lievt. Col.
Mason, Lievt. Col. Worsly, Major Pecker, which were appointed by your
Excellency to look into my cause, that they did faithfully and honestly, with a
great deal of love and tenderness, endeavor to find out the truth, especially
Col. Goffe, and Lievt. Col. Mason, that in my heart I did look on them as
acting against me, as my very enemies, especially Lievt. Col. Mason was so
busy and restless, that truth might be found out; and for this I do pray Col.
Goffe, and Lievt. Col. Mason in particular forgiveness.

And now my Lord, I cannot conclude without an acknowledgment of the many
signal favors I have received from your Excellency, and how tenderly your
Excellency did deal with me about this business; so that I may say of your
Excellency, as it is written of Joseph, Mat. 1^ ^9. that your Excellency being
just, and full of pity, you were not minded to make me a public example, but
to put me off privily, casting also in your thoughts how to do me good, that I
might not be utterly ruined, all which I do with all humility and thankfulness
acknowledge, and am sorry I have this sad occasion to trouble your Excellency,
and yet I rejoice that God has been pleased to be merciful to me: I rest,

Not worthy to be reckoned amongst the living, much less your Excellencies poor
unworthy servant; Edm. Chillenden.
November. 30. 1653.

