An Answer to a Book WHICH SAMVEL EATON Put up to the PARLIAMENT: Which he
says he is a Teacher of the Church of Christ, heretofore meeting at
Duckenfield, now at Stockport in Cheshire; And he calls the Title of his Book
QUAKERS CONFUTED.

Moses who was a Judge quaked and trembled, David a King in Israel quaked and
trembled, and Solomon who was a King trembled, and Daniel a servant of the most
high God trembled, and Jer. the Lords Prophet his bones shaked, and Habak. a
Prophet of the Lord his lips quivered, and his belly shoke, and Paul a Minister
made by the will of God trembled, and Job the servant of the most high God, who
saw God trembled: And these saw God, and many other of our Witnesses we might
bring.

And these heard the voice of God, and thou that writest, thou may say thou
have confuted all them; for he that is against them, is against us, and he that
is against us, is against them, for the same power is witnessed; b^t thou
Eaton, who says thou art a Teacher of the Church at Duckenfield, who says
thou have not heard the voice of the living God, and that such a voice as this,
as comes immediately from God, you have not heard, and such an inspiration as
this you have not received, nor do you wait for it.

And Isaiah says, Hear the Word of the Lord all ye that tremble at his Word;
and this is the man that I do regard, says the Lord, that is of a contrite
heart, and trembles at my Word; but such Eaton and his Church does not regard,
but custs out friends of the Lord from them, whom the world calls QUAKERS.

London: Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1654.

To the Reader.
We hearing of a Paper which was sent to a Member of a Church, (as they call
it) at Duckenfield, or that ways; of which one Eaton is the Pastor; and in that
Paper we find many slanderous speeches, and false accusations against us, whom
the world scornfully calls Quakers. So the Paper being sent to us, we seeing
many lies and false reports, we wrote some things to the paper, to clear our
selves from lies and slanders: And that generation which ever does lie and
slander, and sent it back to the Church, as they call it, and certain Queri^s
to be answered: For had the Church, or the Pastor of it, as they call it, sent
the Paper to us, it had been honest; but writing to others, not sending to us,
we see the deceit that would slander the innocent privily; but to us it is
none, because it does not touch us: And the said Church, and Eaton, which the
Queries were sent to, have writ forth a Book, and sent to the Parliament, and
so not sent it to us: Let all people take notice, if here be not pride and
hypocrisy; Had they sent it to us, it had been honest: and in it we find much
wresting of the Scripture, multitudes of conceivings, and consequences, and
contradicting Christ's words, and Gods words, which were spoken forth by his
Prophets, as hereafter shall be made appear.

An Answer to a BOOK, Entitled, The QUAKERS CONFUTED.
A Reply to the Answers of some Queries in a Book entitled the Quakers
confuted, set forth by Samuel Eaton, a Teacher of the Church of Christ, (as he
says) heretofore meeting at Duckenfield, now at Stopworth in Cheshire, which
was directed to the Parliament of this Nation, sitting at Westminster: To them
I find much flattering and crouching, but under whose tongue there is venom,
under a color, as contending for the faith, which he knows nothing of, and
them that do, will trample his dirty stuff under their feet: and the said Eaton
under a color would make people believe he appears for God and Christ, yet his
intent is to persecute and incense, and provoke people to wrath against those
people he calls Quakers: but the Lord is their defense, and heard such in all
Ages, as in the days of Isaiah, David, and the rest, who were of a contrite
and humble spirit, and t^embled at his word, which the Lord would not despise,
but regard; but the world would not, but despise, as Eaton, and the world does
now.

Object. O Eaton, thou liar, Does Paul, and Christ, compare them that trembled
at the Word of the Lord, as wolves, and Satan transforming himself into an
Angel of light, and so into Ministers of Righteousness.

Reply. O thou liar, Does Satan transform himself into Ministers of
Righteousness? Here I charge thee in the Presence of the Lord to be a liar, and
perverts the Apostles words, they may transform them as the Ministers of
Righteousness, but not into Ministers of Righteousness, and this is thy Quakers
confuted.

Object. And thou say that John makes them all Antichrists.

Reyly. This shall stand for thy own condition, who does oppose Christ as thou
declares in this Book, and as touching Satan's transforming himself into an
Angel of light, this is thy own condition, and into the Ministers of
righteousness, as thou say, here thou have uttered forth thy lies: And on
touching Christ's call ng them wolves, that is thy own condition, who art making
war against the Lambs of Christ, and be silent, and slander thou not the Church
of Christ: he need not have an outward power to maintain it that is dispersed
abroad in this Land, which does torment thee; for its the pillar and ground of
truth.

Object. Which sows much corrupt seed.

Reply. This is thy own condition, as thou have showed in this Book, but that
which thou calls corrupt is the Seed of God, and God will judge thee for thy
blasphemy, who art in error. In this Book thou have sown thy corrupt seed.

Object. Doctrine of Seducers.

Reply. This is thy own condition, for such practices we do abhor, and how fain
would thou raise a persecution, and show your selves zealous of his glory in
these things, and says, the Lord will bless you hence-forward: And the
Magistrate is for praise to good works, and a terrou^ to evil works, then will
it take hold upon thee thou envious man, who art seeking after blood, as all
thy generation did.

Object. Whereof thou art accusing Apostasy from the true God, from the true
faith, and from the true word.

Reply. This is thy own condition.

Object. And thou say. If there be sorcery, and familiarity with the Devil,
to be found among a people who challenge propriety in God.

Reply. This is thy own condition: for them whom thou calls Quakers, does own
the true faith, and true Christ, and true God, and denis all such filthy things.

Object. First thou accusest them, and says, That it is held forth much of
their doctrine, and practices, concerning revelations, and immediate voices,
and against the holy Scriptures, Christ's Ministers, Church, and Ordinances.

Reply. And these are all lies; for Revelations we own according to the
Scriptures, and immediate voices. Christ's Ministers, Church, and Ordinances, we
own according to the Scriptures: And, O man, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and
blush, and be ashamed, for thy lies; thou may be set up with the world,
which lies in wickedness; but from God, thou liar art turned, and must into
the lake that burns.

And something in answer to the story or tale, which thou tells to the
Christian Reader, and many reports, respecting a people called Quakers,
concerning sorcery and witchcraft, being among them.

Object. And thou say, Thou metst with a man, a Teacher to a people, about
half a mile from Nottingam, and thou asked him, whether he did conceive that
there was sorcery among them; and he said, Yea, that there was sorcery among
them.

Reply. The chief Priests, such as you did ever judge the Power of Christ to be
of the Dev l, for it did ever overturn your Kingdom: O vain man, here thou have
printed forth what he did conc^ive; and in your mind of conceiving lodges the
spirit of sorcery, and that which carries sorcery, hearing and telling of new
things, as the Athens did, who shows thy self ignorant of the holy men of God,
who were in trances, tremblings, and quakings.

Object. And as thou speak of a young man, which came twice or thrice to
their meetings.

Reply. Was he come to the trembling of Devils, and do thou and he blaspheme
that power, which made him to tremble? and this story thou gives to the Reader,
that all may see thy folly, which story thou receivedst from the Min ster, as
thou calls them.

Object. And thou say, thou thoughtest to have nothing to do with that
generation of men.

Rep. Did thou not utter forth thy lies and slanders in a paper? And do not
thou utter forth thy lies now, and so for the Truths sake are we moved to write
against thy lies, which thou have printed in this paper?

Ob. And whereas thou tel'st the Parliament and Reader of another story of a
man and his Wife, and art troubled, because he titled the Ministers under the
name of the Priests of the world, and Teachers of the world: Are you not such,
which say, you have not heard a voice speak from Heaven, neither do you look
for it, that such a voice as this, that comes immediately from God, you have
not heard; nor such an inspiration as this you do not wait for?

Rep. And here thou have cleared thy self for being any Minister of God, and
from having the Spirit of Inspiration; and here thou art a Teacher of the
world, which teaches deceit, which denies perfection.

Ob. And thou art tormented, because the said Richard Waller affirmed, that he
had his Teacher within him.

Rep. And does not the Scriptures witness the same? Ye need not that any man
teach you, but as the anointing which is within. And does not the Prophet
exhort them to cease from man? and would thou teach them to follow man? And
does not the Apostle bid them to take heed of the light within them, unt l the
day dawn, and the Day Star arise in their hearts? Here do not thou clear thy
self from the Spirit of the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles; and cannot
endure the Doctrine of Christ, the Prophets, and the Apostles, which is the
sound Doctrine?

Samuel Eaton.

And the answer to the paper which thou accused the Quakers of, thou shall find
to be true, though thou can not own it with thy sottish and sensual mind.

Ob. And thou say the Saints and the world may know what a people we are.

Rep. Here thou put'st the Saints and the world both together; the world knows
us not, but who are Saints witness us.

Ob. And thou say, What little hope there is of any good to be wrought of
any of them, what a people these are?

Rep. Thy teachings we deny, and thy discoursing upon the Scriptures with
corrupt mind we deny, but the Scriptures we own, they are ours; and so such
busy minds, who are giving senses and meanings to the Scriptures we deny, for
they are of no private interpretation.

Ob. And thou say, they pretend to speak and act all by the Spirit, and if
any one will try their Spirit that they speak by, their reply is, That th y can
neither witness Scripture nor Spirit.

Rep. But what Scripture can thou witness, who denies the immediate Voice
from God, and immediate Inspiration? And thou say, they increase in number
continually, and this torments thee, and now thou come to prophecy.

Ob. The time will come they shall proceed no further, but this is the false
Prophet, The time is come that thou shall proceed no further, for thy folly is
made manifest already, which is to the glory of God, renting thy Kingdom, and
setting up his own Kingdom; so that the power and effectual working of God,
which turns the mind of so many unto himself, from the world by his Spirit, and
to the uniting their hearts together from the worlds Forms, Sects, and
Opinions: And thou who denies the immediate Inspiration, and immediate Voice
from God, which thou have put up to the Magistrate, but God will dash all the
earthly Bonds asunder with his immediate power and eternal Spirit, who denies
the immediate voice, who lives in Error and Heresy, as thou have made it
manifest: And this is in answer to the stories thou gav'st to the Parliament,
and to the Christian Reader.

Samuel Eaton, now something in Replication to thy answers of the Queries.
Que. FRiend the first Query which was put to thee was, Whether thou had the
eternal Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, yea or no?

Object. And in thy answer thou believes, that the Spirit of Christ dwells in
Saints, yet thou asserts the Spirit of Christ to be distinct from the Saints,
and the Saints from the Spirit.

Rep. Here thou have cleared thy self from the eternal Spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures: The Query was put to thee, Whether thou had the eternal
Spirit, who says, The Spirit of Christ is distinct from the Saints. Let all
people see if thy Spirit be not distinct from the Saints, and a lying Spirit,
to say the Spirit of Christ is distinct from the Saints, when the Spirit that
gave forth the Scriputre says, which was in the Saints, they were led by the
Spirit, and they had received the Spirit; and Christ said, the Spirit of the
Father spoke in them; and the Apostle said, If you have not the same Spirit as
raised up Christ, you are none of his.

Obj. And thou say, The Spirit of Christ is distinct from the Saints.

Rep. And the Ministers of God said they were in the Spirit; and here openly
thou show thy self to be rambling up and down with thy own Spirit, and not
guided by the Spirit of Jesus, but by the Spirit of Error and confusion; and
this is the Record, God has given us his Spirit, but this was not spoken in
thy Generation, and ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and thou
say, they are distinct from it.

Obj. And thou say the Spirit of Christ dwells in them, which Spirit is God,
but thou do not believe that there is any essential or personal unity between
this eternal Spirit, and the Saints believers, for such unity would either make
the Spirit and Believers some third things.

Rep. Silence Flesh, who art in confusion, for thou have nothing to do to talk
of Unity, nor this eternal Spirit, which thou say is God, and yet there is
no eternal Unity with the eternal Spirit.

Query 2. Whether the Apostles did give a right meaning to the Scriptures, when
they gave them forth, or left them to you to give the meaning of them, yea or
no?

Ans. And thy answer is, That in all the Scriptures they gave forth, had a
meaning with those Scriptures which they gave forth, yet not always so
plainly, that the meaning thereof might be rightly taken up by those that read
them, unless compared with some other Scriptures, which they also have given
out, which have plainer sense in them, and are helpful to expound them.

Rep. And hear thou leaves Spirit, and thy confused stuff is issued out of thy
Bottle, who would make the Apostle a liar, who used plainness of speech, and so
the Scriptures were of no private interpretation, nor came not by the will of
man, which thou in thy will art giving senses unto, who say, it is left to
you to find out the sense and meaning, who says, the letter contains
contradictions; thou liar, there is no contradictions in it, but the
contradictions is in thy self; for where the same Spirit is made manifest, as
was in them that gave forth the Scriptures, it own it without any of thy
senses and meanings, who art in the number of the Beast; here is wisdom, let
him that has understanding count the number.

Obj. And whereas thou say Christ commands to search the Scriptures, because
the meaning lies deep in many places, yet by searching what Scriptures lay
together speak, the sense may be gotten out.

Rep. Here thou art a liar; Did Christ bid them search the Scriptures to find
out the sense of the Scriptures? Here thou add'st, to make people believe that
there was life in the Scriptures, when Christ says not so, but says, Ye will
not come unto me that ye might have life: And though they had the letter of the
Scripture, yet they knew not Christ, therefore they were to come to him, that
they might have life, which opens the Scriptures without thy senses or
meanings, for they had thought to have found life in the Scriptures, as thou
do.

Object. Another Scripture thou brings of Christ destroying this Temple, and in
three days raise it up again.

Rep. And thou liar, thou say there is a sense in these words; did he not
speak plainly? Here thou show thy self to be among them that gave a sense
upon his words, and could not understand his speech, and as they did, so do
thou, who can not understand plainness, and have cleared thy self from that
Spirit that spoke forth these words; and if you had that Spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures, you need not bring Scripture to interpret Scripture, for the
same Spirit that gave them forth, will open all again; but from this Spirit
thou have cleared thy self, and thou art unlearned without the life in thy own
sense and points.

Object. And again thou say, they are not left to put your own sense upon
them.

Reply. What is it but thy own sense when thou say, God does not intend to
teach immediate, or if it be not immediate, it is carnal, and natural: And the
carnal man knows not the things that are of God, who lives in thy own sense.

Quer. 3. Whether plagues be not added to them who add to the Prophesies
written in this Book, or whether his name be not to be diminished out of the
Book of life who diminishes, or whether you can witness this Name, yea, or no?

Ans. And thy answer is nothing to purpose, or the Book of life, or the new
name thou shows thy self ignorant of, therefore thou art unlearned, and must be
silent, as thou art to it: and let the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles
alone; for they all spoke by one spirit, according to their growth, and the
fulfilling of the Scriptures.

Object. But thou speaks of an Interpretation that agrees to the spirit of the
Scriptures.

Reply. That Interpretation we deny; for you would have another Interpretator
besides the Spirit: and here thou shows thy self to be in thy fancy, adding to
whom the plagues of God are due, who adds another interpretation besides the
Spirit, and thou art in the nature of all them who thou reckons up which art
out of the truth.

Object. Thou accusest the quakers for grand Impostures, which they beguile
people, they bring the letter which serves for their purpose.

Reply. This shall stand for thy own condition, for thy impostures we abhor,
and here thou art a liar: I charge thee in the presence of the Lord, as to say,
we bring the letter which serves for our purpose to deceive the people; for
every tittle of the Scripture is ours, and we own them, and do not deceive the
people from the truth, but such as you call Ministers, which make a trade upon
the Scriptures, and lead people into darkness, with your senses upon the
Scriptures, we deny: And so here thou a t found the adder, giving senses and
meanings according to the Spirit, as thou say: and here thou make it
manifest, that it is thy self that interprets, and not the Spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, which Spirit opens them again.

Object. And thou say the sufficiency of the Scriptures do build men up to
salvation.

Rep. Here thou set'st the Scripture before God and Christ, who is the Savior,
and perverts it, had thou said they were able to make one wise to salvation
through Faith in Christ Jesus, but there thou art diminishing, as to say the
Scripture is sufficient to build men up to salvation.

Que. 4. Whether you have an infallible judgment to judge of things eternal, yea
or no?

Ans. Thou say every man is darkness.

Rep. And there thou art in thy first estate, who has uttered forth many words
to this Query out of thy confused mind.

Obj. Thou say, them that the Apostles said knew all things, which was but
an hyperbolical expression, and did import only much knowledge to be in them.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a perverter of the
Apostles words, and one that adds: John speaks no such word as hyperbolical,
therefore let thou John's words alone: Here all may see whether thou speak
by the spirit or no.

Object. And thou say, they that had received the Unction, had not an
infallible judgment.

Rep. And here let all people take notice what thou speak from, and yet thou
say, though they had the Spirit, which if they have the Spirit to judge
withal, the judgment is infallible, and thou belyes them, and wrongs them, for
they knew the truth, and that there was no lie of it, and then they had an
infallible judgment; and the Apostles said, they knew all things.

Obj. And thou say, it did but import much knowledge.

Rep. And here thou would make the Apostle a liar, and the Scripture false.

Obj. And thou say, neither you, nor any other has an infallible judgment
in all things.

Rep. Here thou have cleared thy self from the spiritual man, who judges all
things, and has an infallible judgment.

Obj. And again, Thou say in all things, and at all times, but you are
subject to error in many things, you do not apprehend to speak right of God,
of Christ, of the Spirit, of the Saints, and of your selves, and of the Mystery
of the Gospel.

Rep. And here again thou have cleared thy self, who does not apprehend and
speak aright of God, Christ, the Spirit, Saints, your selves, and of the
mystery of the Gospel: Let all people take notice whether thou have not cleared
thy self from God, Christ, the Spirit, the Saints, and the Mystery of the
Gospel.

Obj. And thou say, you do not apprehend your selves.

Rep. Let all people take notice, and see if you be a fit man to preach, who
cannot apprehend to speak right of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, of the
Saints, and of the mystery of the Gospel, and thou have confessed it, and
openly showed thy self to be a natural man that knows not the things of God,
who cannot speak aright of God, as thou say, and that which is not right is
wrong, and the Spirit of Error, which thou say ye are subject to.

Obj. Thou say there may be an infallible judgment, which may be made from
the Scripture without the Spirit.

Rep. This is thy judgment, like unto the Jews, who had the Letter, but not the
spirit, who judged Christ to be a devil, and so here are the fruits of thy
manners and Doctrine, as thou call'st them, and thy pretending truth much
confused stuff, here is in this answer, as thou call'st it, and yet thou
confessest an infallible judgment, which cannot be made without the Spitit, but
that Spirit is without them.

Obj. And in some things thou say you have an infallibility, but this is the
confusion, that the Scripture is the foundation of an infallible judgment
concerning things contained in them, and not the Spirit.

Rep. Here thou would make people believe, that the Scripture was before the
Spirit, and so shows thy self to be natural and carnal, and shows thy self
ignorant of that Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, which is the Judge of
all Error, and such as shows forth the Spirit of Error.

Que. 5. Whether you be above the Apostle, and able to judge his condition,
because you say he was not perfect, who said, he spoke wisdom among them that
were perfect.

Ans. And in thy answer thou say, Paul denied perfection, and thou deniest
perfection.

Rep. Thou liar, where did Paul ever deny perfection, and here you sit as
Judges, and when Paul spoke, Let us, as many as are perfect be true minded, he
did not speak only of himself, neither did he speak of comparative perfection,
which thou say some attained unto: And here I charge thee again to add to
the Scriptures, and perverts the Apostles words, for he spoke plainly, Stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, and be perfect; but he does not
speak of a comparative perfection.

Obj. And thou brings the words of the Apostle James, who says, He that can
bridle his tongue is a perfect man.

Rep. He says so, but thou says not absolutely perfect: Here again thou
perverts the Apostles words, and would make him a liar, and that Scripture
false, but thou art the liar, and art for the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.

Obj. And thou say, The heart may be unruly, though the tongue be
restrained, and such thou say are comparatively perfect.

Rep. Where there is no such thing mentioned in the Scripture as comparative
perfection, but it is thy coined words added to the Scriptures, and the plagues
will be added to thee.

Obj. And thou say among such perfect ones Paul speaks wisdom, but not
amongst absolute perfectists.

Rep. Paul says he spoke wisdom among them that were perfect, and thou say
not amongst absolute perfectists: Here I charge thee in the presence of the
Lord to be the liar, but thou would make the Apostle a liar.

Obj. And thou say it is a senseless foolish question, because we ask you
whether you be above the Apostles condition.

Rep. Seeing you sit as Judges of his condition, as you have made it appear,
perverting his words, and would make him a liar.

Que. 6. Whether you have the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world
was, which the Apostles speak of, yea or no?

Some things in reply to thy answer of this Query: Now thou say, if Christ
be this hidden wisdom, the question runs of Christ, whether you be or no, our
answer runs to this.

Ans. And here you have showed forth your self, and cannot confess the hidden
wisdom as the Apostles did with that they had, and so have given no answer to
the Query, but have given forth many words, and says, we do imagine many
things of Christ, and of God, and his flesh.

Rep. But that is thy own condition, who art in thy imaginations, for we deny
thee and them both, who has put these lies upon us, for neither Christ, nor
God, nor Scriptures are known by imaginations.

Object. And thou speak of Christ within them, teaching them.

Rep. That is witnessed, and where he is, grace is, and strength and holiness,
and the spiritual man need not any external thing to lead the spirit, and so
all thy external Ordinances and external Teachings we utterly deny, but the
Scriptures we own, and the Ordinances of Christ in their place, and here thou
have showed forth thy venom.

Object. And thou say, Christ within them is sufficient for all things, and
to have no teachers but Christ; this we assume not, nor dare, and we declare
against it as a satanica delusion that these poor creatures are in, which
confess Christ is sufficient for all things.

Rep. All who are in light may see what utter darkness thou lives in, who would
have Christ sufficient for all things, and all purposes; and the Scripture
says, he is all in all, and thou art in the estate of thy first parents, as
thou calls it, and a servant to thy Master.

Que. 7. Whether you have heard the voice of the living Lord God of heaven and
earth, or whether you do not take the Prophets words, Christ's words, and the
Apostles words, and say it, when says the Lord, I never spoke to you.

Ans. Our answer is this, That such a Voice as this, as comes immediately from
God, we have not heard, and such an inspiration as this we have not received,
nor do we wait for it.

Rep. Here thou show thy self one that runs before thou art sent, and one
that uses thy tongue, and no Minister of God, and thy self to be a Heathen not
hearing his voice, who speaks from heaven, whose voice shakes the earth, so
thou knows nothing of salvation but by heresay; and here thou show thy self
to be a false Prophet, that takes the Saints words, and say, he says, when
says the Lord I never spoke to them, and does confess that the Jews said Moses
heard his voice, and among the Jews thou art, who persecutes the truth.

Object. And thou say, Such an inspiration which is immediately received
from God, we have not received, neither do we wait for it.

Rep. Here thou have cleared thy self, that thou have not received the Spirit
of God, but art in the spirit of error, for the Scripture was given us by
inspiration, and by immediate inspiration of the same Spirit are understood
again, and from this thou have cleared thy self, and from the life of all the
holy men of God, and say, thou do neither look nor wait to receive such an
immediate voice, nor such an insp^ration; and here thou show thy self to be
a natural man, and one of the dumb Prophets, that has not a word from the
Lord, but an imposture, thou accusest them thou call Quakers withal, and art a
deceiver, but those words they deny, and Wonders, and Miracles, and Signs are
amongst them, but your adulteress generation could never believe.

Object. And thou say the Querie strikes at all preachings, but what
immediately proceeds from the suggestion of the Spirit, and this thou say is
the ven^m and poison of the Query.

Rep. And here again thou clearest thy self to be no Minister of the Spirit,
but art in the suggestions of Satan, and counts that venom and poison the
immediate preaching of the Spirit, to thee it is poison, but it must dash thee
to pieces, and thou through many words would blind the people, who utters them
forth without knowledge, and so a fool is known.

Object. And thou say, the word of old, which was spoken by the Prophets,
and this, is a more sure word then any immediate word.

Rep. There thou have cleared thy self from the immediate Word, who art built
upon a rotten foundation, which is not immediate, and would clear the Prophets
from this immediate word to make them like thy self, who says, and calls this
a more sure word of Prophecy then any immediate word. Here thou go about to
make the word and Prophecy not an immediate word, and shows thy self to be a
dreamer.

Object. And thou say, consequently God did not intend immediate teaching,
not to give out an immediate voice in after ages, which should airect and guide
men in the ways of salvation.

Rep. And here again I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar,
and a blasphemer, who would limit God, and would be his Counselor, and yet
says, thou never waits to hear his voice, and not come so far^, as to be a
Minister of the letter, who would have it kept in store, and says, it is a
precious treasure; God says, he will power out his Spirit upon al flesh in the
latter days, his sons and his daughters shall prophecy; and thou deniest
immediate teaching, and so denies the spirit of the Lord which guides in the
way of salvation, which thou denies, and thou have denied, that thou last heard
any Voice from God, neither do thou wait for it: And here thou denies thy
self to be taught of God, for all the children of the Lord are taught of the
Lord, and they that are taught of him hears his voice, which thou denies, and
shows thy self to be a stranger from God and Christ.

Object. And thou say there must not be a waiting for a new immediate word.

Rep. Here thou show thy self that thou know not the immediate word, and
this immediate word thou have cleared thy self from, which gave forth the
letter, and would keep others from waiting for the receiving of it, and speak
of a word spoken to you, though not immediately, and if not immediately, it is
carnal.

Object. And thou bring Paul, who said. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah.
He did not say, well spoke the Holy Ghost to me, but to Isaiah.

Rep. Here thou would make people believe, that the Apostle had not the Holy
Ghost which opened to him all those words which Isaiah spoke, for without the
Holy Ghost he could not understand his words, nor never shall thou.

Object. Thou say it was Gods word to Isaiah, which he made use of against
the people, to whom he spoke, though not Gods word to him immediately.

Rep. And here thou show, that thou neither knows Gods Word, nor his
immediate teaching, who sits as a Judge upon Isaiah's condition, Silence flesh,
for thou art for judgment and destruction; and would make people believe, that
Isaiah was one of them that used his tongue.

Query 8. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin while he is upon the
earth, yea or no?

Ans^ And in thy answer thou said no.

(...) The Apostle said yea, they were not in the flesh, but (...), and he
thanked God they were made free from sin, (...) put off the body of sin, and
become servants of righteousness. And here thou show thy self to have a
lying Spirit (...) to the Scripture, which thou boastest to be thy rule, and so
thou brings the Saints weaknesses, as they passed the warture to maintain thy
own Kingdom of Sin; and when John and the Apostle Paul speaks plainly of
overcoming the world and Body of Sin, thou speak of a sense of overcoming,
as though they did not speak truth, and so art giving an interpretation to
their words, who art in the lying Generation; and for the warfare which the
Apostles speaks of, the Saints witnessed, and do witness it, and witnesses a
Victory over the Body of Sin, and are not always in the warfare, for whilst
ye are in the warfare there is no peace, but they that overcome witnesses peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost, For he that is born of God does not commit sin,
neither can he sin, because his seed remains in him: And here the warfare is
ended, who witness this, and the Victory over the Body of Sin, and are not
si^ly women always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; but in that Generation thou art leading silly women captive, always
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, keeping them
always in their sins, and pleading for thy own Kingdom, which is the Kingdom
of the Devil, for he that commits sin is of the Devil, which thou so plead'st
for.

Query 9. Whether you do preach no other Doctrine but what the Apostles did,
that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which w^ have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word o^
Life, for this Life is made manifest, and we have seen it, an^ bear witness,
and show it unto you.

Ans. And in your answer to this Query, you say, That yo^ aim at nothing but
exalting Christ, and you should have a your preaching tend thither; and you
say, you do not preac^ that Christ which you have seen with your bodily eyes,
for Christ is in heaven, and not in earth, not any other that lives upon earth
has heard of him, and seen him.

Rep. O thou dark Sot, Does any see Christ with their carnal eyes, and know
him? Was it not said to the Apostle, that flesh and blood had not revealed it
unto him, when he said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God? and
from this Revelation thou have cleared thy self.

Ob. And thou say, That Christ is in heaven, and not in earth.

Rep. And here thou have cleared thy self to be a Reprobate.

Ob. And thou say, How shall they preach, except they be sent?

Rep. And before thou denied'st as hearing any voice from heaven, and denied
immediate inspiration, and how do thou exalt Christ, and knows him not? and
the framing of a Christ shall stand for thy own condition, who art without; and
Saul seeing Samuel, indeed saw the Devil, and talked with him, and had
fellowship with him, but saw not Samuel.

Ob. And thou say, You do not give your assurance, but you conceive.

Rep. Let all people see if thy preaching be not fancy, and no assurance, and
to be scattered among the proud, who live in their imaginations and
conceivings, and have cleared thy self from the eternal Spirit, and can give
no testimony of that which was from the beginning.

Ob. And thou say, Thou give not thine own assurance, but you conceive and
speak of the Apostles assurance.

Rep. Let the Apostles assurance alone, for that we own, who wi^ness assurance,
but deny thy conceivings.

Query 10. Whether you have this word which was from the beginning, and this
Life manifest unto you, which was to the Apostl^s, and if it be, why do you
take a text from the Letter, and preach from it, and show the people that
letter.

Ans. And thy answer is, Th^s Word, and this Life, which is Christ made
manifest in the flesh; and thou say, The design in this question is to draw
all persons from all that is written, to depend upon an unwritten word,
something within them, the word from the beginning, and is the Life, and is
manifest, as they gave it out.

Rep. This word is owned among them you call Quakers, which was from the
beginning, which all the Apostles spoke from, which is immediate, which thou
have cleared thy self from, and shows, that thou have nothing but the letter
which is death, and feeds people with that.

Object. And thou say, this sort of men which has the immediate word, does
the devil show his spite, spleen, and malice against the holy Scriptures.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar, and in that
state thy self, for where the immediate word is, which was in the beginning,
which gave forth the Scriptures, it owns every tittle of it again, and many
Scriptures have thou wrested for the taking of a Text, which Christ and the
Apostles spoke of the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and showed the fulfilling
of the Scriptures, and to bring men to Christ out of the letter into that thing
the letter speaks of, that they might not live in the oldness of the letter,
but in the newness of the spirit.

Ob. And thou say, you take a text, because the whole w^ll of God, and mind
of Christ, is left you in letters, which is now left us in words and letters in
the Evangelists and Apostles writings, and so you take a text from the letter,
and if the Gospel be hid, it is hid from you that are lost, whom the God of the
world has blind^d the mind of them that believe not.

Rep. Here thou speak thou know not what, for if all should have been
written which Christ spoke forth, the world could not contain the books that
might have been written of him, and many could speak of his word, but had not
his mind, therefore they persecuted him as thou do, and there thou show
thy self to be him whom the God of the world has blinded the mind who has the
letter of the Gospel, but not that which it speaks of the Gospel, the glad
tidings, the Son that was given, but that is without thee, and the letters of
it thou have, but not the Gospel.

Object. And thou say, Saints do not as yet see Christ, and yet Abraham saw
his days.

Rep. What confused stuff is this that comes out of thy bo^tle? these are thy
Saints which do not see Christ, and how do thou exalt him? The Saints witness
Christ in them, the mystery, the hope of glory, but thou have cleared thy self
from this Christ, from this mystery, from this hope of glory, to be a Reprobate
and an Antichrist, and from the faith of Abraham.

Query 11. And show me where the Prophets did take a text and preach from it,
but only Christ read a place, and said it was fulfilled, who said, he was
anointed to preach, and which of you can witness you are anointed to preach by
the living God, yea or no?

Ans. And in thy answer to this Query thou speak, whom God calls out to be
to the body in place of eyes to guide and direct them, and before you denied as
hearing any such voice as from God.

Reply. Here all people may see thy folly, and thou do not say, that you are
anointed to preach by the living God, or how can thou who have denied his
voice, or immediate inspiration.

Obj. And thou say, the Prophets did take no text, but laid the foundation.

Reply. And here thou have cleared thy self from the Prophets, Christ the
Foundation; and though Christ did read, who fulfilled the Prophets, who
prophesied of him, and Moses who wrote of him, for he was the substance and the
end; and though they had Synagogues, and Temple, and Sabbath Day, to read
Moses, the Law, and the Prophets. When Christ was come, and sacrificed up, and
who believed, and received him, had received the end of the Law, the end of the
Prophets, and the end of the Sabbath, and they went into the Synagogues,
showing the people the substance of what they had read, and to bring them of
the Temple the Sabbath days, and observing of times, which in all thy words
thou clearest thy self from that life and doctrine, but would keep people in
observing of days and times, and places; and so shows thy self in the dark
generation, living long in a text, and not witnessing it fulfilled, as Christ
did.

Obj. And thou say, Christ might have discoursed of a subject many months,
who came to fulfill what was written of him.

Reply. Here you would make Christ like thy self, who art unlearned,
discoursing with thy carnal mind upon that which was given forth by an Eternal
Spirit, who art for death and destruction.

Quer. 12. Tell me, why you sing David's Conditions and Experiences in Moeter,
and when you read them, hats you put on, and when you sing them, hats you put
off.

Ans. And thy answer is, David's Conditions and Experien^e^ are many times your
own.

Reply. And before thou denies as hearing Gods voice, and how can thou know
David's conditions, who heard the voice of God in the holy Temple, and thou
denies hearing of Gods voice; but abundance of words thou have heaped up
together, and would make the Saints singing like thine, who sung with the
spirit, and with understanding.

Obj. And again thou say, God would have you in your meetings to rejoice.

Reply. Thou liar, How know thou the mind of God, and never heardst his
voice, who hist openly showed thy self to be a Heathen, who knows not God, who
knows nothing of the rejoicing, and singing in spirit; and what have thou to do
to talk of the Church of God, which is the pillar and ground of truth, who
denies the voice of God, and immediate inspiration which is both in the Church
of God.

Obj. And as concerning putting on hats, when you read, and putting them off
when you sing: Then say you shall not much contest.

Reply. Then you must confess it to be a tradition, and that you worship the
works of your own hands, and yet thou go about to justify it who art mudled
in thy confused generation, who would have the hat put off, when thou prayest
with a part of the scripture, and when thou read part of the scripture to
put thy hat on. See if this be not thy own tradition.

Obj. And as for singing David's Psalms in meeter, thou say, the Hebrews had
their Poetry, and it is suitable for every Nation to have their own Poet, and
particular Poetry to themselves to praise God, and Meeter is congruous, as thou
say, to our English Poetry.

Reply. And this is all thy conjured stuff, and likenesses, who give^ every
Nation liberty, who art in the Nations, and stands up for thy own, who have
cleared thy self from the spirit which the Saints sung withal in
understanding, who comes to be redeemed from Nations which yet thou art in, and
languages in the customs of the Nations, which who sing praises to God, are
redeemed from, and so thou maintains thy own customs and traditions: but the
Church of God slander not; for they deny your Customs, and your Ordinances,
which God never commanded, and there is no difference between your postures,
and the worlds, nor your singing, and the worlds; but there is a difference
between your singing and the Saints, which knew God, and heard his voice, and
sung with the spirit, but thou have denied the immediate inspiration of the
spirit, and so thou caust not sing with that spirit the Saints sung withal.

Quer. 13. Whether you do know the voice of Christ, from the voice of a
stranger: My sheep know my voice, says Christ, seeing you are so forward to
judge, and sit as Judges of the Saints conditions.

Ans. And thy answer is, That which Christ preached, and the Prophets, and
Apostles, which is left upon record, which, you have in the Scriptures, that
is, that voice of Christ, and with it you are able to distinguish from the
voice of a stranger.

Reply. Here you show your selves that you have the form, but not the power;
for many come to speak the Prophets words, and use their tongues, and say, he
says, when says the Lord, I never spoke to them: and this is your condition,
who has the letter, as the Jews had, which knew not the voice of Christ, nor
with the letter can you know his voice, and there you are.

Obj. And thou say, this immediate voice you have not heard, neither do you
know it within your selves experimentally, neither do you wait for it; for you
know it is not the voice of Christ.

Reply. Here you have cleared your selves from the voice of Christ, and to be
strangers, which never heard the voice of Christ, which is immediate; for you
deny hearing this immediate voice within, and so denies Christ to be within,
and show your selves to be reprobates. And you show your selves to be in the
state of the Jews, which knew not the voice of Christ which was immediate, but
judged it to be of the Devil, as you do.

Obj. And this immediate voice you bless your selves from, and say, It is the
voice of the Devil, and say you have never heard the Devils voice, nor seen his
shape, and yet you plead for sin as long as you are here.

Reply. And is not sin the shape of the Devil? and you that plead for sin, that
is, the voice of the Devil in you, and not the voice of Christ; for the voice
of Christ testifies against all sin, and here you show that you never heard the
voice of Christ, which is immediate, but only has the letter, as the devil
has to bring, and the form, and calls that the Voice of Christ, and here you
show your selves to be natural men, not knowing any thing of the immediate
Voice of Christ, but judges it of the devil.

Query 14. Whether that within you which judges, be eternal and infallible,
yea or no?

Ans. And thy answer is, That that Spirit which we profess to be the Spirit of
Christ, is that Spirit of delusion, which does all things in us.

Rep. O thou deceiver, who knows not the letter, does not the Scriptures say
they, were led by the Spirit, and the fruits of the Spirit, and the Comforter
which was to come should lead them into all truth, and they denied themselves
with the Spirit for doing any thing; and here thou have cleared thy self from
the Spirit of Christ, and art in thy own Spirit of Error.

Object. Thou say, though the Spirit of Christ, which i^ eternal and
infallible dwell in the Saints, yet it must not judge of persons and things
after an infallible manner, that they should neither say, nor do, nor judge any
thing by any understanding of their own, but this Spirit, this we do deny, for
the Apostle speaks of himself, When he would do good, evil is present.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be pleading for the
Devil and self, and denies the Spirit of Christ, and shows thy self to be in
the state of the Wolves which Christ speaks of, which should come in sheeps
clothing, who has showed forth thy fruit to be of the corrupt tree, who has
cleared thy self from the spiritual man which judges all things.

Object. And thou speak of Antichrists denying the Father and the Son, and
false Teachers, bringing in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought
them.

Rep. These words shall stand for thy self, which thou accusest others withal,
for thou have denied, as hearing any immediate Voice from God, from heaven, or
any immediate inspiration of the Spirit; and here thou have denied both the
Father and the Son, for his voice is immediate, and he that has the Son has
the Father also, and he that has not the Son of God, has not life (He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear) and in thy answer to this Query thou show
thy self to be carnal, who has nothing but the letter to judge withal, and have
denied the eternal spirit which judges all things.

Query 15. What are the Ordinances which are ordained of God, that those which
you call Quakers deny, or when did God command you to observe them, as to
sprinkle infants, to pray before and after Sermons as you call them, or to set
times, and days, and hours, which was in the Generation wh^^h was enemies to
Christ, who observed such things.

Query 16. Where these Ordinances of God be, which you speak of, and where God
commanded them, and to whom, which you say, them you call Quakers deny, mention
them in particular, and declare them openly in writing, and give our accusing.

Ans. In thy answer to these two Queries, thou say, we are against ^ll
outward teaching.

Reply. We are against a public prayer, which is in the state of the
Phar^^e^s, which Christ forbids, but the praying with the Spirit we own, and we
are against sprinkling Infants, for there is no Scripture for it, but the
Baptism of the Spirit we own, and we are against all your singing David's
quakings, tremblings, prayers praises, and prophesi^s in M^eter, but the
singing with the Spirit we own, and all your performing Religion in your set
hours, days, and times, we are against, for that which is pure performs
Religion, and this is the pure Religion which keeps unspotted from the world,
therefore we do declare against your Traditions, not to be Ordinances of
Christ, but the Ordinances of Christ we own.

Object. And something in answ^r to your own practice, concerning sprinkling of
Infants, is this: First for the act of sprinkling, thou say, something may
be held forth, though you use it not.

Reply. And here thou art confused, you would go to hold up something for your
own practice, and yet thou say, you do not use it.

Object. And thou bring the blood of Christ which is called the blood of
sprinkling, and thou say, seeing water in Baptism be sprinkled, and the
subject types of Christ's blood.

Reply. Here thou have made this tipe, Christ made it not, neither is there any
such types made in the Scripture, neither any such seal as sprinkling infants,

Object. And thou say, as for sprinkling Infants, something may be held
forth for it, the blood of Christ called the blood of sprinkling.

Rep. Here thou would set the sprinkling of Infants above the Blood of
Christ, and make the blood of Christ of none effect, and make the blood of
Christ a figure of sprinkling Infants, but the blood of Christ we own, and deny
thee and thy holdings forth, who would make the substance a figure or a type
sprinkling Infants, and many Scriptures you bring, but not a word to justify
sprinkling Infants, and fain you would bring some Scriptures to cover thee, but
there is not one will witness thee in the Scriptures for sprinkling Infants.

Object. And whereas thou bring'st Genesis 17. ver. 7. as concerning God
establishing his promise to his seed.

Rep. Thou liar, here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to pervert the
Scriptures; does that Scripture speak of sprinkling Infants, there is not such
a word in it, who makes people blind like thy self, and would make them, but
God has raised up a light in the hearts of his people that does discover thee.

Object. And thou bring'st Exodus 12.48. which there is not a word in it to
justify sprinkling Infants, and thou bring'st Deuteronomy. 19.10.11. Jer. 31.34.

Rep. I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar, for in all these
Scriptures there is not a word that speaks of sprinkling Infants, but thou liar
and Sorcerer goes about to bewitch people with thy Enchantments, but thy
Whoredoms are discovered, and Acts 22.16. thou pervertest, there is not a word
in it of sprinkling Infants, and Acts 2.38. which thou would pervert: And
here again I charge thee to be a liar, for those Scriptures do not speak of
sprinkling Infants, and to the state of Simon Magns thou art not yet come, to
witness that Baptism, as he did, but art in thy Sorcery, and so as thou made a
type, thou art now making Seals and Covenants, and thy sprinkling Infants is a
Seal of thy Covenants, which there is not a word in Scripture for. Again, Genesis
17.7. thou perverts the Scriptures to maintain sprinkling Infants, which there
is not a word in Scripture to justify it; and Romans 4.11. thou bring'st to
justify sprinkling Infants, which there is not one word for it; and Heb.
10.16. thou bring'st to justify sprinkling Infants, which there is not one
word for it; and Jer. 33.33. thou bring'st to justify it, where there is not
so many verses in it, not 33. Col. 2.11. thou bring'st also to justify
sprinkling Infants, which speaks not one word for it; and Exodus 12.48. over
again, once would have served thee to prove thy self a liar; and Deuteronomy. 9.10.11.
thou bring'st over again to prove thy self a liar withal, for there is not one
word to justify it; and thou bring'st Mat. 7.4. for the application of Water;
and here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar, and a wrester,
and a perverter of the Scriptures, for not one word in all these Scriptures
does speak of sprinkling infants, who would have a cl^ak, but can get none,
and calls these the Ordinances of Christ, which are none, for the Ordinances of
Christ we own, and Baptism we own, but thy Traditions we deny.

Object. And in thy answer concerning praying before and after Sermon.

Rep. Thou bring'st the Saints conditions, the Apostles praying, and the Saints
to justify thy own, who a^t in the state of the Pharisees, and so puts no
difference between the holy and profane, betwixt the precious and the vile,
and so shows thy self to be a false Prophet among the false Prophets, for as
thou confesses, thou never heard the Voice of God, and denies immediate
inspiration: And what have thou to do to pray or talk of the Church of Christ,
the Apostles conditions, who have showed thy self to be an hypocrite, for God
hears not hypocrites, and we do believe and know, that you never heard his
Voice, and here thou sh^west thy prayers are abomination to him; therefore I
charge thee in the presence of the Lord to let the Saints conditions and
prayers alone, for God hears the righteous, but accepts not the prayers of
the wicked, who art not come so far as Balaam, for he heard the Voice of God;
therefore because the Saints prayed, which you would bring their conditions for
thy praying before and after Sermon, and there is no Scripture will cloak you.

Object. And whereas thou say women are not suffered to teach.

Rep. And did not Christ send a woman to teach, and did he not say his
Daughters shall Prophecy, thou art the woman that art forb^dden to teach, who
confesses you never heard Gods Voice, nor immediate inspiration, therefore
silence flesh before the Lord, but the Apostles and Saints praying we own.

Object. And whereas thou say we are against that which the Saints used.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a liar, for the Saints practices we own, but thy
performances we deny.

Object. And thou say, we might be convinced that you are not in the
condition of the Jews hours and prayers.

Rep. We find you in the same nature, though under another color, and enemies
to Christ.

Object. And thou brings Acts 3.

Rep. That will fit and maintain thee in the Jews estate, all people take
notice, the Apostles did not go up to uphold the Jews hours and prayers, but to
bring them off those things; and here thou have uttered forth thy folly.

Object. And thou say, They strike at godliness.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of God to be a liar.

Object. And whereas thou say, If they can but destroy all forms, the power
will fall with it.

Rep. And here thou have uttered forth thy folly indeed, and blasphemy, as
though the form was before the power, and here thou have showed thou have no
power, but the form, as the Apostles speaks of, so thou plead'st for days, and
hours, and months, which the Apostles speaks against: And here thou have
cleared thy self from the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Lords day we own,
f^r all is the Lords, and the Saints meeting we own, but thine we do deny, who
denies immediate inspiration: And what have thou to do to talk of the Apostles
meeting the first day of the week, and worship of God, who denies immediate
inspiration, and hearing Gods voice, and denies immediate teaching, for God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth, and
that thou can not, who denies immediate teaching, thou have got a likeness of
a Church, and so imitates the Apostles meetings, the first day of the week, and
so have got the form, and not the power; and because the Saints meet on the
first day, from their words thou gathers likeness, which is forbidden, and what
Scriptures have thou, that it is named the Lords day, when the Supper is
nominated the Supper of the Lord we own, and the day of the Lord, but thou
know nothing of the Supper of the Lord, nor the day.

Obj. And in thy answer, thou would make people believe we deny prayer.

Rep. And in that thou art a liar, and what have thou to do to talk of Abraham,
and holy men of God, who denies hearing the Voice of God, and denies immediate
Inspiration, which the holy men of God witnessed.

Object. And thou talk of Jacob purging away the Idols, and reforming his
family.

Rep. O man! look at home, and pu^ge away the Idols from thy self, for David
and Jacob we own; and do witness, and the Saints will not deny prayers but such
as thine, who prayest and never heard the Voice of God, nor immediate
inspiration, as thou have confessed it, and do not look for it, and what good
will all thy prayers do thee evening and morning? we witness the Apostles
words, pray always, and praise with the spirit and understanding: Here thou
have showed thy self, as the Priests of Baal, who cut themselves, who fasts;
and yet thou say, let us seek Gods face in prayer, and denies hearing Gods
Voice.

Query 17. Whether do you not seduce the people, to draw them from the
anointing within them, when John says, They need no man to teach them, but as
the anointing, and the promise was eternal life to him that did abide in the
anointing.

Ans. In thy answer to this Query, thou say, the word that Christ preached
was outward.

Rep. And here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar; for he
said the word which he spoke, was spirit and life, and here thou draws people
from the anointing to the Satanical delusion, as thou calls it, and publishes
lies.

Obj. And thou say, John's Ministry was outward, and yet he came in the
spirit, and power.

Reply. What confused stuff is this? Here I charge thee again to be a liar:
John's teaching we witness, and Christ's teaching we witness, and deny thine
which is outward, and thou must needs be there; for thou denies immediate
inspiration, who draws people from the inward to the outward; Here thou shows
what thou art, if there had been no reply, and who puts no difference betwixt
ears; for there are ears, and hears not, and there are ears which hear: and
here thou shows thy self to be a false prophet, who says they are seduced,
which are drawn from the external means which is earthly, let all people see,
if you be not that wi^ch that the Scripture speaks of that bewithed the
Galatians, in drawing them from the spirit within to observe circumcision
without them who draws to the external, who says to wait for the receiving of
the Spirit without any word, is delusion; Here thou goes about to make the Word
and the Spirit two.

Obj. And thou say, One was newly redeemed out of the hellish captivity.

Reply. He is fit to be Ambassador of thy Church, a drunkard, one of thy
redeemed ones: There was a Warrant granted out against him; for drunkenness
fence he was redeemed, as thou calls it.

Obj. And thou pleads much for man's teaching.

Reply. Here thou shows plainly, that thou art a Minister made by the will of
man, when Paul declares that he was not made a Minister by the will of man, but
by the will of God: and here thou have cleared thy self plainly from being a
Minister made by the Will of God, or taught of him.

Obj. And thirdly, thou say, The words, You need not any man teach you, but
as the anointing teaches you, is an byperbolycal expression.

Reply. Here I charge thee again to pervert the Apostles words.

Obj. And thou say, the Apostle tells them, they knew all things, and thou
say, is is an excessive speech.

Reply. And so thou goes about to make the Apostle a liar, and are giving a
meaning to his words, and would give a comparative senc^, as thou call it
to it, and here thou show openly, that thou do both add, wrest, and
pervert the Apostles words, who shows thy self openly to be deceived, who art
giving private interpretations to the Scripture, when the Scripture says,
there is none, and thou art perverting the Lords words, who says, they shall
all know him from the greatest to the least, they shall not need to teach every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother; for they shall all know me from
the greatest to the least of them, says the Lord.

Obj. And thou say, there is no such measure of the spirit that can thrust
out outward teaching, while we are here.

Reply. Here thou high blasphemer, have denied the everlasting Covenant of God,
and while thou art there, thou shall never know it.

Obj. And thou say there is no such Scripture as to abide in the anointing,
that the Promise was Eternal life to him that did.

Reply. And here thou do neither understand the anointing, nor the Scripture.

Quer. 18. Whether you do not bewitch the people, and draw them from the Spirit
of God within you, to observe those things which God never commanded, to tell
the people of a Sacrament, and following your outward teaching, who stands
praying in the Synagogues, and art called of men Master, which Christ did
forbid, Mat. 23. And have the chiefest places in the Assemblies. Whether these
be not Antichrists which act contrary to the Commands of Christ, yea or no.

Ans. In thy Answer to this Query, thou say, They strike at Pastors, and
Elders.

Reply. Here thou art a liar; for the Query does not mention Pastors, or Elders.

Obj. And why do thou say, they speak of the Synagogues in a derisive way,
and that the title of Masters, and assuming the chiefest places in the
Assemblies, to be ambition.

Reply. And this thou seeks to clear and justify, which Christ cried woe
against, and shows thy self to be in the state of the Scribes and Pharisees, as
you may read, Mat. 23. Let the letter judge thee, if thou will own the
Scripture. And does not Christ cry woe against them that are called of men
Master, and have the chiefest place in the Assemblies, stand praying in the
Synagogues: H^re ^hou shows thy self to be an opposer of Christ's words, who
would justify the worlds practice, which he cried woe against, and so thou art
a friend to the world, and an enemy to Christ.

Obj. And thou say concerning the Sacrament, there is no Ordinance a foot
amongst us which we call by that name, though there might be a defense for it.

Reply. Here thou shows thy self where thou was before, in making a defense for
that which is not, which ^here is no Scripture for: And what have thou to do to
talk of O^dinances, the Blood of Christ, and the Seals, and the Faith, and the
Covenant of God, who denies his voice, and all who are taught of God, hear his
voice, and who are sealed, are sealed with the Spirit, but thou denies the
immediate inspiration; and here thou clearest thy self from the Seals, from the
Covenant, who says men must be taught; for all who are brought into the
Covenant, are taught of God, and hear his voice, and need no man teach them,
which you deny: Oh Lucifer like, who talks of these things, and cannot witness
any of them but ar^ justifying Synagogues, standing p^aying there, which the
Pharisees did: O thou Fox, thou are found out in all thy holes; we who witness
the B^ood of Christ, the Covenant, the Seals, and the Supper of the Lord, deny
all these things which you and the Pharisees held up which Christ cried woe
against, and here thou art reckoned, and found amongst those despisers of the
grace of God, which never heard ^^s voice, as thou say, amongst the greatest
sinners whichever blasphemed Christ, though they pro^ess^d him in words, ^o
do thou, the world may justifi^ th^^e, but that Christ which the Scripture
speaks of, if you w^ll own the Scriptures, does condemn thee, who holds up, and
pleads for these things, which he cries woe against.

Obj. Secondly, And for thy justification of outward teaching, thou say, it
is the power of God to salvation.

Reply. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar, and knows
not what thou speaks; is the power of God outward, and salvation, which is a
Mystery? and here thou have shut thy self out from the Mystery, and art in thy
will, and a Minister made by the will of man, which is outward. Paul who was a
Minister of the Spirit, which was not outward, made by the will of God: here
thou have shut thy self from the Minister of the Spirit, which ministers to the
Spirit in prison, and art a Minister of the Letter made by the will of man, and
holden up by man, and thou wrests many Scriptures for to justify the outward
teaching, as Mat. 4.13, 14. Acts 26.16, 17, 18. and many other Scriptures, and
so pu^s no difference betwixt the Ministers of the world, which is outward, and
Christ's Ministers, and the Apostles, which is immediate, and inward by the
Spirit, and shows thou art not yet come to repentance, to discern the right
hand from the left, He that has ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
says, and that is not outward; And what have thou to do to talk of the Apostles
preaching? Let the Apostles preaching alone; for they denied the Pharisees
teaching, I command thee in the presence of the Lord.

Obj. And thou say, the Apostle says, He rejoiced though some preach Christ
from an envious spirit.

Reply. Here thou adds to the Apostles words; all people read Psalm. 1.18.
though the Apostle did say then, Some preach Christ of envy, some of strife,
some of contention: yet that was a time when few did believe, that that was the
Christ, so his Name was spread abroad, he rejoiced in it; but when his Name was
spread abroad, and covetous men, and proud men, as thou art, and heady men, and
men that followed pleasures, had got the form, but had not the power: which led
silly women captive, always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, which thou shows thy self to be one of them; and the Apostle
exhorts from such to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.1. And what have thou to do to talk of
Christ, and his Disciples, and Moses, these had the immediate inspiration which
thou denies, who have gotten the outward form and words of Christ, and the
Disciples, as the Pharisees had gotten the form of Moses, and the Prophets; and
there thou art j^dged withal, who has the Eternal Spirit, the life of them
that gave forth the Scriptures.

Obj. Whereof thou art giving senses of the end of the world.

Reply. Silence sense and consequence; for that proceeds from the world in thy
heart, for there it is set, for thou confesses thou do not know the voice of
God, who art lost in thy senses, nor never shall in that nature who denies
immediate in^piration, and so denies the life of the Scripture, and shuts thy
self out; For Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. And his
teachers are the same, with the same Spirit, and all thy whole intent is as to
keep people from the voice of G^d, and immediate inspiration, and to keep the
Letter, and to make Ministers, with it, which is outward as thou calls it.

Obj. And whereas thou say, Christ ascend^d on high, and has given gifts
unto men.

Reply. These words will condemn thee; are these gifts outward? thou art
talking of an outward, these words Pastors and Teachers, are the Saints words,
and ours, we own them but we deny thee, and all thy filthy stuff of
consequences, and senses of the Saints conditions.

Obj. And whereas thou say, Till the Saints come to the state of perfection.

Reply. And again thou denies it, and says, None can attain to it in this
world; and here the Scripture will judge thee to be a liar, which thou say,
is thy rule; for the Scripture says, As he is, so are we in this present world.

Obj. And thou say, but Ministerial gifts are not to be found in the world
which the Ministers of the Gospel had.

Rep. Here to the view of all people thou have brought thy self unthe curse,
for if it be not the same M^n^stery and the same gifts, it is another;
therefore silence flesh, let the Apostles alone, command and charge thee in the
presence of the Lord, who say, the gifts are not now to be found in the
world, which the Ministers of the Go^pel had; here thou have cleared thy self,
and thy generation from them, if it be not the same, it is another, which is
contrary; and here thou show thy self to be the w^^ch that bewitches people.

Object. Which says, there is now no such gifts as they had, which were
Ministers of the Spirit, nor any such Pastors, Offic^rs and Teachers now as was
then.

Rep. Here again I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be a liar, who
has shut thy self in the state of the Pharisees, has cleared thy self from
the Church of God, Pastors, Officers, and Teachers, for the Officers, Pastors,
and Teachers are the same now which ever was, we witness it, and witness thee
to be a liar, and all that are not the same Officers, Pastors, Teachers, and
Ministers of the Spirit, are accused, which thou and all thy Generation are
guilty of, who are not the same Officers, Pastors, Teachers, and Ministers as
was then and if not the same, then they are contrary to Scriptures, and here
let the Scriptures condemn thee and them, and here thou deny'st your selve; to
be any Pastors, Teachers of the Church of Christ, who says there is none such
now as was then, and we witness the Church of Christ the Pillar and ground of
truth, to be the same now as ever was, and the same Officers, Pastors,
Ministers, and Teachers of the Spirit as ever was, and yours thou say is not
the same, therefore they are all false, contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to
the Gospel, therefore the curse is upon thee, who say, they are not the same
now as was then, we witness Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever,
and what have thou to do to talk of establishing truth, which says, Officers
are not the same now as was then, then the truth is not the same, nor the
Gospel; there thou show thy self to be a gainsayer, and what have thou to do
to talk of qualifications, who would make truth changeable, truth changes not.

Obj. And as thou say, you reason there is no believers in these latter
ages, because thou say, they shall cast out devils, and speak with new
tongues.

Reply. In thy generation there is not, but they which believe now speak with
new tongues, and cast out devils, that makes thee to vent forth thy blasphemy
against them that does, and here thou show thy self to be an unbeliever, let
the Scriptures judge thee.

Object. And thou say, The Apostle requires a waiting upon an outward
teaching and exhorting.

Reply. Here thou would judge the Apostles teaching, which is immediate, to
be like thy self which are carnal, and without, who denies ^here is any such
Officers, Pastors, and Teachers now as was then: Here thou prov'st thy self to
be a Witch, who draws people into another thing, as thou decla^^st in the 47.
page of thy book, in thy answer to the eighteenth Query.

Obj. And thou talk of waiting upon the office, and living upon the Gospel,
a temporary and transitory Gospel, and yet thou d^niest the same Officers and
Teachers as was then.

Reply. There thou art without in another temporary and transitory Gospel, as
thou call'st it.

Obj. And whereas thou say, In these days they shall heap up to themselves
Teachers.

Rep. This is thy self, O your selves, who says, Teachers are not the same now
as was then, and here thou come under the Prophecy that Paul speaks to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.4. for thou confess^s they are not such as was then.

Object. Whereas thou say, Can any rational person conceive, how preaching
is like to be kept up?

Rep. The preaching of Christ is kept up without thy conceiving, for it is not
any rational person that keeps up preaching, who lives in the conceivings: And
again, thou clearest thy self from the Ministers of Christ, who were made
Ministers by the will of God, and thou who deniest the same teachings to be now
as was then, art one amongst those Teachers that follows their own lusts,
phancies, and fables, and cannot endure sound Doctrine, having itching ears,
turning to fables from the truth, thou have confessed there is no such Teachers
now as was then, therefore thou and thy company art another in your own w^lls,
out of the will of God, distant from truth, and to be them that Peter and the
Apostle prophesied of, which should come in the last time, following your
phancies, senses, and consequences, which the eternal Spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures ever judged and condemned such.

Object. And whereas thou say, Thou would have them first proved before
approved, and thou alledgest 1 Timothy 3.10.

Rep. And thou deny'st that Office that was then, that there is none such now,
and here thou art disapproved with the Scriptures, for it disapproves thee, 1 Timothy 3.10. and in the 47. page of thy book.

Object. And in the third particular thou art justi^ying, standing, praying in
the Sinagogues, and thou bring'st Solomon's examples, who pray^^ in the behalf
of Israel.

Reply. Here thou show thy self plainly to be a false Prophet indeed, who
puts no difference between Solomon's praying, and the Pharisees, who stood
praying in the Synagogues.

Object. And whereas thou accusest us, that we are against praying.

Reply. Here thou do lie, thy praying we deny, who puts no difference between
the Heathen and the Saints, but the Saints pravers we own, and Solomon's praying
we own.

Object And thou say, Your places cannot hardly be called as the Jews
Sinagogues was, for it was not erected for any spiritual use.

Rep. No more is yours, for thou deniest immediate inspiration, and they that
did witness imm^diate inspiration, was persecuted in the Jews Sinagogues; the
Saints which meet together in the eternal word denied all the Jews practices,
which met together in such a man's ^ouse.

Object. Fourth particular, and thou do lie, in saying we would have no
meetings.

Rep. Because we do deny such Teachers as thou art, and such practices as thou
practices, and such meetings, who confesses, that you are not the same Pastors
and Teachers now as then, so then your meetings are not the same; but the
Teachers as was then we own, and the meetings as was then we own, for truth
changes not: But here thou show, that thou art changed from it, who has
confessed, that your Teachers is not the same.

Object. F^fth particular, thou say, we are cavelling at places, and strikes
at persons.

Reply. Thou may as well say Christ cavelled at persons; do not speak
Christ's words, who art thou, that thou car'st oppose him, who said, they was
called of men Master, have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, stand praying
in the Sinagogues, and thus he shows to the multitude how they may be known,
and here thou art known, and seen, who would justify that which Christ cried
against in thy ambition, and says, you have not cause to reject those things
he cried woe against, as to be called of men Master, and have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies, those things spoke Jesus to the multitude, and the
multitude seeing his word, as thou may read in Mat. 23. if you will own the
Scriptures to be truth, and thou bring'st Philip, and the Goalor came to Paul
and Silas, and said Sirs, and these words thou bring'st to oppose Christ's
words, who said, be ye not called of men Masters: And here thou declar'st rhy
self to be an open Antichrist, who opposes Christ: I charge thee in the
presence of the Lord, for Christ says, be not ye called of men Master, for ye
have one Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren, and thou bring'st the
Goalors words to oppose Christ, Acts 16.30. Christ's Doctrine denied to be
called of men Master.

Object. And thou say, That in Mat. 23. those words will stand us in no
steed, which were Christ's words.

Rep. Here thou do say Christ's words will stand us in no stead, thou deniest
his Doctrine, and teaches for Doctrine the Traditions of men, and there thou
show another Doctrine which is damnable and cursed.

Object. And thou say, The title of Mastery is a civil respect, and importts
a civil honor.

Rep. Here thou show the Master thou serves, who denies the Doctrine of
Christ, and how can thou believe, which seeks honor of another.

Object. And whereas thou say, It is a mere slander to speak against them
who have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, and art called of men Master.

Rep. Here thou might as well call Christ a slanderer, who spoke against all
those things which thou seek'st to justify in the sight of the world, but in
the sight of God is condemned, and of all who are of God, and by them thou art
judged.

Object. And whereas thou say, The Apostle says, giving honor, go one
before another.

Rep. What have thou to do to talk of the Apostle, who denies the same teaching
to be now as was then, for the condition we own, which must be honored? But
thou have declared thou never heard'st Gods voice, nor waits for it, and so
declares thy self to be a Heathen that knows not God, to whom he will render
vengeance in flam^s of fire, and that is not honored of God, nor none of his,
but we honor all men in the Lord.

Obj. And whereof thou accusest us of destroying relation.

Reply. All such relations as is contrary to Christ, and his Doctrine, we d^ny;
And who would take the ^itle from Christ to be called of men Master, and layest
thou will not reject it; h^re thou shows forth thy presumption to be called of
m^n Master, let all people see if you own that Christ which the Scripture
sp^aks of, who forbad it, Mat 23. Bu^ you would take the title from him who art
for destruction, who shows that Christ never sent thee, for if he had, you
would abide in his Doctrine, which thou do deny, and who takes the Apos^l^s
words to just^fie that to oppose Christ's words, who spoke to them that were in
the state of servants and Masters. Earth makes Masters, but the time will come
as with the Master, so with the servant; he that can receive it, let him, as
Philemon, Paul's doctrine to him, who can receive it, may.

Quer. 19. Whether a man shall ^v^r grow up that he need no man teach him under
your Ministry yea, or no, seeing the Apostle says, You need no man teach you,
and you which have been long teachers, how many have you brought up in this
condition?

Ans. And in thy answer to this Query, thou say, Such opposition as excludes
all humane helps, you do confess, That no man is ever like to grow up so high.

Reply. Here thou art not so far as some of thy fellows; for they deny humane
helps, though they be in the same nature that t^ou art in; and he that grows up
in perfection, grows out of ignorance and humane helps; the Ap^stles said, they
knew all things, but this thou have denied, and calls it an hyperbolyc^l
expression.

Obj. And thou say, they may grow in a sense under teaching of Ministers
among you, to know all the truths of the Gospel, and yet thou denies immediate
inspiration, and the same teaching ^ow as was then; and yet thou say in a
comparative sense, they may not need teachers.

Reply. This is thy sense who have denied the Doctrine of C^^^ and thy confused
stuff which comes out of thy bottle, and Peter's Ex^ortation* and Paul's, thou
have chared thy self from, for thou say, the same t^^chings are not now ^s
were (...) and the Church of Christ we d^^^^itness to be he p^liar and ground
(...) truth, which you have c^ared your selves from, and ^^om the Teachers,
Past^^s, and Elders of it, who s^i^^, there is none such now, as were th^^, wh^
would mak^ truth changeable, and (...) thou art a (...) in thy own g^n^ra^ion,
who knows not God manifested in flesh, just^fi^d inspirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world.

Obj. And you say you have answered our questions agreeable to the Scriptures.

Reply. There is another lie, let the reader read them, and prove whether thou
have not spoken contrary to the Scriptures, and all thy consequences and senses
are contradicted with us, and den^^d and trampled upon with all knowing
Christians, who are in Christ; and thou art he whose desire is to destroy the
Scriptures, who would subvert the faith of the Gosp^l, who leads people captive
after thy own delusions, who have denied Pastors, teachers, and Officers now,
as in the time of the Aposti^s, and here you have cleared your selves to be no
Pastors, no E^^^rs, no Offic^rs, but a likeness or an imag^, which Go^ forb^ds;
for thou say, there is not any suc^ Officers P^stor, and teachers, as was
then, then you are (...) ^alse, and to b^ denied, who are contrary to the
Scriptures, for with it you are proved, and with the life judged: and your
prayers we d^ny, for God has opened our eyes, by which (...) you del^^ed poor
creatures, who are thus sold under d^^usion, as thou (...), and Gods E^ection
thou knows noth^ng of, but are s^a^^d and ^^p (...) by the Devil, who art led
captive for the present after his will, this all who are in the Eternal light
there will thee see.

ANd Eaton, thou says, these things thou have pres^nted for this end and
purpose, to obstruct their way, and stop their further proceedings, that their
imposture might prevail no longer.

Here thou have dug a pit, and art fallen into it, and laid a snare, and art
taken; I take all the children of light to record, and with the light do judge
thee, and to see if thou be not in the imposture, and an high imposture, and in
the witchcraft.

First, Thou do assert, and thy company, that the Spirit of Christ is
distinct from the Saints, and the Saints from the Spirit.

Here thou have cleared thy self from the Saints, who were in the Spirit, and
to be an imposture; and this is in thy answer to the first Query.

Secondly, Thou and you says, That you do not apprehend, and speak right of
God, and Christ, nor the Spirit, nor of your selves, nor of the Ministry of
the Gospel.

Thou have delared it, who says that the Spirit is distinct from the Saints,
and the Saints distinct from it, and thou not apprehending aright of God, and
Christ, nor the Saints, and taking thy self to be a Pastor, thou haft openly
deceived thy self to be an imposture, which art stopped, and shall proceed no
further; and you not apprehending aright of your selves, as thou says you do
not, declare your selves to be blind guides, and not fit to teach others, that
does not know your selves, but we know it is so, that you do not know your
selves, and this is in thy answer to the fourth Query.

And thirdly, you say, That such a voice as comes immediately from God, you
have not heard of, such an inspiration as this, you have not received.

Thou that have not received an immediate inspiration, and have not heard the
voice of the living God; here thou have raked thy self from all that did hear
the voice of God, and them that had received the immediate inspiration; here
you have turned your selves among the Impostures. Witches, and Sorcerers, which
have not heard a word from the Lord, as thou thy self faith; Let all the
children of the light judge thee, if thou be not an imposture, and a deceiver,
but thou art made manifest to the children of light, praises be to our God, the
living God, for ever. And this is in answer to the seventh Query.

Fourthly, Thou say, there are no such Pastors now, no such Officers now, no
such Teachers now, no such Mininisters of the Spirit now, nor no such gifts
now, as was then.

Here thou, and all thy Teachers, and Officers, and Pastors, are under the
Prophecy, as Peter speaks of, and Paul speaks to Timothy, heaps of Teachers;
and here thou thy self have made them all Impostures, and Inchanters, and
Sorcerers, and Charmers; if the Pastors be not now as was then, and the
Teachers now as was then, and the Officers now as was then, they are not in the
truth, for we do witness the same spirit, now as was then, and the Pastors and
the Teachers the same now as was then, made by the same Spirit.

But thou says, There is none such, and we do believe it, and know it, that
there is none such in thy generation, so thou have cleared thy self, and all
thy company out of the truth, and here thou would make people believe, that
the truth is changeable, and here thou show that thou have not the Spirit
that the Apostles had, but the spirit of error, and guided by it, and
impostures, and given over to fables; and this is in thy answer to the
eighteenth Query.

And for the Act of sprinkling Infants, thou say, Something may be held
forth for it, the Blood of Christ.

Here thou makes the Blood of Christ a figure of sprinkling Infants, and the
sprinkling of Infants must then be the substance, according to thy words; and
yet thou com^s after, and speaks of Water, Baptism, Types of Christ's Blood; for
there is no Scripture that speaks of sprinkling infants; and here thou art
rasced out, and that which thou holds forth, which thou would bring to
justify sprinkling ^nfants: For the Blood of Christ is the Substance: this is
in thy answer to the sixteenth Query.

And thou say, Consequently God did not intend immediate teaching, nor to
give out in after-ages an immediate voice, which should lead and guide men in
the way of Salvation.

O thou vain man, God will stop thy mouth, and thou must be confounded, who
denies the everlasting Covenant of God, who says he will teach his people, and
make with them a new Covenant, that all shall know God: and he^e again before
the Lord and all the children of God I charge thee, to be an imposture, and
there all the children of the light may see thee, who are taught of God
immediately, and directed, and guided in the way of salvation.

Thou sayes^, thou never heard the voice of God from Heaven, nor received the
immediate inspiration, nor does not wait for it.

Let all the children of the light see if thou be not an imposture, who has
not heard a word from the Lord, and one of them that ^^ns before thou art sent,
which the true Prophet cried against.

And many Scriptures thou have gathered out of the Letter, which wa^ sent to
thee in answer to thy Letter, which thou calls mire and dirt, which thou calls
Annotations.

Thou high blasphemer, who has cleared thy self from the life which gave for h
^he Scriptures, which life reaches over thee, and does compre^end thee, and
judge thee eternally; Let all the children of the l^ght, who are led by the E
ernal Spirit of Go^, and dwell; Se^ if thou be not in a pre^ence of Spirit, who
denies the immediate inspiration of the Spirit, and hearing the vo^ce of God;
Her^ t^y spe^ch bewrays thee, and thy language is known with the Et^^nal Spirit
of God, where it is made manifest, and what sp^^^^ it is that dwells in thee,
and acts in thee, and rules thee, and t^ be in the first birth, so in the snare
thou art taken, and into the pit thou art turned, who says these persons alone
pretend the Spirit. That is false; for we do not pretend we have it, we witness
it, and thy pretenses we do deny.

And another thing thou brings to fill up thy Book, and make it large; the
confession of one Joh^ Gilpin (a Quaker) Was John Gilpin come to the trembling
of the D^vils? which power of God m^de ^^m to confess his f^rmer conversation,
as in his paper he declares it, and to see the deceit of the Priests, and to
forsake his drunkenness, and was he bewitched with such as thou art? who now
follow drunkenness, and was drunk; that there was a warrant granted out against
him, and this is one of thy converts, and one of thy sacrifices, that thou puts
up to the supreme Authority, which the Authority strikes down all such things.

And another Sacrifice thou offers up against them whom the world calls
Quakers; a discovery of myst^cal Antichrist, displaying Christ's Banners, but
attempting to lay waste Scripture, Gospel, Christ, Fa th, Hope, and concerning
an Examination of the doctrine, and way of the Quakers in Yorkshire, written by
John Pomroy, Paul Glissen, Joseph Kellet.

We are acquainted with your generation, and your reproaches to us are riches,
and your slanders; for them you will be rewarded, and your portion for your
lies is the lake, and its well they have set their names to these lies, John
Pomroy, Paul Glissen, Joseph Kellet, that they may be known: For with the
chi^dren of light they are, and their Spirit tried, had they not uttered forth
their names, and their voice discerned, and the Eternal Light of God sees them,
which shall be their eternal condemnation, and the Judgment of God will fall
upon hem for th ir lies, and slanders, for them that they call Quakers; ^usking
we own, else we should lay waste the Scriptures, as you do: For David quaked,
Moses quaked, and Paul trembled, and Habbakuk quivered, and Jeremy shaked, and
these were in the faith, and hope, and these had the life of the Scriptures,
a^co^di^g to their measure. Now let all people see, if John Pomroy, Paul
Glissen, and Joseph Kellet, wh ch have digg^d a p^t for others, see if they be
not fallen into it themselves* who are laying waste the Scriptures; for the
Gospel of Christ we own, and the Scriptures are ours, and the Doctrine of
Christ we live in, and Faith, and Hope, and not laying waste the Scripture, but
all such as make trades on the Scripture, such we would have laid waste.

And thou Eaton, and the rest, who says there are no such Officers now, no
such Teachers now, no such Pastors now, as was then: Do not thou here lay
waste the Scripture, and have showed thy self to be one of them, and can
imposture that what thou knows, thou knows naturally, which were ordained of
old for condemnation, as Jude speaks of, for thou denies immediate inspiration,
and thou denies hearing the voice of God, when Christ is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever; and they that are of God hear his word, and they that
hear his word he^r his voice; and here thou have showed thy self that thou art
not of God, and the Gospel is the same, which is the pillar and ground of truth.

And another thing, thou Eaton, sets as a witness against them, whom thou calls
Quakers, which word thou spoke in thy letter to Richard Walter, and thou
said Satan had filled his heart with such fogs and mists, and darkness* and
this is in thy page 56. and this is in thy own letter, which thou would^st
slander us with thy own words, which came out of thy own bottle.

But, O thou Enemy of good, thy door is set open, and what is in thy house is
seen, and wh^^ is in thy bottle pours out, and so for the truths sake, because
an evil report and slander should not rest upon ^t; and for the simple ones,
and d^luded ones, that are subject to catch at his histories and reports. So
for the trut^s sake have I given forth this, not to be justified of man, nor to
b^ known outward^y, but to be known to the Lord God, and of him to be
justified, and not to stir up strife or war, but that truth might be set up,
and all d^ceit confounded, and the simple ones directed, and their minds guided
to God to hear his voice, and to wait upon him, that they might come into the
life of the Scriptures, that they were in, that gave them forth, which thou
have declared that thou have not, neither do thou wait for it, so shows thy
self to be an imposture, and keeps all in the pit, and from hearing the voice
of the living God.

And as for railing, such we deny, and all such as lay waste Scripture, and
live not the life of it, and Christ, and says, and hope, but in their places
we own all as it was given forth; and here be thou Samuel Eaton, and John
Pomroy, and Paul Glissen, and Joseph Kellet, to that in your consciences I
speak, that it may witness against you, that you are witnesses against the
truth of God, and them that live in it, who has published forth your lies and
slanders, who are for the Lake. And thou Samuel Eaton, who makes a color of
answering the Queries, thou have made many Queries, and has answered thy own,
let the Reader of thy Book but take notice, and see thy deceit, and imposture,
which thou so often accuses them, that thou calls Quakers with, which therein
thou art comprehended thy self with the children of light, and I leave thee to
be judged with them all, because thou have published thy Book openly, let all
the children of the light judge thee what spirit thou art guided by, who denies
immediate inspiration.

And in thy Answer to the seventeenth Query, thou slanders the Apostle, and
says it was a hyperb^lycal Speech, when the Apostle said, they knew all
things, and needed no man to teach them, but as the ano^n^ing, and this thou
say was an hyperbolycal expression, O vain man; where did the Apostle give
^orth any such expressions? thou would make him a liar like ^hy self, who
cannot own his words, therefore do we own the Apostle, who spoke plainly, and
deny thee, with thy hyperbolycal expressions, who art in the wisdom of words,
and slanders the Power of God, which makes the earth to tremble, in which power
stood the Saints faith, and wisdom, as the Apostle spoke to the Corinthians, in
which Spirit and Power of the living God stands our says and wisdom, and not
in the wisdom of the world, which wisdom we see all comes to nothing, which
wisdom thou lives in, and so with the world thou may be justified, for it
loves its own, and in it thou may have many witnesses; but thou do not
know, as thou have confessed, and with him no liar nor slanderer, nor with them
who are Gods.

Thou say, The Church of Christ, is the pillar and ground of truth, and does
witness the truth contained in the Scripture.

But this is another, and not thine; for thou can not witness it to be the
pillar and ground of truth, but art an enemy to it, and denies the immediate
inspiration, and hearing the voice of the living God.

And thou asserts that the Mystery of Godliness is great.

Thou may assert it, for godliness is a mystery to thee, thou know it
not, but he that spoke these words, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, witnessed these words as he spoke them, and to such as thee it is a
mystery without any consequences, or ^ences, thou may very well assert it,
for thou art without God i^ the world.

And as for El ction thou knows nothing of; For his secrets are with them that
fear him: and thou denies ever hearing his voice, therefore how should thou
know his Secrets, and there let thy mo^th be stepped, for thou knows not what is
elect^d, which art pleading for sin, and for the D^v^l, and denie^ p^rfection
and pu^i^y, so thou art without among the dogs, and the Whoremongers, and the
Adulterers, and there we leave thee.

And thou who say, thou never heardst Gods voice, (nor do not wait for it)
nor never shall in the state thou art in, though thou say, thou have
confuted the Quakers, but it is with that nature which is for utter c^nfusion
and d^struction, and that which thou say thou have confu^ed, shall confound
thee, and thy gene^ation, and all who are in the l^ght may see thy pride, and
hypocrisy.

And as thou say, Our speech bewrays us, but it is made manifest to all,
who is in any measu e e^lightened, that thy sp^ech bewrays thee, what
generation then, and art of which never heard the voice o^ God, that thou knows
not the Spirit of God, where it is mad^ man fest, neither art thou guided by
the light of thy conscience; but art warring for the Devil against the Lamb,
and ^he Saints; but the Lamb shall get the victory over such beasts, and false
prophets as thou art: Praises be to our God, the living God, for evermore. And
so grace and peace be mul^iplied among all those that love the Lord Jesus
Christ.

A Reply to a Book which is full of lies, and slanders, set forth by Higgison,
a Priest in Westmerland, which he writ against the Northern Quakers, as he
calls them.
FIrst, Thou gives an Epistle to the CHRISTIAN READER.

Reply. O how dare thou mention Christians, who appears so openly to be an
enemy to them! For when one Thomas Holme came to thee, to speak to thee in the
Steeple-house, he was cruelly beat, and his clothes rent and torn, and set in
the stocks; and this was by thy Church, as thou calls it, and is this thy
conferring with Christians?

And thou say in thy Epistle, Thou would not have the Government of this
Nation to read thy Book, not as lying lines.

And how have thou proved thy self to be a liar in thy own Congregation? who
says, you do not persecute, and besides hundred of places more I might
mention, where they have been, and are daily imprison^d, and stockt.

And in thy seventh Page to thy Book, thou gives to the Reader a story of one
Fox, as going to a Gentleman's house in Cumberland, with one or two more men,
and one of the house came to them, and asked to know their business, and they
asked if the Gentleman of the house was within, and called him by name.

O Higgison, thou liar, and slanderer, I charge thee to mention that man's name,
which him, which thou calls Fox, as thou say, went to in Cumberland; him
that thou calls Fox had not been in Cumberland then; And here I charge thee ^n
the presence of the living God to be a liar, who art a publish r of lies, who
art impudent, and brazen, and hardened in thy deceit.

And thou say, the Gentleman took them aside, and they told him they were
sent to him from God.

Reply. And as for the Gentleman's taking him that thou calls Fox aside, it is
a lie, and a slander, there was never no such thing.

And as for saying, that he heard a voice, that is ano her of thy lies, and
slanders.

And as he whom thou calls Fox, calling for a little water at the Gentleman's
house.

Thou liar, here I charge thee to be a liar again, he was never there. And as
for him thou calls Fox, going to an Alehouse, and desiring the host to provide
meat, O thou slanderer and liar, here I charge thee in the presence of the
living God to be no Minister of Christ, but in iniquity. And let the Gentleman
in Cumb^rland witness against thee.

And le^ the Reader of thy Book, read with a single eye, and he will see it is
come out of the generation of liars, and will be ashamed that ever such as thou
should be mentioned to be a Min ster of Jesus Christ, who sued one of thy
hearers for two-pe^ce. And Higgison, who art for destruction in the lake that
burns, where the portion of all liars is, to that in thy conscience I speak,
which shall be a witness against thee, and condemn thee.

Here are more of thy lies and slanders that thou casts upon him whom thou
calls Fox, And th u P^iest Higgison says, that he cr^pt into the Country,
whom thou calls Fox.

O thou liar, and slanderer, thy Book is nothing but lies, and slanders, and
flatteries, let all the Country witness against thee to be a liar, who art the
envious man, that art sowing thy seed, but thy seed is seen, and known.

And, O thou Higgison, thou filthy liar, and slanderer of him whom thou calls
Fox, in the eighteenth Page that thou gives to the Reader, as a filthy lying
slander which shall turn upon thy self, the earth may open and swallow thee up
quick.

Thou say, that some Person of quality, brought this thy lying story to
Kendal, which thou have caused to be put in print, and told what disorder he
had caused in the Country, and here thou envious man art sowing thy wicked
seed, lies, and slanders, who art one of the Devils servants, but thou art
discovered, and shall proceed no further, as in thy Book thou have declared thy
self, to be more openly known then thou was before, though thou was known to
the children of light before.

And thou Higgison says, He was in a certain house, together with many of his
Disciples, thou slanderer who makes di^^urbance in the Country, and so this
shall return upon thy self. And another lying story thou tells of the Devils
discovering him to be of his Vessel and Agent, and which caused many of his
followers to desert him, as he was speaking in a certain house, procur^d Foxes
apprehension, and imprisonment in Nottingham Castle, till he ran away with his
Keeper.

O thou slanderer, and liar, who art of the Devil, and for the Lake, they in
Nottingham Town, and Shire, will witness against thee, he that was with his
Keeper, whom thou calls George Fox, was the Sheriff. He was kept at his house.
And of saying he was taken at a house, and carried to prison to Nottingham.
Castle; these are slanders and lies, and they in Nottingham will witness thee
to be a Minister of the Devil, who ministers lies.

Thou Priest Higgisson, O thou impudent, Him that thou calls George Fox, as
saying, he run away with his Keeper from Nottingam Castle, they all in
Nottingam Town, will witness again thee to be a liar, and slanderer: And him
that thou calls George Fox, was hayled out of a Steeple-house to prison, for
speaking to a Priest of thy generation, who spoke lies as thou do; And here
thou Higgisson, I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a liar,
who art a vessel for Satan to dwell in.

And thou liar and slanderer, who says he was accused for sorce^y, but sorcery
is thy own, for he is of God, and in him is no gu^le, but upright, godly, and a
just man, and innocent.

And thou Higgisson, have written forth many lies, and stories, and fables, and
so shows thy self to be one of those that the Prophet prophesies of, who art
given up to follow fables and lies, who has uttered forth thy lying stories;
but thou and a^l thy lies are for the lake that burns, and the fi e and the pit
eternally, and the snare, whose mouth must be stopped, and thou shall proceed no
further, for the whole Country will (...)

His lies and slanders are these: First, That Benet should prison him for
saying, That that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem was a togue. 2. That a woman a
follower of him, went up and down to get some to kiss her. We Robert Withers of
Kellet, and James Taylior of Neuton, both in the County of Lancaster, being
moved of the Lord for the truths sake to go to Derby, and the Country
thereabouts, to search out the lies, and slanders, and reproaches, which Benet
a Member of the House of Parliament, and Justice of Peace in Derby, cast upon
the truth; and the innocent by which all the innocent suffer: we did not go,
because we did not know the truth and falsness of these things before; for the
truth that is made manifest amongst us does testify against all these things,
but that an evil report should not rest upon it, that they who be in
simpl^city, should not stumble; and when we came into the Town of Derby, and
Country thereabouts, we did with much diligence search and inquire of his life
and conversation, and doctrine: and then they cried out in the Town of Derby,
and thereabouts, against Benet's filthy lies, and scandals; and said, tha they
must needs witness against him: the contrary; and that George Fox did always
declare against that, and all other such filthy practices, and never such a
word came out of his mouth, as to say, That that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem
was a rogue; and they in Derby, and the Country thereabouts could tell the
words which he imprisoned him for almost a whole year: which was no breach of
any Law; so when he had put him in the House of Correction, put him in the
Dangeon, and kept him in four prisons, almost a whole year; and then when he
would not satisfy his will, and that no Law could take hold on him; then Benet
struck him, and commanded the under-Goaler to put him out of the Town, half a
mile, or a mile: and this many in Derby, and the Country thereabouts, w^ll
witness: so we being willing that the thing should be known openly, as we
declared it openly: We have got the Copy of the Mitimus of the Master of the
House of Correction, whither he sent him; and a Copy of the Heads of the words
which he spoke, when they examined him: and this we bear witness to in the
presence of God.

James Telor. Robert Widder.


The Heads of the words that George spoke, when they examined him.
1. THey asked why they came thither: We said, God momoved us; so says Peter,
And God does not dwell in Temples made with men's hands, as says Stephen. We
said, Look at Christ in you, and not at men. We said, Christ is in us, and has
sanctified us; so says the Apostle: To the Saints ye were unclean, but now are
ye washed. They asked us, Had we no sin? I said, No: and in Christ was no sin.
They said, Where is Christ? And we said, In us: and he has taken away our sin;
so says John, We abiding in him, sins not. They asked us, How we knew that
Christ did abide in us? And we said, By his Spirit, that he has given us. They
said, Was we Christ? And we said, We were noth^ng, Christ was all. And they
said, If a man steal is it no sin? And we said, All unrighteousness is sin; and
they stumbled at it: and many other words were spoken, but these are the Heads.

A Copy of the MITTIMUS. To the Master of the House of of Correction in Derby,
Greeting,
We have sent you here the Bodies of George Fox, late of Munsfield, in the
County of Nottingham, Cordwinder, and John Fretwel, late of Stainsby, in the
County of Derby, Husbandman, brought before us this present day, and charged
with the avowed uttering, and bro^ching of diverse blasphemous opinions,
contrary to a late Act of Parliament, which upon their examination before us,
they have confessed: these are therefore to require you forthwith upon sight
hereof to receive them, the said George Fox, and John Fretwel, into your
custody, and them therein safely to keep during the space of six months,
without bail, or main-prise; or until they shall find sufficient Sureties to be
of good behavior, or be there delivered by Order from our selves hereof you
are not to sail: given under our hands and seals this thirtieth Day of October,
1650.

Jeremy Benet. Nathaniel Barton.


FINIS.

