WAY of deliverance from BONDAGE.

Set forth in love to the simple, who have erred for lack of knowledge.

The Redemption of the holy Seed, is through Judgment on that which has
hindered its gro^^^ Isa. 1.27. and purification is by the sire of Zion, ^^d and
the furnace of Jerusalem, the which comes to (...) known by owning and
submitting unto the power of the burning Light in its operation of Judgment
against the transgressor, which breaks the peace of the wicke^ that he has in
his wickedness, and hereby throu^^ submission unto the sword of the Spirit of
Judgment is learned to answer the requitings thereof, by which man comes to be
purged, and made a vessel unto honor, meet for the Masters use.

^h! prepare to meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, for all his ways
are Judgment,

Deuteronomy. 32.4. By one that desires the enlargement of the righteou^ Seed, which
is imprisoned in the unconverted. THOMAS CHILTON.

^ondon, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

The way of deliverance from Bondage. He is in the way of life that receives
(and keeps) instruction, but he that r^fuseth reproof is brutish.
ALl men by nature being obedient children unto the God of this world, and
subjects to the prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.3. Ps. 14.^.3 Jer. 10.23
are disobedient unto the God of heaven, the everlasting King of righteousness,
and have no power in them (that is of them) to turn from evil to good, being
they are under the rule and Authority of their Master the Devil. Now if any
have in them a desire to be delivered from the bondage, and servitude of sin,
and death, they must look unto that light which ^akes the condition manifest,
Ephesians. 5.13.
and from whenc^ the desire to be delivered arises; for it is the light of
Christ in man which wars against the King and kingdom of darkness, striving to
overturn his government, and to deliver the captives from under his power which
keeps them in bondage; but the natural man when the light of the spirit makes
manifest his sin, and shows the danger of walking therein, and reproves him for
it, and exhorts him to follow the light and obey its counsel, which would lead
him out of sin, then he cries out, I want power; Now to such I say that the
power over sin is in the spitit which reproves for sin, and he that rejects this
spirit (which is light) rejects the power, and he that receives it receives the
power; yet it may be objected by some he has not a free will, nor power to
receive that in which the power is. An. Its true, man as he is in the power which
captivates him in sin has not a free will, for its in bondage; but there is a
will in man which is not of man, which does strive to beget the will of man
(that is in bondage) into freedom; Ezekiel. 18.
and this is that which wills not the death of him that dies, but that all
men should come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved. And as for those
who say they have not power to receive that in which the power (over sin) is, I
(out of tender love to their precious souls) have written a few words for their
information.

The immortal wise God of love (whose grace has appeared unto all men)
desires not that any man should perish, Tit. 2.11, 12. Mat. 1.21.
but that all should come to know his power, his light and grace; (which is his
Son) to be their Savior, Isai. 59.2.
(who saves his people from their sins) therefore does he strive to draw all
men unto the Son by the cords of his love. Now he draws that which has been
separated, for all men by reason of transgression has been degenerated, and
separated from God, and his work is to draw and separate the creature (by the
light) from that which has blinded the creature, and hid the face of God. Now
all the strength which man has is to look unto the light which makes manifest
his deeds of darkness, and reproves him for them, Isa. 30.7. Man's strength is
to sit still.
and so to sit still from his own willing, and running, that the power of the
light which wrestles and brings judgment on the power of darkness, may rend
the cords of iniquity which ti^ the creature to the devil, and this spiritual
light of judgment does draw and strive to redeem the creature out of its
bondage, by bringing judgment, and Ministering condemnation upon all his deeds;
and all that is required of the creature is to stand still and own the spirits
Ministration of judgment on him, and quietly to lie down under them, and
herein lies his strength. And as there is a patient waiting under the
judgment of the power, the strong man comes to be bound, and the keepers of
the house are made to tremble; and in this manner is the creature brought forth
into victory, (through judgment) over his enemy the devil, but where the
drawings of the Lord are refused, and judgment scorned, the power over sin is
not known; and before any comes to feel power over sin, they must first know
(and open) the door at which the power enters, to wit, a standing still from
self-willing and acting, which darkens the heart, and to look with care unto
the light which shines in the midst of darkness, that the blind eye may be
opened, and receive sight; and this light is the free gift of the Father which
plentifully springs from the fountain to refresh the dry thirsty Land: but many
there be who throw up mountains and heap up great hills (out of their
impenitent carnal hearts) to stop the passage of the sweet streams of the
waters of Shilo which run softly, and there is none can truly taste the virtue
and goodness of this water, but those who come down from of the mountains [of
their imaginations,] for the mountains are high, but the waters are below the
hills, and the way to receive it is to stand still in coolness, and not to
reach after it in a self-will, for that cannot taste it, nor embrace it; but as
there is a sitting still in a sober frame of spirit, it springs up freely of it
self in the heart, to beget a thirsting desire, and also to satisfy it with
that which is more precious then Rubies, he that has an ear let him hear. So
the chief thing which is first required of people [by the light*] is to sit
still, that is, when the light ministers forth judgment, and condemnation
upon all their wicked words, and actions, that they do not fly back from the
light which makes them manifest, nor revolt from the judgments thereof; but
that they own the smiting of the Lord by the light, for their manifold
transgressions, and condemnation to be due unto them; and so to look unto the
light which makes manifest sin in the first motion, and submit to [and lie down
under] the judgments of the power thereof, which first wounds, and then by
degrees cures with the healing stripes of his love, and this is the strength
which the Lord requires, and whosoever will not make use of it; Prove. 1.24. to
the end of the chapter.
but runs on without fear in the race of wickednesses, casting the Counsel of
Gods love behind their backs, and will have none of his reproof, they are
hardened, and their destruction is of themselves; therefore let all who feel
the reproves of the Lord by his light in them, mind what it reproves for, and
there to stand still, looking unto the light which counsels to do so no more,
and as it is owned in its reproof, by degrees the power comes to be received
over those sins which it reproves for, and as there is a patient waiting under
the ministration of condemnation, and a standing in aw of the light, fearing to
act those things which is guilty of reproof; then man comes to be guided out of
sin, and led in a way to life which he knows not. And so let none refuse, Isa.
42.16.
but all mind the drawings of the Father, who with the light of his Spirit
striveth with man to turn from darkness to light; Genesis 6.3: Psalm. 95.7, 8.
for the Spirit shall not always strive with man, but whilst it does strive
and call (to day) if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, least he
cease striving with you, and seal you up in the pit of torment, out of which
there is no Redemption, then it would have been better ye never had been born;
Therefore when the light reproves, and calls t^ depart from sin, let none
say, I want power, nor refuse to make use of their strength, in sitting still;
for that is the slothful servant [and not the willing] who must be turned into
utter darkness, Matthew. 25.30.
where there is sore tribulation, and anguish; but blessed are those who have
learned by the light, to cease for evil, and to do well, for unto such, power
is increased to give victory over the enemy, who goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

And what though the covetous money-sucking Priests, and ignorant, contentious,
carnal professors, have set themselves in battle against the light [which is
the good gift of God to every man, 1 Cor: 12.7. 2 Pet. 1.19.
unto which all would do well to take heed] some calling it a natural light,
and others calling it darkness, giving it lying titles to fright people from
believing it to be of God; y^^ the light shall grow and flourish, and all that
oppose it shall fade and wither. And as the people of old had several
judgments and opinions concerning the man Christ Jesus, so the people have now
concerning his light; some said, he was a good man, others said, John 7.12.
nay, but he deceives the people; so those who have tasted the virtue of the
light, and know its sufficiency, say, it is able to lead all rhat give up
themselves to be guided thereby un^o the knowledge of Salvation by Jesus
Christ; but [out of ignorance] others say, nay, it is a delusion; yet the
unbelief of some, makes not void the Faith of those who feel the riches of the
goodness thereof to be more worth then rubies; John 1.4, 9.
and this light with which every man is enlightened, is Spirit, and life, though
this [corrupt wordly wise] professing age will no more acknowledge it to be so,
then the Jews of old would acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ. Oh! England,
England, thou that deniest the light of Christ, which appears in the inward
parts of all people, thy knowledge has puffed thee up, thy wisdom has perverted
thee, and thou art become a nurse to the Babylonish whores bastards, who art
envying the honest woman, and pleading for whoredom, but the wages due for thy
work, thou shall receive unavoidably.

The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon him.
By one that desires the releasement of the imprisoned seed.

THE END.

