A LETTER Sent from the Queen of SWEDEN To the King of FRANCE TOUCHING, The
Affairs of that Kingdom, and the King of Scots With her Majesty's desires and
gracious promise thereupon.

ALSO A Message from the States of Holland to his Majesty concerning the peace
of that Kingdom, and the United Provinces.

WITH A perfect Abstract and Narrative of the whole proceedings and transaction
of affairs, between the French and Dutch, in relation to the Commonwealth of
England, and the King and Crown of Spain.

Brought over by the last Post and Packets, June the 2d. 1652. June.5.

LONDON: Printed for G: HORTON. 1652.

The Queen of SWEDENS Letter to the King of FRANCE.
SIR,
DIstance of place must make no difference of minds, Love and Life amongst
hearts make an end together; I have long longed to hear from you; but now
having such an opportunity, I thought good to let you know, that I yet live to
love you, and withal present you with such Occurrences that are most
remarkable and extant in these parts, viz. her royal Majesty the Queen of
Sweden has sent a Letter to the King of France; wherein she earnestly implores
his Majesty to hearken to an accommodation and Treaty for a general peace, and
o comply with his Council, in all such ways and means, that may tend to the
honor of his Majesty, and the liberty and freedom of all his liege people in
general: for composing the present differences, and settling of a perfect
Union, Her Majesty offers her mediation in the business, and to that end and
purpose has sent another letter to the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of
Orleans, desiring their condiscentions and assent thereunto, but as yet they
have returned no answer; the King has answered her, and employed a Messenger
of his own: Her Majesty in the said Letter, reminds the King of the Pension
formerly granted and conferred upon the Scotch King, desiring a continuance
thereof, etc. which probably will not be effectual; by reason that the present
emergent affairs of that Kingdom; requires extraordinary and vast sums of
moneys, for the carrying on of the work in hand: for indeed, great are the
differences and distractions throughout his whole Territores, and its
conjectured, that they will not soon be composed; by reason that the Duke of
Lorrain is come into the assistance of the Prince of Conde, and to that end the
work is to be taken into mature deliberation at the Council conveened in the
Louvre, in ororder whereunto on Sunday last about ten a clock at night, the
Duke of Lorreign arrived here, having been met before by his royal Highness
the Duke of Orleans, with the Pith, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Beauford
the Prince of Tarante, and many other Grandees of the same party as far as
Grosbois in Brie.

He came into Paris (through a great crowd of people) in the Duke of Orleans
his Coach, who was brought to the Dukes Palace, where he now lodges, having
been visited by the Cardinal of Raets and many others. He gives out that he
has no other design but the procuring of the general peace: A Princely
juggle. It is thought that the Prince of Condi, will command his army and march
himself to Estempes. They have crossed the river of Marne at Lagny, and have
given the allarm at Mellun, where the King is in person, having surprised and
plundered the Suburbs, whilst the King with his forces was in the town, and
they set several houses on fire. Since which the said army of Lorrains has
got over the river of Sein at the port of A L' Anglois.

The Duke of Orleans has sent a Message to the King of the arrival of the said
Duke of Lorrain, and of his forces which he advertiseth are coming for the
destruction of the enemies of the peace and welfare of this State. We have
advice from Estamps, that the Kings forces having taken a Half moon belonging
to the Outworks of that place, those of the town had forced them out with great
loss on both sides, but the next day it was taken again for the King by the
Marshal Thurenne, and again retaken by the Princes forces, and again taken and
retaken since that, with the loss of a great many men on both sides, but it is
still kept by the Princes forces, the Count of Quince, the Count De la Land,
Mounsieur de St. Amore, Mounsieur de Kategret, Lieutenant of the Guards, and
several others of the Kings party, being some slain, others taken, and many
sorely wounded; at last that work being make untenable by the Canon shot from
both sides, was quit.

The Marshall of Thurenne has raised his batteries, and does play hard upon De
Estamps, being resolved to storm them by a general assault, and those within
are desperately resolved to oppose them, so that probably there will be a great
slaughter. The Count of Harcourt has sent some of his Horse thither, to
reinforce the Kings army there.

The plague is very rife in the Spanish army before Barselona, and the French
forces in great want there. Orders have been sent to Challons to bake bread for
4000 men, whom the Marshal de la Ferte does bring from Champagne to the King.
The Arch Duke Leopold has for certain sent 3000 of his horse to join with the
Princes, under the command of the Duke of Wittemburgh: The Regiment of Person
going toward Dunkirk, for the re-inforcing that Garrison, have been routed and
destroyed by the Arch Dukes forces.

We have advertisements from Bourdeaux, that 24 Members of that Parliament
being suspected of malignancy, are put out of the Parliament, and the rest
settled, and secured, to administer the Justice as formerly. The Citizens are
about subscribing the Union, but will not suffer this Parliament to enter into
it with them, suspecting many of them to be disaffected, and not to be trusted
in the business. The Princes party is very strong in the City, and carry a
great influence at present.

There has been lately a fight between the forces of the Count of Harcourt,
and a party of the Princes men: the Princes forces were worsted at first, but
by the coming in of Mounsieur de Balthazer, they were relieved, and got the
victory, many of Harcourts men being slain and diverse taken prisoners, and the
whole party routed. The Count of Moore marching with a party of fourscore
Horse, was fallen upon, and himself slain, not far from Libburney. But his men
carried away many prisoners of the Count Harcourts forces, many of which also
were slain.

Paris 5 June, still. nov.
A Letter from CONAVGHT in IRELAND.
SIR,
SInce the Rendition of Galloway, all that County and Mayo have both submitted
to Contribution. The whole force of the Enemy is marching into the county of
Sligo, on the borders of Ulster, and Clanrickard with them, where they intend a
conjunction with the Ulster Forces, and if they can keep their men together,
will attempt something upon Ulster. I have a considerable body of Horse
attending them; and next week the Commissary-General and my self resolve to
march directly after them; so that probably you will hear speedily they are
dissipated or engaged, who are the most considerable Body in this Nation: and
if the Lord give us success, the work here will be at an end.

The States of Holland has likewise sent a Letter to the King, assuring him of
their readiness, or the effecting of a perfect union to the end, that they may
be in a condition to assist each other in an offensive or defensive war,
against any nation whatsoever that should oppose them; indeed it is high time
for them to begin to look to their game; for the English (if provoked) will
play their cards home, without much shuffling; and the Spaniard is very active
for re enforcing his passage into the united Provinces, which causes them to
make great preparations forwar; and to fortify and strengthen their frontier
towns; their old Regiments formerly discarded, are ordered to appear at a
general randezvouz about the 10th: of this instant, and Count William of
Nassaw, has received directions therein. Vantrump talks high, and is very
active in re-inforcing of his shipping; they abound much, and say they are
forthwith to put our again to sea; upon the same score, which if they do, the
English Navy is ready to receive them, and have kept several days of
humiliation to implore a blessing.

FINIS.

