A SERMON PREACHED At the public Fast Before his Majesty at Christ-Church in
OXFORD.

By William Chillingworth.

Published by command since his death.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL. 1644.

2 TIMOTHY Chap. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,

Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontitinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good,

Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.

Having a form of godliness, but denyng the power thereof.


TO a discourse upon these words, I cannot think of any fitter introduction,
then that wherewith our Savior someime began a Sermon of his, This day is this
Scripture fulfilled. And I would to God there were not great occasion to fear
that a great part of it may be fulfilled in this place.

Two things are contained in it: First, the real wickedness of the generality
of the men of the latter times, in the four first verses. For by men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. I conceive is meant, men
generally shall be so, otherwise this were nothing peculiar to the last, but
common to all times, for in all times some, nay many have been lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. Secondly, we have here the formal
and hypocritical godliness of the same times, in the last verse, having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; which latter ordinarily and
naturally accompanies the former. For as the shadows are longest when the
Sun is lowest, and as vines and other fruit trees bear the less fruit, when
they are suffered to luxuriate and spend their sap upon superfluous suckers,
and abundance of leaves: So commonly we may observe both in Civil
conversation, where there is great store of formality, there is little
sincerity: and in Religion, where there is a decay of true and cordial piety,
there men entertain and please themselves, and vainly hope to please God with
external formalities, and performances, and great store of that righteousness
for which Christ shall judge the world.

It were no difficult matter to show that the truth of Saint Paul's prediction
is by experience justified in both parts of it, but my purpose is to restrain
my self to the latter, and to endeavor to clear unto you, that that in our
times is generally accomplished: That almost in all places the power of
Godliness is decayed and vanished, the form and profession of it only
remaining: That the spirit, and soul, and life of Religion, is for the most
part gone, only the outward body or carcass, or rather the picture or shadow
of it, being left behind: This is the Doctrine which at this time I shall
deliver to you, and the use, which I desire most heartily you should make of
it, is this. To take care that you confute, so far as it concerns your
particulars, what I fear I shall prove too true in the general.

To come then to our business without further complement, let us examine our
ways, and consider impartially what the Religion of most men is.

We are baptized in our infancy, that is, as I conceive, dedicated and devoted
to Gods service, by our Parents and the Church, as young Samuel was by his
mother Anna, and there we take a solemn vow, To forsake the Devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires
of it, to forsake also all the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow
nor be led by them. This vow we take when we be children and understand it not:
and how many are there who know, and consider, and regard what they have vowed,
when they are become men, almost as little as they did being children? consider
the lives, and public Actions of most men of all conditions in Court, City,
and Country, and then deny it if you can, that those three things which we have
renounced in our baptism, the profits, honors, and pleasures of the world,
are not the very gods which divide the world amongst them, are not served more
devoutly, confided in more heartily, loved more affectionately, then the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose name we are baptized: deny if you can
the daily and constant employment of all men, to be either a violent
prosecution of the vain pomp and glory of the world, or of the power, riches,
and contemptible profits of it, or of the moment any or unsatisfying pleasures
of the flesh, or else of the more diabolical humors of pride, malice,
revenge, and such like: and yet with this empty form we please and satisfy
our selves, as well as if we were lively borne again by the Spirit of God, not
knowing, or not regarding what Saint Peter has taught us, That the Baptism
which must save us, is, Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet.
3 21
but the answer of a good conscience unto God.

When we are come to years capable of instruction, many, which is lamentable
to consider, are so little regarded by themselves or others, that they continue
little better then Pagans in a Commonwealth of Christians, and know little
more of God or of Christ, then if they had been bred in the Indies. A
lamentable case, and which will one day lie heavy upon their account, which
might have amended it and did not. But many I confess are taught to act over
this play of Religion, and learned to say, Our Father which art in Heaven; and,
I believe in God the Father Almighty: but where are the men that live so, as if
they believe in earnest, that God is their Almighty Father? where are they that
fear him, and trust him, and depend upon him only, for their whole
happiness, and love him, and obey him, as in reason we ought to do to an
Almighty Father? who if he be our Father, and we be indeed his children, will
do for us all the good he can; and if he be Almighty, can do for us all the
good he will; and yet how few are there, who love him with half that affection
as Children usually do their natural Parents, or believe him with half that
simplicity, or serve him with half that diligence? And then for the Lords
prayer, the plain truth is, we lie unto God for the most part clean through
it, and for want of desiring indeed what in word we pray for, tell him to his
face as many false tales as we make Petitions. For who shows by his
endeavors, that he desires heartily that Gods Name should be hallowed, that
is, holily, and religiously worshipped and adored by all men? That his Kingdom
should be advanced and enlarged? That his blessed will should be universally
obeyed? Who shows by his forsaking sin, that he desires so much as he should
do the forgiveness of it? Nay, who does not revenge upon all occasions, the
affronts, contempts, and injuries put upon him, and so upon the matter curse
himself, as often as he says, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us? How few depend upon God only for their daily Bread,
viz. the good things of this life, as upon the only giver of them, so as
neither to get nor keep any of them, by any means which they know or fear to
be offensive unto God? How few desire in earnest to avoid temptation? Nay, who
almost is there, that takes not the Devils office out of his hand, and is not
himself a tempter both to himself and others? Lastly, who almost is there
that desires heartily and above all things, so much as the thing deserves, to
be delivered from the greatest evil, sin, I mean, and the anger of God? Now
beloved this is certain, he that imployes not requisite industry, to obtain
what he pretends to desire, does not desire indeed, but only pretends to do so:
He that desires not what he prays for, prays with tongue only, and not with
his heart; indeed does not pray to God, but play and dally with him. And yet
this is all which men generally do, and therefore herein also accomplish this
prophecy, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

And this were ill enough, were it in private, but we abuse God Almighty also
with our public and solemn formalities, we make the Church a Stage whereon to
act our parts and play our pageants, there we make a profession every day of
confessing our sins with humble, lowly, and obedient hearts, and yet when we
have talked after this manner, 20. 30. 40. years together, our hearts for the
most part continue as proud, as impenitent, as disobedient, as they were in the
beginning. We make great Protestations when we assemble and meet together to
render thanks to God Almighty, for the benefit received at his hands; and if
this were to be performed with words, with Hosanna's and Hallelujah's, and
gloria patri's, and Psalms and Hymns, and such like outward matters,
peradventure we should do it very sufficiently: but in the mean time with our
lives and actions, we provoke the Almighty, and that to his face, with all
variety of grievous and bitter provocations; we do daily and hourly such
things as we know, and he has assured us to be odious unto him, and contrary
to his nature, as any thing in the world is to the nature of any man in the
world; and all this upon poor, trifling, trivial, no temptations. If a man
whom you had dealt well with, should deal so with you, one whom ye had
redeemed from the Turkish slavery, and instated in some indifferent good
inheritance, should make you fine speeches, entertain you with Panegyricks,
and have your praises always in his mouth, but all this while do nothing that
pleases you, but upon all occasions, put all affronts and indignities upon you,
would you say this were a thankful man? Nay would you not make heaven and
earth to ring of his unthankfulness, and detest him almost as much for his
fair speeches, as his foul actions? Beloved, such is our unthankfulness to
our God and Creator, to our Lord and Savior; Mat. 21 9. M rk 15.13.14.
our tongues ingeminate, and cry aloud, Hosanna, Hosanna, but the louder voice
of our lives and actions is crucify him, crucify him: We Court God Almighty,
and complement with him, and profess to esteem his service perfect freedom,
but if any thing be to be done, much more if any thing be to be suffered for
him, here we leave him, we bow the knee before him, and put a reed in his hand,
and a Crown upon his head, and cry, Hail King of the Jews: But then with our
Customary sins, we give him gall to eat, and vinegar to drink, we thrust a
spear in his side, nail him to the Cross, and Crucify to our selves the
Lord of Glory. This is not the Office of a friend to bewail a dead friend with
vain lamentation. Sed quae voluerit meminisse, quae mandaverit exequi, to
remember what he desires, and execute what he commands; so said a dying Roman
to his friend, and so say I to you, To be thankful to God is not to say, God
be praised, or, God be thanked, but to remember what he desires, and execute
what he commands, to be thankful to God is certainly to love him, and to
love him is to keep his Commandments, so says our Savior, Ioh. 19. If ye
love me keep my Commandments: If we do so, we may justly pretend to
thankfulness, which believe me is not a word, nor to be performed with words:
But if we do not so, as generally we do not, our talk of thankfulness is
nothing else but mere talk, and we accomplish Saint Paul's prophecy herein
also: Having a form of thankfulness, but not the reality, not the power of it.

If I should reckon up unto you, how many direct lies every wicked man tells
God Almighty as often as he says Amen, to this form of godliness, which our
Church has prescribed. If I should present unto you all our acting of piety,
and playing of humiliation, and personating of devotion in the Psalms, the
Letanies, the Collects, and generally in the whole service, I should be
infinite: And therefore I have thought good to draw a veil over a great part
of our hypocrisy, and to restrain the remainder of our discourse to the
contrariety between our profession and performance, only in two things; I mean
Faith and Repentance.

And first for Faith, We profess, and indeed generally, because it is not safe
to do otherwise, that we believe the Scripture to be true, and that it
contains the plain and only way to infinite and eternal happiness: But if
we did generally believe what we do profess, if this were the language of our
hearts as well as our tongues, how comes it to pass that the study of it is so
generally neglected?

Let a book that treats of the Philosophers stone, promise never so many
mountains of gold, and even the restoring of the golden age again, yet were it
no marvel if few should study it, and the reason is, because few would
believe it. But if there were a book extant, and ordinary to be had, as the
Bible is, which men did generally believe to contain a plain, and easy way for
all men to become rich, and to live in health and pleasure, and this worlds
happiness, can any man imagine that this book would be unstudied by any man?
And why then should I not believe, that if the Scripture were firmly and
heartily believed, the certain and only way to happiness which is perfect
and eternal, it would be studied by all men, with all diligence? Seeing
therefore most Christians are so cold and negligent in the study of it, prefer
all other business, all other pleasures before it, is there not great reason
to fear, that many who pretend to believe it firmly, believe it not at all,
or very weakly and faintly? If the General of an Army, or an Ambassador to
some Prince or State were assured by the King his Master, that the
transgressing any point of his Commission should cost him his life, and the
exact performance of it be recompensed with as high a reward as were in the
Kings power to bestow upon him: can it be imagined that any man who believes
this, and is in his right mind, can be so supinely and stupidly negligent of
this charge, which so much imports him, as to oversee through want of care any
one necessary article or part of his commission: especially if it be delivered
to him in writing, and at his pleasure to peruse it every day? Certainly this
absurd negligence is a thing without example, and such as peradventure will
never happen to any sober man to the worlds end: and by the same reason, if we
were firmly persuaded that this book does indeed contain that charge and
commission, which infinitely more concerns us, it were not in reason possible,
but that to such a persuasion, our care and diligence about it, should be in
some measure answerable: seeing therefore most of us are so strangely
careless, so grossly negligent of it, is there not great reason to fear,
that though we have professors and protestors in abundance, yet the faithful,
the truly and sincerely faithful are in a manner failed from the children of
men. What but this can be the cause that men are so commonly ignorant of so
many articles, and particular mandates of it, which yet are as manifest in it
as if they were written with the beams of the Sun? For example; how few of our
Ladies and Gentlewomen do or will understand, that a voluptuous life, is
damnable and prohibited to them? ^ Tim. 5.6.
Yet Saint Paul says so very plainly; She that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives. I believe this case divinely regards not the Sex; he would
say, He well as She, if there had bin occasion. How few of the gallants of our
time do or will understand, that it is not lawful for them to be as expensive
and costly in apparel, as their means or perhaps their credit will extend
unto? which is to sacrifice unto vanity, that which by the Law of Christ is
due unto Charity; and yet the same Saint Paul forbids plainly this excess
even to women -- also let women (he would have said it much rather to the men)
array themselves in comely apparel, 1 Timothy 2.^.
with shamefastness and modesty, not with embroidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly apparel; and to make our ignorance the more inexcuable, the
very same rule is delivered by Saint Peter also, 1 Epist. 3, 3.

How few rich men are or will be persuaded that the Law of Christ permits them
not to heap up riches for ever, nor perpetually to add house to house, and
land to land, though by lawful means, but requires of them thus much charity
at least, that ever while they are providing for their Wives and Children, they
should out of the increase, wherewith God blesses their industry, allot the
poor a just and free proportion? and when they have provided for them in a
convenient manner, (such as they themselves shall judge sufficient and
convenient in others) that then they should give over making purchase after
purchase, but with the surplussage of their revenue beyond their expense,
procure as much as lies in them, that no Christian remain miserably poor: few
rich men I fear are or will be thus persuaded; and their daily actions show as
much; yet undoubtedly, Mat. 19.19.
either our Saviors general command, of loving our neighbors as our selves,
which can hardly consist with our keeping vainly, or spending vainly what he
wants for his ordinary subsistence, lays upon us a necessity of this high
liberality, or his special command concerning this matter, Mat. 19.2^.
Quod superest date pauperibus, that which remains give to the poor, or that
which S. John says, 1 Epist. 3, 17. reaches home unto it, Whosoever has this
worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of
his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Which is in
effect, as if he had said -- He that keeps from any brother in Christ that
which his brother wants, and he wants not, does but vainly think that he
loves God, and therefore vainly hope that God loves him.

Where almost are the men that are or will be persuaded the Gospel of Christ
requires of men Humility, like to that of little Children, and that under the
highest pain of damnation? That is, that we should no more overvalue our
selves, or desire to be highly esteemed by others, no more undervalue, scorn,
or despise others, no more affect pre-eminence over others, then little
children do, before we have put that pride into them, which afterward we
charge wholly upon their natural corruption* and yet our blessed Savior
requires nothing more Rigidly, nor more plainly then this high degree of
humility; Mat. 18, ^.
verily, says he, I say unto you, he speaks to his disciples affecting high
places, and demanding which of them should be greatest, except ye be converted
and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Would it not be strange news to a great many, that not only adultery and
fornication, but even uncleanenesse and lasciviousness; not only idolatry,
and witchcraft, but hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, and contentions, not
only murders, but envying: not drunkenness only, but revelling, are things
prohibited to Christians, and such as if we forsake them not, we cannot inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven? and yet these things, as strange as they may seem, are
plainly written; some of them by S. Peter, 1 Epist. 4. chap. But all of them
by S. Paul, Gal. 5, 15. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these; adultery, fornication, uncleanenesse, lasciviousness, etc. of the which
I tell you before, as I have told you in times past, that they who do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

If I should tell you that al bitterness and evil speaking (nay such is the
modesty and gravity which Christianity requires of us) foolish talk and
jesting are things not allowed to Christians, would not many cry out these are
hard and strange sayings, who can hear them? and yet as strange as they may
seem, they have been written well nigh 1600 years, and are yet extant in
very legible Characters in the Epistle to the Ephesians. the end of the 4. and the
beginning of the 5 chap.

To come a little nearer to the business of our times, the chief Actors in
this bloody Tragedy, which is now upon the Stage, who have robbed our Sovereign
Lord the King of his Forts, Towns, Treasure, Ammunition, Houses, of the
Persons of many of his Subjects, and (as much as lies in them) of the hearts of
all of them: Is it credible that they know and remember and consider the
example of David recorded for their instruction, 1 Samuel 24, 11.
Whose heart smote him when he had but cut off the hemme of Saul's garment?

They that make no scruple at all of fighting with His Sacred Majesty, and
shooting Muskets and Ordnance at Him (which sure have not the skill, to choose
a Subject from a King) to the extreme hazard of his Sacred Person, whom by all
possible obligations they are bound to defend, do they know (think you) the
general rule without exception or limitation left by the Holy Ghost for our
direction in all such cases, Who can lift up his hand against the Lords
Anointed, 1 Samuel 2 6 9. Prove. 24.21.
and be innocent? or do they consider his Command in the Proverbs of Solomon,
My son fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that desire change?
Eccles. 8.2.
Or his council in the Book of Ecclesiastes, I council thee to keep the
Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God? or because they
possibly may pretend that they are exempted from, or unconcerned in the
commands of obedience delivered in the Old Testament, do they know and
remember the precept given to all Christians by S. Peter, 1 Pet, 2, 13
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him? or that terrible sanction of the same command, Romans 13, 2.
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, left us by St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Romans, who then were the miserable Subjects of the worst
King, the worst man, nay, I think I may add truly, the worst beast in the
world, that so all rebels mouths might be stopped for ever, and left without all
color or pretense whatsoever to justify resistance of Sovereign power.
Undoubtedly if they did know and consider and lay close to their hearts, these
places of Scripture, or the fearful judgment which befell Cora^, Numb. 16.32.
Dathan, and Ab^ram, for this very sin which now they commit and with a high
hand still proceed in, it would be impossible but their hearts should smite
them, as David's did, upon an infinitely less occasion, and affright them out
of those ways of present confusion, and eternal damnation. And then on the
other side they that maintain the Kings righteous cause with the hazard of
their lives and fortunes; but by their oaths and curses, by their
drunkenness, and debauchery, by their irreligion and prophannesse, fight more
powerfully against their party, then by all other means they do or can fight
for it, are not I fear very well acquainted with any part of the Bible; but
that strict caution which properly concerns themselves in the book of Deuteronomy.
23.9. I much doubt they have scarce ever heard of it, When thou go to Wars
with thine Enemies, then take heed there be no wicked thing in thee, not only
no wickedness in the cause thou maintainest, nor no wickedness in the means
by which thou maintainest it, but no personal impieties in the persons that
maintain it. Beloved for the former two, we have reason to be full of comfort
and confidence; For what is our cause? What is that which you fight, and we
pray for? but to deliver the King and all his good Subjects out of the power of
their Enemies, who will have no peace but with their slaves and vassalls? and
for the means by which it is maintained, it is not by lying, it is not by
calumnies, it is not by running first our selves, and then forceing the people
to universal perjury; but by a just war, because necessary, and by as fair
and merciful a War as if they were not Rebels and Traitors you fight
against, but Competitors in a doubtful Title. But now for the third part of
the caution, that, to deal ingenuously with you, and to deliver my own soul,
If I cannot other men's, that I cannot think of with half so much comfort as
the former; but seeing so many Ionasses imbarqued in the same ship, the same
cause with us, and so many Achan's entering into Battle with us against the
Canaanites, seeing Publicans and sinners on the one side, against Scribes and
Pharisees on the other; on the one side Hypocrisy, on the other prophannesse,
no honesty nor justice on the one side, and very little piety on the other; On
the one side horrible oaths, curses, and blasphemies; On the other pestilent
lies, calumnies, and perjury: When I see amongst them the pretense of
reformation, if not the desire, pursued by Antichristian, Mahumetan, devilish
means; and amongst us little or no zeal for reformation of what is indeed
amiss, little or no care to remove the cause of Gods anger toward us, by
just, lawful, and Christian means; I profess plainly I cannot without
trembling consider what is likely to be the event of these distractions; I
cannot but fear that the goodness of our cause may sink under the burden of
our sins: And that God in his justice, because we will not suffer his
Judgments to acheive their prime scope and intention, which is our amendment
and reformation, may either deliver us up to the blind zeal and fury of our
Enemies; or else, which I rather fear, make us instruments of his justice each
against other, and of our own just and deserved confusion. This I profess
plainly is my fear, and I would to God it were likewise the fear of every
Soldier in His Majesty's Army; but that which increases my fear is, that I
see very many of them have very little or none at all: I mean not that they
are fearelesse toward their Enemies, (that is our joy and Triumph) but that
they show their courage even against God, and fear not him, whom it is
madness not to fear. Now from whence can their not fearing him proceed; but
from their not knowing him, their not knowing his will and their own duty? not
knowing how highly it concerns Soldiers, above other professions to be
religious, and then if ever when they are engaged in dangerous adventures, and
every moment have their lives in their hands, When they go to War with their
Enemies, then to take heed there be no wicked thing in them.

You see, beloved, how many instances and examples I have given you of our
gross ignorance of what is necessary and easy for us to know, and to these it
were no difficult matter to add more. Now from whence can this ignorance
proceed, but from supine negligence? and from whence this negligence, but from
our not believing what we pretend to believe? For did we believe firmly and
heartily, that this Book were given us by God for the rule of our Actions, and
that obedience to it were the certain and only way to eternal happiness, it
were impossible we should be such enemies to our selves, such Traitors to our
own souls, as not to search it at least with so much diligence, that no
necessary point of our duty plainly taught in it could possibly escape us. But
it is certain, and apparent to all the world, that the greatest part of
Christians, through gross and wilful negligence remain utterly ignorant of
many necessary points of their duty to God, and man: and therefore it is much
to be feared, that this book, and the Religion of Christ contained in it,
among an infinite of professors, labors with great penury of true beleivers.

It were an easy matter (if the time would permit) to present unto you many
other demonstrations of the same conclusion; but to this drawn from our willing
ignorance of that which is easy and necessary for us to know, I will content
my self to add only one more taken from our voluntary and presumptuous neglect
to do those things which we know and acknowledge to be necessary.

If a man should say unto me that it concerns him as much as his life is worth,
to go presently to such a place, and that he knows but one way to it, and I
should see him stand still or go some other way, had I any reason to believe
that this man believes himself? Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? says he
in the Comedy. Potestatio contra factum non valet, says the Law: and why
should I believe, that, that man believes obedience to Christ the only way to
present and eternal happiness, when I see wittingly, and willingly and
constantly, and customarily to disobey him? The time was that we all knew that
the King could reward those that did him service, and punish those that did
dis-service, and then all men were ready to obey his commands, and he was a
rare man that durst do any thing to his face that offended him. Beloved, if we
did but believe in God, so much as most subjects do in their King, did we as
verily believe, that God could and would make us perfectly happy if we serve
him, though all the world conspire to make us miserable, and that he could and
would make us miserable if we serve him not, though all the world should
conspire to make us happy, how were it possible that to such a faith our lives
should not be comformable? Who was there ever so madly in love with a present
penny, as to run the least hazard of the loss of 10000 li. a year to gain
it, or not readily to part with it upon any probable hope or light persuasion,
much more a firm belief that by doing so he should gain 100000 li. Now
beloved, the happiness which the servants of Christ are promised in the
Scripture, we all pretend to believe, that it exceedes the conjunction of all
the good things of the world, and much more such a portion as we may possibly
enjoy, infinitely more then 10000 li. a year, or 100000 li. does a penny, for
100000 li. is but a penny so many times over, and 10000 li. a year is worth
but a certain number of pence; but between Heaven and Earth, between finite
and infinite, between Eternity and a moment, there is utterly no proportion,
and therefore seeing we are so apt upon trifling occasions, to hazard this
Heaven for this Earth, this infinite for this finite, this all for this
nothing; is it not much to be feared, that though many of us pretend too much
faith, we have indeed very little or none at al? The sum of all which has bin
spoken concerning this point is this. Were we firmly persuaded that obedience
to the Gospel of Christ, is the true and only way to present and eternal
happiness (without which faith no man living can be Justified) then the innate
desire of our own happiness could not but make us studious inquirers of the
will of Christ, and conscionable performers of it: but there are (as experience
shows) very few, who make it their care and business to know the will of
Christ, and of those few again, very many, who make no conscience at all of
doing what they know; therefore though they profess and protest they have
faith, yea their protestations are not to be regarded against their actions,
but we may safely and reasonably conclude what was to be concluded, That the
Doctrine of Christ amongst an infinite of professors labors with great
scarcity of true, and serious, and hearty believers, and that herein also we
accomplish St. Paul's prediction, having a form of godliness, but denying the
power etc.

But perhaps the truth and reality of our repentance may make some kind of
satisfaction to God Almighty for our hypocritical dallying with him in all the
rest; truly I should be heartily glad it were so: but I am so far from being
of this faith, that herein I fear we are most of all hypocritical, and that
the generality of professors is so far from a real practice of true
repentance, that scarce one it an hundred understands truly what it is.

Some satisfy themselves with a bare confession and acknowledgement, either
that that they are sinners in general, or that they have committed such and
such sins in particular, which acknowledgement comes not yet from the heart
of a great many, but only from their lips and tongues: For how many are there,
that do rather complain and murmr that they are sinners, then acknowledge
and confess it? and make it upon the matter rather their unhappiness and
misfortune, then their true fault, that they are so? such are all they who
impute all their commissions of evil to the unavoydable want of restraining
grace, and all their omi on of good to the like want of effectual exciting
grace. All such as pretend that the Commandments of God are impossible to be
kept any better then they are kept, and thus the world, the flesh, and the
devil are even omnipotent enemies, and that God neither does nor will give
sufficient strength to resist and overcome them. All such as lay al their
faults upon Adam and say with those rebellious Israelities (whom God assures
that they neither had nor should have just reason to say so) That their Fathers
had eaten sour grapes, and their teeth were set on edge. Ezekiel. 18.2.
Lastly all such as lay all their sins upon divine prescience, and
predestination, saying with their tongues, O what wretched sinners have we
been; but in their hearts, how could we help it, we were predestinate to it,
we could not do otherwise?

All such as seriously so persuade themselves, and think to hide nakedness
with such fig leaves as these, can no more be said to acknowledge themselves
guilty of a fault, then a man that is borne blind or lame, with the stone or
gout can accuse himself of any fault for being borne so; well may such a one
complain and bemoan himself, and say, O wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from this unhappiness? But such a complaint is as far from being
a true acknowledgement of any fault, as a bare acknowledgement of a fault is
far from true repentance: for to confess a fault is to acknowledge that
freely and willingly without any constraint, or unavoydable necessity, we have
transgressed the law of God, it being in our Power by Gods grace to have done
otherwise.

To aggravate this fault, is to confess we have done so when we might easily
have avoided it, and had no great nor violent temptation to it; to pretend any
great difficulty in the matter is to excuse and extenuate it: but to say that
all things considered, it was absolutely impossible for you to avoid it, is
flatly to deny it. Others there are that think they have done enough, if to
confession of sin they add some sorrow for it; if when the present fit of
sin is past, and they are returned to themselves, the sting remaining breed some
remorse of conscience, some complaints against their wickedness and folly for
having done so, and some intentions to forsake it, though vanishing and
ineffectuall. These heat-drops, this morning dew of sorrow, though it presently
vanish, and they return to their sin again upon the next temptation, (...).
2.22.
as a dog to his vomit, when the pang is over; yet in the pauses between,
while they are in their good mood, they conceive themselves to have very true,
and very good repentance; so that if they should have the good fortune to be
taken away in one of these Intervalla, one of these sober moods, they should
certainly be saved; which is just as if a man in a quartane Ague, or the stone,
or gout, should think himself rid of his disease, as often as he is out of his
fit.

But if repentance were no more but so; how could S. Paul have truly said, 1
Cor. 7.10.
that godly sorrow works repentance? every man knows that nothing can work
it self. The Architect is not the house which he builds, the Father is not the
Son which he begets, the Tradesman is not the work which be makes; and
therefore if sorrow, godly sorrow, works repentance, 2 Cor. 7.1^.
certainly sorrow is not repentance: the same S. Paul tells us in the same
place, that the sorrow of the world works death, and you will give me leave
to conclude from hence, therefore it is not death, and what shall hinder me
from concluding thus also? Godly sorrow works repentance, therefore it is not
repentance.

To this purpose it is worth the observing, that when the Scripture speaks of
that kind of repentance, which is only sorrow for something done, and wishing
it undone, it constantly uses the word (...), to which forgiveness of sins
is no where promised. So it is written of Judas the son of perdition, Mat. 27,
5. (...), he repented and went and hanged himself, and so constantly in other
places. But that repentance to which remission of sins and salvation is
promised is perpetually expressed by the word (...), which signifies a through
change of the heart and soul, of the life and actions, (...), Mat. 3, 2. which
is rendered in our last translation, Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand: But much better, because freer from ambiguitie in the entrance to our
Common Prayer Book. Amend your lives, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.
From whence by the way we may observe, that in the judgment of those holy and
learned Martyrs, repentance and amendment of life are all one: And I would to
God the same men, out of the same care of avoiding mistakes, and to take away
occasion of cavilling our Liturgy from them that seek it, and out of fear of
encourageing carnal men to security in sinning, had been so provident, as to
set down in terms the first sentence taken out of the 18 of Ezekiel, and not
have put in the place of it an ambiguous, and (though not in it self, yet
accidentally, by reason of the mistake to which it is subject,) I fear very
often a pernicious paraphrase; for whereas thus they make it: At what time
soever a Sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I
will put out all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord; The
plain truth, if you will hear it, is, the Lord does not say so, these are not
the very words of God, but the paraphrase of men: the words of God are as
follows -- If the wicked turn from all the sins which he has committed, and
keep all my statutes, Ezekiel. 18.21.
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not
dye; where I hope you easily observe, that there is no such word as -- At what
time soever a sinner does repent, etc. and that there is a wide difference
between this (as the word repent usually sounds in the ears of the people)
and turning from all sins, and keeping all Gods statutes, that indeed having
no more in it but sorrow and good purposes, may be done easily and certainly
at the last gasp, and it is very strange that any Christian, who dies in his
right senses, and knows the difference between heaven and hell, should fail
of the performing it: but this work of turning, keeping, and doing is (though
not impossible by extraordinary mercy to be performed at last) yet ordinarily
a work of time, a long and a laborious work (but yet heaven is very well
worth it) and if you mean to go through with it, you had need go about it
presently. Yet seeing the Composers of our Liturgy thought fit to abreviate,
Turning from all sin, and keeping all Gods statutes, and doing that which is
lawful and right, into this one word repenting, it is easy and obvious to
collect from hence, as I did before, from the other place, that by repentance
they understood not only sorrow for sin, but conversion from it. The same
word (...), Mat. 12, 42. is used in speaking of the the repentance of the
Ninivites, and how real, hearty, and effectual a conversion that was, you may
see Jonas 3, from the 5 to the last verse: The people of Ninive believed God,
and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them, for word
came to the King of Ninive, and he arose from his throne, and he cast his Robe
from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes; and he caused it
to be proclaimed and published throughout Ninive, by the decree of the King and
of his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, heard, nor flock, taste any
thing, let them not feed nor drink water, but let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea let every one turn from his
evil way, and from the violence which is in their hands; who can tell if God
will turn and repent, and turn away his fierce anger that we perish not?

Which words contain an excellent and lively pattern for all true penitents
to follow, and whereunto to conform themselves in their humiliation and
repentance. Jonah 3, 4.
And truly though there be no Jonas sent expressly from God to cry unto us, Yet
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet seeing the mouth of eternal
truth has taught us, that a Kingdom divided is in such danger of ruin and
destruction, that, morally speaking, if it continue divided it cannot stand,
and seeing the strange and miserable condition of our Nation at this time, may
give any considerable man just cause to fear, that as in Rehoboams case, so
likewise in ours, 1 King 12, 24.
The thing is of the Lord, intending to bring his heavy judgment upon us, for
our great sins, and our stupid, and stupendous security in sinning, and to
make us instruments of his designed vengeance, one upon another, peradventure
it would be a seasonable and necessary motion to be made to our King and his
Nobles, to revive this old Proclamation of the King of Nineveh, and to send it
with authority through His Majesty's dominions, and to try whether it will
produce some good effect: who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Who can tell whether he that
has the hearts of King and people in his hand, and turns them whithersoever
he thinks best, may not upon our repentance take our extremity for his
opportunity, Kuk. 19, 42.
and at last open our eyes that we may see those things that belong to our
peace, and show us the way of Peace, which hitherto we have not known: but this
by the way, for my purpose I observe that this repentance, which, when the
sword of God was drawn, and his arm advanced for a blow, stayed his hand, and
sheathed his sword again, was not a mere sorrow for their sins, and a
purpose to leave them, nay it was not only laying aside their gallantry and
bravery, and putting on sackcloth and sitting in ashes, and crying mightily
unto God, of which yet we are come very short: but it was also and that
chiefly, their uniuersall turning from their evil way, which above all the
rest was prevalent and effectual with God Almighty, for so it is written. And
god saw their works that they turned from their evil way, ^^nah 3.10.
and God repented him of the evil that he said he would do, and he did it not.

In the gospel of S. Luke, cap. 24. The condition of the new Covenant, to
which remission of sins is promised, is expressed by the word (...), Thus it
behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and that ((...)) Repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name, which place if ye
compare with that in the Gospel of S. Matthew. Mat. 28.29.
Go teach all Nations baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all whatsoever I shall
command you. It will be no difficulty to collect, that what our Savior calls
in one place (...), repentance, that he calls in another observing all that he
has commanded; which if repentance were no more but sorrow for sin, and
intending to leave it, certainly he never could nor would have done. And as
little could S. Paul Act. 20.21. profess that the whole matter of his
preaching was nothing else but (...), Repentance toward God, and faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ: It being manifest in his Epistles, he preaches and presses
every where, the necessity of mortification, regeneration, new, and sincere
obedience, all which are evidently not contained under the head of Faith, and
therefore it is evident he comprised all these under the name of Repentance.

In which words moreover it is very considerable, as also in another place,
Heb. 6. where among the fundamentalls of Christianity the first place is given
to (...) I say it is very considerable, that though the word may not very
absolutely be rendered repentance, yet we shall do much right to the place and
make them much more clear and intelligible, if in stead of Repentance we had
put conversion as it is in some of the best Latin translations: so for
example, if instead of repentance to God Act. 20. and repentance from dead
works in the Epistle to the Heb. which our English tongue will hardly bear; we
should read conversion to God, and conversion from dead works, every one sees
it would be more perspicuous and more natural, whereas on the other side if in
stead of repentance we should substitute sorrow (as every true and genuine
interpretation may with advantage to the clearenesse of the sense be put in
place of the word interpreted) and read the places sorrow toward God, and
sorrow from dead works, it is apparent that this reading would be unnatural,
and almost ridiculous, which is a great argument that (...), to which
forgiveness of sins is promised in the Gospel, is not only sorrow for
sin, but conversion from sin.

And yet if it be not so, but that Heaven may be purchased at easier, and
cheaper rates: how comes it to pass that in the new Testament, we are so
plainly and so frequently assured, that without actual, and effectual
amendment, and newness of life, without actual, and effectual mortification,
regeneration, sanctification, there is no hope, no possibility of Salvation?

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire, So S. John Baptist preaches repentance; it is not then the leaves of a
fair profession, no nor the blossoms of good purposes and intentions, but the
fruit, the fruit only that can save us from the fire, neither is it enough not
to bear ill fruit, unless we bring forth good. Every tree that brings not
forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, so our
Savior Matthew. 7 21. And again after he had delivered his most divine precepts
in his Sermon on the mount (which Sermon contains the substance of the Gospel
of Christ:) he closes up all with saying: he that hears these sayings of
mine and does them not) and yet these were the hardest sayings that ever he
said ( I will liken him to a foolish man, Mat. 7, 26.27.
which built his house upon the sand, that is, the hope of Salvation upon a
sandy and false ground; when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house, it fell, and great was the fall of it.

They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
So S. Paul. Gal. 5.24. they then that have not done so, nor crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts, let them be as sorrowful as they please, let
them intend what they please, they as yet are none of Christ's, and good Lord
what a multitude of Christians then are there in the world that do not belong
to Christ?

Gal. 5.19.20.21.
The works of the flesh says the same S. Paul, are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, revellings, of the which I tell you before,
as I have told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. He does not say, they which have done such things
shall not be saved, but manifestly to the contrary -- Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but you are sanctified: but he says; they which do such
things, and without amendment of life shall continue doing them, shall not be
excused, by any pretense of sorrow and good purposes. They shall not inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven.

1 Cor. 6, 9.10.
And again in another Epistle, know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor covetous, nor Drunkards, nor revilers shall inherit the Kingdom
of God. Gal. 6.15.


In Christ Jesus (says the same Saint Paul in other places) nothing avails
but faith: nothing but a new creature, nothing but keeping the Commandments of
God; it is not then a wishing but a working faith, not wishing you were a new
creature; nor sorrowing you are not, but being a new creature, not wishing you
had kept, not sorrowing you bare not kept, nor purposeing vainly to keep, but
keeping his Commandments must prevail with him.

Follow peace with all men and holiness, Heb. 12.14.
says the Divine Author of the Epistle to the Heb.) without which no man shall
see the Lord.

Saint Peter in his 2. Epistle, 2 Pet. 1.5.6.7.8.9.
commends unto us a golden chain of Christian perfections, consisting of these
linkes, Faith, virtue, knowledge, Temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, charity: and then adds -- He that lacks these things is blind,
and knows not that he was purged from his old sins, Let his sorrow be never
so great, and his desires never so good, yet if he lack these things, he is
blind, and was purged from his old sins, but is not.

Lastly Saint John, he that has this hope purifieth himself, 1 John 3.3^
even as he is pure, the meaning is not with the same degree of purity, for
that is impossible, but with the same kind, the same truth of purity, he that
does not purify himself, may, nay does flatter himself, and without warrant
presume upon Gods favor, but this hope he has not; and again, Little
Children, let no man deceive you, 1 John 3.7.
he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous; And thus
you see all the divine Writers of the New Testament with one consent and one
mouth proclaim the necessity of real holiness, and labor together to
disinchant us from this vain phansy, that men may be saved, by sorrowing for
their sin and intending to leave it, without effectual conversion and
reformation of life, which, it may well be feared, has sent thousands of
souls to hell in a golden dream of Heaven.

But is not this to preach works as the Papists do? no certainly; it is not;
but to preach works as Christ and his Apostles do it is to preach the
necessity of them, which no good Protestant, no good Christian ever denied, but
is is not to preach the merit of them which is the error of the Papists.

But is it not to preach the Law in time of the Gospel? no certainly it is
not: for the Law forgives no sins but requires exact obedience, and curses
every one which from the beginning to the end of his life, continues not in
all things which are written in the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.
but the Gospel says, and accordingly I have said unto you, that there is
mercy always in store, for those who know the day of their visitation, and
forsake their sins in time of mercy, and that God will pardon their
imperfections in the progress of holiness, who miscall not presumptuous and
deliberate sins by the name of imperfections; but seriously and truly endeavor
to be perfect; only I forewarne you that you must never look to be admitted
to the wedding feast of the Kings Son, either in the impure rags of any
customary sin, or without the wedding garment of Christian holiness; only I
forewarne you that whosoever looks to be made partaker of the joys of heaven,
must make it the chief, if not the only business of his life, to know the
will of God and to do it; that great violence is required by our Savior for
the taking of this Kingdom, that the race we are to run is a long race, the
building we are to erect is a great building, and will hardly, very hardly be
finished in a day, that the work we have to do of mortifying all vices; and
acquiring all Christian virtues, is a long work; we may easily defer it too
long, we cannot possibly begin it too soon. Only I would persuade you, and I
hope I have done, that that repentance which is not effectual to true and
timely conversion, will never be available unto eternal salvation. And if I
have proved unto you that this is indeed the nature of true repentance, then
certainly I have proved withal, that that repentance wherewith the generality
of Christians content themselves, notwithstanding their great professions what
they are, and their glorious protestations of what they intend to be, is not
the power but the form; not the truth but the shadow of true repentance, and
that herein also we accomplish Saint Paul's prediction, having a form of
godliness, etc.

And now what remains but that (as I said in the beginning,) I should humbly
entreat and earnestly exhort every man that has heard me this day, to confute
in his particular what I have proved true in the general. To take care that
the sin of formality, though it be the sin of our times, may yet not be the
sin of our persons, that we satisfy not our selves with the shadows of
Religion, without the substance of it, nor with the form of godliness without
the power of it.

To this purpose I shall beseech you to consider, that though sacrificing,
burning incense, celebrating of set festivalls, praying, fasting, and such
like, were under the Law, the service of God commanded by himself, yet
whenever they proceeded not from, nor were joined with the sincerity of an
honest heart, he professes frequently almost in all the Prophets, not only
his scorn and contempt of them all, as fond, empty, and ridiculous; but also
his hating, loathing, and detesting of them as abominable and impious.

The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God, Prove. 15, 8. What have I to
do with the multitude of your Sacrifices? says the Lord, Esaias the first, I am
full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed beasts, when ye come
to appear before me, who required this at your hands? Bring no more vain
oblations: Incense is an abomination to me, I cannot suffer your new moons,
nor sabbaths, nor solemn days, it is iniquity, even your solemn assemblies:
My soul hates your new moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden
to me, I am weary to bear them; and when you shall stretch out your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I will not
hear, for your hands are full of blood.

And again, Isa, 66, 3. He that kills an Ox is a if he slew a man, he that
sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs neck, he that offers an oblation
as if he offered Swines flesh, he that burned incense, as if he blessed an
Idol; and what is the reason of this strange aversion of God from his own
Ordinances? it follows in the next words, they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delights in their abominations.

Terrible are the words which he spe keth to the same purpose in the prophecy
of Amos, chap. 5. v. 21, 22, 23. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies, though you offer me burnt offerings and
meat offerings, I will not accept them, nor will I regard your peace offerings.

Now beloved, if this hypocrisy, this resting in outward performances, were so
odious to God under the law, a religion full of shadows, and ceremonies,
certainly it will be much more odious to do so under the Gospel, a religion
of much more simplicity, and exacting so much the greater sincerity of the
heart, even because it disburdens the outward man of the performance of Legal
rites and observances. And therefore if we now under the Gospel, shall think
to delude God Almighty, as Michall did Saul, with an Idol handsomely dressed in
stead of the true David. If we shall content and please our selves, with being
of such or such a Sect or profession, with going to Church, saying, or hearing
of Prayers, receiving of Sacraments, hearing, repeating, or preaching of
Sermons, with zeal for Ceremonies, or zeal against them, or indeed with any
thing besides constant piety toward God, Loyalty and obedience toward our
Sovereign, justice and charity toward all our Neighbors, temperance,
chastity, and sobriety toward our selves, certainly we shall one day find,
that we have not mocked God, but our selves, and that our portion among
hypocrites shall be greater, then theirs.

In the next place let me entreat you to consider the fearful judgment which
God has particularly threatened to this very sin of drawing nigh unto him
with our lips, when our hearts are far from him: It is the great judgment of
being given over to the spirit of slumber and security, the usual forerunner
of speedy desolation and destruction, as we may see in the 29 chap. of Esaiah,
from the 9 to the 14 verse, Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, and cry,
they are drunken but not with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink:
for the Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed your eyes. The Prophets and your Rulers, the seers has he covered, and
after, at the 14 verse, The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Certainly this judgment if
ever it were upon any people, we have cause to fear it is now upon us. For if
the spirit of deep sleep were not upon us, how could we sleep so securely,
even upon the brinke of the pit of perdition? how could we proceed on so
confidently in our mirth and jollity, nay in our crying sins and horrible
impieties, now when the hand of God is upon us, and wrath is gone out, and even
ready to consume us? And if the wisdom of our wise men were not perished, how
were it possible they should so obstinately refuse the security offered of our
laws, liberties, and religion by the Kings Oath, by his execrations on
himself, and his posterity, in case he should violate it, by the oaths of
all his Ministers, not to consent to, or be instruments in such a violation, by
the so much desired Trienniall Parliament, from which no transgressor can
possibly be secure; and instead of all this security, seek for it by a civil
war, the continuance whereof must bring us to destruction and desolation, or
else he has deceived us by whom we are taught, Mat. 23.25.
That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

Now what was the sin which provoked this fearful judgment? What but that
which I have labored to convince you of, and to dissuade you from, even the
sin of hypocrisy? as we may see at the 12 verse: Wherefore says the Lord,
forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips
do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me; and their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold I will proceed to
do a mervailous work amongst them: for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, etc.

Consider, thirdly, what woes, and woes, and woes, our Savior thunders out
against the Scribes and Pharisees for hypocrisy, Woe be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, Mat. 25.25.27.29.
and again, and again, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites:
Beloved, if we be hypocrites as they were, Tithe mint and Cumin, and neglect
the weighty matters of the Law, judgment and justice, and mercy, as they did:
Make long prayers, and under a pretense devour Widows houses, as they did:
Wash the outside of the dish and platter, while within we are full of ravening
and wickedness, write Gods Commandments very large and fair upon our
Phylacteries, but shut them quite out of our hearts: Build the Sepulchers of
the old Prophets, and kill their successors, in fine, if we be like painted
Sepulchers as they were, outwardly garnished and beautiful, but within full of
dead men's bones and rottenness, we are then to make account that all these
woes belong to us and will one day over-take us.

Consider, lastly, the terrible example of Ana^^s and Saphira, and how they
were snatched away in the very act of their sin, and that their fault was (as
the Text tell us) that they lied unto God. Beloved, we have done so a thousand
thousand times: our whole lives (if sincerely examined) would appear, I fear,
litttle less but a perpetual lie; hitherto God has been merciful to us,
and given us time to repent, but let us not proceed still in imitating their
facts, lest at length we be made partakers of their fall.

God of his infinite mercy prevent this in every one of us, even for his Son
our Savior Jesus Christ's sake; by whom and with whom, in the unity of the
holy Spirit, be all honor and glory to the eternal Father, world without end:
Amen.

FINIS.

