A CRYSTAL For the CLERGY, Especially those that are corrupt in Doctrine,
scandalous in their lives and conversations. An. Dom. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for R.P. 1641.

A CRYSTAL FOR THE Clergy that are corrupt in Doctrine, scandalous and
impure in their lives and conversations, Anno Dom. 1641.
IF we judiciously view ancient Histories as well Divine as Moral, as the
present corruption of the times, we shall find that those of impure and
unclean spirits of the Clergy, corrupt in their Doctrine, tyrannical in
their government, scandalous in their lives and conversation, have always
been the root and first beginning of the destruction of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, when they are increased with riches and pomp of this world, by
which they wax proud and ambitious; they aspire to sit in places of great power
and authority in Kingdoms and States, both Spiritual and Temporal, which
having attained, so presumptuous is pride, they dare presume to denominate
themselves Lords, nay higher in authority then Princes and Emperors, nay to
command and compel them to do what pleases their desires and fantasies, and
nothing else, though never so contrary to the word of God, or contrary to
natural reason or moral civility, and if these then desires be neglected or
rejected, then never rest they till they have brought to ruin such Kings and
their Kingdoms.

I desire Reader you would peruse this little Yreatise which I termed a
Crystal for the Clergy, and you will easily discern that the corruption,
pride, ambition and luxuriousness of the Clergy in ancient time, exercising
tyranny as well over Princes as their people who they have won, and as it
were subjected to their obedience, and that in these our times, and this our
Kingdom does little ornothing differ. The Bishops of Rome having attained to
the highest step of honor and dignity that ever was any in the whole Kingdom,
and having obtained the power of both swords, the sword of the Spirit, and the
sword of the Magistrate, they then began to display their banners, both as
King and Bishop, and whom they could not bring to their obedience by the one,
they then exercised and used the other: In their first combat they had to fight
with any to subdue them and draw them to their faction, they used their
thunderbolts of excommunication and cursing, this was terrible to Kings and
Emperors; if this failed, then treacheries and treasonable practices of
subjects against their lawful Princes by poisoning, powder plots, stabbings
and the like: if these prevailed not, they procured the national war, one
Kingdom against another: I will only give a touch of either, and then compare
them to these times.

First, Platina in the life of Gregory the 7. shows that this Emperor Henry
the fourth was excommunicated by the Pope: afterward he adds, the Emperor
says he came speedily to Canosie, where the Bishop was with Mathilda, and by
and by laying aside his royal robes, went bare foot to the gates of the City
and humbly required to be let in, his entering denied he took in good part,
notwithstanding that the winter was sharp and all was frozen hard, remaining
three days in the Suburbs of the Town continually craving pardon, at length
at the request of Mathilda and the Earl of Savoy and the Abbot of Chinnes, he
is absolved.

Frederick Barbarouse that he might be reconciled to the Pope laid his neck
under his feet to be trodden on: The Venetians besieged Farrare which paieth
tribute to the Church of Rome, forth which cause they were excommunicated by
Clement the fifth; therefore Francis Dandalous which was afterward created
Duke, went into France where that time the Bishop was to ask pardon for that
offense; long it was ere ever he was admitted to come in the Popessight, at
last he was led with an iron chain about his neck to the Bishops table like a
dog, and there feign to be under the table amongst the dogs so long till the
wrath of Clement without all clemency being over past. This is written in
Sabellicus in the end of the 91. Encide the 7. both full manifest are the
injuries of this beast done to other Kings and people. And thus much of their
first means to bring as well Princes as people to their subjection.

I come now to the second means practiced by the Bishops to draw both Princes
and people to subjection, and that in brief, Platina writing of Gregory the
fifth. Silvester the second, says he, before called Gilbert a Monk of Florey
forsaking his Monastery followed the Devil, to whom he gave himself whole: and
by and by he adds, Gllbert moved with ambition and a divelish desire to rule
through bribery got first the Archbishopric of Regns, afterward of Ravenna,
and after with greater suit the Devil furtnering him, he obtained to be Pope,
yet under this condition, that after his death he should be the Devils wholly,
etc.

Beno in the life and acts of Hildebrand called Gregory the seventh, one
Gilbertus which had infected the city with sorcery, says he, after the
thousand years fulfilled, coming up out of the bottomless pit, of Gods
permission was Pope four years, and changing his name was called Silvester
the second, and after Gilbert the year 25. Theophilactus his scholar atchived
the seat violently, called Benedict the seventh, after him Gratian called
Gregory the sixth, after him Sabinus and he was called Silvester the third: all
these three were Popes at one time. Henry the second Emperor a godly man and
valiant, going to Rome, to purge the Church, compelled Benedict or Theophilact
the Magitian to flee, east Gregory into prison, and sent away Silvester to his
old Bishopric; and he holding a Counsel placed the Bishop of Bamberge whom
he called Clement, in the seat, of whom also he received the Crown, and he
brought Gregory with his disciple Hildebrand with him into Germany: In the
mean time Benedict returning to Rome from flight, vexes Clement, and with
much enchanting infecteth the City, and by letters received from Hildebrand out
of Germany, he learneth what is done in the Emperors Court. Gregory dies there
in prison and lest Hildebrand his heir, both of his false packing and of his
money. Clement dies also whom Damasus the second succeeds immediately but
straightwaies poisoned; and Junio called Leo the ninth succeeded in his place.
And thus much of the second means practiced by Bishops to raise themselves
into places of authority, and to bring all that oppose and resist them to their
subjection or utter confusion.

3 Thirdly and lastly, a word or two of their last means when neither of them
can prevail to bring their purposes to perfection; that is, by raising wars
and seditions in Kingdoms, one against another, wherein they have showed
themselves more merciless and cruel then the most heathenish and barbarous
nations in the world: Benedict otherwise Theophilact, which before I have
mentioned, was carried by the Emperor prisoner into Germany, returning with Leo
the ninth, he armed Leo against the Normans and betrayed him to them; the
Germans therefore flaine by Treason, Leo himself hardly escaped: Hildebrand
himself by degrees obtained the Popedom, where he so carried himself that no
man except blind but might perceive his divelish government requited: the
Emperor Henry the fourth for his carring away into Germany by Henry the second.
This Pope also excommunicateth Henry the fourth, deprived him of the dignity
Imperial: moreover he stirred up his subjects against him; and absolved the
Rebels and Traitors of their oaths of fidelity, and he himself like a
Monarch gave the Crown of the Empire unto others at his pleasure. The power
therefore and treasure of the Empire has he so worn and wasted, what with
civil and what with foreign wars, that these many years now the Kings of
Almaine have never been able to recover their force, nor yet to resist the
most Arrogant tyranny of the Popes. Gregory the ninth whilst Frederick that
Excellent Prince made war in Siria for religion with the Sultan, invaded and
kept the Provinces of Frederick. There were cruel wars betwixt the Popes and
this Frederick. Innocentius the fourth, stirs up the Prince of Theoring
against Conrade the fourth of that name, and Son of Frederick the second,
and when the Emperor Conrade was dead the Pope obtained the good will of the
Neapolitanes, to yield themselves to the Sea of Rome: Conrade a Son and
heir, Conradine, and Manfrede his bastard Brother, which would be called King
of Cicily, wherefore Pope Vrbano the fourth, Son to King Clement the fourth,
Manfred sent for Charles Brother to Lewis the french King, Earl of Province,
and of Gaunt, to come with an Army into Italy, and called him King of Cicilie,
who overcame and slew Manfred at Bewent, and received the Kingdoms of the Pope
to do him homage: There were slain in the battle between them 12000. the
occasion thereof being the Popes. Many such like instances might be taken out
of History, but these shall suffice for the present, it only remains to
compare the impurity, tyranny and malice of those Bishops in the beginning of
superstition and idolatry, and these times wherein we now live, with the
Bishops and Clergy of this Kingdom.

What has been more used by our Bishops of our time, especially the
Archbishop of Canterbury in his hierarchy at Lambeth, in his Courts of
inquisition, high Commission I would say, then excommunications, deprivations,
and degradations of learned and zealous Ministers and teachers of the word of
God, and other his Majesty's good and loyal subjects so far as their power
could extend, began to deny the Princes supremacy in causes ecclesiastical,
what may we conceive would they have attempted, if God in mercy by the wisdom
of our gracious Sovereign, and his great Council of State had not prevented
the same.

Secondly, what divelish practice, what stratagem, what treason, by poisoning
and otherwise attempted by the Arch enemies of our peace, the Priests and
Jesuits, against not only the persons of godly and Religious Peers, the whole
Parliament, and state of the Kingdom, but they directly or indirectly have had
a hand in the same, what then may we think of them if they had power to their
malice?

Thirdly and lastly, what commotions in Scotland, what wars between England
and that Kingdom did they endeavor to stir up and raise, seeking by the
destruction and confusion of both Kingdoms, to work their ends and purposes,
and what distractions and troubles has been in this Kingdom, what miseries
and calamities that are fallen upon Ireland, but some of the Bishops have been
agitators and actors therein.

And thus much of this Crystal wherein the Clergy that are concerned may
clearly see themselves and their actions, and learn to amend and turn from
their evils ways, doing good in the Church for the evil they have formerly
practiced, which God grant, or otherwise cut them off, or remove them from
amongst his children and Saints, that their examples may be no more stumbling
blocks to hinder their walking in the paths of righteousness, piety and
godliness.

FINIS.

