THE DANGER OF BEING ALMOST a Christian.

SHOWING, 1. How far men may go without Grace. 2. Why some men go so far. 3.
Why they go no farther. 4. The dangerous estate of such Persons.


By John Chishull, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed by A. Neile, for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Marygold in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To the Right Worshipful Peter Atkins, Mayor, John Blundel Esquire with the rest
of the Burgesses, Assistants, and Inhabitants of Tiverton.
Beloved in the Lord,
WHat reason You (above all others) have to read and consider the things which
I present to your view, the Introduction to, and Application of the truth laid
before you will tell. I trust many of you are convinced that I carry you upon
my heart, and that my design in this undertaking is only to engage your hearts
more fully to God. Upon this account I am confident of your compliance with it.

I have reckoned it amongst my choicest mercies, that the Lord has owned me in
some measure amongst you, and has made you to feel as well as hear what I have
spoken. Yet in the midst of my rejoicing for some, I have had sad thoughts of
heart for others, for whom I have sometimes had great hopes, and again as great
fears; Since I have known any thing of Preaching, (and indeed it is little
that I yet know of it) I have Preached very much by what I have seen and known
of your tempers and Conditions, and I can say (through Mercy) that my labor
has not been altogether in vain. I bless God that I can think on some of you
with delight; the entertainment which you have given to the Word, and the
gracious ^mpressions which you carry upon your spirits, ^are my rejoicing
before the Lord. Yet give me leave to mind you, that the number of
Conververted ones is but small in comparison of those Convinced ones which I
have observed amongst you. Many have received the Word with trembling, others
with joy; yet after such sh^kings and strong working of heart (which they could
not conceal, have either grown cold again; or else have contented themselves
with a lukewarm profession; This I can truly say has abated much of my former
comfort; and so strong have the impressions of these things been upon my
spirit, that many sad thoughts have risen in me, that surely my labor is near
at an end in that place, and the Lord will call me off either by death (as he
threatened of late) or some other way. Upon this consideration I have been
willing to listen to those who desired that these few Sermons might be made
public, that by this means they might lie before you, either to quicken you,
or to accuse you; that when you shall neither hear, nor see me, you may see in
them how my heart stood affected toward you: and possibly the view of these
lines may awaken the convictions which some of you have buried, the persuasions
which in some are decayed, and the resolutions which some of you have taken up
for God, but not followed: Oh when this Book falls into any such hands, (as
doubtless such it will meet withal) let me entreat those herein concerned to
suffer these two thoughts to dwell a little upon their hearts:

First, that their hearing as well as my preaching must come to judgment.

Secondly, that Convictions slighted, Persuasions not improved, Promises and
purposes broken, will be the worst companions that you can carry to Hell with
you; yet this I am assured of, that many of you cannot perish but under the
weight of many of these.

I have observed two ways, in which especially the Devil couzens convinced
souls.

First, in the Time: he tells them it is too soon to be serio us in youth,
another time will serve; thus many perish under delays. To prevent this evil,
I presented you formerly with a small Treatise The Young Man's Memento.
which I hope has satisfied you sully of the folly and danger of delaying.

Secondly, he labors to deceive in the measure of the change that is wrought;
if he sees that they will do something, yea and that the soul is agreed upon
the time, that it must be Now while it is called to day, then he strives to
limit them. First, with Negatives. He tells them they are not as they were, and
therefore all is well. He tells them they are changed; and it may be true, though
they are not made New. If they be civil or moral that were profane and
unrighteous, this he persuades them is very much: but if he suffer them to put
on a form of Religion, though it reach not the heart; then he assures them that
their Reformation is full in weight and measure heaped up, pressed down, and
running over; when all this time they are not come to the lowest form of those
that are Christians indeed. Now, knowing that some of you are resolved to do
something, and fearing that you should be deceived, and so do nothing to the
purpose. I have laid these things before you, that you might be the better able
to judge of the measure of your persuasions, professions, and performances.

And since I have undertaken to speak to all, being affectionately willing to
be serviceable to you all. Let me add a word to you that refuse to attend the
public Ministry in that place, to hear what has been there delivered; yet
possibly you will vouchsafe a private perusal of these truths: If this little
Tract comes into your hands, I beseech you enquire seriously by it into the
state of your souls; for I fear you have little close convincing Preaching
amongst You. O bethink your selves of former days, when you sat under the Now
despised Ministry in Tiverton, which some of you called the Ministry of Christ,
and your selves the seals of it; You seemed then to have some sense of the
Quickness nnd Power of the Word; but how is it now? Are thief Times better then
those? To what considerable height are you grown in Christianity since you
turned your backs upon those Opportunities you once counted precious? Ah let me
tell you, though you have deserted me, I cannot cast you out of my thoughts,
hopes, and Prayers, trusting that the Lord will bring back such as have set
their faces to seek him in truth, as he has done foam already, in answer to
Prayer. Yet you know that I have lost nothing by your leaving of me, but the
opportunities of being further serviceable to your souls; and this indeed to me
is a great loss; for if I know any thing of my heart, it is this, that I value
my life by the advantages that I have of being helpful to poor souls in the
great things of God.

It is an easy matter to draw up those that have no grace to any form; and
this were a poor low thing to make our interest. By this means it is as easy
to stop young awakened souls before they come half way to Christianity; it is
my fear for many of you, that you are arrived no further then the form; and my
fear is as great that you will hinder others from going beyond it, by
persuading them into an opinion of themselves, that they are Christians, before
they are, or know what it is to be such.

If this may prevent any of you from miscarrying any way, I shall heartily
bless the Lord, and rejoice to be also a helper of your Faith.

Finally my friends of all sorts, Lay what you have heard, or may hearread to
the Word, and your hearts to both, and judge faithfully in this matter. Put it
to the Question whether you are Altogether Christians or no, and resolve to be
such, or to be nothing. Be in good earnest with God, and cleave to him with full
purpose of heart. Oh fulfill my joy which you cannot more considerably further
then by a candid acceptance, and conscientious improvement of what I here
tender to you. That it may be everyway for your good, you shall have with it
the Prayers of

Your willing Servant, in the work of the Lord, Jo. Chishull.
London, Jan. 16. 1656.
ACTS 26.28. Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.


CHAP. I. The Introduction.
IT is not usual with me to make Apologies for, or Introductions to my
Discourses: but at this time I conceive it is convenient, if not necessary to
speak something of this nature. Though it be sufficient warrant for me to pitch
upon this portion which I have chosen, because it is the word of the Lord, and
the same consideration is weighty to enjoin your best attention; yet there is
something more, which has swayed with me to take these words into my serious
thoughts, and to present the result of them to you, which I hope when you have
weighed, they will seem as additional arguments to awaken your spirits, and you
will account your selves particularly engaged to hear what I am so deeply
engaged to speak. I had chosen another subject to treat upon, which I conceived
might suit well with that which I so lately finished; but my resolutions to
prosecute that were changed by some impressions which the Lord made upon me in
my late sickness.

That I was visited with weakness, is known to you all; but how great it was,
and how near to the grave it brought me, is known but to few. But in this,
(which was the soarest which I ever experienced,) yea in the very height and
prevalency of it when my friends did many of them look upon me as under a
sentence of death, then was the Lord pleased

First, to give me a particular assurance of my recovery, from that scripture,
Ps. 118.17. Thou shall not die, but live and declare the works of the LORD.

Secondly, a particular knowledge of the time of my recovery, from Hos. 6.2.
After two days I will revive thee, in the third day I will raise thee up, and
thou shall live in my sight. All which I found exactly made good unto me to a
day, according to the Word of the Lord, which was then set upon my spirit.

Thirdly, the Lord did not only assure me of my life, but did also appoint me
out my work, without which I account my life of very small value. At that time
when I was under a strong Fever, and other distempers which might very well be
judged unfit companions for meditation; I say, being under the pains of my
growing disease, my thoughts were then drawn strongly out to consider of the
state and condition of this place; and considering the people of it, I rankt
them under three Heads.

Frst, some that minded not God, nor Religion, and that sat unshaken under the
Word.

Secondly, some that I hope have received it, and that do sincerely desire to
follow it.

Thirdly, such as halt betwixt two opinions, that hang betwixt God and the
world, that are wrought upon by the Word, and are under strong convictions, and
workings of spirit, but yet are not brought fully to close with Christ; these
are I am persuaded not a few in this place. The serious consideration of these
did most of all affect my soul with pity, and that pity wrought in me strong
and earnest desire. It grieved me to see so many souls like Laodicea, Rev.
3.15. Lukewarm, or like Ephraim, hal-fbaked, Hos. 7.8. it did not a little
trouble my spirit to see so many persons carry their convictions about them, as
prisoners dragg their chains after them: I am persuaded if every person that
has been convine'd under the word in this place, and that has had some kind
of persuasions to come in to Christ, and yet stands it out, had but a chain
about his Leg, we should hear a fearful rattling of iron when the Congregation
moves. Thus was my soul grieved for many of you; but my affections did not
spend themselves in pitying, but awakened my desires, and I then cast about me
how I might be serviceable to you, with that little inch of time that the Lord
should give me, even to you that seem at some times not to be far from the
kingdom of God, and yet if you go no farther, are never like to come there.

While my thoughts were thus working, it pleased the Lord to set this portion
of Scripture which I have read unto you upon my spirit, in which I saw your
condition exactly presented in Agrippa. But this word it self was not barely
brought home to me, but the Lord gave in then to my thoughts those things which
I have to deliver to you, so that I may safely say, that he put the word into
my mouth; for what I have now to deliver, both for the doctrine, and all the
particulars, relating to explain and confirm it, were penned when I was unable
to govern a pen; they were framed in my greatest weakness, and taken from my
mouth by a Friend that came to visit me.

These things I mention to you, that you may be persuaded*

First, to pass by any thing of weakness in this discourse, knowing it was
composed in the midst of weakness, and that I aim not to commend my self to
you, but to present your conditions before you, and that with all manner of
plainess.

Secondly, that if you meet with any thing useful and seasonable, you would
g^ve the glory to God; if the Word me^t with any of your souls, say, the Lord
has met with me this day; if it hit as right as David's stone did, and stick in
your foreheads, know I threw it as he did, not by skill, but by Faith; it is the
Lord that guided my hand. If any say, Can all that which is delivered in
several sermons be the product of a few hours meditation? I answer, that I can
say without faining what Jacob offered to excuse his hasty dinner for his
Father, Genesis 27 20. The Lord brought it unto my h^nd.

Thirdly, to show you what special and peculiar reason some of you have to
attend diligently to what shall be spoken o you cannot but see a finger in the
margent bidding you observe, and the hand of God pointing at some of you; for
though he speaks in every word, yet more especially in such as he sends by
special messengers, or directs to us by singular and remarkable providence.
Now there are two things which should stir you up to listen to this word, as
not being of common and ordinary consideration.

First, that one is raised from the dead to speak to you.

Secondly, that this word was put into his mouth, especially for your sakes, so
that he can say, that this work which he is about this day, is part of his
great errand, for which the Lord sent him back again to this place.

Thirdly, that you may know that I have you upon my heart in all conditions, in
sickness as well as in health, in life and in death. But if none of these
things move you, know that God will raise up Nineveh in judgment against you,
who repented at his word, whom God had brought from the grave. Nay the rich man
in hell will come against you, who persuaded himself that his brethren would
repent if one from the dead were sent unto them; and that which is worse, the
Lord who has now raised me up for you, will raise me up to condemn you; yea
this word which I now preach to you, shall be terrible, and you shall not be
able to stand before it in the day of the Lord.

This is sufficient (and to some may appear more then enough) to my present
occasion of handling the words. Now to the occasion of the words themselves as
they lie in the Text.

The rise of these words is evident to be from Paul his discourse, of which we
have a full account in this Chapter.

The substance of his speech was to defend himself against the accusations of
the Jews before Agrippa, Festus, the Governor, and Bernice, with others that
sat as Judges betwixt him and the Jews. The speech has three principal Heads.

First, an account of his life, and especially of his zeal against the
christians before his conversion, from v. 4. to 13.

Secondly, his wonderful conversion, ver. 13.18.

Thirdly, his practice and profession afterward, v. 19.23.

We have next considerable the issue of his speech, it wrought variously upon
his Judges.

First, Festus deemed him mad, yet he thought his madness was not common; he
judged it to be alearned madness; not being able to entertain the Doctrines
which he preached of the Resurrection, nor to credit the story which Paul told
of his conversion, he thought that these were but clouds and fancies of his
brain which was overwrought.

Secondly, Agrippa is of another mind and receives more candidely, though he do
not digest fully what Paul had said; he seems to be so far convict of the
truth, that he is upon the turning point, ready to come over to Paul.

Thirdly, the whole Council took such impressions from his discourse, that they
all agree that Paul is innocent, verse. 30, 31.

Then.

This shows us the coherence of these words with the former, and it refers us
either to Paul's speech, or to Festus; if we consider it as relating to the
first, then it shows us the ground of Agrippa's persuasion.

If to the latter, then it helps to heighten his persuasion, and to show us how
strong it was and hot at the present. Then, (viz.) when Agrippa had considered
of what Paul had spoken, either in his first speech which was to all the
Council, although directed more especially to him, ver. 2* Now if we consider
these persuasions in Agrippa to arise from Paul's general speech, it will
according to the parts of it afford us these Observations: First, from the
relation of Paul's former course of life.

1. Observation. That when the Lord makes great and visible changes upon open
and violent enemies of his ways, he causes much of conviction to fall upon the
spirits of considering persons; for they which consult with reason, must needs
conclude that there must be some remarkable thing, something of weight that
must cause such a change.

Observe. 2. The discovering of the way the change is wrought in, is as useful
and convincing as the change it self. Paul thought it no idle story to tell
them how God brought him over, as well as that he had done it. This may serve
to justify the practices of those who desire to know the way of Gods working
upon souls in the bringing them over to Christ, knowing how demonstrative this
is of the work of grace, beyond a bare professing that I do believe, or repent.

Obs. 3. From the account that Paul gives of his after-practice, that boldness
in living up to the truths we are convinced of, does make much for the
convincing of such as yet have not received the truth. This argued that there
was something of re^lity in that relation which he made of his change, and the
manner, which at first hearing might seem ridiculous, and incredible. They who
considered how Paul followed the truth in practice, and with what hazard he
professed it, might conceive that his conversion was no dream.

Again, we may refer these words to Paul's particular speech mentioned v. 26,
27. directed in part to Festus, and in part to Agrippa, in which he takes the
advantage of defending himself both against his general charge by the Jews, and
the particular imputation put upon him by Festus, v. 24. and this he does by
taking hold of two things, which did much conduce to his present purpose.

The first was Agrippa's general knowledge of customs, and memorable storice,
and especially of the truth of the matter of fact related, and questioned, yea
censured by Festus.

Secondly, Agrippa's general assent unto the things contained in the
scriptures, v. 27. These things being hand somly couched in a wise and
insinuating appeal, draw out this profession from him, Then said Agrippa unto
Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

From hence observe;

Obs. 1. It is a great advantage for a Minister, when the people he is to deal
withal have some principles laid beforehand for him to fasten his word unto.
This was the advantage that Paul had upon Agrippa, more then upon the rest of
his Judges, and therefore he applies himself most to him, and with good success.

Obs. 2. There must be much wisdom and prudence mixed with the dispensing of
the Gospel, to know when, and how, and to whom to speak, and to epsy out
every little thing that might further or facilitate our work; this was the
craft which Paul mentions, 2 Cor. 12.16. Being crafty I caught you with guile.
He saw Agrippa was the fittest person to work upon, and he espied what was in
him to lay hold of, therefore he sixes most upon this mark.

Obs. 3. A word of commendation and encouragement sometimes given to the
hearer, gains much respect to the truth it self. Thus we find that applause
which Paul gave to Agrippa, he returns to the truth which he professed, and
declares himself almost overcome with the Majesty and splendour of it, which
shined so gloriously in the Apostles Narrative. These things the connection of
the Text with its dependence upon Paul's speech affords us. We may consider it
also as relating something to Festus his censure upon Paul's discourse. Then
said Agrippa, (viz.) when Festus had but now calumniated the truth which was
held forth, and had judged Paul's Doctrine and Relation to be but a learned
madness, then Agrippa, stands up to wipe off the reproach which he cast upon
the truth. If we consider it with these circumstances of the time and place,
when the Gospel had been censured so lately by a potent man, and a ruler, and
in the presence of the Jews who were the Apostles accusers, and strong enemies
of the word he had delivered: Then and there, for Agrippa to make such a
Declaration as this in favor of the truth, was much; considering it thus, we
may observe,

Observation. First, the Lord does oftentimes provide some to stand up for the
truth and the Professors of it in greatest straits, who yet never receive it
themselves.

Secondly, we may here see what great convictions do fall upon the spirits of
some men, who yet are never savingly wrought upon. It must needs be conceived,
that the impressions were strong upon Agrippa's spirit, that they extorted from
him such an open profession as this is, at such a time and in such a place. But
this truth will come more fully under our consideration from the words
themselves; only this circumstance may give some light to that which lies so
open in the Text it self.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine propounded with the general proof of it.
WE have then in the words three things.

First, the impression which Paul's doctrine made upon Agrippa; it wrought by
way of persuasion, Thou perswadest me.

Secondly, The object of this persuasion, that is, embracing and professing the
gospel of Christ.

Thirdly, the measure of this persuasion, Almost.

Almost, (...), in parvo, in a little, or something I should be a Christian
with thee. Paul seems to take him in this sense, when he wishes that he were
as he, (...) not only in little, but in much; not only in some things, but in
all.

Some read it (...), and they understand (...), or (...), that is, thou have
persuaded me in a little time, or by a short speech to be a Christian. Some
translaters render it by Propemodum, and ours follow them, and it is very safe,
almost or within a little thou perswadest me.

Perswadest me, (...) it signifies both suadere, and persuadere, either to use
means to bring a man to our opinion, or practice by arguments and
exhortations, or else to prevail upon the party, and bring him to what we
desire.

First, Sometimes it is taken for exhorting and reasoning only, Acts 18.4. He
reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews, and the
Greeks. This was Conantis potius quam efficientis; he endeavored what he did
not effect: but this could not be the sense of Agrippa here, for Paul had used
no particular exhortation to him.

Secondly, it signifies to prevail upon, and to bring'a person to rest in what
we say, and so is taken here; for it must needs note the influence that Paul's
discourse had upon Agrippa, insomuch that it brought him to assent unto what he
said, and to profess himself even almost ready to join with him in professing
the same things.

To be a Christian, that is, to become a Disciple and follower of Jesus Christ.
I shall present you with my thoughts of these words as they were presented to me
in our Translation, and as we read them, they afford this Observation.

Observe. That men may be almost Christians, and yet never true Christians; they
may be almost such in respect of their persuasion who will never be such in
respect of their practice and performance.

In handling the Doctrinal Observation which I have propounded, I shall

First, lay down something for the general proof of this.

Secondly, I shall particularly open and illustrate it.

Thirdly, I shall apply it:

That this is a truth, is clear from many instances and examples in the
Scripture. How far did Saul go, the first King of Israel, ( I wish he had been
the last example of this truth) he bid fairer for Heaven then many do that have
strong confidence of it. He seemed to be good among good men, 1 Samuel 10.10. he
prophesied among the Prophets, he seems to be good by way of singularity; he
opposes sin when the whole stream ran against him, and seems exceeding tender
of the sins of others, 1 Samuel 14.33, 34. yea he seems to be so zealous against
sin yt he would not spare his dear Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.44. there was 1 Samuel
10.6. such a change upon him as was visible, and made him another man, yea this
change was so deep, that it reached to the very heart of him; it is said 1 Samuel
10.9. God gave him another heart, yet this was not a through change, he had not
a new heart, though another heart; neither was Saul a new man, though another
man.

The young man in the Gospel may be brought as a clear and pregnant testimony
of this truth, Mat. 19.20. see how far he went; he observed all the commands of
God, and not willing to stop here, he professes his desire to know and do more
yet: What lack I yet? this man went so far, that Christ himself says of him
that he was not far from the kingdom of God; yet so near a she came to it, he
never reaches it.

To this you may add the three sorts of bad hearers, which are condemned by
Christ, under the notion of bad ground, Luke 8.12, 13, 14. the worst of the
three did more then barely hear the word; they did receive it, and that into
their hearts; for it is said of the stony ground which was worst of the
three, that the devil took the word, (not before it came at their hearts) but
out of their hearts; he did not take their hearts away, so that they minded not
what was spoken, as he does many men's and women's, but he took it away after
they had received it. Both the other go thus far, and somewhat farther; for
their reception of the word is noted with some additional circumstances, as the
second received it with joy, and did not lose it presently, til in tract of
time cares and pleasures choked it; the third yet exceeded both these, for it
received, kept and improved the Word, inbringing forth some fruits, only it was
not to perfection. If all this be not ground enough to build this conclusion
upon, look to the foolish Virgins, and see how far they go in this point, and
how like they were to the wise, Mat. 25.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

First, as for their profession, it was visible, they had Lamps in their hands.

Secondly, this was not an ignorant profession neither, for they had oil in
their Lamps, some illumination, and some convictions to keep this profession
alive.

Thirdly, their profession was not without practice, intimated in these
expressions,

First, They went: they were upon some motion, they did perform some duties,
and observe Ordinances.

Secondly, They went forth, (viz.) they left many behind them, they went out
from that condition of life in which they had lived, and they took up another
course.

Thirdly, they associated themselves with those who did in truth fear God; they
accompanied the wise Virgins.

Fourthly, they complied with their design, and professed themselves the
followers of Christ, they went to meet the Bridegroom.

Fifthly, they did in every thing behave themselves so like the wise Virgins,
that they were not discerned, nor suspected by the wise Virgins; the coming of
Christ first detected them.

Sixthly, their confidence held out unto the very last; for when the Bridegroom
came they rose to trim their Lamps, thinking to go in with the other, but were
deceived.

Lastly, there was nothing wanting but that which was invisible, viz. oil in
their vessels: they wanted grace in their hearts, and therefore though these
came thus nigh to the very door of Heaven, and cry Lord, Lord open to us, yet
it is in vain; Christ answers them as strangers, I know you not; if there
needed any thing more to make this proposition clear, I could instance in Judas
and Demas, and others who went beyond these also, being not only professors,
but preachers of the truth to others. But it is needless to insist longer upon
the proof of that which the many sad experiences and examples of our present
age has made so manifest. How many has this Age brought forth of this kind,
who have climbed high in profession, but have fallen from the most visible
glorious appearance of godliness to the most abominable profaneness, to be as
conscientiously vile as ever they were strict. This shall serve for the general
proof, by which you may see that this is a truth which I have propounded.

CHAP. III. The Doctrine more particularly explained.
THat this may be the better understood I shall make enquiry into these two
things.

First, what kind of persuasions men may have, which yet are not gracious.

Secondly, from whence these do arise; and in this I shall consider two things.

First, whence it is that they extend so far.

Secondly, why they reach no farther.

For the first, what kind of persuasions these are, which yet prove not
effectual to the bringing men over to Christ, it is necessary to show you first
what Persuasion is: a persuasion is a morral bending of the judgment or will
to truth, or goodness, which are their proper objects, whether they be real or
apparent; it is sometimes taken for the inclining of the judgment, the
bringing of any one to rest in what we say; so it signifies as much as
conviction of a truth; and if this be very full and clear, then it imports as
much as assurance; so it is taken, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that is I am
assured, that nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. I do not hesitate or doubt at all about this: thus it
respects the understanding and judgment.

Secondly, it is taken (and that most commonly) for the working over the Will
to some duty or design, either good in it self, or made so to appear; thus it
is used, Acts 13.43. and chap. 18.13. and so in this place* This persuasion
rested in the Will, and had for its end, Action, following of Christ.

In the first sense Man may be said to persuade; the understanding and
judgment lie more open and naked, and one man's reason does give light to
another.

But in the second (if we take it in reference to the chief good) it is Gods
prerogative only to persuade; he only can penetrate the Will, and turn it to
its proper object, Ps. 110.3. In the day of thy power thy people shall be
willing. Therefore Noah praying for, or prophesying of Japhets condition, says
thus, Genesis 9.27. The Lord persuade Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of
Shem: we read it ordinarily, The Lord enlarge Japhet, but it may be as well
rendered, persuade him. The word is Japht, of Patach, aperuit, it signifies
properly to open a thing, and Metaphorically to persuade, because the heart
must be opened in persuading. Now when Noah prays that the Gentiles which came
of Japhet should be brought into the Church, which was to be settled in the
Family of Shem, he prays that God would open their hearts, and effectually
persuade them, for he was only sufficient^ in this matter.

But to come nearer to the business in hand, we are to consider what kind of
persuasions unregenerate men may have; if we look to the first kind for those
which respect the understanding and judgment, they may go very far, and so
far, that they may seem not only almost, but altogether Christians. The
judgment and reason may be for God, and may assent to every thing that is
good, when the Will is for nothing that is good. As for example I shall
enumerate some particulars.

First, they may be persuaded of the evil of their own vvayes; this the very
Gentiles knew who had not the Law. God had left them so much light that arose
and accused them when they did evil, Romans 2.15. it stood up in the place of
God, and censured their abominations; if those who had no Law, had yet an
accuser; surely then much more those who have both Law and Gosspel cannot but
have some secret intimations and checks with some gripings of conscience when
they break out into such sins which the light of nature, and the Word of the
Lord do so palpably condemn, I am persuaded that the Drunkard, Swearer, Liar,
Sabbath-breaker, the man that neglects Prayer, Reading, and Meditation, do not
think these ways of theirs are good; they walk up and down as self-condemned
persons.

Secondly, they may see not only the evil of their vvayes, but also the danger
of them; they have some glances and hints, yea and sometimes foretasts of the
sad end of these things. They are convinct of the inseparable and just
connection that is betwixt sin and misery; they see that they are going down to
the chambers of death, and that their steps take hold of hell, and yet this
will not stop them, they will have their lusts how dear soever they pay for
them hereafter. This is evident, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the just judgment of
God, that they who do such things are worthy of death, not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. There are three things lie open to them.

First, The judgment of God, that there is such a judgment or sentence
pronounced against such sinners.

Secondly, that this sentence was unto death.

Thirdly, that this was a just and righteous judgment, these things must
needs carry with them very great convictions of the demerit of sin, and the
danger of the sinner.

Thirdly, they may be persuaded of the necessity of a change; this must needs
arise from the two former: he that sees the evil of his own ways, together
with the danger of them, must needs conclude that a change must pass upon him
in order to happiness; though no unregenerate man does know what that change is
which he must suffer if he will be saved; yet many of them know thus much, that
they must be changed; they are convinct that something is to be done for
Heaven, though they are ignorant of the particulars. I have met with some that
have confessed that they could not read or think of that passage of Christ,
John 3.3. (Except a man be born again, he cannot inherit the kingdom of God,)
but it would perplex their thoughts; thus there is ( I am persuaded) in many
men a confused general notion of Regeneration, though they have not a distinct
knowledge of it, and they are convinced it is a work which they have not yet
experienced, without which they cannot be saved. I need not go out of the
Congregation for the proof of this: I am confident this is the persuasion of
many of you, who know you must be changed, if saved: the Lord grant you may not
carry these convictions to hell.

Fourthly, they may be convinced of the equity of the ways of God, and the
reasorableness of all his commands, yea and of his judgments. How many are
there whose affections serve the devil, and their lusts? who vvil
notwithstanding consent in their judgments to the vvayes of God; they will
grant when they are urged to it, that there is nothing more equitable then
that the creature should be conformed to the vvil of the Creator, and that he
that made us should expect from us a submission to his commands, seeing we
depevd upon him, and we should improve and spend all that for him, which we
receive from him. The very principles of Reason will condemn the sinner as a
monster, and the most irregular person in the world, who would live without
being accountable to God upon whom he depends; this is to blot out the notion
of a creature out of his heart; for what reasonable being could expect this,
unless he were of himself, and could subsist without any help from another? if
you propose this to the reason of many men, they will confess it is very
equitable that the Lord who made us, and by whose patience and bounty we
subsist, should put the yoke upon us, and that it is no injustice nor exaction
in him to require the strictest obedience in us, so that when he conside rany
or all the ways which the Lord prescribes unto us to walk toward him, though
he apprehend them as hard and unpleasant thorough his weakness and corruption,
yet when he does but glance upon the sovereign power of God over his
creatures, and the dependence of the creatures upon him, he must needs say,
that it is a reasonable thing, and just to fear this God, and to submitt to all
that he commands. And as they are convinced of the equity and justness of all
his commands to us; so they are from hence forced to see the justice of that
sentence, which shall be pronounced against all those that despise and refuse
the yoke of the Lord, as I hinted before from that of Romans 1.32. For what is
more deeply rooted in nature then this Principle that the work should praise
the workman; and that the workman should draw forth his own honor and glory
from his own? and if these shall refuse to serve the ends of their being, that
then he should subs^ract all comfortable influences from them, and turn his
hand against them for evil. Now if these things be ingrafted in nature,
surely men who have many accessions of light to their natural principles by
the gospel under which they live, will go to hell with a conviction of the
equity of those things which the Lord required of them and of the Judgment
which he has past upon them.

V. They may be persawded of the truth of the threatenings and promises; so that
they may be able sometimes to look into heaven and hell through the truth of
God in the one, and the other Thus Balaam saw the reality of those promises
which God had made to Israel, and he saw also the certainty of the fulfilling
of all that God had spoken against the enemies thereof: thus the eyes of wicked
men are sometimes opened, especially of temporary believers and such as are
almost christians, that they are clearly convinced that there will be a
difference betwixt those that fear the Lord, and those that fear him not; they
know it will go ill with the wicked; but it will go well with the godly; so
that when the threats denounced against such are opened, they tremble as Faelix
did at the preaching of judgment to come, Acts 24.25, They feel something of
what is threatened already in their consciences; the word is as hot as an oven
to them, which scorches them; and convictions and terrors which from thence
fall upon them are like streams of fire breaking out of hell it self; so that
if we did but some times observe, and consider the impressions that are made
upon such men's spirtis, it would put it out of doubt, whether there be a hell
or not; and men would conclude that the dreadful things threatened in the Word
of God are not ciphers, or things to be played vvithal, or the inventions of
men, only to keep others in awe, as some Atheists have believed, but that they
are truths whereof one tittle shall not fall to the ground unperformed; these
things wicked men know to be true here, and shall feel them true hereafter; yea
these tastes of the truth of the threatenings make oftentimes great visible
changes in them, and they do much to escape the judgment written; thus Herod
did many things when he heard John Baptist; and the Jews being terrified with
the sharpness of his Ministry, came to him confessing their sins, Mat. 3.6.
What says he to them, You generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come? as if he had said, Now that hell has flasht in your
faces, you come in a fit of terror, and you pretend to be sorrowful for your
sins; but let me see such things as will evidence this in after-fruits. Beside
this, they are convinced of the truth of the promises of God made to his
people. And when the terrors which brake in from the threatenings, has made some
external change upon them, (mistaking themselves, and taking this which is
wrought for a gracious change) they reckon themselves among the regenerate; and
reading the promises which are made to these, they confidently apply them to
themselves, and that not without abundance of joy. Thus did Herod, Mark 6.20.
when John's Doctrines had some impressions upon him, and these had made an
alteration in his practices and ways, having reformed many things that were
amiss, now he hears John gladly, and he greedily catches at all the sweet
promises which John dropped at any time to such as did obey the truth, saying in
his heart These are mine, and this made him hear with delight. Thus the stony
ground received the word with joy, which must needs arise from some promises
misapplyed, and some good laid hold on, which did not belong to them, whereby
they apprehended that their condition was much advanced; they rejoiced in the
Heaven and happiness which the promises held forth to the Saints, (which they
could not do unless they had believed them) but they were unwilling to go
through a believers hell to his Heaven; therefore in time of persecution they
fell away, hence it is that some are said to have tasted of the powers of the
world to come, Heb. 6.5. that is, they are convinced of the excellent
privileges of the Saints, both in this life, and especially in that to come,
as that they shall have communion with God the Father, Son, and Spirit, with
Angels, and all the Saints. They may be persuaded of the excellent state of the
Saints then in respect of the glory which shall be put upon their souls and
bodies, their freedom from evil, and the accession of all good things. Now
though they have not a true taste of these privileges, and they know not what
grace is, and the pleasure of communion with God is, yet they being persuaded
that such things are, having found a joy in their false hopes, and counterfeit
graces which they have judged to be soretastes of Heaven, they have been sorc'd
to acknowledge that this false joy was yet better then all the pleasures of
their sins, and hence they have been strongly persuaded of the truth of Gods
promises made to his people, though they do not belong to them; this is the
case of many men, who by the persuasions of the truth of the threats and
promises, do not learn to escape the one, and to enjoy the other; and they say
under these persuasions as he did, Luke 14.15. Blessed is he that shall eat
bread in the kingdom of God, yet themselves never come there.

VI. They may be persuaded of the sweetness of Gods ways, and that those who
follow him have their pleasure, yea more pleasure then men can have in sin; it
is said therefore they received the word with joy, Luke 8.13. and Isaiah 58.2.
They delighted in approaching unto God; hence it is said, Heb. 6.5. That they
tasted of the good word of God, they tasted of the goodness of the word, and
having tasted it, they accounted it good. Now we know that the taste counts
nothing good but that which is sweet, though other senses do count bitter
things good, for they may be beautiful, and so good to the eye, and fragrant,
so good to the smelling, but the palate commends sweetness.

The carnal man may esteem the ways of God as pleasant.

First, because the bare performance of some duties, and reforming of some
sins, bath given much ease to conscience, and has procured much rest from the
troubles with which they were before overwhelmed: so that comparing their lives
with what they were before, they do account the much more pleasant then when
they lived in the height of sin, because they had then many gripings of
conscience which spoiled all their mirth; now though they have but a false
peace, yet it is sweeter then their former life.

Secondly, he accounts the ways of God sweet, because he has not only a
cessation from his former troubles, but he has also many times a great
presumption of Gods love, and of the pardon of sin, and of eternal life; so
that he is as it were wrapped up out of the body, and perhaps in a fit out of the
world, that he can set a low esteem upon these also for a time.

Thirdly, he esteems the ways of God sweet, because he finds now an increase of
knowledge, and of gifts by exercising himself in them: so that the knowledge
that he gets under the word, makes the word seem sweet unto him, and he
rejoices in it, Joh. 5.35. Knowledge is pleasant, even of that which we do not
love; so that while this increases the soul is delighted, Isa. 58.2. they
delighted in knowing, but not in doing, and as the word may feem sweet for the
knowledge which is gotten by it: so may prayer because of gifts and parts
increased by it; Thus he may be convinced of the sweetness of Gods ways, so far
that he is carried forth sometimes to prefer the ways of God before the ways of
men, and the people of God before the men of the world, as Balaam was, Numb.
24.5. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! The
Lord is pleased to show carnal men that which they never enjoy; yea they feel
sometimes that which they soon forget. They have some glances of the happiness
which the Saints enjoy in communion with God, though they have none with him;
yet some such workings there are sometimes upon hypocrites, that they find
something which seems like it, and brings them in much comfort, which although
it be not true and lasting, yet it serves to convince them that there is a
sweetness in the ways of God, and they can say, Blessed is he that is in such
a case, yea, blessed is he whose God is the Lord: upon all these accounts they
are in the main persuaded there is a sweetness in the ways of the Saints,
though they do all the while mistake it, and are strangers to that comfort
which the Saints find in duties, when they think they do enjoy them. The ways
of God themselves are not sweet, but there is a sweetness squeezed out of them
which refreshes them, so that upon the whole, they are satisfied in this, that
it is a more comfortable life (all things considered) to live in the strict
performances of the godly, then in the loose practices of the wicked; yet these
men that come thus far, may not be altogether Christians.

7ly. They may be persuaded of things that are excellent, and may be able to
judge betwixt things that differ, yea so far skilled in the nature of things,
that they may be able to instruct others in spiritual matters: they may have
some insight into all the ways of God, in which his people walk; so that they
may be able to direct the weak, and quicken the dull, yea and to set things out
with some eminency, Romans 2.18. Knowing and approving the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the Law. He may not only see or show what
is a duty, but the excellency of it, by which he has the advantage of exciting
others to it; yea he ^^ay not only show how much more excellent grace, and the
exercise of it is then sin, but if any grace more excellent, or duty then
other, he may discern the respective and comparative excellency, that is in one
more then in another, and yet have no true grace himself. Thus we see men in
their judgments may be for God in many things, yea in so many things, that it
is hard to show in what they may not be for him, and yet their wills and
affections stand at a vast distance; thus you see the judgment may be swayed
much, and in this respect a man may be almost a Christian. I am now to enquire
concerning the Will, how far that may be inclined; and although every
unregenerate person is defective here, and it is the will that lies behind in
these imperfect persuasions; yet the Will is not without some motions: he wills
some things, and does many things, as Herod and others did. Let us enquire a
little concerning those persuasions which reach the will, yet imperfectly.

CHAP. IV. How far the Will may be persuaded.
FIrst, some are so far persuaded to be Christians, that they resolve to comply
with all those convictions which I showed you they might have, and they
determine with themselves that they will be Christians, though not yet; they
stick at nothing but the time, they are fully persuaded that they must be
changed; such a sin must be left, and such a duty must be taken up. They
confess that Repentance and mortisication of particular corruptions are
necessary things, and they resolve with themselves, that they will practice
these, but they cannot agree upon the time; I will do this says one, when I am
old, or when I am sicit, says another; then I would willingly be as strict and
holy as the best. Others they crave a less time; the next year says one, I will
become a new man; perhaps another resolves upon the next month, a third craves
but a weeks liberty more, a fourth but a day; nay perhaps a man may so far
comply with his convictions, that he may! resolve to do something the next
hour, and yet as near as these come up to a compliance with the command of God,
they never obey it. See an example of this Luke 9.59, 61. One says, I will but
go and bury my Father; this might have been done in a day, the other says, I
will but go and bid my friends farewell, and then I will come and follow thee,
and this was but an hours work; but Jesus who sees not as man sees, discerns
the distance at which their hearts stood from him all this while under this
fair persuasion; he saw that he and they were never like to meet, as near as
they seemed to be. He knew that these would never bid enough for Heaven, as
fair as they offered; therefore he presently falls upon a discourse to show how
unfit such merchants were for him, as if he had said to the standers by, You
think that I have gotten two Disciples; here are two that will follow me without
dispute. But you are mistaken; there is a greater difference betwixt them and
me then you see; this difference about the time is like to part me and them
eternally; for if they were fully resolved to follow me, they would follow me
now; these delays and promises for to morrow are but a smoother kind of denial
then others do give.

Secondly, some are so far far persuaded that they would be Christians, but not
in all places, they would be Christians in public, but not in private; they
will go so far in profession as others do; they would willingly submit to those
things which come under common observation; that which is visible in others,
they would willingly have to be manifest in them. The form of godliness is
obvious to all, but the power of godliness is a secret thing, and consists in
secret duties which others see not, as in closet-duties, secret Prayer and
meditation, and heart-examination; these things they will not touch withal.
Such were in Ezekiels time, who would have past for Gods people in the
Congregation, Eze. 33.30, 31. they sat there as Gods people, and they heard the
word of the Lord, and they took delight in so doing; this they were in public;
but what were they in private? see Ezekiel 8.7, 8, 9. Abominable Idolaters; thus
men will be Saints in one place, and devils in another; when they come to hear
the Word, they would carry a semblance with them; here they will be for Christ;
but what do they carry of this to their families? there is no sense nor savor
of those truths which they are affected with under the Ordinance; or if they
carry a little of this into their families, and then repeat what they hear, or
confer of it with others, yet follow them to their secret Chambers, do they
carry the impressions of truth thither? do they examine themselves by it there?
do they pray over what they hear there where no eye sees them? surely no. Can
their private retirements witness for them at last that they have been sensible
of their own sins, and the sins of others? can the tears dropped there for the
sins of the place speak for them? can their bed-sides testify for them that
they poured out their souls by them unto God with strong and daily cries? can
the darkness of the night bear them record that their meditations have been of
God, and that they have been laying of designs for the honoring of God in
their places and stations in which God has set them? Oh my friends, consider
these things, and examine your selves whether you have not been as Jehu,
zealous for God before men, that you may have even said by your gesture and
behavior, Come see my zeal for the Lord; and yet in private you have minded
nothing more then he did, the seeking of your selves, and the establishment of
your own houses; oh when you come into your closets, and to your bed-sides, you
should blush and be ashamed to think how much you differ there from your selves
here. Here you pretend your selves to be the servants of God, and there you
profess your selves the servants of the world; oh how few of those truths have
you weighed and considered of there, which you have been convinced of here;
when you come there, you see your books of accounts in one place, your bills of
parcels in another your Letters in another: think how much time you have spent
here in your chair, and how little upon your knees; here you have been
mornings early, and evenings late, but not with your Bible before you, nor at
prayer or meditation upon spiritual matters, but at the affairs of trade. I tell
you that these things will rise up in judgment against you, and condemn you at
last, and God will judge you not by what you are before men, but by what you are
before him in secret, for it is this that he most observes, Matthew. 6.4.6.18: He
sees in secret, that is, he only sees in secret, this is his prerogative, for
he sees and regards principally what men do in secret; he values more that
which men do behind men's backs, then what they do before their faces; he sees
so in secret, that if men be not the same in secret that they are in public,
he will take no notice of it; Upon this account he would not know those
Formalists mentioned Matthew. 6.16. This vvil be enough to prove you to be but
Christians in part, in that you are not Christians in secret. That a man is,
that he is when he is alone; that which a man thinks of, designs for, and
delights in most in private, that shows what a man is.

Thirdly, some are persuaded to be Christians, but not amongst all persons;
they will be good amongst the good, but not amongst the evil; they can swim
down the stream with the godly, but not up the stream; like Peter they vvil
profess while they are amongst the Disciples, that they vvil die with Christ;
but when they are amongst those that deny him, they vvil not know the man. They
are not able to stand before the breath of a scorner; one that scoffs at
Religion beats them out of their profession. How many be there that vvil
profess Christ very far amongst professors, where it is a credit to own God,
who yet vvil be ashamed of this, when they fall amongst those who will
reproach his vvays? then either they join with the scorner, and deny Christ,
or else stand still in a base neutrality, and betray profession by their
silence, as if there were a guilt in it. Thus Saul would be a Prophet amongst
the Prophets, but when he comes into his Family, the evil spirit seizes upon
him; but surely such as these will be found too light when they are weighed in
the scales. Observe that of our Savior, Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my words, in that adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also
shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his father with
the blessed Angels. Christ will own those, and those only, who have owned him
before wicked men, before scoffers and scorners, and such as labor to bring
shame and contempt upon all that own God; therefore says Christ, it is not he
that confesses me now, and favors me secretly, or openly before these who
profess themselves followers of me and my word that shall then be
countenanced, if he be ashamed of me before those who labor to make all men
ashamed of me. Oh consider this you that would be accounted good amongst them
that set an high esteem upon good men: but if you meet with those that scoff a^
goodness, you are for them too; you are silent at least when the ways, and
name, and people of God are blasphemed or reproached, especially if it be a
friend, or a customer, or a great man; then you must say as they say, or at
least say nothing to the contrary. Remember what Christ has said, and how he
will look upon you as being the shame of profession, and of his name, when he
comes in his glory; how do you expect to be justified before all the world, who
dared not to be good in all places, and all companies?

IV. Some are so far persuaded that they will be Christians in respect of the
whole visibility of profession, but they will not take up the power and
spirituality of it; they will reform so far, that they will cleanse the outside,
abstain from all visible ungodliness, yea and take the form of godliness too,
as the Apostle mentions some who did so, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of
godliness, and yet they did deny the power; that is, they did refuse to stoop
to the power of it; there are two parts of Religion; the form which is visible,
and lies open to men; this consists in reforming the outward man, the denying
of ungodliness and worldly lusts; this is the negative part. It lies also in a
performance of all those duties which come under the observation of others, as
hearing the Word, reading, conferring of it, praying in the public, and in our
families, with a sober and unblameable conversation toward men. All this a man
may submit unto, and yet be but almost a Christian. For there is yet another
part of Religion which is the very soul of it; and this lies hid from the eyes
of others, and consists in two things principally. First, in the performance of
secret duties, as self-denial, self-tryal and examination, watchfulness over
their hearts and thoughts, mortifying of inward corruptions. Secondly, it
consists in the frame and bent of the heart, in these and all other duties
toward God. The main of Religion lies here in fearing and loving of God. These
are things which men may, and do often omit and pass over, who yet do embrace
the whole body and outside of Godliness. Praying, Reading, Hearing are but the
Cabinet which contain this Jewel. But godliness consists in a right and true
disposition of the heart under these. Now if Christianity did imply no more
then most men conceive it does, if it were only an abstaining from gross and
common pollutions of the world, and taking up of all those duties which are
commonly confessed to be such, by men professing themselves Christians, they
would be Christians altogether. But the Lord will find amongst those that
perform the duties which make men visible Christians, and submit to all his
Ordinances, many that are but almost Christians at the most, and that upon this
account, because they never attended unto the spirituality of duties. They
prayed and heard the word, and received the Sacraments, but they were carnal
still; their old hearts did continue; their practices were changed, but their
principles and their interests were the same still; their faces were turned but
not their affections; the one stood toward God, but the other was toward some
lust or other.

Fifthly, Some would be Christians in all things, till it come to the beloved
sin, till it come to profit and loss, and when they are touched here, they cry
out, The Lord pardon me in this one thing. If the Minister press at any time
upon men the necessity of an universal change, they mistake it, and think that
by this universal we mean a general change, that is, a change in the greater]
and more visible part; A leaving the greater number of known sins, and a
submitting to the greater number of known duties; they think no rule so
general, but admits of some exceptions in particulars. They think one sin may
be reserved without prejudice to their closing with Christ, and think they may
hold fast enough with one hand upon him, though they keep the other to take
hold of sin and vanity. If at any time they apprehend the truth as bent against
the toleration of any sin, and they see a necessity of parting with Dalilah, or
Heaven, then they say This is a hard saying, who can hear it? They would
willingly be followers of Christ, if he would give them a dispensation for some
things which they account but small: though the least sin is too bigg to lie
with Christ in the heart. How many do part with Christ upon this point, when he
comes to cross their profit and gain, who yet are troubled to lose him, and go
away like the young man, Mat. 19.22. with tears in their eyes! they will do
much rather then live without hopes of Heaven, til it come to the cutting off
the right hand or foot, or plucking out of the right eye; this is like the way
in which Barnabas and Paul parted. Christ and they go together in many things,
but when they come here they must needs part.

VI. Some are so far persuaded to be Christians, that they are ashamed to be
reckoned amongst the opposers of Religion. They abhor the seat of the scorner,
and will not willingly hear godliness derided; they are convinced of the
happiness of those that fear God, and are convinced who they are, they would
willingly be accounted favorers of such, and wish they were in their
conditions: yet notwithstanding all these things, something holds them from
coming up fully to their steps; either they are possessed with a sluggish spirit,
and will not set themselves forth in the duties of a Christian, or else they are
secretly glued to the world, and will not run the hazards of Christians. One
plays the sluggard under his convictions, and cries out thus, I would fain have
knowledge, but I cannot allow the time to search the scriptures, nor to read
good Books, nor to frequent the company and conferences of the people of God;
another says, I approve of Prayer, it is a duty, but I have not parts nor
praying gifts; these are but idle excuses of hearts that will not come up to
God fully; for were your hearts set to know God, you would find time enough out
of your idle and unnecessary businesses to seek after knowledge, nay you would
cut it out of your time that you spend in eating, drinking, and sleeping; have
you not borrowed sometime from these to satisfy your lusts? and for you who
pretend an excuse for the omitting and neglecting of duties in your Families,
and in private, which you are convinced ought to be done, and you think to
salve it with this that you have no parts; alas this is a fiction in some, and
a vain excuse in all that plead it.

For 1. Have you not abilities to express your present apprehensions, and
conceptions to all men you meet with all, and converse with? are you not able
to speak appositely and readily in buying and selling? you that can express
what you conceive of all matters that come before you, may conclude that
neglect of prayer does not arise from a defect of expression.

2. If God should take you, and shake you over hell, and you had but eminent
and deep impressions of your danger herein, you would surely then pray and cry;
you would find words if you did feel your wants, or apprehend your danger; it
is nothing that you want but impression.

3. Do you not see men abundantly beneath you in parts add natural abilities,
that yet are able to come to God with boldness, speak out their own and others
wants freely to God?

4. Know, it is not parts but grace that fits a man for duty. I never knew any
that were wrought upon truly, how ever weak in parts, but was able to Pray
without a Book; and I do believe that the spirit of Prayer ^s an essential
part^ of the work of grace, Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.15. And that a man may as well
live without breath, as he can be a Christian without the spirit of prayer.

V. Be thy parts never so low and weak, yet use them for God, and he will
augment them, Mat. 25.29. To him that has shall be given. Grace will bring with
it such gifts as are of absolute necessity to maintain a communion with God,
and such is the spirit of Prayer: never any man did conscientiously use weak
and tender parts for God, but like the bread which Christ brake for the
multitude, they did increase upon his hands in breaking.

Besides these which are hindered by a slothful sluggish spirit, others come
not up fully to the life of Christians, from a secret tie which is betwixt them
and the world; they are loath to hazard their peace or credit amongst men. Many
men notwithstanding they are convinced of the ways of God, and how they ought
to walk, yet are so studious of a peaceable quiet being in the world, and so
covetous of every ones good word, that they had rather venture the loss of
Heaven, then the displeasing of any man; they will be for godliness in their
opinion, and they will own the people of God, until it comes to this, that they
must appear, they must show themselves, and this will displease such a friend,
and such a neighbor, and they shall suffer by being counted a man of this or
that party; this makes them draw in, as the Pharisees did, who believed, but
yet would not profess Christ; they would show any underhand kindness to him,
but they would not be openly seen to be his followers, especially where their
peace or credit would be impaired, John 12.42. Nevertheless, among the chief
Rulers also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees, they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: Thus you see many
men go far, not only in respect of conviction, but also of compliance with the
truth and ways of God, and they seem to most men to be altogether Christians,
and to the best of men to be almost such, and yet they are as far from being
that which they would be accounted, and what others desire they would be, as
Agrippa here was from being a Christian, who was never such. Thus I have
finished the first head, and have shown you what kind of persuasions these are
which are found in such as are termed almost Christians.

The next thing which was proposed to be opened, is the spring and rise of
these persuasions; in which I am to consider,

First, the extent of these.

Secondly, the defects of them; and here I am to show you whence it is that
carnal men are so far persuaded, that they seem to be almost Christians, and
then bow it comes to pass, that being brought so far, they do not prove
altogether Christians.

CHAP. V. Whence these persuasions do arise.
WHen we consider the thick darkness that is in the understanding naturally,
and that gross opposition and enmity that is in the will against God, and his
ways, we may justly wonder how it comes to pass, that any truth gets into the
former, and that it should find any kind of compliance or favorable
entertainment in the latter; yet consulting with experience, we may see that
the truth does get into the understanding by way of conviction, and into the
will by way of persuasion, and works to a very great height both ways in those
who yet do not graciously submit unto it, and obey it from the heart, and if we
lay our reason to our experience, we may p^rceive that this arises

1. From the relics of the light that are found in the natural conscience,
Prove. 20.27. The understanding of a man is the candle of the Lord. The Lord set
up a light that shined gloriously in the soul at first, and cast her beams far
and near, so that it was able to see a far off: and all the offsprings of his
reason, even down to a thousand Generations, were yet pure, and full of light;
so that although man had made a thousand inferences from one principle, the
last had been as full of light and clearness as the first. The soul has now lost
that vigor and strength to discern things remote; yet she is not wholly
without light, but as a candle shows those things which are near it very
plainly, though such as are remote, it discovers weakly or not at all: so that
light which was once in man, and did like the sun send forth his beams to the
remotest parts of the horizon, now being weak and languishing, discovers only
some few things. The soul dos still retain some of its firstborn notions, which
do shine forth in pure and unspotted beams, full of convincing light, and of
undoubted truth, in which all agree. Jew, and Gentile, Barbarian and Scythian,
bond and free; these are the common principles which boil up in every man, and
do rise with that strength and clearness that none can fully stop them who have
industriously endeavored it.

Such as these:

First, that there is a God.

Secondly, that the soul is immortal.

Thirdly, that there is a Law by which man ought to stear all his actions; and
as they do agree or disagree with this, so they are to be accounted good or
evil.

Fourthly, that this God who gives Laws to all creatures, especially to man is
just, and will in Justice punish those who wilfully break his Laws; These are
truths which we may find in the consciences of all men that have no light, but
that of nature, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which
commit such things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them, Romans 2.14, 15. When the Gentiles which have not
the law do by nature the things contained in the law: these having not the law,
are a law unto themselves, which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another: Nay if the Scripture said nothing
of the compliance of the Heathen with them, they themselves would abundantly
testify their agreement with the Scriptures in these things. I might raise all
the Philosophers out of their graves to hiss the Atheists of this Age out of
the world, who would deny those to be men that denied a God, and would reckon
those as beasts, and worse, that would question the immortality of the soul, or
question whether the creature should receive a law from his Creator, or that
should claim to themselves a liberty to do what they list, as if there were no
standard to measure good and evil by. The Heathen would make many practical
Atheists to blush at last, who could say, Non solum jus and injuria a natura
dijudicantur, sed omnia omnino honest a and turpia; nam and communis
intelligentia nobis res notas efficit, ea quaein animis nostris inchoavit, ut
honesta in virtute ponantur, in vitiis turpia. We are not only able (says he)
to judge of right and wrong betwixt man and man; but we are able to discern what
is good, and what is evil, and all this by the light of nature. God has made
such indelible stamps and impressions of these first principles upon man's
reason, that til he be extremely corrupted, or Judicarily hardened, he
discovers a transcending excellency in goodness, and an infamous blot upon
wickedness; yea they who for the love of sin (that they might enjoy it
quietly,) have labored to silence these first whisperings of nature, and to
blot out what the finger of God has written upon their hearts, have but
labored to wash the Blackamore white; and when the Atheist in practice has
labored to be so in opinion, he has been but a Sceptick at last; these truths
like nature under force return upon them again, and they are sometimes
constrained to fear the Deity that they flout at, and to dread him that they
have often denied. Now seeing it is thus, that such seeds of the knowledge of good
and evil are left in every man's heart naturally, it may well be, and does very
often fall out, that when men come under the word (before they have sinned away
this light, and are brought to a deadly Palsy) by that oil which the
ordinances do add to this lamp, and by accession of more light from the same,
men see these things more clearly, and many things more which were too remote
to be discovered by their first light; hence it comes to pass that he that by
the light of nature saw that there was a God, now sees something of the nature
of God, of his worship, and is instructed in this; he that saw that the soul
was immortal, and that there was a blessedness or misery fitted to it, sees
where and what it is. He that saw sin confusedly, now sees it more
distinctly; yea he sees not only these things, but deduceth many things from
these, and may have a general insight into all the ways of God, so that men
merely enlightened, and having their naturals polished and varnished over by the
often rubbing over of the Word, may come to great convictions of the truths of
God. yea, and these convictions may have some con^derable influence upon their
wills without the help of grace, by the help of this one thing, which is the
nature of every being, it loves and seeks his own good; this is the language of
every being, Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any good. No man seeks evil formally
as such, but as it is disguized by Satan, or dressed up by his own wanton and
corrupt fancy, and made to appear in the habit of goodness, as the Witch of
Endor raised up the devil in Samumuels garments. Thus as men are convinced of
the good that is in God, and his service, so they may from those common
convictions set themselves to seek him, and apply themselves to his ways and
ordinances. And though no man sees the chief good in God and his ways, but he
that is graciously enlightened; yet common light may discover a kind of good in
God, and in the seeking of him; and proportionable to the good they discover in
spiritual things are their persuasions to embrace, and endeavors to attain
them. Hence many without grace go far, but none far enough to reach the kingdom
of God; we have an example of this in the young man, Matthew 19.20. who without
special grace upon the stock of his natural abilities, with the additional
light of the means under which he lived, went very far in observation of the
Law, and offered very fair at Heaven, seeing doubtless a great good in
salvation; but the reason why he went not through with his purchase was this,
he saw not the supreme good in it; though he apprehended it a good thing to
inheriteternal life, yet he saw something which to him was better; had this
been the chief good in his account, it would have been his chief desire. And
doubtless seeing all have the same stock of these first principles to trade
upon, by living under the means they may be so heightened, that they may see
(what he did) a degree of goodness and happiness in the enjoyment of spiritual
things, and may be induced to do, even as he did (having a proportionable
measure of persuasion) to embrace those things, and to comply with the means
leading to them. These are persuasions, or else they would not be moved to do
any thing; they are not full persuasions, for then they would stick at nothing:
but they are imperfect, and are more or less, according to those apprehensions
which they have of the excellency of God, and of his ways, of which the natural
man by the light of nature, and the super-added light of the word, may have a
weak sight, but without the work of grace cannot have a true sight, such as
should draw him out to seek after God with all his heart; yet though he sees
not all, he sees much; and though he will not do all that he is commanded, yet
he will be persuaded to do many things; for though a carnal man cannot apprehend
any good in the strictest profession of godliness, which is accompanied with
the greatest self, denial, and exposes men to the greatest hazards, yet he dos
often apprehend much good in partial compliance with Religion; for this he
supposes may not spoil his particular interest, and yet may attain the end,
which is true happiness; upon this account most men have their measures of
persuasion, some are greater, and some less, but some do border upon a full
persuasion, they are almost persuaded, or persuaded to be almost Christians.

2 These persuasions do arise from good education in many, good counsel and
instructions being wrought wisely into them by the skill and industry of their
Parents and friends; and these being backed with good examples, and fenced by
discipline, many have been drawn by love to entreat, or driven by fear into a
profession of what is good, and by long custom they seem to have gotten a
nature, and they act in a profession as if they were disposed to it by grace;
and whi^es they want the temptations which others have, they seem to be fully
persuaded to be Christians; but when friends or parents are taken away, who
were as a hedge about them, and kept many temptations from approaching near
them; or when they are taken from their friends, and called to live upon their
own stock in some place, where they see other examples, and meet with
temptations of all sorts, they soon show what, and whence their former
persuasions were: they show that ignorance of evil, or want of temptations to
it only made them seem good; But without doubt next unto grace, good education
dos most of all work upon the spirits of men, yea it can do any thing but renew
the heart: we ^ee how children suck in the opinions and persuasions of their
Parents, and ordinarily they do more zealously defend what came from them by
tradition then what the light of the word afforded them. Nay it is no very
difficult thing for parents to draw their children to imitate the; for the
examples of those whom we love, persuade to that which for itself we do not
love, yea and being drawn once to do any thing in imitation of anot^e whom we
honor, we continue in it, lest we should be a dishonor to our copy; and thus
by continuance we come to be persuaded of what we do, and arise so high in
notion and external profession, that nothing is wanting but the power of those
truths which we assent unto, and spirituality of those duties which we perform.
Thus the Parent or the master makes his child or servant almost a Christian;
but its the Lord only can make him altogether such.

3. Convictions and persuasions rise high by some special providence; God
knocks so hard at the door of natural men's consciences by some afflictions, or
eminent danger of death, that although he does not open the heart as he did
Lydias, yet he makes a breach, at which some truth enters, which coming in with
such conviction and power, for the present (yea and perhaps for the future)
makes some changes in the man's apprehensions and resolutions. Thus Pharaoh
himself was convinced of the power of God under affliction, whom he would not
know in prosperity. When Gods providence were calm, he thunders, as if there
were none greater then he; but when God thunders, he is calm, and is brought by
degrees as the storm did increase, to consent to Moses demands, though never
fully and with all his heart. Ahab when he was terrified with the sharp message
of Elisha, how does he seem as a man changed, 1 King. 21.27. he puts ashes upon
his head, girds him with sackcloth, as a man mortified and dead to this world;
yet who that reads the story of Ahabs life, judges this to be any more, then
the lightning which shined in his conscience while the Prophet thundered. Thus
we see men upon a sickbed, while they are under strong apprehensions and fears
of death, yea and of hell too, promise much to others, and resolve much with
themselves, yea and persuade themselves that they are in good earnest, and
engage if God spare them, that they will be altogether Christians, and give
great hopes to others, while the least we can judge of them is, that they are
almost Christians. There is no evil that conscience convinces them of, or any
friend can mind them of in their former lives, but they will confess, lament,
and covenant against; no duty then discovered, but they will assent unto, and
ngage to take up if God will try them, the terrors of the Almighty are so
dreadful, that they vvil do any thing rarher then go to hell. Thus Francis
Spira, who deliberately and in cold blood denied the truth, yet when he lay in
his bitter agonies, he said, if he might be but freed from them, he would
despise all the tyrants in the world, he would never be afraid to profess the
truth with the greatest hazard. When the foolish Virgins were alarumed with
the noise of that dreadful cry at midnight, Behold the Bridegroom comes, they
then begin to look to their Lamps, and they begin to cry for oil, a thing
which they never sought for before; when they were awakened with the terror
of the Lords approach, then they run too and fro from one to another, crying,
give me a little of your oil; nothing less enquired for before, nothing asked
for else now, though it be a truth, that the Judge stands before the door,
James 5.9. yet men are nothing moved at this, they will lie still as long as he
stands still; but when he begins to knock at the door by some special
providence, and threatens to come in speedily, then you shall see how a man will
bestir himself, he vvil do any thing, suffer any thing rather then God should
break in upon him in this condition; then for a messenger, for a Minister, or
some understanding Christian to instruct him, ot intercede for him; there can
be nothing then proposed to him while the dread of the Almighty is upon him,
that he will not submit unto, and accept of; and all this while the heart may
not be changed; all this may arise from hence, he begins to see what a fearful
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God; thus the Lord who stands
always at the door, knocks at men's consciences at one time or other; at some
men's often, and some stronger as well as oftener; and it is no wonder if such
strokes do beat in some light into the soul, and make some change in a man's
resolutions for present, and practice afterward.

4. From the searching and convincing power of the Word under which men live.
The Word is sharper then a two edged sword, a discerner of the heart and secret
thoughts; it enters into the very souls of the wicked, and discovers what is
within, but does not change them; it works a reformation, though not a
regeneration, Heb. 4.12. The word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then
any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and
intents of the heart. Thus the wicked themselves have found. How did Paul get
into Faelix his conscience, and ransaked it? what an Earthquake was there for
the present? The Judge on the Bench trembles, while the prisoner at the Bar
preaches. This is the case of many a scoffer at godliness, and of such as
deride and despise the Preachers and professors of it; they come to hear for
novelty, as Faelix would hear Paul; but the Minister (notwithstanding the
contemptible thoughts they have of him, and the resolutions they have to
slight all that he says) gets within them, rips up their hearts, shows them
the secrets of their thoughts, and they are so far awed with this, that they go
away convinced of the evil of their thoughts and ways, and perhaps resolved to
be other men; yet time and temptation eat out these things, because there is no
depth of earth for these to take rooting in.

5. Men go thus far to quiet their consciences; though an unregenerate man will
do nothing for God, yet he will do much for his peace; when once the word has a
wakened conscience, and rowsed that, when it has taken him by the throat, and
brought him to the judgment, then he presently cries for composition, then he
desires a parley, and then he makes terms for his peace; Any thing to stop the
mouth of an accusing conscience, especially if it begin to condemn, as well as
to accuse. Hence it is, that many wicked men do many things in which they
neither please God, nor themselves; they please not God, because they do them
not upon good principles; they please not themselves because they are contrary
to their lusts, which yet are as strong in them as ever; but they do them to
calm conscience; they think it better to listen to conscience rather then to
their corruptions, because the pleasure of sin does not countervail the sorrow
and trouble that it brings with it; and surely this is the strength of such
men's reformation, their present peace is broken, conscience is enlightened, they
must either deny their lusts, or live in a present hell; if it were not for this
present foretaste of evil, they would not be moved, they would despise all the
evil which is threatened to come.

6. God has some special ends in these things: as

First, God has a design to honor the word, and he makes the wicked
themselves witnesses of the truth, and power of it, as well as the godly. They
carry up and down in their lives the pledges of the same. For their restraints
do prove the power of it as well as the others conversions. Though they will not
love God and his ways, yet God will make them fear, and though we do not preach
to their hearts, yet we shall preach to their consciences: and they shall be
brought in at the last to prove what we preached was true, they themselves
having experienced it. Nay let me add this, that the bridling and curbing of
wicked men by the Word is a greater evidence (in some sense of the power of it)
then the governing of the godly. Those few things which the wicked do for fear
of the Word, shows the power of God more then those many things which the
Saints do for love of it; the reason is this, because the godly have new and
tender hearts, which are easily wrought upon, and are ready to comply with
every command of God; but the other have hard and stony hearts, unapt to yield.
The strength or sharpness of a sword is more seen by making a small impression
upon steel or stone, then a large one upon wax; and surely Gods word is
glorified not only by converting, but by restraining; by chaining up the Lion,
as well as leading the Lamb; the scars which unregenerate men carry of the
Ministry, prove it mighty through God.

2. Gods end is to give men here a foretaste of the judgment to come; God
keeps a petty sessions here, before the great Assise. Faelix had a taste of
this Judgment; the Lord made him to feel something of what he heard, and while
Paul was reasoning of judgment to come, God made it seem present; and the
Judge is by the authority of the Word put into the place of the prisoner; he
trembles as if he were really at the Bar, which Paul had but now discovered,
Acts 24.25. Thus the Lord deals often with wicked men, who slight all bonds,
and cast the cords of God far from them; he binds them fast in irons, and
reserves them in chains for judgment to come; and though they seem to have the
only liberty of all men, and to enjoy all pleasure, yet they carry some
relishes of this day upon their spirits, which are as the chains which the
prisoner draggs after him. Nay he dos not only keep them in irons thus, but he
gives them some tastes of hell it self, such as Cain and Judas had, and then he
takes them out of one hell, and throws them into another, as the Saints are in
Heaven, often times before they die, in the assurance of their interest in it: so
wicked men are often in hell beforehand, by their fore-tast of it.

3. To leave men inexcusable; nothing will strip them so naked at the last day
as these persuasions which they had; according to the measure and clearness of
these, such will be their shame, and such will be their confusion, to see how
near they came to the kingdom of God, and yet shut out. God convin^es those of
sin whom he intends to save, that they may condemn themselves, and justify God
here; and he convinces many whom be intends not to save, that they may be
forced to justify him hereafter, when he shall condemn them, Psalm 51.3, 4.
Against thee have I sinned, that thou may be justified when thou speak,
and pure when thou judge. David did not sin that God might be justified, but
David was convinced of his sin, that God might be cleared, and David condemned
in himself. Saints convictions make them humble themselves, and the convictions
and restraints which are thereby made upon wicked men, will make very much for
the justifying of God at the last, and for the taking of all excuse from them;
for they can never answer this plea: If there were not evil in sin, why did you
fear or refrain from any? and if there was evil in it, why did you not refrain
all sin? and this will stop their mouths, that they had knowledge of this day,
and of the judgment of it; for God will take out a copy of the Judgment of the
day out of their own consciences.

CHAP. VI. Showing the reasons why men so far persuaded go no further.
QV. How comes it to pass that men thus far persuaded go no farther?

As it is a wonder that men go so far as some do without grace; so it is as
strange a thing, that being brought so far, they should stop here; but this is

First, from Satan; he labors to blind their eyes, that they should not see
the things that belong to their peace; but if he cannot keep them in a gross
darkness, and in a total neglect of Heaven, then he has a hundred ways to
cousen them, and to bring them to composition, and to persuade them to half it
with God; if he cannot keep them where they are, yet he will make them sit down
in the mid way to Heaven; he knows that he that underbids shall buy the truth no
more then he that never cheapens it. He knows Christ has set the price upon
it, and he that vvil not give all that he has for the kingdom of Heaven, shall
as surely lose it, as he that will give nothing. He that will keep one sin, or
deny one command of Christ to submitt to it, shall thereby be excluded as well
as he that yields in nothing to Christ; the devil does labor therefore to
hinder awakened souls from coming up fully to Christ; when he cannot hinder
them from doing something, he will persuade them to keep the right hand, or to
spare the right eye. If they will take their lamps, yet he will not suffer them
to take oil for their vessels; and this way Satan cousins not a few, who
cannot be tempted to sit still, yet are easily kept from pressing forward to
the mark.

Rea. 2 From their consciences. Conscience having attained its end which was
peace, the man sits down. It was nothing, but trouble of conscience at first
that makes such men stir, and now, by doing something, having obtained a
little peace, they say, soul, thou have enough; they never act in religion
beyond necessity; nor go further then the terrors and fears of conscience
will drive them; and these are often times removed without grace, and they sit
down without Christ. I showed you in the former how the devil did hide from
them the extent of their duties, and the latitude of Christ commands, that so
they might not attempt to go farther then h^ might consent unto, with security
to his own interest in them, having cozened them into a good opinion of
themselves and misrepresented the work of grace, and the change which is
wrought in them; they think all is well, and conscience is in a great calm, and
this being once asleep again they settle upon their lees; the dregs which are
yet left are not purged out; for all the motions of man which proceed from no
other principle then the fears of death and hell, carry a man no farther then
to seek his own peace; the conscience is wounded, and if the man can lick that
whole again, he is quiet; but if the will were wrought upon he would not set
down till he were perfectly changed.

Reas. 3. may be from their own corruption. Being awakned by the word they
begin to stir under the sense of the danger, and being convinced of the truth
they receive it with joy, and like Herod do many things, til it comes to some
peculiar corruption, and there they are stopped; there is some darling lust or
other that they cannot leap over; they march like Jehu furiously with a
seeming zeal for God, til they come to the golden Calves of Dan and Bethel, and
they cannot pull these down; some lust, some interest, some advantage hinders
them from following of Christ fully, and had they but grace in their wills
suitable to the light in their understandings, they would be Christians indeed,
as in the case of Jehu, 2 King. 10.25, 29, 30. The young man in the gospel goes
on very cheerfully, and bids fair for Heaven, as one that was resolved to have
it upon any terms, Mat. 19.20. What lack I yet? He seems to be vvilling to
give more for Heaven, then all had yet given, and to do more, then yet he had
done, as if all that God had required in the law had been too little, and too
low a price for glory; but when Christ makes a proposal to him which met with
his darling sin, which was the love of the world, he goes away sorrowful. This
man that was so near the kingdom of Heaven in all appearance, leaves it behind
him for the love of one corruption; this is the case of every haif-Christian;
one Just or other hinders them, (though they seem to run well) and parts Christ
and them for ever.

Reas. 4. From the means they live under; they may live under a fawning and
flattering Ministry, who vvil persuade them that the smoke is a fire, and the
spark is a flame, that cry peace, peace where there is none, healing their
vvounds slightly, and daubing them with untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 13.10. How
many are there that go to Hell in peace, whom their Ministers canonize here for
Saints? how many are careless of themselves, by reason of their Ministers
considence, who will salute his people by the name of believers, as if he knew
their place in Heaven? This makes them think they live high, when indeed it is
he that preaches low, and that all is well, because he never showed them how ill
it is. Men preach the work of conversion by halves, they search not their
people to the quick, they come not near the consciences of their hearers,
neither do they labor to do it; if they can cloth their matter in silken and
soft language that may please the ears of their people, and gain applause
amongst them, they think all is well; and it is no vvonder if they think as they
do, and thus both go down slumbering into hell.

Reas. 5. May be in respect of God, and that in a fourfold account.

1. In respect of his Justice, he punishes their disobedience to their former
light, by vvith-holding of light from them, Romans 11.28. and because when they
had but little they were not faithful with that, therefore God will trust them
but with little; it is just with God to punish the abuse of natural light and
gifts, by a withholding of supernatural.

2. God does it to show his sovereignty; grace is absolutery his own; he ows it
no man, but gives it to whom he pleases; he denies it to the enlightened and
convinced, and to him that is almost a Christian, he refuses to the Scribes
and Pharisees, and gives it to Publicans and harlots, Mat. 21.31. that men
might know that he will do what pleases him with his own.

3. That he might show what the will of man is, and how vain a thing when left
to it self. God will have us to see that it is not of him that wills, or of
him that runs, but of God which shows mercy, Romans 9.16. If it lay in the
will of man, doubtless men so far persuaded would turn to God.

4 God orders it so, that he might be admired, 2 These. 1.10. in them that
believe, that they that are saved may see its wholly from God, when the people
of God shall see those that followed them so close in profession, that they
tread upon their heels, and perhaps in parts and common gifts exceeded them,
when they shall see these standing on the left hand, and themselves on the
right, they will then easily see what it was that made them to differ, they will
then cry out, grace, grace, and admire the wisdom of God.

CHAP, VII. The first Use of the Doctrine.
USE 1. This speaks terror to those that are not at all persuaded to be
christians. If those that are almost christians are like to fall short, what will
become of those who are so far from being christians, that they have only the
name, and nothing else? that have not the show and appearance of being such?
what will become of the profane, the Drunkard, the Swearer, the Scoffer, the
Sabbath-breaker, and the unclean, of him that is so far from carrying oil in
his vessel, that he has none in his lamp? if those that in the judgment of
many pass for righteous, shall miscarry, what will become of those whom all men
brand with the name of wicked and ungodly? If some shall be sent to hell from the
society of the Saints, who went so far, that they were not discerned by the
strictest professors, as the foolish Virgins: what will become of them, that are
the companions of the wicked, that eat and drink with the drunken. If God deal
thus with the green tree that has leaves, yea and some fruit, because his
fruit is sour, or not ripe: what will the Lord do with the tree that is dried
up, and has neither fruit nor yet leaves? surely God will bind these up in
bundles, and cast them into everlasting burnings. O consider with your selves,
you have heard how far a man may go, and yet be but almost a Christian; are not
many of you convinced that you fall short of these, and that you come not near
those who yet sal short of the mark of the high calling? if these shall perish
who go beyond you; how can you possibly escape that come not up to them?
surely this must needs convince many of you, that your coudition is full of
palpable and manifest danger; I Will not spend time to reason out the misery of
your condition, nor to convince you concerning these things, for you carry up
and down with youth worm which gnaws you already. The Drunkard and the
Swearer I am persuaded, is condemned of himself; but I shall hasten to address
my self to another sort of people who are ready to be more quiet then you, and
to please themselves in hopes that it is not so bad with them as with others,
when perhaps it is worse with them then all the rest.

I shall now turn my self toward those who would be accounted Christians, and
do in a measure and degree more or less comply with the ways of God.

CHAP. VIII. The Second Use which is of Examination.
USE 2. Give me leave (my friends) to make application of all that hah been
said unto you, for I have spoken this principally for your sakes. Dos not this
place begin to put on the face of Religion? you do not only profess your
selves to be Christians, but many of you do believe that there is more in being
a Christian then a bare profession, and that to be a Christian is more then to
be called a Christian; you would pretend to be Christians in the strictest
sense. Oh my friends, is it an honor to be called, and accounted a Christian,
and is it not much more an honor to be a Christian? if there be any good in
being a Christian, then labor to be such indeed, and if there be no good in
being so, then do not pretend to be so; either labor to be what you would seem
to be, or do not pretend to be what you desire not to be; be christians in
truth, or be no Christians in appearance. I know you cannot hear the things
which have been spoken to you, without some convictions; you must confess that
your conditions have been ripped up, and by what has been said, if your hearts
be not in a deep sleep, you must needs be sensible that many of you are very
far from being christians, and the most of you are but almost christians. Are
these things of a slender consideration? can you think that this is your
condition, or suspect it, and yet: be quiet? nay can you chose but tremble to
think what a dreadful thing it is to be but almost a christian? some of you
perhaps are convinced you are not almost Christians yet, some that you are but
almost, and some are so guilty, that you dare not put it upon the trial, least
it should be manifest that you are such as the doctrine has discovered. Some
of you perhaps are like Gallio, you care for none of these things; you are
resolved to be quiet what ever the Minister says, not minding that there is a
greater that condemns you then the Minister; if we could throw hel-fire about
your ears, and scorch you with the heat of the Word, yet you would be quiet
again so soon as you can get out of the sight of the pulpit, and the sound of
the Minister; if we could call for fire from Heaven, as Elijah did, 2 King.
1.19. Tell me, do not many of you sit here in little ease? are you not sometimes
under much trouble, and under many convictions while you are under the word?
but when you are out of the noise of that, you grow quiet again. Ah my friends,
will you never be serious, and in good earnest? will you always be betwixt jest
and earnest? will you always dally with convictions, and trifle with eternity?
shall all that I have spoken to you from this Text be to no purpose? shall I
conclude, that the Lord raised me up in judgment to be a witness against you?
Pray give me leave to reason with you a little, and oh that the things which
have been delivered to you, were written upon your hearts, that I could but
make you sensible of the danger of that condition in which many of you are. Oh
that I could so affect my own heart, and yours in this thing, that those words
which Francis Spira breathed out in his agony, might be ever sounding in our
ears; It is a fearful thing to be almost a Christian. I beseech you brethren
enquire concerning your conditions, and compare your selves with the word which
has been preached. Gather up those convictions which you have met withal in
this discourse, and see what answer you can make to the Inditements which your
consciences have drawn up against you from it.

If conscience have not acted its part hitherto, let it do it now. Begin and
judge your selves, that you be not judged of the Lord. Better it is to judge
your selves, and lie in the dust, then to be judged of God, and cast into
hel-fire. I would entreat all you that have at any time attempted any
reformation, and pretended to a change: to consider seriously of this thing.
Are there not some here, who have been under great convictions of the evil of
your conditions, and when these were strong upon you, you made great promises
of reforming, and of being new men. Nay, you could not conceal this, but others
have taken notice of it, good people took notice of it, and they had great
hopes; and wicked men took notice of it, and perhaps for present were startled
at it; but have they not since said lo, see what is become of such a man's
reformation, the man is become like one of us again. I am confident here are
those amongst us who will be stung to purpose, when they come upon their
deathbeds, when they do but look back, and consider what convictions they had,
what promises they have made, what profession they have taken up for a time,
and how near they came to be Christians, and how they have fallen away from
their profession, and are fallen to their wicked practices again in private,
yea and sometimes to plead for these evils of which they have been convinced.

Others of you that have not fallen back so visibly, yet how have you stood
still, and shamed the hopes of Gods people, who have expected greater things
from you, then they see, or find! It may be said of some of you, as it was of
the Galathians, ye did run well, who did hinder you? you seemed to begin in the
spirit, but will you end in the flesh? you did run at first setting forth, and
you were very sensible, and seemed very serious, but now you slack your pace.
Is there less evil in sin now, then when your eyes were first opened? you
could then roar and cry, oh the evil of sin, oh my Drunkenness, my
company-keeping, my Carding and Dicing; these were bitter things; but are these
things less evil now then they were? I am sure some of you have other thoughts
of these then you had; is there less need of Christ now then in former days? or
are you less sensible of it? is there less need of zeal for Gods glory now then
before, and of circumspection in your walking? is the society of the people of
God less profitable, or less desirable then it was, that some of you who
seemed to desire opportunities of getting acquaintance with them, are at a
stand? Look into these things, and tell me whether these things do not speak
sadly of many of you, that you were once almost Christians, and are now gone
back, and others are but almost Christians, and therefore stand at a stay, if
you do not decline? Oh that I could persuade you to pluck off those Figg-leaves
with which you cover your selves, and see the nakedness of your souls,
acknowledge it, and come to Christ for white raiment, that your nakedness do
not appear; that profession which you cover your selves vvithall now, will be
your shame at the last day.

But here will arise a great question; How shall I know whether I am a Christian
in good earnest or not, whether I am altogether a Christian? Now, you will say
this must needs be hard to resolve, because we sin all, and every one has some
defects or other, and will have til we are perfected. How shall we be able to
distingish betwixt the defects of a true Christian, and one that is but almost
a christian?

Ans. A sound christian commonly fayls in the manner of performing duties, but
he that is but a christian in part fails in the matter; the first fayls in the
circumstantials; the second in the Substantials of duty. A sound christian
performs every duty made known to him, the other picks and chooses his
duties, such as are easiest or most profitable or most in fashion, or such as
are best accommodated to his own parts or abilities. He takes up some, and
leaves out others; but a sound christian takes up every duty, embraces all the
commands of God, with equal respect, not having any respect to those things
which guide the other is his profession and practice; The one will perform
public duties, because he can make his advantage of them; there is an honor
or a profit attending them, but he neglects private duties, because he can make
no advantage of that which no man sees. Or if he do perform private duties
of prayer, and reading, yet he omits the examination of his heart, and the
watching over his thoughts, and the mortifying of his secrett corruptions,
because these things are hard, and the other are more easy. Besides amongst
his public duties he performs some because they do make most for the
discovering of his abilities, as a man that has a gift in prayer, or in
opening the word, may do much in them not for the love of the duties, but out
of a desire to exercise his own parts: But he that is indeed a christian will
do all that is commanded; though it be a duty which is not fitted to his
advantages, nor to which he is not sitted by natural accomplishments, yet he will
do it willingly and cheerfully, though he can do it but weakly, this was David's
frame Psalm 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

Now I beseech you consider this. Are there not here those who do pick and
choose their duties, and that live in the constant (nay total) neglect of such
duties, as they are convinct of? With what face can you lay claim to an
interest in Christ, and call your selves christians? How many are there here
that will take up some duties that are in fashion, and yet will neglect others
that have a little self denial annexed unto them? Can you be disciples of
Christ without following Christ, nay can you be disciples without following him
with your crosses upon your backs? Mat. 16.24. Do not flatter and deceive your
selves, it is not every one that cries Lord, Lord; it is not every one that
calls himself a Christian that will be found a christian at the last day; that
which will pass you for a Christian amongst men; will not do it before the Lord,
who judges not with man's judgment. The Lord is impartial in judgeing; and if
you be not so in your profession, and in your obedience, be sure of it, the
Lord will put a difference betwixt you and those that fear his name.

2. Though all do fail partly in the matter, and partly in manner of
performing duties, yet a sincere Christian labors to find out his defects,
and to be humbled for them; but the half Christian either sees or considers
them not, and therefore is quiet under them. A gracious soul is much in prying
into its own miscarriages, both in its omissious, what duty hasbin neglected
and into its weaknesses; what neglect has bin in the duties, what grace was
wanting, or what was weak in it, and so one duty rises out of the ashes of
another. But the other takes noe notice of those things, but contents himself
when he has done the duty, and is glad that his task is over, even as one
rejoices that he is come to his journeys end; the one sees a reason to pray
again, when he has been at prayer, to beg pardon for the sins of his prayers;
but the other sees no such thing; the language of a carnal heart after any
duty (however it be done) is nothing but this Now soul take thy ease. Oh now
tell me, be there not many that live in the neglect of duties, public, and
private, family and closet duties, and yet you are quiet under them? this is
sad evidence that you are of these half christians. If you were truly humbled,
ii were impossible that you should please your selves in such a posture; it is
impossible for a man or woman to continue resolvedly in that for which he is
truly humbled: that which thou groanest under, thou will labor to lay down
and if thou art not humbled under thy defects, thou art no Christan; Remember
and consider it all you that hear me this day, it is a thing in consistent with
the truth of christianity for a man to live in a willing, quiet, constant
neglect of any known duty. The best Christian may be be put by the performance
of his known duty: by the strength of some temptation for a time; but to
persist in this, to make this his constant practice, and quiet himself in it,
is a notorious proof of a half Christian. But this let me say to you, who are
complaining of your failings in duty, and are deeply sensible of your
wanderings, and weakness, and your souls are afflicted for them, and you are
filled from hence with humble thoughts of your selves; God vvil put a
difference betwixt your defects, and other men's. Be of good comfort, you shall
not be reckoned amongst these halters, and halfers in the worship of God; you
that make this daily use of the imperfections of your duties to lie lovv, and
humble before the Lord, shall never be charged with them in the world to
come. And you that can neither think well, nor speak well of your selves in what
you do, you shall have this honor, and this comfort, to hear well of God, and
shall have this testimony, that you have pleased him, when you shall have the
great seal of Gods approbation set upon your weak, but sincere obedience, Well
done you good and faithful servant.

He that is but almost a Christian is unwilling to find out his duty, though he
dare not live out of the practice of it, being convinced; but he that is
altogether a Christian, does not only live in the practice of what he knows,
but is greedy to know what he ought to practice. It is not so much the living
up to what we know, as the desire to know how we should live, that does
evidence a man to be a sound and impartial christian. It is possible to find a
man that neglects no known duty, and yet is but half a Christian, for
conscience may be so awakened, that a man may not dare to neglect any thing
which he is convinced he ought to do, being known he must practice it, for his
peace sake; but this man is not willing to know his duty, he will not take it up
til it be clearly brought home to him, he will not seek for it, and hunt after
it, he will stop his ears and eyes as long as he can, but when he can withstand
the hints, and intimations, and convictions no longer, then he cannot but take
it up: but he that is a true Christian does not only practice what he knows,
but he desires to know that he may practice; he seeks out for his duty, which a
hypocrite will not do; the hypocrite seeks for his peace in the performance of
duty, but the godly man seeks out for his duty; if he have the least hint in
the Word of any duty which he has been ignorant of, he cannot be quiet til he
be satisfied about it, til he has found it out. The other does not more
greedily suck in comfort and notious tending that way, then he dos information
of duty and directions about it.

Now let me tell you the difference between those two sorts of persons is not
more eminently discerned in any thing then in this I am speaking unto. For the
highest pitch that such a man can come to who is not fully a Christian, is
this, that he may live in the practice of every known duty, yet here he is
distinguished from a sound, hearty, substantial Christian; there is in him an
unwillingness to be informed, and convinced of his duty. There does remain in
every unregenerate man, (and is the surest mark of unregeneracy,) an
unwilingness to come to the light, least their deeds should be discovered.
Natural conscience, and legal working will make a man follow the light when once
it has found him out, but nothing but grace will make a man love the light, and
seek after the light to walk by it, John 3.20, 21. Give me leave to commend
this particular to your consideration, and take heed you be not deceived here.
Here are some of you come to the Word, and perhaps God meets with you, and
convinces you of a sin, and you go away, and resolve against it; nay perhaps
you make conscience of that ever after; again you are convinced of such a duty,
and go home, and take up some resolutions to practice it, nay you cannot be
quiet in the neglect of it, and you will say, surely I am now a Christian
indeed, for I live in the Commission of no known sin, nor in the omission of
any known duty; do I lack any thing yet? this is enough for to make thee pass
for a true Christian with others, but this does not make thee so before the
Lord, neither may thou conclude thy self such a one from all this; thou
may be almost a Christian all this while; for the maine thing may yet be
wanting, which is, grace in the heart; thou may not neglect duty, and yet
thou may not love thy duty; thou may not dare to disobey the command, and
yet thou may not delight in the commands of God; if thou have nothing but
convictions and awakenings of conscience, thou will never hunt after thy duty,
seek abroad for it as Esau hunted for the venison; thou perhaps, when it is
brought home to thee, and pressed upon thee, wilt receive it as Jacob did the
Kids flesh upon his Mothers importunity. Oh tell me, are you not troubled when
you meet with a conviction under the Word, and you struggle against it, and
would fain evade it; you would not willingly see your sin, nor willingly see
your duty. Nay, when you do meet with a conviction of either kind, your hearts
do rise against it, and you say in your selves, Oh that this were no sin, that
I might enjoy it quietly, or oh that there were no such command to make this my
duty; so that though you yield to the conviction, and walk by it, yet you are
surprised by it; the duty finds out you, you do not find out that, nor go forth
to meet it half way; this is a clear sign you are not come fully up to close
with Christ; there is as great a difference betwixt you and one that is come
fully to the terms of Christ, as there is betwixt green wood and dry; the
greenest wood may be made to burn if it be put into the fire and much blown
upon, but the dry wood takes fire presently without the help of the bellows. A
godly heart is like Tinder, the least spark of conviction that falls upon it
kindles it, he complies as readily with the word of conviction, as with the
words of comfort; nay ordinarily catches hold of the former, and improves it
more then the latter. Balam was so convinced of sin, that he dares not go
beyond the command of God; but his behavior may prove, that the discoveries
which God made to him, did not please him. But David dos not only follow a
conviction, but loves it, and loves the means by which he was convinced, Psalm
119.10, 11. With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from
thy Commandments; thy word have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against
thee, Psalm 19.11. David counted the word sweet unto him, because it gave him
warning concerning sin that he might avoid it, and because it enlightened his
eyes, and showed him his duty that he might practice it, v. 8. Surely an
hypocrite cannot love the word of God upon this account, these are not the
breathings of unsound hearts; they say nor as he did, Psalm 119.5. O that my
ways wore directe^l to keep thy statutes! They pray not as he did, Psalm
119.27.33, 34, 36. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: Teach me, O
LORD, the way of thy statutes: Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law:
Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies. They have not his affections, Psalm
119.14, 16, 20, 72. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as
in all riches, I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy
word, My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and
silver. These are the great and infallible charecters of a heart fully
complying with God, of one that is a Christian, and Disciple of Christ indeed;
the man or woman that does thus is doubtless such a one as David prayed he
might be. Psalm 119.80. his heart is sound with God; but if it be otherwise
with you, I tell you you are not yet the Disciples of Christ, you do not follow
him in that great thing, in which he is proposed as our example (viz.) he did
not only do his Fathers will, but he counted it meat and drink to do so.

4. He that is a Christian indeed, labors to be much more a Christian then yet
he is; he that is but almost a Christian, contents himself with what he is, and
thinks all is well; and indeed this is a sure discovery of both these. They who
are altogether Christians, I mean in respect of their persuasions and
endeavors, account themselves but half Christians in respect of practice and
attainment: But he that is but half a Christian both in practice and in
persuasion, accounts himself enough in both. I have heard this complaint fall
from the mouth often of one of the eminentest christians that ever I knew, I am
but half a christian. But I never hear you formalluke-warm professors so judge
of themselves. These are much in observing the difference betwixt them and
others, rather then the disproportion that is betwixt them and others, and that
great example by which they are to walk, and that holy Law unto which they are
to be conformed, whereas a true christian is much in comparing himself with the
Law of God, humbling himself for falling short of that, and not applauding
himself for that in which he seems to exceed others; now that you may the
better judge of your selves by this trial laid down, I shall help you a little
by branching this Head into these four particulars; for there is none that will
seem guilty of this at first sight, but will say, I would be more a christian
then I am, and I wish I were better, and pray God make us all better, and yet
such persons have a secret opinion of their condition that it is good enough,
and they strive not to be better: you shall know whether you do reckon your
selves altogether christians or not, by these four things.

1. If the performance, some duties take thee off from the enquiry after
others; thus it is wit ha half christian, he makes one duty a vail to cover
another, he makes one duty a blind to another, and because he does some things
which others neglect, he thinks he does all that is required. Thus it was with
the Pharisee, Luke 18.12. I thank God I am not as other men. And thus it was
with Paul before conversion, Phil. 3.6. Touching the righteousness which is in
the law blameless. But a true christian is careful that while he performs some
duties, he does not neglect others, and he carries a jealousy over himself
still, that he has not found out the duties of every condition, and of every
relation, he fears still that something of his duty is hid from his eyes.

2. A man that thinks himself to be enough a christian, does not only think
that he does enough, but he thinks he does every thing well enough, he thinks
that he is spiritual enough in duty; but the other labors to be more spiritual
in what he does. So that he does not only desire to abound in the matter of
duty, but so excel in the manner of performing it.

3. He that thinks himself enough a Christian, looks not unto Jesus Christ his
pattern and example, but he looks to himself, and to others that are beneath
him, and this confirms him in opinion of himself: and hence it is, that he is
not humbled under his failings, but lifted up under his performances. But a
true christian that thinks himself but a piece of a christian, and would be
much more such, is much in eying Christ, and is much in humbling himself for
falling short of him in every thing that he does. If he looks to men, it is to
them that excel him in grace; but he looks more to Christ, then to all men
living, as the Apostle did, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I way
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ. Brethren, I count not
my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

4. He that thinks himself enough a christian, will show himself in this, he is
not willing to receive any conviction from any one concerning his condition; he
cannot bear with any one that will deal plainly with him, and call his
condition into question; he is shy of such as are faithful with him, and
offended at any word that seems to be pressed upon him; he thinks he does not
deserve it. But a sound Christian takes it kindly, when any deal faithfully
with him, and he receives every reproof or conviction with much tenderness; nay
he is not offended if any do suspect or fear his condition conscientiously,
though perhaps causlesly, and the reason why he can bear with the fears and
jealousies of others is because he has jealousies of himself. By these things
you shall try your own spirits whether you do account your selves enough
Christians. If upon inquiry you find that you have this esteem of your
selves, then know that you are no christians indeed, and in truth. For he that
is a christian fully in persuasion, desires still to be more a christian in
practice; he is not and cannot be contented with what he is, nor with what he
does, but labors as much to exceed himself, as the others does labor to
exceed others; he labors to have his last works more then his former, where
as the other contents himself in running his round, and in doing to day, as
yesterday, and to morrow as this day.

5. He that is but almost a christian differs from a sound in this: he will
follow God no farther then to get quiet of conscience, the other follows God
for holiness. Now a desire to pacify a troubled conscience may carry a man
far; but a desire to be holy will carry a man much farther, and the reason is
evident. Because the one is a constrained motion, the other is free and
voluntary. A man that is acted merely by a desire of peace, will not go so far
as he that is moved by an inward principle, because he is not conversant in
duty for the love of duty, but for the love of his peace, which if he miss, he
will after a time cast aside the duty as vain and unprofitable; or if he meet
with it, he will begin to be more remiss in it, counting it needless to be so
strict, when he has attained his ends. Again, such a man will limit himself in
duty, that seeks nothing but his peace in it; he will go no farther then he sees
he must go, or hazard his peace; and when he has quieted his conscience, by
arriving at such a measure of reformation, and by attaining to such a degree of
profession, he then resolves to sit down, and says, All is well. Every motion
ceases in the attaining the end of it; so does this man's endeavor, when he
has gotten a little rest to his spirit; but a man that follows God for
holiness can never be satisfied with it; he cannot sit down and say it is
enough; for he can never have the fill of his desire in this life; there is an
infiniteness in the desire of every renewed heart after God, and holiness,
which cannot be filled up til it come in Heaven. We have a very plain scripture
for this, 1 John 3.23. Belov^d, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet
appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is that has this hope, purifies himself as
God is pure; here is a sure rule to judge of the truth of our desires by. He
that desires holiness unfaignedly and sincerely, desires it infinitely; but he
that desires it for something else, desires it but in a such a degree as will
serve to reach such an end as he proposes to himself, if a man seeks it for his
or edit in the world, then he seeks no more of it then is in credit with men.
If he seek it for his peace, then he seeks it only so far as may serve to
allay the heat of his conscience, and to remove such convictions that are upon
him; and when this is done, he strives no farther. What a man uses as a means
to another thing, which is the end, he seases to use when he has attained that
for which he used it; but what a man desires simply for it self, that he
desires still, so long as it is absent in any degree; this is one reason why
covetous men are never satisfied with riches, because they desire them for
themselves. A covetous man makes riches his end, and he can never be satisfied
unless he had all. A godly man makes Gods glory his end, and uses riches but
as a means to this; so that if he have but enough to help him in this design,
to attain his end of honoring God, he is satisfied; as good men seek riches
and honors, so do wicked men seek grace and holiness in their notions; they
seek these as means to some other thing, they would have some grace, as much
as would serve their turn to hold up their credit in the world, or to keep the
worm of conscience from gnawing now, or as much as they think will bring them
to Heaven; but a little will serve for the first, and they think a little will
serve for the last, and therefore they would not have much; they would not be
too strict, nor too precise to trouble the world, nor have people think that
they are singular, yet they would be counted good Christians; let me tell you as
many of you as limit your selves, and set such and such bounds to your
profession and desires, and think a measure of grace and holiness is enough;
you think you are good christians as you need be, yea and as good as you desire
to be, it is manifest you do not make grace and holiness your end, but you
desire it for something else, it is but a means to some other thing, which you
having attained, rest in; if you did seek grace and holiness for it self, you
could not possibly rest in any degree of it which is attainable here; you would
never sit down and say you had enough, til you were holy, even as God is holy.
If you did seek God aright in an ordinance, you would not only seek the
knowledge of him, but conformity to him. A carnal heart may desire the
knowledge of God, but a regenerate seeks to have communion with him; the one
would know the truth, but the other would experience it; one would not be
ignorant of God, but the other he would not be without God, he makes it his
business to enjoy God, and til he do so, nothing will satisfy him.

But now least I should wound any poor doubting soul with that which was
intended only to awaken you, and send such a one away grieved from this
ordinance, and strengthen those sad conclusions which such a one is to ready to
draw against himself; I shall lay down a few things for the satisfaction of
such, which may stay their souls with some comfortable persuasion, that they
are not the people intended in the convictions and reproofs which have been
laid down in this Doctrine. Tell me then thou doubting soul who fear greatly
concerning thy condition, and art jealous that thou art but almost a christian,
answer me the question which I shall propound unto thee, and I trust thou will
be able to unty this knot which is upon thy spirit.

1. Art thou willing to know all the will of God? is there in thee an impartial
desire to be acquainted with every command, and to have all the light to shine
in thy face? Do thou not desire to shroud thy self under any cloud of
darkness and ignorance of the mind of God, nor to shift off any convictions
of the truth, and of thy duty contained in it? if thou done love the light, yea
all the light, convincing as well as comforting light, this speaks comfortably
to thee, as to a soul that is sound in the statutes of God.

2. Do thou find thy heart complying with every command of God, when it is
made known to thee? can thou say with David, that thou have respect to all
his ways? art thou glad when thou gettest more knowledge of sin, that thou
may escape it, and more light concerning thy duty, that thou may embrace
it? this is a sign that the Law is written in thy heart, and thy heart will not
be removed from it.

3. Do thy endeavors witness the truth of thy desires? art thou willing to use
every means which God has appointed to bring thee to that end, which thou
say thou proposest to thy self? Many are full of wishes and wouldings; they
will say We must be holy, and we must be thus and thus, and pray God we may be
so, and pray God turn our hearts, but these are idle wishes, they are not
accompanied with the use of every means which is appointed to this end. They
would wish that God would make them such and such, but still they continue in
their shops, when they should be in the public Ordinances, or in private
duties, and they link themselves to such company where they cannot expect such
things as they pretend to desire. They neglect to join themselves to the people
of God, who might further such designs; this is an argument their desires are
not designs, but pretenses, but if thou do use^ every means which God has
appointed as a furtherance of holiness; this does testify for thee that thy
desires after holiness are true and unfeigned.

4. Do thou desire to exercise every grace as well as to perform every duty?
do thou endeavor to fill up thy duties with grace? this is the great
discovery of a Christian indeed, who does not content himself to perform
duties in a slight and formal manner, but does labor to exercise that grace
which is required in the duty, and does account this the ornament of duty, when
much grace is exercised in it. He is not satisfied with parts and gifts, and
the enlargement of these in prayer, meditation, or conference; but he looks to
the frame of the heart, and rejoices when he finds that set right for God Is
this thy desire, and thy great design in every duty? oh this may be a good
evidence for thee that thou art a Christian indeed.

5. Do thou bless God simply for the change that is wrought upon thy soul?
he that is a Christian indeed rejoices more in the change which is begun in his
soul, then in any thing that is here below; he that has been truly humbled for
sin, and grieved for that, rejoices principally in sanctification, and blesses
God for that; he that was never truly humbled for sin, can rejoice, and thank
God he is not as other men; but it is rather a boasting, then a thanksgiving,
he can rejoice in the fruits of such a change as is wrought in him; he comforts
himself in this, that there are many worse then he, and that people look upon
him with another eye then they do other men; this he rejoices in, because it is
for honor, but he rejoices not simply in grace and holiness; for then he would
mourn for others who want it, and not exalt himself; he may rejoice also
because he has gotten a little quiet in his own spirit by the change which
seems to be in him, and he says it is better now then in former times, yet he
may not rejoyee simply because he is changed, for then he would desire to be
more and more changed from grace to grace; but a true christian rejoice; in the
beginnings of sanctification without respect to any by considerations, or any
advantages which may come to him by it. Tell me, do you rejoice with the
formalist because your profession has gotten you a little repute in the world,
or a little quiet in, your consciences? or do you rejoice with the people of
God, that you are more spiritual in duty, more humble, more mortified to the
world, more like to God in every faculty of the soul, and moreenlarged to him
in all your affections; this is the true and proper joy of Gods people; it is
not peace, but purity that pleases them their comforts do increase but as their
grace does increase; as they get more grace, so they get more joy, because
nothing comforts them but the renewing of their souls, according to the image
of God in Christ Jesus; now if this be the rise of thy joy, this is a good
witness for thee that thou art a christian indeed.

6. Do thou not rest in that measure of grace which thou seem to have,
but labourest after an infinite holiness, to perfect holiness in the fear of
God? 2 Cor. 7.1. and to be holy as God is holy. If it be thus, thou art a
christian indeed, and thy hope which thou have for Heaven, is a true hope. 1
John 3.3. For he that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure.
He is not the truest Christian that seems to have most, but he that really
desires, and designs for most; for the Lord measures us by these; the hungring
christian is the sound christian; therefore blessed, yea undoubtedly blessed
are they that thus hunger and thirst after righteousness, who have a kind of
infiniteness in their desires after God and his holiness, and can say truly
that their desires after this do exceed their desires after all other things.

7. Can thou make thy appeals for thy principles, that they are spiritual as
well as thy actions? that thou art not moved by base, and low, and carnal
interest in what thou do, but it is the honor of God, the love of his ways
and holiness that acts thee in thy general course? many may do much for God,
and yet carry their own interest under it, as Jehu did; but if thy ends be for
God as well as thy actions, then thou art a Christian altogether.

8. Can thou appeal to God for thy sincerity before him? do thou not look
to men so much as to God in thy profession, and labor to commend thy self to
them, but to God chiefly and mainly, and endeavourest in every thing to approve
thy self to him? If it be thus, then know, that though thou have many
imperfections, and failest in every thing that thou do, yet thou art
altogether a Christian; thou art perfect in the perfection of the gospel,
though not in the perfection of the Law. I may invert that saying of the
Apostle, Philip. 8.15. He says as many as are perfect are thus minded; I may
say as many as are thus minded are perfect; this is the perfection which the
Gospel requires and accepts; but if you come not up to a gospel-perfection, all
your profession and performances are in vain; for know that the gospel requires
its perfection as strictly as the law did; only with this difference; the law
required perfect obedience in act, the gospel accepts sincere obedience in act,
and perfect in desire and endeavor.

CHAP. IX. A Use of Caution.
USE 3. The third and last Use shall be of caution to all, that you rest not in
such half persuasions; and in handl^ng this, I shall lay down first, some
quickening motives, and secondly, conclude with some directions. I have spoken
something in general to the use of the point. I shall draw toward a conclusion,
when I have laid down a few motives to quicken you all to the particular
application of the truth, and to a careful avoiding of that evil temper which I
have discovered in the text. I have shown you that a man may be almost a
christian, and yet never truly such; I have shown you what it is to be such. I
shall now show you the evil of being such. I know some of you are or have bin
convinced, that this is your condition, and yet you are quiet again, I shall
now lay down a few things as motives to awaken your convictions, and to rowse
you yet if it be possible, out of that slum bering state in which you are; I
should be loath to leave you asleep after all that I have spoken, least you
should sleep the sleep of death.

First, consider if you are not altogether Christians, you are then altogether
no Christians, all your labor is lost, your profession will come to nothing,
all that you have done will not profit you, you shall be reckoned among the
heathen, and such as have not known God. Christ will one day profess to you
that he knows you not, all your bodily labor and external profession, though
it should be accompanied with never so great expense and charge in the worship
of God, will not be reckoned of, if your hearts be not right before God. We find
notable expression of the Lord to Solomon when he had built the Lord a temple,
with a vast expense of treasure, and had sacrificed two and twenty thousand
oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep, which was a very large service,
then the Lord appears to him 1. King 9.4. and says thus, If thou will walk
before me as thy Father David walked in integrity of heart and uprightness, to
do all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments,
then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever. Mark what
a seasonable caution the Lord gives Solomon, think not now thou have done
enough because thou have done all this for the building of my house; for
although thou have done very largly, and have bin very magnificent in my
service, yet know that all this will not serve my turn, if thy heart be not
upright before me; all this will not profit thee nor this people that glory in
it; if thou shall stick at other of my commands, it will not avayl thee that
thou have obeyed me in this thing.

If thou do not obey in all things, all thy obedience is nothing worth; yea
though it may seem much, yet if truly weighed, it is very little. I shall
insist a little upon this because it arises naturally from the words; and here
shall endeavor to prove that he that is but almost a Christian, is but the
least part of a Christian. If we compare the words of the text with Paul's
answer to it, we shall find that this sense may be safely put upon the same,
which I hinted in opening the words. I told you ((...)) which is here rendered
almost or within a little, may as well be rendered in that which is little: I am
persuaded to be a Christian, or I am a little persuaded. I could in some things
be content to be a Christian, but not in all. Paul seems to take him in this
sense by his reply which is, I wish thou were (...) as well in much as in
little, as well in greater matters as in less, such as I am. This is the case
of many men under the word; they have some convictions upon them, and some
persuasions wrought in them, and they would compounde with Christ, they would
follow him in some things, but not in all; and they would be Christians in some
things, but not in others; and these things unto which they are persuaded to
yield, and in which they will comply, they are but little things, and though
they seem to be altogether Christians to some, and almost such to all; yet they
are but the least part of a christian all the while; he that comes nearest to a
christian, and is not so altogether, is very far from being a christian: though
convictions and persuasions may be strong in such as are not yet regenerated,
and they may go very far (as I have showed you in opening the Doctrine.) Nay if
they should go so far, as to give their goods to the poor, and their bodies to
the fire, and many such things, which may seem very glorious in the eyes of
men, yet let all that such men do be seriously weighed and considered, and you
shall find it exceeding small. The most glorious hypocrite in the world, and the
cunningest formalist that has put on the outside of Religion, and in many
things can hardly be discerned to be such, is lighter then vanity it self,
compared with a true Christian. Though these are like Saul among the people,
taller by the head and shoulders, yet set him amongst Christians, and he is a
Dwarf; and though he may be of great esteem for a Christian with some, yet he
is still a Christian only in little things. Now this is that which I shall
labor to make plain and evident unto you, it being my great design in this
to pull down the high and lofty spirits of formal and empty professors, who
content themselves to walk in a stinted profession, and whiles they look to
some things in which they exceed many others, (as to some common works of
conviction which they have had, and to some measure of persuasion, and to their
outward profession) they think themselves to be some body, they are nothing,
and they think they do much when indeed they do little. The Apostle speaking
of the performances of hypocrites, 1 Cor. 13.2. says expressly, if this were all
that he had to show to prove himself a Christian, he were not only little, but
nothing. All these without grace would make me nothing. These are great things
with some men, and would make a man pass for such; but these things will not
make a man seem any thing before the Lord; and if we look upon such aright,
they vvil seem little to us, which I shall demonstrate four ways.

DEMONSTRATION 1.
1. A formalist is a Christian in little things, because he does but little in
comparison of Christ, who is his pattern, 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides
in Christ, ought to walk as he walked. Now if we compare the half-christian
with Jesus Christ, who is an example of holiness, unto whom every one that is
called after his name should be conformed, we shall find him to be empty, and
lame indeed; it would require much time to compare the life of such a person
with Christ in particulars. But you will say, If we compare the best men's lives
with Christ, they will be found to fall short as well as he, and the strongest
christians will be as nothing in comparison of him.

Ans. Though the best christians have cause to be humbled for their failings,
when they look to Christ whom they are to follow, yet there is a great
difference betwixt these and the formalist in this thing. For though there be a
seeming conformity in every hypocrite to Christ, yet it is but in appearance,
not in reality, but there is a real and sincere conformity to Christ in every
true christian.

2. Though there be some likeness, yet there is more unlikeness to Christ in
the half-christian; but in the true christian, though there be some unlikeness,
yet there is more likeness; for first, though they have flesh as well as spirit,
and a part unregenerate as well as regenerate, yet the spirit does prevail over
the flesh, and the regenerate over the unregenerate, so that this may, and does
still pass for the principal part: it is not so with the formalist; for at the
best he is carnal, and altogether flesh.

Secondly, though he fails in every duty, and there is some corruption mixed
with what he does, yet there is something of Christ in every duty, and this
weighs down all his corruption; but in a formalist there is nothing of Christ
in any duty that he performs; though he may exercise parts, and have great
enlargements, yet there is nothing of grace in it, and so no conformity to
Christ.

Thirdly, though there be a great difference betwixt the actions of Christ and
a christian, in respect of the perfection required in the Law (Christ did every
thing according to the righteousness of the Law) yet in respect of that
perfection which the gospel admits of, there is not so much disproportion
betwixt the obedience of Christ and a christian. If the Law were to be judge of
this, it would cast away all that a believer does, and conclude it no way like
to what Christ has done, because not every way like it: but let the gospel
judge it, and it will acknowledge a great conformity in the one to the other,
Romans 8.29. yea there is such a conformity in a believer to Christ, that he is
accounted perfect, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore. as many as be perfect, be thus
minded. The work of holiness in him is so deemed, 2 Cor. 7.1. Perfecting
holiness in the fear of God; and particular graces are pronounced perfect, 1
John 2.5. all these are in the gospel acceptance: so that with the favorable
interpretation of the gospel, you see a believer is very like to Christ who is
his pattern; but all the grace and favor that the gospel does show to any,
cannot so help a formalist, to make him to appear like to Christ in this sense.

4. Though in all things he does not attain to that measure of perfection to be
able to walk as Christ walked, yet in his desires and designs he is so; there
is the same mind in him that was in Christ; take the inner man of the heart,
and you shall find it exactly like to Christ, renewed in knowledge, and in
grace also according to his image, Col. 3.10. John 1.16. Of his fullness have we
all received grace for grace. Look to his principles, and they are the same,
love to God, and to the word of God, and will of God; this is his meat and
drink, as it was Christ's, John 4.34. Thus it was with David, Psalm 119.97. O
how love I thy law, it is my meditation all the day. Look to his ends, they are
like Christ's, the honor and glory of God, and the good of other souls, as we
find, Phil. 1.21.24. But to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. So that all
things considered, there is more agreement and conformity betwixt the life of
Christ and a true christian, then there is disagreement, or nonconformity; they
agree in more then they do differ in; but the life of a halting christian is so
far short of following, that he is not any way like him; so that upon this
account, he that is but almost a Christian does very little in all that he
does, because it is no way proportioned to the life of Christ, which is the
copy after which every christian must write.

DEMONST. 2.
As all that such a man does, is but little in comparison of Christ whom he is
to intitate: so also it is but little in comparison of what the Saints do; he
comes very far short of the very weakest of the people of God, in these two
particulars.

1. In actual performances; weigh what he does, and it is little to what a true
christian does.

2. Look to his desires and designs, and they fall yet more abundantly short.

1. To their performances: and a man that is truly wrought upon, sticks at no
duty, he yields obedience to all the commands of God impartially; but the other
professes with reserves, and yields obedience with respect to credit, or ease,
or profit, or the peace of his own conscience, and such a man wll not, cannot
go so far as a sound and thoroughly persuaded christian.

2. He does not only do all that is commanded, but he exercises some grace in
every thing that he does; and upon this account it may be truly said, the least
true believer does more in the least gracious performance then all the
formalists, and half christians in the world do, if they were all put together.
What was the reason that the Widows mite was greater then all the Pharisees
great gifts? because there was grace in that gift, this raised the value of it
so much; so the least exercise of grace is more then all the gilded
performances of these half-christians: Though these can pray, and hear, and
preach, and discourse, and give alms, yet they cannot exercise any grace in
these, there is nothing of Christ in these; and therefore they are of no value.
One duty of a true believer has more weight and worth in it, then all that
such men ever did, or vvil do (while they are such) to the end of the world.

Secondly, as they fall short of the Saints in action, so much more in design;
for in this there is no more comparison betwixt a formal half-christian, and a
sound christian, then is betwixt finite and infinite; for the desire and aim
of a gracious soul as I have shown you, is after infinite holiness; it knows
no bounds, and therefore cannot be compared with any thing that is limited, and
bounded within a compass, as the persuasions and professions of one that is
but almost a Christian are. Now though the Law takes no notice of intentions,
or of desires, or designs to do a thing that is not done, but looks only to
action, which is the perfection of intentions: yet the gospel sets a high
esteem upon this where it is sound and true; and the Lord accepts this, and
esteems it as if it were brought forth into act, as in David, 1 Kings 8.18.
yea and he measures actions by this, as being a supplement unto them; yea this
makes small things seem very great, when they are weighed, because they were
done with great desire and affection, and in a design to some greater thing.
Upon this account there is no proportion betwixt the desires and designs of
one that is but almost a christian, and him that is altogether such; for the
latter has a greater reach with him in all that he does, and docs as far
exceed him, as that which is infinite does exceed that which is finite.

DEMONS. 3.
He that is but almost a christian, does but little, if you compare what he
does with what he omits. He seems to do many things, but all that he does is
not like that which he omits, which will be manifest upon these two accounts.

1. He does fewer things then he neglects.

2. He performs small things, and omits great. Perhaps he may be said to do many
things with Herod, Mark 6.20. that is in comparison of former days; he began to
observe many things which he made light of before, but these many things
compared with the things which he ought to have done, would seem a very few.
This I could easily show you, if I should open the life of a christian, and the
duties of it, and show you how exceeding broad the commands of God are; and
when you did see how vvide and deep these are, you would easily see how short
and weak such a man's obedience is; but this will be too large a task at this
time: yet I shall give you a hint of this, to clear the truth before us.

A formal professor may do much to the observation of others, yet it is but
little of what he ought to do, if we consider,

First, that his obedience to the commands does principally lie in negatives.
He considers not so much what the command requires, as what it prohibites, and
he pleases himself rather in abstaining from evil, then in doing of good, in
being reformed, then in being renewed; he thinks it enough that he turns from
sin, though he turn not to God; this is the first thing such a man looks to, as
the Pharisee, I thank God I am not as other men.

2. If he look to the preceptive part of the command, he is low and carnal in
this; for he does not look to the spirituality of the Law; thus the Pharisees
did, and the Papists do, who taught the people to be zealous of some few
things, but neglected many more then they taught. In so much that Christ told
the people, that if their righteousness did not exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no wise enter into the kingdom of God.

That which is the reason of his falling short in both these, is this; he takes
the common sense which men put upon the commands of God, and observing them in
their sense, he seems to do much; but in the sense which God puts upon the
word, he does nothing; thus while Paul vvalked by the interpretation of the
commands which the Pharisees did put upon them, he in his own account is
blameless. Phil. 3.6. but when he began to see the spirituality of the law,
and to look upon it in the sense and meaning of the spirit, then Romans 7.9. Sin
revived, and he dyed. While we look upon the command of God with a carnal and
common eye, there is little duty discovered thereby; but let us look aright
upon it, and every command vvil convince of much sin, and discover much duty:
much more sin then many are convinced of, and much more duty then they submit
unto, and then we shall see that they omit more duty then they perform. I will
give you an instance in one command. Thou shall have no other gods before me.
Such men think that nothing is condemned here but Atheism, to have no God at
all, or idolatry in worshipping of stocks and stones, not minding that these
things are condemned as sins against this command;

1. Ignorance of God: for how can we have him as our God, whom we know not?

2. Unbelief: if we know him, and do not believe what he speaks by promise, or
by threats; for when we fly from the word of God, and go to any thing else to
help us, we make a god, and say, It is safer to rely here then there; and when
we do not fear the threat, but run to this or that shelter, we make that our
god, as if we could be defended from the power and justice of God.

3. Want of love to God, or not loving him suitable to himself: to acknowledge
him to be God, and not to love him, is a contradiction: and to say we love him,
and yet not to love him intensly with all our hearts, and with all our might,
is not to love him as our God.

4. The over-loving of any creature: this is the setting up of another god;
when we set up any thing in our affections, and in our esteem in the highest
place, this is the setting up of another god, because we set up something in
the place of God.

5. Pride of spirit: setting up too high an esteem of our selves, and of our
own wisdom or righteousness; this is the setting up of another god; therefore
David lays the reason of neglecting God and his worship here; Psalm 10.4. out
of the pride of their heart, they will not seek after God.

6. Carnal joy: to delight in any thing so much as in God, and his worship and
ways, is idolatry also. That which brings in most comfort is our god: if God
will ever be a Heaven to us, his worship and service must be our Heaven here.

7. Luke-warmness in his service: for to have no God, and to worship him as if
he were none, is all one; and to set up a god of silver or stone, or to worship
God as if he were no better, and knew not the heart, are things of the same
import.

8. Slightness of spirit: which is when either we suffer our hearts and
thoughts to wander we know not, and care not whether, and think not upon God,
or when we think slightly of him; the first of these David observes as a
sufficient ground of the Atheism of many in his time, Psalm 10.4. God is not
in all his thoughts; and God himself seems to take special notice of the
second, and threatens sore for it, Psalm 50.21. thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self.

9. Neglect of seeking God: this is a great breach of this command; public
and private neglect of this duty. God puts those men amongst the heathens
himself, Jer. 10.25, Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and
upon the families that call not on thy Name.

10. Unthankfulness for mercy received; this is a principle in the light of
nature that we must acknowledge God in all that we enjoy; therefore the
heathenish idolaters did never obtain any great victory, or enjoy any great
thing, but they did sacrifice to, and praise their gods. To have a God, and not
to call upon him by prayer, and thanksgiving, not to take our comforts out of
his hands by the one, and put them into his hands by the other, is to say we
have no God, and to say we have no need of him, which is an ungodding of him.
Thus I might show you in other commands how much sin is reproved which a
formalist is not convinced of; and as there is much in the negative part of
this command which he sees not; so there is a preceptive part which he
considers not, which is to have God for our God, and this requires many things.

1. That we know God; for without knowledge of God we cannot have him for ours.

2. Acknowledgment of him; we must own and profess him to be ours, and to be
what he is to us.

3. Believing in him; we must take his word as the best assurance, and receive
all his commands and threatenings for truth.

4. To love him as the chifest good, and to desire communion with him as being
the chiefest blessing: for to account any thing better, or to desire any thing
like him, is not to have him for our God. We must say as David, Psalm 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, neither have I desired in the earth any thing
in comparison of thee.

5. To fear him, and to tremble at his word: therefore the worshipping of God
is set out thus by the Prophet, Isai. 8.13. Make him your dread and your fear,
Isai. 66.2.

6. We must delight in him above all things: for the chiefest good enjoyed must
needs breed the greatest joy that is possible in the hearts of the creatures.

7. To be zealous for his glory: we do not serve him as God, unless we serve
him with very intense affections, and set up his glory above all glory, and
mind his honor and glory as God himself does mind it, who seeks it in every
thing he does. These and many more duties are required in this command; as, To
remember him at all times, to have him before your eyes in the creatures, and
our hearts in meditation; to call upon him in all streights, to be thankful to
him in all enjoyments, to seek his favor in all conditions, and to labor to
preserve the evidences we have of it above all precious things. This is to have
God for our God; thus you might see if I should run through other commands of
God, that they are exceeding broad; and that the man that seems to be almost a
Christian, does but little in comparison of what he omits; the sins which he
refrains by his interpretation of the command, are few to what the command
forbids, and the duties which he performs, are few of those which the command
requires, and he neglects. In this respect the formalist halfchristian does
less then he leaves undone, because he does some duties which lie more visible
in the Word; but such as are not so easily seen, and generally acknowledged he
omits; he performs public duties which come under common observation, but he
omits private duties, which are more then the public duties of a christian,
and he abstaines from the gross and public sins of the outward man, but makes
no conscience of the sins of the heart, and thoughts, which are more then the
sins of the outward man.

Besides all this, in every duty which he performs, he omits more then he
performs; the duties of a christian are complicated; there is no duty performed
singly, if it be performed aright. Many things must concur in the right
performance of any duty; as for example, if a man comes to hear the word, there
is much more required in that duty, then the bare hearing or attending to what
is said, or the carrying it away with us in our books, or in our memories, or
the repeating of it when we come home to our families, though many do not mind
thus much that hear the word; there are these three things especially to be
minded in the right performing of this duty.

1. To prepare for it.

2. To keep the heart in it.

3. To be careful of the word, and our hearts after it; he has not heard the
word aright that has not heard it thus. Now in every one of these there are
many things required, as in preparing to it we are,

First, to get our hearts affected with the pretiousness of the word that we
are to hear.

Secondly, to consider, and be humble under our natural deadness and inability
to profit by the word.

Thirdly, to mourn over our former unprofitableness.

Fourthly, to get a sense of the wants of our souls.

Fifthly, to heighten our resolutions of cleaving unto the Lord, and to bring a
full purpose of heart with us to the Ordinance, to submit to all that God shall
say. In the hearing of the word we are required,

FIRST, to see if our hearts be present.

SECONDLY, to keep God in our eye, and to make him our dread and our fear, and
to get our hearts affected with the consideration of his majesty.

THIRDLY, to take part with every word of conviction, and to receive truth, and
to side with it, though it strike at a right eye, or a right hand.

After the hearing of the word, the duty is not ended; for then it must be thy
care,

First, to keep those impressions alive, which the Word has made upon thy soul.

Secondly, to have a special care of the bent of the heart tolabour to prevent
backsliding.

Thirdly, to enquire whether thou have profited by the Ordinance, and how.

Fourthly, to cover the Word by prayer, and meditation, as the Husbandman does
the seed, least the fowls of the air steal it away.

Fifthly, to put that speedily in practice which the word has convinced ought
to be done, or to lay that down which the word says must be left. Thus it is in
praying, and every other duty; there are many things to be minded, and done in
every duty which the half christian does not mind; and while he only looks to
the visible part of it, and neglects all these concomitant duties, he does
manifestly omit more then he does perform; thus it is manifest in the first
sense, that such a man does perform less then he does omit, because he omits
many things, and performs but few; he does little in comparison of what he
omits, if we consider that the things which he omits are greater then those
which he does perform; he is careful and strict in some things, but they are
little things; but he neglects the great and weighty things of God; as it was
said of the Scribes and Pharisees, they paid tith of Mint and Commin, but
neglected the great and weighty matters of the Law. He omits those duties which
are of greatest account, in which the life and power of godsiness lies; he is
in the form of Religion, but minds not the spirit and strength of it, which
consists not in praying, reading, hearing, receiving of Sacraments, giving of
Alms, or abstaining from the outward acts of it, but it lies in the frame and
disposition of the heart to Godward in all these. It lies in the fearing and
loving of God, believing and delighting in him; this is that which God eyes and
values in every duty. But he that is not altogether a christian, is not
acquainted with these things; he is not acquainted with heart-examination, or
watching over his thoughts, he cares not about the ordering of his heart aright
in duties, and the exercising of grace in them. Now alas, when these things are
abstracted from duties, what are they? they are nothing in Gods account, and so
for all his reformation it is very little, when we consider it is but in the
outward man; when he abstains from the outward acts of sin, but not from the
inward; his reformation is not mortification, and alas all outward reformation
has little in it in comparison of the mortification of the least sin, so that
if you set his duties against his neglects either in number or weight, it is
manifest he does but little to what he leaves undone.

DEMONSTRATION 4.
He that is but almost a Christian, is but little a Christian, because there is
very little in that little he does; it is of little account and esteem with
God, nor with good men, and that upon several accounts.

First, because his heart is not in what he does, and that being not in it,
which God calls especially for, he values it not; when the children of Israel
did continue the worship of God, and observation of many things commanded, he
charges them as if it had been will worship, because it was not worship
according to his will. Who has required these things at your hands, says he,
Isai. 1.12.

Secondly, such men's obedience will not be owned at the last day, when Christ
shall come and survey every man's work at the great day; he will say to such as
come with such, half convictions and performances, I know you not.

Thirdly, there will come a time when such persons themselves will be made to see
and to acknowledge that there is but little in all that they have done when
they shall be forced to cry out as the foolish Virgins did, Our lamps are gone
out, Mat. 25.8.

Fourthly, Satan will make but a very slender account of all that these men do,
or have done; alas how easily will he shake such men's hopes and confidence, as a
reed is shaken with the wind? In time of temptation how does he batter their
resolutions, and in time of sickness or death? how will he take the house which
they have built, and pluck it down about their ears? he will make nothing of the
storming of such a soul, but will lay their strength in the dust in a moment.
This Job intimates, Job. 27.7, 8. that at such a time the hypocrites own heart
will reproach him.

Fifthly, all that such a man does is so little, that it is not worthy to be
compared with the least performance of a gracious heart; he that does least,
and does it sincerely, does more then he that does most in a way of formality;
for there is more done in the least act in which grace is exercised, then in
all those things in which gifts and parts are exercised without grace for this
is that only which makes things down-weight with God. Upon this account it was
that the Lord Jesus set a higher value upon the gift of the poor Widow, who
cast in two mites, then upon all the great gifts of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Sixthly, there is so little in all that is done without grace, that God
accounts it worse then nothing, he reckons it as profaneness: it is with God no
more then the cutting off a dogs neck, Isai. 66.3.

Last of all, how ever the profession and performances of such a man may seem
great, yet they will appear very small by that time deductions are made for what
is to be deducted; do but deduct out of his performances,

Consid. 1. what is done upon low carnal principles, and what is done upon base
ends and interests of his own, there will be very little left of all that he
seems to do; as for example, Jehu went very far in observing many of the
commands of God, and appeared very zealous in the prosecution of them; but by
that time we abate Jehu for his own interest, and for the settlement of the
kingdom in his own hand, we shall find little left standing upon the account of
obedience to the command; yea when the Lord reckons up what Jehu had done by
one of the Prophets with these deductions, he calls not what he had done
obedience, or zeal for the Lord, but murder, Hos. 1.4. such interpretations may
those actions have, which in themselves are good, and carry a great appearance
with them of obeying and honoring God, when they are weighed with the dreggs
or dross of those false principles and ends which are with those that perform
the same.

Con. 2 If you be not Christians in good earnest, all that you do will but
aggravate your sins; your compliance with God in some things will not excuse,
but aggravate your breach with him in other things; this will bring your sins
under other aggravating circumstances, which other men's sins do not fall under;
your sins will be judged hypocrisies in that they were under a profession, and
sins against knowledge in that they were under convictions, and contempt of
Christ and his ways, in as much as Christ came so near to you in the word, and
yet you put him by.

Consid. 3. you have the least, or will have the least to say for your selves of
any people. Of all men, halters in Religion will have the least excuse. We find
when the Prophet Elijah dealt with the children of Israel in this case; they
were all silent before him; one man strikes a whole congregation dumb when he
charges this sin upon them; they who use to have their excuses and pleas at
hand in all other cases, have none in this, 1 King 18.21. The people answered
not a word. Of all men in the world, these will be left without excuse; and of
all sins, halting and lukewarmness will appear in their nakedness.

4. You are the greatest dishonor to God of any people; you dishonor the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit; for men look upon you as men serving and
owning God, and they judge of God, and his worship, by you.

First, you dishonor the Father; men have low thoughts of his majesty, and
holiness, when they see those who go under the notion of professors, and owners
of the ways of God, to be slight and cold in his worship; when they see the
spirits of men that worship God cold in it, and stinted, and shut up in such
and such a compass of profession, setting bounds to themselves! this and that
they will do, and no more. Oh how can men think that the God whom you have to do
withal is a holy God. Oh the mean and base thoughts men do harbor of God,
from the beholding the lukewarm conversations of such half christians!

Secondly, dishonor Christ and the gospel under which you live; oh my friends,
is it not a reproach to Christ, that it should be said, This life which you
live in, is that life which Christ came to purchase, and for which he laid
down his life; did Christ come to give life, yea and abundance of life? John
10.10. and is this that life? Is that life which many of us live (who would be
accounted partakers of the life of Christ) like that life which Christ came to
give? the Evan gelist says, we receive grace for grace from him; but where is
it, and when it is exercised? Ah my friends Christ is reproached in this, when
we call and account that the life of Christ, which is but an abomination to him;
Nay this is a reproach to the gospeltimes, in which was promised a greater
measure of grace to be poured forth, and that God would give a more choice and
excellent spirit to his people, Zachary 12.10. But do not the low and lukewarm
tempers of many pretended Christians bring mean thoughts upon the gospel, and
the times of it, while they live much below the professors of religion in the
times of the law?

3. It is a reproach to the spirit of God, whose office it is to sanctify and
renew the heart of his people: what honor does the Scripture put upon this? it
calls it The beauty of holiness, Psalm 110: 3. as if there were no beauty but
this. Now what a vilifying of the spirit of God is it, to set up a dead, cold,
heartlesse profession without life and vigor instead of the sanctifying work
of the Spirit of God? as if we should say, Lo this is all that the spirit
works in the hearts of Gods people. Doubtless it is from hence that men and
women have such mean and low thoughts of sanctification, because they see so
little in the lives of those that profess it, and many do believe that it is
nothing but a pretense and a shadow, and a notion taken up amongst men; and if
they do but go to Church sometimes, and say their prayers, and believe as the
Church believes, they are as much sanctified as any* for they see no more in
others then in themselves, but that some can talk more then they. Thus I say
the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, they are all vilified, and all by reason
of those who call themselves christians, but are not; and if there be a woe to
that man by whom offenses come, then much more woe to those men by whom all
these offenses come.

Cons. 5. You are the greatest blots to religion in the world: All the
Apostasies of Professors which have hardened many men's hearts against Religion,
have risen from the midst of you: There was never an Apostate in the world, but
he was first a lukewarm professor. Look to all the gross and damnable errors
which have broken forth, and the horrible Apostasies which have been from the
profession of the truth, and they sprung up amongst those who have been halters
with God; Some that have seemingly, and in part received the truth, but have
not received it in the love of it. These are the people which God has given up
to strong delusions, and are swept away with abominable errors, and these have
fallen away in time of temptation, because they were not rooted and grounded in
the truth; but there was never any one did Apastatize and fall away wholly and
fully from the truth that was altogether a Christian. If you would not be
Apostates from the truth, pray that your hearts may be sound in the statutes of
the Lord, Ps. 119.80.

Consid. 6. You are men upon whom the Devil has the greatest advantage of any
men in the world; he chooses you out as instruments to carry on all his great
works, and to further his grand designs in the world; by your help it is, that
he manages all the affairs of his kingdom: it is a dreadful thing to think that
you should be the chief pillars of Satan's throne; he chooses not out the
profane, because they are too gross, they will be easily discovered; he cannot
easily engage the godly, because they will discover him: the first he uses not
because they are not so fit for his work; the second he cannot engage, because
they do not like his work; but when he cannot speed any where else, then he
comes to you the formalist and lukewarm professor, who never fails him; but
amongst these he finds instruments enough, and those he most uses for his
transactions; therefore the devil made use of Judas, and of the false brethren
in the Churches, and of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ, and the devout
women against Paul, Gal. 2.4. Acts 13.15. he uses these rather then any other.

First, because these are most able to hurt the people of God, knowing their
ways and counsels as the false brethren did, 2 Cor. 11.26.

Secondly, because their opposition to religion seems to carry in it some
weight, and reason, and men judge there is some great evil in it which these
men see, or they would never oppose. The Scribes and Pharisees would not so
oppose as they do, if they did not see more evil in these things then we do,
John 7.48. Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?

Thirdly, it is greater reproach to religion and to the professors of it, when
the devil can engage some against it that have professed it: as the Lord wounds
the kingdom of Satan by conversion: so does Satan wound the kingdom of Christ
by tempting men to Apostasy.

7. You are the greatest hinderers of the salvation of other men; for many have
their eyes upon you, and they reason thus with themselves; these men are wise
men, and civil men, they are good men, and will be wary, they know what they do,
and we will follow them, we will go no farther then they go. Many more that will
not take a Drunkard, or profane Swearer for example in Religion, will take one
of you for a president, whom he sees to walk civilly, and morally in your
conversations, and perhaps he will give more heed to you, because of your wisdom
and wariness in the world, then to those who walk more close with God; as we
see the people looked more to the Scribes and Pharisees then to Christ, and it
was not the Publican that kept off so many from Christ, but the Pharisee; so I
say that woe may fall upon you which was pronounced against them, and it is a
fearful one, Mat. 23.11. because they neither enterd into the kingdom of heaven
themselves nor yet suffered those who were entering in to go in.

Cons. 8. You are a people of whom the Lord speaks no good, God is so tender
that he will not pass by any good where ever he finds it; if it be never so
small, he will not pass it over without observation; yet when he speaks of such
as you are, he cannot afford them one good word; we find the Lord who will not
break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, would take notice of some
good that was in Abijah who was of Jeroboams house. 1. King. 14.13. when he
comes to speak of the Church of Laodicea who was of this lukewarm temper, he
speaks never a word in commendation of her, Rev. 3.17. She had high thoughts of
herself, but God thought not so of her. He reproves the rest of the Churches
for their sins and threatens sore, but he commends some good in every one
except Laodicea; thus I say the Lord will speak no good of you; you may perhaps
think as highly of your selves as she did, but at the last day are like to hear
the worst of your selves of any generation of men whatsoever.

Cons. 9. God does not only speak no good of them, but they are of all sorts of
men most despised of him, We use to say he is poor that God hates; surely then
the half Christian is a poor man; if there be any one poor under heaven, for no
man carries such a brand of infamy and reproach upon him as he does. God does
abominate such a man more then he does the profane Esau, or the scoffing
Ismael, or the unclean Sodomites; men that are down right Atheists, or plain
Idalators, or that have no pretenses to the fear or service of God are not such
an abhorring to God as these men are? I will convince you by two, or three
instances of this, that you may see and fear to rest in such a state as this
is; see such a temper compared with him who has no religion at all, Rev. 3.15.
I know thy works, that thou are neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or
hot, God wishes they were rather stark cold. God had rather men had no pretense
to religion at all, that they were stupid, and had no life nor motion at all,
then to move thus; better be without sense, then not to have a true sense;
better have no convictions nor stirrings under the Word, nor pretense to love
or fear God, then not to be in good earnest; better to do nothing, then to
stick at any thing. Now this must needs be a sad profession which God dislikes
rather then no profession.

Secondly, see it compared with idolatry, which of all sins which do openly
show themselves, does most affront God to his face; and therefore the Lord
threatens the setting up of Idols in his jealousy, in the second Commandment;
the Drunkard, the Swearer, the unclean person, do not so openly oppose God as
the Idolater, because he does manifestly ungod him. But he that is a downright
idolater, is not so bad as he that is a halter in the worship of God; the
Prophet complains of the present temper of the children of Israel, that they
did halt betwixt two opinions, they would not cleave to Baal, nor yet to God, 1
King. 18.21. And Elijah said unto all the people, How long halt ye between two
opinions? If the LORD be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him: so it
may be said to the half Christian, why do you halt betwixt a Baal, and God? to
have a heart divided betwixt God and corruption, is worse then to serve sin
with all the heart.

Thirdly, see it compared with open profaneness; we find the servant who did but
comply with the wicked and profane, in eating and drinking with them that were
drunken, yet threatened more then all the rest, Mat. 24.49, 50, 51. The lord of
that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour
that he is not ware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion
with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. He did not
cast off his subjection to his master altogether; he said not that he had no
master, neither did he cast off the thoughts of his masters coming, but he
removed them a little from him; and when he had done this, we do not find that
he was a drunkard, but he began to associate with them, he began to neglect his
duty, and to comply with the profane whom he should have curbed; and now the
Lord passes by them, and seems to take less notice of their open wickedness,
then of his secret compliance with it; thus it is with many who will not be, or
dare not be Swearers, or Drunkards, but they will keep a hand for the drunkard,
or the scoffer, they will be the friends and familiar^ with such in secret;
they have not gotten so much zeal for God, and for his ways, as to despise a
vile person, Psalm 15.4. but such as these God complains of by the Prophet,
Hos. 7.8. Israel was a cake not turned; if you look upon their outside, they
were Christians; but if you could see the inside, they were idolaters. Such God
will spue out of his mouth, with the greatest loathing possible; he does most
commonly cast them out of their profession here, and out of their
Church Priviledges if they be under any, 1 Cor. 11.19. or if not here, when he
comes to judgment, he will surely remember these; they shall be cast out before
men and Angels, Mat. 24.51. they shall have their portion with hypocrites,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; these shall have a place in hell by
themselves, the prophanest sort of men will hiss them out of their company, the
devils will stand off from them, because they seemed to be distinct from them
in the world; and as for the godly, they shall be separated from them, because
they were not of them. Thus these hypocrites shall have a place by themselves,
and if any worse then other, it ^^al be theirs. As of all sorts of sinners,
these are the worst, because hypocrites: so of all kind of hypocrites, these
are worst. It is a great mistake amongst the common people who think none are
hypocrites but they which make some extraordinary profession of Religion, they
judge them to be hypocrites; and them only who make a greater profession then
the common standard (by which the multitude measure their Religion) will allow
of: so that none are reckoned for hypocrites, but those who are noted for
professors. This I say is a great mistake; for there is not a wicked man or
woman in this place, how profane soever, but is an hypocrite, for every one
here does profess himself a Christian; and if it be not so, he is an hypocrite;
there is not one here that will renounce all interest in Christ, or that will
openly in words refuse obedience to him, yea there is not one here but does at
some times, in some ways profess a subjection to him, and shall therefore at
the last, not only be condemned with the profane, for saying Christ shall not
reign over them, but they shall be judged with the Hypocrite for saying that
they go when they go not, as the evil son, Matthew 21.30. who added a lie to
his disobedience. But although amongst them that call themselves Christians;
there be many kinds of hypocrites, and all that take the name of Christian
upon them, are either Saints or hypocrites, yet these which are almost
Christians, are the worst of hypocrites; he that is almost a Christian is of
the highest form of hypocrites; the higher a man rises in profession, if it be
not in truth, the higher he arises in hypocrisy; for he that does not follow
God fully, when he is at the height, he is but almost a Christian, and that is
but a raised piece of hypocrisy; and when a man is in this condition, this is
his misery, that all his profession does but increase his sin, he is so much
the more an elaborate hypocrite. Of all persons Christ cries out against these
in the Scripture; how often does he cry out, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites? for all the people of the Jews by virtue of their profession were
such, who did not obey the truth. But these did excel in profession, they went
beyond others in many degrees, and yet did not love the truth with all their
hearts, therefore he cries out more against the Scribes and Pharisees,
hypo^crites, then against the Publicans and harlots, Hypocrites, Mat. 22.13,
14, 15 23, 25 Christ did not cry out against these for Hypocrites for doing
more then others, but for not doing what they ought to do; Hypocrisy lies not
in making more profession then we ought, but in doing less then we do
profess. Therefore although he condemned their hypocrisy, yet he commended
their profession, and set people to imitate and exceed them, Mat. 5.20. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

Cons. 10. These are the greatest despisers of God, of Heaven, and holiness, of
any people; these bring the greatest contempt upon the kingdom of Heaven of
any, because they come in sight of it, and then go back, which is a manifest
contempt. God was more angry with the people of Israel for talking of returning
back to Egypt, when they were in the widerness, then for all their
unwillingness to come out of Egypt. Nay, he was more offended at their
unwillingness to go into Canaan, when they came upon the borders of it, then
for all their murmuring at the red sea, especially when they had seen the fruit
of it; this was a manifest contempt of the good land; for if they should have
gone back after they came so near unto Canaan, it would have broughtmore
discredit upon that land then if they had never stirred out of Egypt; for if
they had refused to go out of Egypt, all men would have imputed it to their
idleness; but if they had returned, the fault would have been laid upon the
land. If a man passes by your shops, and inquires not for any commodity, you
take little notice of him; but if he see your goods and cheapen them, and leave
them, he either condemns the commodity or the seller, either it is not good, or
it is too dear: So men that look not after Heaven, do but neglect it; but those
who come to buy, and yet will not come up to the terms, these discredit it.
When men come so near it as the young man did, who was offered it, and yet left
it when there was but one thing lacking, these do bring the greatest dislike
upon the things of God, of any men alive; for these men do in effect say, it is
not so much worth; they say that God offers it at too dear a rate; and what
greater reproach can there be cast upon the kingdom of heaven: then to say it
is too dear? The profane sort of men do but neglect it, they never ask after
it, they cheapen not; but the half Christian he sees and asks, and cheapens,
but will not buy; this is a villifying of it. This is your case, you that are
almost christians; you will be found the greatest contemners of the ways of
God; for other men fall short out of ignorance, as having not seen or known
God; but you come oftentimes so near, that you see the kingdom of God, as
Baalam did whose eyes were opened, you taste of the powers of the World to come,
you are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have found a sweetness in the
good Word of God; for you now to stop here, or go back again, it must needs be
a contemning of the Kingdom; you say as that young man did. There is not so
much worth in the same to countervail the loss of all other things, Christ will
put that interpretation upon your motions, which he did upon the Jews, John
15.24. For you have seen and hated both me and my Father. The sins of ignorant
persons are accounted but neglect, but the sins of such as are convinced, will
be judged hating of God; because such do knowingly cast away the offers of the
Gospel, and refuse the kingdom of God, and their refusing is not a bare
neglecting to receive it, but a despising of it.

Consid. 11. Such men have the least pleasure of any. They stand betwixt the
pleasures of the World, and the pleasures of the Saints, and enjoy neither.
Such a man cannot share with the Epicure in the pleasures of the flesh, because
of his convictions; these give a check to his lusts; so that he cannot take
that liberty that his heart does desire; his unhappiness is that his heart is
not mortified to the love of sin, yet he is dead to the pleasure of sin; that
which is sweet to others is bitter to him; not because he loves it not, but
because he finds some gnawing of the worm of Conscience, which will not let him
be quiet in his lusts. If he go to the Alehouse, he sits uneasily there,
because Conscience accuses him; if he goes not thither, he is not quiet,
because his heart is there. In the midst of his laughter, there is heaviness in
his heart; in his sinful pleasures he is sad, and enjoys not what others do,
or what he has done in former times: Time was, he could hearken to his carnal
appetite in any thing and it was pleasant to him; but it is not so now;
conscience either restrains him from the sin he loves, and this cannot please
him, or else it withholds from him the pleasure of the sin he commits, and this
must needs be sad. Beside this, he loses the pleasure of duty, if Conscience
puts him upon any duty, he loses also the pleasure of that, because it is not
performed with an upright heart; he wants a new nature to make the duty
pleasant unto him; he wants holy and spiritual affections in it, to make him
delight in his work; and although in some Ordinances he may have some flashes
of joy, yet he wants that constant spiritual comfort and refreshing which Gods
people have in the service and worship of God; he cannot say that his chiefest
joy lies in his duties; he cannot say as David, that God puts more this way
into his heart then when Corn and Wine increases, Psa. 4.7. Nay, we find that
this may be, and is the frame of such as find no comfort in following God, that
they are burdened with duty; the people of Israel who delighted to approach
unto God, as we find Isa. 58.2. they seek me daily and delight to know my ways,
yet said, When will the Sabbath be over? Am. 8.5. And such as these do often
upon this account Apostatize from the ways of God, and then they do reproach
them most of any persons, as those hypocrites did, Mal. 3.14, who said It is in
vain to serve God. Now lay these things together, and see in what a sad case
these men are; they have neither the pleasures of the wicked, nor of the godly:
Wicked men have their good things here, the godly have their good things
hereafter. The wicked seem to have one Heaven, the godly has sometimes two (a
Heaven of peace and joy in the Holy ghost here, and a Heaven hereafter also)
but the half Christian has no Heaven, neither here nor hereafter. The open
profane have one heaven the godly two, the hypoerite none. so that it may be
said of them truly that they are of all men most miserable because their hope
and comfort is only in this life, and yet it is nothing considerable to other
men's.

Consid. 12. Such men as these do lose themselves to all parties. They are
esteemed of by none, though they design to be honored of all. First of all
they lose their credit and repute with their old companions by their
profession. That reformation which they have made already, may perhaps make the
profaner and looser sort cast them off as not fit for them. And although they
despise them for their profession, yet the godly will not heartly embrace them
they are as much dis-satisfyed with their profession, that it is no more, as
the other are troubled that it is so much. Thus they are cast off by their old
friends before they are received of the new, and by this means they are
destitute of both. The profane sort think they are too strict for them, and
the godly suspect they are too large for them; they are too hot for the one,
and too cold for the other; one thinks he looks too like a Puritan, and the
other doubts he is too much a formalist, and upon this account he is deserted
of both; like the Bat, which is in the body like a Mouse, and yet winged like a
bird, is excluded from the society both of Birds and Beasts. They are placed
betwixt the godly and the wicked, as some Divines have drawn Solomon's Picture,
betwixt Heaven and Hell, not knowing in which to place him. If they should be
placed among the profane they would be offended, having escaped the
corruptions of the World through Lust; and if you place them among the Godly,
you should wrong the generation of the just. I knew in my time in the
University three Doctors heads of houses,

One was an Innovator.

The second accounted a Puritan.

The third was reckoned a Neuter. A witty Scholar presented them thus.

The first in a Coach driving to Rome.

The second driving to Genevah.

The third running on foot, begging sometimes the one, sometimes the other to
receive him, yet both refusing. Such are these Neuters in Religion, lest out by
all. All those which are but almost christians, are but Neuters at the best.
They are not what they were, and they are not what they would seem to be; and
so being of neither kind, they are refused of both. It is hard for any man to
make any profession of a change without troubling the prophaner part of men;
and it is as hard for any man that is not truly changed, to make such a
profession as to please the godly. The people of God will find out their cold
formal spirits, under the most zealous profession that may be; that profession
must be very handsomely put on, that must cover the old unregenerate heart for a
time; but if it should do so, it is not like to hide it long from the eyes of
Gods people; and when this is once discovered, there is no greater abhorring to
them.

The Neuter still has least friends, so has the half Christian. He is
despised by the profane, rejected of the godly, and loved heartily of none.

Consid. 13. Such people are in greatest danger of being hardened of any. The
light and knowledge which they have, together with the profession which they
make, does but darken them, and thereby they are befooled into a good opinion
of themselves, and rest quiet in their supposed good estate until the day of
wrath comes upon them unawares: There is more hope of converting a profane
wretch, then a formal professor. For a man has more advantage upon such a
one, having something more to take hold of in him, then in the other. If a man
deal with a drunkard, swearer, or unclean person, you have his natural light,
common received principles, and his conscience to take hold of, which will all
take part with you in this case: But natural light, common principles and
natural conscience will not serve to detect this man, they will all rather rise
up and plead his cause. For a little profession and weak performances serve to
quiet the Conscience, and make it lie down well satisfied. Him that Conscience
would not suffer to be quiet in an Alehouse, nor in the pollutions of the
World, yet may be quiet in the performance of some duties, though they be done
without the exercise of any grace. It is harder to fasten a conviction upon
such men's spirits, then upon any others, because their sins lie more inward,
and are hid from the eyes of men; yea and therefore from the light of their own
consciences. Hence it is that the Lord makes the conviction of unbelief so
great a work Joh. 16.7.8. he says the spirit should come to convince of this.
Natural conscience does convince of drunkenness and swearing, of idolatry and
uncleaness, but it does not convince of unbelief, because this is a sin of the
heart. Nay, Unbelief is not always alike easy to be detected, it is more
easily discovered when it lies under profaneness, then when it lies under
profession; it is easier to convince a drunkard unbeleever, or an unclean
unbeleever, then a praying unbeleever; because his unbelief lies more curiously
hid, and is where we would not expect. Hence it is that the Scribes and
Pharisees were so handly convinced, and so few of them were converted by the
preaching of the Gospel; yea the Publicans and the Harlots entered into the
kingdom of God before them; when the word took hold of the Publicans and
Harlots they confessed their sins and were humbled, but the Scribes and Pharisees
justified themselves; Conscience accused one, and excused the other; therefore
one was convinced and converted, but the other was lifted up and hardened.

Consid. 14. He that is but almost a christian, is in a sad condition, because
of the miserable disappointments of the last day: doubtless this is one of the
woes pronounced against those who are lifted up to Heaven, and from thence cast
down to Hell. To fall from such hopes and confidence, and presumptions, as many
half christians have, to a state of misery (as much below other men, as their
hopes were above theirs) must needs be an extremity of misery, to fall down a
precipice, from an expectation and assurance of happiness, to be plunged in
endless and remediless grief, and horror; this must needs be a double Hell.
These are the men and women that have punishment of loss as well as sense. The
punishment of loss is nothing so considerable to other men, as it is to them.
For, for a man to lose that which he neither had, nnr hoped for, nor cared for,
is but small to what it is to him that hoped it, attempted it, and concluded
himself in a manner possessed of it. A man that never meant to go to Sea, nor
cared for merchandising, laments not that he has not the riches of the Indies,
because he never studied for, nor endeavored it. But the Merchant that
victuals and man's his ship, and goes along voyage and fails of his design in
the very Continent, or that is taken coming back, or is forced to cast all
over board in a storm, when he is within sight of his own shore, he is
tormented with this loss, feels it, and smarts under it. The very loss of such
a man's hopes, is as great an affliction as can befall him. Thus doubtless the
bare loss of Heaven, will be a Hell to the half Christian, and will fill his
soul with inconceivable sorrow. Beside the punishment of his hypocrisy (which
shall increase his pain) he shall be more exquisitely tortured with the sense of
his loss then other men, which will be like a gnawing Worm continually
afflicting his soul, and, will be as bad, if not worse, then all the devils can
inflict upon him. Was it not think you a sad aggravation of the misery of the
foolish Virgins, (who kept company all their days with the wise) to be
separated from them, and to be reckoned with the transgressors? Oh were they
not in hell in their spirits, as soon as they saw their Lamps gone out? what a
darkness was then upon the face of their souls? utter darkness, and despairing
thoughts, blacker then any that ever covered the face of Egypt. Was not (think
you) their trouble greatly increased by the accession of this evil unto the
rest, that this was an un looked for grief? they rose to trim their lamps with
confidence of being able to walk by the light of their Lamps, as well as the
other. But when they came to the door, and found that shut against them, and
cried, Lord, Lord, and had no other language, but I know you not; how do you
think their hearts could hold any longer? Did they not now break, and did they
not now begin to beat their wretched breasts faster then they had beaten at the
door, and lament themselves, wishing that they could but find any place to hide
themselves from his power, who could not get into his favor? And all this
being carried back to their former condition, must needs afflict them; they a
few hours since had their Lamps burning, and shops open, where they might have
bought oil for their vessels; but now their Lamps are gone out, and the shops
are all shut, and no provision is laid up, nor none to be gotten for eternity.

Oh it was not many hours since, that they had strong hopes of being saved, but
now they have none; Oh now they wish they had that hope again, or wish they had
never hadany, that the remembrance of it might not torment them; but this
cannot be? they can neither recover what they have lost, nor forget what they
had. What do you think is the condition of these poor souls? are not they in
hell already? is it needful to cast them into another hell? surely the punishment
of loss does deeply afflict them, and if they should be left under the bare
sentence of an exclusion from the kingdom of God, they would suffer in some
proportion with the rest of the damned; what then will be their misery, when
they shall be thrown amongst the damned and cast into utter darkness? Oh my
friends think on these things, and take heed that this be not your case. I fear
it will be thus with some of you that are here, that some of you will be found
dead like the Levites concubine, with your hands upon the threshold of the
house and Kingdom of God; some of you that have had great convictions, made
great promises, made some attempts upon reformation, taken up a profession, and
gone so far as to give some hope to others, perhaps much more to your selves
take heed that you do not fall from this hope; if you do it will be more
tolerable for them of Sodom and Gomorrah then for you. Thus I have given you a
glance of the sad and woeful estate of such as are almost Christians, and
though what I have said may convince you, that such as these are in a miserable
condition; yet words are too weak, and our conceptions are all too shallow to
express, or take in the inexpressible and inconceivable wretchedness of the
men of this rank and order in the world: That which Francis Spira breathed out
in agony of his soul, when he felt a Hell kindled in his conscience, these men
will breath out at last in Hell. Oh what a fearful thing it is (said he) to be
almost a Christian.

CONCLUSION. Some Directions how to avoid this evil temper.
BUt you will say, How shall I do to avoid this evil frame and temper which you
have discovered? what shall we do that we may not be half Christians? I shall
shut up the application of this Doctrine, with a few directions to you that
desire to be Christians indeed.

1. Direct. If thou would be altogether a christian, then labor to be very
exact in thy first works of Christianity; if thou would build high, be sure
to lay the foundation well; make a good beginning, if ever thou would see a
good end. It was the Lords advice to the church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. and there
can be no better given. Do thy first works, labor to revive the sense of sin
which thou had at first, and call to mind how apprehensive thou were of thy
need of Christ; renew thy close with Christ, and choose him afresh as if thou
had never chosen him: Be ofen in these first works; for though half
christians are defective in many things, yet the ground and reason of all their
defects lies in this, that they were never right and sound in the beginning.
Their first works of closing with Christ, and humbling their souls for sin, was
never truly performed yet; and whatever is built where the foundation is weak
will fall.

2. Direct. Study Gospel perfection, for know God requires a perfection now
under the Gospel, as well as he did under the Law; though that perfection which
the Law requires, cannot be attained now by any, yet there is another
perfection suited to the Gospel, and to thy state and condition required ( viz.
First a perfection of Desire.

Secondly of design; it is not a bare desire, but of desires combined and
strongly contriving to attain the end.

Thirdly, Of endeavors; these designs are not the bare secret workings of the
thoughts, and the idle thoughts of the sluggard, who would have his work done,
if it could be done with thinking while he lies and stretches himself upon his
bed; but these designs must be brought forth into act, and backed with all the
use of the means which may further and facilitate such a work.

Fourthly, There is a perfection of self resignation; though thou can not
serve the Lord perfectly with any member of the body, or any faculty of the
soul, yet thou must resign all these to the Lord, to labor to serve the Lord,
both actively and pasvely, by and with all these.

3. Direct. Keep a deep and tender sense of thy own failings to humble thee,
and to quicken thee to look after this perfection; for nothing makes men sit
down short of this, but pride of spirit, and want of a due search and inquiry
into their own defections; it was this which made Paul press forward, Phil.
3.12, 13, 14. I count not that I have yet apprehended, and surely, thou will so
account of thy self; if thou do but take an account of thy daily failings;
but pride of spirit and an oversight of our own spiritual wants and weaknesses,
makes us sit down short of the mark, as high conceited Laodicea did, Rev. 3.17.

4. Direct. Be much in eying of Jesus Christ, who is thy true pattern, by whom
thou art to walk, and to whom thou ought to be conformed, 1 Jo. 2.6. He
that says that he abides in Christ, ought to walk even as Christ walked.
Nothing does so much stint and streighten the spirits of men, as the looking
too low, and mean examples of holiness; but surely if we did look to the Lord
Jesus, whose life is laid before us so eminently in the word, we should see
cause enough to be humbled when we are at highest, and not sit down under any
seize, seeing we fall short so far of him who is our pattern.

5. Direct. Be sure to make conscience of the inward and hidden part of duties,
make Conscience of that which no eye sees but the Lords. Men may see the
outward acts, and the external ornaments as flourishes of gifts and parts, but
have thou a chief care to exercise grace in every thing; for this is that which
makes thee pass for a Christian before God, whatever makes thee seem such
before men. If thou do thus, thy vessel shall not be found empty at last,
nor thou be condemned for an empty outside professor.

6. Direct. Never think thy self enough a Christian, so long as thou find
any so much a Christian as thy self. You know when men run in a race together,
a man does not content himself to run as fast as others, but if any comes up
with him, or near him, it makes him strive, and put forth all his strength in
running, that he may keep still in the head of the company, and lead the way
to all. He fears if any one should come up with him, that he would take the
prize from him; thus it should be with a Christian, who should thus run, if he
would obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. not as it were to get a prize with others, but a
price from all others.

Lastly, whatever thy condition be, or how great soever thy seize are,
yet labor to be much more a christian then thou art; if thou should excel
all others, yet then make it thy business to excel thy self; so shall thou be
sure not to fall under the weight of this heavy word, which has been spoken to
those who are but almost Christians.

FINIS.

