ARTICLES TO BE CONSIDERED OF BY THE Churchwardens and others within the
Archdeaconry of Derby. In the Visitation Archidiaconall of Derbyshire, Anno
Stis. 1641

Let all things be done Decently and in Order. printer's device of Thomas Cotes
and Richard Cotes POST TENEBRAS LUX

Printed at London by Tho. and Rich. Cotes. 1641

Articles concerning the Clergy.
1. ARe there in this Archdearenry any wandering ministers, or pretenders to
holy orders, that resorts to your Church and there by begging disgrace that
holy calling?

2 Are there any that keep, or frequent drinking houses, and use unlawful
games.

3 Any that having taken holy orders forsake their vocation, and live secularly?

4 Does any man in lower orders presume to do the duties of an higher office,
and having no orders to do any public duty?

5 Do the Priests and Deacons carry themselves discretly, gravely,
exemplarily? do they make their families patterns to the people of God? does
the Deacon assist the Priest in divine Service, the administration of the Lords
Supper, and distribution thereof? read the holy Scriptures and Homilies to the
Congregation, instruct the youth in the Catechism, baptize and preach (only
if so far allowed by the Bishop) discover the impotent and needy (where such
provision is made) to the Curate that they may be Christianly relieved?

6 Does your minister show diligence in prayer, and that open, not being
hindered by the study of Divinity? Is he studious in Gods holy word, and all
other conducing studies? Is he a lycensed preacher? and then does he (not
lawfully hindered) preach every Sunday in his own, or some neighboring Church?
not being licensed, does he procure monthly Sermons, and at other times read
Homilies? does your minister in his Sermons confute all erroneous and strange
doctrines? exhort the whole and the sick occasionally? and advance love, peace
and quietness in his own charge and elsewhere? does he read the book of
Canons as is required? has he opposed any other preacher in his Sermons, or
bin opposed by any? declare it and the manner how? does he keep proportionable
Hospitality for the poor?

Prayer before the Sermon.
Does your minister pray before every Sermon for the Kings most excellent
Majesty, with a full declaration of the Royal style? Defense of the
abolishment of Popish usurpations.
does he four times at least yearly defend the just abolition of all
foreign power within these realms? dehorting from any obedience to such
power? does he maintain that the Kings power within the realms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, is the highest under God, to whom all men, Inhabitants as
well as natives do owe loyalty of obedience before and above all other powers
in earth by Gods law? does he exhort to obedience unto his Sacred Majesty, and
all subordinate Magistrates? does he also pray for the Queens Majesty, Prince
Charles his Grace, and all the royal progeny?

Impugners of supremacy of government, etc.
8 Does he or any in your parish impugn the regal supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical? or the Ecclesiastical government established by Archbishops,
Bishops and the rest, as Antichristian and repugnant to Gods word? or the
books of ordination and consecration? or affirm that the Church of England is
no true Apostolical Church? That our Common prayer book is of corrupt
superstitious unlawful contents and repugnant to the h^ly Scriptures? that the
rites and Ceremonies established by law are wicked, superstitious,
Antichristian; Not to be approved, subscribed, or used with a good conscience?
Does be pray for the Archbishops and Bishops before his Sermon? does he read
all the offices and forms in the book of Common prayer set forth, as occasion
shall require, ^istinctly and reverently, without addition or contraction, of
his own private phantasy? and in the ornaments commanded?

Bidding of Holidayes, etc.
9 Does he notice all Holidayes, and Fastingdayes? and duly commend to the
parish the pious remembrance of the poor?

Baptism.
10 Is your minister (being required) diligent to baptize sick Infants in case
of necessity as the book directs? does he admonish not to deferce baptism
beyond the next Sunday or Holyday after hirth, saving upon great and reasonable
cause showed and approved by him? is baptism ministered in private houses
without great necessity? does any except a lawful minister baptize? are
Infants so baptized brought to the Church, and all things examined and done in
that behalf required, that the congregation may be certified of the lawful
baptism? Is public baptism ministered in a full Congregation after the last
lesson at Morning or Evening Prayer, as the Curate shall appoint? does the
Minister begin with that question whether the Child be baptized, or no? does
he after baptism receive the Child and sign it? are the Godfathers and
Godmothers Communicants? does he command that the Child be brought to
Confirmation by them, when it has learned, as is expressed in the Rubricke?
and do the Godfathers and Godmothers look to their charge?

Catechizing.
11 Does your Minister or some other by his appointment diligently upon Sundays
and Holidayes half an hour before Evening Prayer openly in the Church,
instruct and examine so many Children of your Parish sent unto him as the time
will suffer and he shall think fit, in some part of the Catechism? and
further observe his Majesty's late directions in that behalf? and when the
Bishop gives notice of Confirmation, does he bring or send in writing, the
names of all fit to be Confirmed? and does he admit any to the holy Communion,
before they have well learned the Catechism, and be confirmed?

Communion.
12 Does he celebrate the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of Christ so
frequently in the year, that every Householder may Communicate thrice in the
year at least? whereof the feast of Easter to be one?

13 If any Parishioner be a notorious evil liver, or injurious to his
neighbor by word or deed, has your Curate having knowledge thereof called
such a one and advertized him not to presume to come to the Lords Table before,
1. Dec^aration of his true repentance, 2. Satisfaction given to the
Congregation by his amendment, 3. And recompense to the wronged, or at least a
purpose and profession so to do? and where in his observation, malice and
hatred has reigned, has he labored mutual reconciliation betwixt the
parties, and admitted the penitent party only to the Sacrament? and does the
Curate and Churchwardens provide the best elements at the charge of the Parish
for that holy use? and does the Curate take the Remainder to his own use? and
punctually govern his actions in this holy Sacrament by the rubrickes of the
Communion?

Marriages.
14. Are all banes of matrimony asked three several times on Sundays and
Holydaies, in time of divine Service, and in presence of the people? and that
in both Parishes if the parties so inhabit? and no marriage celebrated in that
Case without certificate of the one Minister to the other? Is it begun in the
body of the Church, and continued with all the solemnities in the Rubricke of
that Office? is it done within the limited hours of 8. and 12. Do the new
married then receive the Holy Communion?

Churching.
15 Does your Minister refuse to Church any women that have been safe delivered
out of the perils in Childbirth, and does he observe the form in the Book?

Commination.
16 Does he in the beginning of Lent, publish the Commination, and according to
the rubrickes in due place, time and manner?

Visitation of the sick.
17 Does he, especially upon notice, diligently resort to the sick, and do his
Spiritual Office according to the directions in that form given? does he
exhort his charge in time of health to frequent participation of the Lords
Supper, and principally in plague time? and does he Minister the Sacrament to
such as desire it in their sickness, and that according as he is directed?
and have any, desirous of the Sacrament, dyed without it by his neglect? and
does he monish men and women to settle their estates in time of health, and to
liberality to the poor?

Burial.
18 Does he bury the Dead according to that form, meeting the Corpse and friends
at the Church style etc?

Lecturers.
19 Is your Lecturer, being settled, a Licensed Preacher, well Salaried, and that
duly paid, does he read Divine Service with all due observation, and
Administer both Sacraments twice in the year at least, In his own person? and
especially does he so read on the Lecture day?

But if your Lecture be bestowed by the grave Divines of the neighborhood, do
you provide fitting entertainment for them when they come to Preach,
respectively, that they be not either charged for their Love, or preiudized in
their health.

20 Are the Chaplains of your Chapels, Vicars or stipendaries of appropriate
Churches well endowed, or stipended? the buildings sustained? hospitality kept
for relief of the poor? or who is faulty? and has your Curate competent
allowance?

21 Does your Rector or Vicar reside with you, unless for some great cause
dispensed with, has he being dignifyed with plurality, a sufficient Curate
Preacher in the Church, where his abode is not so constant? and is the Chancell
in all parts, and all the Church houses and buildings in good repair:

22 Does your Parson and Vicar keep exact books of all his yearly receipts
for the good of the Successor?

23 Does your Minister notice the perambulation of the bounds according to Law
and Custom, and follow the royal directions given in that case?

Of the Patron.
1 Has the Patron of your Church presented his Clerk without suspicion or fame
of any Simoniacall contract, direct, or indirect?

2 Is he zealous to his power to defend the Church and incumbent from the wrong
and injury of ill affected persons?

3 Does he intimate any his Clerks in utility to his Church, (except in the
case of sickness or extreme age) to the Bishop, that he in his wisdom may
remedy the Church according to Law?

4 Has your Church-Patron living amongst you, all due respect from the Parson
or Vicar? Is he in decay? has he the honor of the chief seat in the
Church, where he is Patron?

Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 ARe you duly chosen, and in Easter Week? and so of the other Officers?
have all your Predecessors passed clear and just accounts of all Church goods
and moneys in the end of their several years, and exhibited a bill in writing
of all receipts and expenses, and transinitied, or undertaken so to do, all
remaining sums of money into the hands of their successors in Office? are
there any arrerages, and upon whom?

2 Is the fabric of the body of your Church in good repair in walls, roof,
pavement, windows, gates, belfrey, bells frames, wheels, etc. and also
decently, beautifyed, with all Canonicall-paintings, and choice sentences? have
you a seemly Table for the Lords Supper, placed according to Law? has any
presumed of private pleasure to remove it, who? and whether? have you a fair
carpet, one or two Coverings of Damask or Diaper, if your Parish be able, or
other fine linen? are they kept choycely, and clean? one fine surplesse at
least, made well, and kept clean for daily use, as need shall require?

3 Are the great Bible, the Service Books fair and good? kept clasped, or
stringed after divine Service, and well laid up? have you the books of
Martyrs, Erasmus Paraphrase, and the works of Bishop Jewel, and are they
chained in some convenient place? the Books of Homilies? the homily of
rebellion? the Articles and Canons? and are they safely kept for the use of the
Parish?

4 Is your Challice silver, and the cover thereof? not battered? kept cleene
for all Communions? Is your Font of Stone sound, beautiful? and well covered?
have you a velvet cushion? sightly Pulpit, Pulpit cloth, reading Pew? are all
the Seats in reasonable repair, and uniformity? have you a just inventory of
all your Churches goods? and exhibit a Copy thereof, particularly describing
what is fair, and good, old or in decay? what vessels have you to bring the
Wine in, to the Lords board? are they kept clean scoured, and used only in
Gods Service? have you a Table for the discovery of lawful or unlawful
marriages? is it hung up in a frame? have you a chest for the poor? with so
many locks as is required? and all other chests, locks, and keys? if you
have a vestry, is it kept in repair and decency?

5 Have you several books well bound for the Recording of the Christen and
surnames of all persons and their parents, baptized in your Parish, all married
or buried with like relations? and the Licencers of all strange Preachers in
your Church? all these with the day of the month in the line, a decent
margent, and a subscription in the bottom by the Minister and Churchwardens to
every leaf? are they fairly written, weekly? and carefully examined after?
Are any books of Christnings, Weddings, Burial grown old? Then signify it,
that they may be transcribed, and not so much evidence lost as is endangered.

6 Are your Churchyards kept clean, and well fenced, or closed, and by them
that are bound?

7 Have you a Terrier of the Recovery, and Vicarage, Glebes, and Houses, and
also of all lawful customs? and if you have not, make one and bring it in
subscribed by the Minister, your selves, and some of the chief Parishioners,
and keep a Copy by your selves.

8 Do you keep safely all such terriers, books, rentals, bonds, wills,
leases, accounts or any other muniment or evidence belonging to your Parish?
with the assistance of the Minister. So that nothing be defaced, injured or
imberreled?

9 Do you, and did your predecessors vigilantly cause all Parishioners to
frequent the common Prayers, Sermons, and Sacraments, and all other duties of a
christian man in public, in due time? with due continuance and reverence to
the end? did they, and do you levy one shilling weekly for absence according
to Law? and is it converted to the use of the poor?

10 Have any out of corrupt affection smothered any public and scandalous
crimes, what were they, and who have done so in their Office?

11 Are your Overseers, Sides men, Clerk and others diligent in their Offices?
and is the Clerks wages rightly paid?

Schoolemasters
1 HAve you any free Schoolemasters and Vshers? any that teach otherwise
openly, or privately? are they licenced, painful, profitable? as well in
nurtering youth in good manners as learning, sound Protestants, good livers
frequenters of the Church for Service and Sacraments? bring they their
Scholiers with them (having borders) or leave they any behind at their houses,
and that usually?

2 Are there any that teach privately in Recusants houses, or Recusants
children in their own? name them all.

3 Is the Curate contented if any besides himself do teach School?

4 Does your Schoolmaster teach Master Lillies Grammar and other warranted
Authors? And for grounds of Religion, the Greek and Latin Catechismes in
that respect provided, according to the childrens several capacities?

5 Are any houses, Schoole-lands, or repts derayed, concealed, misemployed, or
diverted to other uses, how, and by whom, Is the number of your Feoffees full?
and do they diligently perform their trust? Is the Schoolehouse in good
repair within and without, or in what convenient place are your children
taught?

Parishioners.
1 Do they live in the fear of God, exercising all piety, and charity? do
they observe holidays and fastingdayes, without servile labors, buying, or
selling in Church time, do they continue the perambulations in Ember week? do
they without wandering abroad, keep to their own Church and chapel
encouraging their Minister, and giving a good example, and do they abide there
until the end?

2 Are there any that disallow and separate from your Prayers and resort to
sermons only, or comply in all things except the Sacrament, and what are their
names? are Wednesdayes and Frydayes, and holiday Eeves observed for devotion?

3 Do every Parishioner receive thrice yearly, and is Easter one time? and
do all above 16. years old receive, and do all kneel, and use other
Canonical reverences, especially in the holy Sacrament?

4 Do Masters, Dames, Parents, cause their servants and children to submit
obediently to catechizing, till that be well learned which is appointed?

5 Does every Parishioner living, or being landed within the P^rish, pay his
reasonable Lunes and taxes, to Church and Chapel? and the poor and who
refuses?

6 Does every Parishioner make a clear reckoning yearly at Easter, with the
Parson, Vicar, or their Deputy, and also pay Clerks wages?

7 Do Communicants signify their names to the Minister over night, or before
or after morning Prayer.

8 Are Parents careful to baptize their children on the next Sunday or Holyday
after birth, and give the Minister canonical notice, that he may appoint
accordingly? and are the Godfathers, Godmothers, people and children ready at
the Font at the time appointed.

9 Does the Parish stay at the Church style until the Minister can meet the
Coarse?

10 Do women resort to Church for thankesgiving after Childbirth? do they
kneel near the holy table, and do they offer then the accustomed offerings,
and on Communion days, Communicate?

11 Do the Parishioners on the first day of Lent, come to the Commination?

12 Are there any unlawful meetings for common actions of Religion as is
pretended, in any place but the Church or Chapel?

13 Are there any that have dyed intestate? does any Executor neglect to prove
the Will, pay legacies, etc. or any administrators faulty in their
administrations?

14 Are there any that disturb the Minister and godly peoples attentions in
time of Gods service by quarrels for seats or such like? scorners, pratlers,
murmurers, sleep in Church? loyterers in near high ways houses, especially
Alehouses, Church yard, or Church porch? what their names that accustom so to
do?

15 Are there any that profane the Christian Sabbath or Lords day, and holy
days appointed, by worldly affairs, or vicious actions? any that profane
Churches or Church yards, with brawling, fighting, secular pleas, and Courts,
eating, drinking, plays, or other unfit actions or behavior?

16 Are there any Churches or Chapels where divine service has been formerly
used let fall? and by whose defauit or any Church lands, goods, plate, bells,
clocks, stocks of money and implements, etc. sacrilegiously, or uniustly taken
away, concealed and misemployed?

17 Have any at any time laid violent hands upon your Minister, or defamed him,
or used any irreverent language toward him?

18 Are there any noted for perjury, blasphemy, vain and idle swearing; and
who, and of what condition?

19 Any, any ways inconformable; and refractary to his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Laws established by high Court of Parliament? especially
Recusants, and Seperatists, and who are they?

20 Have any been married by other Minister or form then the Church of England
does allow? or so baptized? any children kept unbaptized by the space of a
month, or longer? any children conveyed beyond the seas, for Popish breeding?
any buried otherwise than the statute has commanded, not being excommunicate
with the great excommunication?

21 Do recusants refuse to submit to godly conference, have they any busy
seducers about them, as Jesuits, Seminaries etc. declare the whole matter, and
the names of all parties as also all misleaders of his Majesty's good subjects
in any other by ways?

22 Are there any that maintain any doctrines against the Catholic Faith, in
obstinate and heretical manner? any fallen away from the faith, to popish
faction, or from all religion, any that use witchcrast? sorcery, charms,
unlawful invocations in Latin, upon man or beast? or suspected so to do,
cunning men or women, or resorters to them? or any other addicted to
superstitious observations, and spreaders of the same?

23 Have any in your Parish (not hitherto questioned) lived in any kind of
incontinency, as incest, adultery, fornication? any bawdes, ayders, instruments
entertainers of unchaste persons? have any strangers delivered in your Parish
been after Churched, and departed without penance, who are they? and who has
been affirmed or suspected to be the Father of the Child?

24 Are there any supposed not to be truly married, that converse as man and
wife? Any having or deeming to have two or more wives or husbands, does any man
or woman married live apart, without a lawful sentence of divorse? has either
party during the others life married again? have any persons married to one
party been precontracted to another, and what clandestine marriages have been
in your Church made with out consent of parents, guardians, publication of
banes or licenses, and no satisfaction rendered to the Church?

25 Are there any in your Parish that sow discord and debate amongst neighbo^s,
man and wife, etc. any ribalds, malicious persons, scolds, slanderers,
defamers, depravers of the lyturgy, in word, writing, or otherwise?

26 Have you any Almeshouses and Hospitals! and whether of the Kings, or other
pious benefactors foundation, are the buildings in good repair, the poor
justly dealt with, the feoffees or Overseers careful, and entite in their
number, and who is the visitor (as you have known and heard) thereof?

Excommunicate Persons.
1 What persons in your Parish, and for what causes, stand excommunicate?
neither desiring, nor endeavoring absolution? and how long have they stood so?
are such denounced in your Church every ^ixe months?

2 Have any been admitted to the rights and privileges of the Church without
repentance, and absolution?

3 Has the sentence of excommunication been delayed or neglected to be
divulged, longer than the next Sunday or Holiday after the receipt?

4 Are there any that favor and cherish such persons as (being so cut off)
care not to be restored, nor to satisfy the Church?

Apparitors.
1 CAn your Apparitors read and write competently?

2 Is there any excess in their number? and more then former times have known?

3 Do they dispatch their mandates in their own persons faithfully, and not
by others?

4 Do they behave themselves as promotors or informers, vexing some
wrongfully, ex^using others for lucre sake? and know you any that have so
prevented the repentance of delinquents, and the Churches satisfaction?

5 Does any of them exact more or greater fees than the table ratified does
allow?

FINIS.

