ARTICLES TO BE Enquired of, AND ANSWERED UNTO, BY THE CHURCHWARDENS and
SIDES-MEN, IN THE VISITATION OF THE REVEREND the ARCHDEACON of Essex. Anno Dom.
1683

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1683

The Tenor of the OATH of the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall Swear, That you and every of you, shall faithfully execute your
several Offices of Churchwardens and Sidemen, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws: So help you God, and the Contents of His Holy Gospel.

ARTICLES to be Enquired of, and Answered unto, by the Church wardens and
Sidemen, in the Visitation of the Reverend the Arch Deacon of Essex, Anno Dom.
168
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. Canon 8^.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for the
Roof, Window, Floor, and Seats?

II. Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple, been demolished or
pulled down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way embezled or sold, and by whom?

III. Is there a decent Font of Stone, with a Cover? Can. 81.
and does the same stand at or near the neither end of your Church in such
manner as anciently and usually Fonts have stood, for the Baptizing of
Children? Does the Minister baptize publicly only in the Font? Is there a
decent Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and an other
covering of white Linen to be spread thereon? at the time of Administration of
the Lords Supper? And have you a fair Chalice, or Communion Cup, with a cover,
and one or more Flagons? have they been profaned by common use?

IV. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew, 8^. 20. 82. 83. 80. Stat.
wherein to read Divine Service; a Pulpit, with a decent cloth or cushion; a
large Bible of the last Translation, and a book of Common Prayer lately
published, Anno 1662. the book of Homilies set forth by Authority, and a
printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, and a Book of
Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? And a decent Surplice and Hood? 99.
58. 87. 70.


V. Have you a Register Book in Parchment of Christnings Burials, and
Marriages? and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use?

VI. 52.
Have you a book of Paper to record the Names and Licenses of such Strangers as
are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel? and do such strangers
subscribe their names? as also a third book for the Churchwardens Accounts, as
also a Chest with Locks and keys, wherein to keep the said Books, 70.
and the before mentioned Furniture?

TIT. II. Concerning the Church yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced and decently kept? Has any person
encro^ched upon the same, or made any Door into it? and how long since?

II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate and the Outhouses in good
repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? Can. 87.
have there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient
marks or bounds removed or changed and by whom?

III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebelands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? as
also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister, and by whom, as you know or
have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

II. Has he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? and did he
within two Months after his Induction Publicly in the Church upon some Sunday
or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, established by Authority; and there Publicly declare his assent
thereunto?

III. Is he resident among you? how many weeks has he been absent from you
without urgent necessity?

IV. C^^. 47.
Has your Minister a Curate? is he in holy Orders and conformable to the Laws
of the Church? is he allowed by the Ordinary?

V. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the book of common Prayer,
lately established, and the Act of Conformity published therewith, without
either diminishing in regard of preaching or in any other respect or adding any
thing in the matter or form?

VI. Does your Minister at the reading of Divine Service wear a Surplice and
Hood?

VII. Does he observe the Holy Days, and Fasting-dayes, the Ember-weeks, 14.
58.
and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as is appointed by the Rubric?

VIII. Is your Minister Licenced to Preach? If so, does he constantly (not
having a reasonable Impediment) Preach one Sermon in your Church or Chapel
every Sunday? Or if he be not Licenced, or be hindered, does he procure, one to
supply his Office by Preaching or reading one of the Homilies?

IX. 45. 46. 47.
Does your Minister instruct the Youths in your Parish in the
Church-Catechism,? And prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop?

X. Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, or to Baptize any Infant that
is in danger of death? Does he baptize any with out Godfathers or God mothers,
or admit either of the Parents to be God father or God mother to their own
Children? Can. 57. Rubr. before confirm.


XI. Has your Minister Married any Persons without publishing the Banes on
three Sundays or Holy Days? or has he Married any in Private houses, or not
between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the Morning unless he had a License
and Dispensation so to do?

XII. 67. 69. 62. 72. 73.
Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any Public or private Fasts,
Prophesyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority? or does he or any other
either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private
Houses within your Parish for People of several Families to resort unto, under
pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation, contrary to the
Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XIII. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and
conversation? or is his Carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there any in your Parish that makes profession of any other Religion
than what is established in the Church of England, Act for uniformity. 1. Q
Elizab. C. 109.
and that refuse to come to the public Assemblies, Prayers or Service of the
Church? if there be any what are their Names?

II. Is there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common Fame, or
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards
within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any
that are noted to be Railers, unclean, of filthy Talkers, or sowers of
Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their neighbors?

III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
Wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and sellers
of Beer, and Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon
those days?

IV. Does every person in your Parish, duly resort to your Church or Chapel,
Can. 13.
upon Sundays and Holi-days and as well during Divine Service, as preaching the
word of God demean themselves reverently, 18.
uncovering their heads kneeling at prayers, standing up when the Creed and
Gospel are read?

V. Rubr. Rub. of Bapt.
Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to be
baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? Or do they send them
to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they baptized after other Form than is
appointed? Or are they kept unbaptized longer than is allowed? or are there any
Infants, or more aged Persons as yet unbaptized?

VI. Is there any person in your Parish of sixteen years of age who does not
receive the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be
one? does any refuse to receive it kneeling, 112. Rub. after Commu^, 27. 28. 65.
or resort to other Parishes? or do any strangers come to your Parish Church to
receive it?

VII. Are there any in your Parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate
for any crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any
of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church,
and absolved?

VIII. Are there any in your parish, who have been unlawfully Married contrary
to the Laws of God? or any that being lawfully divorced, have married again?
Expressed in a Table set forth by Authority An. Dom. 1563. 99. 107. Rubr. Can. 85
Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of
Law, do not co-habit together.

IX. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their Delivery from
the peril of Childbirth refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God in
the Church? and when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their Offerings according to Custom?

X. Are there any that refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings, or refuse
to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church of Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging? Rubr. b.


XI. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? or any Goods Administered without a due Grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying in your parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XII. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish, for their
pews or seats in your Church? have any new pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary.

XIII. Do all and every householder of your Parish, Fathers, Can. 59.
Masters, Mothers and Mistresses, cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentices, which have not yet learned their Catechism, to come unto Church on
Sundays and Holy Days in the Afternoon; obediently to hear, and to be ordered
by the Master till they have learned the same.

TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clarks and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish Clark, aged one and
twenty years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and
sufficiently able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he
chosen by your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at
the Church: Can. 91.
Are his Wages du^y paid unto him? Or who withholdeth the same from him?

II. Does he diligently do his duty, in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
Tolling and Ringing the Bells before Divine Service? And when any person is
passing out of this life does he upon notice Toll a Bell that the Neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of
God?

Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Chyrurgions and Midwifes.

I. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, Can. 77 ^9
who is not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? Does he teach the Scholars the
Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause his Scholars upon
Sundays and Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? And see that
they behave themselves quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

II. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Chyrurgery, or any Woman take
upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen
I. Can. 89
ARe the Church Wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church Wardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. You are further to understand, that according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.

Rubr. at Commun.
YOU also are to Exhibit a Bill of Presentment to this Court, of all and every
the Offenders in any of the matters mentioned in the preceaent Articles, and
therein to take the assistance of your Minister.

FINIS.

