ARTICLES OF Visitation and Inquiry Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL,
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the Arch-Deaconry of BERKS.

At the Visitation of the Right Worshipful PETER MEWS Doctor of Laws, And
Archdeacon of BERKS.

Holden in the Year of our Lord God 1667.

OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Anno Domini,

The Tenor of the Oath to be given to the Churchwardens of every Parish.
YOu shall swear that you will truly execute the office of a Churchwarden in
your Parish; You shall give a true account at the going out of your office, of
all such Moneys as you have or shall receive for the use of your Parish, and if
any shall remain in your hands, you shall deliver it over to your Successor.

You shall likewise upon due consideration of the Articles given you in charge,
Present every such Person of your Parish, as you shall know to have wilfully
committed offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in any of them; And this you
shall do uprightly and truly, without Favor or Malice, hope of Reward, or
fear of Displeasure, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God.

The Sidemens Oath.

You shall swear that you will be assistant to Your Churchwardens in the
Execution of their office so far as by Law you are bound.

So help you God.

Articles of Visitation and Enquiry within the Arch-Deaconry of
Titul. 1. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Can. 85.
are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate? the Windows well
glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened, and conveniently
placed, and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the House of God?

2. Has the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof
been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto,
been imbezelled, sold, or made away? in whose hands or custody does the same,
or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein.

3. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good cover thereunto, Injunct. Eliz. Can.
81. Can. 82. Rub. Com. Can. 20.
standing in a convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the
Administration of Baptism? and is there in your Chancel a decent
Communion Table for the Administration of the Lords Supper, with a Carpet of
Silk, Stuff, or Fine Woolen Cloth, and another covering of white and pure
Linen to spread thereupon? And have you a fair Communion cup or Chalice, with
a cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto
belonging.

4. Have you in your said Church or Chapel, Can. 82.
a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Divine Service in? a
Pulpit, with a comely cloth or cushion for the same? Can. 83. Can. 30.
A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and two Books of Common
Prayer, established by Act of Parliament, 1662. both well and substantially
bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies, set forth by authority? a Book
of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a Printed Table of the Degrees
wherein Marriage is prohibited?

5. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his public Ministration in the Church provided, Can. 58.
and to be duly washed at the charge of the Parish?

6. Have you a Register-book of Parchment, Can. 70
wherein to Register the Names and Sirnames of all such Persons as are Married,
Christened, or Buried within your Parish, together with the Names and Sirnames
of both the parents of the children so christened, expressing the day, month,
and year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the
Transcript thereof yearly, within one month after the 25th of March, brought
into the Bishops Registry?

7. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, Can. 52.
wherein to record the Names and Licenses of all such strangers, as are
admitted at any time to preach in your Church or Chapel? as also a third Book,
wherein to write down the Churchwardens Accounts; Can. 84. Can. 89.
together with a strong Chest, with locks and keys, wherein to keep the
aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe custody?
and lastly, Have you a Biere, with a black Hearse-cloth, for the burial of the
Dead?

Titul. 2. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belong to
the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, Can. 85.
or made any door into it, out of his own ground, or habitation, without
allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down? how
long since? by whom? and to whose use and benefit?

2. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage? as
also a Note of such Penstons, Rate-tythes, and portions of Tithes, Can. 87.
or other yearly profits (either within or without your Parish, as do belong
thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister? or by whom,
as you know, or have heard?

Titul. 3. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister defamed, Injunct. Eliz. 26.
or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice, or Orders, by any
Simonaical compact?

2. Has he been legally Inducted into his Benefice? and did he within two
Months after his Induction publicly in the Church, 13. Eliz. Cap, 12.
upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39.
Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there publish
his assent thereunto?

3. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, in reading the Morning and Evening
Service. Can. 14.21.68. Rub. Matr. Visitat. Eurial. Comminat.
Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of
Women after Child birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and
pronouncing Gods commination against impenitent sinners, use the Forms and
Words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any addition, omission,
or alteration of the same? and does he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all
parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book? so far as you have
observed?

4. Does your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Devine Office in your
Church, Can. 58.
or Chapel, wear the Surplice?

5. Does he observe the Holy days, and Fasting-days, as also the Ember weeks,
and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, Can. 64. Rub. Com. Pra. Injunct.
Eliz. 19.
as in the Common Prayer Book, or by the Ecclestastical Canons is appointed;
giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church in the
time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before?

6. Has your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop? if so, Can. 48.
Can. 49. Rub. Com. Can. 45. Can. 46.
does he then constantly (unless in case of sickness, necessary absence, or
other impediment) himself preach in your Church or Chapel, one Sermon every
Sunday, or if he be not a licensed Preacher, or being so licensed, be hindered
by sickness, or otherwise as aforesaid, does he procure a Sermon to be so
preached by some other Minister, a licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies
set forth by Authority, to be there read by a Priest, or Deacon lawfully
ordained?

7. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechisme? Can. 59.61. Can. 66. Injunct. Eliz. 44.
and does he prepare and present them being so instructed, to be confirmed by
the Bishop? and does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other
Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish to the true Religion
established in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the
Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof.

8. Does he refuse or neglect to visit the Sick, Can. 67.68.69. Rub. Com. Pra.
Can. 29.
or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any
Child past infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers
default yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Does he baptize any without
Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or
God-Mother to their own Children?

9. Has he at any time (as you know, 13 Eliz. 12 Injunct. Eliz. 31.
or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical
Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into Parties and Factions, to the
disturbance of the public peace and unity either of Church or State?

10. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Can. 72.73.
Prophecyings, or Exercises not appointed by Authority? or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicles, or Meetings in
private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

11. Has he presumed to marry any persons in private houses, Can. 62. Rub. Mar.
or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without
the Banes first published on three Sundays or Holidays in the Church? or at any
other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, unless he had License
or Dispensation so to do?

Titul. 4. Concerning Parishioners.
1. IS there any person in your Parish a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? Can. 110.
any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that refuse to
come unto the public Assemblies, Prayers or Services of the Church, or that
make profession of any other Religion than what is established in the Church of
England; and if there be any such, what are their Names?

2. Is there any person in your Parish that lies under a common fame, Can. 109.
or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any
common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods
Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers or Sowers
of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

3. Do any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and
ordinary labors, Injunct. Eliz. 34.
or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold? or
do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of Beer or Ale
suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those days?

4. Does every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duly resort
unto your Church, Injunct. Eliz. 33. 1. Eliz 2. Injunct. Eliz. 46. Injunct.
Eliz. 52.
Chapel, or Chapels, upon every Sunday, and Holiday appointed for Divine
Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order and
decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
Service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the
Preaching, and not to the Common Prayer of the Church?

5. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant Children to
be baptized publicly in the Church, Rub. Bapt.
unless in case of urgent danger; in which case the Child may be baptized at
home by a lawful Minister, after the Forms and Rites appointeb in the Liturgy?
or do they send them to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other Forms
than is appointed? or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time then the
Church allows? and are there any Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish
as yet unbaptized?

6. Does every Householder in your Parish cause their children and servants to
learn their Catechism, Can. 59.
and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of
them openly in the Church upon Sunday and Holidays, as in the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? that when they are well instructed in the same,
they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

7. Is there any person in your Parish, Can. 114.21. Rub. Com.
who being sixteen years of age, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling; or from the hands
of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad?
Can. 57.
or are there any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own
Churches, and usually repair to yours for it?

8 Have you any amongst you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? Can. 65.
how long have they been so excommunicated; and do any of your Parish keep
society with them, before they be reconciled to the Church and absolved?

9. Are there any living in your Parish as man and wife, who are within the
degrees prohibited, or any that being lawfully divorced, Can. 99.
have married again? or any that being lawfully married, and not separated, or
divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together?

10. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who, after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, Rub.
refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God in the Church? and when they
come so to do, do they come decently apparalled, and make their Offerings
according to custom?

11. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? Rub. Com. Pra. Can. 92.
and are there any Wills and Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that be
yet umproved? or any Goods Administered without a due grant from the Ordinary?
Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

Titul. 5. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry, a Parish-Clerk, Can. 91.
aged 20 years at the least? is he of honest life and conversation? and
sufficent or able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing, Singing? Is he
chosen by your Minister? and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services in
the Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? or who withholdeth the same from him?

2. Does he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked, Can. 67.
and opened at due time? and does he keep the Church or Chapel clean from
dust, Cobwebs, and other annoyance? Does he toll or ring the Bell at the
accustomed hours, before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening,
that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is
passing out of this life, does he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell,
as has been accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend
the dying person to the grace and favor of God?

Quaeries to be put to the Minister.
Titul. 6. Concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Can. 89.
or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, Cap. 89.
and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining in
their Hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church, or
Chapel?

3. Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care, and see, who of your
Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service, and Sermon in your Church, 1
Eliz. 2.
or Chapel, upon Sundays and Holidays? And if they find any to have absented
themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of the
Justices of the Peace, Levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods the sum
of Twelve pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several sums so
levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law?

4. Do they note them, Can 90.
that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun, Can. 19.
or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church, or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other sacred Offices?

5. Do they suffer no Mis-behaviour, or Disorder to be done by Men, Women, Can.
18.
Servants or Children in your Church, or Chapel? Are they careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they permit no
Dogs, or Hawks, to be brought, or come into your Church to the disturbance of
the Congregation?

6. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Rub.
Can. 20.
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine according
to the number of Communicants?

7. Do they cause all Strangers, Can. 52
that Preach in your Church, or Chapel, to subscribe their Names the same day
in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the Name of the Bishop, that
Licensed them to preach in this Diocese? And do they permit no other to Preach?

8. Have they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) now Sworn to give in a true
answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, Can. 119.
taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted
with you their Minister for your faithful assistance?

TIT. VII. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions, and Midwives.
IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free School, not of the
Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors
or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it
ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to


