CHRIST'S BIRTH NOT MIS-TIMED: OR, A clear Refutation of a Resolution to a
Question about the time of CHRIST'S NATIVITY.

By R. S. Pretending to evidence by Scripture, THAT, JESUS CHRIST was not borne
in December.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, in Ivie-lane. M. DC XL. IX.

CHRIST'S BIRTH NOT MIS-TIMED, etc.
AMongst the rest of the Pamphlets, there came forth this Week, a Resolution to
a Question made by the Lord CAREW, touching the true time of the Birth of
CHRIST, framed by way of a Letter, and subscribed [ R. S.] What operation this
Resolution may have in these unsettled times, I know not: but being it pretends
so far to the Scriptures, I may have leave to fear it may have some
influence on the minds of such as are not well affected to the Resolves of the
Primitive times. Who being already too forward to deny all obedience to their
Mother Church, where she cannot evidence her commands expressly and particularly
out of the Word of God; will be greedy of an occasion or pretense to desert her
in that, which may any way seem contrary to it. To prevent any such
consequence, I have sent this Refutation after R. S. his Resolution, not
doubting but it will clearly show the invalidity of whatsoever he has
endeavored to bring for the confirmation of his novel Assertion.

TO the I. Section, or Preface, I answer nothing, because it is only an
Address, and pretends not to any part of the proof. Of the II. Section, the
Title is this, [ The true time of Christ's Nativity evidenced.] In this I
desire to join issue, and deny that any Evidence of the true time of Christ's
Nativity is to be found in this Section, which is the Body of his Resolution.
His Argument runs thus, The Conception of John Baptist was in the Month of
June. Therefore the Conception of Christ ( not the Birth) was in December, the
6 Month after June.

The consequence I acknowledge without any further dispute, and therefore shall
not at all question the proof. If John the Baptist can be proved out of
Scripture to have been conceived in June, I will not deny but our Savior was
conceived, and consequently will confess that he was not Borne in December.

But the Antecedent is in no wise to be admitted, wherefore I absolutely deny
that it can be proved out of Scripture that John Baptist was conceived in June,
and therefore to your Argument contained in the second part of the II. Section,
which endeavors to prove the Antecedent, I answer thus:

The Argument, so much of it as is taken out of the Scriptures, is no more then
this: The course of Abiah was the 8 course of the Priests, 1 Chr. 24. 10.
Zacharias was of the course of Abiah, Luke 1. 5. After the course of Abiah,
John Baptist was conceived, Luke 1. 26. Nisan (or Abib) was the first month of
the year, Exodus, 12. 2. 13. 4.


Now if all these Propositions, taken out of these several places of Scripture
be reduced into form, the Argument will run thus, The course of Abiah was the
8 course of the Priests, 1 Chr. 24. 10. Zachariah was of the course of Abiah,
Luke 1. 5. Ergo, Zachariah was of the 8 course of the Priests.


This Syllogism I acknowledge to be very good, and therefore shall take the
Conclusion for a truth: Only this I must have leave to put in by the way. If
the Course remained in the same Order, in the days of Herod, in which they
were instituted by K. David. For, being this cannot be proved out of the
Scripture, and being possible that in so long time, and so many confusions, the
order might be altered; therefore though the premises be both in the Scripture,
yet the Conclusion is not altogether of Scripture Authority.

But being Josephus has witnessed, that the Order was not altered, I admit the
Conclusion as a truth.

Which being admitted, the next Syllogism will be this: The course of
Zachariah was the 8 course of the Priests. John Baptist was conceived at the
end of the course of Zachariah, Luke 1. 26. Ergo, John Baptist was conceived at
the end of the 8 course of the Priests.


This Syllogism I likewise willingly admit. But being this has not yet made an
end of the Question, We must thus proceed: The end of the 8 course of the
Priests was in June. John Baptist was conceived at the end of the 8 course of
the Priest. Ergo, John Baptist was conceived in June.


Without this Syllogism it is evident that the Question is not proved at all,
and by this Syllogism, if it be good, it is as evident, and I do freely
acknowledge, that the Question is by the Resolver fully proved. But to this I
answer,

The Minor, or second Proposition, I acknowledge, as being the Conclusion of
the former Syllogism which I before admitted. But the former Proposition, or
Major, I absolutely deny to be formally or virtually contained in the
Scriptures, and consequently I affirm the Conclusion not to be proved by this
Argument out of Scripture.

All the Scripture which is brought by the Resolver to prove the Major, are two
places out of Exodus, from which it is truly collected, that Nisan, or Abib,
was the first Month of the year: So that his Argument must run thus, Nisan (or
Abib) was the first month of the year, Exodus 12. 2. 13. 4. Ergo, The end of the
8 course of the Priests was in June.


This is all which he brings out of the Scriptures to prove this Proposition,
and every one sees that of it self this proves it not. Therefore the Resolver
in his discourse has not proved out of the Scriptures, that the end of the 8
course was in June, and consequently, has not proved out of the Scriptures,
that John Baptist was conceived in June, which he undertook to prove.

But though he have not proved his Assertion out of the Scriptures, yet I must
confess he adds that of his own, without any authority of Scripture, or any
other Author, which if it were in the Scriptures, might prove his Assertion to
be of Scripturetruth, and of divine authority; or if it were in any other good
Author, might make it probable according to the authority of the Author.

Now that which thus he adds, as I said of his own, consists of these two
particulars: 1. That the first Course began always at the beginning of the
first Month of the year. 2. That each Course continued a Fortnight, and so the
24 Courses made up a full complete year: and consequently, that the end of the
8 Course was at the end of the 4 Mouth, which was June.


But this addition of the Resolver, is not only not to be found, in the word
of God, or in any other Author of any antiquity, (as I presume) but is in it
self considered apparently false. For, 12 Fornights do not make an Hebrew
year, nor 2 Fortnights an Hebrew Month. Suppose then that the course of
Joiarib, or the first course, should be the first day of Abib, and that day
fortnight. 1. The 15 day of Abib the a Course, and so successively to the end
of the 24 Courses, it is evident that all the Courses would be gone over in 336
days, for 14 times 24 make precisely 336. But even in the Lunar year of the
Hebrews, without any intercalation, there are contained no less then 354
days. So that of necessity there must be 18 days left at the end of the year
without any Course of Priests: and consequently the daily Sacrifice must cease,
for the constant performance of which, these Courses were instituted, which of
it self is most false: or the first Course must then begin again, which is
most contradictory to the first part of the Resolver's Addition, viz. That the
first Course always begins with the first day of the first Month.

But, the truth is, these parts of the Resolver's Addition do not only (taken
jointly together) include a manifest repugnancy, (which proves but one of them
false) but each of them severally is not only destitute of any proof in the
Holy writ, or other good authority; but will appear by it self to be false by
as good authority as can possibly in such a case be had.

Josephus a learned Jew, who was himself a Priest, and one of the course of
Jeiarib; the only man upon whose authority the continuation of the Order in
the Courses from Solomon's institution to the destruction of the second Temple,
(without which, the very first part of the Resolver's Argument signifies
nothing) this Josephus, I say, tells us plainly, that David instituted these
Courses of the Priests not for a Fortnight together, but a Week. His words are
these in the 11 chap. of the 7 Book of the Jowish Antiquities, (...). i. e.
David appointed one family in its course to minister unto the Lord for 8 days,
from Sabbath to Subbath. He calls (indeed) the space of time allotted to each
course, 8 days, reckoning (according to their manner) both the day they began,
and the day they ended their service; which is evident by the words which
immediately follow them, from Sabbath to Sabbath. As therefore it is said, Luke
2. 21. When eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the Child,
his name was called Jesus; whereas he was circumcised on the 8 day, and so
there were but 7 complete days from his Nativity to his Circumcision: So the
Courses of the Priests are said to minister 8 days, whereas they began their
service on the Sabbath; and ended at the same time of the day the next Sabbath,
which is but the space of 7 complete days. And so they performed the service
of but 7 days. Which is most evident out of a Book of theirs extant, called
(...) Sepher Maamadoth, i. e. the Book of their Services, or their Liturgy;
which is divided into seven parts, containing the Services of the 7 days. The
Courses then were not for a Fortnight, but for a Week, as Theophylact upon
Saint Luke, has well observed, saying, (...) (...), i. e. Solomon when he had
finished the Temple, appointed also the Courses, that is to say, the Weeks. And
this may be further evidenced yet even out of the word of God. For, at the same
time that the Priests were divided into 24 Courses the Levites were divided so
likewise for their attendance on the Priests, 1 Chronicles. 23. 6. of which Josepus
speaks very expressly, (...), i. e. David divided also the Tribe of Levi into
24 parts, who by lot kept their Courses for 8 days, after the manner of the
Courses of the Priests. The Levites then were divided after the same manner
with the Priests and kept the same Courses. But the Levites Courses were but
weekly, as appears, 1 Chronicles. 9. 25. And their Brethren, (viz. the Levites)
which were in their Villages were to come after 7 days from time to time with
them; therefore the Courses of the Priests were weekly. And this Week began
always on the Sabbath day, as appears by the words of Josephus, (...), from
Sabbath to Sabbath: and out of Sepher Maaboth, or their Liturgy, in which are
these words, (...) i. e. And in the Sabbath they added one Benediction to the
Course that went off.

Now being every Course began on the Sabbath day, and the first day of the
month began on any day of the week, as well as the Sabbath, and being all
these weekly Courses were completed in 168 days (for 7 times 24 make so many)
and then to begin again, that there might be no intermission of the service of
God; therefore the first Course could not be tied to the beginning of any
month, much less to the beginning of any year. The truth of all which any man
must at first of necessity confess, who has but observed how exact the Jemes
were in keeping these Courses, and how loose in the observation of their Months
and Years.

By all which it is clearly demonstrated (as far as matters of this nature
are capable of demonstration) that the several Courses of the Priests
instit^ted by David did not continue for a fortnight together; Neither did the
first Course of Joiarih always begin with the first Month Nisan or Abib,
Without which Propositions granted to be true, (as they are most certainly
false) all which the Resolver brings out of the Scripture does nor prove any
such thing as, that John* Baptist was conceived in June.

From hence I conclude, that the Resolvers Argument does not prove that our
Savious was conceived in December, because the Antecedent of the Argument is
not proved, viz. that John Baptist was conceived in June.

To the III. Section, by way of Postscript, in which he endeavors to show,
that Saint Chrysostom was the Occasion of this Error, who supposed Zachary to
be the High Priest. I Answer,

That Saint Chrysostom did think Zachary was the High Priest, is true: and
that that opinion of Saint Chrysostom is false, I confess: But that that
opinion was the Occasion of observing the 25 day of December for Christ's
Nativity, I absolutely deny. And this the Resolver does not, cannot prove.

For, that which was observed before Saint Chrysostom's time could not be
occasioned by any opinion of S. Chrysostom.

But the observation of the 25 of December for the Nativity of our Savior was
before S. Chrysostom's time.

Therefore the Observation of the 25 of December for the Nativity was not
occasioned by any opinion of S. Chrysostom, and consequently, not by that
opinion of his, that Zachariah was the High Priest.

The major is without all Question true. The minor is as certain out of
antiquity. But I shall only prove it by S. Chrysostom's own testimony: who
in a Sermon preached upon this day at Antioch, declares, that he was not the
Author nor occasion of the Celebration of it; but that he received it from the
Church of Rome, who by an ancient tradition had long observed it: his words are
these, (...), i. e. But hear and believe, that we have received this day (25
of December) from those which have exact knowledge of these things, and inhabit
that City, (Rome) where the Censuals Tables were extant in which our Saviors
Nativity was described. (...), For they which live there, having a long while
by an ancient Tradition celebrated this day, have now at last transmitted the
knowledge of it to us. Thus the Eastern Church, and particularly S. Chrysostom:
received this day from the Western Church, and conse quently S. Chrysostom: by his
error was no occasion of the Celebration of the 25 day of December. (...).

THE END.

