THE INHUMANITY OF THE Kings Prison-Keeper At OXFORD.

Or a true Relation of the most transcendent cruelties, cheatings, cozenings,
and base dishonest dealings of William Smith Provest Marshall General of the
Kings Army, against the Parliament Prisoners under his custody. As it was
delivered at the Bar in the House of Commons, by one, who with many others,
were sworn before the Lords assembled in Parliament, and were prisoners in
Oxford six Months, being further confirmed by Captain Wingate in the Commons
House, he being Member of the said House, and some time prisoner in Oxford, the
space of 9. Months.

TOGETHER. With the Copy of a Letter from a Gentleman of quality confirming the
former particulars.

Also the Copy of a Petition and Articles exhibited to the King, His Council
of War against Smith.

Likewise a Letter to the Speaker, subscribed with 70. Prisoners hands.

Whereunto is added the unsufferable cruelties, exercised upon the Cirencester
men, in their passage to Oxford, and at Oxford, in the Castle and Bride-vvell,
when they were taken.

Written by Edm. Chillenden. who was a Prisoner there 6. Months.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for John Bull, 1643.

A True RELATION OF The trancendent Cruelties, and base inhumane practices of
Captain William Smith, Pro. Marshall, General of the Kings Army, extended and
exercised on the Parliament Prisoners in the Castle at OXFORD.
Upon the fifth of December. 1642. I was traveling upon the Road about my
lawful occasions, and in my journey toward Newbury, between Henly and
Reading: I met with one, whose name was (as after I was informed) ^hithe^^, and
falling into discourse, asked him the best and readiest way toward Ne^bury,
which he certified me was through Reading. But I answered him I was loath to
go that way because of the Garrison, and for fear of giving offense, he
replied to me, that if I pleased to to go that way, he would do me so much
favor as to have me through Reading without any let or stay, I giving credit
to him, went with him into Reading, and set up my horse at the Bear, where we
supped together and there did Inn all night on the morrow early in the morning
(the aforesaid) Whithead, came to my chamber and certified me, I must go
before the Governor which was Sir Arther Ashton (a rank Papist as I am
informed,) being come thither, there was also Colonel Feelding, which knew me
to be a Londoner, and takes me by the hand and swears he was very glad he had
met with me, and so certified the Governor that I was as arrant a Round
headed. Rogue and Traitor as any was in England and one that has 700. men to
command at any time to aid the Parliament. With that ^he Governor without any
further examination, swore at m^ bitterly and calls me damned Rogue and Traitor
and with that struck me with his Cane on the head, This carriage of Ashton and
Feilding is not to be pa a^^eld in Tur y many pa ^ o^ the World.
and brook it very sorely and swore like a mad man that he would presently hang
me; and with a guard of Musketeers did send me to the Gallows, where I stood
some quarter of an hour, expecting death: but such was Gods goodness toward
me, that I was conveyed from thence to Prison, whither came the aforesaid
Whethead, and in the name of the Governor took away my Moneys: On the next
Lords day I was conveyed to Wallingford, and the Wednesday following to
Abington. I being brought before the Governor, A very moderate ^ivill
Gentleman.
Lieutenant Colonel Sherly, there being diverse Cavaliers in his company, and
one whose name was Smith, that had the watch that day, he would needs have me
to say the Lords Prayer over to him, which I refused: Yet to give him
satisfaction I told him, if he pleafed to lend me a Bible, I would read the
Chapter over where that was, but that would not content him, he swore he would
lay me neck and heels in Irons, which to prevent, I addressed to the Governor,
and said, Sir, I conceive I am your Prisoner, and this Gentleman ha^h nothing
to do with me, and if it be your pleasure to put me in Irons I am content.
This is not Smith the Marshall, but a Captain of a foot Company.
With that the Governor said, you came without Irons to me, and without you
all go away: but Smith swore I should not; they swore so long, that they fell
to blows and by this difference by Gods providence I received mercy from the
Governor. So the next day being Thursday I was conveyed to Oxford Castle. Who
afforded me a good supper and bed at the Provose Marshalls ^uarter that night.
But to leave my particular sufferings, and come to give you a relation of
others, I shall begin with a relation of the usuage of the Prisoners taken at
Malborough, (in the County of Wilts) by the Cavaliers in their passage to
Oxford.

After they had surprised the Town, and had taken 180. odd Prisoners they
drove many of them through the waters and the first night thrust them all up
into a nasty stinking stable amongst Horses; where was one horse dead, there
they continued till the next morning, and had no food allowed them, and so
drove them like Rogues and thieves, tied together by the arms in the horse way
up to the knees in mire and dirt, and allowed no food to them, nor suffered no
friend to come at them; for a man coming to see some of them, was carried away
to Oxon to Prison with them, and in four days time, as they were drove from
Malbrough to Oxford, were allowed no food but only at Lamburne, a Gentleman did
provide some for them: but they would scarce give time to receive it, and that
was all the sustenance they had in all their passage, not so much as water, for
some of them being dry, would feign have drank of the water in the high way,
but they would not suffer them, nay, they struck many of them over the heads
with their Canes for stooping to take a piece of Ice to hold in their mouths to
quench their violent thirst.

On Friday they came to Oxford; and as they passed through the streets toward
the Castle, there was much rejoicing by the Inhabitants, Scollers, and
Soldiers, calling them Round-headed Rogues and Traitors, and striking some of
them. One passage is worthy observation, that the Lord George Digby and
Commissary Wilmot took Master John Franklin, By this you may see how the Lord
Digbie, and she now Lord Wilmot loves the House of Commons,
Member of the House of Commons, and led him away from all the rest of the
Prisoners, to a Tree, and there swore deeply they would hang him like a damned
Rogue and Traitor, if he would not confess where his Money was. And this is a
short Relation of these men's sufferings before they came into the Castle.

Now you shall know our usage after we were in the Castle, under Captain
William Smith, This is not Smith the Fencer, his name is Thomas Smith*
the first night we were put up into the Tower, 180. od, the place being so
little that we were forced to lie one upon another, and were allowed one penny
bread a peace, and a Can of small Beer (water was better) and so for the best
part of 13. nay some of us 23. weeks, were allowed no more. Some of us have
many times been two days without any thing at all, so that by this cruelty,
and living on the boards, many fell sick and very weak in body almost all of us
like to perish and end our days by the bloody flux, and one of us was starved
to death; and as this man was drawing on toward his end Marshall Smith was
solicited in all the fair ways that possible could be, by the Gentlemen and
the Captains there in Prison, that he would suffer some thing to be provided
for the poor man but such was his cruelty, that he would not, and so the man
died.

He says it was a base Protestation, only framed by a company of ebels and
Traitors to take away the King-Crown and life.
Some few days after, he called us to take the Protestation, (which he stilled
the Kings, we desired to hear it read over to us, which when we had heard it,
we refused it, as being against our Consciences, telling him we had taken one
already, which was the King and Parliaments, he swore at us, and called us
damned Rogues and Traitors, striking us with his Cane, drives us all up into
the Tower, swearing deeply he would make us take it or he would make us to shit
as small as a Rat: But he was forsworn, for we showed him a fair pair of
heels.
whereupon he gives command that no body be permitted to come at us to relieve
us, either with food or linen, causes a hole to be made up where things used to
be conveyed to us, and confined us to our former allowance, and charge was
given upon pain of death that no more should be allowed us, or any thing else
permitted to come at us, which was accordingly done, for food being sent to us
out of the City by some he caused his Soldiers to take it way and eat it.
Then the Gentlemen and Captains imprisoned, made a weekly Purse for the
relief of the poor Prisoners (and made A Lieutenant of Horse.
Lieutenant W. Dingly Steward of it) which if they had not done I am very
confident, we should half of us have perished. He causes this to be
restrained, and threatens the Steward to lock him up close Prisoner, if he did
after offer to relieve us with Bread or Beer.

Some small time after this, Sir James Penimon vvanting Soldiers, they called
us down into the yard, and as we passed through the great Chamber, where at
least 12 or 14. Gentlemen lodged, and had vvashed their hands in a Basin of
water, such was our extreme drought, that we could not be restrained from
drinking it yea the very rain water that was on the Barrels heads that stood
in the yard.

There they propounded to us, that if we would take the Protestation, and
take up Arms to serve in that Army we should presently be all released. We
all refused it, with that Peniman swore at us, and Smith ran after us as fast
as his lame legs would giv him leave drives us all up again into the Tovver
striking us with his Cane, swearing deeply that he would wake take it, or he
would make us to shit as small as a Rat; and so kept us still to our former
allowance.

When they had tried by all these ways of cruelty, they had or could extend to
us in the Castle, then they sought by fair means to win us, and Sir James
Peniman, and Smith, calls us all down into the yard, and there they argue the
case to us, and allege the Scripture to us, (as the Devil did to Christ) but
when they saw that by this they could not prevail with us, they swore most
bitterly at us, and Sir James Peniman swore God dam me, none of us all did
belong to Salvation, but we were a Company of damned Rogues, Rebels, and
Traitors, and swore we should be made to take the Protestation, for we should
have no Victuals allowed us, saying they that would not work should not eat,
But after this 14. were removed out of the Dungeon to an upper Chamber so
little, that we could but lie down, when we went to sleep.
and so we were kept without any thing for a day and above; And to extend his
Cruelty, and increase our misery, Smith causes us on Monday Feb. 6. to be
removed from the Castle to Bridewell to the Dungeon, where we were above 40 of
us put down into it, about four Weeks thronged, in so little Room, that woe
were scarce able to stir one by another, There being never a house of Office.
the place also being made very noisome, because we eased our selves in the
same, so that in some place of it, we might go over the shoes in Piss and
filth.

About a Fortnight after, woe had bin there: A Petition that we had made to the
Lord General of that Army, and a Letter that was written to London, setting
forth the barbarous usage of us by Smith, came out in P^int The Letter was
Printed in my name, which is Edmund Chille^den, which Smith would have fathe^ed
on me, but he could not prove it. But this Letter and Petition netled Smith,
that he gave the Capt. and Gent. a great deal of Liberty upon it.
Whereupon the General as we conceive appointed Commissioners to examine the
truth of the things contained in the Letter and Petition, and on Mu^day Feb.
22. Six of us, namely, Edmund Chillenden, Thomas Cheny, Edward Leader, Edward
Bradney, William Whitlawe, Joseph Blises, were like Felons and Rogues brought
through the Streets in Irons to Sir Jacob Ashleys, where was Dr. Reeves the
Kings Advocate, and two other Commissioners, who instead of examining of us,
fell a Railing at un a^king us to take the Protestation; We Answered we had
taken one already, which was the King and Parliaments, which we would maintain
to the last drop of our bloods, I making this Q^estion, because it was I that
spoke for all of us; They told me that I should of all the rest be hanged,
say^ng you are a peermtory Rogue indeed.
but as for this Protestation we know not what it is, nor whose Authority if
bears, for we know that the laws of this Land provide; That no O^th should
be forced on us contrary to consent in Parliament, which Laws were out
Inheritance, and therefore we would defend and maintain them as our proper
Rights and Liberties, and no ways betray them, or words to this effect: We
further said that to swear the Earl of Essex was a Traitor, or the Army under
his conduct was raised against the Kings, or that the Kings proceedings with
his Army was good and necessary, or whether the Subjects of England were bound,
or not bound by the Votes Acts, and Orders made by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, was a high point above our Capacities to decide, and therefore
desired to be excused from taking that Oath, conceiving that we must not
swear upon doubts and questions, but in judgment, righteousness, and truth.
Smith he cries out, hark, hark, they are a Preaching; we then complained to
them of our ill usage, and told them it was the way to starve us, and that a
many of us were sick in the Dungeon, and desired they might be removed where
they might have more Air, and we said that we hoped, that it was not the
Kings will, nor the Counsel of Wars pleasure, thus to destroy us: But Dr.
Reeves told us in plain terms, that it was the Kings mind, and Counsel of
Wars pleasure to destroy us, But the Dr. has forgot his Spectacles would
multiply.
and took his Spectacles and looked on us, and said we looked as fat as
Connies, and so we were sent back again to the Dungeon, and those that were
sick, grew weaker and weaker: so that one eased nature as he lay, Namely one
Giles Carter, and Caleb Self.
and another was troubl^d with a continual Vomiting; those things were
gr^evous to us, they being done in the place where we all were; when Smith
came to Bridewell, we complained to him of it, and desired him that they might
be removed where they might have more air, and have some comfortable thing
made, and permitted to come to them, or else they would not live long; he called
us, if we would take the Protestation we should have any thing; we desired, but
if we would not, if we all died he did not care, we were our own
murderers, and did not permit any thing more to be allowed, save our former
Allowance; not any Friend, no not our Wives, to come to see us, or any to have
our Shifts washed: Nay, he put the Man that dwelt in the Bridewell in Prison
in the Castle, because he had meat a boiling over the fire, for his own
dinner, and all Smiths men came and eat up the man's meat, so that by his
cruel usage, the aforementioned Giles Carter ended his days in great extremity.

We seeing this conceived in our selves if we staid here, there was no way
but of death and perishing; did with one consent resolve our selves of this
extreme misery, so we with our knives, and the hook of a door, made a hole
through a Free * stone wall, above a yard thick, and so all that were well
went forth, which was about 40. whereof 4. were taken again, and 6. was left
sick, in the Dungeon, which 6. (when Smith knew the rest were gone) laid in
Irons when we were so weak as not able to stir, and so kept us till
Thursday, or Friday, having nothing to comfort us, but water; and then we were
removed to the Tower in the Castle again, wherein the room where we were put,
was about 60. men, and a many sick of the small pox, so that the place was
very unwholesome and nasty, and there allowed us one penny bread, and a Can of
Beer.

I come now to relate to you some other of Smiths Tyrannical and dishonest
practices.

When Marlborow men were sick, Smith gave to one Mr. Betterise a Chyrurgion of
Oxford, 5, s. to provide some hot and comfortable things for the sick^
Prisoners, Mr. Betteris laid out some of the money presently, after this
meeting him in the street demanded his money of him and threatened him, if he
would not give it him, so M^. Betterise gave him all his 5. s. again, though
he had laid out some of it before: This Mr. Betterise did use to come at first
into the Castle to dress the wounded Prisoners, and by that means knew the
disease of the sick Prisoners, did say to some N^ighbours of his, that they
were spoiled for want of water, and so indeed they were; for we had no water
sometimes in two days time; Smith he hears of this, and meeting with Mr.
Betterise put him in Prison in the Castle, for so saying, but was within a
short time by Sir Jacob Ashley released out of the prison, but by Smith
commanded to come no more to dress the wounded prisoners.

About this time there were some prisoners brought in, which were taken at
Banbury, and amongst them was one that was wounded in the head with a Pole-Axe.
Smith was by the Gentlemen and Captains in all the fair ways, entreated to
let a Surgeon to come in to dress him, he would not permit any to come, so
that this man's wounds festered and stuncke, and in a short time he ended his
days in great extremity.

There a so being in the Tower many Prisoners, and they hav^ng had no water in
20. na^, 48. hours time, knocked for water, Oc^don the Captains man came and
told them he could help them to none (though the River run by the door)
they being dry knocked again, Smith came himself, and said I will give you
water, caused 3, or 4, of his men to come armed to guard his person, and called
down one that was my Lord Says Miller, and lays him in Irons Neck and
Heels; and one Sergeant Wallis he Canes him at least 60. blows over the
head, and wounds him very sorely, that he has lost one of his joints, and
after this lays him in Irons 28. pound weight, Neck and Heels, and so keeps
him 48. hours in a nasty Dungeon, without bread or water, or any other
sustenance; and Caned Lieutenant Whitehead, and laid him in Irons; and to
color over his Tyranny; commands his men to say, they made a mutiny.

There was one Mr. Freeman a Constable near Banbury; Smith calls him to take
the Protestation, he refuses it, Smith said if he would not take it, he
should go up into the Tower, he said that was the worst he could do to him.
Is it says Smith you damned Rogue, and striked him with his Cane, sweating
bitterly at him, la^ed him in Irons neck and heels, set him on a cold Stone in
the yard, takes away his coat from him, sets a sentinel over him, so keeps him
30 4 days in the winter time, without either bread or water, or air, other
food: This Freeman was also removed to the Dungeon in Bridewell, where he
escaped to his own house, and there was taken again and brought into the
Castle; Smith lays him in Irons and so he ended his days also in great misery.

The same day he called down one of Marlborow soldiers, and offers him the
Protestation, the youth refused it; Smith swears at him, and beats him with
his Cane, lays him neck and heels in Irons, puts him in a Dungeon, set a
Sentinel over him, so keeps him till he had forced him to take the
protestation, and allowed no food to be given him.

There was one Mr. VVierby a minister, and one Mr. Price, and one Mr. Selven,
that did refuse the protestation; he strikes them, and break their heads,
makes the blood run down their ears, and sends them to the Dungeon in
Bridewell.

There was one Mr. Edward Bradney, that had a man exchanged for him, yet had
not his liberty; Smith told him if he could get 10. l. to pay his Fees he
should have his liberty. Mr. Bradney got 5. l. told Smith I have 4. l. 10, s.
Smith said he would not take that, so Mr. Bradney was putting up his money
again, Smith snatches his money from him, and said I will keep this in part
or payment; so took away four pound, and kept the man in prison six months
after; first in the Tower, then in the Dungeon in Bridewell, where he escaped,
but was taken again, Smith laid him in Irons hands and feet, and so keeps him
about 8 weeks: by reason of this his cruel usage, he fell very weak and sick,
and in his sickness he would not suffer any body to come to help him in his
great extremity, so that for three weeks he lay in his own Dung and piss,
and so by a long and languishing disease, being pined to nothing in, a great
deal of woe ended his days.

There was one Richard Cawdle, and one Robert Neale, that escaped out of
Bridewell, and were taken again, he burnt them with match between the fingers
to the bone, and laid them in Irons hands and feet, suffers no Surgeon to come
to them, so keeps them 8. weeks, and they both in this extremity ended their
days in much misery.

There was one Andrew of London, who came to Oxford, and being brought into
Prison, Smith himself took 23. s. out of his pocket, and kept him there a
short space, and then turning him going, but never gave him his money.

There was one Mr. I. A, the Lord of Douns man, brought in for a Spy, he took
the Protestation, and was by Smith released, paying 50. s. fees; and he
coming into the Castle to see a Friend, Smith would not let him go till he
had paid him 50. s. more.

There was one Mr. Wild a minister, a Malignant, committed to prison, who lay
there 7 days, and paid Smith 3. l. 10. s. for his Fees.

There was two Londoners, Mr. C. Mr. M. that took the protestation, that paid
Smith 20. l. for their fees.

There was one William Burden a Constable, that took the protestation, and
was by Smith released paying 4. l. but he after heard he was a rich man, got
him in prison again, and there keeps him to make him pay 60. l. more, and did
not let him go, till he had paid him 20. l. more.

There was one Mr. Ad. of London, prisoner, Smith took 5. l. 10. ^illings, out
of his pocket, and never gave it him more.

There was one Mr. VV. B. a Gentleman, whom the Bishop of Armath You may by
this that if there be any villainy to be done, a Bishop is at hand to act it,
persuaded to take the protestation, he was released paying 20. l. fees; Smith
gets him again and keeps him prisoner, till he had made him pay or given him
bond for 30. l. more.

He also got a Bill of Exchange for 30. l. from Captain Wingate, and Captain
Austen, but he has not yet paid them, though he has bin often asked for it,
and Captain Auston asking him for it, Smith gave him very opprobious words,
calling him shitten Prentice boy, and threatened to lay him in Irons, neck and
heels.

There was one Dr. Claiton, Doctor of Divinity of Waltomstow in Essex (as he
himself said) who was taken at Branceford, and carried to Oxford Prison, who
lying there in great misery, did endeavor to make an escape and getting over a
wall, fell down and broke his neck.

Captain ^ohn Lilburne, he kept him in Irons 19. or 18. days and since he
being very sick, even to death yet would not permit any woman to come to look
to him in his sickness.

Captain ^ohn Frank in and Master John Brown Gentleman, he ironed together,
and so kept them a good while, and since Captain John Frankling is dead.

Master William Dingly, a Lieutenant of Horse, he laid him in Irons, and so
kept him 8. or 9 weeks. He kept one Master Andrew Ellu (one of my Lord
Generals Lifeguard, a Gentleman of the Innes of Court) in the Tower amongst
the Common Prisoners, and made him to lie on the Boards.

Master John Frankling, Member of the House of Commons, he has most basely
abused, and called him Rogue and damned Traitor, yea stinking fellow and took
him by the shoulders, and thrust him into a little Chamber, saying to him you
are a damned Traitor, and I will use you like a Traitor; locks him up close
Prisoner, and gives the key to one Bradshaw that was a Cavalier in Prison, and
Smith on purpose set on this Bradshaw, and one Captain Cew, one of the
Cavaliers an Irish Papist, to drink healths and carrouses in the room with
Mr. Frankling, to abuse and torment him, This B^adshaw being si^ did confess.
and has ever since kept him close Prisoner. And Captain Walton, Captain
John L lburne, Captain Vivers, Captain ^atesby* Captain Scroope Captain,
Auston, Captain L^dcot he has kept them all close Prisoners, for the most
part of their time, and seldom would permit their friends to come to visit
them, no nor their wives to see them.

Yea he has taken away the beds from the Captains and made them to lie on the
cords, and against their wills placed some of the Cavaliers in them.

As for Captain Wingate, he has always kept him close Prisoner alone,
without any company, not suffering him to confer neither with men nor Books,
not permit him to have a Bible, only when Blage was hanged. Master Harfeild
Minister of Banbury, and he was in one Chamber, and Smith had laid this
Reverend Minister in Irons hands and feet, and after that Blage was dead
brought his body and threw it into the Room where Captain Wingate and this
was, and so locked them up all three close Prisoners, and many times Smith has
kept those that have died so long till they have stunk like to poison them, nor
would not carry them away, till the Prisoners were constrained to pay for their
burial. He would not suffer Captain Wi^gate to walk in the Garden for his
health sake, notwi^hstanding the Kings mind was that he should, as has been in
my hearing declared by the Lord of Craford.

As for Captain Clifton Cot sby and Captain Vivers, they being in ^anbury,
his Majesty was pleased by his Herald of Arms to declare, that if they would
come and yield themselves to Him they should have a free Pardon, the which they
did, and had also the Lord Generals word, on his honor to confirm the same:
yet after this they were brought to Oxford Prison, and by Smith kept there, and
were before the Lord chief Justice Heath, on Oyer and Termine^, arraigned for
their lives. Whereupon they both of them made a Petition declaring his
Majesty's Act passed to them which was acknowledged by the Generall^ as
appears plainly by the Answer of the Petition, The Petition I have seen with
the Answe but as yet ^ann ^ procure he Copy of it He would not (...) Cap aine C
teso^y, ^ c^ se h w^ (...) not pay him ^oo pounds for his fee, and so also he
did by Mr. Ha field, Minister of ^^^bury, and so by Captai^e Vive ^. I do not
believe any of them committed any fa^lt, de^erving any Pa don, but this I say
according to their Proceedings.
and thereupon order was given, they should be released, yet notwithstanding
Smith kept them in Prison close, and by his ill usuage, Captain C^tesby is
since dead, and Captain Vivers has bin almost at Deaths door, and is yet
Prisoner: therefore it behooves the King and the General to vindicate their
Honor by executing Justice on Smith, for thus grosely abusing the King and the
General

He has kept many in Prison (after they have been pardoned by the King and
have taken the Protestation) for excessive Fees.

But to let all the world see he is a knave in all respects, and to all persons
friends and foes, he hired a Priest to preach in the Prison, and this Priest
was as base as Smith himself, and would rail against the Parliament and the
City of London, as loud as Smith, yet when this Priest came to demand his
quarterage of Smith, P^ th^s it (...) that the P^rl^^ment ^s (...) in the least
^^staken, in say^i^^ the King is (...) and invi^^^d i^ by King ^^, ^naves and
^^eeves.
he to save his Money, and deprive the Priest, of his due, calls him all to
naught, and says to him, you rail against the Parliament, you shall have
quartering, and so claps Irons on the poor Priest, that he was glad to loose
his Money to be rid of his Irons, and so he serves all his men, when they ask
him for Money, now let all the world judge whether it be for a Kings honor to
have such Officers.

And further to set out his base dissimulation when the Commissioners from the
Parliament are in Oxford, then to make the matter fair as if he were a
stranger to a Tyrant, he will let the Gentlemen and Captains have liberty to
walk in the Garden, and suffers their friends and wives to come to them, but
as soon as ever they are gone forth of the City, he locks them up close
Prisoners, and debars all friends, yea their own wives, and though they be
sick, will not suffer them to come to help them in their extremity, nor no
Physicians, but whom he will appoint, which for ought any knows, may poison
them, for in a short time there has died of these Gentlemen, Captain Liacot,
Captain Fleminge, Captain John Frankling, Captain Gasterill, Captain
Stevens, Junior, Captain Stevens Senior, Captain Plai^r, Captain Austen,
Captain Caseby, Lieutenant Flower Master VVitman Merchant of London, Mr.
Herfield Minister of Banbury, old Thomas Web, and three more Clothiers of
Glocestershire. and 4. more common men, which are before mentioned.

There was a Clothier of Glocestershire, which was released, Smith got him
again, and kept him in Prison to make him pay a great Sum of Money, and
there the man ended his days.

A True RELATION OF The taking of Cirencester, and the cruel dealing of the
merciles Cavaliers toward the Prisoners they there took in their passage, as
they went to Oxon and at Oxon.
UPon Thursday the second of February 1642. Prince Rupert with a great company
of his Cavaliers, came before Cirencestor, and there after an hot Skirmish,
they being valiantly resisted by about 400. of my Lord Stamfords Blew Coats,
and Captain Wallingfords Dragooners there being in the Town not above 500.
Soldiers, with the Trained Bands and all, yet such was the cruelty of the
Cavaliers, seeing my Lord Stamfords Blew-Coats thus valian^ly resisting them,
and in their resisting slew many of them so that thereby they were much
enraged, insomuch that they set on fire a Barn and some houses, and Hay Ricks,
which did much anoy our men, who had overtoyled themselves with resisting them,
not being relieved by the Trained Bands which were in the Town, and by this
means were forced to retreat into the Town the Cavaliers pursuing them, and so
surprised the Town, and after they had given them Quarter, because they had
slain none, before they murdered many of the Inhabitants, about twenty
persons or more; Let all Malignants take notice, that notwithstanding they love
them and their Cause, yet where they get the ^ictory, they will make no
diffe^ence between a Mal gnant and an honest Roundhead.
and most of them were Malignants against the Parliament.

After they had thus taken us, we were led into a field about half a mile from
the Town where the chief Commanders were, that they might take a view of us,
who threatened to do execution upon us all, and there the Common Soldiers
stripped us, and wounded many of us, and then drove us back to the Church in
Cirencester, where we remained almost two whole days, and two nights in all,
which time they allowed us no sustenance wherewithal to live, till just as
they drove us toward Oxford, they gave each of us a small piece of bread and
cheese, and then bound us all with match, and so drove us along without
stockings on our legs, or shoes on our feet, or hats on our heads, many of us
having no Dublets, and some Gentlemen of good quality without Breeches and so
we came to Burford hill, where the Cavaliers gave each of us a little piece of
Bread, which was all the relief they gave us in our way between Cirencester
and Oxon, and for this we waited a long time upon the hill, the wind blowing
very cold, and we standing barefoot and bareleg'd in the snow. Then we came to
Witneigh, where we lay in the Church, and from thence were drove toward Oxon,
and about a mile from the City His Majesty with the Prince, and the Duke of
York, came thither to see us drove along more like dogs and Horses then men,
up to the knees in mire and dirt along, the horse way, and abundance of the
Scollers much rejoicing at our misery, calling and abusing us by the names of
damned Rogues, and Traitors. And when we came to Oxon, we were put all together
in the Church, and there we received, for the most part of us, a piece of bread
that night, the next morning they separated the Volunteers, from the Trained
Bands, and cruelly used us to force us all to take the Protestation, and take
up Arms for them against the Parliament, for they allowed us but one small
piece of bread, and a can of B ere a day, and would not allow us to have a
draught of water to drink, we offering to pay Money for it, yet we could not
obtain it: by which cruel usuage they forced the most of them to take the
Protestation, that of 1100. and 66. Prisoners, there was but 16. that refused
it, that they had scraped about the Country for, for they brought old Alms
men, about three or four score year old, and lame Cripples from their mothers
womb blind men, and all to make up the number of a great many Prisoners, they
not only forcing them to take the Protestation, but afterward fined them
beyond their estates, and drove them to other desperate courses, so that one
cut his throat, he not dying presently was asked the reason why he did so; he
answered, he was so hungry that the Divill tempted him to cut his throat to be
out of his misery; and diverse others of them fell weak and sick, and were sent
to Bridewell, where they died two or three in a day, and one man drawing on
toward his end, I and Edward Leader, and another, had opportunity to speak
unto him, and we asked him what he thought of his last end? he said unto us,
and fetch d a great sigh, he could have both said and thinked more if he had
refused the Protestation and kept close to Christ, and so d^parted. Whilst
they contiue in the Churches we that were in the Dungeon hearing that they
wanted bread, gathered 7. shillings amongst us and gave it the woman of
Bridewell to lay out in bread for them, which she accordingly did and went to
the Church to give it them: but such was Smiths cruelty, as that he would not
permit it to be given them, so i^ was returned to us again and those of them
that refused to take the Protestation, he beat and abused, tying some of them
neck and heels, and others he sent to the Dungeon, others he brough into the
Castle, where we were made to stand in the cold yard a^l the first day in the
snow; then at night we were put in^o the Ha l wh re we continued 3. or 4.
days, without receiving any allowa^ce from them whereupon we asked Captain
Smith for some allowance, he then giving us bitter words, and swore at us hid
his man give us so much bread as he would give a dog a day, and for water let
them lap in the yard and be hanged or pox't for a company of damned Rogues Dogs
or to this effect.

Then after two or three days* he allowed us half a p^nny loaf a day, but we
had no water to drink in two days together. Then we were put up into the
Tower and there we were allowed a penny a day in bread and a can of beer,
which was the best allowance that ever we received from them lying for the
space of 15. weeks on the boards; and by reason of this hard usuage many of us
fell sick, which dr^ve us to call from the Tower for more relief: whereupon he
strikes two of us with his Cane over the head and lays us neck and heels in
Irons, and kept their allowance from them: and since the Pa^liament has sent
down 1^0 for the relief of the poor Prisoners, he has ever since kept away
the Kings allowance from us.

The Copy of a Letter written from the Castle at Oxon, by a Gentleman in Prison
there, confirming the former particulars.
Noble Sir,
I Cannot but take special notice of your respects manifested unto my self,
and all the rest of the Gentlemen my fellow Prisoners, in so kindly writing
unto us, and sending to see how it faires with us, which, true it is there came
once a Trumpeter of Captain Lidcots, about the exchange of his Master for
another, and for his pains he was clapped up Prisoner with his Master, and kept
there by Captain Smith, till such time as he could conform unto Captain
Smiths will and pleasure, and take a new Protestation, and serve in the Army,
which is called the King and his Captain has here since with five more, in
14. days, ended his days in a great deal of misery, and woe. In the last
Letter which I have seen, though the Bearer was not permitted to come in to us,
you let us understand of that courteous and noble usuage the Gentlemen that are
Prisoners with you find at your hands, and you tell us, that you are sorry to
hear of our hard usuage, which you hope is not so bad as the report goes: Truly
let me say thus much in brief, from my very soul I do believe, that the
Barbariousnes inflicted upon the poor Gally slaves in Turkey, cannot parallel
those inhumane cruelties, which abundance of poor men have undergon from the
hands of Sm th himself: the full particular rising of which I am confident
will fill diverse hundred sheets of Pap^r to make a second Book of Martyrs with
more sadder Stories then are to be found in Queen Mary's cruelties: The
^ris^n^^s report
A little touch of some part of which you may read in the Relation of one
Master Wierlay that broke Prison here, and in the Letters that diverse others
put out in Print In a Letter Entitled a true Relation of (...) u^^ag^ of the
Prisoners at Oxon.
and a little more of which you will hear in the Relation of one Mr.
Chillenden, who with 18. more broke Prison here four nights ago for I believe
that he will make a Declaration to the world. We have from time to time
complained to our friends at London, which have hitherto hoped that Letters
from the Gentlemen to the Court, of the good usuage of the Prisoners with them,
would have prevailed with His Majesty and the General here, to purchase the
like for us: but alas it is in vain. We have Petitioned His Majesty and the
General, and Articled against Smith, for trancendent cruelties but we never
could have hearing by reason of the potency of his friends and those damnable
Oaths that he has swore against us, to which there is no more credit to be
given, then to the Divill and those wicked lies that he has told, and those
false reports that he has raised on us, and filled the Court full of strange
and unheard of matters, that never entered into our hearts to think of much
less to plot; and those be his usual practices and evasions when we complain
of him, so that our struggling and complaining has done us rather more hurt
then good, because our friends in Parliament has not taken the right course to
deal with their Prisoners, as we have been dealt with; which if they had, they
themselves, I am confident, would long ere this, by their importunate desires
and informations to His Majesty, have eased us of Smith, and purchased more
liberty for us, so that this is our last refuge that we have to betake us to,
to press our friends immediately to get all their Prisoners of quality clapped
up close Prisoners as we are, and used in some reasonable proportion to what we
are here, and if this be not speedily done I do verily believe, they will
scarce see the face of one man in ten of us, for so near as I can judge. Smith
more then Pagan-like cruelty has already murdered above 40. men yea, above
60. men in this house, the blood of all which he is guilty of, for his
starving, beating, fettering, clapping head and heels together, close
imprisoning, and other bad usuage has already brought the Plague amongst us,
and two poor m^n in the Tower lie sick of the Plague sores, as the Chyrurgion,
^vers: yet in this great extremity, will not let the heavy hearted wife come
relieve and nourish her sick and distressed husband: yea, he has clapped a
Chyrurgeon in Prison for coming to dress the stinking putrified sores of the
wounded and diseased; yea, and the poor people that dressed our diet, and
washed our linen are not permitted to come unto us, yea and though Captain
Scroope a Gentleman of quality be vety sick, yet will he not suffer his
Apothecary to come to administer any thing to him.

But the saddest Story of all the rest in this house, might be ma^e of one Mr.
Edward Bradneys sufferings, who was an honest Warwickshire Man, who has laid
a long time in languishing death; first in this Castle, then at Bridewell, and
almost ever since they broke Prison there, in fetters of Iron, who died
yesterday, whom all the Gentlemen in the House, neither for love nor money,
could not entreat Smith nor his Lieutenant (who is grown as bad as himself)
to let us have for out money, any poor Woman to look unto him, so that he was
forced for 3. We^kes together to lie in his own Dung and piss, and never was
made clean all that time but once, as those that were nearest unto him have
for certainty informed me, so that they that lay in the Room with him, and
next unto him, have been almost poisoned with stincke by him; ^^a though the
poor Prisoners many of them be alm^st spent in watching with their f^llow
dying Prisoners, yet the inhumane Lievte a^^ the other night, threw stones in
at the wi^dowes, in a Room where fou e lay sick, because the poor watching
Men had b^t a faggot burning to refresh them, and a Candle bu^ning to see to
give them drink, and such things as they had for them.

I rest your Servant.
Oxon Castle, May 26. 1643.
THE TRUE COPY OF A Petition and Articles, which the Captains and Gentlemen
in Prison, preferred to his Majesty's Privy Counsel Commissioners, and
Council of War, against SMITH. To the right Honorable the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, the Commissioners, and the Counsel
of War ass^mb ed in OXON. The most Humble Petition of some Prisoners in the
Castle, at OXON, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed.
Shows,
THat we presume not from any forgetfullnes of our sad condition, being
Priso^ers under his Ma esties high displeasure, and the in^eperable consequents
therewith, which in all humility, and sense of Sorrow we both apprehend and
submit unto, or out of any unquietness of disposition to increase trouble to
your Lordships, to interrupt your great affairs, which we most humbly crave
pardon for; But the long and still daily ^ll entreaty (we all receive under
our Keeper the Provost Marshall General Captain Smith) is so exorbitant and
intolerable, as upon the Reputation of Gentlemen; we profess that a fair
passage out of this World will be far more welcome unto us then such a life.
A particular of some of his Actions we all in humbleness as your Lordships
shall vouchsafe to signify your pleasures) desire to present unto your
Lordships, beseeching your Lordships to take them and us into your grave
consideration; And to show your Petitioners such favor and relief therein, as
your Lordships shall think meet.

And we shall daily pray, etc.

Some Particulars of Captain SMITH, his Carriage toward his Prisoners.
Smith.





William Essex old doting Fool and Ass, and swore that he would lay him head
and heels together, that he has suddenly in great rage, come unto the
Captains and Officers in the presence of diverse strangers, and his own
Servants; no offense that we know being given, or by him expressed, and swore
that he would lay the proudest o^ us neck and heels, and that he spoke it to
them all in general, or to any of them in particular; and challenged them now
or at any time hereafter, if they were at Liberty, to justify it upon them,
that he has called some of the Captains Boys, and other Gentlemen,
Iackanapes, Rascals and Fools; and that he would whip their arses, and lay
them in Irons in the Tower.





per diem, yet they received hereof but 5 farthings a day, whereby many of them
had been starved, had it not bin for the relief of some other Prisoners, who
made Collection for them: and that Captain Smith his Servant Rich. has gained
2. s. out of every five thus collected, for the relief of the poor Prisoners,
and the said Rich. by the allowance of his Master, sells beer at an
excessive rate; to wit that in a Kilderkin of 5. shillings, he has gained 6,
or 7. shillings.

Smith as he said came with an express command from the King to some of his
prisoners, and told that his his Majesty himself commanded him that the
Gentlemen should have only bread and water until they had paid Mr. Fishers
bill of 150. pounds, or there about, a bill that has caused much difference
between Mr. Fisher, and Captain Smith, consisting of Captain Smith his
Servants of 7 pounds spent by him in wine; a bill of the diet of the servants
and prisoners, when sometimes they were in number 60, 70, or 80. one day more,
another less, which made it a confused bill and reckoning; and did not at all
as we humbly conceived conc^rne any of us; we having agreed, and Captain
Smith promised that we should have a 12 penny Ordinary; which we never
refused, but was always ready to pay those that had money, and the rest to
give the best assurance they could for it, and because this 150. pound was nor
presently paid by some few of them, they were locked up close Prisoners, and
Sentinels set in their Chamber doors, to see that they received nothing but
bread and water, which Captain Smith swore was the Kings express command, but
he said he would allow them bread and beer.

This Petition was exhibited about Allhollantide, 1642. but by Reason of the
potency of his friends, we could never have any hearing, though since that time
we have preferred many other Petitions.

HEre you have seen a glimse of Smiths Tyranny, but to repeat all his cruelt
es with his cozening, and cheatings, and the c rcumst^nces about him, would
make vollume of many sheets of paper; but by this all the world may see how the
King is wounded in his honor by such bast Egyptians, that care for nothing but
their own base and by ends; therefore those great friends of Smith that have
bore him up, and stayed the Prisoners off from being heard in their just and
lawful requests, whereby they might have been righted, and Sm^th have received
Justice according to ^^ d^merits, may be ashamed to poss sse the King, and say
they are his friends, when indeed they are his u ^er and only enemies, that
do all they ca^ to stain him in his Justice a d Hon ur^: therefore I^ pe that
now they w ll see their error, and the King, and Lord General of that army
will vindic^te their honors by doing justice one Smith; which if ^hey do no^,
it will lie as a blot on them to all Po terity, and if his Maje^t^^ please to
grant to me and other W^nesses against Smith, his ^f. conduct and protection,
I will prove to im, as I have already here, a l ^hese pa ticulars upon oath,
Viva voce, and many more.

For sinc^ Cap^aine Wingates, that honorable and faithful Gentleman's escape,
about it Smith was in trouble, but was no sooner restored again to his place,
but he again begins to play the Tyrant, he and his Lieutenant falls upon some
of the Gen lemen and wounds them, likely to kill one Lieutenant Fuller, and
after that lays him neck and heels in irons; and another Captain he wounds
him sorely and puts him up into the Tower, and locks all the rest close
prisoners, and swears that he would lay Captain Lilburne in irons, because
he did look out of his Chamber window, he having been sick, to take the air:
because he saw him play thus the Tyrant, and thus be his usu^ll p^actices,
that men were better be cut of their lives, then come to be under his custody;
therefore I hope all the m n of our Army will fight it out to the last, and not
suffer themselves to be taken, but die rather like me^ and brave Soldiers,
then to be by him starved and stuncke to death.

I^ will now be looked f r, that I should relat^ the manner of Captain
Wingats and my own E cape. Thus much i^ b^i^fe that God in his due time was
good to him and me, and to may more, all the while he and I was under this
misery, to support us by his strength, and also by his wisdom and power at
last, perfectly to deliver us: But to relate the full particular remarkable
providence of God to Captain Windgate, and to my self, and the rest that did
escape, would be t^o tedious; but this we say, and we speak the truth, God
also bearing us witness that we do not lie, that by many hard and difficult
ways we escaped, God going along with us apparently, which Captain Wingate
desires and my self also; and all the rest that did escape, that the sole and
only Honor, Glory, and Praise, may be given to GOD.

And so desires your Friends and poor brethren in the defense of the House, to
the last drop of their bloods, EDMUND CHILLENDEN. Thomas Cheny. Edward Leader.
William Gough. William Whitlow. Thomas Chamberlain. William Briant. All sworn
before the Lords Assembled in Parliament.
Joseph Bliset. Daniel Ashton. Christopher Weeks. John Allen. Witnesses not
sworn.



TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM LENTALL SPEAKER of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Noble Sir,
THE grievous burden of miserable thraldom, which we in Captivity now groan
under, presents it self to your self to your serious consideration relying on
your Favor and compassion for speedy redress: we had not thouht that ever
we who have adventured our lives and Fortunes, to maintain and preserve the
true Protestant Religion. His Majesty's Person, and just Prerogative, the
Lawful Liberty of the Subject, and the just Privileges of Parliament, should
be so soon obliterated out of your memory, and left to the more then Pagan
usage of Tyrannical and merciless men; we are not only deprived of the
society of our Friends, of pen, Ink, and Paper, but what we have by stealth,
whereby we might acquaint some of our charitable Friends of our languishing
condition: but we have no allowance from his Majesty, ever since we came in,
and but small allowance from the Members of the House of Parliament here with
us, because they cannot get Money in the Town, nor if they could get it, will
Smith the Marshall General suffer it to be broug^t into them: so that we are
bereaved of almost all the means of livelihod, for when we have been ready to
faint for want of water, to satisfy our Languishing thirst, having not a penny
to buy us beer, the said Smith has taken the keys from his man, who was
about to fetch us the water, laid him in Irons, vexing him very much, for that
he assayed to do us that courtesy, afterward took off his clothes, and
turned him out of doors. And when some have asked him, wheher his Majesty
allowed us any thing as Prisoners, he has after a most ignominious manner
revised us, giving us no better Terms than Rebels, Traitors, and
Parliamentary Rogues, saying eat stones ye Roundhead rogues and be hanged,
in like manner, threatening all of us that will not take their soul condemning
Protestation, to take up Arms and join with them against the most Honorable
Court of Parliament, and my loving General his Excellency; and likewise go to
erect their Bulwarks, which if any refuse to do, he is immediately cast into
the Dungeon, laid neck and heels together, with Bolts of five and thirty
pound, permitting none to administer him any comfort (which cruelty with
abundance of menacing words, having no hope of any intermission, of this
insupportable burden of misery, has struck such terror in the hearts of many
of the Prisoners, that they have taken their Protestation and engaged
themselves to serve as before, which has cost many poor prisoners their lives,
whose blood will one day be inquired after, at the hands of those who were the
efficient Causers thereof; yea even the Parliament men themselves here with us,
have been so restrained of their Liberties, that they have been locked up and,
confined to stay in their chambers for three or four days together, and not
suffered to have any communication with the other Captains their fellow
Prisoners, neither have had Meat, Drink or water, but what has been conveyed
to them by stealth, and have been enforced to ease Nature and throw it out of
their Windows; and all this because they have endeavored for relieve by
means whereof Master Francklyn a Parliament man lies now a dying. And that
which more augments our grievances is, that we are not only confined to lie on
the bare boards, on the Tables, under the Tables, on the chymneyes hearth, nay
on the very stayres, and sometimes on the top one of another, whereby is bred
such a noisome stink, that it infecteth very many with the pestilent Feavour,
and other very dangerous diseases, there being, at this instant of time about
twenty persons infected amongst us, and in our Judgment past recovery: the
disease being so violent that i^ q^ite bereaveth them of their senses: In this
deplorable condition we beseech you think on some means to revive our dying
nay almost dead Spirits, that we may once again enjoy our Freedom which we
have been so long time bereav^d of, or take some course with the best of them
which you have Prisoners with you to keep them short, and bar them of their
Liberty as we are, to the end that they may with more earnestness solicit
their Friends, and negotiate to procure their inlargements by exchanging of us;
for we are credibly informed, and do believe it to be true, that they have so
much Liberty and Favor at London, and elsewhere, that they need not care much
for their imprisonment. In a word if we are not speedily exchanged, or some
course taken for our better usage which now is insufferable: many amongst us we
fear will change themselves from being our Friends, and become our Enemies,
and be as active in Tyrannizing over us as any that have been forced to
apostatize from us; we beseech God so to direct the powers of your mind, that
you may with all sedulity importune and direct in our behalf to the most
Honorable Court of Parliament, and then we doubt not, but God will bless your
and our Endeavors, to whose protection we commend you, and remain

Your humble Servants, though distressed Captives.
From our extraordinary cruel bondage in Oxford Castle, this 19. of July,
1643.
The NAMES of the Prisoners.
HVmphrey Morgon. William Andrewet. Thomas Fipps. Timothy Code. Foulke Greffes.
Robert Grage. Io. Geuton. John Gleed. St. Richards. John Burkhill. James
Clerring. Richard Bradshaw. Edward Parricke. Thomas Wells. Io. Williams.
Humphrey Lebbes. Thomas Dungeon. Thomas Gibbs. William King. John Gell. Maurice
Mocor. William Wood, Richard Symons. Joseph Ratclyffe. John Walter. Joseph
Amye. Joseph Rushaley. John Adler. John Gelcot. Christopher Fowler. Richard
Mixon. Nathaniel Smith. Richard Frith. John Overton. Richard Weauright, William
Baenes. Thomas Hartwell. Edward Keep. William Elkoanley. William Ashley.
Robert Child. Io. Read. Clement Prat. John Shaw. George Sharp. Cha. Smith.
Richard Smith. William Croley. Edward Huggens. Richard Whitehead Lievte.
Roger Cotrill Lieutenant. Io. Reeve Serg. to the Earl of Stamford. Henry
Fitzherbert. Edward Fitzherbert. James Cragford. Andrea Pest Quartermaster.
M^aurce James. Arthur Rose. Scapcot Perdes. George Rose. Robert Holly. John
VVilye. Nathaniel Cambridge. William Hawks. John Butchius: John Grage. Ienkyn
Price. William Hughes. With many others that are so sick that they are
notable to subscribe. Mr. Francklyn is since the penning of this dead, by
Smiths Cruelty.
FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
Some things more which Jhere add, as his fishing one Mr. Fsheirs-house,
claping him prisoner in the ^ower a m st starving him, afterward ceasing on
his goods, turning (...), his Wife and Family out of doors, and also his
seizing o t ^^ctor Gardens house, and turning Mistress Garden into ^he street,
after he had beat and pinched her, and most basely abused her: neither have I
set forth his pedigree, and what has been his manner of life, which has
always been base enough, as appears by the Testimony of one Mrs. House of
Chichester, where this Smith with his Family did lie about a year, who to get
into Favor dissembled himself a puritan, and must needs have a Minister s^nt
for to satisfy his troubled Conscience, and when his dissemblednesse could no
longer be hid, he abused them and railed on them, and went away not paying them
a farthing, this has been his continual course to live by cheating and
cozning. Therefore I desire the State would be pleased to take into their
consideration, the m sery that poor honest men are like to suffer under hand,
and to keep all the common prisoners they take to exchange them for our common
men, which they never let free, but always keep, yea, and do much abuse them.
These things J have written to let all the World see and know the truth, which
if they will not yet believe I wist, they had seen and felt it as much as I.
And whereas some men say their prisoners here suffer as much I deny it, because
I have been in the Prisons both here in London, and at Windsor, and find it is
altogether false, whatsoever Malignants report.


