A DECLARATION Of Her gracious MAJESTY THE QVEEN of SWEDELAND; CONCERNING The
King of Scots, the resigning up the Crown and Scepter; the Laws and Government
of all Her loyal and liege People, to be inviolably kept and preserved; the
Contract of Marriage; and a Remonstrance of Her Privy Council, concerning the
Day of Coronation.

Written by Her Majesty's own Hand, and published by special Authority. Febr. 16

London, Printed for George (...), 165^. 1651.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Queen of Sweden, concerning the King of SCOTS; And Her
Majesty's Resolution touching the Contract of Marriage, and resigning up the
Crown.
WHereas Her Royal Majesty the Queen of Sweden has had sundry Disputes and
Conferences with the Lords of Her Privy Council, and the Estates of that
Kingdom, touching the Government of all Her Majesty's Loyal and Liege People;
and having been much importuned by the Lord Vernoon, and others of the said
Council, to resign up the Crown and Government to Prince Palatine Charles, Her
Majesty thought it meet and requisite, to declare unto all Her loving Subjects,
Her gracious Resolutions and Intentions; a Copy of the said Declaration
follows:

A DECLARATION.
E. R.

WHereas many of Our Privy Council have with preposterous rigor, and
unreasonable severity, endeavored to kindle and blow up those horrid flames,
the sparks of Discontent, which want not the least of pre-disposed fuel for
an absolute Rebellion; and like some Cyclopick Monsters, whom nothing will
serve to eat and drink, but the flesh and blood of Our own Subjects; in whose
common welfare Our interest lies, as much as some men's does in their
perturbations: who think they cannot do well but in evil times; As for Our
resigning up the Crown and Government to the Prince Palatine, We are clearly of
another Judgment; And truly it is the unfeigned Desire of Our Heart, to wear
the Crown and Scepter no longer, then that His Glory may be Our End; and His
Word Our Rule: And upon that Glorious Account We shall leave the success of
all to God, who has many many ways to teach Us those Rules of true Reason,
and peaceable Wisdom, which is from above, tending most to Gods glory, and his
Churches good; which we think Our Self so much the more hound in Conscience to
attend with the most judicious zeal and care, by how much we esteem the Church
above the State; the glory of Christ above Our own; and the salvation of men's
souls above the preservation of their Bodies and Estates.

Since the publishing of this Declaration, there has been high Disputes
amongst the Nobility; and some have declared for the King of Scots, desireing a
contract of Marriage, the calling in of his person, the day prefixed, and the
general Attributes thereof to be solemnly declared, throughout the cities of
Heidelburgh, Switzaon, and other places: But others of the Nobility are
resolved to the contrary: However her Majesty has declared, that she desires
nothing more then the free Vote, and real Consent, of her People: touching
which, many of the Nobility inclines to her Majesty's gracious will and
pleasure; but others again seem to be of a contrary judgment.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Hague in Holland.
SIR,
THe great and unparalled Nest of Bribery is (in part) found out amongst our
cunning, crafty, and subtle States, many of whom are now brought upon the
stage, and will be handsomely cudgel'd and whipped for their Roguery. The Lord
Wimmenon is threatened to be let blood in the Neckvein, being now under
inquisition; yet he seems not to be danted in the least; but very plainly told
his fellow-states (at his Trial) when they charged him, that they were as
guilty as he, and that if they would not confess, as he did, he both could and
would prove it. A strong Argument to stave off prosecution! The number of those
found out and impeached, are 26. A jolly company; but a pack of as arrand
Knaves, as ever Europe afforded; And stands committed upon these ensuing
Articles.

1 That they had held correspondency with the Enemies of the State. 2 That they
had converted great sums of money to their own private use and interest. 3 That
they had been partial in levying of Taxes, by favoring the Rich, and
oppressing the Poor. 4 That they had most traitorously endeavored to subvert
the very Rights and Beings of the People, by taking of great and intolerable
Bribes, and continuing of heavy and burdensome Taxes, etc.

These Articles of Impeachment being read, the prisoners at the Bar were
required to answer to the Charge; which they did; And in defense thereof, began
several eloquent speeches, protesting their innoceney in any of the said
matters of Fact or Crimes laid to their charge: But upon the examination of
Witnesses, and Evidence given in, it was plainly manifested, That they were
guilty of those Crimes laid to their Charge; and in order thereunto, they were
remanded back from the Bar, to the place of confinement; another Day being set
apart for their further Trial. This purge will greatly stir the ill humors of
a corrupted Politic Body. And it will be very requisite, this Springtime, to
wring off the Necks of these fine-fether'd Birds and Peacocks. The calling in
of your Letters of Reprisal, gives great satisfaction to all in general, and
seeds us with hopes of good success of our Embassy. Our daily prayer is, that
we may agree with you: if not, we are unhappy.

The Names of those that are to be tried upon the precedent Articles of
High Treason.
The Lord Mousch. The Lord Ondenbock. The Lord Wimmenon. The Lord Van Asperen.
The Lord Vervoorden. The Lord Ranswick. The Lord Arnhem. The Lord Bernt Van.
The Lord Verbolt. The Lord Cappelle. The Lord Lentelo. The Lord Brouckhorst.
The Lord Bercham. The Lord Lucassen. The Lord Rhynswode. The Lord Bormwal. The
Lord Hardenbreck. The Lord Ploos. The Lord Loo. The Lord Ripperde. The Lord
Andelo. The Lord Moleard. The Lord Verdria. The Lord Ondenbartshol. The Lord
Intrina. The Lord Egbert.
FINIS.

