A DECLARATION Published in the County of DEVON By that Grand Ambo-dexter, Sir
George Chudleigh Baronet, To delude his Countrymen in their Judgment and
Affections, touching the present differences between his Majesty and the
PARLIAMENT.

Together with a full and satisfactory Answer thereunto, transmitted from
thence under the Hand of a Judicious and well Affected Patriot.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON Printed by L. N. For Richard Clutterbuck. An. Dom. 1644.

A delusory Declaration of Sir George Chudleigh Baronet.
THe ancient (if not the prime) fabric of the famous Kingdom to be raised
upon these three maine pillars, the Royal Soveraigntie, and the two Houses of
Parliament, is so well known as it needs no de^laratio^; as the proportionable
structure and disposition of these three does promise to the eye of reason, and
sound policy, nothing but uniformitie, strength and beauty; so the experience
of all ages ha^h constantly taught, as that the unity and correspondencie of
these Fundamental pieces has been the support, preservation, and happiness
of the whole: and no less apparent is it, that their disjunction and
separation must be their total ruin and destruction. The King has Royal
prerogatives undeniable, without which he cannot govern as a King: The two
Houses of Parliament have their peculiar privileges, wherein every Subject
has his interest; the end of all is, that by a meet temper of their several
rights, Just frame of government may arise for the common good, which may
restrain all exorbitant affections and attempts, if any happen in either part;
now these prerogatives of the King, and privileges of the Subject, though they
have distinct operations, yet they are of so near conjunction, as differences
do sometime arise to interrupt their motion; much like the wheels of a clock
or watch, so depending each upon other, as the smallest moate or hair may
beget a stop and disorder, the greater care should be had in the keeping; but
differences do sometime arise, though never (as I suppose) aggravated to that
extremity as now; petitions of right are commendable, Remonstrances not
unlawful, but Arms though defensive seem doubtful. My Lot fell to be cast
on the Parliaments side, by a strong opinion I had of the goodness of their
cause, and the Loyal service I should do his Majesty, in defending that His
high Court from the manifest enemies that then to my judgment appeared against
it: Religion and the Subjects lawful rights seemed in danger, and the general
interest called for the common care to preserve it, but I believe it has gone
too far; the destruction of a Kingdom cannot be the way to save it, the loss
of Christian Subjects, the Subjects loss of their Estates, by a double plunder
or assesment, concurs not with piety nor yet with propriety. Touching
Religion, which is the chief, (and I confess, in greatest danger) his
Majesty (whom God long preserve) has given us unquestionable security during
his own time; for the rest the Lord of hosts with me has determined the
controversy, having done my utmost faithfully according to my Protestation, I
have thrown my self at my Sovereigns feet, and embraced His gracious pardon,
I will contend no more in word or deed. And this my resolution with the
indisputable grounds thereof, I thought fit to declare to my friends and
Countrymen, that they may understand my sitting down to proceed from no
compulsion, but the necessity I conceive there is of ceasing this destructive
war, unless we will become the wilful Authors of the calamities we would
decline; this may suffice for this time, making my prayer according to my hopes
for speedy peace: but if the war shall continue (which God forbid) I may
happily take up some further determinations.

The answer to the Declaration.
Sir,
MEeting with a gallant Oration directed to your Countrymen, I conceived it
concerned my self, and upon perusal found it to be an issue of your own
brain, both by the elegancie of the Phrase, and the Sophistry of the matter:
to be plain, I must tell you, it is a lively Character of your self and
Actions, wherein you discover learning enough for a country Justice: you seem
to apprehend some general notions and speculations of government; your
intellect floats on the superficies, but your reason was never so weighty to
sink down into the deep fundamentalls; you have gone beyond your last; when
you talk of Fabrics, Pillars and Fundamentalls, you raise a top without a
bottom: The learned will tell you that the prime and Ancient constitutions of
this Kingdom were raised upon that which we call Lex terrae, the Law of the
Land, and this Law is the pillar of Soveraigntie; safety and propriety
enthrones the King, and sets the Royal Diadem on the head of Majesty, it is
the rule as well of Soveraigntie as of obedience; abrogate Law, what becomes of
Soveraigntie, when obedience is ^nfranchised? The wisest of Kings has
determined the question, Plebs sine lege ruit; And that learned ornament of the
Law aged Bracton tells us, Quod Rex attribuit legi, lex attribuit Regi: which
implies a reciprocal support each of other: the King gives life and motion to
the Law, and the Law retributes virtue and operation to the King: if so, why do
you pery winck at the pillar? you were once accounted a pillar your self, and
so you are still, as Lots wife for looking back; but honest Countryman,
herein appears a Sophistry; he rendereth you to Soveraigntie, but tells you
not a word of Law; he knows the rule, frustra anxilium legis petat qui in
legem peccat: Certainly had he been a well-wisher to the Law, he would have
lent a hand to the Law, in raising the prime Fabric; but what is the reason
you do not inform us of the pillars and Fundamentalls of the Law? why, the
Fundamentalls themselves are the reasons, and they are, first; General
Maxims; secondly, the Law of God, thirdly, eternal reason, fourthly, Acts of
Parliament, fifthly, general and approved customs: has not your treachery
and Apostasy offended all these Fundamentalls? are not these the support,
preservation and happiness of the whole that you speak of? are not these the
policy, strength and beauty of this nation? Why do you mistake the
principal? I fear me; your wisdom is guilty of a concealment: Why do you
traduce us with a partie-coloured Division, and take them divisim, which are
not but conjunction; The King and the two Houses of Parliament nominally three
but virtually one? Why do you and your adherents abuse us all with your
divisions, to tell us that the disjunction and separation of these must be our
total ruin and destruction? I must confess it tends that way, the Kingdom
divided cannot stand; but this text admits of a Magis and a Minus, the disease
is not grown to that height but there is a cure, we have a receipt from Solomon
the best naturallist in the world; take away the wicked from before the King,
and His throne shall be established; this probatum est, do not mistake your
self, this must, this may be done without total ruin or destruction, and let
them be accursed that were the Authors of those exigents. But you tell us, the
King has Royal Prerogatives undeniable, without which he cannot govern as a
King; this is granted and allowed: but what do you mean by these Prerogatives,
a will at large, or commands illegal? can the King create Prerogatives De novo
or extempore? herein again you show your sophistry: now prerogatives are
regulated, not exorbitant, but such as Lex terrae prescribes: the statutes De
praerogativa Regis, are declarative antiqui, non introductiva novi Iuris?
prerogative is a branch of the Common Law, this is a truth unquestionable, has
not then Prerogative its rise from the Law of the Land? I fear you couch an
ill meaning under apparent truths: you say the two Houses of Parliament have
their peculiar privileges; you might truly have said, they had or ought to
have but can you say they have, when they are invaded, when there is an Actual
war made against them, by a crew of such Royalists as your self? how can we
expect a meet temper of these, or a just frame of government, when these
exorbitant affections and attempts are above the frame of this government? you
talk much of distinct operations, and the wheels of a clock, to show you are
an observer of times, rather then a preventer of the aggravation of the
extremity you speak of: you say petitions of Right are commendable; why did
not you speak out and say, petitions of Right are necessary, when prerogative
gives it a mortal wound, and destroys a principal, that Ius nunquam moritur?
Why, could you afford Remonstrances no better language, then that they were not
unlawful? are they not convenient, when necessity requires them? Arms (you
say) though defensive, seem doubtful: to whom do they seem so? It seems
you degenerate from nature, Law, and Religion: is there not a cause? did David's
Army seem doubtful? And why did you take up Arms at first? we are now
sensible of the reason, you were a doubtful man at first, but now we know what
you are without Question; you say, your Lot fell to be cast on the Parliaments
side, surely the Parliament had ill-fortune in that Lotterie. But you fell and
were cast, for you never stood right on the Parliaments side: you say, you had
a strong opinion of the goodness of the cause, and of the Loyal service you
should do His Majesty in defending that His high Court of Parliament, from the
manifest enmity that then to your judgment appeared against it: how comes your
strong opinion to be weakened? examine your self, when you lost your
goodness, your judgment was infatuated, and then you deserted Loyal service
to King and Parliament. When the Parliament trusted unfaithful men, then the
cause suffered, but the goodness of it is not yet tainted. Why do you cast
aspersions on the Houses of Parliament? it seems you are troubled with many
Apparitions, when you saw Religion and the Subjects right seemed in danger: was
it but a semblance? did you but see in a vision the thousands of slaughtered
carcasses, whose death your unfaithfulness seems to be the Author, you would
confess with horror and trembling, Religion and Right were in danger; what,
has the common care gone too far to preserve Religion and the Subjects right
as (you say) you fear it has? nay can it go too far? I wish you had as much
faith as fear, then you would have put into your creed that Religion, and the
Subjects right were in danger. The destruction of a Kingdom cannot be the way
to save it: it is a truth, why then have you walked in those ways of
destruction? for our parts we desire to walk in the ways of God: to meet him
in our fasting, in our prayers, in our Humiliations, and in our reformations:
and doubt not but we shall find him in the preservation of this Kingdom from
destruction: you say the loss of Christian Subjects, of estates double
plundered, and assessements, concur not with piety nor propriety; it is a truth,
and could not the old Sophister cite a Text, but misapply it? who is it that
has inacted all these offenses to be lawful? has made murder lawful,
stealing lawful, violence and oppression lawful, Idolatry, swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, whoring, drinking, blaspheming; nay, are not these accounted
acceptable services to God? nay, who is it that puts these things in
practice? These things I confess concur not with piety nor propriety;
Religion, you say, seemed in danger; and did it but seem so? Let me put you a
case: if there be a Nursing Father, and a Nursing Mother of contrary Religions,
of what Religion are you sure their children would be? The Civill-law tells us,
Partus sequitur ventrem, and we know by experience, children delight in the
dugs and infusions of the mother; the mothers Beads and Pictures are more
delightful to children, then the serious and wise Instruction of the father.
You tell us you have unquestionable security, for Religion; but for how long?
you say, during the Kings own time; I wish, O King live for ever: yet give me
leave to tell you, you have a very uncertain estate in Religion, the King has
no Prerogative above Subjects in the certainty of his life; let me advise you
to take a further and better estate in Religion, you may procure it as good
cheap to you, and the heirs males of your body, as you may for three lives: to
be serious, does your care for religion extend no further then during the Kings
own time? what will you and your posterity do afterward? it seems by your
following discourse, that you mean to sit down, and to leave Religion and Law
to the wide world: is it not a paradox, to maintain the Protestant Religion
with Popish Armies? you say his Majesty has given you unquestionable security
touching Religion: what security, or what religion do you mean? though you
keep that to your self, yet if his Majesty were redeemed out of the hands of
those of your religion and Ends, we should as little doubt the security of our
Religion as you. You pray that God would long preserve the King, with a
Parenthesis, but we will pray for the long preservation of the King with an
Emphasis, and never leave praying till we have prayed him out of your hands;
for we cannot think him safe there: assure your self, we will sacrifice our
selves to reduce him to his Center the Parliament, whereby the Laws he ought
to be, and hope to bring all your confederates to the throne of Justice, where
his Majesty being established by his Laws, shall pronounce the sentence of
unfaithfulness against you: but how can you for shame say you have done your
utmost, according to your Protestation? I confess I cannot without indignation
confute you, I pity your Apostasy, it needs no demonstration; have you thrown
your self at your Sovereigns feet? it is your duty: and embraced his gracious
pardon? I commend your wisdom: you stand in need of more pardons then one, if
you would but take a survey of what you have done: I must confess we have all
offended, and have need of pardon, but in this wherein have I offended his
Majesty, that he should hunt after my life as a Partrich? I will sue to God
for pardon of my sins, but I will never betray mine own innocence.

For the rest, you say, the Lord of Hosts with you has decided the
Controversy* what do you mean by the rest, and what controversy do you mean?
when had you a right of Association to sit in Judgment, and decide
controversies with the Lord of Hosts? what do you mean by those lofty strains,
it is as proud a theme as that of an insolent Prelate, Ego and Rex mous, etc.
the Lord of Hosts with you is an elevation above the Pole. You say you will
contend no more in word or deed: What, will you do no more for your God, your
King nor your Country? it seems you resolve to be but a neuter ^t best.

Thirdly, you say that this your resolution, with the indisputable grounds
thereof, you thought fit to declare unto your friends and contrymen; where
do you find such indisputable grounds for such ignoble resolutions? should so
active, so wise a man as your self sit down and be a spectator of your
countries Tragedy, and neither speak a word to preserve it, nor do one good
deed to revive it? but base resolutions have proud thoughts. You presently fall
upon a strange conceit, that your sitting down with your Declaration, will of
necessity end these destructive wars; why are you so self-conceited, to think
your precedent will draw the whole world into your imitation? are your
positions so positive, that they are undeniable, unquestionable, and
indisputable? from whom have your conceptions such a prerogative? If you have
such indisputable things, why do you not produce them for the common good? Then
you conclude with a menace to your contrymen, that if the war cease not, you
will take up some further determinations; what determinations do you mean? I
must needs say you are the intricatest man that ever I read; but I guess at
your meaning, you will be a looker on, and at last determine, like a door on
his hinges, to turn either way, so you think in your judgment, that a neuter
will be entertained at your pleasure, of either party. I have spoken my
thoughts, and so leave you to your own conceits and fortunes.

FINIS.

