THE CAMP OF CHRIST, AND THE CAMP OF ANTICHRIST, all Troopers after the LAMB.
Revel. 10.11.14. or his two Horns, Rev. 13.11, 12.
1. The Troopers for Christ are distinguished from the Troopers of Antichrist,
by the end they aim, and the side they undertake; for the one must be against
Christ, that is discussed and resolved: the other are encouraged for Christ, by
the certainty of the victory in the end, proved all at large out of Scripture,
but especially out of the Apocalips.

2. Here is likewise declared how the government of this Kingdom has been
since it had first a being till now.

2. General, the Camp of Christ, called, chosen, faithful in fight with
Antichrist and his Army.

1. Declared to be fought under four Standards, reduced to four Ensigns,
declared at large what they be: The Lambs Camp compared to a Lion for courage
and valor; to a Man for wisdom; to an Ox for patience and industry; to an
Eagle for speed and expedition: Antichrist is the General of the Prelates
Army.

2. Two Captains, two Camps, their fatal and final wars, an instance in our
Kingdom, Revel. 17.14. They shall make war with the Lamb, showing the age of
Antichrists it being, and her now Ruin.

3. The War proved lawful from Scripture and Reason, from the breach of Law
and its own duty to hinder the Kings coming to rule by Arbitrary and Tyranny,
as for Hezekiah to oppose Senacheribs coming against Israel.

Wicked men take no notice of that which good men observe, viz. the time,
times, and half a time of Antichrist. Dan. 12.7.10.
THe War is wonderful that Antichrist should fight against the Lamb with
his own Horns; for what are the horns of the Lamb but his own power? And what
is that power, but the power of the keys? And what power have the keys, but
to bind and loose, remit and retain sins? And to whom is this power given,
but to the Pastors of the Church? And of them who challenge the ordination of
all Ministers, and the jurisdiction over all persons, but the Bishops? And
therefore of them we conclude, what they would have according to revelation.
Apoc. 13.11. the second Beast had two horns like the Lamb, the honor of
Episcopacie, but he spoke as a Dragon, the dread of their calling, and disgrace
of so great a dignity. The ten horns, Dan 7.24. Rev. 17 12. are expounded to
our hands to be ten Kings, that take away the Cesars, 2. These. 2.6, 7. and
succeed him in his kingdom, Rev. 13.1. the crowns were upon the sixth head,
Rev. 12 3 that is one Caesar held them, and by civil and barbarous wars ten
enjoy them to themselves, which is called an Apostasy from Caesar, 2. These. 2.3
and this is first in order, but in time we must join it with another from
Christ, Revel. 17.12. and this is to Antichrist, to whom the other give their
power, and both fight with the Lamb and his chosen Army, who as Troopers in
white, and upon white horses, make their expedition against a cruel company
with the greatest innocence and alacrity in the world. Antichrist is said to
come out of the earth, Revel. 13 11. both for secrecy and silence. He is not
seen so soon as the ten Horns that rise out of the Sea, for they are up in
commotion, but he steals up in their troubled waters, and at their back subdues
them, Dan. 7.25. Let my counsel be acceptable to the King and Kingdom, and
consider our Camps, and how we have argued our selves into a civil war, and
from words are come to blows. Both cannot be innocent, or Caviiiers of the same
condition. The Troopers in white must be known by the truth, and the truth by
God and the Country. God, if we defend true Religion; and the Country, if we
seek the peace of it.

The misery of our war shall be the meditation of our misery, ever since we
were a Kingdom. We have been ruled by Romans from the first King that ever we
had, who having killed his own Father by accident, exiled himself into this
Island. A thousand years and more before Christ, Brute a noble Roman ruled us,
and some 58. years before Christ we fell into a civil war, and Julius Caesar
conquered us, and when the Cesars were conquered, we fell into a civil war,
and the Saxons Fortiger sent for to help him conquered his son Vortimer, and
themselves by a civil war fell into an Heptarchie, and in this time came the
Monk from the Pope and mastered our Bishops, and by them our Kings, and at
this time they are suspected to join with a Malignant Party, to part the King
and his Council, and all because he cannot have a Monarchy of their making,
which is stamped with that character, 1. Sam. 8 9 11. where the judgment,
reason, or will of the King is tyranny, if the judgment of the Kingdom be not
in it. Nineteen Propositions propounded by his Council have provoked him
exceedingly, and made many to think his very Council would impose a tyranny
upon him, and all this for want of a true distinction between justice
distributive, and commutative. Distributive of honors to deserving persons,
and in this the Kings Prerogative cannot be violated. Privy Counselors,
Bishops, Judges, Soldiers, public Officers, Courtiers, Servants to the King
are by him to be honored, but not to the hurt of the Kingdom. His Majesty must
look by distributive j^stice to the qualities of the persons he honors, that
they be as himself, not for themselves, but the common good. Queen Elizabeth
would say, Populus nihi preciocissimus, Courtiers, Maledictus, and when his
Majesty says his beloved people, too many curse them, and say keep them
under. By reason of the which oppression they cry to God, and we hope God will
hear them, as he has in this Parliament; which zealously seek the peoples
good, not to distribute honors the right of the King, but prevent their hurt
the right of the Kingdom by commutative justice, that respects not persons but
things; and if his Majesty mean to distribute hurtful honors, his Council
may well request that commutative justice may not be exchanged into tyranny.
Jus militiae ^^m bellum indicendi quam gerendi cum inimicis, pacis quoque
contrahendae and paciscendae cum peregrinis est lex Regis. To proclaim and make
war, to contract and make peace, are in distributive justice the Royalties of
a King: but in commutative justice, the men and money the King would have to
make war, must come from common consent. Let this be the carriage of the
Commonwealth, and we shall soon be at peace.

The Camp of Christ, called, chosen, and faithful, in fight with Antichrist,
and his Army.
THe Camp of Christ consists of 144000, and the Camp of Antichrist of 666;
not because Christ has the greater number, but the better men, as being
virgins undefiled with women, Rev. 14.4. The other is a round number of a name,
of a Beast, of a man, Rev. 13.17, 18. There will be great wisdom to search
them out, and as opposites compared together will more clearly show
themselves. The 144000 is distributed into 12 Tribes, and the 12 Tribes into
four Beasts, Rev. 4.6. and here we must begin our search, Domine, ediscere
nobis parabolam istam, Mat. 15.15. We must in the allusion fetch our Camp
from the Congregation in the Wilderness, Psalm. 68.10. Thy Beasts dwelt
therein; So our English ancient translation has it, and the original word is
so, and our new translation gives us the sense of it, for by the Beasts we must
understand Gods people, which in this book of the Revelation is the ordinary
expression of that part of the Church, as the 24 Elders are of the Pastors, to
whom the 24 thrones belong to judge the others, and the crowns of gold to show
their rule. They are the presbyteries of the Church, from the which our Bishops
are fallen into a temporal jurisdiction, worse then any other Lay-Eldership,
under the which for this thousand years our Church has groaned and if we will
learn a true presbytery, we must find it in the first 600 years. St Paul
speaks of it, 1 Timothy 4.14 and Cornelius and Cyprian use it in the same sense,
and that without the Eldership they did nothing in the Consistory. Epist.
6.13.35. Presbyt. and Diacon. Cornel. Cypr. Ep. 46. doubtless the 24
Presbyteries allude to the 24 Ephemeries, 1 Chronicles. 24.4. Luke 1.8. But there is
now no speaking of Consistories, we must follow the Camp, as David did from
Hebron to take Jerusalem from the Je^usites, before we bring the Ark of God
into any peaceable Tabernacle, and we have fixed our selves in the Lambs
Camp under four Standards, that express both the order and excellency of it.
The 12 Tribes of old were reduced to four Ensigns, Judah, Issachar, and
Zebulon to a Lion: Reuben, Simeon* and Gad to a Man: Ephraim, Manasses and
Benjamine to an Ox or Bullock: Dan, Aser, and Nephtali to an Eagle. Thus were
the Tribes quartered, and from them we take the spiritual meaning of the
Lambs Camp, for fortitude and courage in the Lion: for wisdom and prudence
in a man: for patience and industry in the laboring Ox: for speed and
expedition in an Eagle; and we may further take notice of the names of Beasts
in this Book, to describe both the Camp of Christ, and the Camp of
Antichrist. Beasts are Emblemes for both, yet in Greek their names are not the
same. Zoa is for Gods people, and the word signifies life. The other is
Therion, and there be two of that kind, the Beast with ten horns, and the
Beast with two: the first makes up Antichrists Army, as it consists of the
people that follow him, and the second is Antichrist himself, or the Bishops
that abuse the power of the Lamb in the two keys, turning them into so many
horns to the hurt of the Saints; for if it were not so there should be no such
cause to complain of them as now is done by all men, even those that are no
enemies to their calling. If they had used the keys aright, and not made
horns of them, long might they and their calling have flourished, but now the
crowns on their heads, and thrones they have sitten upon, are like to be
shaken; and as Simeon the prophetical Monk foreseeing an earth quake, whipped
the pillars of the Church, bidding them stand fast, for they should be shaken;
so might these pillars have foreseen their scourge, if they by whipping of
others had not thought their standing had been out of the danger of a
Parliament. I would wish them to struggle no longer, but to join their
learning with others, and seriously observe the times, and what mischief they
have done by the keys; which I cannot but honor in the Episcopal Dignity,
and do verily believe that in the Presbytery, the Thrones and the Crowns do
not equally belong to all the Elders. The thing I shall note is, that the
Lambs horns make Antichr st as well in England as at Rome; and since Austen
the Monk meddled with us, our Episcopacie has had too much of divine right,
and by the excess of that is like to bring Church Government into a defect, if
both extremes be not prevented; but I say we must have the fire of civil
war quenched, before we can be quickened in the right use of the keys. I have
begun the Camp at the four Standards, reduced the 12 Tribes to them, and now
must number the Tribes as they are elsewhere no where numbered, Rev. 7. Each
Tribe has the like number, and that is completely twelve thousand, surmounting
the Beasts almost one half, yet put them altogether, and they are above half
short of his number, if we compare the great Court of the Temple with the
Temple it self, as the holy Ghost has done, Rev. 11.1, 2. What a number of
Gentiles may stand in Atrio magno, in respect of the inwarp Temple, and
therefore it we go on to view both Camps, we shall learn out in the end the
mystery. Certainly, in six and twelve is some hidden secret. The great and
grand Captain of our Camp has his under-Captaines, and they are the 12
Apostles, in this book called 12 Stars, to give the Church light, Rev. 12.1.
Secondly, they lie in the foundation with the Prophets, to bear it up for
sinking in the sand of unsound doctrine, Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. Every
building is reduced to its foundation, and all companies to their Captains;
and in this Antichrist shows himself that stands so much for Peter, that he
would lay all upon him, because he is called Petros, which signifies a stone,
and among 12 fundamental stones he is one, and perchance may be the first in
order, but under none, and therefore they are laid orderly one by one, that the
Tribes may build upon them all. So was it first, and since the 12 Apostles have
left their cure to 24 Elders to be understood by the Ephemeries of the Priests
and Levites, but I suppress my notion, and will set upon the hurtful horns
of the Church, that is, Kings and Bishops. Kings and Kingdoms that make the
Camp of Antichrist, and Bishops that make Antichrist to be their General. I
hope Kings that have helped the Whore will hate her, and Bishops that are good,
if any be so, for the most believe there are none, will no more horn it, but
hate that office, and learn as brethren to exercise the keys.

Two Captains, two Camps. Their fatal and final wars. An Instance in our
Kingdom.
Rev. 17.14. These shall make war with the Lamb.
THese ten horns given to the Beast with two horns shall make wars with the
Lamb and his called, chosen, and faithful Servants. The ten horns are these,
Vortimer and Hengist in England; Childerike, Gunderike, and Theodorike in
France; Riciarius in Spain, Genserike in Afric; Theodemire in Panonia;
Marcian in Greece. Caesar hinders the being of the Beast, and these ten Kings
make war for him, and the Apostasy from him and Christ begin una hora, ver.
12. It is a rule in the Word that wrath should be feared when God does first
inflict it, as in the captivity of the City and the Sanctuary, 2. King.
25.3.8. There be seven years difference, and the judgment begins with the
first to account the seventie years captivity. But in Mercies it is clean
contrary, the return of the people was a great blessing, Ezr. 1.1. but the
building of the Sanctuary a greater, Ezr. 6.14. and so the sure account of 70.
weeks for the welfare of the Jews must begin with the second year of Darius
Nothus, Ezr. 4.24. Happy are the Nations that take notice of Christ when he is
angry, lest it kindle into wrath and they perish, Psalm. 2. 12. Blessed are all
they that put their trust in him. Mercy is at hand to this Nation that with
zeal seek to set up Gods Sanctuary amongst us, and the time will be shortly
when we shall see it, in the expulsion of those clouds that have fallen upon us
since Reformation began amongst us; but by reason of the Samaritanes that dwell
amongst us, could not to this day be accomplished. You have heard that
judgment should be speedily looked unto, and Antichrist was not of 700. years
thought of, but began as Magnum mundo malum, when these ten Kings fell from one
Caesar: They are the Apostles words, 2. These. 2.3. a falling away first, that
is, of duty to Caesar, and faith to the Lord Jesus Christ. The Crowns depart
from the heads of the Cesars, Revel. 12.3. to the horns of these Kings, Rev.
13.1. This Apostasy of kingdoms is the evidence we must have for the other
being a mystery, and not so manifest at the first. There are noted three
divisions of the Roman Monarchy, the first by Constantine, the second by
Theodosius, the third by Charles the great. We must begin at the second, for no
sooner had Honorius and Arcadius the Empire shared between them, but the West
part was quickly distracted and dilacerated as we have said, and Augustus Caesar
breathed out the ghost in Augustulus, when Odoacer made him abdicate and divest
himself of all Imperial dignity. The misery began by Alaricus, Ann. 395. was
followed by Radagaisus, and the miseries of war like a Northern storm,
Revel. 7. fell upon the people as grass, and the Princes of the Provinces as
the taller Cedars, Zech. 11.2. and then the very mountain of the Monarchy was
moved, Rev. 8.8. and cloven asunder into ten kingdoms, and the Western star
falls out of the orb thereof, Revel. 8.10. so that between the first assault by
Alaricus and this of Odoacer, Ann. 475. we may state the division to be made
perfect in the number of ten Kings, Anno 456.

Martian in the East was a good King in those miserable times, and had peace,
and died before he had fully reigned seven years, leaving behind him great
grief in the hearts of the people, because they lost so good a man. He called
the fourth general Council, wherein Leo and his Legates stormed at the honor
done to the Patriarch of Constantinople, fearing some might advance him above
the Pope, whose perking up in pride prepared for Antichrist, who prevailed
least in the East till the second Nicene Council, which was the first that
ever decreed the worship of Images. The Greek Emperors still retaining the
name, as Leo Isaurus, Constantinus Cabalinus, Nicephorus, Stauratius, Leo
A^menus, Michael Baldus, Theophilus, opposed, when Gregory the second, and
third, Paul the first, Stephen the fourth, Adrian the first and second, Leo the
third, Nicholas the first, etc. upheld them. 338. Bishops in a Council at
Constantinople, Ann. 754 solemnly condemned them, and 787 their veneration was
made a Law, which to that day was a private opinion, and as Irene, and after
her Basilius gave Images their first honor, so God dishonored their
succession with the Saracens and Turks, and the next General Councels, as the
Papists call them, were all to make war with the judgments of God for the
sins of the Church, and the children of God that repented, but none at all to
pull down Idolatry, for the ten Councels called by the Popes of Rome, are not
one of them like the first, but are found to handle these matters, fitter for a
Council of War, then Consistory of Priests. First they consult of an holy
War with the Saracens and Turks, and so pilgrims go out of the West into the
East to purchase graves to themselves in the Holy Land by fighting with God in
his two woes, Revel 9. and the very sin that caused them is expressed, v. 20.
of which they repented not, and prospered accordingly. Secondly, they are
recalled again from the East into the West, to fight with the Waldenses, and
Emperors that stood in the Popes light, and lastly the Kings and Princes of
Germany that have forsaken the Church of Rome, how are they persecuted as
Lutherans, and so you have all the General Councels held by the Church of
Rome, and I wonder they do not blush at their words, for the first condemn
them of horrible pride, and they have denied two of them in some Canons of
Orders as if they had erred in a point of Faith, when they used their lawful
liberty in such things as were most indifferent. The fifth General Council
condemned Vigilius for a cursed Nestorian. The sixth judged Honorius for an
Heretical Monothlite. The seventh and eighth manifest them to be guilty of
Idolatry never decreed before by any Councels, but condemned by all, and the
ten last (the worst of all) are called by Popes against regal, and Imperial
authority, and condemn truth for heresy, Saints for Heretics, and prove the
Pope the greatest Tyrant in the world. If from Martian we cast our eyes upon
the 9. Kings, I know not one of them to be good, and for our Nation before
Vortimer I can say much both for Kings and Bishops. We had the first Christian
King and Emperor in the world. An. 181. Lucius sent to Eleutherius for a
Bishop, Rome being then famous, and his kingdom preserved pure religion to the
days of Diocletian, and in that 10th persecution we were tried for it. Our
nation is thought to receive the Gospel from the ministry of Joseph of
Aramathea, which was purely maintained above 250. years. It was the only
Sanctuary of the Saints, and for them being persecuted to flee unto. In the
tenth Persecution Diaclesian found us out, as being the most general, cruel,
fatal and final of all the rest, as we may fear this to be in which we are,
and may be the last by Antichrist, as that was by the Pagans. This proved our
faith, and I find it failed not till Austen the Monk came from Rome. And I
pray you note it as being noted in the book of God. I would feign know seeing
all the Seven Seals have their Indexes, as four Beasts for the four first,
and earthquake for the sixth, and Seven Trumpets for the last. What is meant by
an Altar for the fifth, Rev. 6.9. certainly, Martyrdom, and of all the ten
Persecutions that is called Era Martyrum, the age of the Martyrs, as being the
greatest an most remarkable, and ended in our Nation, because he that put an
end to it under God, was the Great Constantine, borne in our Nation, and for
the Church to deliver it. After him we fell into a division and the two Kings I
mentioned began our misery, and of Britons we became Saxons, and fell into an
Heptarchie, and from Rome comes Austen, and lands in Kent, the first part of
our seven Kingdoms, and there begins as great a confusion in the Church, as
there was in the State. He found many godly men of the Clergy which he
insulted over, and being forsaken by them as used to no Roman pride, or Popish
orders, but following such as came from the East, which Rome abhorred, they
would none of his reformation, and therefore like a limb of Antichrist he
begins their persecution, and by such Roman horns made war with the Lamb,
which less or more has continued to this day; for as the ten horns that have
usurped the Crowns from the Caesar's, so the two horns that the Bishops usurp
from Christ are used against him, and have for 900 years, as a book taken out
of the Records of the Tower has showed unto us, plainly proving the keys of
the Church by the Bishops to have been turned into horns to the hurt of it;
for it is they that challenge the Lambs horns, that is, the power of the
keys, Rev. 13.11. to themselves, and by the Lambs own horns fight against
him, and cause the ten horns so to do, who are rather seduced by them, then
cruel to Christians, being Christians themselves; for it were unnatural for
the members of the body to do so, except some Devil, or Divine inspired with
his spirit should do it, and my conjecture is not in vain by the words of a
Pope himself, which are these, Rex superbiae prope est, and quod dici nefas
est, Sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus, Greg. l. 4. Ep. 38. A King of pride
is not the Pope alone, but a prepared Army of Priests, and therefore may in our
Bishops extend to us, and yet it is not they as Bishops, but as they use their
keys for horns, and cause Kings to use their Crowns so, to whom in the Lamb
himself, I shall now yield a better example in their Wars.

Pie regnare, recte judicare, just pugnare, to reign religiously, to judge
rightly, and righteously to make war, are proclaimed in Heaven by a divine
Herald when the Captain of our Salvation goes out to war. He sits upon a
white horse when he gives Crowns to the obedient, Rev. 6.2. and casts them
down in the disobedient, Rev. 19.18. The Priests have Crowns and Thrones,
Rev. 4.4. grant them to be the Bishops, and as we have said of their two
horns, to be their honors from the Lamb, yet will not the Lamb spare them
in the great day of his wrath, Rev. 6 16, 17. Let Princes and Prelates think
of their powers and prerogatives as vain things with an angry Lamb; but why
say I angry, when he calls to a nuptial Supper, Rev. 19.7.9 O but it is the
Supper of the great God, ver. 17. and the fowls of Heaven must be filled with
it, that is, the Devils and hell, for thither go alive the Beast and the
false Prophet, ver. 20. and hellfire devoureth them, and because we meet them
so coupled in their final and fatal ruin, let us see their combination in
all their Wars, and the expression is thus. The Beast and his Image, the
Beast and the false Prophet. The Beasts Prophets are the Bishops, and he is
deceived with their horns, that is, with the keys, and by them they mould
Kings into what Image they please, and therefore (good Reader) toties quoties,
as often as thou meets them thus matched, make this their mystery. The Beast
and his Image, by Beast understand the false Prophet, or the Bishop with two
horns, and by his Image, all Kings and Kingdoms molded by him, and then with
ease thou will understand, that when Beast and false Prophet come together, the
Beast must be Kings, and the false Prophets the Bishops that deceive them,
which is no more dishonor to good Bishops, then the false Prophets of Baal,
were to the Prophets of the Lord. Where are thy Prophets, Jer. 37.19. that is,
thy deceivers, O Zedekiah; have not I told thee the truth, that the Caldeans
would come again, and though Pharaoh King of Egypt had wounded them all, yet
should they rise up in their Tents, and borne the City, ver. 10. Where are the
men of thy peace? Jer. 38.22. Thy Prophets that promised thee, that the King of
Babylon should not return, have deceived by their counsel, and prevailed, and
fastened thee in the mire, etc. Pedes tui defixi funt in luto, retro conversi,
from my counsel thou art gone, and invincibly tied by flatterers in the mudde
of thy own mischief. Be wise therefore, ye Kings, how you fight for
Antichrist by the Lambs own horns, or your own; let not the Bishops be your
Counselors, as Austen was when he came from Rome, but let such as come from
the Lord Jesus Christ, with the right use of the keys, command your
Consciences, (not your Crowns) to use them for the Lamb, and by his example
to make war; and give me leave first to begin with Pie regnare, to rule
religiously, that is, from God as the cause, for God as the end, and by men as
the means.

And because his Majesty says the personal right is in him, as of any other
thing he enjoyes, I will show him plainly by Gods Word his error, as the
Parliament has done by the Laws, confessing my self a Royalist for his crown
to be from God, and a friend of the kingdom to hold their own by Law which
they have from God as well as his Majesty means to maintain what God has
given him. Come we to the issue between David and all Israel for the kingdom
and his wife. They restore her without conditions, as being absolutely David's,
and injuriously both taken from him by Saul, and kept from him by Israel, and
therefore well might David say, See not my face, except my right in her be
restored to me. Wife, children, goods belong to a King by commutative justice,
and in them all, he has a personal right, and is injured in the detaining of
them from him by any force, or fraud. By this right he may not claim his
kingdom, and say to his people the land is mine in commutative justice, for so
it is not his but theirs: yet in distributive justice it is his not theirs, for
God has distributed to him the honor of the kingdom, but not the goods.
Every man by Law is the owner of what is his, and all being put together the
kingdom may keep from the King whatsoever it has, if by common consent it
will not grant it him. The Historian says, Imperium iisdem modis tenetur,
quibus paratur, a kingdom is kept as it is gotten, and that is but two ways,
by conquest or by contract. The right of conquest, or rather the wrong, is
obtained by the Sword and is so held, except people can by the same come to
their right again. The Lord was with Hezekiah, and he prospered whithersoever
he went forth: and he rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not,
2. King. 18.7. The King is here in the case of his Subjects conquered by the
sword, and the Rebellion is warranted by the Sword to recover what is lost by
it, and therefore Gods people need not to fear the title of the Sword, but
courageously defend themselves against it, which conquerours may call
rebellion, but it is such a rebellion as shall be prospered by God, and
therefore let Kings be wise that hold their kingdoms by contract, and keep it
as God has given it unto them. The four Monarchies are so many tyrannies,
because they are both kept and come by in the tempests, and tumults of war,
Dan. 7.2.3. Winds, that is, wars strive, and Beasts, not men, appear as they
can get out of the Sea when they seek their greatness.

Come we to the second, Recte judicare, the Lamb makes war in judgment,
Revel. 19.11. and his word counsels all kings, Prove. 20.18. With good advice
make war. (...), unicum rectum consilium, magnam militum manum vincit, Eurip.
It is said of Issachar, 1. Chron. 12.32. that the children of his Tribe were
understanding men of the times to know what Israel ought to do. Its to be noted
that all the Tribes that came to Hebron to serve David are set down by their
several excellencies, and this Tribe is described, Genesis 49. by strength,
compared to the bone of an Ass able to bear any burden, and it is the best so
to do, when prudence with patience makes us content to rest quietly in a
kingdom, and what we can to follow that judgment, that is the stay of all
good government, and so he that is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is a
meek and patient Lamb, and stands first as an Angel at the Altar to receive
petitions, Rev. 8.3. as also he stands by it when it is measured, Revel. 11 1.
as the Judge of truth, and he that is Agnus occisus, a Lamb killed once for
our sins, is likewise Leo occidens, a killing Lion to all his Enemies; but
before he kill in fight, he is found in judgment, and so should all kings be.
Its true, Armorum officia nisi jussu principis sint interdicta: that is, to
private men, for God has only given the sword to the Magistrate, Romans 13.4.
who is not the Master of Arms, but the Minister of God, and is to revenge for
him. Men of war are the honor of the King, and the help of the Kingdom. It
is in him by distributive justice to give the honor: but because they help at
the charge of the kingdom, justice commutative calls for the Council thereof,
and without common consent no war can be made. God had commanded his people
to root out Amaleke from under heaven, and had laid his anathema or curse upon
the seven Nations, and so for war with them no counsel was necessary, but
they might at all times fight against them, and because when they overcame,
they made them but Tributaries, Judge. 1.28. they were overcome and made
Tributaries themselves, and met with iron chariots, ver. 19. they could not
conquer, and the strong hold of Sion that the Jebusites maintained to the days
of David, and yet God was with them, but because they were not wholly with him,
he suffered them so often to fall into their hands that hated them, and yet
helped them by Judges which for the most part were good, and honored for
faith, Hebr. 11.32. when the kings they desired were few of them good; for we
are deceived in our thoughts of Monarchy, and do not distinguish it from an
apparent Thearchie or divine Dynastie, wherein not the will of men, but of God
is followed, and the people are happy that are at the will of one man, when his
will is ruled by the will of God: but when kings follow their own judgment
their government is never good. There is one excellent reason why the
Canaanites dwelt amongst them, Judge. 3.1, 2. to learn them war not as a
blessing, for no war is good in it self, but to be wise and prudent is of
excellent use, and to be taught by enemies, valor is virtue prized by God. I
must tell my Nation the iron chariots, and the strong holds of the Jebusites
that oppose it is for the sins thereof, and yet to try our manhood to expel
them at the last. Commanded war needs no counsel, but where God is silent,
no Israelite might fight but by the advice of their great Senate, Deuteronomy. 17.8.
and to this the King was referred, verse 14. and by it to him war was
permitted, and therefore Christ is an example of judgment in war, and for
method to make my matrer more plain, I will speak of a threefold judgment,
Judicium legis, Regis and Regni, the Law, King, and Kingdom.

The judgment of the Law is this, Id Rex attribuat legi, quod Lex attribuit
ei, Let the King yield that to the Law, which the Law has yielded to him. His
Crown, his Council, his Kingdom, the Church, and Laws of both are in his
custody. Rex leget in libro legis, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.19. the copy of the Law must
be in his keeping, and for his learning; First, to live by it; secondly, not to
lift up himself above his brethren; thirdly, to beware of Apostasy; fourthly,
to prolong his life; lastly, to leave his Kingdom to his children. The Kings
Crown is not so much his by any inherence in himself, or inheritance from
others, as adherence to the Law. It both sets on and keeps on his Crown. He
that reads the seven Seals of five judgments, has but two mercies
interlaced. The Gospel in the first Seal, and the Law in the third. Of the
Gospel the Emblem is White; of the Law Black, and both for expedition are
well mounted, and well armed. The first with a Bow and Crown, to give honor
to the conqvered, for whosoever obeyes the Gospel is crowned with felicity.
Law is severe and appears in black with Balances to measure out all things.
The two Horses that oppose these are red and pale, blood and death, war and
woe, to teach us all the true causes of our misery. Lev. 26.25. I will bring a
sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. The Crown is
not safe that keeps not the Covenant of the Law and Gospel with Christ.
Idolatry consented unto by Christian Kings, and oppression not regarded by
them, has deprived them of their Crowns, and caused so many alterations in
all States.

For the second, no King is above his Council, but in it as a member. In solio
Rex est sine pars, In the royal seat the King has no Peers, but in Concilio
habet pares, but in his Council he has Peers, not to command him, but to
agree with him, Consilio, consensu, and votis. We may resolve two doubts: The
first of a negative vote; the second of the Kings Supremacy. That the King
has a negative vote, quoad interesse suum, no man can deny it, and the Lords
and Commons have as much, and the reason is good, no one part can be injurious
to another; but quoad interesse regni, of the common good of all the members,
they are all bound to consent to what is good, and to dissent from what is
evil. The privy Council, Judges of the Land, Men of War, Officers of
State, etc. must all receive their honors from the King. What shall be done to
the man whom the King delights to honor? Esther 6.6. Royal favors must
come from his Majesty, but not with the hurt of the Subject. Ahasuerus reading
the Chronicles of his Kingdom, and finding Mordecai to have done him good
service; will have him rewarded, and Haman that had prepared the Gallows for
him, must be the Herald of his enemies praise; and when Hamon is found unworthy
of his honor for the hurt he had done his Subjects, the King commands him to
be hanged for Mordecai. Here is right distributive justice, and it is only the
Kings to give: But to deny his Council hearing in the hurts of his people is
most unjust, and commutative justice pleads the Parliaments providence to
provide for all these, and no King can deny it, and the contention rises that
the King may not give honors, which is true when they hurt his Subjects, and
the Parliament may see he be punished whosoever has such honors, and if by
that Council they may be deprived of them, doubtless to save labor, they may
advise the King not to give them, except he mean greater hurt to his people,
then honor to his favorites. In point of Supremacy, we may thus be resolved.
Rex est Major singulis, the King is greater then his Subjects, Minor universis,
less then his Kingdom, and his Council that represents it. No King needs to
fear his Supremacy, for he both has it sine pari, and cum paribus. The
Kingdom is his, but not by conquest but contract. The Church is his to nurse
it with the sincere milk of the Word, but not with the poison of Popery. The
Laws are his to keep them, but not command them at his will. The judgment of
the King in the distribution of rewards and penalties is properly his, as the
provision in the vacancie of Parliament, for such accidents as happen above
Law, beside the Law, or beyond the reach of it. Vltra, supra, praeter legem,
the Prerogative is as necessary, as Ordinances are to provide where Law is
defective: but contra legem terrae, or fundamental Laws commonly and
constantly received in this Kingdom, neither King nor Council are warranted
at all, for both are to build upon that foundation. Furthermore, the King has
no legislative power, contra statuta regni.

Having then found out the maine matter of the Kings Prerogative in praemiis
and paenis, we will to his honors add potestatem vitae and necis, and
instance in that Indictment of Felons, Contra coronam and dignitatem regis,
etc. It is the Scripture phrase, Vir es mortis, thou art worthy to dye, Non
morieris, thou shall not dye, is the Kings mercy, and yet here his Majesty is
limited, and his pardon proves void when there comes in interesse viri, the
right of any one man, much more interesse regni.

Come we then to the judgment of the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10.25. where we have
the same word Mishphat, but applied to a more universal subject, as the
judgment of the Kingdom, and so it is in the great Council, Deuteronomy. 17.8,
9.11. There is a judgment in that place inferior both to the King and
Council, and therefore what is too hard for inferior Courts comes to the
supreme, and that must be heard and feared of all. The great Charter of this
Kingdom granted by Henry the Third, has in it these three fundamental Laws,
that completely secure every free man in this Kingdom, yet now most grossly
trodden down by our Caviliers, and his Majesty should think how they eclipse
his Protestation, in a violation of it and all good Laws. There is jus
personarum, nullus liber homo capietur, imprisonetur, the Law is that no free
person be arrested, imprisoned, or compelled to do or suffer any thing,
further then may justly be required by Law, Secondly, Jus rerum, quae nostra
sunt sine nostro consensu a nobis tolli non possunt, fine furto Latricinio.
Thirdly, Jus actionum, nulli justitiam negabimus, etc. How are these Laws
observed in the Kings Army? What man can resist violence done to his person?
save his goods from rapine, theeverie and Latrocinie? What action or suit of
Law can he have with lawless men?

Our last Point taken from our Captain, is just pugnare, to make war in
righteousness. This appears in four things, in his vesture which he puts on,
in his thigh which gives him issue, in his name which gains him glory, and the
inscription of it both upon vesture and thigh, to perpetuate his honor and
fame to the worlds end. He puts not on the vesture of blood, he is Dominus in
albis, he and his appear not like bloody Soldiers, but Saints in the purest
white, which may be dipped in blood by others, yet is it not their natural dye.
From his thigh spring forth millions of men to be saved, though he smite his
enemies, as Sampson did hip and thigh with a great slaughter. His name in so
doing is above all names, and Kings and Lords must come under it. The
inscription of this honor remains to this day on his vesture and thigh,
maugre the malice of Antichrist and all his members, whose reign is most
wicked, judgment corrupt, and war cruel. They that cannot abide to be
servants to God, are willing to be the greatest slaves to the Devil. Gideon
knowing the best Government to be a Thearchie, would not make himself a
Monarch at the request of the people, Judge. 8.23. neither he nor his should
alter the form of the Kingdom. God for him and them should rule over his own
Nation, all that he will request of them are the golden eare-rings gotten from
the Ishmaelites, amounting to a thousand seven hundred Shekles of Gold, which
the people give, and what will they not give to make an Idol? They give beside
them, Ornaments, Collars, and Purple raiment, that was on the Kings of Midian,
and beside these the chains also that were about the Camels necks. A mass of
costly materials to make an Ephod for a Monument of their deliverance. David
danced in one not so costly as this for it seems to rise as high as Aarons
Ephod. But Gideons good intention for God proved superstition in the people,
who went a whoring after it, as soon as he was dead, and what he made for God,
that they speedily dedicated to Baal. Ready they were to change their
Government, and to take any man for God that did them good, though he were but
the instrument, and God to show how the best men may fall, gives them over in
some things, to show they are but men. Thus was it with the Bishops of the
Church, who by the keys of the Lamb gained power with his people, and might
command ears and eare-rings, hearts and hands to set up any monument to God,
and time turned all humane inventions into gross Idolatry, and the very keys
of Bishops prevailed with Princes to go higher then their ears, even to the
top of their heads, and take off their crowns and cast them into the laps of
Bishops, which have so handled their keys, that they are become horns held as
upon the head of the Lamb, but made to fight against him, and having gotten
such interest in the Kings of the earth, and their Crowns, work them as
horns with theirs to wage war with the Lamb, and he is blind that sees it
not in that part of the Street of the great City that is in our Kingdom.
Brute, a Roman, for killing of his Father was banished into this Land 1108
years before Christ, the first King we read of in our Nation, and some 58
years before Christ, Julius Caesar being twice beaten out of the field, and
having his sword taken from him by a valiant Duke, and Labianus a Roman
Tribune slain by it, yet civil wars gave Caesar the Conquest in the end,
and when he lost his Crowns in all his Monarchy, he had the same fortune with
us, and Vortiger, a murderer of his lawful Prince to hold that Crown craves
aid of the Saxons, and Hengist for his good service marries his Daughter, and
brings in the Saxons so fast, that as tumbling stones they came upon us, and at
the last over-bare us, and then in this division comes in the Monk, and finds
horns fitted for him, and so the ten and two in all Kingdoms agree to war
with the Lamb, and these miserable slaves to Satan, hold up his Soveraigntie
against Christ, and not like Gideon grant Christ his due, but as the people
will have it, take all to themselves.

We see in our days jurisdiction without Empire to do well in the
Low Countries, and the States rule, and their General the Prince of Orange
wars for them and they prosper, and may be some think they should do
better, if the Prince of Orange were their Emperor and the States changed to
be his servants. There is Empire with Jurisdiction, and this is twofold, merum
and mixtum Imperium. Mere Empire is absolute Monarchy, and that is divine or
humane. Divine, when God alone rules, the Lord shall rule over you, Judge. 8.23.
yet at this time was there an Aristocratie assisting this Thearchie, for Elders
left by Moses, Numb. 11.17. and that outlived Joshua, Judge, 2.7. kept the
people to God, and might have done without kings in all ages; for we are
mistaken to tie God to them as by a Law of nature to rule the world. The
Apostle says not be subject to kings, but to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. and
to confirm us in them all, says, Th re is no power but of God: and therefore
to resist one power with another is as well damnation, as to withstand one
alone; and therefore the forms of Government must be obeyed, as well as the men.
In the Thearchie of God the Elders as well as the Judges were to be obeyed, and
may be with the disobedience of God, the people disobeyed their Elders, and for
both were punished. Judges successively one by one are raised, and for the life
of their judge they are said to obey, and being dead the people presently sin
again, and I may think if they had been constant the people would have been the
worse, for if God had not humbled them by oppression, and so for a time made
them sensible of their sorrow, they would, as they were in the wilderness,
have kicked at their Commanders, Deuteronomy. 32.15. And it appears so at the last, as
the book of the Judges ends their story for Thearchie, that when they had no
kings, that is, no Judges, every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
This is arbitrary Government, when no form is observed, and as his Majesty
accuses the Parliament thereof, I dare say if we forsake that Government, our
government will be as the King says, an arbitrary Government, for mere
Monarchy is no other. The two Horns have long strugled for it, and the Pope
has gotten it over all Bishops, and what is his Government but an arbitrarie
rule to rule all men, as if all men should rule themselves, and because Caesar
kept Antichrist from this mere Empire to the thraldom of all the world: so
Antichrist having gotten it from Caesar, cannot endure one king to reign in
Italy, Dan. 7.24. till he have subdued them all. I told you of Martian a good
Emperor in the East, and the story of him is that the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes,
and Herules, gained from him the West, which in the days of Theodosius
belonged to Constantinople, and from them it was gained again by the valor of
Belisarius, Mundus and Narses, and lost again to the Lombards, and by
Antichrist assisted, by the French they are expelled, and the French too, and
the two Horns evidently the absolute Lord of Rome, and has used his horns so
well, that he has by one means or another tamed all the ten horns, and either
by power or policy makes them serve him. Its true hatred is spoken of, Revel.
17.16. and in point of Supremacy, Princes have since Luther looked to this two
horned Beast, but their hatred as yet is not hot enough to eat the flesh of the
Whore that Antichrist labors to cherish in all Countries. I said this Whore
ends her street with us; for Brute a Roman, and Caesar, Romes perpetuus
Dictator have given us more then Ireland and Scotland our denomination to be in
the Roman jurisdiction, and I see Historians this way carry it no further
then us, which makes me suspect this our present time to agree with Revel.
11.7. The street that from Jerusalem stretches to us receives our dead bodies,
that is, the Church and kingdom which politically are taken for the two
witnesses, for blessed be God, in spite of all that Antichrist, but Church and
Kingdom do witness against him, and he must do to us as he has done in other
parts of this street over-seas, bring us into straits with them, and the time
is when they and we shall be about to finish our testimony, and then rises
the last war to lay us as low as the graves mouth, but not to be able to
bury us, and the reason is the same that we have, 2. King. 13.21. The invasion
of the Moabites make the Israelites cast by the dead body, and fall to their
Arms. It is thought our Bishops the worst of them intended again to bury us in
the grave of Popery, and would have done it solemnly in an honorable mixture
of their sweet spices and ointments; and if Scotland had liked well of their
preparation, we had gone down together into the grave without redemption. But
Scotland tasted the Myrrh and Aloes to be too bitter to be born by them, and
there is no Nation up to hinder the burial, and Ireland and England follow,
and over-seas the watres preceded, and God has so tempered them, that if the
Papists were at peace amongst themselves, they would put hard but they would
heave us into their grave again, and make their own peace by our burial. They
are glad they have such an opportunity to kill us, but their joy will not be
long to hurt us with their horns. That the horns of Antichrist are in it is
more then manifest, and our Bishops so blinded that they see it not, and if his
Majesty cannot through the thick mist see it, God of his goodness expel the
clouds that hinder it. Admiration it is, to see Papists flock to the Church,
take the oath of Supremacy by some dispensation from the Pope, for certain it
is he loves mere Monarchy, and may persuade Kings so to do; for if his
Majesty would come to mixed Monarchy, and consider that his Parliament by the
form of Government in this Kingdom must join with him, he would not forsake it,
or suffer Papists to abuse his Crowns, to be as horns to goare his own body to
prevent an arbitrarie Government where it cannot be, to set up one where it
ought not to be. I say it is impossible to make the Parliament an Arbitrarie
Government, for all the world cannot invent a better means against it, and his
Majesty says the power of it is sufficient to prevent tyranny, and therefore
it cannot set it up: But Anarchie, and absolute Monarchy that is not
Thearchie, is and ever will be an arbitrary form of Government, the good God of
heaven preserve us from both for we are in the way to fall into them.

FINIS.

