ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Concerning certain MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To
the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the ARCH-DEACONRY OF
BEDFORD: For their better direction in their Presentiments in the VISITATION OF
THEOPHILUS DILLINGHAM D. D. Archdeacon of BEDFORD.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the Year 1669.

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish.
YOu shall well and faithfully execute the office of Churchwardens (or
Sidemen) in the Parish of N. and true presentment make of such defaults and
offenses, as you know to be enquirable by the laws Ecclesiastical of this Land.
So help you God.

Articles of Enquiry within the Arch-Deaconry of BEDFORD.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and their Possessions, with the furniture and
ornaments, thereunto belonging.
1 IS your Church or Chapel with the Chancel and Steeple thereof in good and
sufficient repair both within and without? 2 Are all things therein cleanly
kept, free from any thing that may be noisome or unseemly? 3 Has any part
thereof been demolished or pulled down? have any of the bells, lead, timber, or
utensils, heretofore belonging to the same, been imbezelled, or converted to
private uses during, or since the late War? 4 Have you in your Church or
Chapel, a large Bible of the last translation, the book of Common Prayer
lately established, the book of Homilies allowed by authority, the table of
degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, as also a Register-book in Parchment,
for Christenings, Marriages and Burials; and is the same kept in all points as
is required? 5 Have you a Font of stone standing in the usual place for Public
Baptism, and does your Minister therein only baptize Publicly? 6 Have you a
decent Communion Table, with a carpet, and another convering of white linen to
be spread thereon, at the time of the administration of the Lord's Supper? What
cup, chalice, patten or flagons have you belonging to that Service? 7 Have you
a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Service in, a comely Pulpit
set in a convenient place to preach the word in, with a decent cloth or cushion
for the same? have you also a large Surplice for the use of your Minister in
his public administrations? 8 Have you a book for the Church-warden's
accounts, a box for the Alms for the poor, a strong chest with locks and keys
wherein may be safely kept the plate, vessels, carpets, vestments and books
belonging to the Church? And have you a Bier with a Herse-cloth for the decent
burial of the dead? 9 Is there any strife or contention among any of your
Parish about the Pews or Seats in your Church or Chapel? Have any new Pews or
Monuments been erected there without license, or any old Monuments or Ornaments
of your Church or Chapel been defaced contrary to law, and by whom? 10 Is your
Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced, and decently kept, without abuse or
nusances? Have any encroached upon the ground thereof; or cut down any trees
growing therein, unless for necessary reparation of the Church or Chancel? 11
Have you in your Parish a house for your Minister to dwell in? Is the same,
with the outhouses thereunto belonging in good and sufficient repair? Have any
of them been defaced or pulled down without license? 12 Have you a true and
perfect Terrar of all the Glebe-lands and tenements belonging to your Parsonage
or Vicarage, taken by the view of your Minister, and other honest men of your
Parish? as also a note of such pensions, rate-tithes, and portions of tithes
both within and without your Parish, as belong thereunto? And is a copy thereof
delivered into the Bishops Registry? 13 Is there any Almshouse, Hospital, or
Free School, (being not of the Kings foundation) in your Parish, and are they
and their endowments preserved and employed to their right use? 14 Have any
dying in your Parish given any legacy to the Church, or Poor, which has been
misemployed and disposed of to other uses?
TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
1 HAve you a settled Minister in your Parish? If not, how long have you been
destitute? What is the living yearly worth, and who is the Patron thereof? By
whom are the fruits received and how are they diposed of? 2 Is your Minister
(so far as you know or believe) in holy Orders according to the laws of the
Church of England? 3 Does he diligently attend upon his Ministry, in reading
the lessons and prayers, preaching the word, administering the Sacraments,
Catechizing the youth, visiting the sick, and in all other the offices of his
Ministerial function, in such manner, form and habit, as is directed by the
Book of Common Prayer lately established, and the Act for Uniformity therewith
published? 4 Does he give notice of the Holy days, and of the Ember-weeks, that
the People may be minded to pray for such as are to be solemnly called to the
work of the Ministry? As also of the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week,
for preserving the bounds of the Parish, and for desiring Gods blessing upon
the fruits of the earth? Does he also observe the fifth of November, the 30th
of January, and the 29th of May, according to the Statutes and Orders set forth
in that behalf? 5 Is his Doctrine (so far as you can judge) agreeable to the
Word of God, and the 39 Articles agreed upon, and published Anno Dom. 1562? 6
Has he at any time, that you know of, publicly or otherwise spoken against
the Order or Government of the Church of England as is now by law established?
7 Does he administer the Sacraments in private houses otherwise then is by law
allowed? 8 Does he every year publish in your Church or Chapel, the Statute
against profane swearing, and cursing, according as it is thereby enacted? 21
Jac. cap. 20. 9 Does he permit any strange Minister to preach in your Church or
Chapel, who is not sufficiently authorized thereunto? 10 Does he serve more
then one Church or Chapel in distinct Parishes upon one day? If so, how far
distant are those Churches or Chapels which he so serves, and what wages, and
salary has he for his pains? 11 Is your Minister a man of a godly, sober and
peaceable conversation? or on the contrary, is he a frequenter of Taverns or
Alehouses, or does he board therein? Is he a Common Gamester, a profane
Swearer, an obscene Jester, or an intemperate Drinker? Is he vehemently
suspected of incontinency? Is he a fomenter of suits and contention among
neighbors? Does he give himself to any base or servile labor, or secular
trade, unbefitting the duty and dignity of his office? Is his apparel grave and
decent, both for fashion and color, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is
his carriage and conversation in any kind disorderly, scandalous, or
unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?
TIT. III. concerning Parishioners.
1 DO any of your Parish make profession of any other Religion, than what is
professed and established in the Church of England? Do any reproach the same
Religion, or seduce others from it, or endeavor to alienate the hearts of the
People from their Loyalty and Obedience to the King? 2 Do any absent themselves
from the public assemblies and Services of the Church? or not come in due time
as well to Service as Sermons, or not behave themselves when they are there
with such reverence, order, decency and attention, as is required; or depart
thence, before the Service and Sermon be ended, and the blessing pronounced? 3
Do any refuse to send their Infant-children to be baptized in your Church or
Chapel, unless in case of extreme danger? or are any children kept unbaptized
longer than is allowed? or are there any more aged Persons yet unbaptized? or
are any children, not Communicants admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers in
Baptism? 4 Do the House-holders of your Parish, take care to send their
children and servants to your Church or Chapel, there to be instructed in the
Church Catechism, that so they may be brought to understand, and take upon
them, their Baptismal covenant, and be confirmed and admitted Communicants? 5
Do all Communicants of your Parish, upon timely notice given by the Minister,
thrice at the least every year (once whereof at Easter) in that meek and
reverend manner which is required, partake of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper? and do such signify their names, and purpose to Communicate, unto the
Minister at least the day before the Celebration thereof? 6 Are there any
living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married contrary to the laws of
God? or any who being lawfully divorced have married again? or any who being
lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by due course of law, do not
cohabit together? 7 Have any been clancularly married in private houses, or in
the Church without license, the Banns not being thrice published, or by license
or without, neither of the Persons so married dwelling at that time in your
Town? 8 Do any married Women in your Parish, after their delivery from the
danger of Childbirth, refuse in due time to make their public thanksgiving in
your Church for so great a mercy? or to pay their accustomed duties as is
required? 9 Are such as die in the Parish, (who are not denied Christian
Burial) decently buried according to the order of the Church? 10 Do any profane
the Lord's day, by working in their ordinary callings, by tippling, gaming, or
any unlawful exercises, or pastimes? 11 Do any walk, talk, or stand idle in
the Churchyard, or Church Porch, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon?
12 Do any quarrel, chide, brawl, smite, or lay violent hands upon any other,
either in the Church or Churchyard? 5 and 6 Edw. 6. C. 4. 13 Have any
irreverently used your Minister, or spoken slanderous or reproachful words
against him, to the scandal of his vocation? or interrupted him in his
administrations? 14 Do any refuse to reckon with him at Easter? or to pay unto
him such Ecclesiastical duties as are then accustomably due, and to be paid? 15
Do any refuse to pay the Rates assessed upon them, for the repair of the Church
or Chapel, and the providing of Books, Utensils, and other necessary Ornaments
for the same? 16 Are there any in your Parish Blasphemers of Gods Holy name?
Any common Drunkards or Swearers? any commonly known, or suspected to be guilty
of fornication, adultery, incest, or any other notorious Crime of
Ecclesiastical cognizance: Declare who they are that they may be punished
according to their deserts.
TIT. IV. Concerning Churchwardens.
ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Have the former,
and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the Minister and
Parishioners, and also delivered up to their Successors the moneys remaining
in their hands together with all things else, belonging to your Church or
Chapel?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks.
HAve you a Parish Clerk, chosen by your Minister, of twenty years of age at
least? Is he of ability to perform his duty, and does he perform the same in
all respects as is required of him? Are his accustomed wages duly paid unto
him? or do any withhold the same from him?
IF you know any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance not
expressed in these Articles, you are likewise to present the same, and therein to
take the assistance of your Minister.

The Minister of every Parish, may join in presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen: and if they will not present such enormities as require
reformation, the Minister himself, (being the Person that should have the chief
care for the suppressing of sin and impiety in the Parish) may present the same.

FINIS.

