A Christian and Brotherly EXHORTATION TO PEACE: Directed unto the Soverain
States of ENGLAND, and the United Provinces of the NETHERLANDS. And to the
People of both NATIONS.

Translated out of the French Copy, sent by a Lover of Peace from beyond Sea.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street.

To The Illustrious Sovereign States of ENGLAND, and the United Provinces of
the NETHERLANDS. And to the People of both the said NATIONS.
I Could wish, my Lords, and beloved Brethren, that my tongue might be untied
and loosed to as good a purpose for your Peace and Reconciliation, as that in
time past was of a dumb man for the saving of his Father.

Though I am not affected with the same natural fright and amazement, as that
was which did untie his tongue in an instant. Yet I dare assure you, that the
affection, which I bear for your Peace and Reconciliation, is no less, then
that of a child for the life of his Father. And this is that which does
obliege me to conjure you to consider, whether those differences of yours can
be pleasing unto him that has freed you from the captivity and Kingdom of
death and darkness, into which you were plunged, and has gathered you unto
his holy Jerusalem, received you into his Covenant, united you unto himself and
his, with an everlasting and indissoluble bond; or whether it be not contrary
unto his will? Do you believe that he has gathered you together, and united
you with those whom he has enlightened, and to whom he caused the light of the
Gospel to shine, that you should unite your selves afterward with them that
follow after the Beast, that have given up their Kingdom unto it, and are yet
under the power of death and darkness? If you be alive, what communion can you
have with the dead, and with those that make war with the Spouse, and with the
truth of him that has raised you by his Spirit of life? Can you believe, that
he has delivered you from the hand of the Babylonians, that you should
reunite your selves again with them: Or that he made you go out of Babylon,
that you should make peace with those that maintain the Crimes, and uphold the
Dominion thereof? Are you not of those, to whom the Lord has said, Apoc. 12.
Go out from Babylon, my people? Are you not of those that have received the
Testimony of the Witnesses, which their King has slain, and whom the Lord has
raised to show unto you his will? How can you then unite your selves, and make
peace with those that accuse them and make war against them? Remember you not
the violence and cruelties they have exercised against you and yours in the
preceding age, to bring you into subjection and bondage? Have you forgotten the
Army which they called the Invincible, which they had designed for your
destruction? Are they not the very same, who seeing that they could not prevail
against you by open force, and remembering that a short truce of twelve years
failed but a very little of having undone you, conceived that a deceitful peace
would make an end of you, and that according to the advice which sometimes
Balaam gave unto Balaak, of uniting himself with the children of Israel to
divide them from God, and to provoke his anger and jealousy against them, it
would be a means to bring their design to pass. Do you believe that it is for
your good, and not much rather for their own Interest, that they have sued for
a peace with you, which is so deceitful? Are you still so blind, as not to
see that they mind nothing else* but how they may divide you from your
Brethren, and ancient Allies? Have they not been your enemies by hindering you
to entertain more advantageous confederacies? And you may sufficiently
understand by the good offices which they perform unto you at this present,
what their thoughts have been toward you, when they have sought peace at your
hands.

Oh if you could but have hearkened unto the advice which was given you
concerning it, a little before you came to a conclusion; you would now be at
peace with your Brethren, and would be perhaps far from those troublesome
Neighbors, which do so often disturb you! How much blood and treasure would
you have spared! Your people which have been but languishing all this while in
regard of the flourishing condition, they were in heretofore, would as yet
possess a glorious prosperity. And you also, Sirs, who do lend them your
hands; do you not consider the good offices, which they do unto those, who
peradventure have most contributed to maintain them in a good part of their
Estates which have been shaken? Do you not know that they are of those, who do
not think themselves obliegd to keep faith unto you, and that they cannot
suffer any of their subjects to make profession of your Religion, without
putting them to cruel deaths? Can you hope, that when they shall see their
advantages and the occasion of advancing their affairs, they will deal with you
otherwise then they have dealt with your fathers, and at this present do deal
with your brethren, notwithstanding all the benefit and advantages they have
received from them? By what Policy can you be united unto those, which do think
you to be Gods enemies, and are persuaded that he does command them to make war
against you, and would be content with the loss of Kingdoms and millions of
men to have you all utterly rooted out with all those of your Religion? How can
you give assistance for the taking of Places, even the strongest upon your
Borders, and thus insensibly to weaken and to block up your selves? Do you not
think that they may turn about and make peace with your Neighbors? Do you not
know, that thousands of Babylonians do most pas^ionately desire it, and that
already many do endeavor on all sides to bring them to a Reunion; to the end,
that they may fall upon you, promising to themselves nothing else then to
divide the spoil, which they will get of you and of your brethren? Do you not
perceive, that there be many discontented and interes^ed amongst you, which do
yet pant and long after Monarchy? Can you be ignorant, that the Interest of
Kings does obliege them to give them all possible assistance, and do you not
call to mind the hatred which you have brought upon you and the jealousies,
which you give to all, and which have drawn upon you mighty enemies? You know
but too well, that there be many of yours which do not yield unto your
Government, but by power and constraint; that your Ecclesiastical, Politic,
and Military States do consist of ill-affected persons, that are full of
discontents and emulation, which do wait only but for an opportunity, that they
may safely discover themselves? Do you not remember both of you, that there be
still some Princes, that had the Supreme Power over you which will never be
forgotten by them? Remember therefore, that upon the least disgrace that may
befall you, all those enemies will stir up themselves and join together against
you, and then indeed if you are not united with those which have followed the
Lamb, and have not Christ on your side; you can expect nothing else but an
utter desolation: And there is no great need of any great Prophet or Politician
to foretell you, that within a very little time, you will be embroiled with
those, with whom you now have made peace, and to whom you are united, unless
they will shortly feel the smart of the Thunderbolt of the Popish
Excommunication, since they do absolutely depend from the pleasure of this
pretended Holy Father? Do you not well know, that he has no greater desire in
his heart then to undo and destroy you, at what cost soever; because he does
not see any greater hinderance to the universal re-establishing of his
Hierarchicall Empire, then your faithfulness to the Lamb? Remember, Sirs, and
welbeloved Brethren, that this false and mercenary Shepherd will promise all
things unto those that are persuaded that God does command them to destroy you,
to dispose them to assault you, thinking that he has right to dispose of your
dominions, he will give it unto them, to obliege them thereunto, and offer unto
them, as from God, all the absolution they can wish for, having surprised you:
He will promise to place them in the highest degree of heaven, to move them to
conquer and to destroy you. Have you not Chronicles of the mischiefs which
these Hierarchists have done unto you in former times? Verily I cannot believe,
if you should but read them, that you would thus easily be resolved to put your
trust in those that depend upon him, and believe that God has given them an
Omnipotency both in Heaven and Earth, and hold their decrees to be divine and
worship him. Nevertheless, examine a little, whether you can do any thing that
may delight and content this Priest and his Adherents more, then to raise a
cruel war amongst your selves, and to unite your selves to, and to put your
trust in his mightiest and most confiding Son; and do you doubt but that all
those that do homage unto him are not filled with joy, to see your strength,
which they were afraid of, employed to cut the throats of one another. Oh if ye
could but look into their hearts, you would easily discern their joy. Consider
the advice, which the Lord does give unto you, Esa. 57. If you had taken notice
of the great and mavelous things, which he has done for you, whilst you
were united, and which have filled the earth with astonishment and admiration,
even to remove the Scepter and Government from your enemies, to put it into
your hands; you would not have been so ready and prompt to make peace with
those, which have not desired it from you for any other end then to do you more
hurt, and who do only conspire to bring you into subjection and to oppress
you: And you might also expect the same blessing upon your Arms, if they were
united, as they have been formerly, for the advancement of his Kingdom. But
can you believe, that he who has exalted you and followed you with his mercies
and blessings, whilst you fought for his Interest and glory, against the
enemies of his Spouse, seeing that now you have changed and turned his Arms
against his own people, and against his holy Jerusalem for those vain things
here below, and that you do not fight but for your own Interest, honor, glory,
and the Treasures of the world which he has given in portion to his enemies,
will still go forth with you? Do you believe, that the great Judge of the
whole Earth will render himself partial, and change his Covenants and
Relations for your sakes? Do you pretend either on one side or the other to
subdue your brethren? at least I would not entertain these thoughts, that you
are possessed with a desire to extirpate them: If the glory of the world, and
the desire to give law to other Nations should cause you to refuse peace with
your brethren, the example of some Kingdoms, which you have seen flourishing,
not long ago, extending their conquests to all sides, and looking upon other
Nations with contempt: The condition and the divisions, wherein you see them
at this present, because they refused an honorable and most advantageous
peace, should lead you thereunto. But one man's death, or the change of one
Minister of State is sufficient to alter the face of a whole Empire. The God of
peace loves the peacemakers: and the righteous King of Kings, stirs up his
jealousy as well against those, who will be too absolute and Lording over
their Brethren, and to give them the Law, as against those, who arrogate unto
themselves his rights, titles, and qualities. He delights to lift up the
humble, and to cast down oftentimes those that are lifted up on high: And can
you believe, that he has put all those great forces into your hands to bring
his people into subjection: Remember Christians, that they are none of yours,
and that they belong as well unto him, as to your selves. You must not think
that it is his spirit which makes you thus to degenerate from the nature of his
children. Is it by the sacrifice of his people, whereby you would pretend to
appease his wrath, and to establish your Governments, by making war against
him. I make no question, but many amongst you will reflect upon those things,
and condemn the heat and animosity, which has p^ecipitated you into these
wars, which have already cost you so much blood on both sides.

But perhaps you will say, that it is too late to think now upon these things;
that this fire is too much inflamed to quench it. Christians; It is true, that
it is too late, but seeing we cannot call back again what is past, we must
think upon the future: There is but too much mischief done already, but you
ought to consider, that it is but the beginning of lamentations and sorrows.
Let us think upon the evils and miseries which may yet ensue, and wherewith we
are threatened, and which we may prevent by our own humiliation before God, and
by asking of him a spirit of peace with our Brethren, and not a spirit of
Victory, except it be to overcome our own humors and passions. We must lay
aside our own Interests for the love of Christ, and put our selves into his
hands. And you shall see, my dear Brethren, that you will receive so large a
satisfaction therein, that it will ravish your hearts with Joy and Consolation.

Perhaps you will ask me the question, Who I am? From whence I come? and who
has sent me? and tell me, That you do not know me; and that I have nothing to
meddle with your business, That you are wise and cleer-sighted enough to know
what you have to do. Brethren, I tell you that by the grace of God, I am a
Christian, as you are, and have the same sense of the purity of the Faith of
the Gospel, and that the share which I have of the evil you suffer, and of the
injury you do the cause of Christ, makes me to speak in this manner, and to
conjure you in his name to forbear a little your passions. Nevertheless you
may examine, whether that which I tell you is truth, and the things which I
desire are not conformable to the will which he has revealed unto us: If you
believe, that Romans 12.
We are all members one of another, as his Spirit does assure us, you will
find that I have reason to complain of the wrong you do unto me: If the hand
is hurt, the head may complain of it: and if the head suffers, the heart may
groan. 1 Cor. 17.26,27.
If one member suffers, all the members suffer with it. Now ye are the body
of Christ and members in particular. Wherefore if you believe, that all those
which boast to appertain unto Christ, ought to be affected with his cause; you
will find that I am bound in christian Charity to advertize you of the wrong
you do unto him by working mischief one against another: And although I should
not only be hated, but also persecuted of my brethren; yet I would not hold my
peace, because Gods cause is concerned herein, and the rights of him, who has
given his life for a ransom both for yon and me. If you seek his Kingdom, you
may know, that the desires I have, and the supplications I make in his name, do
not proceed from the spirit of darkness, nor from the heart of an enemy.

Perhaps you will say, that you have good and excellent men enough, who have
told you all these things before, and greater too, and in better language. Well
then in Gods name, if it be so, then you are obliged the more to hearken unto
them, and to make some reflection upon the fervent desires of so many good and
honest people, that do seek to God for your peace and Reunion. And verily, if
the spirits of Prophets have been subject unto the Prophets: you are obliged
much more to yield something unto the prayers of your Brethren, that suffer and
groan for your divisions. And if charity does hold the principal place in your
hearts, then are you bound to make them to rejoice again, and to comfort them
by your Reunion, which will lift up their hearts and voice to heaven in holy
exaltations, and make them shed many thousand tears of joy, and sing praises
unto God. Do you not know, that your Creator would have pardoned a great City
full of abomination for ten righteous men only, if they could have been found
therein.

And if your Savior commands you to forgive your brethren, not only seven
times, but seventy times seven times: Shall we that are taught in his School,
and would fain be his Disciples, exercize our revenge upon many millions of
poor innocent Christians, that suffer and groan for our dissentions? Do ye not
know, Brethren, that the blood of the righteous is precious before God; and do
you not fear, that that, wherewith you now color the Seas, shall rise up one
day in judgment, together with the cries of so many Widows and Orphans which
you make, if you continue? Remember, my dear Brethren, that we shall shortly
see him come in his glory with his holy Angels, and then be ashamed and
confounded to see his wounds open still and his members murdered by the blows
we give him: How can ye hope or imagine, that, coming before him, covered with
the blood of his children, he should go forth to meet you to embrace you, to
set the Crown upon your heads, and to make you sit down upon the throne with
him, for these brave atchievments? Do you think he will receive your excuses,
and approve of these proceedings of yours against his people? Do you not
understand what he says to those, that shall presume to argue the case with
him in the day of Judgment, That whatsoever they have done to one of his
little ones, they have done unto him. And can you say unto him, that it was his
glory and the advancement of his Kingdom, you sought with the blood of your
Brethren? Do you think he will not know, that it was nothing else but your own
selfishnesse and proper Interests ye have sought at such a rate? If he should
deal with you, as you deal with him in his members, could you well bear his
Indignation? Remember, dear brethren, how many a time you have offended this
good and righteous King, and how many great wickednesses he forgives you every
day. Does he not teach us to ask of him forgiveness for our offenses, even as
we forgive them that have offended against us. Think upon the Imprecations
which we draw upon our heads, if we be not minded to forgive one another the
offenses, which we imagine we have received. It may be if you would examine the
first occasions of the disgust and ill will, which you have conceived one
against the other, with some sparks of love; you would find more of innocence
and mischance, then of ill will. You know well, Sirs, that in great
consultations, consisting of many several heads, the wisest and best advice is
not always the strongest and, and that many times a man cannot bring to pass
what a whole Nation desires; it may be you did as well on the one as on the
other side that, what you had never an intention to do, and perhaps could not
do what you had a mind to do.

Oh if we could but hearken a little to, and practice that just Commandment
which the Lord has commanded us in the third Chapter of the first Epistle of
his well-beloved Disciple, Verse. 11. For this is the message that you heard
from the beginning, that we should love one another. Verse 12. Not as Cain, who
was was of the wicked one, and slew his brother. Verse 14. We know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves not
his brother ahideth in death. Verse 15. Whosoever hates his Brother, is a
murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. Verse
16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us,
and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Verse 23. And this is his
Cemmandement, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another, as he gave us Commandment. Chap. 4. Verse 20. If a man say,
I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar. For he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen. Verse 21.
And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God: Love his brother
also.

Hearken also to what his Apostle, animated by his holy Spirit, says, in the 1 Corinthians. Chap. 6. Verse 5. I speak it to your shame; Is it so, that there is
not a wise man amongst you? no not one that shall be able to judge between his
brethren? But brother goes to law with brother. Verse 7. Now therefore there
is utterly a fault amongst you, because ye go to law one with another: Why do
yet not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be
defrauded. Verse 8. Nay ye do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren,

And again, hearken what he says in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 12. Verse
9, 10. Let Love be without dissimulation: abhor that which is evil, cleave to
that which is good, Be kindly affectionedone to another with brotherly love,
preferring one another.

If that be not enough, Brethren, behold the fervent prayer which his Master
himself makes to his Father, and to our Father for your union, before he died,
Joh. 17. Verse 11. Holy Father, keep through thine own Name those whom thou
have given me, that they may be one as we are one. Verse 22. I have given them
the glory which thou have given me, that they may be one as we are one. Verse
23. I am in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and
that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me.

Truly, if these words of Christ, the well-beloved Son of God, who has
purchased the Kingdom for you, and will give it unto you, cannot move you, nor
induce you to love those that are his, and to forgive one another trespasses,
what may we hope from you in his Name? We cannot but think upon the reproaches,
which he will make one day unto you, if ye do continue to defile your hands
with the blood of his children: If you had eyes to see and ears to hear, you
would understand very well, how much he is troubled at your quarreis: Oh ye
that divide his people, are you not afraid, lest he do destroy you, as such as
are appointed for destruction, or lest he swallow you up in the Sea, as he did
Pharaoh, that pursued them? Do you think you can be united unto Christ, without
being united unto his members which you persecute? What avails your zeal and
devotion, your fastings and prayers, with all the good Orders which you may
establish amongst you, to live according to the Will of God, and to practice
his holy Commandments, if you cannot love your Brethren, and forgive one
another offenses, and if you persist in your resolutions to cut them off root
and branch? How can ye hope or believe, that he will accept of your sacrifices,
or suffer them to ascend before his face? How long will you that the sword
shall devour: you that may in all humane appearance restore peace unto
jerusalem, will you continue to seek its desolation? Can you hope to be
partakers of those blessings which the Lord promises to them that pray for its
peace, whilst you do depopulate and waste it? Do you not know that you are
shortly to be united unto those from whom you do separate your selves at
present with an everlasting tie of love and concord, and that it has been the
good pleasure of the Father to give you the Kingdom, both to you and to them,
Luke 12.32. and that you shall be partakers of the same glory? How can you then
separate your selves from those, whose members you are? Have you no. Communion
of the spirit and of Love with the other members of Christ? Have you no zeal
for the glory of the heavenly Father? Have you no Charity to cherish and to
comfort his Spouse and his children that groan for your divisions sake? Shall
the great King of peace have no children amongst you, that dare open their
mouths, and that will labor and endeavor to quench these flames and to allay
those storms and passions, which do disturb and hinder you from knowing your
Brethren, and showing your duties unto them? Must a poor dumb man strive to
speak and to cry out from afar off, to warn you of the danger, which you throw
your selves head long into, and to conjure you in the name of Jesus Christ, to
give a stop to your distractions, to make your complaints unto him, and to
submit your selves unto his Judgment, which cannot but be rather most just and
advantageous for both, then to stay so long till he himself put his hand to the
work, and make you feel the effects of his Indignation for your goings astray,
and let you perish in your hard-heartednesse, with them to whom you unite your
selves and make peace. O that ye could but make some reflection upon these
words, which he has pronounced with his sacred lips, which you heard even now,
and prevent one another with cordial condescensions, or at least endeavor and
try to beget a good understanding, and embrace one another to please him;
wherein we would be much more happy then if we had overcome our brethren! Do
you not know, that he sees you, and that he does sympathize with us in the
evils we do one to another, and that he himself hears the strokes and blows
we inflict?

Oh that these words might as well sound in your ears, as your shots of Cannons
do sound in his ears; and that you could have him as well as St. Paul, Acts 9.
going to Damosous to persecute him! how should you be able to bear these sharp
reproaches without being moved thereat? What are you doing children, you that
know me, are you resolved to persecute me and to crucify me afresh; are you
not my people? do you not belong unto me as well the one as the other? why do
you strive to spill my blood, and to make me suffer, seeing you are nothing
else but one stick, one people, and one flock in my hand, to make use thereof
for such things as I shall employ^ you in? I make no questiou but you would be
ready to throw down your Arms, and most heartily embrace one another.
Certainly, if you had appeased a little these troubles and distractions, which
do hinder you from hearing this sweet voice, which your Brethren do hear, and
sigh for your deafness, it would work more strongly upon your hearts then your
ears; Are you persuaded, that if you should have lost all, and left all these
momentany things and worldly honors to your enemies themselves for his names
sake, that you should have lost any thing? Do you not think he is sufficient
and faith full enough to recompense and restore unto you a thousand fold and at
last life everlasting? Why then do you refuse to yield somewhat unto your
Brethren and to his children for his own sake, for the peace of his people
sake, for the honoru of his Names sake, for the quiet of his Spouse sake, to
comfort your Mother which you afflict and groaneth for your dissentions; and
for the Interest sake you pretend unto his Inheritance in the glory and
everlasting life, which he has prepared for you?

Let us turn aside our eyes from these things, Christians, and think on these
honors, on these glories, and on these everlasting riches, which do wait for
us, and cannot fail us. What if we our selves be so earthly minded, that we
cannot refrain our affections from these base and unworthy things, which we are
to leave behind us; Think you that the great King of Kings has not Treasury
and honors enough in this World, to fill and enrich you therewith; has he not
Indies and hidden Treasures, yea Kingdoms to give unto you, when he pleases?
Is it not upon these things, that you should rather make your Assignations for
your Indempnities, then upon the blood and lives of his people? Do you not
know, that all the Kings and Princes of the Earth are to come to bend their
knees before him, and that he promises unto his people Empires and Kingdoms?
Oh if we did but well ponder these things, we would not be so eager to cut one
another throats, and to make so great a breach into the holy City for things
of naught! perhaps you would not have gone half so far in the design, which it
seems you have to destroy one another. When he shall open your eyes, and make
you know the wrong which you have done unto him; He will make you sigh for it,
and then perhaps you will present your selves before the breach, which you your
selves have made against those, which do lead you thereunto, and that wait for
nothing else but to come to assault the holy City and your good Mother, after
the beach is made. You that do justify all your proceedings before men, and
endeavor to persuade them, that you have not acted any thing, but by the
righteous and just motions of the Spirit of God: How do ye think that the true
Christians can be persuaded of these things, when they see, that you will have
no peace with those, whom the Lord has also enlightened with his knowledge,
received into his Covenant, and amongst whom he causes also to shine the light
of the Gospel? Can you imagine, that those who have suspended their Judgments
all this while, and would see first the carrying on of your proceedings before
they would condemn you, when they see that you have no peace nor communion with
the Saints, will entertain any favorable thoughts on your behalf? Do you not
well know that there be but two sorts of people in the world, and that those
which are not sealed with the Seal of God, have taken the mark of the Beast,
and worship the Dragon? Faith does assure you, that you are written in the Book
of the Lamb, Charity also obliegeth you to believe the same of those who have
followed him, who have done like your selves, who are gone forth out of
Babylon, to enter into the spiritual Jerusalem, who are members of the same
body, who have the same Faith, the same Law, the same Rule with you, who follow
the same truth, and who have been till hitherto your brethren, and with whom
you have been enrolled under the same Standard, promising to stand for the same
cause and the service of the same King, who follovv the Lamb, who have followed
him even unto death, who maintain his rights against his enemies, who are
quickened and cherished with the same Spirit, who sing and publish his praises,
who love and adore him, and seek his Kingdom, who are hated and persecuted for
the same cause as you are. Why then do ye not unite your selves to follovv your
King, who comes to deliver you, and to give you the possession of the Kingdom?

After all this, if we be resolved not to recede at all from our Interests, and
that we cannot compose our differences between our selves, by the way of some
friendly Mediations of our Brethren, as the Lord does command us; at least let
us not decline such a thing, which the fiercest enemies refuse not in the heat
of a Siege for less weighty reasons then these are, for which we do invite
you in the name of Jesus Christ to make a cessation of Arms; to the end, that
your distractions may be appeased, though it were but for a fevv years, or for
some months; during which, you will find (well-beloved Brethren) that the
great King of Peace will open your eyes, touch your hearts with sweet
affections, and restore unto you holy exaltations and rejoycings in the Lord.

Do you not see the confusion which begins to be spread over Babylon; and
instead of making use of this for the advancement of his Kingdom, it seems
you are a friend of the fall of that whore, and that you would fain delay it,
and advance the desolation of Jerusalem, and fill the Holy City with troubles?
Devour you not another flesh, and make your enemies believe that he also made
you drunk with the Wine of astonishment? Do you not hear the joyful shoutings,
and the cries of Blasphemies, which the Babylonians do already send forth? O
that the world would but well consider the things which the Lord is about to
do, and whereunto he will employ us, for the execution whereof he has put
these mighty Armies into your hands, to employ them against his enemies, and to
exercise his vengeance in his Judgments against those who have slain his
Witnesses, destroyed his Saints, and made his Inheritance desolate; and who
condemn you to Hell, usurp his Rights, and hinder the approach of his Kingdom,
and who conspire your Extirpation and thraldom, Should you not give care to
the Commandments which he lays upon you, to exercise Vengeance, and to
render unto them double for the mischiefs they have done unto you? Do you not
fear that he will one day call you to an account for that power he has given
you to be avenged of his enemies; instead whereof you were so blind and
wretched, as to lend them your hands and to dis-unite your selves one from
another to be united unto them? Certainly, if you will be united unto the
well-wishers and Protectors of Babylon, you must needs expect these two things
to ensue; Either she and her King will be Conquerours over the holy Jerusalem,
or she will be overvvhelmed by the Judgments of God. If she does remain
victorious, behold you are reduced again to the spiritual Captivity, from
whence you are gone forth. But if she is subdued, you must fell the plagues,
wherewith she is threatened, and drink of her cup. How can you then be united
and make peace with those, who do uphold her, who have given up to her their
power, and who do learn her blasphemies, and adhere unto them against your
brethren? Let us hearken to the advice which the Lord herein gives us, touching
the fall of this great Whore, and of the abolition of her King; Apoc. 18.19.
Let us then separate our selves from these Babylonians, as the people of God
from Corah and his companions, left we perish with them. We are come to the end
of the war, and to the valley of Josaphat, to the day of Decisions: Do you not
see the Beast with the false prophet gathered with the Kings of Satan against
him, who rides upon a white horse, and against his Army, which are the Elect
and faithful to make war against them? Apoc. 17.
Do you not understand their plots and devices? Are you ignorant of their
Resolutions? Do you not know, that the most fervent desires of their soul do
only tend to your destruction? Apoc. 19.
Speak your conscience, think you that you can follow the Lamb, and make war
against those who follovv him; or can you be united with those, who have
given up their power to the Beast, and are gathered unto the false prophet,
without separating your selves from him, who rides upon the white horse,
leaving his party: Be not deceived, if you be found united and gathered with
the Kings, who have given up their power to the Beast against the Lamb and
his Army, you can never avoid the danger, wherein they are, of being rejected
with the unbelievers and effeminate into utter darkness. We must raise our
Spirits, overcome our passions, and follow him, who calls us to the victory
against his enemies. Are you not of Israel and Judah? Are you not of those
winnowers, who shall winnow Babylon? Are you not of those whom the Lord
commands to be set in battle array against her, and to fill her cup to the
brim, which she has filled to you? Are you not of those, whom he commands to
rejoice over her fall, and in whose behalf he promises to work a thousand new
miracles.

Think on these things (Brethren) and do not believe them to be delusions: we
are come unto the time of their Accomplishment, and do you refuse to serve the
Lord in this Occasion? Perhaps he will remove the Candlestick elsewhere, and
employ others, and it may be you will find your selves ensnared with those
with whom you are united, and have made peace.

Let us lift up our eyes and hands on high, and we shall see our deliverance,
and the Kingdom of our God to be at hand, and the Kingdom of the Saints of the
Sovereign, who fills all the earth. He comes with an armed hand and a
stretched out arm, to make his enemies feel his vengeance: Let us not put afar
off his judgments by our Union with them, He comes to begin his Kingdom of
peace in the midst of us, let us not put back the Establishment of his
Government, and the sweet melody of his praises by our dissentions. He comes
to show mercy and favor to the Jews and to the Gentiles, and to gather them
again with the house of Judah within his Sheepfold. Let us not stop the course
of his Bounties and Gratuities by our unthankfulness and divisions. He calls
us to the Victory, and to his Kingdom of Peace, there to crown our
faithfulness. Let us gather all our forces, and unite our selves with heart
and affections, that we may not hinder his glory and our own. If we find some
difficulty to overcome our selves and our resolutions, our humors and
passions: Let us think upon the sharp reproaches which he will one day cast
upon all those, who would not abate the least thing of their Interests and of
their Rights for his sake. We are the children of the King of Kings, and the
heirs of the Kingdom. Let us live therefore like those, who shall shortly
possess the Crown of honors and eternal riches. Let us yield one to another,
yea to our enemies, those things of naught, that we may lift up our hearts and
affections to the glory and happiness, which has been promised us, and which
we expect. Let us remember, that the greater pains we have taken to overcome
our selves, and the greater difficulties we met therein, so much the more
weighty and excellent will the reward be. Let us follow the example of him, who
is come forth victorious out of the grave, with the weapons in his hand to
finish the victory. He has fought, he has suffered, he has been overcome by
death to overcome death. He has conquered and has been victorious in glory.

He is now sitting on the Throne with our Heavenly Father. If we can follow
him, and overcome our selves, we are assured to reign with him.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street, 1653.


