ARTICLES FOR VISITATION Concerning certain MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED
To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the DIOCESE
of ELY.

In the third EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God BENJAMIN
By Divine Permission Lord Bishop of ELY.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University. M.DC.LXXIV.

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sworn-men.
YOu shall well and truly execute your several Offices of Churchwardens, and
Sidemen, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws.

So help you God and the Contents of his holy Gospel.

Articles of Instruction to the Churchwardens and Sidemen, in some more
special matters to direct them in their Presentiments. Anno Domini 1674.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1 IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for the
Roof, Can. 85.
Windows, Floor, and Seats?

2 Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple been demolished or pulled
down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or sold, and by whom?

3 Is there a decent Font of stone with a cover? and does the same stand at or
near the nether end of your Church, Can. 81.
in such manner as anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the baptizing of
children? Does the Minister baptize publicly only with water poured into the
said Font, without the use of a basin? 82.
Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and
another covering of white Linen, to be spread thereon at the time of the
Administration of the Lords Supper? and have you a fair Chalice and Communion
cup, with a Cover, and one or more Flagons? have they been profaned by common
use? 20.82.83.80.


4 Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service; a Pulpit
with a decent Cloth or Cushion? a large Bible of the last Translation, and a
Book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set
forth by Authority; Stat. 99.58.
and a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, and a
Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; and a Decent Surplice and Hood?

5 Have ye a Register-book in Parchment of Christenings, 87.70.52.
Burials, and Marriages? and is the same kept in all points according to the
ancient use?

6 Have you a Book of Paper, to record the names and Licenses of such Strangers
as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel? and do such Strangers
subscribe their Names in the same? As also a third Book for the Churchwardens
Accounts? as also a Chest with Locks and keys, wherein to keep the said Books,
70.
and the aforementioned Furniture?

7 Has any in your Parish defaced or caused to be defaced any Monuments or
Ornaments in your Church, Chapel or Chancel, or erected any new Pews or
Monuments therein without License from the Ordinary?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1 IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since?

2 Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or
bounds removed or changed? and by whom?

3 Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? C. 87.
as also a note of such Pensions, Ratetythes, and portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or
have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1 IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

2 Has he been legally instituted and inducted into his Benefice? And did he
within two months after his induction, publicly in the Church upon some
Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by Authority, and there publicly declare his
assent thereunto?

3 Is he resident among you? how many weeks has he been absent from you
without urgent necessity?

4 Has your Minister a Curate? Is he in holy Orders, Can. 47.
and conformable to the Laws of the Church? Is he allowed by the Ordinary?

5 Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith, without
either diminishing in regard of Preaching or in any other respect, 14.
or adding any thing in the Matter or Form?

6 Does your Minister at the Reading Divine Service, 58.
wear a Surplice and Hood?

7 Does he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, the Ember-weeks, and the
yearly perambulation of Rogation-week, as is appointed by the Rubric?

8 Is your Minister licensed to Preach? if so, does he constantly (not having a
reasonable impediment) Preach one Sermon in your Church or Chapel every
Sunday? or if he be not licensed, 45, 46, 47.
or be hindered, does he procure one to supply his Office by Preaching or
Reading one of the Homilies?

9 Does your Minister instruct the youth in your Parish in the Church
Catechism, Can. 56.
and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop? Rubr. before
Confirm.


10 Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, or to Baptize any Infant that
is in danger of death? 67.69.
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

11 Has your Minister married any Persons in private houses, 62.101.
or such as being under the age of 21 years, have not the consent of their
Parents, or without the Banns first published on three several Sundays or
Holidays in your Church, or at any other hours then between 8 and 12 in the
forenoon, unless he had a License or Dispensation granted by Archepiscopal or
Episcopal Authority so to do? name who were the Parties so married, and who
were present at such marriages, and what Minister married them, as far as you
know or have heard?

12 Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
72.
prophesyings or Exercises not appointed by Authority? Or does he, 73.
or any other, either Minister or Lay-person hold any Conventicles or Meetings
in private houses within your Parish, for people of several families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

13 Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and
conversation? 75.
or is his carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a
Minister?

14 Has the Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly Administered in your Church
or Chapel so often, and at such convenient times, that at least thrice every
year, (whereof once at Easter) every Parishioner within your Parish, being of
the age of sixteen years or upwards, might receive the same?

15 Has any Child been Baptized within your Parish in any private House,
(except upon great necessity; and if so what was the same?) 3. Jac. 5.
or by any Lay-person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other then your
own Minister? and has such Child which was privately baptized, Rubr. of
private Bapt.
if he lived, been afterward brought to your Church, that the Congregation and
the Minister of the Parish (in case such Child was not Baptized by him) might
be certified whether such Child was lawfully Baptized, or no?

16 Does your Minister publicly in your Parish Church or Chapel, Ratif. Can.
once every year, read over the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, agreed
upon by the Clergy of both Provinces An. Dom. 1603. in such manner as is
commanded to be done?

17 Does your Minister every six months in your Parish Church, C. 65.
openly in the time of Divine Service, upon some Sunday denounce and declare
Excommunicate by name, all such of your Parish as do persevere in the sentence
of Excommunication, not seeking to be absolved?

18 Has your Minister said Divine Service while any Excommunicate person has
been present in the Church? or has he delayed to denounce any Excommunication,
Suspension, or Absolution that has been sent unto him from his Ordinary,
further then the next Sunday or Holiday after the receipt thereof under Seal?

19 Does your Minister, upon Sundays at Morning Prayer declare unto the
Parishioners, Rubr. after Nic. Creed. C. 64. C. 50.
what Fasting days and Holidays are to be kept the week following?

20 Has any strange Minister been admitted to preach in your Church, who did
not before the Churchwardens subscribe his name in your book provided for that
purpose, 52.
and the day when he Preached, and the name of the Bishop or Bishops of whom he
had License to Preach?

21 Does your Minister publicly read over the thirty nine Articles unto the
people twice every year, to the end that they may the better understand the
same, and be made more thoroughly acquainted with the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, and not so easily drawn away from the same, as formerly
they have been?

22 Does your Minister in the presence of your the Churchwardens, 70.
write and record in your Register Book, the names of all Persons christened,
together with the names and sir-names of their Parents; and also the names of
all Persons married and buried within your Parish from time to time, and the
day, and the year of every such christning, marriage, and burial? Does he
subscribe his own name, and the Churchwardens theirs, to every Page of that
being filled with inscriptions?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1 IS there any in your Parish that makes profession of any other religion then
what is established in the Church of England? Does any reproach the same
religion, or seduce others from it, Act for Uniformity. 1 Q. Eliz.
or endeavor to alienate the hearts of the people from their loyalty and
obedience to the King? Do any absent themselves from the public assemblies of
the Church, or that come not in due time as well to Service as Sermons? If
there be any, what are their names?

2 Is there any person in your Parish, C. 109.
that lies under a common fame, or suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or
Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers,
or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or
filthy Talkers, or sowers of Sedition, Faction, and discord amongst their
Neighbors?

3 Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
wares sold? or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers or sellers of
Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those
days?

4 Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel upon
Sundays and Holy Days, Can. 13.
and as well during Divine Service, 18. Rubr.
as preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reverently, uncovering their
Heads, Kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are read?

5 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infantchildren to be
Baptized in the Church, Rubr. of Bapt.
unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them to be Baptized in other
Parishes? or are they Baptized after other form then is appointed? or are they
kept Unbaptized longer then is allowed? or is there any Infants, or more aged
persons as yet Unbaptized?

6 Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age who does not receive
the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
112. Rubr. after Commun. 27, 28.
Does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes? or do any
strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it?

7 Are there any in your Parish that be Denounced and declared Excommunicate
for any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? 63.
and do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to
the Church, and absolved?

Expressed in a table set forth by Authority. Anno Dom. 1563.
8 Are there any living in your Parish who have been married contrary to the
laws of God and the Church? or any that being lawfully Divorced have married
again? or any that being lawfully married, and not Separated or Divorced by
course of Law, do not cohabit together?

9 Are there any married Women within your Parish who after their Delivery from
the Peril of Childbirth, 99.107.
refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they
come so to do, do they come decently Apparelled, and make their offerings
according to Custom?

10 Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter offerings, Rubr.
Can. 85.
or refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or
Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging?

11 Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? Rubr. b.
and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that be
yet unproved? or any goods administered without a due grant from the Ordinary?
did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and charitable
purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

12 Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

13 Do all, and every householder of your Parish, Fathers, Can. 59.
Masters, Mothers, and Mistresses, cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentices, which have not learned their Catechism, to come unto Church on
Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by
the Minister till they have learned the same?

Rubr. before the Commun.
Do such as intend to be partakers at the holy Communion signify their names to
the Curate, at least some time the day before as is appointed by the Rubric?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
1 HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 years
at the least? Can. 91.
Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his
duty in Reading, Writing and Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and does
he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? are his Wages duly
paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him?

2 Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service, and when any person is
passing out of this life, does he upon notice toll a Bell, that the neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and mercy of
God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Surgeons and
Midwives.
1 Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, Can. 77.79.
who is not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? Does he teach his Scholars the
Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause his Scholars upon
Sundays and Holidays orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that
they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service
and Sermon?

2 Does any in your Parish practice Physic and Chiturgery? or any woman take
upon her to exercise the office of Midwife, without License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, Can. 89.
by the joint consent of your Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your
Minister, and the other by the Parishioners?

2 Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens, the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

3 You are further to understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Rubr. at
Commun.
a sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.

4 Have you a decent basin provided by the Parish, wherein to receive the Alms
for the poor, and other devotions of the people at the administration of the
Lords Supper, Rubr. at Commun.
and are they then especially collected by you the Churchwardens, or some
other fit person for that purpose?

YOu also are to exhibit a Bill of Presentiments to this Court, (...) all
Ecclesiastical offenses committed by any that now is, or of (...) was
inhabiting within your Parish; especially concerning the ^^^ters mentioned in
the precedent Articles, and therein to take the (...) stance of your Minister.

FINIS.

