ARTICLES FOR VISITATION Concerning certain MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL: EXHIBITED
To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within the
DIOCESE of ELY.

In the primory EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God
BENJAMIN By Divine Permission Lord Bishop of ELY.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. MDCLXVIII.

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens, and Sworn-men.
YOu shall Swear, that you, and every of you, shall faithfully execute your
several Offices of Churchwardens and Sidemen, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws. So help you God and the Contents of his Holy Gospel.

Articles of Instruction to the Churchwardens and Sidemen, in some more
special matters to direct them in their Presentiments. Anno Domini 1668.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for the
Roof, Can. 85.
Windows, Floor, and Seats? 2 Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple
been demolished or pulled down? what part, and how long since? or any of the
Lead, Timber or Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or sold,
and by whom? 3 Is there a decent Font of stone with a cover? and does the same
stand at or near the nether end of your Church, Can. 81.
in such manner as anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the baptizing of
children? Does the Minister baptize publicly only in the Font? Is there a
decent Communion Table in your Chancel, 82
with a decent Carpet, and another Covering of white Linen, to be spread
thereon at the time of the Administration of the Lords Supper? and have you a
fair Chalice or Communion-cup, with a Cover, and one or more Flagons? have they
been profaned by common use? 20
4 Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service; 82
a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cushion, 83
a large Bible of the last Translation, 80
and a Book of Common Prayer lately published Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies
set forth by Authority; Stat.
and a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, 99
and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; and a Decent Surplice
and Hood? 58
5 Have ye a Register-book in Parchment of Christenings, 87
Burials, and Marriages? 70
and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use? 6 Have you a
Book of Paper, 52
to record the names and Licenses of such Strangers as are admitted to Preach
in your Church or Chapel? and do such Strangers subscribe their Names? As Also
a third Book for the Churchwardens Accounts? as also a Chest with Locks and
Keys, 70
wherein to keep the said Books, and the aforementioned Furniture?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1 IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
enchroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since? 2 Is
the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good repair?
have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license? have there been
any enchroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or bounds
removed or changed? and by whom? 3 Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all
the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your
Parsonage or Vicarage? C. 87.
As also a note of such Pensions, Ratetythes, and portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or
have head?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1 IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England? 2 Has he been legally instituted and inducted
into his Benefice? And did he within two months after his induction, publicly
in the Church upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read
the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his assent thereunto? 3 Is he resident among you? how many
weeks has he been absent from you without urgent necessity? 4 Has your
Minister a Curate? Is he in Holy Orders, Can. 47.
and conformable to the Laws of the Church? Is he allowed by the Ordinary? 5
Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith? 14
without either diminishing in regard of Preaching or in any other respect, or
adding any thing in the Matter or Form. 6 Does your Minister at the Reading
Divine Service, 58
wear a Surplice and Hood? 7 Does he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, the
Ember-weeks, and the yearly Preambulation of Rogation-week, as is appointed by
the Rubric. 8 Is your Minister licensed to Preach? if so, 45, 46, 47.
does he constantly (not having a reasonable impediment) Preach one sermon in
your Church or Chapel every Sunday? or if he be not licensed, or be hindered,
does he procure one to supply his Office by preaching or Reading one of the
Homilies 9 Does your Minister instruct the youth in your Parish in the Church
Catechism, Can. 59.
and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop? Rubr. before
Confirm.
10 Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, 67
or to Baptize any Infant that is in danger of death? 69
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? 11. Has your
Minister married any persons without publishing the Banns on three Sundays or
Holidays, 62
or has he married any in private houses, 101
or not between the hours of eight and twelve in the morning, unless he had a
license or dispensation from the Archbishop or Bishop of this Diocese, or from
their Chancellors or Vicars General, or from the Commissary for faculties so to
do? Name who were the parties so married, and who were present at such
marriages, and what Minister married them as far as you know or have head. 12
Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts, 72
Prophesyings or Exercises not appointed by Authority? Or does he, or any
other, 73
either Minister or Lay-person hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private
houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under
the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation, contrary to
the Laws and Canons in that case provided? 13 Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or
Lecturer, a man of a sober life and conversation? or is his carriage in any
kind disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister? 14 Has the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly Administered in your Church or Chapel
so often, and at such convenient times, that at least thrice every year,
(whereof once at Easter) every Parishioner within your Parish, being of the age
of sixteen years or upwards, might receive the same? 15 Has any Child been
Baptized within your Parish in any private House, (except upon great necessity;
and if so what was the same? 3. Jac. 5.
) or by any Lay-Person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other then your
own Minister? and has such Child which was privately baptized, Rubr. of
private Bapt.
if he lived, been afterward brought to your Church, that the Congregation and
the Minister of the Parish (in case such Child was not Baptized by him) might
be certified whether such Child was lawfully Baptized, or no? 16 Does your
Minister publicly in your Parish Church or Chapel, Ratif. Can.
once every year, read over the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, agreed
upon by the Clergy of both Provinces An. Dom. 1603. in such manner as is
commanded to be done? 17 Does your Minister every six months in your Parish
Church, C. 65.
openly in the time of Divine Service, upon some Sunday denounce and declare
Excommunicate by name, all such of your Parish as do persevere in the sentence
of Excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? 18 Has your Minister said
Divine Service while any Excommunicate person has been present in the Church?
or has he delayed to denounce any Excommunication, Suspension, or Absolution
that has been sent unto him from his Ordinary, further then the next Sunday or
Holiday after the receipt thereof under Seal? 19 Does your Minister, Rubr.
after Nic. Creed.
upon Sundays at Morning Prayer declare unto the Parishioners, what
Fasting-days and Holidays are to be kept the week following? C. 64.
20 Has any strange Minister been admitted to preach in your Church, C. 50.52.
who did not before the Churchwardens subscribe his name in your Book provided
for that purpose, and the day when he Preached, and the name of the Bishop or
Bishops of whom he had license to Preach?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1 IS there any in your Parish that make profession of any other Religion, then
what is established in the Church of England? And that refuse to come to the
public Assemblies, Prayers, Act for Uniformity 1 Q. Eliz.
or Service of the Church? If there be any what are their names? 2 Is there any
person in your Parish, C. 109.
that lies under a common fame, or suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or
Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers,
or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or
filthy Talkers, or sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their
Neighbors? 3 Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their
bodily and ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops
kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers
or sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses
upon those days? 4 Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church
or Chapel upon Sundays and Holidays, Can. 13.
and as well during Divine Service, 18
as preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reverently, uncovering their
heads, Rubr.
kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are read? 5 Is
there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infantchildren to be
Baptized in the Church, Rubr. of Bapt.
unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them to be Baptized in other
Parishes? or are they Baptized after other Form then is appointed? or are they
kept unbaptized longer then is allowed? or is there any Infants, or more aged
persons as yet unbaptized? 6 Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of
age who does not receive the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter
is always to be one? 112
Does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes? Rubr.
after Commun. 27,28.
or do any Strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it? 7 Are there any
in your Parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate for any crime
committed? 63
How long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of your Parish keep
society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved?
Expressed in a table set forth by Authority. Anno Dom. 1563.
8 Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married,
contrary to the Laws of God? or any that being lawfully Divorced have Married
again? or any that being lawfully Married, and not Separated or Divorced by
course of Law, do not cohabit together? 9 Are there any Married Women in your
Parish, 99
who after their Delivery from the Peril of Childe-birth, 107
refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they
come so to do, do they come decently Apparelled, and make their offerings
according to Custom? 10 Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter
Offerings, Rubr. Can. 85.
or refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or
Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging? 11 Do any refuse to bury their dead
according to the Rites of the Church of England? Rubr. b.
and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that be
yet unproved? or any Goods administered without a due grant from the Ordinary?
did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and charitable
purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? 12 Is
there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or
Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the
body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary? 13 Do all, and
every householder of your Parish, Father, Can. 59.
Masters, Mothers, and Mistresses, cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentices, which have not learned their Catechism to come unto Church on
Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by
the Minister till they have learned the same?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
1 HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk, Can. 91.
aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and
sufficient or able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing and Singing? Is he
chosen by your Minister, and does he duly-attend him in all Divine Services at
the Church? are his Wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from
him? 2 Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent,
in tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service, and when any person is
passing out of this life, does he upon notice, toll a Bell, that the neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of
God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Surgeons and
Midwives.
1 Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, Can. 77.
who is not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? 79.
does he teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority?
does he cause his Scholars upon Sundays and Holidays orderly to repair to your
Church or Chapel, and see that they behave themselves quietly and reverently
during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? 2 Does any in your Parish
practice Physic or Chyrurgery? or any woman take upon her to exercise the
office of Midwife, without license from the Ordinary?
TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Can. 89.
or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? 2 Have the
former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the Parish, and
delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining in their
hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel? 3
You are further to understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Rubr. at
Commun.
a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants. YOu also are to exhibit a Bill of Presentiments to this
Court, of all Ecclesiastical offenses committed by any that now is, or of late
was inhabiting within your Parish; especially concerning the matters mentioned
in the precedent Articles, and therein to take the assistance of your Minister.
FINIS.

