PREACHING VVITHOVT ORDJNATJON OR, A Treatise proving the lawfulness of all
Persons, of what Degree, Rank, or Trade soever, being enabled with sufficient
guilts and qualifications from God by his Spirit, to preach and set forth the
Gospel, though no Minister nor any other Officer in the Church of God.

1. Peter 4.10. As every man has received the gift, even so let him minister
the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. 1. Corinthians. 14.31. For you may all prophecy one by one. Psalm 149.9. This honor
have all his Saints, praise ye the Lord. By Edmond Chillinden.

Imprinted at London, for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Blew Anchor in Cornehill near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

To the National Synod or Assembly.
SIRS,
I Have a few words to speak to you, and they are to tell you, that I here
present to your view this Treatise following, viz. concerning Preaching without
Ordination, and my desire is, Esa. 8.20. 1 These. 4* 21.
that you would read and seriously consider it, trying all things therein, by
the word of God, and if in the trial it shall be found to corrispond to truth,
then quench not the spirit, nor despise the preaching therein contended for.

But let me entreat you to take the Council of Gamaliel, which he spoke to
another Assembly, Acts 5.34.35.38.
ye men of Israel take heed to your selves what you intend to do, as touching
these men, so I say to you, take heed to your selves what ye intend as
touching the suppressing of preaching the Gospel by the breathing of the Spirit
of God in the hearts of his people (though not ordained by your humane
Ordination.) Refrain least you be found fighters against God; for if this
Council and work be of God (as by the Scriptures to me it appears to be of
his right hands planting) then it shall stand and prosper.

It is very strange that you who would be counted the only advancers and
inlargers of the Kingdom of Christ should rise up in Arms against him, and
with might and maine labor to suppress the power that he has ord^ine to
conquer and bring under all Nations, and Kingdoms, to his subjection, the
preaching and declaring the Lord Jesus Christ in the spirit by the word of
truth, whereon God in Christ rides forth gloriously, conquering and to conquer,
bringing in all thoughts and hearts to subject unto him.

Did you but see the miserable desolations that the Devil has made in most
parts of this Kingdom upon poor souls and all for want of the powerful
preaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, so that I may say as the Prophet says, my
people perish, and are destroyed for want of knowledge, so that thick darkness
covers the whole face of this Kingdom, Psa. 11.12.
and the truth of God in the professors and practisers are the only Butt, that
wicked men ruled by the Prince of darkness, Hosea 4.6.
bend their bows and make ready their arrows upon the string that they may
privily shoot at the upright in heart.

You cannot be ignorant, but this is the main design of the Devil to hinder
the propagation of the Gospel by preaching, because he knows by the power
thereof, Christ's Kingdom is advanced and enlarged, and I am very confident
that the maine reason that has impeded and obstructed the Parliaments just
proceedings, and that the people in many parts of this Kingdom are so
ill-affected, is because they have not had the Lord Jesus Christ held forth to
them in the preaching of the Gospel, for I have observed in my travills, since
God called me into this Army, that in many of the Counties of England, there is
not one Parish of tenn that has one of your ordained men that is able to
preach Christ, these things generally I have taken notice of, that where any of
them are, they are either Drunkards, unclean persons, dumb Idols, or at the
best cruel Malignants that have ever been opposite to the glory of God, the
Parliaments just proceedings, so that the Proverb in the Prophet is made true,
like Priest, like people

Therefore these things considered, I hope you will all of you to the utmost of
your powers endeavor that Christ may be preached in every part and corner of
this Kingdom, Esa. 11
that it may be full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters
cover the Seas.

What if some which are called Sectaries, and that of the Army have preached
Christ out of envy and contention, and not sincerely; howsoever I know, and
many thousand souls besides me can testify that Christ has been preached,
Phil. 1.15, 16, 17.
yea, and that effectually and powerfully to the praise and glory of God, and
the comfort of many hearts, and I bid defiance to the Devil and all his
blackmouthed Instruments to produce that ever those that they call Sectaries,
in preaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, did by that open a gap to profaneness,
or disaffect the people from their loyal obedience to the Parliament, or their
proceedings; but have gained them to yield subjection in bringing forth the
peaceable fruits of godliness, and righteousness toward God and men;
therefore my thinks you and all people should rejoice, that Christ is preached,
and God made known.

Therefore refrain ye from that envious spirit, in causing the Magestrate to
forbid us knowing that your selves are men of like passions with us, though you
be the people and wisdom shall die with you, Job. 12.2.3. 1 Cor 14.36. John
3.8.
but there are those that have understanding as well as you and are not
inferior to you, yea who knows not such things as these, the word of God
came not from you, neither came it to you only, but as well to the rest of the
Saints, besides you, seeing the wind blows where it lists, hold not back,
neither hinder the blowings or breathings of it least God come and fight
against you with the Sword of his mouth, Revel. 2.16. Heb. 6.9.
and slay you before him, because you will not let him reign over you nor his
people; but I hope better things of you and things that accompany (the
propogation, and setting forth the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, by
preaching as the way of) Salvation, so I rest.

Yours to serve Christ in the Gospel; Edmond Chillenden, Lieutenant of Horse in
Colonel Whalies Regiment.
From my Quarters at Kingston upon Theames August the 20. 1647
To the Reader, especially my fellow Brethren and Saints, Commanders and
Soldiers with me in the Army, under his Excellency, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
THese are the days of Jacobs troubles wherein the affliction of Joseph begins
to be multiplied, iniquity geting the upper hand, does with Iron sinnewes, and
the brow of brass outface and bear down the word of exortation, so that now
no man may strive or reprove one another, the consideration of which has
occasioned me to present you these following lines to consider of, and if the
Lord shall give ye understanding, in the knowledge of the truth herein
contended for, fear not to Practice it, notwithstanding the threats and
menaces of men, though their words be stout, against the Lord, and make the
righteous offenders for a word, yet let those that fear the Lord speak often to
exort, teach, and admonish one another in setting forth the Lord Jesus Christ a
Savior for sinners.

Now all you that have tasted how good the Lord is and has seen the goeings
out of his Arm, before you, be not cast down nor discouraged, but with
Nehemiah resolve not to fly, though Tobiases and Sambalats enemies of Gods
truth and people be never so great, and mighty, and stir themselves never
so much; shall such (...) as we fly, shall we flinch, shall the voice of a
damsel now make us afraid and tremble, that have had the experience of a
Gracious God preserving of us, and making us to stand and oppose the fury of
our enemies in the field, in the midst of flashing flames, and showers of fiery
bullets, did he make us to have stout hearts to stare death in the face, and
contemn the terror thereof, shall we now distrust him, ^oe, far be it from us
for God is faithful, and will never leave us nor forsake us, but shall and
will stand by us to deliver us out of all our troubles.

I have only one word more to say, I know you with my self had thoughts that
though in the Bishops days we snut our doers for fear of those Jews and eat
the bread of affliction, and drank the waters of adversity, yet now they being
taken away and the armies of the alians being put to flight, we had hope our
eyes should never have seen our teachers thrust into corners again but should
have inioyed the sweet fruit of outward peace and liberty in the free
worshipping of God, but you see God ordering of it otherwise; Therefore his hand
being in it, we must conclud it is for his glory and for our good. (Let us with
patience possess our souls letting our moderation be known to all men, the
Lord is at hand) and give our cheeks to the nippers, and our backs to the
smiters, and not to resist authority, but patiently to bear and suffer what
penalty shall be put upon us, for this is the will of God that by well doing we
should put to silence the ignorance of foolish slanderous men that so report of
us, and that ye may so do it, shall be the prayer of him that is your
brother and fellow soldier and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom,
and patience of Jesus Christ.

Edmund Chillenden Liuetenant.

PREACHING WITHOUT ORDINATION
THE great controversy, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5.25. Esa. 8.20. Act. 20.26.27.
Mat. 28.18. to the end Mat. 18.17 to 20. Rev. 22.18.19. Gal. 6.16. Ephesians. 4.8.
to 12. 1 Timothy 3. tota. Tit. 1.6. to 10. 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.6, to 9. Act.
1.13.14.15.21. to end. Act. 6.1. to 7. Act. 14.25
or thing in this juncture of time is: Whether men (though by God furnished
with gift^ and graces, and every way made able to dispense the Gospel;) may
preach the same either private or public, except they be ordained.

Therefore to make it appear, that it is lawful for men (so furnished and
enabled by God,) to preach, publish, and declare the Gospel, though they be not
by any Church or men ordained thereunto; I shall premise these things to
consideration.

1. That Christ has purchased unto himself a Church.

2. That to this Church he has given Laws and ordinances in his written word,
by which they are to walk, and by none other.

3. That in them he has declared and set forth to his Church, what, and how
many Offices, there are with Officers to be supplied with their qualifications.

4. How the several Officers are to be invested, ordained, or put into their
several Offices.

1 Co. 12.13, 14. chap. 1. Pet. 4.10.11 Heb. 10.23.24.25. Act. 6.3.1. Tim. 3.
tota. Titus 1.6. to 10. Psalm. 132.11. Act 2.3. and 10.38. Act. 2.36. Esa.
9.6.7. Rev. 15.3. and 17.14.19.20. Act. 20, 28. Psalm. 87.3.1. Pet. 2.5 9. Psalm.
48.2. Mat. 18 to 20.28. and 18 to end Psalm. 147.19.2^. Heb 3 2.6. Ephesians 1.22.23
and 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Rev. 22.18.10 Deuteronomy. 4.2 Pro. 30.6. Pet. 1.3. 1
Cor. 11. 1 Gal 1 7 8 9. v. 1.2.3. chap. Ephesians. 1.2. Col. 23.10. Ephesians. 5 3.24. 1
Cor 5. and 16.1. Act. 14.23. 1 Cor. 1.1. Mat. 13, 19, 20 2 Cor. 1.1. To. 1.7.
Mat. 28.18^ compared with Mat. 18.19. and 20. compare that with Psalm
149.8.9. and all them with 1 Cor. 5 16. 1 Col. 3.10. Rev. 1, 2, 3. chap. Act.
1.21. to 26. and 6.2. to 6. and 14. to 23. Gal. 1. 1 Timothy 3.1. to 12. Tit. 5.7.
Act. 2.37. to 47. compared with Act. 6.2. to 6.14. to 23. Mat. 18.16. to 27. 1
Cor. 49. Rev. 2. Romans 10.17. 1 Timothy 3.1. to 12. Tit. 1.5.7. Act. 1.15, 16, 26.
and 6.6.3.7.14.22.23. to end. 1 Timothy 4.12. Ephesians. 4.21. 1 Cor. 1.5. Col. 4 3.
5. The manner how they are to manifest their gifts, par^^, and qualifications
to declare their fitness, that the Church may know and judge of them before
they be ordained, that they may not be mistaken in their choice.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ being the anointed of his father, set on the Thrown
of David, King of Saints, King of Kings, has purchased to himself by his
blood, a Church which is a City, or body politic, whence it is called the City
of God, of the great King, the body of Christ, his Temple, Orchard, Vineyard,
nichosed Garden, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices to God through Jesus Christ the Lord.

2. This Church or spiritual City he as their King and head, has given laws
and ordinances in his written word, as rules by which she is to be guided, and
in them is laid down to his people, all things needful for life and
godliness to make the man of God perfect in the performance of the visible
worship of God, so that there is no need for man or any sort, Company or
assembly of men, to devise or make laws, or institute Ordinances for his
people, to observe in acting any thing concerning the worship and service of
God, or in the choice or ordination of Officers in his house.

3. This Church is set forth in the Scriptures to be particular congregated,
visible Saints depending on none but Christ, in things concerning his
spiritual Kingdom, it is not a house of lime and stone, nor a Congregation of
visible wicked men, no national, provinticall, diosian Church, those the
Scriptures do not allow, nor in no wise declare, that God has promised his
blessing and presence to dwell amongst since the assention of Christ, and
whence such Churches came, and of whose devising they were, you may see in the
Scripture cited. Rev. 16.19 and 13.1. to 11. to end Rev. 18 2.3.

4. Those have power given them, and it lies in common to all and every of the
Saints (members of the Churches of Christ) jointly together to choose them
Officers, as namely, (Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons) being the whole
number of Officers I find mentioned in the Scrip^ures and to act in all other
things given them in charge as Prayer-Preaching, receiving into fellowship
judging of offenders and administration of the other Ordinances, this power
does not lie nor ever was given to the Officers, Ministers, or Presbytery
only, that I can find in the Scriptures, but to the several Congregations I
find that they had power to choose from amongst themselves men fitted and
enabled by God, to supply the several Offices in his house and Sanctuary, to
invest and ordain them.

5. If the Church have power, it must be supposed or granted, that first there
must be a Church, having this power before there can be any Officers rightly
and orderly ordained, except it can be maintained from the Scriptues, that
there is Apostles still, or men having an Apostolical function which I
conceive no where in Scripture is to be found; therefore if men may not preach
before they be ordained, then how men should be ordinarily converted to the
faith, and order of the Gospel I see not, because faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word preached, and if this be not granted, how and which way
Churches can be gathered, and Officers ordained I cannot see except the Popes
Ordination will serve which for my part I am loath to allow.

6. Again for to choose one into Office presupposes an aptness and fitness in
the parties for the sufficient discharge of that place unto which he is so
called, chosen, or ordained, and it is granted of all sides that the Officers
of the Churches are so and so to be qualified as the Scripture sets forth, as
namely, that they be men of wisdom, knowledge, grave, modest, of good report,
both of them without, as well as with them within, full of the holy Ghost, apt
to teach well, learned in Christ, no novice or youngling in the School of
Christ, to be instant in season, and out of season, always ready to convince
the gaynsayers by sound Doctrine, as he has been taught the truth in Jesus;
these quallifications are required in the teaching Elders, or Bishops, before
they be ordained; therefore it is clear, that the gift of utterance and sound
knowledge by which a man is enabled to pray, preach, teach, declare, set forth
Christ in the Gospel not only may, but must both be, and appear to be in any
men before they be chosen into the office of the ministry, 1 Timothy 3.1. to 22.
Tit. 1.5. Esa. 56.10.11. Act. 20.28. Act. 6.3.6 and 14.23. Job. 13.17. These.
1.4.20. Luke 4.16. Mat. 13.54. Act. 13.15.16. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. compaire 2 Timothy 3.17. Heb. 3.3. to 6. 1 Cor. 21.13.14. Chap. Romans 22.6, 7 Ephesians. 1.7. to
17. Col. 3, 16. Heb. 10.23. to 26. Heb. 3.3. to 6. Ephesians. 1.21.22.23. 1 Cor.
44.33.40. Act. 1.14. to end. Act. 6.1. to 7
for he that is not a Prop^^^, or has not the gift of preaching, before he be
chosen (...) the ministry, is a dumb dog and an idel Shephard; for the Office
does not give, (nor indeed cannot any whit increase) the gifts, or convey by
the same any spiritual qualification or ability, only gives a solemn charge
and Commission to use their gifts by virtue of their office they have
received, This I suppose granted on all sides.

7. Then it will easily be granted, that except men before they be chosen and
ordained may be suffered and permitted to declare their gifts in Doctrine and
Prayer (which are the maine things, and that which is chiefly to be looked on,
that the Pastor or teacher is specially to be qualified with) how shall the
Church that is to choose them take knowledge of their sufficiency, that they may
both with faith and good conscience, call them and submit to them, And
otherwise, for trial of men's gifts (whereby they may be judged fit to be
chosen into the Ministry, but only by the way of preaching before Ordination
by virtue of their gifts, I find none, the the Scriptures are silent in it.

But the other, that is prophesying or preaching, by virtue of the gifts and
grace of God, before ordination or office; thus the Scriptures are very
plentiful in manifesting and declaring which God has instituted for that end,
that his Church may grow up thereby a complete habitation, completely
furnished with all her officers or servants, to supply all her several offices
to the praise and honor of Jesus Christ her head, who has instituted all
things in order, he being the God of order has left nothing in disorder, but
always has been careful to provide for his house, not only Officers to
supply her in her several Offices; but also has prescribed a way and a rule
for them in the choosing them in their several Offices as is partly before
specified.

Obj. But here some may say, that a man that is a good Scoller, having been at
the University, and studied Divini^y, may be permitted (as it is usually
practiced in their Universities) to preach a Sermon two or three for
approbation or trial of his sufficiency before he be ordained.

Answ. 1. To this I answer, that it is not his learning, 1 Cor. 2.10. to end.
Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 1.19.20. and 2.1. to end. 1 Cor. 1.5. Col. 4.3. Col. 2.4.8.
nor any humane art; that will be sufficient to enable him to be a Minister of
the Gospel, because by that no man can understand the mind and will of God in
the Scriptures.

2. Because no man by his studying or labor in humane things, can procure the
gift of utterance whereby he may be enabled to set forth and declare Jesus
Christ in the Gospel.

Answ. 2. It is granted in the latter part of the objection, that it is lawful
and so practiced by our adversaries, to preach before ordination; therefore I
do wonder why they should condemn that in others, which they practice
themselves; for if a man may preach one Sermon, why not two, then why not
twenty, and if one month, why not twelve months, and so I conceive, if it be
lawful thus to preach, as they themselves grant, then the great controversy
about this point, is between them and me at an end.

3. But I further say, that it will not be sufficient to preach a Sermon or
two, whereby to judge of a man's fitness, because it is impossible that his
gifts and qualification can be judged off, by any in so short a space, and so
the Church to be mistaken in their choice, and instead of an able and painful
Minister set up a lying Idol, dumb dog, as it has often fallen out in many
of the Parishes of England.

4. Now I shall come to examine the several Scriptures that do hold forth the
lawfulness of all the Servants of God preaching before Ordination, I shall
take them in order as they lie, and I shall endeavor to clear them from those
false glosses which have been put on them, which have hindered the appearing of
this truth, I shall also answer such objections as seemingly may lie in the way.

1. The first Scripture to prove the thing in hand is written in Numbers:
11:26, to the 30, the words are these at the 26: verse: but there remained, two
of the men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, the name of the other
was Medad, and the spirit rested one them (and they were of them that were
written, but went not out unto the Tabernacle) and they Profied in the Camp,
and in the 29 verse: Mosen said would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets the Lord will put his spirit on them (Reader take notice) Moses here
wishes that all the Lords people were Prophets, the Lord putting his spirit on
them, I h^pe none will say that he wished that all the Lords people were
Priests or Levits (I mean ordained official men) but they were all Prophets.
1 Cor. 14.3.21. Romans 12.6. to 9.
Teachers, or Preachers of Gods will, and mind, one to another for their good
and edification, that which Moses wishes here, is that all the Lords people
were such as Eldad and Medad were, and they were no Officers, neither Priests
nor Levites, and yet we find they prophesied in the Camp, by reason of the
Spirit of God, resting on them, and not because they were ordained Officers;
for then I conceive Iosuah would not have complained of them, as may appear in
the 27.28. verse but Moses makes it all one to be a Prophet, and the Lord
putting his spirit on a man, Mat. 25.14 to 29. Luke 19.12. to 24. Mat. 5.15.16.
Mark 4.21. Luke 8.16.17. Ephesians. 4.7. to 17. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 10.34.35. Iam.
2.1. to 10. 1 Cor. 1.19.20.27.28. John 3.5. to 9. Mat. 13.11.16.17. and Mat.
11.25.26.
then why should not men now, to whom God has given of his spirit, with gifts
of utterance and knowledge be a Prophet and Preacher, and that of the Lords
own making; for Moses does wish the use or exercise of Gods spirit and graces
in men, as the having and possessing of them for the gifts of God are not
given to be hidden under a Bushel, or to be kept in a napkin, but to be made
use of to the praise and glory of God, that is the giver of them, who has
given gifts unto men for the works of the Ministry, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the edifying of his body, which is his Church and people, so
then I thus argue, if any man now that is a Member of the Church of Christ,
though not ordained unto whom God has given sufficient gifts, and
qualifications by his Spirit, whereby he is made able to preach, he is not
only to possess it, but to employ it for the perfecting of the Saints
laboring in the word and doctrine of Jesus Christ.

2. And seeing God is no respecter of persons, but gives his gifts by his
spirit to whom he pleases, where by all men that partake of those gifts are
enabled to prophecy or preach, though not ordained what should hinder them
from being Prophets and Preachers, and that of the Lords own making, by the
free gift of his spirit, seeing it blows where it lifts, as soon upon a
Cobl^r, Tinker, Chimneysweeper, Plowman, or any other Tradseman, as to the
greatest learned Doctors in the world.

Then I here demand the reason, why he namely the Cobbler, Tincker, etc. may not
be permitted, to manifest the gifts and graces of God in him, by Preaching and
declaring the Gospel as the other: to wit the Learned man, I confess my self
ignorant of any reason against it in the whole word of God, but greatly for it,
and lays it on all men that have received the gift so to administer: 1 Pet.
4.10, 11.
so to use it as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God.

Obj. But some object and say, that this spirit here that those, to wit Eldad
and Medad had, was not the spirit of prophecy, but of Government.

Answ. I answer, I shall not deny but they had the spirit of Government, but
that they had not besides it the spirit of prophecy, I leave by the wise to be
judged; for look into the text the 26 verse of Numb. 11. and if we will not be
wilfully blind, we cannot but see and know, they had also the spirit of
prophecy.

For says the text, Eldad and Medad propesied (or preached) in the Camp; Now
if they had done nothing but concerning Government, without question Ioshuah
would not have desired Moses to forbid them, in regard that God had made known
that he would take off the spirit that was on Moses, and give it unto the
seaventy, and this Joshuah could not but know; For the Lord says to Moses, in
the 16 ver. Gather unto me seaventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou
know to be the Elders of people and Officers over them. Now from hence it is
plain that Ioshuah knew they were Officers, (that is Magistrates) and if in
point of Government it was that which they did, then I conceive Ioshuah would
not have said Moses forbid them.

Secondly, The Lord says I will come down and talk with thee, and I will take
of the Spirit that is one thee, and will put it on them. Now it is clear in
the Scriptures, that Moses had not only a spirit of Government, but a spirit
of Prophecy (or preaching of prayer and supplication); Exodus 14.15. Deuteronomy.
18.15. Act. 7.37.
Therefore if God took of that spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it to the
seauenty whereof Eldad and Medad were, then it cannot be restrained only to
Government, but it must extend to all the rest of operations and works of it,
as to prophecy or preach the great matters of Gods law to his people.

Obj. But some may further object and say, these were Officers, and such as
Moses knew to be so; therefore it will not follow from hence that all may
preach though guifted, except they be Officers as these were.

Answ. I grant they were Officers in the Commonwealth of Israel, to wit,
Magistrates; but what is this to the thing in hand, to wit, Preaching without
Ordination; for there is no mention that they were either Priests or Levites,
or any Officers of the Church, neither did their Office bind them to prophecy;
I leave it to be judged, whether it was any principal end in their Office,
binding them to preach, neither can it be gathered from the Scriptures because
they were Officers therefore they preached; no, but because God had powered on
them, Job. 32.18.19.20. Joel. 2.28. Esa. 44.3. Act. 2.17.
end filled them with the spirit as Elihu like new bottles, and as wine that
has no vent; therefore they must speak and open their lips that they might be
refreshed, and this was the cause of their prophesying or Preaching, because of
the powerful work and operation of the spirit of God in them, and not because
they were now Officers for that they were before this time, as is plain by the
text, and Gods words to Moses in the 16. verse.

The next Scripture I come now to handle, is the 2. Chron. 17.7. verse, and to
the 8.9. verse, where it is said, that Iehosaphat sent to his Princes to teach
in the Cities of Judah, and they taught in Judah, and had the Book of the Law
of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and
taught the people, whence it is evident, that the Princes of Judah that were no
ordained Ministers, preached the Law of the Lord to the people, with the
Levites (a practice that those who in our days call themselves the Tribe of
Levit) I could desire that they would press it upon the Princes of our times,
those who are furnished with the spirit of God to preach the Gospel of Jesus
Christ to the people, Amo: 8.11.12.
in our several Cities, that so there might not be that famine of the word,
that is in the many parts of this Kingdom, you see Jehosaphat did not question
their Ordination neither did the Levites forbid any such thing, so my thinks it
would evidence a good heart in the Levites of our times to press Princes and
people, all that have gifts to preach Jesus Christ to the people, that the
earth might be full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, Habak. 2.14.
as the waters cover the Sea, and not to be of the envious spirit with Josuah,
to persuade the Magistrates to forbid them, Esa. 11.9.
because they are not ordained by their humane Ordination; there was never any
such thing heard of, nor declared in the Scriptures, for it is evident in the
writings of Moses and the Prophets, Luke 2.46.
that any of their wise men as they are called in the Scriptures, might and
ought to teach in their Synagogues without any regard or respect had to any
Office or Ordination in the Church, we find Jehosaphat himself, Mat. 9.35.
Luke 4.16.17. Numb. 11.29 Mat 23.34. 1 Cor. 1.20. Ier. 18.18. Phil. 3.5.
2. Chron. 19.6, 7, 8, 9.10, 11. verses, confirming this to us how he preached
to the Judges, and to the Levites, and also his divine and excellent prayer to
God in the public congregation and of Ezekiah his Sermon in the very Temple of
God, and so of Nehemiah and others, who taught the people the Law of the Lord,
a good pattern for our Princes now, and do we not read freequently in the
Scriptures every where that the Scribes Pharisees and Lawyers, in any of which
were no ordained Ministers, neither Priests nor Levites; Mat. 13.54. to end.
Mark 6.2. to 5. Luke 4.16, to 22. Luke 2.46. Act. 15.16. and 17.2.
yet taught publicly amongst the Jews, as appears by the Scriptures, and if
it were not so practiced how comes it to pass that Jesus the Son of Joseph,
who was no ordained person, that is no Priest nor Levite in their Church, that
they permitted him to dispute in the Temple with the great Doctors, and to
teach and preach frequently in the Synagogues as he did, and the like may be
seen of Paul and Barnabas, that were no ordained Ministers that the people of
the Jews took notice of, yet they preached frequently and publicly, and so
it appears, to be the constant practice hitherto set out in the Scriptures, to
preach without Ordination.

Obj. But some may say, that Jesus Christ was extraordinarily endued with
guists, and the like of Paul and Barnabas, and taught by their extraordinary
gifts, and were so permitted by the Jews to preach.

Esa. 9.6. and 61.1.2.3.
Answ. He that so says that they were extraordinarily endued with gifts,
speaks the truth, though to little or no purpose to the matter in hand; for
what was that (to wit, their extraordinary gifts) to the received order and
practice in the Temple, and Synagogues amongst the Jews, that did not believe
in Christ nor acknowledge him, nor his Apostles in any such way.

Object. Some may further say, that Jesus was the Son of God sent of God to
preach, and Paul and Barnabas were Apostles and so might preach, because they
had an Office that did bind them to it.

Jews look on Christ as he was the Son of God? did they look on Paul and
Barnabas as Desciples of Christ? Mat. 13.34. to end. Mark 6.1. to 5. John
7.46. to end. Mat. 13.34. to end. Mark 6.1. to 5. Acts 4.13. to 18. compared
with 5.28 Acts 13.16.
I am sure no man will dare to affirm it; because the Scripture is against it.
We find declared in the Scriptures, that the Jews looked on Christ with scorn
and contempt in relation to his being the Son of God, and say of him, Is not
this Jesus the Son of Mary the Carpenters Son, even of Joseph. Nay is not this
Jesus the Carpenter, did they not hate and despise both him and his Apostles,
and in the consideration of his being a minister of the Church of God, or his
Apostles any Officers, they did not believe at all; but only according to the
common custom amongst them, they permited Jesus to preach and dispute, and so
was it that Ruler of the Synagogue sent to Paul and Barnabas, that if they had
a word of exortation to the people to say on; and not because they were
Officers or had any ordination in the Rulers understanding, and so much shall
suffice for this particular. I now come to the next Scripture,

Acts the 18.24 to the end, where it is thus said, A certain Jew named
Appolloes borne at Al^^^ndria, an eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures,
came to Ephesus; this man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being
fervent in the Spirit he spoke, and taught dilligently the things of the Lord,
knowing only the baptism of John, and he began to speak boldly in the
Synagogue; whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them
and expounded unto him the way of God were perfectly. And in the 28 ver. it is
thus said, For he mightily convinced the Jews and that publicly, showing by
the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. Reader, thou see what is recorded
in the Scriptures of this man Appollos how he preached Jesus Christ diligently
and that publicly in the Synagogues, and yet thou see there is no office nor
Ordination which is at this time once hinted as that he had, and yet he
preached the Gospel by reason of his fervency in the Spirit: so that was the
cause of his so boldly speaking and teaching in the Synagogue: and that he had
no Office nor Ordination at this time, I shall give thee these reasons 1.
Because the Scripture is altogether silent in it and does not once hint any
such thing. 2. Because we only find this mentioned of him in the Scripture,
that he was instructed in the way of the Lord being fervent in the Spirit,
spoke and taught boldly mightily convincing the Jews, Acts 18.2^
and that publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. 3. He
knew the Baptism of John he was so far taught in the way of the Lord to
embrace Christ as that he went beyond the Jews and so could be no officer in
the Church of the Jews.

4. He could not be any officer in the Christian Church, because he knew only
the Baptism of John he was not yet come far enough in the knowledge of the
Gospel for that: These reasons I conceive are sufficient to evidence to all men
that are not guided by a partial Spirit that Apollos here preached not by
virtue of any office or ordination but by the virtue and power of the Spirit of
Gods operation in him.

But some may say this man was extraordinarily guifted by God, and so by his
extraordinary gift preached.

I answer that some things especially above other man is recorded of him, as
that namely he was a very eloquent man, Acts 18.24.
and that he was mighty in the Scriptures, and that he boldly taught, and that
by his teaching, he mightily convinced the Jews, but that this did prove that
he was extraordinarily endued with gifts from God I cannot see, but do believe
the contrary, and for that I shall offer the Reader these reasons, first,
because if God had extraordinarily inspired him, he could not have been
ignorant of the revealed will, way, and Council of God declared in the Gospel,
and only to have known the Baptism of John, Acts 20.26.27.
for none that God did so inspire, but did know the whole Council of God
revealed, as witness Paul and all the oiher Apostles.

John 14.28, and 16.13, to 16.
2. Because if he had been so inspired, then he would had no need of Aquillaes
and Priscillaes teaching or more perfect learning him the way of God, for then
he might better have taught them, but we find that when they had heard him,
they took him unto them, and expounded or showed him the way of God more
perfectly, and therefore for these reasons is it that I believe he was not
extraordinari^y guifted of God, and so much may serve to evidence the truth
from those false glosses and misinterpretations, that some have endeavored to
put upon this Scripture to hinder the Saints from following the rule and
example of Christ and his faithful Servants set forth to us in the Scriptures,
in preaching and declaring the Gospel without Office or Ordination. 1 Cor. 11.1.


I come now to Acts 8, 1, 4. compared with Acts 11.19, 20, 24. Where it is thus
written, And at that time there was a great persecution against the Church that
was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of
Judea and Samaria except the Apostles; and in the 4. ver, it is said thus,
therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word,
and in Acts 11.19, 20, ver. Thus now they that were scattered abroad upon the
persecution that rose about Stephen travailed as far as Phenice and Cyprus and
Antioch preaching the word to none but the Jews only and some of them were
men of Cyprus and Cyreene, which when they were come to Antioch spoke unto the
Grecian preaching the Lord Jesus and the hand of the Lord was with them and a
great number believed and turned to the Lord; here (Reader) consider seriously
what God by his Spirit has recorded in these places of Scripture for our
learning, if it be well minded God does as it were point out to us his
foreseeing the error, and evil that men in this point would run into and
therefore says that all the Church except the Apostles were scattered, so that
I conceive that God does point out here that the officers staid behind and
those that were scattered and went preaching the Gospel were no ordained men to
that end, And I conceive it cannot be thought, nor gathered from what is in the
Scripture related that these that were scattered this whole Church were
ministers, ordained men, namely Pastors, teachers or Elders, it seems somewhat
strange to me that the whole body of a Church should be ordained Ministers for
that were to make the body monstrous, and disorderly, because, as the Apostle
says 1. Corinthians. 12, 17, ver. If the whole body were an eye where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing where were the smelling? but now has God
set the members every one of of them in the body as it has pleased him so that
it is clear that if God be the God of Order and does all things orderly it
cannot be thought that the whole body of this Church being at Jerusalem with
the Apostles were all ordained Ministers, Acts 8.1.3.
they consisting at least of three thousand persons, such a thing was never
heard of, nor yet never any Scripture produced holding forth or hinting any
such thing, for in these Scriptures here is only thus much said, the whole
Church at Jerusalem except the Apostles were scattered, and they being
scattered went preaching every where Jesus Christ and this is all that is in
the Scripture mentioned of them, and no office nor ordination at this time
minded.

But though they had no office all of them yet some of them had,

I confess there is mention of Philip who was an ord^ined officer as you may
see in Acts the 6. and the 5. ver.

That they were extraordinarily inspired to me^ seems unreasonable, and that
for these reasons.

First. Because there is not the least tittle in the text than gives any hint
that way. Secondly, Because the only titles given them are all the Church that
was at Jerusalem except the Apostles were scattered and they were some of them
men of Cyprus and Cyrene, and nothing minded in the least of extraordinary gift
or endowment. Thirdly, Only their preaching here and there is noted and spoken
of, ^and that by reason of their persecution they became so scattered and not
by reason of any extraordinary gift bestowed on them. Acts 8.3, and 11, 19, 20.
4. Because that if so be they had had any Apostolical function or ordination
or extraordinary gift of the Spirit then in my understanding there had not been
any need of so sudden (nay not at all) of a sending of Barnabas from Jerusalem
to Antioch, Acts 11.22 23.29.
though he were a good man and full of the Holy Ghost to settle and confirm the
disciples which they by their preaching had begot to the faith.

For I conceive that any extraordinary gifted man or men amongst them was well
able to have done that work as Barnabas: Ephesians. 2.20, and 3.5. 2 Peter 19 20.21.
and let any show out of the Scriptures that where the Apostles did preach and
beget to the faith that there went out or was sent any to confirm it better
after they had begun is, but such was the sending here of Barnabas, therefore
for these and the like reasons I conclude that these men th^^ Church that was
thus scattered and went preaching the Gospel begetting men to the faith and
obedience of the Gospel, were not officers neither ordinary nor extraordinary
(...) nor any ordination to any such thing, neither any extraordina^y gift or
endowment: but ordinary such as God promised to pour upon all flesh, Joel 2.28,
Acts 2.17. Isa. 44.3.^
which these having received some tallents of the Spirit of God, such was the
power of the grace of Love shed abroad in their hearts that they could not but
speak and declare those they had seen and heard making use of that saying, when
thou art converted thy self strengthen thy brethren.

no man is against.

I understand by preaching of the Gospel, Luke. 2.10, 11. and 8.39. Mark 5.19.
Acts 13.32. 1 Ioh. 1 1. to 4. Psalm. 16.10. 2 Cor. 4.13.
it is not to go up into a pulpet to be apparelled in black, to make a long and
tedious oration of far fetched tales, out of the old and ancient fathers both
popish and heathen, but to declare Gods will and mind to his servants that he
has revealed to them by his Spirit agreeable to the word, and this I find to
be the substance of preaching the Gospel, was it not the same that the Angels
did in the second of Luke. And the blind man in Luke the 8. And the woman of
Samaria John the 4. Two of these preached so effectually that they begat faith
in the hearers, and how faith can be wrought in persons in an ordinary way
without preaching you may consider the Scriptures cited. Romans 10.14. to 17.


2. Again it is more then can be gathered from the text that they did but
discourse, for the text says they Preached, Acts 4.2, and 5, 42 and 8.25, and
9.20, 27 and 10, 36 37, and 17, 1, 2.3. Acts 18.4.20, 7, act 8, 30, compa.
35.37.
and if we look into other places of Scripture that speaks of preaching we
shall find the same expressions that is here used, and therefore strong reason
there is to believe that this preaching was such as the Apostles used, as may
be seen in the Scriptures cited.

3. That they did discoursively preach Christ, I will not, nor dare not deny,
but that they did that only, is more then can in my understanding be concluded
from the Scriptures. For I find that Philip when he joined to the Eunuchs
Chariot did use intercourse of speech ver. the 30. and 31. but ver. the 35. we
find Philip to have begun at that place, of Scripture and preached Christ to
the Eunuch so long without any intercourse of speech, till he had by the
powerful work of Gods Spirit wrought faith in the Eunuch: to believe in Jesus
Christ, and to submit to him in his ordinance of Baptism: as may appear by
ver. 36. Therefore I think it is clear that he preached in that way of
preaching that is so much contended for.

The next Scripture that offers it self to be looked on in this particular of
preaching without ordination is in the 1. Peter the 4.10, 11, ver. where it is
thus written as every man has received the gift even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold graces of God: if any man speak
let him speak as the Oracles of God, if any man minister let him do it as of
the ability that Godgiveth, that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever Amen. For the
understanding of the understanding of the intent of the Holy Ghost, here we are
to consider the words as they lie, and the Apostle says as every man has
received the gift all persons in general of the who^e Church not to the
Officres or Ministers only, but to all without any respect to office or
ordination that have received the gift, they all as they have received so they
ought and they are bound to Minister (that is preach) and declare it one to
another that they may be good, faithful in discharging of the trust and
stewardship committed to them, 1 Cor. 4.2
as every man has received the gift, (that is) as every one has received
this, and another that, and every one has received he ought to offer the same
as a free and willing offering toward the building up of the spiritual house
and Church of God, as the Israelites of old did every one that was willing
whose Spirit within stirred him up, Exodus 35.5. comp. Re. 20. to 29.
did come and bring according as they had received toward the building of the
Tabernacle: and it is to be taken notice of that h^^e here toward the building
of the Tabernacle there was one admitted only the Priest and the Levite, they
that were consecrated and in holy Ordination, but every one whose hand was
willing brought as he had received, Ephesians. 4.7. to 15. Collo. 2.19.
and God excepted of it as a sacrifice well pleasing in (...) sight, so now
toward the building of the Spiritual house of God, God has given gifts unto
men for the work of the same and does require our freeness and willingness to
offer the same as he has commanded for the perfecting of the saint that they
may increase with the increasing of God, and thus much is clearly held forth in
these words,

But some may say the Apostle has not to do here with preaching, else in hand
but to exhort this Church, and by them all the servants of God to the exercise
of the grace of love, which is shed abroad in their hearts, and does not love
extend it sel^? and is it not the Apostles mind and intent here to instruct
the servants of God how they should improve his grace of love in all manner of
ways, that they might bring glory to him and good to his Church and people, is
not this his main aim and intent? does not he end and conclude with this
saying? that God in all things may be glorified, then as God is honored and
glorified when his people are full of Charity, Isai. 61.10. Rev. 2.17
and do extend the bowels of mercy and compassion to them that stand it need:
to feed the hungry, to clo^he he the naked, to harbor the stranger, thi^ I
hope the great adversaries against preaching without Ordination will not deny,
but it is the duty of all persons that to do, or else I am afraid they would
not have so many good gifts of their good Masters and D^^^e as they have had so
is it not the duty lying upon all as they have received the gift, should by the
grace of love extend and hold forth the bowels of mercy and compassion and
riches that is in Jesus Christ, to clothe the naked and distressed sinner with
the robe of Christ's righteousness, to refresh their thirsting souls with
streams that may glad the City of God* Psalm. 78.25. and 46.4.
fill their hungry souls with Angels food even the hidden Man^^; I conceive
here is a most real manifestation of the grace of love, when we extend it
liberally with both hands and not sparingly, therefore I conceive it is very
clear, that the Apostles words are not to be restrained only to outward
hospitality and charity for the body, ^hey that shall so do^, cannot but do
violence to the text, and wrong the meaning of the Spirit (in my apprehension.)

2. Again consider the Apostles exhortation, ^s to the administration of a
manifold grace, not of one us of hospitality ver. 9. bu^ to all and general
the gifts and graces of God for the which end the Apostle in the 11 and 12.
verses brings two things, First the gift of preaching in speaking, if any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracle of God.

Secondly if any man minister let him do it as of the ability that God gives,
so that by this it is clear, the Apostle has some thing else in hand besides
hospitality, to w^^ preaching and declaring the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
that by virtue as they have received the gifts of the Spirit, therefore how any
can make such a construction as that the intent and scope of the Apostle and
meaning of the Holy Ghost is to be restrained only to ver. 9. I leave by the
wise to be judged, how it has the least sutablenesse to the analogy of faith,
but as the Apostle says as every man has received the gift, this I conceive
is his intent, that even such men mutually together in the bond of love
communicate this their gifts as good and faithful stewards of the manifold
grace of God, Collo. 3.14.
and a manifold grace is not one grace, but hospitality is but one grace, but
to the exercise of a manifold grace, is it here that the Apostle does exhort
the people of God to the administering of them, not only to be barbarous, for
that were the ministering of but one grace, and one is not diverse or manifold,
and so I come to the next Scripture, which is the 1. of Corinth, the 12. verse
7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

But the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

At the 1. Corinthians. 14. verse. 1. follow after Charity, and desire spiritual
gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy compare with the verses 3. the 23,
24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 39. the Apostle in this Epistle, and in the
places cited, treates very largely of the exercise of the gifts and graces of
God in prophesying or preaching the Gospel by all men that are enabled
thereunto with sufficient gifts from God, and this the Apostle presses on them
by the exercise of the grace of love, as is ployn if we look into the 12.13.
and 14. Chapter before cited and in the beginning of the fourteenth Chapter he
says follow after Charity and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
prophecy, now we are to take notice, who it is that the Apostle exhorts to the
exercises of the graces of love, and that is as may be seen in the comparing
what the Apostle, says in the first verse in these words, but rather that ye
may prophecy the (ye) that he means here in the 23. verse, appears to be the
whole Church, excluding none that have gifts, so that I hope none can have any
ground to think that this his exhrtation was minded or intended only to the
Ministers, Officers, or ordained men in the Church of Corinth: he writes and
exhorts the whole Church to covet after the best gifts, but rather that they
might prophecy, and this he persuades them to, by an argument drawn from the
excellent benefit that came to them by the having and exercising of it, as may
be seen in the 3. verse, he that preaches speaks to men for their
edification, exhortation, and comfort, it is the excellent way that God has
ordained to beget men to the faith, to discover the secrets of their hearts, to
convince men of the truth of God, and the way of his worship, as may be seen
in verse the 23. to the 26. and this the Apostle presses upon the whole Church,
and that this whole Church should be all of them ordained men, to men it seems
somewhat strange, I think it be so miraculous a thing, as it is beyond all
imagination, never read of in the Scriptures, nor heard of in any age of the
world; so that then it will appear, and must be granted that the Apostles
exhortation extends generally to all men, Members of the Church of Corinth,
without respect had to Officer or Ordination, to covet earnestly to preach, and
declare the Gospel as he says in verse 31. ye may all prophecy, yea all the
whole Church of Corinth, that have gifts, one by one, that all may learn, and
all may be comforted, wherein is to be noted that the Apostle speaks of all
preaching, as largely and universally as all learning, from whence I still
affirm and thus argue, that all those now that are the Servants of God, 1 Cor.
9.16. 1 Cor. 11.1. Col. 3.16. Heb. 10.23. to 26. Jude 20. Rom 12.6. to 9. and
15. and 14. Object.
that have received gifts from him, whereby they are enabled to preach and
declare Jesus Christ in the Gospel, though no Officer, neither having any
Ordination may, ought, nay they are bound, and woe be to them if they preach
not the Gospel, a necessity is laid upon them to do it, and to exhort others to
the practice of it, as our Appostle here does, seeing we are to follow them as
they followed Christ, and we find that in all their Epistles, they still
multiply exhortations to the Churches in this nature, as may be seen in the
Scriptures cited.

But some may object and say, that though they were not Officers, nor had any
Ordination, yet they were extraordinarily guifted.

Answ. To which I make this answer, that this to think much more to affirm is
very absurd, and tha for these reasons, because it was never heard of, nor in
all the written word of God hinted at, especially concerning this Church of the
Corinths, that the whole body of them were extraordinarily guifted, 2. because
the Apostle does restrain women from preaching, or others speaking in the
Church, from whence it is plain, Luke 2.36. Exodus 15 20. Judge. 4.24.
that this prophesying is ordinary, and lies in common to all the Servants of
Jesus Christ, for women that were extraordinarily guifted I affirm, and the
Scripture cited with me might preach, and did without restraint, so that from
hence I thus argue, that the Apostle forbidding and prohibiting women from
preaching, gives liberty to all men guifted for to preach, and again I argue
from this ground, that they were not Officers ordained, nor extraordinarily
guifted, because the Apostle opposes women to men, Sex to Sex, and not women
Officers or extraordinary guifted men; for then I conceive the Apostle would
nor have aid, let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted for them to speak; but the Apostle would have aid, let your women
keep silence in the Churches because they are no Officers, nor have any
Ordination, not any extraordinary gift, therefore they are to be silent in the
Churches; but he says it is not permitted for them to speak, not out of any
such consideration, as before minded, but because of the Command of God, they
are to be under obedience, and to learn in silence, for it is a shame for
women to speak in the Church. 3. because the Apostle exhorts that the Church
should judge of the Doctrine that these Prophets or Preachers should teach, as
appears by verse 29. let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the rest
judge for the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, now if they
were extraordinary Prophets, and infallibly guided, they could not err; and so
the Apostle might have spared his labor of pressing them to judging of their
Doctrine delivered; Ephesians. 2.20.35. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Timothy 16.17. Psalm. 19.7.8
for such Prophets or Preachers as were extraordinarily guifted I affirm could
not err, and so were not subject to any such Judgment as the Apostle calle^
for at the hands of the Church of Corinth, and for any to say that Prophets
extraordinary could or might err, is to weaken and shake greatly the ground and
pillar of our faith, and if they might err, then the Apostles, and if in
Doctrine taught why not in writing, and if this were true, we were of all men
most miserable, but we know we have a more sure word of prop^ecie, whereunto we
do well to take heed, and diligently to mark and study, and upon this sure
word we know is our faith, built even of the Prophets and Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.19.
that we are guided by the unering spirit of God, and need not their Doctrine,
should be called in question, or so judged by any of the Sons of men;
therefore these Prophets here spoken of were not extraordinary, but ordinary,
by reason the Apostle commands the rest of the Church to judge, and try their
Doctrine.

Again the Apostle says in the 37 and 38 verses, that if any man think
himself a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things that I write
are the Commandments of God; but if any man be ignorant, let him he ignorant
still, by all which it appears plainly, that they were but ordinary Prophets
or Preachers, and had no other then ordinary gifts and indowments, for could
they be thi^s infallibly guided by the spirit, and yet must Paul call on them
to acknowledge the things he writ, were the Commandments of the Lord Jesus, in
my understanding, he might have saved this labor, for he could not but know
that such that had the same measure and manner of the infallible spirit with
him could not be ignorant of the Doctrine and Commands of Christ; therefore it
is most apparent and plain* that they were but ordinary Preachers, and
preached by an ordinary gift, such as is common by the promise of God, to be
powered forth upon all flesh, and hence is it that the Apostle in the close of
all, exhorts them to the use and study of this preaching, and declaring of
Jesus Christ, as appears in the 39. verse in these words, wherefore brethren,
covet to prophecy or preach; where is to be noted, he puts them on to the use
and study of means, even the word and Gospel of God which is able to make the
man of God perfect to all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
thereby furnished, so that in my understanding it clearly appears they were
not extraordinary Preachers, but ordinary, for extraordinary Prophets or
Preachers were at no time exhorted to any such thing, that ever I read of, to
the use and study of means immediately to be fitted or furnished, 1 Cor. 2.12.
Act. 2.1. to 5.
but immediately without any means freely given to them of God, without any
study or labor, as may be seen plentifully in the Scriptures cited; so that
from all that which has been said, it is most apparent and clear, and that
from the further exhortation which the Apostles uses to the Churches and Saints
of God, it is lawful, yea, necessary for them to preach, to declare to make
known, and set forth, yea and that publicly, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for
our Savior says, that which I have told you in your ears, do you preach upon
the house tops, and the Apostle in Romans 12. at the 6. says having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given unto us (not Ordination) whether
prophecy let us prophecy according to the proportion (of what) (not
Ordination but of Faith) and the Apostle exhorts the Collosians the 3. and 16.
to have the word of Christ dwell in them richly, in all wisdom, whereby they
should be enabled with grace in their hearts (not Ordination) to teach and
admonish one another, and build them up in their most holy faith, the same
Apostle in Hebrews the 10.23. to the 25. verse provokes that Church to hold
fast the profession of Faith, without wavering, to consider one another, to
provoke one another to love, and to good works, to exhort one another, and
blames them in the 5. Chapter and the 12. verse, for not being frequent in the
exercise of the gifts of the spirit in preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
by which they might for the time have been teachers of others, and for the
neglect they had need to be taught themselves again the first principles of
Religion, there be some Scriptures more which is cast in the way as opposing
this truth in Romans the 10 and 15. how shall they preach except they be sent?
and so they argue that ordination is the sending here intended, but that there
is any such thing here minded peruse the Scripture; I understand the sending
here is the being furnished with gifts from God inabling them to make known God
through the preaching the Gospel that those that hear it may believe, and so
much my thinks the Apostle argues from the 13 to ver. the 18. and minds nothing
of any office or ordination but only the gifts and manistations of the Spirit
bring the Gospel of peace and glad tidings of good things, another Scripture
which is alleged the 1 of Corin. the 7. Chap. ver. 20. let every man abide in
the same calling wherein he was called whence it is alleged that a man being
by Gods providence called to this or that trade he ought therein to abide, and
so from thence that preaching of the Gospel is a trade for some men to abide
in, now to clear and set forth the Apostles meaning here consider the scope of
the Apostle which he has here in hand, and that is this, that in whatsoever
particular calling or trade and in what particular relation and engagements men
were, in whether bond or free Circumcision or uncircumcision, Jew or Gentile,
whether master or servant, whether married if by the Gospel of Jesus Christ
they were called to believe, they in the same relations condition, bond or tie
were therein notwithstanding their now being beleivers to abide with God, for
the Apostle says in the 21 ver. and 22. Art thou called being a servant care
not for it: now I hope none will say that Calling i^ here ordination to the
Ministry, the Apostle exhorts here he should not care for it and none will say
that men being called to the office of the ministry ought not to take care,
but diligently to wait upon the Ministry, it is evident the Apostles meaning,
by calling here is the bringing of men by the power of the Gospel out of a
state of unbelief and infidelity to be believers in Jesus Christ, and so being
husbands or wives, masters or servants, they were therein to abide with God and
to know that their now being believers did not break their civil ties or
relations and this is that which the Apostle here intends from verse the 12. to
verse the 25. and does not at all mind any calling to any office or ordination
to the ministry, neither does make it here or in any other place of Scripture
a trade to preach the Gospel: but generally through the whole Scripture lays
it down as the general calling which belongs to all the Saints by virtue of
their being interested into Christ by the power of the Spirit in the preaching
of the Gospel; and so much for the present I offer by the wise to be considered
and tried by the Scriptures in the Spirit of love and meekness. Now for
conclusion I shall only add thus much from all that which has been said,
that it does appear to me very clear that God has laid it upon all men
believers in Jesus Christ so as they have received gifts whereby they are
enabled with knowledge and utterrance to set forth, teach and declare Jesus
Christ in the Gospel that they ought to do it as good and faithful stewards
of the gifts and graces of God, 1 Peter 4.10.11. 1 Corin. 4.1.
God requires it of them and they may not neglect it, nor no man may forbid
them without manifest breach of Gods holy will and commandment, Acts 5.29. and
4.19.
and therefore let us consider whether to obey God that says unto us, what I
have spoken to you in secret that preach, declare and make known on the house
top, and as you have received gifts for the work of the ministry, so let us
labor in the word and doctrine to build up and perfect the Saints in our most
holy faith and not fear man whose breath is in his nostrils, Jude 20.
or the son of man who is lighter then vanity, but let us fear God and obey
his Commandment for that is good and acceptable in his fight: without which
doing none of the Saints can discharge faithfully that trust committed and
given to them, for we must employ his talents laboring in his vineyard which
is his Church that he may have the praise and glory of all his works and graces
in them, and therein we shall greatly manifest our faithfulness to God, our
justness in discharge of the trust committed to us, and in that consideration
we are bound; and woe be to us if we preach not the Gospel, how can those that
believe, do but speak, how can those that have heard and seen and received the
word and Gospel of Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.1. to 3.
but must say with the Apostle how can we but speak and declare those heavenly
glorious excellent things which we have both seen heard and received.

Therefore Reader if God shall persuade thy heart to the acknowledgement of
this truth, fear not to practice it, though men and divils set themselves
against thee, 1 Cor. 10.13.
yet know that God is faithful that promises and will suffer no temptation to
overtake thee but what he will enable thee to bear: and though thou may by
men be opposed and brought into great afflictions and tribulations, Acts 14.22.
it is written that through such we must enter into the kingdom of heaven,

It is the Legacy that Christ has left to his people, that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus and follow him, Mat. 16.24.25. Heb. 13.5.
must take up his Cross and suffer persecution, yet know he will never leave
us nor forsake us, but stand by us, and his spirit of glory shall rest upon us
for our strength-making, bringing about all the thrests and terrors of
imprisonments, Romans 8.28.
afflictions, penalties that shall be laid upon us for his sake, turn to our
good and benefit; Therefore gird up the Loins of your minds, be sober and
hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1.13.
for the grace that is to be brought to you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
fear not, neither be dismayed, 1 Cor. 7.23. and 16.13. Ephesians. 6.10.11.16.
you are bought with a price, be not the Servants of men, watch, stand fast in
the Faith, quit you like men, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might (...) on, the whole Armor of God; above all taking the Sheil^ of faith
whereby ye shall be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, and quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked; 2 These. 1.1 12.
wherefore all my prayer always shall be, that our God will count you worthy
of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the
work of faith with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.11.12.
to comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word, and work. Amen,

Psalm 68. and 11. The Lord gave the word, great (...) the company of those
that preached it.

Job. 32. and 7. to 10* I said days shall speak, and moltitudes of years
shall teach wisdom. But there is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding, great men are not always wise, neither do
the^ged understand Judgment. Therefore I said heathen to me, I also will show
mine opinion.

FJNJS.

