THE Christians DAILY MONITOR To the performance of Personal and Relative
Duties.

With a Resolution of some Cases of CONSCIENCE.

Published for the benefit of Young Persons;

By Joseph Church.

Together with so much of Mr. Samuel Hierons Catechism, as concerns second
Table Duties.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Bible upon London
Bridge, 1669.

TO Mrs Elizabeth Papilion, Eldest Daughter to Mr Thomas Papilion, The Author
wishes increase of Grace and Peace.
THe intent of this Dedication, is not to tell the World how hopeful and
towardly a Child you are, but partly for mine own sake, to testify my sense of
those many kindnesses I have received from your Parents; which I cannot see any
possibility I should ever require, and the least I can do is to acknowledge.
Low^ Parents do accept from a poor hand a small kindness that is showed to
their Children: Even God himself our Heavenly Father, because our goodness
extends not to him, accepts of what we do to his Children; and because my
thankfulness cannot ascend, I was willing that it should descend, ever judging
it a true principle, If I cannot do the good I would, to do what good I can.

But for your sakes also do I Dedicate this small Book to you:

1. To lay an obligation upon you to answer the means you enjoy in a good
education, that the prayers, pains and cost your Parents are at with you may
not be lost.

2. That you might have a Daily Monitor of your Duty to God and Man. You are
not sure to have Father or Mother always with you, or Ministers, but these
things if they sink into your heart, will abide with you to comfort and counsel
you. I do therefore exhort you to a frequent and serious r^^ding of them, with
prayer unto God, that they may be blessed to you; and if no other should gain
by them, yet if you do, I shall not altogether repent my pains: But if others
should gain by them, and you not, you and I both shall have cause of grief and
shame. Pardon my plainness with you; I speak not this as distrusting the Grace
of God in you, (which I pray may grow up with you more and more, and abound in
you:) but as one I love in the Lord, to warn you, and admonish you, that you
may not begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh. Some of these things you
have heard discoursed to you, and some of them in public, and there are some
that I have collected from others, which owe nothing to me but the mere order
and form of them, of which I have given an account by prefixing the two first
letters of their names. I know you have many other useful, and spiritual Books
by you; let not this take you off from them, nor them, or this, make you
neglect the reading of the Scriptures, and the orderly reading of them,
according to an example you have daily before your eyes: For all other Books
are written to give light to the Scripture, and to stir us up to the practice
of those duties there laid down. I shall trouble you no further now, but
commend you and this Treatise to the blessing of the Almighty; And Rest

Your Souls, and your Faiths Servant in the Lords Work, Jos. Church.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT was not because the World needed Books that I appear in Print, or if it
did, there are (blessed be God) enough others, more able, and fit to supply its
wants: But one great inducem^nt to me to Print, was the need I stood in of the
Press to ease me of the labor of transcribing these things for my own near
Relations and Friends; and were there not a kind of necessity of multiplying
the number of Copies beyond what would have served my particular occasion, (to
any one will make use of that ingenious Invention of Printing,) I could very
well have been contented to have been consined within the limits forementioned.
I would entreat thee therefore to consider, that these things were first
written and laid together for the private use and benefit of some young
persons: And my touching upon so many subjects, and with brevity, was with
respect to that age; for variety and brevity do most please them: and if any
think by brevity I am guilty of obscurity, let it put them upon meditation, and
beating things out in their own thoughts, or else enquiry of others what such a
thing means, before they condemn me: But I am not conscious to my self of that
crime, for though I have endeavored to speak pertinently and shortly, yet I
have also done it plainly. I have ventured at some cases of conscience, which I
observed did frequently occur among sober good Christians; not that I think my
self able for that kind of divinity, but if by any means I might provoke some
of my able Brethren to travel in that so much wanted and desired work of
Casuistical Divinity: And if I have not wrote what may give full satisfaction,
yet I hope I have taken the safe way, and said that may stay the violence of
the distress if rightly applied, till they meet with that interpreter of a
thousand, that shall speak a word in season to him that is weary. I am very
sensible, that whosoever does appear in Print, lays himself open to the lash
of every man's tongue: Some will criticize, some will censure, others will
deride and scorn, but all these shall hurt themselves more then me. I do not
expect better measure then those that were far my betters had before me, and
have at this day. It is vastly more comfortable to have a man's words and name
reproached innocently, then to censure and wrest proudly and uncharitably, what
is well meant, and upon examination will be found well-spoken, if it be but
well taken.

To please all is impossible, to please men in their sins is wicked, and to
please good men in these days, wherein there is such a consumption of charity,
is very difficult. As for those that are learned (if any such should stoop so
low as to peruse these things) it may be if they find no beams of light, they
may find some sparks of fire to kindle their affections, and to beget some
ardour and fervency of desire to add to their knowledge practice: as for any
other fire of contention and strife, I trust they shall find none: I should
think the worse of my self as long as I live, if I should be really guilty of
that. O that we could all avoid studium partium, the espousing particular
opinions and interests, and labor after an universal charity to all that love
our Lord Jesus Christ, and silence our own private sentiments which might cause
a public disturbance, which we must not expect till we see more piety. For the
Schools have long ago told us, Rivulus charitatis oritur ex fo^^e pietatis,
That the stream of charity to our Brother, comes from the fountain of piety
toward God: If therefore thou art an ^n^my to true piety, thou art at the same
time an enemy to charity. For the promoting therefore true piety in young
persons and comers in, I have offered my endeavors in the ensuing Discourse:
That if this present Generation, after all their cultivating should bring forth
no fruit, nor admit of any melioration, yet the seedlings and young plants
might draw in a more benign juice, and shoot up and bring forth more and
better fruits. It is a general complaint, that Relations prove so bad; and
indeed to find a man faithful in all Relations, is to find a rare Jewel.
Nothing more honors God and the Gospel, then when those that profess it, live
up to the duty commanded them in their Relations, as nothing dishonours God
more, shames the Gospel, ruins families, then undutifulness and unfaithfulness
in Relations. No plainer proof of our sincerity in our Religion then this is.
Thou can not be a good Christian if thou art not a good Child, a good
Servant, a good Master or Mistress, a good Subject, a good Husband or Wife. The
same God that commands to be a good Christian, commands thee to fill up the
duties of the other also, as he calls thee to them; and one great cause of the
neglect of these duties, and the decay of them, is the neglect of Catechizing
in private families, which till it be conscientiously practiced, all public
preaching and chatechizing will be the less successful.

Upon whose account soever the neglect of this does lie, I am sure it will not
be found light one day; and one man's omitting his duty, will be no excuse then
for thy neglecting thine. I have here offered a plain short Catechism of the
heads of second Table Duties: I made choice of this Author, as one who lies
liable, as I know of, to no exception; the Catechism having been reprinted
several times with good approbation, and also because his answers are for the
most part the words of Scripture pertinently quoted and applied: Upon which
account as the duties herein pressed come with more authority, so the learner
is accustomed to Scripture phrases and language, for want of which, and the
unbounded liberty many give to their fancy, we have so many uncouth, wild,
extravagant and offensive expressions even in Religious performances: Which
however weak ones may account the height of devotion, yet riper judgments, and
sober Christians know them to be nothing else but the statulency of fancy. I
exhort thee therefore (Christian Reader) to hold fast the form of sound words,
get thy heart stocked with sound knowledge, and take heed of phraseologie in
Religion, which is a minting and coining new expressions, and differencing our
selves from others by an affected style or form of speaking, and making people
believe we have attained more light then others, when as indeed when these
notions come to be examined and weighed in the balance of Truth, they are
worth no more then the trash and trumpery that the Cardinals Sumpter horses
carried (a story so well known, it needs but naming.) And this is all will be
found among the Enthusiasts of this Age, the Behmenists, Paracelsians,
Familists, etc. Thus I have in brief, with plainness of heart, given thee an
account of this Work, which I shall pray to God may be acceptable to his
people, and successful to their spiritual edification, in Knowledge, Faith,
Love and obedience. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, Jos. Church.

The Christians daily Monitor. To the performance of personal and relative
Duties, etc.
. 1. Of Humility.
HUmility is a foundation grace: to increase this grace, compare thy self,

With the brute creatures, that have only sense, yet they keep the Law of
their Creation.

With the fallen Angels, that sin only against Gods power; thou sinnest against
his Grace.

With thy self, What thou should have been if man had not fallen, what thou
art now by sin, what thou might have been, if thou had not neglected thy
duty.

With others inferior in means, superior in growth, that have fewer mercies,
and more thankfulness.

With the Holy Angels, who serve God cheerfully, readily, sincerely, fervently,
constantly.

With Jesus Christ, Who was meek, and lowly in heart, who for our sakes humbled
himself, and was obedient to the death of the Cross; and then thou will abhor
thy self in dust and ashes.

. 2. The best Physician.
Christ our heavenly Physician exceeds all earthly Physicians in seven things.
1. He never leaves any work behind him for others. 2. He never undertakes any
cure, but he finisheth it. 3. He does all freely, without desert in us, or
reward from us. 4. There is nothing in him, but has a healing virtue in it,
his eye, his lips, his hand, his blood, his garments, etc. 5. He cures Nations
as well as Persons. 6. He cures Death as well as Diseases. 7. He always makes
his Patients the better, not only after, but by their sickness.
Oh! I am sick of sin. Lord show thy Art,
One touch of thine will break, and heat my heart:
O rare Physician, that shedst thy blood,
And give thy life, to do poor sinners good.
. 3. Successful begging.
The way to be heard in prayer, and not to loose our labor, is,
1. To ask in faith, Mark 11.24. that is, believing God is able and willing to
bestow good things on us. 2. To ask in sincerity, for right ends, Jam. 4.3. 3.
To ask fervently as Jacob, who wrestled with God, and prevailed, Genesis 32.28. 4.
Seasonably, while the door is open, Isa. 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be
found. 5. Constantly, pray continually, 1 These. 5.17. or without ceasing. 6.
Patiently, Psalm. 40.1.
He that can pray to God withal this cost,
Is sure his labor never shall be lost.
Who asks in sound faith, zeal, fixed patience,
And season, always, has sure recompense.
Stay not at one, or two, or four, or five,
But get all six, and then be sure thou wilt thrive.


. 4. The Heavenly care. From Dr. H.
There are five things considerable in that Promise, he cares for you, 1 Pet.
5.7.

There are five things considerable in that Promise, he cares for you, 1 Pet.
5.7.
1. God cares for his people when they think he does not. 2. He so cares for
them, as he cares for none else comparatively. 3. He cares for them, when none
else care for them. 4. He cares for them, when those that should care for them
neglect them. 5. He cares with others to bless their care, and make it
successful.
Q. But must Gods Children cast off all care?

A. No, they must use a care of prudence, and providence, a Godly care, but
they must take heed of worldly, immoderate, heartbreaking, heart-corroding,
distrusting care.

Martha with many things distracts her mind,
Mary in one thing all content does find.
Lord cure my cares, that I thy word may hear;
Lord choose for me the troubles I shall bear.
. 5. The Dutiful Aid.
God has in wisdom so framed our bodies, that one part cannot say to another,
I have no need of thee. So it is in the Political; and Ecclesiastical body. The
Prince cannot say to the Subject, he has no mind of him; nor the Subject to
the Prince, he has no need of him; for he is the Minister of God to us for
good. The like may be said of Ministers, if they need our Temporals, we need
their Spirituals. Know therefore that Superiors need the prayers of
Inferiors; because

They resemble God more then others.

They have a greater charge lies upon them.

They have more tentations standing on higher ground.

They have more influence to do good; they set the lesser wheels in motion.

They commit more faults, and seldom sin alone.

They have more opportunities.

They must give a greater account at the last day.

The best assistance that can be given them by Inferiors, is to pray that the
special presence of God may be with them. Let inferiors remember these things,
and it will keep them from envy, murmuring, ambition, reviling, etc.

. 6. Of the Love of God.
A True Christian loves God no more with the world to boot, then though he were
all alone without the World.

It is God a Christian loves in the creature, and he loves them for God; as the
Fisherman loves the fish, for the pearl that is in it.

He that loves not God above all, loves him not at all. Joseph loves his
Mistress, his Master, and God; but when his Mistris's love rose up against his
Duty and love to his Master, away he runs, as he would have forsaken his
Masters, had it been contrary to God. For a True Christian stands always ready
to forgo all for the love of God. True love to God is sincere, supreme,
universal, constant.

Our obedience to Christ is a sure ground of our love to him. If you love me
keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15.

Or love to Christ is a sign. We are beloved of Christ, 1 John 4.19.

From Christ's love to us spring all the blessings of time and eternity.

. 7. A Dialogue between a Minister and a Christian.
Chr. Pray Sir, which is the way to Heaven?


Min. Your ready way lies in the Ordinances, which is the King of Heavens
highway.


Chr. Which are they?


Min. The Ordinances of God are,

1. The Word both read by us, and heard from Ministers.

The Duties here to be observed are, before it Preparation; at it Attention;
after it Practice.

2. The Sacraments, and seals of the Covenant, which are, 1. Baptism; the type
Circumcision; the duties going before it, Prayer; following after, the care of
a new life. 2. The Lords Supper; the Type, the Passover; duties herein, going
before, examination; at it, the use of faith to apprehend and apply Christ;
after it, a trial what benefit we have received, an amendment of life, a care
to keep our Covenant with God. 3. Prayer, the Key of Heaven; the type incense.
Duties before it are, searching and emptying our hearts; in it, fervency of
Spirit, and Faith; after it, care to walk worthy of Mercy, past, present,
future.


Take the Spirit for your guide, you cannot miss the way; there be no turnings
to the right hand or the left: Follow your Leader, doubt not. By an unknown
Author.


. 8. How to preserve Love among Christians.
1. Avoid groundless suspicions, and jealousies, which will be the break-neck
of true Charity. 2. Keep down thy natural passions; and in fighting with them,
be sure to watch the first rise of them, and fight with that that thou know
the strongest. Passions are an unnatural heat, that prey upon brotherly love
and charity. 3. Be courteous in thy salutations. This draws out and strengthens
love. 4. Bear one another infirmities. 5. Stand for thy Christian friends,
when they be spoken against. 6. Pray for one another heartily. 7. Visit the
afflicted in their misery. 8. Hold fast to the Truth. 9. At some times part
with that which is thy right. Do nothing to make any hate thee; suffer
something to make them love thee. 10. Interpret doubtful things in the most
charitable way. 11. Take not all advantages for gain, or opportunities to rise
and get preferment in the world; be contented others should outshine thee. 12.
Ever remember the three great supporters of love; Humility which wins others;
Diligence, which helps others; ^^d quietness which pleases others. Be good with
quietness, do good with cheerfulness, and receive good with thankfulness: This
is the way to promote and increase love.
. 9. The Spiritual Touchstone.
Twelve Graces that distinguish a true Saint from a counterfeit one:
1. Brokenness of heart for, and from all sin. 2. Mourning for other men's sins,
as Lot, David, Jeremy, Ezra, Nehemiah, Paul, did; This is an argument of great
sincerity, for we never read any in Scripture did this but Godly men. 3. The
grace of self-denial in the extent of it, to be able to deny natural, worldly,
religious self: this is a grace none but a true Christian can attain to. 4. To
love God for himself, not only because he is our good, but because he is the
chief good; not only to make our Heaven our God, bu^ ^o know and believe, God
himself is our heaven and happiness. 5. To love a child of God, because he is a
child of God; and the more eminent he is in grace, the more to love him; to
love all the Godly as well as some, to love their company, and to take their
reproofs kindly, is the distinguishing character of a true Saint. 6. To advance
the Glory of God in thought, word, and deed, and to rejoice that Christ is
magnified, whatever becomes of us. 7. To prize Jesus Christ for himself, as
well as his rewards; to prize his Kingly and Prophetical, as well as his
Priestly Office, to prize him above all things, and at all times, is a sure
note of a child of God. 8. Every branch in Christ brings forth fruit; every
true Saint is a growing, and a fruitful Saint. A picture of a Child does not
grow, but a living Child does. 9. A true Saint is heavenly-minded; his
thoughts, his affections, his hope, joy, desire, his speech, his conversation,
are all heavenly. 10. A true Saint is careful to redeem his time. Natural men
make no conscience of idle thoughts, idle words, and idle time. 11. He is known
by the Uniformity and universality of his obedience to the will of God, he has
respect to all Gods Commandments; he is holy and honest. A true Christian makes
conscience to abstain from the sins of both Tables, and to do the duties of
both Tables, that he may keep a conscience void of offense toward God and Man.
12. Every true Saint has a thankful heart, a thankful tongue, and a
thankful life.


. 10. The seven last words of Christ.
The first was a word of mercy for his persecutors.

Luke 23.34. Father forgive them they know not what they do.

The second was a word of free grace to the penitent thief.

Luke 23.43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

The third a word of care and affection for his dear Mother.

Joh. 19.26, 27. Behold thy Son! behold thy Mother.

The fourth a word of sad complaint.

Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

The fifth, a word of want and distress.

John 19.28. I thirst.

The sixth, a word of triumph and gratulation.

John 19.30. It is finished.

The seventh, a word of perseverance.

Luke 23.46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Twenty Directions how to live well and dye well from these seven last words of
Christ, being the heads of several Sermons, preached by Mr. E. C. B. M.
1. He that would live well and dye well, must be much in prayer. The first,
fourth, seventh words are prayers. 2. He must be well versed in the Book of
Psalms: the fourth and seventh words are out of it. 3. He must forgive his
Enemies, and pray for them. 4. He must have a care of relations, and dispose of
his worldly estate. 5. He must do what he can to convert others. 6. He must not
abuse the example of the penitent thief, to delay his repentance. 7. He must
believe the souls of the Godly go immediately upon their death to a Heavenly
Paradise. 8. He must thirst after communion with God, and the enjoyment of God
in Heaven. Jesus Christ thirsted after our salvation. 9. He must meditate of
the soul and body sufferings of Jesus Christ: what he suffered in his soul,
when he uttered the fourth word; what he suffered in his body when he uttered
the fifth word. 10. He must so live, as that he may upon good grounds call God
Father: The first word was, Father forgive them: The last word was, Father into
thy hands, etc. 11. He must take more care for hi^ precious soul, then his
mortal body. 12. He must believe that Christ has finished all things necessary
for hi^ salvation, in point of merit and satisfaction, and that nothing is
required of him, but to testify his thankfulness in a holy life. ^3. He must
believe on good grounds that Christ has finished His Salvation: O happy man,
that when he is breathing out his last, can say, my salvation is finished. ^4.
He must finish whatsoever is behind, and to be done by him to fit him for
heaven; something we are to do, and we must finish it; not only begin well, but
end well. ^5. He must fly in the time of tentation to Christ's sufferings; there
is a great deal of comfort in that word it is finished. ^6. He must stay
himself on God in a time of darkness when there is no light; Christ said, My
God: we must not let go the faith of adherance, though we want the faith of
evidence. ^7. He must remember Christ wore a Crown of Thorns, that we might
wear a Crown of Glory; he was forsaken for a time, that we might no^ be
forsaken for ever. 18. He must believe, that through many tribulations, we may
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. A man man from the Cross go to Heaven. Chri^
was Crucified between two thieve^ and yet died gloriously. 19. He must study
the love of Christ i^ suffering such a cursed death on the Cross for his sins,
that he may b^ able to say, He loved me, and gav^ himself for me; and rejoice
in nothing save in the Cross of Christ. 20. He must after the example of Chri^
commend his soul to Gods hands and remember Christ has commended thy soul and
my soul already into the hands of God, and when we dy^ God will remember the
depositu^ left with him.
. 11. The order a Christian is to observe in his walking every day: with an
answer to objections, and encouragement to set about it.
1. In the morning awake with God, Psalm. 139.18. (i. e.) season thy mind with
awful and thankful thoughts of Gods morning and evening mercies, and lift up
thy heart in some short mental prayer to God, that he would help thee to renew
thy resolution to walk with him.

2. When thou art up, as soon as conveniently thou can betake thy self to
prayer. Private prayer should be the first thing we do. The first hour is the
Golden hour, and by so doing thou may open thy heart to God, and shut it
against all sin. For family prayer, that is the fittest hour, when all the
family, or the greatest part, can most conveniently meet together; and if thou
art a servant, take heed of voluntary neglecting family prayer: Let it be some
urgent occasion that hinders thee, an^ when thou can not be there with thy
bodily presence, yet be sure thy affection be with them.

3. After prayer, and other religiou^ duties performed, Go to thy calling, an^
follow the works thereof, (as that statio^ God has set thee in) with
diligence, conscience and cheerfulness, and be contented with thy calling
though mean. Be not like worldlings, who do all with a greedy mind of getting:
But remember a Christian has two Callings, one general, the other particular;
and he is a happy and wise servant that so minds his general, as not to neglect
his particular, and so follows his particular Calling, as he does not neglect
his general: Usually the former have some tincture of hypocrisy, and the
latter are too much overgrown with covetousness. Labor therefore to keep thy
eye upon thy heart, and upon the rule. Do all in thy particular Calling with
uprightness and faithfulness, in wisdom and order, referring the success to
Gods blessing, and labor to be armed with patience against crosses and losses.
In buying and selling, take heed of lying and dissimulation, covetousness and
frowardness, of multiplying words carelessly, and of over-praising thy own wares
when thou sellest, and saying it is naught when thou buyest.

4. When thou art alone look to thy heart, and say, Heart, where art thou? what
art thou doing? where have thou been? whither art thou going? keep thy heart
with all diligence; Prove. 4.23. Keep it as a Guardian would do a rich Heir,
that has many Suitors, or as a General would do a Castle that was a key or
inlet to the whole Country; and in order to this remember five things.

1. Observe the motions of it; thy mind is thy self. Be not a stranger to thy
self; God looks at the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. he delights in truth in the inward
man, Psalm. 1.6.

2. When any good thoughts and holy motions come into thy soul (as those that
are truly good shall not find themselves long without them) cherish and
entertain them; say as the Spouse, It is the voice of my beloved that knocks;
say, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, why stand thou without? but i^ evil
motions arise, let them not lodge with thee, but chase them from thee.

3. Employ thy heart, and set it t^ work. The mind is a restless mill, always
in motion. Calvin prayed every day, the devil might never find him idle If our
hearts be doing nothing, they will be doing evil; like a garden, if yo^ do not
sow good seeds, will soon b^ overun with weeds. Remember, Go^ and Nature abhor
idleness, and the Devil watches for the idle hour.

4. Limit the workings of thy soul that the world may have no more o^ thy
thoughts and time then needs must*

5. Spiritualize the operations of thy mind, and extract heavenly and divine
meditations out of thy employments, out of fit objects.

5. Look carefully to thy senses, especially make a Covenant with thy eyes, as
Job did Chap. 31.1. and pray with David, that God would turn away thy eyes from
beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37. There is a quick passage from the eye to the
heart. A Christian should not let his eyes fly at random. Consider:

1. The eye is a sense of the greatest extent and latitude; it beholds all on
earth, and reaches even to heaven.

2. It is a sense above all others most frequently and constantly exercised.

3. It works more immediately and strongly upon the heart and fancy.

4. It is a sense above all others most easily induced to sin, to wantonness
and vanity, to injustice and oppression, to covetousness and idolatry: Pride
and Envy dwell in the eye, Ezekiel. 23.16. Prove. 6.17. Prove. 23.33. Jer. 22.17.
Josh. 7.21. Ezekiel. 6.9. Chapter 20.24.

5. It is a most noble Sense, God has provided noble objects for it; and
therefore O Christian, young or old, look t^ thy eyes every day, give not
indulgenc^ and liberty to them. There is a promis^ made to this, Isa. 33.15. he
that shut his eyes from seeing evil shall not dwe^ with everlasting burning.
Remembe^ Gods eye is always upon thee; and h^ that rules his heart, will
easily rule hi^ eyes; and he that does not look to his eye^ it is a great sign
he never looked well t^ his heart. Heaven it self is reserved for the eye;
hearing is suited to faith, bu^ the eye is suited for vision.

6. If thou art in company take heed t^ thy self, that if thou can do no good
nor get no good, thou may do no har^ nor get no harm. If thou at any tim^
fallest into such company, as there is n^ likelihood to do or receive good, the
business being dispatched, and civilit^ observed, get out of that company, for
he cannot be a Christian indeed that i^ not curious of his company. When tho^
have conference with others, speak neither falsely, rashly, nor vainly, let thy
words be few, true, spiritual; let no filthy communication come out of your
mouth: Let thy speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt, such as may
minister grace to the hearers. Speak of God, his Word, Works, Ordinances with
holy reverence. Speak of thy self modestly and humbly, of others charitably; of
the gifts and graces of another, with joy and thankfulness; of the infirmities
and failings of good men speak sparingly, and with a due respect to their good
name: Of the sins of wicked men, speak not but with grief and detestation, and
admiration of the grace of God to thee, since what is in their practice, is in
thy nature, and who is it O man makes thee to differ? It may be useful and
necessary to speak of the world and civil things: But let not these things take
up all thy talk. If thou inquire after news, let it be to understand how it
goes with Gods Church, that thou may the better direct thy prayers for them
if afflicted, o^ thy praises if they prosper: Specially take heed of the sins
of these times much speaking, rash censuring, prou^ boasting, slandering and
backbiting, speaking evil of dignities, spreading false reports, which are too
much the sins of professors; as profane swearing, horrible imprecations and
cursings, sordid flattery, obscene talking, scoffing and mocking at Piety are
the sins of Hectors and Ranters.

7. Wherever thou art, at home or abroad, give good examples, that thou may
not leave any stinking savor behind thee, to open the mouths of the malicious,
to harden them in their sins, and make the weak to stumble, or to sad the
hearts of the Godly. We may be innocently cheerful in company, and in a
journey, to pass over the wearisomness of the way: but let thy moderation be
known to all, be not profane, idle, vain, especially take heed to thy words
and actions before Children. For the heathen could say, there is a great
reverence due to them; the seeds of goodness are soon quenched, and vicious
inclinations are more corroborated. Let it be then thy great care in all thy
ways and actions, to show thy self a pattern of goodness, laboring to adorn
the Gospel of Christ, holding forth the word of life in a good conversation; to
which purpose make it thy care to walk in the exercise of four things;

1. To show all fidelity and honesty in thy dealings. The Apostle Peter would
have us to have our conversation honest among the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 2.12. It is
a vain thing to pretend to be religious if we be not honest. The Apostle Paul
would have poor Servants, to show all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus, 2 Tit. 10. It is a woeful time, when we know not
where to find a faithful man. God forbid it should be said, that Turks, and
some Papists, and Quakers, and common Protestants have more uprightness, truth
and faithfulness in their words and dealings, the^ those that make the highest
profession in Religion. By these sins God suffers i^ his honor, Jesus Christ
suffers, and the Gospel suffers, and the Godly suffer. By being faithful in
your dealings, you will beat the enemies of Christianity with their own
weapons; all the Glory they have is their justice and fidelity, that they wrong
no man, that they will not circumvent and work upon their neighbors necessity
or ignorance. Now when a Christian shows such fidelity, he overcomes them in
that which they themselves confess to be good; and all men see, that if there
be any thing in them praiseworthy, it is to be found among true Christians
with more advantage and luster.

2. Labor to evidence an humble subjection to those in Authority over us. This
is the Herculean Argument the Papists and other wicked men use in all ages
against the Godly, That they are enemies to Kings, stubborn, disobedient,
turning all things upside down. It becomes then all that profess the name of
Christ, as far as they can to obey all the commands of Magistrates; for this is
the will of God, Tit. 3.1. and to give ^ll lawful demonstrations, that we are
not stubborn, refractory persons; That if any do maliciously accuse us, we may
be able to say with Daniel, that innocence is found in us before God, and that
to the King we have done no hurt, Dan. 6.22.

3. Thou must labor for a peaceable conversation, avoiding as much as you can
all contentions and quarrels, study^ng to be quiet, and minding your own
business, 1 These. 4.11. remembering the Apostles rules, Heb. 12.14. follow peace
with all men, and holiness, etc. As much in you lies live peaceably with ^ll
men, Romans 12.18. (have peace, keep peace, love peace, make peace, seek peace;
that phrase, live peaceably, includes all.) That so the wicked may say of us,
as the Shechemites of Jacob^ Sons, These men are peaceable with us therefore
let them dwell in the land, Genesis 34.21. It is a question yet unresolved,
whether the persecutions o^ enemies, or the divisions of brethren have done the
Church of God mo^ harm.

4. Thou must walk charitably: labor after a beneficialness in thy
conversation, to be profitable to men, to b^ public spirited, open handed to
the poor, to be as Job was, eyes to the blind to cloth the naked, visit the
sick, defend the fatherless and widow. This i^ well pleasing to God; these
things ar^ good and profitable to men.

This is the way to adorn thy Conversation, and to be a pattern of goo^ works;
and without such things as these thy profession and religious performances will
have no great luster no^ beauty.

8. If God give thee prosperity, and riches increase, be not overjoyed with it.
Trust not in uncertain riches, do not bless thy self in abundance, as if thy
happiness did stand in possessing, or thou were sure to have these things
continued. If we rejoice exceedingly in the day of prosperity, we shall grieve
immoderately when the time of parting comes.

9. Therefore prepare for adversity. Thy Savior has commanded thee to take up
thy Cross daily, in preparation and expectation; And Solomon has told us, We
know not what a day may bring forth. If adversity comes, be not impatient;
murmur not against God, if he cut short thy Estate, but say with holy Job,
Shall I receive good things at Gods hand and not evil? The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes, blessed be his holy Name, Job 1.21. c. 2.10.

10. In Recreations which the necessity of Nature calls for, and Religion does
not deny: Look to thy self, for it is easy stepping out of the use into the
abuse of them; See therefore, 1. To the kind of them, that they be lawful,
innocent, and of good report, as also that thy recreations be in offensive:
That which is in it self lawfu^ may be in expedient. Use no recreation that
has got an universal evi^ report among Sober, Godly, Wise grave persons. 2. To
the time. We should abridge ou^ selves Recreations in times of Common Calamity
to our Country, or the Church of God. See also that it b^ not on the Lords day,
which is to b^ employed in Heavenly exercise. W^ must not suffer them to thrust
out Family duties, or crowd them up in ^ narrow compass: And finally, se^ that
they take thee not off from the important works of thy Calling. 3. To the
place, that it be not too public and open to draw others to se^ us, who
notwithstanding thy libert^ may be offended; or that it be not place of gusling
and drinking, where we may be drawn to excess. 4. To thy Company, that we sort
our our selves as much as we can with Godly, wise Christians. 5. In the
continuance of them. Recreations as they should not be over frequent, so they
should not be overlong. Make not thy by-work, thy work; Use them as sauce, a
little here is enough, and enough may be too much; and as the Proverb says,
Too much of one thing is good for nothing. 6. To the end of them, which must be
to refresh the outward man, to benefit the inward man. We must not play to
play. No man uses a whetstone, but to put a keenness upon an Instrument.
Imitate the Primitive Christians, of whom Tertullian gives this account: We sit
not down to eat, till we have first prayed to God; we eat so as to satisfy
hunger; we drink so as not to inflame lust; we feast so, as to remember we must
go to prayer, and come away as if we had been at ^ watch, rather then a feast.


11. Be ready to every good work, and constantly perform such holy duty as God
calls thee to, and do not willingly omit them. If God calls thee to hear his
word, and pray to him, go to it that not out of form, but out of a conscience
of thy duty, and a sense of thy wants; get some time every day for Meditation
of Gods Word and Works and if thou art so barren, thou can no^ find matter,
meditate of thy barrenness, and humble thy soul for it.

12. And now in the Evening, take ^ view of the former particulars, and examine
all; how thou have prayed, how thou have performed the works of thy Calling,
what has come into thy thoughts, what has gone out of thy mouth, how thou
do find thy self in prosperity and adversity, how it has been with thee at
home, and abroad, alone, and in company, in recreations, and in religious
duties: And herein deal faithfully with thy own soul. If thou have upon due
enquiry into thy self found, that thou have kept this order in some good
manner, give God the praise and Glory: If thou be conscious to thy self of any
disorder, blame and shame thy self, beg pardon of God, fly to the merits of
Christ, renew thy resolutions to walk with more watchfulness. And as thou did
rise with God in the morning, so close the day with him, making thy peace with
him, that thou may rest in the arms of thy beloved, and have good hope thou
shall go to heaven, if thou should dye before the morning.

Objections against this daily order in our Conversation.
Obj. 1. O but says the flesh, this is more then needs, more then God requires.

Ans. But go and learn what that means, to love the Lord with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and
then thou will not say it is more then needs, except thou think there is no
need to please God.

Obj. 2. But this will spoil all mirth to observe this order.

Ans. It is nothing so, these Rules observed will keep from nothing that is
lawful, delightful, profitable, thou may eat, drink, buy, sell, keep
company, recreate thy self, only it teaches thee to do these things without
sin. If there be no mirth but in sin, then the Devil is the merriest creature
in the world, for he does nothing but sin.

Obj. 3. But it is impossible to do this always, and this makes Religion a
bondage.

Ans. The love of God makes his Commandments not to be grievous when we first
enter on it, it seems harsh and hard, not that it is so, but it seems so,
because we have used our selves to so much liberty; as a new garment is strait
at the first putting on, but after a little wearing it is easy. Do not say
Christ's yoke is heavy and strait, when he says, it is easy. If God give thee
a new heart, thou will never complain of the difficulty of a new life.

The encouragements to observe this Order are these five:
1. This will keep out many sins that overtake us for want of it. The resolving
against sin in the morning, and prayer to God to strengthen that resolution,
are excellent helps to keep us from sin.

2. It will preserve us from many troubles and sorrows, which it does by
keeping us from sin, for Sorrow follows sin, as the shadow does the body.

3. It preserves from lying and continuing in sin; he that observes this order,
if he falls in the day through infirmity, he rises the same day by repentance,
and evens his recknings with God through the mediation of Jesus Christ.

4. It will keep us from foul and heinous sins, from conscience-wasting sins,
which a man falls not ordinarily into, but by degrees lessening his care, and
remitting in his duty, as we see in David and Solomon. The observing this daily
order, stops the disease in the beginning, quenches the fire in the spark,
kills the Serpent in the Egg.

5. It makes a man's life very comfortable and joyful. The more carefully and
constantly a man walks with God, the more peace and joy he will find and
retain. By this means we shall be more fit for holy duties, and to perform them
in a right manner; hereby we shall the more easily prepare our selves for a holy
Communion. By this way also we shall with more success manage our spiritual
Conflict, even to triumph over Satan. Hereby we shall realize the profession of
Religion we have been so solemnly dedicated to in our baptism. Lastly, hereby
we are fit to live in all times, and thus living we shall be fit to dye. What
need he that has thus orderly walked with God fear Death, since he knows he
goes to that God with whom he is at peace?

. 12. A Direction to Christians how to carry themselves in Evil days,
especially in in times of fear and danger.
1. It highly concerns every man to examine and prove himself whether he be in
the Faith or no, how the case stands between God and him, Lam. 3.40. Hag. 1.5.
If we will not try our selves we shall be tried; and woe unto us, if we be found
too light.

2. We should be every day weaning our hearts from the world. Things that hang
on a pin easily fall off, but things that are glued, are hardly severed:
inordinate love to any worldly thing, makes the cross ten times heavier; and it
is like a heavy burden on a sore back. Let not thy heart so cleave to these
things, that judgments should rend and tear them from thee; but let thy
affections be so mortified, that they may fall off easily, as Elijahs mantle,
when he went up to Heaven.

3. Be twice as much exercised in Religious Duties as before. When Judas was
plotting, Christ went to the Passover. When Haman was revelling, Esther with
her Maids were praying. It is good to be well employed, when God is riding
circuit in his judgments. Blessed is that Servant, who when his Lord comes is
found so doing.

4. Labor to keep a good Conscience; that though thou have trouble without
thou may have peace within. No comfort like a good conscience, it is a
continual feast; it is like that good Woman, Prove. 31.12. It will do thee good
and not evil all thy days: no torment like a bad one, for it is like that evil
Woman, Prove. 19.13. that is a continual dropping, but drops fastest in a rainy
day.

5. Inure thy self to some hardiness. Delicate persons can hardly suffer. Soft
flesh if it be pinched soon swells. They that know not how to lay aside their
fashions, how will they endure the want of the necessities of Nature? We should
therefore deny our selves somewhat in meat, drink and apparel, and pleasures,
and abase our selves, least the Lord abase us.

6. Make sure of the favor of God. It will be very sad to have God and man
against us both at once. The wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion: But
who knows the power of Gods anger?

7. Make much of the Promises, and get them in thy heart, and labor to have
them in a readiness upon all occasions. Thy word, says David, has comforted
me in my affliction. God uses more words in promises then in any dispensation
of his will; when he threatens he speaks shortly, when he promises he speaks
largely.

8. Get into thy heart the sound and experimental knowledge of the Truth, and a
fervent love to it. It is the truth that thou art like to suffer for, and a man
can never suffer for that he does not know, much less for that he does not love.

9. Labor to better thy Knowledge in the Doctrine of Afflictions; to know the
nature, usefulness, end of them, how to judge rightly of them, how to bear
them, how to improve them: fix in thy mind such things as these; There is no
Son of God without Chastisement; That no Affliction comes but by the will of
God; That by Afflictions we are made both serviceable and conformable to
Christ; That all troubles, losses, strokes are proportioned to our strength,
that they all are for our profit and good: the more we believe these things,
the more comfortable and courageous we shall be in evil days.

10. Christians should by holy confe^^nce edify and comfort one another, Mal.
3.16. They should improve the communion of Saints, for instructing,
strengthening; encouraging one another.

11. Meditate often of the attributes of God, the former experiences of Gods
dealing with his people, and the joys of heaven, and the reward is set before
us: as Christ did, Heb. 12.1. as Moses did, Heb. 11.27. and Paul, Romans 8.18. 2
Cor. 4.17.

12. Spare no sin unmortified; Entertain no Dalilah, no Herodias, for in an
evil day it will work more woe and bitterness then we are aware of. It will
fill thee with tormenting fears, and racking doubts. One fire-ball will burn
thy house: one sin unrepented of will burn thy soul. Do not hide iniquity in
thy heart, when God is making inquisition for it.

13. In an evil time the prudent should keep silence. There is a time to speak
and a time to be silent. Many times ou^ speaking dishonours God, gratifies
enemies, discovers corruption, discredits religion, endangers our persons: W^
should therefore pray to God to set watch before our lips, especially in ev^^
times, and endeavor our words may be few, true, and spiritual.

14. But we must not be silent as t^ God, in ceasing to pray unto him, for i^
is his Command, Call upon me in the day of trouble; and he expects when his
chastning is upon us, we should pou^ out our prayer unto him, and that i^
affliction we should seek him early; tha^ we should pray oftener and better. The
nearer Christ came to his suffering, the more earnestly he prayed. Go then and
enter into thy Chamber, and shut thy door; Get under the wings of the Almighty,
and say with David, Thou art my hiding place, Psalm. 32.7. I fly unto thee Lord
to hide me, Psalm. 143.9.

15. With other exercises of piety join ^harity; exercise mercy, forgive thy
^nemies, be reconciled to thy brethren. ^isit the sick and imprisoned, plead
the ^ause of the widow, give a portion to even, and also to eight, for thou
know^st not what evil shall be upon the earth, ^ccles. 11.2. Therefore, says
the Co^^tous heart, part with nothing, hoard ^p against a rainy day; therefore
says God, give freely, for the merciful shall and mercy.

Lastly, let the present fears alarm ^ee to prepare for sad events; go not
without thy armor, be not secure, say ^ot the overflowing scourge shall not
^ome nigh me. But think with thy self, though I have been in the rear of ^ther
judgments, I may be in the ^ront of this. Labor to be fitted to en^ertain
terrible things. When thou ^earest the Minister sound the Trumpet, and say
judgment is at hand, the Lord is risen out of his holy place to judge the
inhabitants of the earth. When thou hear what is done to others, when
wickedness is advanced and Godliness slighted and opposed then get those Graces
that will fit the^ for an evil day: such as, 1. Resignation of thy self, and
all tho^ have unto God; be content that h^ should dispose of thee as he
pleases, 2 Samuel 15.26. 2. Faith, which is a Grace will live i^ hard times, for
Faith lays claim to the fullness of Christ as its own. Fait^ has two hands, a
working hand an^ a receiving hand, the receiving han^ relieves the working
hand. 3. Apply the promises of perseverance 4. Patience in both its Acts, the
bearing act, and the waiting act, and s^ doing, thou may be able to stan^ in
the evil day; Which none of these five sorts of men will be able to do. 1. They
that slight God and Religion in peace and prosperity, will never suffer for God
and Religion in adversity. ^. Those that will not witness for truth with their
mouths, will never for the truths sake lay down their lives. 3. Those that
serve God only for the praise of men, will leave the service of God when men
disgrace them. 4. Those that will not endure the smaller trials, will much less
stand in the greater. 5. They that will not suffer the power of Gods word to
part them and their lusts, and vain conversation, will not seal the truth of
Gods word with their blood.


. 13. A few Motives to young persons to be Religious.
^here was never more need for Ministers, Parents, Tutors, Masters, to season
youth with piety, and to improve their interest, wisdom, authority in this
Work, then in these days, wherein there is such a general decay of Godliness,
that if God do not stir up the hearts of Governors, and if they will not stir
up themselves, and those under their charge, the next Generation are like to
prove Banquerupts in Religion, and to prove either Papists or Atheists. To
encourage young persons to look to themselves, and to call them out of the
tent^ of wickedness;, I would earnestly entreat them to let these few
considerations rest upon their minds.

1. O young man or young woman, consider the end of thy being, Why God made
thee, and gave thee a reasonabl^ soul, capable of eternal happiness? why did
God bestow upon thee many endowments of mind and body? why he has vouchsafed
the cultivation and improvement of thy natural abilities by education and
instruction? Wa^^^ all this that thou might glorify him, and be serviceable
in thy Generation to the great end of being and living? Cans^ thou imagine that
so bright a lamp as a^ ^mmortal soul, was ever put into the ^arthen candlestick
of thy body, for ^ase and sensual ends, merely to serve ^y fleshly appetite,
the most deformed and unsatiable monster that is in the ^orld? Can thou upon
serious ^oughts conceive thy being is for ^ch poor low ends? No, remember ^od
and men expect better things from ^ee. You that are young, the good ^d welfare
of Church and State de^ends on you: you are the Seed-plots ^^d Nurseries of all
Religion and Virtue, (...) Liberty, Honor, Trade; either you ^ust transmit,
and hand these down to ^osterity, or all these must dye and be ^xtinguished in
your hands; and are ^ou willing to be recorded in future ^istories for
prodigals and betrayers of them all? Such a man by Religion and ^ertue raised
his Family; and such an ^eir, such a Grandchild ruined it by ^is debauchery.
Stobeus relates, that ^he Ephebi among the Athenians took ^n Oath, not to leave
their Country in a worse condition then they found i^ but in a better: Oh that
it might be ^ said of this Generation.

2. Consider, It is a monstrous thi^ for young persons to be old sinners. T^^
Age in which sin is committed is so f^ from excusing it, that it aggravates it.
^ is a sad character of a man, he was so a^ so wicked of a Child; he was a
sweare^ a liar, a scoffer, an enemy to Godline^ from his long Coats. God
himself wh^ he would aggravate man's sin, says, t^ imaginations of man's heart
has be^ evil from his youth, Genesis 8.21. A^gustine in his Confessions bewails
h^ boyish tricks, Lord, when I was a litt^ Boy I was a great sinner. And Davi^
begs pardon for the sins of his youth Psalm. 25.7. and mark how God brand the
disobedience of Israel, Jer. 22.2^ I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, b^ thou
saidest I will not hear; this has been thy manner from thy youth, tha^ thou
obeydst not my voice. And in Jer^ 32.30. God aggravates the sin of Israel and
Judah, that they had done evil before him from their youth. Take heed of
calling sin, tricks of youth, and and thinking your age gives you a
dispensation. If ever you return to God, those sins must be repented of, and
they will cost you dear; as you may see in those Converts, Jer. 3.25. We lie
down in our shame, and our confusion covers us, for we have sinned against
the Lord, we and our fathers from our Youth even to this day. Consider
therefore how dear you must pay for your youthful lusts, they will prove dear
bought pleasures, they are but honey licked off from thorns: Like that fruit in
the West Indies, the Spaniards call the Devils sweet meat; a fruit very
delicious, but the place where it grows is so hot in the day, and so infested
with venomous insects in the night, that none care for dwelling near them. Your
youthful pleasures expose you to the scorchings of Gods wrath, to the bitings
and stingings of your own conscience. Your youthful lusts must be repented of
either here or in hell, where repentanc^ will do you no good. Consider wha^
these courses are, none can prevail wit^ you now to leave, and whither they
tend; they provoke God to hate you^ good men are grieved for you, and ashamed
of you, nay, even wicked me^ themselves in their cool thoughts would not have
their children as bad a^ themselves. But O how few person^ consider, that by
youthful lusts, the^ lay a foundation for old age miseries.

3. Consider it is the greatest honor to be good betimes. It was the praise o^
that good Courtier Obadiah, he feare^ the Lord from his youth. It was the Glory
of Josiah, that while he was ye^ young he began to seek after the God o^ David
his father, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. It wa^ the commendation of Timothy, tha^ from a
child he had known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. God takes i^ very kindly
when you begin betimes to serve him, Cant. 7.12. Christ loves the buds, the
blossomings of Grace, as well as the ripe fruit; and the Devil is a great enemy
to this age, he opposes the bringing young persons to Christ to be dedicated
and to be instructed and catechized. There are four reasons among others why
the Devil labors to corrupt youth.

1. Because he knows a vicious youth lays the foundation of a vicious life.
Reason teaches, that if we would alter the disposition of any thing, we must do
it while it is young: Now the Devil acts according to this principle; and
because youth is an age of fancy, and apt to receive impressions, therefore he
labors to stain and pollute it: no color holds so well, as that which is dyed
in the wool.

2. Because their age being least able to discern between good and evil, will
soonest bite at his baits, and yield to his temptations. Young persons are
soonest catched in his snare.

3. He does not know how short a time they have to live, and therefore he would
get them into his clutches as soon as he can.

4. Because God loves this age, therefore he loves to be cropping early buds;
indeed God highly values a^ a Religious Childhood and youth, he has given us
all testimonies how much he accepts it. Under the Law, the acceptable services
were young things, young lambs, young bullocks, young pigeons; the first ripe
fruits, the first born, God challenged to be his. O how does God delight in
young Samuels, young David's, young Daniels, young John's; the one was a young
Prophet, the other a young Apostle. Says God, When Israel was a Child then I
loved him: And can there be a greater honor to you, then to say, I loved God
from my Childhood, I knew Christ from my Childhood? to say as David, Psalm.
71.5. O Lord I have trusted in thee from my youth.

4. The word of God does concern you, and Religion is as proper and fit for you
as for any persons whatsoever.

The Scriptures are written for young persons, that they may know how to
cleanse their ways, Psalm. 119.9. The word is the best staff for old men to
lean on, and the best sword for young men to fight withal. The Heathens indeed
thought, that youth might be indulged in sin. Cicero in his defense of ^aelius,
says, something is to be allowed to youth, till the heat of that age be
abated; but I could appeal from him as a Mercenary Orator pleading for his Fee
the Cause of a debauched young man, to himself in another place in his sober
mind, telling us, That this age is in a special manner to be kept from lust,
and that they are much mistaken, that think way should be given to the
licentiousness of young men. But it is no great matter what they thought; since
we know God has so framd the Scriptures that Religion belongs not only to
thos^ of riper years, but to Children also, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Those words as the
learned observe have extraordinary point^ in the Hebrew, and three times there
are mention made of Children in the Decalogue. The Scripture teaches, ther^ is
a duty you owe to God, Eccl. 12.1. There is a duty you owe to men, Ephesians. 6.1.
and both these are clear, because God has appointed correction, as a^ means to
keep them in the way of their duty, Prove. 22.15. and God promises a blessing to
it, Pr. 23.13. now God promise^ not a blessing, but as a means appointe^ by him
to an end. Nor is there any ag^ more proper for Religion then this is This the
learning age: now you have leisure, now your minds are not so preingaged and
prejudiced as they will b^ hereafter. Religion is like water, fit to be poured
upon tender plants. You will never have a fitter time in your lives. The time
of youth is the faires^ flower that grows upon the stalk of Time. Now your
understandings are quick, your memories tenacious, your affections soft and
pliable. If you redeem not this time for God and your souls, I dare be bold to
say, you will repent of it sometime before you dye.

5. Conversion after youth proves very difficult and rare. I would not be
thought so arrogant, as to set any bounds to Gods Grace, or limit it to any
time. Possibly some unwary expressions that way have done much harm: But this I
say, sins of youth are hardly left, and seldom forsaken; as those bones that
grow crooked in Childhood, are hardly rectified when we become men. It is said,
Mark 11.13. the time of figs was not yet; the time of gathering figs was not
yet, as some expound that place, it was a time of bearing figs, for that kind
of fig tree, says a learned man, uses to have fruit on it of the first,
second, and third years growth: Now Christ being hungry came to see if he could
find any thing upon it. Old age i^ the time of gathering fruit; Youth i^ the
time of bearing fruit. If you do no^ bear fruit while you are young, how shall
Christ gather fruit when you are old? and what then can you look for but a
curse?

6. Good education makes the sins of youth more heinous. You therefore that
have sprang from Godly Parents, that have been the Children of many prayers and
tears; you that have been brought up in Godly Families, that have had many
Fathers, many Instructors, know you cannot sin at so easy a rate as others.
And here I cannot but take up a sad lamentation over the degenerate children of
Godly parents and ancestors; Then which there is not a worse symptom among us
of Gods utter leaving and forsaking us: Many Sons and Daughters are so given
over to looseness, prodigality, scurrility, pride, uncleanness, contempt both
of the form and power of Religion, that if their Parents and Ancestors were
now upon ^arth, would they know them to be ^^eir Posterity? Surely it may be
said ^f them, as in the Prophet, Abraham is ^gnorant of them, and Israel knows
them ^ot. Sarah, and those Holy Women of ^ld, would not know their Daughters.
Those Squirril-brain'd creatures that ^isk from one fashion to another; those
^potted and painted faces of yours, do ^ore resemble Jezebel, then the Saints
of old: And know you not that their Children you are whose works you do? ^any
young men, their fathers were ^overs of God and Worshippers of him, ^ept the
Sabbath, prayed in their Families, were chaste in their minds and body, ^ust in
their dealings, careful of giving offense, meek, humble, lovers of them that
were good. But look upon their Children, do these things live and survive in
them? are they the inheritours of their Fathers virtues, do they walk in the
steps of their Godly Ancestors? O no, it may be said of them as in Judges
2.17. You have turned quickly out o^ the way wherein your fathers walked
obeying the Commandment of the Lord but you do not so. Is not Gods servic^
contemned by you? Do not you loo^ upon it as a disgrace to be Religious* When
do you hear Gods word, or when does God hear from you in prayer? An^ not all
days alike with you? even tha^ holy time God has chosen for himself, is it
not many times more vainly and wickedly spent, then the week day? What are your
Consciences but graves, wherein you have buried all the good principles you had
in your education? Are not your bodies the sinks of lust and the epitome of
Diseases? You^ estates so wasted in the service of the Devil, that they are
become but a mea^ skeleton? Your breath is become more infectious then the
steam of a Sepulcher; who more bitter against Godliness then you? Who more
ready to shake hands with the wicked then you^ Who more ashamed of their Godly
Ancestors then you are? Do not many ^f you think their strictness and
circum^pect walking a crime, and for fear least you should be involved in it,
you think that you have no way to clear your selves but by doing the quite
contrary? And now Sirs, do you think to escape? I tell you in the name of God,
except you repent, your condition will be doubly miserable.

1. In this life, the judgments of God will overtake you, Deuteronomy. 32.20. They ^e
Children in whom is no faith: says God in the 23, I will heap mischief upon
^^em, I will spend mine arrows upon them. What a fatal deluge befell those Sons
of God, and of the Church, that corrupted themselves, and fell from God, Genesis
7.8. What a dreadful curse befell degenerate Cham in Noah's family? How heavy was
Gods hand upon Ishmael and Esau? the time would fail to let off the sad ends
wicked children of Godly Parents have come to; to speak of Nadab and Abihu,
Hophni and Phineas, Absalom, the Sons of good Samuel, of Jehoram, the Son of
good Jehoshaphat, of the Children of Josiah, of the^ posterity of the seven
Asian Churches. O you degenerate ones read these examples, and tremble at them.

2. But most miserable will you be i^ the day of judgment, Mat. 8.13. When the
Children of the Kingdom shall be cas^ into utter darkness. There shall be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth; that day will be a sad day to two
sorts of persons, to wicked Parents and Rebellious Children; when Christ shall
say to a Child, who taugh^ ^ou to swear and drink? etc. and they shall say
Lord, I had a Father and Mother did n^ more for me then beasts do for their
young I never was taught any thing was good; ^ was never warned against sin, I
knew little of thee and Christ, (except it were how to abuse and profane thy
Name.) O the misery of those Parents. But o^ the other side, when Christ shall
say t^ another, who taught you to take suc^ courses, and do such things? and
the Parents shall say, Lord, this our Son, ^ur Daughter, were Children of
Belial, we warned them night and day with tears, we were gentle to them, and
exhorted them as fathers should do their their Children; we corrected them, we
^rayed for them, we entreated others to ^ray for them, we wept over them; Lord
thou know the sighs and tears, the heart-breakings we had from them, but
they would not hear: O the misery of that Child, and of all such Children.

Now let me add but a little Counsel to you, which if followed will do you much
good.
1. Engage your hearts to God, give up your selves to him. Avouch the Lord to
be your God, and resolve to be his Servants; then you will easily answer those
many temptations, that will come a sui^oring for your hearts, and be very
importunate with you. Satan is Gods rival in suing for the heart, the world and
the flesh are his Pandors. Now O^ young man engage thy heart to God, and then
thou may say, I am not mine own, I have bestowed my affections already, and
I like my choice too well to change.

2. Do not think your selves too wise to learn, and too good to be taught,
which is the sin of most young people. It is your great wisdom to hearken to
instruction, Prove. 12.15. He that hearkneth to counsel is wise, Prove. 13.1. A
wise Son hears his Fathers instruction. There is no greater folly in young
people, ahen to think themselves wise enough already. It is reckoned in Sacred
Scripture, great impiety not to hear instruction, and there is a curse promised
against those that like the deaf Adde^ stop their ears, and will not hearken to
Parents, Ministers, Godly, wise friends. Whom do you despise but God himself?
Ezekiel. 3.7. You find it the brand of Reprobates, 1 Samuel 2.25. Eli hi^ ^ons
hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them, 2
Chapter 25.16. The Prophet tells A^aziah, that his not harkening to counsel, was an
argument God had determined to destroy him. I have read a story of Bernard, who
had a younger brother that was a Soldier, and led a wicked life; his brother
used many ways to reclaim him, but he slighted all; Well says he to him,
Brother, the time may come that God may let my ^ords into your heart by a hole
in the side; not long after this gallant was wounded in his side: then his
Brothers words came to his mind with great astonishment. You that have
faithful Parents, Masters, Friends, that advice and counsel you, take heed of
shutting it out of your ears and hearts, least God let it in with a witness
afterward. I would entreat young persons to study that place, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. It
is the first Commandment that has a promise with it, and there is a fourfold
cord to bind to the performance of it.

1. It is just and equal, this is right:

2. That it is the first Command, tha^ which leads to all the rest; he or she
that keeps this, will keep the other; h^ or she that breaks this, is in danger
o^ breaking all the other, 2 Timothy 3.1.

3. It is a Command, with a promis^ to allure them to it, and that of a
temporal blessing, and that blessing which every one desires, long life.

And 4. The Apostle in Col. 3.20 adds one more; this is well-pleasing t^ the
Lord; and who is there that would not please him? O remember how i^ all other
things you are willing to b^ instructed: What Scholar is not willing to learn
of his teacher the Tongue^ and Arts? What Servant is not willing to learn his
trade, and to be instructed and bind himself seven, eight, nine years to learn
an Art or Mystery that he may live by hereafter? And are you^ souls nothing to
you? Are you so wise for saving them you need no help?

3. Though you are in strength and health, likely to live many years, yet
remember all you Young ones that you must dye, and come to judgment. It is
Solomon's counsel, Eccles. 11.9. There are in Goigotha skulls of all sizes;
there is only this difference between a youth and an old man, That the one must
dye through the necessity of nature, the other may die through the violence of
a disease. There is nothing so powerful to hold men off from sin as the
meditation of death. There are says one, two sorts of trees God quickly cuts
down, old trees that bear no fruit, and young trees that bear evil fruit.

4. Labor to work on thy heart the Meditation, how little the world bids for
thy soul, and what inconsiderable things, those vanities and pleasures are
young persons are so much taken with: Many are but the pleasures of fancy, at
the best they are but the pleasure of sense. It is very little that young
persons know and understand of this, and that makes them so mad after them, and
so desirous to taste and try them. We please Children with bables; and they are
no better the world puts you off with, such things as dare not endure a
scrutiny at the bar of Reason. What do these things contribute to the bettering
your beings, and satisfying your appetites? I mean to the giving you true
content. Alas! they are things that perish in the using, and it will not be
long e're you your selves will be of another mind. Now the more you understand
youthful vanities, the more careful you will be to pass that age with as much
innocence as may be, and to avoid those sins you must commit before you can
come at them; and you will be afraid to venture much in the cracking that
shell, that will yield you nothing but matter for repentance.

5. Take heed you be not ashamed of your Duty. Satan does many times abuse
that natural modesty that is in your Age, to stave you off from Religion,
telling you, you will be but laughed at, and scorned for your pains: But learn
to be ashamed of nothing but sin; and this is that modesty that is always the
companion of comeliness and beauty, to be ashamed to do evil: But when a man
has done evil not to be ashamed, this is that which has the greatest
deformity in it: He that is ashamed of doing good, it is to be feared will grow
past ^hame in doing evil. It is the common excuse, I shall be laughed at, and I
am ashamed. But if you be derided for your piety and singularity in Godliness,
because you will not run with the wicked to the same excess of riot; so were
your betters, both Prophets and Apostles, nay, the Lord of both, Jesus Christ
himself was despised and mocked. But who are they that deride you? none but
wicked men. And will it not be more grievous to have God laugh at your
calamity, then for men to deride your piety? Chose whether you will be ashamed
of Christ and his words in an evil Adulterous Generation, that you may avoid
the reproach of the ungodly; or whether you will own Christ now, that he may
own you when he comes in the Glory of his Father bringing all his Holy Angels
with him.

6. Look well to your company; let your delight be in the Saints that are on
the earth, and in them that excel in virtue. Young trees seldom grow straight
in hedge-rows, nor young persons good in evil company. Where your own
corruption would draw you one mile, your company will draw you two^ as a man's
company is so is he, Prove. 13.20. Chapter 28.7.

14.. The Character of a wise Chrishian.
1. He takes the word along with him in all his concernments and actions; he
that steers his course by any other rule is like a man that leaves the
Pole Star, and sails by a Meteor, Read Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.

2. He does above all things labor to ^lease God. All wisdom without this ^
naught and rotten: but to make the pleasing God our first and chief car eis ^he
truest wisdom.

3. He is careful to secure the main. The Serpents wisdom is to save his head.
And a Christians wisdom is to save his soul.

4. He does all things with a plain, ho^est, sincere, upright heart: he
main^ains the Doves innocence with the Ser^ents policy, Mat. 10.16. True wisdom
is a pure, chaste, Virgin wisdom, that will not mix and blend with world^y and
carnal policy; he knows that honesty is the best policy, and has the advantage
of all things, 2 Cor. 1.12.

5. He exercises a holy Government ^ver his passions: for there is nothing
^peaks a man further from wisdom, ^hen inordinate affections. Wisdom is ^he
ballast of the mind, that keeps it steady. If all Government be the result of
wisdom, much more must the Government of a man's self speak him in possession of
true wisdom.

6. His eyes are in his head; He carefully discerns between good and evil,
between things and things, between man and man, that he may approve what is
good, and reject what is evil, for otherwise the knowledge of good and evil is
not true wisdom.

He is careful to aptly fit means to the end. The folly of men in the false
Church, is, they set up other means then God has appointed; and the folly of
men in the true Church is they separate the end, and the means, and think they
may come to holiness without happiness: But a wise Christian knows, as there is
no coming to the end but by the means, so no means which bring us to the end,
but such as are of Gods appointing.

8. He is careful to time all his actions; and in order to it, to observe and
improve all opportunities, because to all things there is a time and season
that renders them beautiful and facile, which if slipped, things become doubly
difficult, and sometimes impossible. ^on if it be struck while it is hot, you
^ay work it to any figure; so it is ^n matters of Religion. There are golden
moments, that a wise Christian will observe and redeem.

9. He does consider with himself what will be the issue and event of things. A
wise man understands consequences. True wisdom, Janus like, looks backward and
forward, it has eyes before and behind. Every wise man holds intelligence with
time past by memory, with time present by prudent circumspection, with time to
come, by providence, laboring to foresee what such and such things will end
in. Thus God himself to keep our first Parents in integrity, gave them the
commination, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye, expecting that in
wisdom they should discern what the event and issue of disobedience would be.

10. He does provide for his latter end. This is a great point of wisdom,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. One of the greatest perfections a man attains unto is wisdom. The
proper act of wisdom is consideration; the chiefest point of consideration is
our latter end; every man must dye, and it is not an easy thing to dye well;
and therefore it is wisdom to dye daily in meditation and preparation, that
when that time comes, we may have nothing to do but to dye.

. 15. Why are those that have received Grace so troubled with distractions in
holy duties.
1. Because there is corruption in the best, which clogs and shackies us in our
best duties. Remainders of sin, will be hinderers of our close communion with
God; these dogs will be barking though their teeth be pulled out.

2. Because Satan stands at our right ^and to withstand us when we appear
be^^re God, and to disturb us in our wor^^ipping of him.

3. To show unto us our need of Jesus christ, to be our High Priest to bear the
^niquity of our holy things.

4. To teach us that when we do seem ^ be most dutiful, yet even then we ^ave
need to be most humble.

5. To be a touchstone of our spirituality and growth in Grace. The more
spi^ituality we arrive at, the fewer distra^tions in Gods service we shall meet
with.

6. To teach us to watch as well as pray, to keep our hearts with all
diligence. Every Christian in duty must fight as well as work.

7. To teach us not to make our selves the fountain of assistance and strength
in holy duties.

8. To make us strive to be more fervent in spirit in serving the Lord. When
the flame arises the smoke decreases.

9. To stir us up to delight in Gods service. Our hearts will abide there where
they do delight.

10. To make us long after heaven that blessed state, where no distraction are.

The remedies against them are of tw^ sorts, by way of prevention, by way of
care.
1. By way of prevention; remembe^ these three things.

1. Holy retirement, sometimes of body, always of mind. Esau went in the field
to meditate. Enter into thy Closet, says our Savior. But in public^ there
must be a retirement of spirit; cal^ off thy heart from the world, and from
external objects. It was a saying of Bernard, it is not unusual for men of
untamed fancies to be surrounded with multitudes when alone; nor is it
impossible for a man of a sound spirit to be alone among multitudes.

2. Come to holy duties armed with ^ly resolution; say with David, Ps. 71.^6. I
will go in the strength of the ^rd: Resolve not to be taken off.

3. Supplication. There must come ^ower from above, and prayer fetches in: And
in prayer against distractions ^earnest with God, for

1. The sanctification of thy fancy and ^agination. That grace that sanctifies
^r minds, confines them; grace sets ^r hearts upon the right object, and ^kes
them move orderly and regular^

2. Beg a fixed heart, Psalm. 86.11. ^avid prays, unite my heart, make it ^e,
and he often speaks of this; my ^art is fixed, or prepared.

3. The spirit of love. The soul lives ^here it loves, and causes an immora^on
on the object; the more love to ^od, the fewer distractions, and the ^ore
composedness of mind.

4. The grace of holy fear. In thy fear ^ill I worship, says David, Psalm. 5.
Pray to God to possess thy soul with an aw^ of his Glorious Majesty.

5. Beg holy Zeal. Let thy heart b^ seething hot. Flies use not to come ^ the
boiling pot. Zealous Christian complain least of distractions.

2. By way of Cure.

1. Get indignation at the first rise ^ them. If they be injected by Satan,
thro^ out the fire-ball; if thy heart ha^ been the mother to conceive and brin^
them forth, let it not be the nurse ^ bring them up.

2. Be humbled for them. Gracio^ souls cannot but be grieved at then but vain
thoughts never trouble va^ men; but walk humbly with God ^ the sense how little
thy heart is wit^ him.

3. Exercise faith in Christ for t^ pardon of them, and power against them when
thou art troubled with these fie^ Serpents, look to the brazen Serpe^ Christ
Jesus.

. 16. ^ brief consideration of that common distress of conscience arising from
fear that a man has sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, in three questions.
1. Showing what are the reasons why God suffers some to be exercised with this
^emptation.

2. Who are they that are far from ^mmitting this sin?

3. What are those Graces that are ^eservatives against this sin?

1. Q. What are the reasons that God ^ffers some to be troubled with this
ten^ation?

It is a thing of common observation among those to whom distressed souls ^o
open their maladies, that they find ^any sore pressed with this tentation; ^he
reasons with submission to better ^udgements may be such as these.

1. It many times arises from ignorance, ^ant of right and sound information
of the nature and ingredients of this sin Many poor Christians charge them
selves with it, before they understand what it is.

2. Because they have not made ^ right application of the word to their own
hearts, but have been censoriou^ and uncharitable to others, and no^ they are
forced by a Divine hand, whether they will or no, to make application to
themselves; and this is God carrosive to eat out uncharitableness.

3. It may be they have been secu^ and formal in Religion, and neglecte^ the
duties of it against the conviction o^ the Word and Conscience, and abate^ in
their affections to God, to the Ordinances, to the Children of God. Sin against
light and backsliding, thoug^ in such and such a degree they do no^ constitute
this sin, yet they look too lik^ it.

4. It is to make others fear, and tak^ more heed to their ways. When we se^
God as it were letting our brothe^ upon the rack; this is to check our
negligence, to be a bridle to our looseness.

5. It is to exercise the gifts and graces of others, both Ministers and
Christians, to put them upon the exercise of prayer, consolation, pity,
charity, labor, brotherly kindness, and the like.

6. They may be exercised with it to fit them for some eminent service and
employment, as to make some open confession of the Faith, or to make them
experimental comforters of others, with the comforts wherewith they themselves
have been comforted of God, or to prepare them for undergoing some heavy
outward affliction, which seems ^ight to those that have had a wounded spirit,
or to make them live a more strict and exemplary life, or to possess some
greater measure of spiritual joy, or to ^ortifie them against the assaults of
some beloved sin, or to undergo some fierce conflict with Satan; some or all
these may be the condition of the party hereafter; and God is now fitting and
preparing them by this trouble for it.

They may think they have committed this sin by Gods leaving them to hearken to
Satan's persuasion. They failed in believing God who spoke for their good, and
now they believe Satan who speaks for their ruin; they did not hearken to the
motions of Gods spirit for their consolation, and now they hearken to the false
reasonings of an unbelieving heart prompted by Satan for their vexation. Satan
was not formerly more diligent to draw them on to sin, then he is now to keep
them from comfort; and their own perverseness did not then make them further
from instruction, then now it does from consolation.

2. Quest. Who are they that are far from committing this sin?

The solution of this may serve as a remedy against this distress; for
whosoever finds in himself these things, may be confident he is not guilty of
this sin.

1. They are far from committing this sin, that do esteem Christ, and desire to
enjoy him, and are willing to be subject to his Authority.

2. They that do truly desire to honor Christ, not only inwardly in their
hearts, but outwardly in their lives and conversations by words and actions.

3. They whose illumination is attended with reformation, who not only know
the Truth, but love and obey it.

4. Those who with well to the Kingdom and Gospel, and people of Christ, that
for Sions sake cannot hold their peace.

5. They who cleave to the Ordinances, though they want comfort, that wait upon
the Lord who hides himself from the house of Jacob.

6. They who desire the efficacy of the ministry on the souls of others, who
can rejoice when souls are converted, and are glad to see that Grace in others
they want, and that grieve when the edification of souls is opposed and
obstructed.

7. They that aspire after a holy life, that are students for piety, and
mourners for iniquity. These have not committed the sin against the Holy Ghost.

3. Qu. What are those Graces that are preservatives against this sin?

1. A cheerfulness in the service and ways of Christ. Serve the Lord with
gladness, account not his Commands grievous.

2. A sincere love to Father, Son and Spirit. This sin is committed out of
malice and hatred.

3. A daily desiring, thirsting after Christ, ever desiring Christ will keep us
from ever despising him.

4. A laboring to get heat unto our light, that our knowledge may be attended
with a change in heart and life.

5. A daily care to persevere, and hold on in Religion and Grace, with a
jealousy of our selves least we should be guilty of declining and back sliding.

6. A pleading and standing up for the truth in our places and callings with
courage and wisdom.

7. A perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, avoiding not only all gross
sins, but also, as much as we can, keeping our selves from infirmities, at
least not allowing our selves in them.

. 17. The spirituals man's aim, or a resolution of an important and serious
question, concerning our aims and intentions, whether they be for God or the
world.
Aims and intentions are secret things, removed from the cognizance of others.
The rectitude of intention contributes so much to the acceptance of our
services with God, that without this nothing, though never so materially good
and plausible can denominate us sincere in his sight; or prevail for any
acceptance with him: Now though others are not competent judges of our ends,
yet if we will deal faithfully and truly with our own souls, we may know them
by such plain things as these are:

1. By our desires. Try thy heart by this, whether thou do desire most to be
with God, or to be in the world. That which is our end we would be in the
fullest enjoyment of.

2. By thy hopes. What is it thou hopest for? is it to grow great or rich in
the world? or is it that thou art approved of God, and in favor with him? That
which is thy chiefest hope is thy end.

3. By thy delights. Do thou so delight in the world, that if that flow in,
and that thou have any probable assurance of its continuance, thou find thou
can be contented without God? or do thou account thy self miserable
whatsoever thou enjoyest, except thou have some soul communion with God, and
can find some tastes of his love, even in outward mercies, and those tastes
carrying thy soul to delight more and more in God as the fountain of them.

4. Examine how thy heart is affected upon the loss of outward things: What is
it grieves thee most, the burning thy house, loss of trade, death of friends,
or the want of Gods presence, the dishonor of his name, the danger of losing
the Gospel, and the like? that which is our end, we are grieved for, being
disappointed of.

5. If the world be thy darling, thou will be afraid to own Religion when it
exposes thee to danger, shame and loss: always worldlings are for an easy,
creditable, che^p Religion: But if God have thy heart, thou art jealous least
the world should draw thee from God, and thou will account no pains too much
for him, thou will be diligent in the use of all means. In the service of God
thou will account losses gain, and think thy self abundantly honored in being
accounted worthy to be dishonored for Christ.

6. That which is a man's end he will plead for. We see profane men plead for
the world; gross sins are with them small sins, nay, no sins, nay sometimes
commendable things, or at least indifferent; for ends will make men find cut
many Topics to argue from. Monstrous apparel is but decency, drunkenness is
but good fellowship; they can say much for unlawful gaming, wanton dalliances,
stage plays, recreations on the Lords day; Alas, say they, these are but
innocent Divertisements for the body and mind: But those that make God their
end will plead for him, they stand up for his Name, ^is Word, his People,
Wisdom is justified of her Children; they have much to say for devotion, for
mortification, for fasting and praying, for holy conference, for modest
apparel, for sobriety and temperance, for circumspect walking, and the like.

7. He that serves the world will suffer much for it, in his body by pinching
it, in his name and reputation by reproach, (for even a covetous miser shall
have some scoffs; he will make such pitiful complaints, and such ridiculous
excuses, and do such base drudgery, the world will laugh at him) yet he suffers
all this because it is his end: So he that serves God is willing to suffer for
God, to part with all for him when he calls for it, to endure scoffs and jeers
for his not complying with the Vices of the world.

Lastly, if God and the World call, whom do thou follow? the Bell touls, the
Play-bill is set up, whither do thou go? Here Is the Bible or a good Book,
there is the Tavern, or the Gaming house; God calls to the one, the World to
the other, whom do thou obey? If a Lacquey follows two Gentlemen, when they
part, he whom he follows we know is his Master; that which a man follows from
morning to night, from week to week, and leave other things to follow, that is
his Master, that he serves, and that is his end.

. 18. How must we carry our selves to God a^ our friend.
Trust him because he is faithful.

Prize him, because he is so transcendently excellent.

Be advised by him, for he is infinitely wise.

Suffer for him, for Christ did so for us.

Delight in him, because he is amiable.

Be zealous for his Glory, and grieved at his dishonor.

Love his Children for his sake.

Long to hear from him, and let him hear often from us.

Rejoice in his gifts, but more in his ^resence.

Invite him to come unto us.

Do nothing to grieve him.

Be comforted in this, our friend will ^ever be our enemy, and our enemy shall
never find us friendless.

. 19. Of the Providence of God in two cases, how it is abused, and how it may
be improved.
The Doctrine of Gods providence is ^ most comfortable Doctrine to Gods
Children, and that which we should ^abour to have a distinct knowledge of. Two
things at present I shall briefly ^ouch upon.

1. To show how the providence of God is abused.

2. How the providence of God may be improved for the comfort of the Godly, in
some common cases that may befall them.

1. Quest. How is the providence o^ God is abused?
I answer, the providence of God i^ most sadly abused these four ways:

1. When the providence of God is no^ observed and taken notice of, hereupon
God loses that Glory he might have from us, and we lose that comfort we might
have, if we did observe how al^ things come from God, and are ordered by him.
It is true, that there are mysterious workings in the providence of God, which
some think was set out by the hands under the wings of the living creatures,
Ezekiel. 1.8.

But of those things that are seen and visible, we take little notice of them,
of which God complains, Isa. 5.12. There are several things in the providence
of God, the not observing whereof speaks us guilty of abusing it.

1. When we take no notice how the attributes of God, his wisdom, holiness,
power, truth, love, justice, shine forth in all his works.

2. When we observe not the bush ^urning and not consuming, the eminent
^reservation God gives to his Church, ^ending them full and seasonable relief
^n all troubles and dangers; the substence of the Church, when the design,
^ower and malice of the world is against it, seems no less then a continued
^iracle, to one that weighs all circum^^ances.

3. When we observe not how emi^ently God infatuates enemies, disap^oints and
frustrates their expectations, ^^d that when they have traveled, and ^^ought
things to the birth, that all ^^ings are ready for execution, the de^^gn and
counsels are ripe for action, then God overthrows all; these are things that
run into our senses daily, and every age gives proof of them, yet who ob^^rves
these things?

4. Not observing Gods vindicative justice in a way of retaliation, when God
does, as we may say, cry quit with ^icked men, punishing them in that very way
and kind they have sinned against him, as in Adonibezek, Judges (...) in the
case of Sodom, burning with lus^ it is burnt with fire; they were guilty of
unnatural lust, and fire has an unnatural motion, it comes downward. Thu^ God
threatens drunkards, Hab. 2.15* 16. to give them cup for cup, spewin^ for
spewing. So Isa. 33.1. a Text often to be read to oppressors and perfidiou^
men: You shall have spoiling for spoiling, and treachery for treachery. Again
Joel 3.6, 7, 8. a good Text for cru^ men, God threatens to pay them in their
own kind: Therefore David often magnifies the Lord for this work of hi^
providence, Psalm. 7.16. Psalm. 9.15, 16 And at the destruction of Babylon, the
Angel of the waters glorifies God for this, Rev. 16.5. because he had the
judged; thus they sinned, thus the^ were punished.

5. When we observe not how the providence of God is a fulfilling the Word of
God. The providence of Go^ well understood and applied, is a most ^lear
excellent comment upon Gods lord. Thus we see Jehu, a naughty ^an, yet 2 Kings
9.26, 37. in the case ^f Gods justice upon wicked Ahabs ^^mily; mark how he
comments, This is ^he word of the Lord, this is the fulfilling ^uch a
threatening: The thing in it self ^as good, to observe how God in his ^orks
makes good his word; but the ^ffection in Jehu was naught. We have ^ example of
Christ's Disciples when he ^is purging the Temple, Joh. 2.17. ^is Disciples
remembered it was writ^n, The zeal of thy house has eaten me ^p.

Some say, if two Lutes be equally ^^ung and tuned, though they be laid ^
several places, yet strike one, the ^ther will sound; so when God strikes upon
the string of providence, present^ the word answers it; this is done, ^^at the
Scripture might be fulfilled: ^he bread I eat is a fulfilling the Scri^ture, he
is ever mindful of his Covenant, he has given meat to them tha^ fear him,
Psalm. 111.5. The preservation I have are a fulfilling the word, Psalm. 91. he
shall keep thee in all thy ways. A seasonable calling to mind the word o^ God
when we see the works of God, i^ a sign of a gracious heart, and a sanctified
memory; whereas the not regarding God, the not seeing him in the things he does
and gives to us, is a sign of a degenerate heart, and the abuse o^ Gods
providence.

2. Providence is abused, when from thence men take occasion to sin from it and
that among others is done these three ways;

1. When any conclude they may sin because God in his providence can tur^ it to
good. This is that presumption corrected by the Apostle, Romans 3.8. Le^ us do
evil that good may come of it which was a slander cast on the Apostles, as if
they had taught such Doctrine. God is indeed the soveraig^ cause of all events,
yet this excuses no^ instruments; for what God does very justly, men may do
very wickedly.

2. When we do not distinguish between tempting providence, and the commands
of God: we must follow providence no further then we have the Word for our
rule: Because Achan followed providence, he stole the Babylonish garment; but
because David followed the word of God, he durst do no harm to Saul, though
providence had put him in his hand. There are tempting and permitting as well
as directing and commanding providence; and it requires a great deal of
wisdom to cut an even thread, between Gods providence and man's improvidence,
between providence of wrath, and providence of mercy. We err most dangerously
when we do engage in actions providence seems to favor, when there is a plain
express word against them; when we mis-interpret Gods providence, to think God
in his works likes that, and encourages to that, he has in his word forbidden,
is as sad a mistake as a poor creature can run into, and it is a great sign of
infatuation; when a man sees and observes what may encourage him, and thinks
himself clearly and powerful called to it, and is stark blind, and can take no
notice of the stops, checks, rebukes, and discouragements God lays in his way.
To make providence a cloak for any unlawful action, is to abuse the dealings of
God. Remember, God is not mocked, nor can any fig leaves hide from him, who
has a penetrating eye, and whose judgment is according to truth.

3. When the providence of God in his mercies and blessings are perverted and
turned out of their right channel, and made to serve pride, lust, envy, luxury,
and the like; and this way the providence of God is most universally abused in
the world, both by Heathens and Christians.

3. We abuse the providence of God, when we make an evil construction of the
afflictions of Gods people; when we conclude from thence they are wicked men,
hypocrites, that God has forsaken them, and cast them off. Thus Jobs friends
dealt with him, and the wicked with David, Psalm. 71.10, 11. and the Jews with
Christ: Whereas all these providence are either probative, corrective, or
purgative: Bu^ to conclude, they are none of Gods people, because they are
afflicted, is a horrible abuse of Gods providence, a condemning the generation
of the just, and argues desperate ignorance, or something worse.

4. When we insult over those that are in misery, a thing too common among
those that are called Christians. There is a spirit in the world that rejoices
in others afflictions, a generation that ^lap their hands at our divisions, or
^osses, or sufferings, and say as they in the Psalms, so would we have it: But
as Solomon says, Prove. 17.5. He that is glad at calamities shall not go
unpunished. If any should rejoice in the dismal burning of London, and say it
was well burnt, but in an ill time, God himself has said of such, they shall
not go unpunished; the Devil himself shall as soon escape the vengeance of
eternal fire, as such shall escape the judgments of God.

2. Quest. How providence is to be improved for the comfort of the Godly,
instanced in some common cases, may and do befall them.
1. Case is, Concerning the deadness and inefficacy of means.
I call that deadness of means, when there is either a total inaptitude in the
means, or no suitableness or congruity in the means to the end, as in Abraham's
Case, Romans 4. There was no likelihood that such an ancient couple as Abraham
and Sarah should have a young child: So in the destruction of Jericho, that the
compassing the City in a kind of procession, six days should contribute to the
taking of the City: What efficacy seemed in this? So, that Cyrus a Heathen
should proclaim liberty to the Jews to return to their own Land, and that he
should contribute to the building the Temple to the God of Israel, was a very
unlikely thing, no one would have thought him a fit person for such a work,
that he should become another Solomon in this particular.

Thus many times a Christian sees no ^ively suitable means to bring about that
good he desires and expects. In this Case we may be comforted;

1. Because the fountain from whence we expect all good to flow is God: Now God
is not tied to means; all means work only by way of instrument. If a man be
sick, physic is the ordinary way to cure him, but the fountain of ^ife and
health is God; and therefore God many times blesses poor, weak, un^ikely means,
to restore a man to health: So when a man is poor, friends and acquaintance are
the ordinary way to relieve him; but sometimes God makes strangers and enemies
to do it: whosoever i^ the instrument, it is God that sends the supply, Phil
4.19.

2. God many times denies and hides suitable and lively means, because we
should put too much trust in them; and it is our over-prizing, and
over-expecting from creatures, makes God to put a deadness into them.

3. Providence seldom appears in means of our choosing, or works by tools of
our appointing. When we limit the Holy One of Israel, to time, to persons, to
means, God always holds back his hand, for God will not be prescribed by us
what he shall do.

4. Divine providence can put life into the deadest means that are; he can
prosper the most unlikely means; he can m^ke dry bones live. This many times he
does to show, that he can quicken the dead, that he is wise in counsel, and
excellent in working.

2. Case. The crosness of events.
Cross events are when things do fall out contrary to expectation; when we look
for light, but behold darkness, for peace, but behold trouble, for healing, but
lo a breach, for ease, and behold a burden; when we have said of such a thing,
surely it shall comfort us concerning our sorrow; and when it has been
produced, it has been either a rod to beat us, or a Serpent to bite us: this
is that causes great trouble and sadness of heart. Deceived hopes trouble us
more then present wants. Present wants may pain us, but deceived expectations
shame us, and a rational creature endures any thing better then shame, which is
caused not only from doing things against common principles, but from losing
and missing our expectation: Therefore David prays, Psalm. 119.116. that he may
not be ashamed of his hopes. This the Godly meet with at every turn: Many times
children, other relations, callings, do not answer our expectations, all things
go cross with him: In this case consider.

1. There are certain Royalties in Divine providence, with which we may not
meddle. We must submit to God, for as God is the cause of all actions why they
are, so he is the cause of the cessation of acts.

As God has the highest reason for what he does, so he has good reason why he
does not do such a thing, or why he does invert or stop such a thing.

2. How cross soever the events of providence are, they are always founded
upon unerring wisdom, and unspotted goodness. God knows well enough what he
does, he works all things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.
For as in the body of man the foot has an eye to direct it, and in the soul
the will of man has the light of the understanding to go before it; so God
would have us to conceive of him, that the light of advised wisdom is with him
in all he wills or works. In all our desires therefore we must put them up with
a reservation of the will of God, and how cross soever things fall out to our
hopes, yet remember what God works is better then what we pray for; we may err
in our prayers, but God never mistakes in what he does.

3. Cross events in providence are many times the punishment of some sin in us;
either it is for our untimely desire of things, or our inordinate desire, or
the neglect of some duty required as preparatory to make such a thing come as a
blessing.

4. Cross events many times come from Divine Love. A Father will not let the
Child have a knife, or climb up in some high place, because he knows he will
hurt himself: So God many times sees if he should gratify and succeed our
hopes and our desires, we should but thereby be rendered more incapable of
serving him, we should be prone to terminate in the creature, we should
contract more falls and bruises. Consider then God may grant in anger, and
withhold in love.

5. If God in his providence do cross us in one thing, it may be it is to
bestow upon us some better thing. When he shuts the hand of his common bounty,
it is that he may open the hand of his special grace.

(Lastly) In such providence God does not simply cross us, but many times by
things and ways that seem contrary he gives the good that we desire. Gods way
for Israel to Canaan was a straight way, or a right way, Psalm. 107.7. Though it
had many turnings and windings, going backwards and forwards; So God makes the
crossing us for the present a ripening circumstance for the future; here is all
the difference, God brings the mercy round about, and we look for it straight
forward.

3. Case. The strength and successiveness of Afflictions.
That is, when afflictions come one upon the neck of another, like Jobs
messengers, and a whole series of providence are against; as in Jacobs case,
Genesis 42.36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin also,
all these things are against me.

1. Consider, all afflictions take their commission from divine providence;
there is no rod but is of Gods making and sending, Job 5.6. Affliction springs
not out of the dust: That wicked King or Lord, 2 Kings 6.33. raised a true
Doctrine, when he said, this evil is of the Lord: But he made an ill
application, when he said I will tarry no longer.

2. There is a Divine providence that qualifies successive afflictions, and
makes them all mercies to good men. Whatever repeated rebukes, and reiterated
strokes are to wicked men, they prove good physic to the Godly.

3. Divine providence proportions these renewed afflictions to our disease; If
he sends many afflictions, it is, because we need them, 1 Pet. 1.6. manifold
temptations come not but where need is. We serve diverse lusts; no wonder God
sends diverse trials. Job could not have been without one of his afflictions.
Many times single afflictions do not make us understand; we look upon the first
as an accident, as a by-blow, but when it comes again and again, we begin to
think what is the matter, somewhat is amiss. When the report was brought to
Galienus the Emperor, Egypt was lost, what then says he, cannot I live
without the flax of Egypt? And when it was told him Asia was lost; and cannot
I live without the delicacies of Asia? Such a kind of spirit that slights
single afflictions, makes God double his stroke. When God musters up an Army of
afflictions, and pursues us with Fire, Sword, and Pestilence, it becomes us to
think what is the cause, sure here is somewhat done more then ordinary, sure
there is some Achan, some abominable thing among us: We do not send a train of
Artillery, and an Army to kill wasps: nor does the wise God make such
preparations for death, but where there is just occasion given.

4. These troubles, though they come thick like hailstones, yet they are all
measured and moderated by God, as to the time and continuance. There will be a
last affliction, the last plague, the last enemy to Gods people; all
afflictions, as they are from the will of God, so every circumstance, the
height, breadth, length of every one is measured by God, and that is a singular
comfort.

4. Case. The blasting of probabilities.
That is, when things have been regularly sought of God by holy means, and in a
lawful way, and we have come near the Mercy, in sight of it, things have been
wound up to the top, of a suddee all things run backward, and we lose the sight
of the mercy; so that we are to begin all anew.

1. Consider, God checks visible probabilities, least we should ascribe all to
means, and rob him of his Glory.

2. To show us the vanity of Creatures, and to convince us of the folly of
promising our selves so much comfort and satisfaction from them. The Creatures
promise us great things, and we are too apt to believe them. Riches promise to
ease us of our care and labor, and we many times promise our selves a writ of
ease too; but they do but increase our cares; they promise liberty, but they
bring us into bondage; they promise us contentment, but they fill us with
disquietings and vexation, and so in other things: We expect great matters from
changes and alterations. The Servant promises himself great matters in his
freedom, the single man in his marriage, the heir in getting out of wardship
and minority: But all these things are fuel to inflame our desires, rather
^hen food to satisfy. But there is no way to make us believe it till we feel
it; therefore God blasts many things that are probably like to prove comforts,
that we may experimentally see the vanity of Creatures.

3. God many times interrupts probabilities, to see how we can behave our
selves in the midst of improbabilities, whether we can live upon a promise ^or
no. For though a promise be not so sensible a ground to rely upon, yet a
promise is a surer ground then the most probable providence that is. In that
God has promised to be my God, and my exceeding great reward, and has said,
if I commit my way to him, ^he will bring it to pass, this is a better ground
to rest and stay upon, then if I had all the probable means in the world. Now
when God cuts off probable succors and supports from us, it is that we should
live more upon himself and his promise.

5. Case. The pinching wants of our present Condition.
That is, when there is a thinness and scantiness of outward provision: many
mouths, little meat; many backs, little raiment; many wants, and small
supplies; we have nothing but what we have from hand to mouth. In this case,

1. Consider, Divine providence is a daily care. Christ's Disciples must take no
care for to morrow, Mat. 6.34. The whole congregation of Israel must gather
Manna day by day, Exodus 16.4^ They shall gather a certain rate every day, that
I may prove them. Vatablu^ refers Gods proving Israel to this particular Law of
gathering Manna; thi^ was a great trial of their dependence o^ God, and
obedience to him.

2. God can send means successivel^ day by day, as he did to Elijah. Is no^ the
earth the Lords, and the fulnes^ thereof? God has strange ways t^ provide for
his. In the year 1573. when Rochel was besieged by the French Kings Army, God
sent them in daily with the Tide an infinite number of small fishes, such as
before that time were never seen in that Haven, and after the Siege ended
retired again. God can lengthen out a little means, and put a secret sweetness
and fatness and blessing into the morsels of the Righteous.

3. God sees a depending life best for his Children. Egypt was a Country that
owed its fertility to the overflowing of the River Nilus: This was not judged
by God so fit a place for Israel as Canaan, a Land that was watered with rain
from Heaven; they depended on God for that rain. Our wise Father sees that a
dependence on his providential care is best for us, and therefore has taught
us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread.

6. Case, Is concerning posterity.
I should, says many a man, do well enough for my self, but what if I should
dye, and leave many poor Children in a helpless condition; this troubles me
more then my personal calamities do.

To this I propose but this one consideration from the providence of God.

The Law says, the King never dies: So I say, the providence of God never
dies; though thou die, God still lives. Providence is not restrained to one
age of a man's life, or to elderly and grown persons: providence does eminently
concern it self for little Children. What care did God take for Ishmael when he
was a little child? How strangely did providence work for Moses, when he was
hid three months! and David, Ps. 27.10. supposes that if Father and Mother
should forsake him, (for the words do seem to be vox fidei, the language of
David's Faith.) Yet God will take care of him, and Psalm. 107.41. He sets the
Poor on High from Affliction, and makes his Families like a flock. A flock of
sheep are maintained with a little charge, the taking out of some, is often a
means to preserve the rest; they remain a flock still. God can make one Child a
help to Father and Mother, and all his Brethren; so Joseph was to Jacobs
Family. Make it thy care thy Children may be Gods, and then leave them to his
providence, with whom the Fatherless find mercy. The good of posterity lies in
the same hand of providence thy own good lies in. Do thou like Abraham command
thy Children and Household to keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and
Judgment, and God will bring upon thee and thine the blessing of Abraham, to
be a God to thee, and to thy Seed, Genesis 18.19.

Christian Reader,
THe ensuing Catechism is for the most part taken out of Mr. Hierons
Catechism, and is only the latter part of it, which contains general
directions for Holiness and Righteousness applied to particulars, both to our
daily carriage and to our Age, duty in our Calling and Relation; and because it
is out of print, I was very desirous to have at least this part reprinted,
because it does so pithily, plainly and orderly set down Relative Duties: Some
Alteration and addition I have made for illustration and application sake,
which I hope thou will have no cause to complain of. Read, Meditate, Pray and
practice, and God will give a blessing to thee.

. 20. 1. Directions for a man's daily carriage.
Question.

WHat must our work be in the morning?

Answer. To let our Prayer come before the Lord, and to praise his mercy, which
he shows in our continual preservation; and thus to do is to awake with God,
Psalm. 139.13. Psalm. 88.13. Psalm. 59.16.

Quest. What must our apparel be?

Answ. Such as becomes those that profess the fear of God, 1 Timothy 2.10.
Therefore neither costly beyond ability, nor garnish beyond modesty.


Quest. What is next to be done?

Answ. We must follow our own business with quietness, That is in those
particular Callings God has set us in.
1 These. 4.11. 2 These. 3.12.

Quest. What must chiefly be cared for in our business?

Answ. To walk with God, Genesis 5.22.

Quest. What is it to walk with God in our Calling?

Answ. 1. To set the Lord always before us, Psalm. 16.8.

2. To labor to approve our selves to him in well pleasing, 2 Cor. 5.9.

3. To acknowledge him in all our ways, Prove. 3.6.

4. To refer all to his Glory, 1. Cor. 10.31.

Quest. What must our Speech be?

Answ. Gracious always, Col. 4.6. Such as may witness Grace in the heart.


Quest. Why must we be so careful of our speech?

Answ. Because for every idle word we must give account, Mat. 12.36, 37.

Quest. Why else?

Answ. Because if any man seem to be Religious, and bridles not his tongue, his
Religion is vain, Iam. 1.26.

Quest. What things must we chiefly avoid in speaking?

Answ. Lying, swearing, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting and railing, Ephesians.
4.25. chapter 5.4. Jam. 5.12. 1 Cor. 5.11. This is called, Ephesians. 4.29. rotten
communication, because it discovers a rotten, corrupt heart.


Quest. What company must we keep?

Answ. We must desire and endeavor to be companions of them that fear God, and
let our delight be in the Saints which are on earth, and in them that excel in
virtue, Psalm. 16.3. Ps. 119.63.

Quest. Is there any danger in evil company?

Answ. Yes, for a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20. Prove.
28.7.

Quest. What must we do in such company?

Answ. Learn not their evil ways, and if sinners entice thee, consent not to
them, Ier. 10.2. Prove. 1.10.

Quest. What must we do when we come to our meat?

Answ. We must do as Christ did, look up to Heaven and give thanks, Mat. 14.19.

Quest. How many things must we look to in our diet chiefly, as we are
Christians, and reasonable Creatures?

Answ. Three things.

Quest. What is the first?

Answ. That our use of the Creatures be with sobriety, least our hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34.

Quest. What is the second?

Answ. That we forget not God, nor the operation of his hands, feeding our
selves without fear, Isa. 5.12. Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11, 12. Jud. Ep. 12.

Quest. What is the third?

Answ. That of that which remains nothing be lost, John 6.12.

Quest. Ought not some time to be set apart every day for spiritual uses?

Answ. We ought to redeem the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.16.

Quest. May not Recreation be used?

Answ. Yes, there is a time to laugh, Eccl. 3.4.

Quest. What kind of sports may we use?

Answ. Such as be harmless and of good report, Phil. 4.8.

Quest. What particular Rules are there about Recreations?

Answ. Four especially.

Quest. What is the first?

Answ. Recreation must not be in the use of holy things, Exodus 20.7.

Quest. What is the second?

Answ. That we make not sport with the sins or offenses of men, Prove. 14.9.
Psalm. 119.136. 2 Pet. 2.8.

Quest. What is the third?

Answ. That our rejoicing hinder not better duties, 1 These. 5.16, 17. Paul
joins rejoicing with Prayer, to teach that that mirth is evil that hinders or
unfits for Prayer.


Quest. What is the fourth?

Answ. That we cause not our Christian liberty to be evil spoken of, Romans 14.16.

Qu. What is our evening duty?

An. Prayer, Psalm. 55.17. That the sin of the day past may be pardoned, and
that the night following we may be preserved.


Qu. What else must we do?

An. Examine our selves upon our beds, and every man to say to himself, what
have I done? Psalm. 4.4. Jer. 8.6.

Qu. How many things make sleep comfortable?

An. Two. The first is honest labor, Eccl. 5.11.

Qu. What is the second?

An. A Godly care to thrive in Reliligion, Prove. 3.13. compared with 21.24.

Qu. How must sleep be used?

An. Love it not, least thou come to poverty, Prove. 20.13.

. 2. The Magistrates Duty.
Quest. What is the principal duty of the Magistrate?

An. To beautify the house of God, Ezra 7.27. To advance True Religion; and
this belongs to all in Authority according to their place, even from the King
to the meanest Officer.


Qu. How must he carry himself among the people?

An. As a Minister of God for their good, Romans 13.4.

Qu. How shall he procure it?

An. By being for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of
evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14.

Qu. What kind of men are fit to be Magistrates?

An. Men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness, Exodus
81.21.

. 3. The Subjects Duty.
Qu. What is the Subjects duty?

An. To be subject for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Knowing Magistracy to be
Gods Ordinance.


Qu. What else?

An. To pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Qu. What besides?

Ans. Not to curse the King so much as in a thought, Eccl. 10.20.

Qu. Is there any other duty?

An. We must not join our selves with them that are seditious, Prove. 24.21.
These three last duties flow from the first subjection for Conscience Sake; he
that is so, will pray, will neither in heart curse, nor in act rebel.


. 4. The Ministers Duty.
Qu. What is the Ministers Duty?

An. To take heed to his Ministry that he has received, that he do fulfill it,
Col. 4.17.

Qu. How may that be done?

An. Several ways.

Qu. What is the first?

An. By watching continually over the flock, Isa. 62.9. Act. 20.28.

Qu. What is the second?

An. By being diligent to know the state of his flock, Prove. 27.23. This Rule
of Solemon may fitly applied to this matter, since every Minister is a
Shepherd.


Qu. Why must he be careful to know the state of his flock?

An. That he may pity the ignorant, admonish the unruly, comfort the feeble
minded, bring again that was driven away, Heb. 5.2. 1 These. 5.14. Ezekiel. 34.16.

Quest. What is the third?

An. By giving attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Qu. What is the fourth?

An. By not being entangled with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4.

Qu. What is the fifth?

An. By being instant in preaching the Word, 2 Timothy 4.2. and administering the
Sacraments, as occasion shall require.

Qu. What is the sixth.

An. By Catechizing, Gal. 6.6.

Qu. How else?

An. By being an example to them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.12.

Qu. What is the punishment of a negligent Minister?

An. God will require the peoples blood at his hands.

Q. How many things are chiefly necessary for him that is to be a Minister?

An. Two: First, that he hold fast the Faithful Word, Tit. 1.9.

Secondly, That he be able to exhort with wholesome Doctrine, and convince them
which gainsay it, 1 Tit. 10.

. 5. The Peoples duty.
Qu. What is the peoples duty in regard of such a Minister?

An. The peoples duty has five branches.

Qu. What is the first?

An. To obey and submit themselves, Heb. 13.18. To the soundness of Doctrine
and power of Exhortation.


Qu. What is the second?

An. To have him in singular love, and to reverence him, 1 These. 5.13.

Qu. What is the third?

An. To make him partakes of all their goods, Gal. 6.6.

Qu. What is the fourth?

An. To pray for him that utterance may be given him, that he may speak the
word as it ought to be spoken, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.4.

Qu. What is the filth?

An. To receice no accusation suddenly against him, Tim. 5.19. It was a
direction given, especially to Church-Rulers, but may be applied to private men.


Qu. Why must the people thus carry themselves to their Minister?

An. For three causes:

Qu. What is the first?

An. Because he works the Lords work, 1 Cor. 16.10.

Qu. What is the second?

An. Because he watches over their souls, and must give an account thereof,
Heb. 13.17.

Qu. What is the third?

An. Because otherwise he shall do his duty with grief, which is unprofitable
for the people, Heb. 13.17. The Lord seeing the grief of his soul, will punish
those that caused it.


. 6. Household Duties.
Qu. What is the duty of the Master of a Family for matters of Religion?

An. To command his Children and and his household to keep the way of the Lord,
Genesis 18.19. For this end he must have Religious Duties in his Family, as
Prayer, Reading, Catechizing, Holy Conference; he must also bring them to the
Ministry of the Word in the Public Congregation.


Qu. What is his duty for outward things?

An. To make provision for those of his own Household, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Qu. What is the Wives duty in these things?

An. To be a help unto her husband, Genesis 2.18. Both in matters of Religion, and
in outward things.


Qu. What is the man's duty in regard of his Wife?

An. To dwell with her as a man of knowledge, and to love her as his own body, 1
Pet. 3.7. Ephesians. 5.28.

Qu. What is the woman's duty to her husband?

An. To submit her self to him, as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22.

Qu. How is that?

An. Willingly and cheerfully in all lawful things.

Qu. What is his duty, whom God has made a Father?

An. To bring up his children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians.
6.4.

Qu. What is the mothers duty?

Ans. To nourish her Children, and instruct them, 1 Timothy 5.10. Prove. 31.1.

Qu. What is the Masters duty in respect of his Servants? By Servants are
meant, those that are employed by us in our business, whether they dwell with
us, or otherwise.


An. To do unto them that which is just and equal, Col. 4.1.

Qu. What is childrens duty to their Parents?

An. To obey them in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1.

Qu. What is the reason to encourage them to it?

An. Fourfold.

Qu. What is the first?

An. Because it is right and equal.

Qu. What is the second?

An. It is well pleasing to God, Col. 3.20.

Qu. What is the third?

An. It is the first Commandment with promise.

Qu. What is the fourth?

An. That it may be well with them, and they may live long in the Land.

Qu. What is Childrens duty to each other?

An. To see that they fall not out, Genesis 45.24.

Qu. What is the servants duty?

An. In singleness of heart, and all good faithfulness to please their Masters,
yea, though they be froward, Ephesians 6.5. Titus 2.10. 1 Pet. 2.18.

. 7. The Duty of single Persons.
Qu. What is required of Persons unmarried?

An. If they cannot abstain they must marry, 1 Cor. 7.9. It is a general
Commandment appertaining to all sorts of men.


Qu. How must they marry?

An. Only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. With Consent of Parents, and with Care had
of Religion.


. 8. The Duty of Neighbors each to other.
Qu. What is required of Neighbors that live and converse together?

An. To consider one another, and provoke to love, and good works, Heb. 10.24.

Qu. How must we be affected in respect of those things that happen to our
Neighbors?

An. We must rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep Romans
12.15. 1 These. 3.7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 11.28, 29. All things befalling our Neighbor
may be referred, either to prosperity or adversity; therefore this Precept
teaches us how to behave our selves toward them in both these Estates.


Qu. Must we rejoice with all men upon all occasions?

An. No, For folly is joy to him that is destitute of understanding, and it is
a sport to fools to do mischief, Prove. 15.21. Prove. 10.23.

Qu. Must we show our selves grieved with all men when they are grieved?

An. No. In case they grieve because they cannot sin, as Amnon did, 2 Samuel
13.2. or because there are any that seek the good of Gods Church, Neh. 2.10.

Qu. What must we do in this case?

An. Be grieved for them, but not with them, Psalm. 119.158.

Qu. What is the benefit of a good Neighbor?

An. He is better then a Brother afar off, Prove. 27.10. That is afar off in
place or kind affection.


Qu. What is the best means to preserve good Neighbors?

An. He that has friends must show himself friendly, Prove. 18.24.

Qu. How is that?

An. By bearing one another burdens, Gal. 6.2.

Qu. How else?

An. By relieving their miseries according to our abilities, 2 Cor. 8.3.

Qu. But how if there be jarring sometimes?

An. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.

Qu. But what if we be daily provoked?

An. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21.

Qu. But what if my neighbor be my enemy?

An. Love your enemies, and pray for them, Mat. 5.44.

Qu. When a man has many enemies, what is the best way to peace?

An. If a man's ways please God, he will make his enemies to be at peace with
him, Prove. 16.7. Unless God in his Wisdom sees it (...) for us to be
exercised with the (...) wicked men.


Qu. How if a man live in a place so wicked it is not safe to have familiarity
with almost any of them?

An. He must strive to shine as a light in a noughty and crooked Generation,
Phil. 2.15.

. 9. A direction concerning Contracts.
Qu. How must we carry our selves in our dealing toward men?

An. We must neither Oppress By hard and extreme dealings, as Racking, Usury,
taking Advantage;
nor Defraud By cunning and subtle courses, as false Weights, Measures, etc.
any man in any thing, 1 These. 4.6.

Qu. What is the Rule by which all our Contracts must be guided?

An. Whatsoever we would that men should to us, we must do even so to them,
Mat. 7.12.

Qu. What is a good help to this?

An. To have our Conversation without Covetousness, and be content with such
things as we have, Heb. 13.5.

Qu. Why is this such a help?

An. Because the love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.

. 10. The Rich Man's Duty.
Qu. What is the Rich Man's Duty?

An. To honor God with his substance, Prove. 3.9.

Qu. How is that done principally?

An. If he be rich in good works, and and ready to distribute, 1 Timothy 6.18. By
giving or lending freely, Deuteronomy. 15.8. and sometime by forgiving debts, Neh. 5.9.


Qu. What things must a rich man take heed of?

An. Of high-mindedness, and confidence in his wealth, 1 Timothy 6.17. A conceit
that he is in Gods favor, and such as he ought to be, because he is Rich.


Qu. What must be the rich man's joy?

An. That he is made low, Jam. 1.10. That is, has a low mind in a high
condition, God having given him Grace to see the vanity and uncertainty of
riches, and that they commend us not to God.


. 11. The poor Man's duty.
Qu. What is the poor man's duty?

An. To learn to know how to be in want, Phil. 4.12.

Qu. What is the poor man's comfort?

An. That Christ for our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might
be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9.

Qu. What is the best means by which a man may be assured while he lives,
never to fall into extremity?

An. To seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, That
newness of life that becomes the heirs of Gods Kingdom.
and then all other things shall be added to him, Mat. 6.33.

Qu. What must be the poor man's joy?

An. That he is exalted (to be the Child of God by Grace) Jam. 1.9.

. 12. The Duty of Aged persons.
Qu. When is age a Crown of Glory?

An. When it is found in the way of Righteousness, Prove. 16.31.

Qu. What is the duty of the aged man?

An. To be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience,
Tit. 2.2.

Qu. What is required of elder Women?

An. To be of such behavior as becomes holiness, and to instruct the Younger
Women, Tit. 2.3, 4.

. 13. The young persons duty.
Quest. What be the duties of young folks?

Answ. Three especially.

Quest. What is the first?

Answ. To remember their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccl. 12.1.

Quest. What is the second?

Answ. To be sober minded, and to flee the lusts of youth, 2 Timothy 2.22. Tit.
2.6.

Quest. What is the third?

Answ. To honor the person of the Aged, Lev. 19.32.

Quest. What is required of young Women?

Answ. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own
Husbands, Tit. 2.5.

Quest. Why must they thus carry themselves?

Answ. That they give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully,
least the Name of God be blasphemed, 1 Timothy 5.14. 2 Tit. 5.

Quest. Wherewithal shall young persons redress their way?

Answ. By taking heed thereto according to Gods word, Psalm. 119.9.

. 14. The Sum of All.
Quest. What is the brief sum of the whole duty of Man?

Answ. To fear God, and k^^p (...) ^^^mandments, Eccl. 12.13.

Quest. What is the reward (...)

Answ. He that does th^se ^ing^ ^ha^ ^^ver be moved, Psalm. 15.5.

Glory be to God alone. AMEN.
FINIS.
Christian Reader:
BEfore thou read, mend with thy pen these more considerable faults in
Printing; for points and Commaes either mend them thy self or pardon them:

In Epist. Dedic. Leaf 1. for sakes r. sake. In Epist. to the Reader. p. 5. l
2. for in r. on. p. 5. l. 19. for mind r. need. p. 17. l. 22. r. adherence. p.
34. l. 9. r. and that not. p. 38. l. 22. for a holy r. the holy. p. 45. l. 20.
r. fitted. p. 48. l. 6. r. Banquerouts. p. 61 l. 23. for let r. tell. p. 65. l.
13. r. your side. p. 72. l. 10 add (7.) p. 74. l. penul. for pulled out r.
cannot bite. p. 76 l. 13. for Esau r. Isaac. p. 80. l. 12. r. Corrosive. p. 82
l. 4. add (7) p. 107 l. 1. r. six days. p. 64. l. 19. for promised r.
pronounced.

Books to be Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge.
AN Exposition of Temptation, on Mat. 4. verse. 1. to the end of the 11th: by
Tho. Tailor, D. D.

A learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, by Richard Sibbs, D. D. Fol.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, Fol.

The view of the Holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton. Fol.

Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By E. Pagit. Fol.

These six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatice of making Religion ones business;
The first Part. 2. Likewise a Second Part. 3. The third and last part of the
Christian Man's Calling. 4. The door of Salvation opened by the Key of
Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized; and the True Christian
Characterized. 6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith.
An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon; By Will. Greenhil. 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
by Peter Buckley. 4to.

Gods Holy Mind touching matters Moral, which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edw. Elton, B. D.
4to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines
and deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed for the sake of London. 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialing universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts; A new method by
Sylvanus Morgan 4to.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of
Prayer; by Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered. By Theophilus Polwheile.

Wells of Salvation opened; or words whereby we may be saved; with advice to
young men: by Tho. Vincent.

The Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations: by
S. Rolls.

The greatest Loss, upon Mat. 16.26. by James Livesey. small 80.

Moses unvailed: by William Guild.

A defense against the fear of death: by Z. Croft.

Gods Sovereignty displayed: by Will. Geering.

The Godly Man's Ark or City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven: by Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian Discovered; or the False Professor tried and cast: by Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against temptation: by Mr. Mead.

A Divine Cordial.

A word of comfort for the Church of God.

A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle: by Tho. Watson.

The True bounds of Christian freedom: by Sam. Bolton D D. out of Joh. 8. v. 36.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath: by Philip Goodwin.

Ovid's Metamorphosis Translated Grammatically: by J. Brinsley.

Closet Prayer.

A Christians Duty: by Oliver Heywood Author of the Hearts Treasure.

A Little Book for Little Children, by Thoma. White.

A Memento to Young and Old: by John Maynard, late of Mayfield, Sussex.


