ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED of AND ANSWERED unto BY THE Churchwardens and
Sidemen, IN THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God,
NICOLAS Lord Bishop of Chester. M.DC.XCI.

Chester, Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.

The Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of each Parish.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of Churchwardens
and Sidemen within your Parish, and shall diligently enquire, and make true
Presentment of such Things and Persons, as you know to be presentable, by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm.

So help you God.
ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED of AND ANSWERED unto BY THE Churchwardens or
Sidemen, in the DIOCESE of CHESTER.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and Chapels, with the things thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, Can. 85.
in good and sufficient repair, both for the Roof, Windows, Floor and Seats;
and are all things therein kept in such decent sort as becomes the House of
God?

II. Can. 81.
Is there a Font of Stone in your Church or Chapel, standing in the ancient
usual place? Does your Minister Baptize publicly in the Font? Can. 82.
Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, Rubric before ye Communion.
covered in time of Divine Service with a decent Carpet; and when the Lord's
Supper is administered, with a fair white Linen Cloth? Have you a Rubr.
before the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church. Can. 82. Can. 83.
Can. 80. Can. 99. Can. 58. Can. 70.
decent Basin to receive the Alms for the Poor? And have you a Chalice or
Communion-Cup, with a Cover; and one or more Flaggons?

III. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew, wherein to read Divine Service; a
comely and decent Pulpit set in a convenient place; a large Bible of the last
Translation; a Book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the Book of
Homilies set forth by Authority; a Printed Table of the Degrees wherein
Marriages are prohibited; a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical,
and a decent Surplice?

IV. Have you a Register Book in Parchment, for all who are Christened,
Married, or Buried in your Parish? And is the same kept in all points according
to the Canon in that behalf? And is the Transcript thereof yearly; within one
month next after the 25th of March, brought into the Bishop's Registry?

V. Can. 52.
Have you a Paper Book, in which the names of Strangers who preach in your
Church or Chapel are set down? And another Book for the Churchwardens
Accounts? Can. 70.
As also a Chest with three Locks and Keys wherein to keep the said Books, and
the forementioned Furniture? Can. 84.
And have you a Chest with three Keys for Alms?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging to
the Church.
I. Can. 85.1.
IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? And how long since?

II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulied down without License? Have
there been any encroachments made upon the same? Or any of the Ancient marks or
bounds removed or changed? And by whom?

III. Can. 87.
Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards,
Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also a note
of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other yearly profits
(either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the
same been withheld from your Minister? And by whom as you know, or have heard?
And is your Terrier laid up in the Bishops Registry?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. Act of Uniformity. Can. 48.
IS your Minister Vicar or Curate Episcopally ordained, and duly qualified
according to the Laws of this Realm? Has your Minister been legally inducted?
Has he read the 39 Articles within two Months after his Induction upon some
Sunday or Holy Day in the time of Divine Service, Stat. 13. Eliz. c. 12.
and declared his Assent thereto? Is he defamed, or suspected to have obtained
either his Benefice or Orders by any Simoniacal Compact?

II. Can. 45. Can. 47. Can An. 1571.
Has your Minister any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he constantly
resident among you, and does he preach every Lord's day, having no lawful
impediment? How long in one year has he been absent from his Cure?

III. Can. 47. Can. 48.
Has your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate a man of able
parts, of a pious and discreet Conversation and Conformable to the Laws of the
Church of England? Does he serve any other Cure besides? What yearly Stipend
does your Minister allow him?

IV. Act of Unifor mity.
Does your Person, Vicar or Curate, in reading the Morning and Evening Service,
Administration of the Holy Sacraments, and other Religious Offices, use ye
Forms prescribed in ye book of Common prayer, and all such Rites and Ceremonies
as are appointed Can. 58.
in that Book, so far as you have observed? Does he wear the Surplice, together
with such other Habit as is suitable to his Degree?

V. Rubr. after Communion Can. 21. Rubr. before communion. Can. 26. Can. 22.
Rubric Com, Can. 59 Rubr. after Catechism. Can. 61. Can. 66.
Does your Minister celebrate the Lord's Supper so often in every Year, that
every Parishioner may receive thrice at least? And does he keep back those who
(according to the Rubric and Canons) ought not to be admitted, giving an
Account of them to the Bishop? And does he on the Sunday or Holy Day before the
Communion, give notice thereof in the Church, and read one of the Exhortations
fitted for that purpose in the Common Prayer Book?

VI. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism? And does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be contirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England?

VII. Can. 67. Can. 68. Can. 69.
Does he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or bury the Dead, or delay the
Baptism of any Infant in danger of Death? Is there any Child past Infancy, or
other Person grown up through your Ministers default, yet remaining un-baptized
in your Parish? Rubr. before Pub. Baptism. Can. 62, 63. Can An. 1397.
Does he use to Baptize any without Godfathers or Godmothers.

VIII. Has he presumed to marry any Persons in private Houses; or such as
being under age have not the consent of their Parents or Guardians; or without
Banns first published on three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church, unless he
had a License so to do; or at any other hours, than between Eight and Twelve in
the Morning?

IX. Can. 64.
Does your Minister declare to the People every Sunday at the time appointed in
the Communion Book, the several Holy Days and Fasting days in the Week
following? And is he an Example to others in observing them?

X. Can. 75.
Is your Minister or Curate, a man of a studious, unblamable and exemplary
Life? Or is he a frequenter of Taverns, or Alehouses, a common Gamester, a
Swearer, Railer or Quarreller? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker, or
vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any Person? Is his Apparel grave and
decent, Can. 74.
as the Canons of the Church require? And does he in all his behavior so carry
himself, as that he may adorn the Gospel, whereof he is a Minister?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. Can. 109.
IS there any Person in your Parish, that lives under a Common fame, or
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards
within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's name, or any
that are noted to be Railers, Unclean or Filthy Talkers; or sowers of Sedition,
Faction and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

II. Do any of your Parish profane the Lord's Day; Stat. 29. Car. 2. c 7. Can.
1571
by working in their ordinary Callings; by setting forth, and exposing to sale
any Wares, Fruits, Herbs, or Goods on that day, or by Loitering, Tippling, or
any other practices.

III. Can. 18.
Does every Parishioner in your Church or Chapel, as well during Divine
Service, as preaching the Word of God; behave himself with such Reverence,
Decency and Attention, as the nature of such Holy Duties, and the Order of the
Church does require?

IV. Can. 85.
Are there any in your Parish, that refuse to pay their duty for Easter
Offerings; or refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the Repair of your
Church or Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging?

V. Did any by their last Wills or Testaments, leave any Legacy to your Church
or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and charitable
purposes? Which has been misspent and imbezzelled, and by whom?

VI. Act for Exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects from the Penalty,
etc.
Ace there any Persons living in your Parish, who under pretense of Liberty of
Conscience, wholly neglect all public Worship of God; neither going to the
Church, nor to any Assembly that meet together, according to the late Act?

VII. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? Have they
certified their place of meeting to the Bishop, or such others as that Act
appoints? Have their Preachers subscribed the Articles of Religion, except
those excepted in the Act, and taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Declaration
therein required?

VIII. Is there any public Chapel in your Parish, for which your Minister
has provided no supply? Has any such public Chapel been lately Usurped by
and sort of Dissenters?

IX. Can. 112.
Are there any who profess to live in the Communion of the Church of England,
who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being of age fit to
receive it?

X. Rubr. after Catechism. Can. 59. Can. An. 1571. Can. 99.
Does every Houshoulder who lives in Communion with the Church of England,
cause their Children and Servants to come to the Church to learn their
Catechism, and to give an account thereof to their Minister?

XI. Are there any living in your Parish, as Man and Wife, who are within the
Degrees prohibited?

XII. Do you know, or have you heard of any in your Parish, who having the
presentation of an Ecclesiastical Living, has made any Simoniacal compact or
gain thereby; either in Money, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes, or Glebe
belonging to the Benefice?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
I. Can 91.
HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel, a Parish-Clerk, aged twenty
years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation? And sufficient or
able to perform his Duty, in Reading, Writing and Singing? Does he duly attend
your Minister in all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid
unto him? Or who withholdeth the same from him?

II. Does your Sexton diligently do his Duty, in opening and locking the Doors
of the Church at due times; in keeping the Church clean and decent; in Tolling
and Ringing the Bells before Divine Service?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schoolmasters, and Schools.
I. WHat Hospital, Almshouses, or Free School has been founded in your
Parish? Are they so ordered in their Revenue and Use, as the Founders
appointed, and the Law of the Land allows?

II. Can. 77, 78, 79.
What Schoolmaster private or public, is there in your Parish? Is he Licensed
by the Bishop? Is he of sober and honest Conversation? Does he teach his
Scholars the Church Catechism? Can. An. 1571.
And does he cause them upon Sundays and Holy Days, to repair orderly to the
Church; and there see that they quietly and reverently behave themselves during
the time of Divine Service and Sermon? And does he at other times train them up
with such Sentences of Holy Scriptures, as shall be most expedient to induce
them to all Godliness?

III. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Chyturgery or Mid-wifery, without
License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens, and Sidemen.
I. Can. 89.
ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. Ibid.
Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the Parish,
and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the money remaining in their
hands; together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel?

III. You are further to understand; that according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and good Wine, according to the number
of Communicants, at the Charges of the Parish.

TIT. VIII. Concerning the Officers in the Ecclesiastical Courts.
I Can. 178
Does the Chancellor or Commissary, substitute any person in his absence to
keep Courts for him, who is not either a grave Minister, and a Graduate, or a
Licensed public Preacher, and a Beneficed man near the place where the Courts
are kept; or a Bachelor of Law, or a Master of Arts at the least?

II. Can. An. 1571.
Does the Chancellor or Commissary (not being in Holy Orders) pronounce the
Sentence of Excommunication? Or is the same pronounced only by the Bishop, or
by some grave man of his appointment, which is in the Ministry?

III. Can. 134
Do you know, or have you heard of any Payment, Composition or Promise, made to
any Ecclesiastical Officer for conmving at any Foult committed? Has the
Register received any Reward in any Cause whatsoever, in favor of any party?
Or has he been of Counsel directly or indirectly, with either of the parties
in Suit?

IV. Can. 135
Has any Register, or any other Ecclesiastical Officer, or any Clerk under
them, exacted, or taken extraordinary, or greater Fees, than those contained in
the Table of Fees, for that purpose made? Can. 136


V. Are there two Tables containing the several rates of Fees due to each
Officer; the one publicly proposed in the Consistory, the other in the
Registry, that every Person whom it concerns may without difficulty come to
the view and perusal thereof?

VI. Can An. 1571. and 1597. Can. 133
What money has been given for commutation of Penance? By whom? To whom? For
what Offense? How has it been employed?

VII. Is there any Proctor who does not behave himself modestly in the Court,
and is not presently silent when the Judge or Advocate speaks?

VIII. Can. An. 1597. Can. 138
Is there any Apparitor who executes his Office by a Deputy? Does any Apparitor
exact more or greater Fees then are prescribed?

Let these, and all other Abuses and Offenses, which any Officer belenging to
the Ecclesiastical Courts is chargable with, since the 16th day of May, 1690.
be carefully presented to the Bishop.

The Churchwardens and Sidemen, are required to advise with their Ministers,
concerning their Presentiments; and conscionably to discharge their Office, duly
considering the Obligation of their Oath, and the danger of Perjury; and that
those Sins and Offenses will lie at their Doors, which through their
unfaithfulness in not Presenting them, remain un-reformed in their Parishes.

If any Minister thing fit to Present, let his Presentment be distinct from
that of the Churchwardens.

TO MY BRETHREN OF THE CLERGY.
YOU are desired to prepare the Young people of your Parishes for Confirmation.
And to the end it may be Administered to the greater Edification of those who
shall receive it. I desire you to take notice, that I intend to Confirm none
but those who are of the age of Fourteen Years at the least, and whose Names
shall be delivered to me, by the Ministers of the respective Parishes from
which they come, with a Certificate under their Hands that they have Examined
them (unless they be Persons of Ripe age) and find them not only capable of
repeating the words of the Catechism, but that they understand the meaning of
that Solemn Vow, that was made in their Name at their Baptism, and declare
themselves resolved, by the Grace of God, to live answerable to it.

For the better regulateing of Ordinations, I desire you to observe.
First, That I will admit none to Holy Orders, but such as be presented to some
Ecclesiastical Preferment in this Diocese, or have some other Title specified
and allowed in the 33 Canon; amongst which a Curacy under a Parson or Vicar is
not to be accounted as one, unless such Parson or Vicar does under his Hand and
Seal, oblige himself to the Bishop, both to accept that Person bona fide (when
he shall be Ordained and Licensed by the Bishop) to serve under him, and allow
him such a Sallary as the Bishop shall approve of, so long as he shall continue
to do his Duty there.

Secondly, I desire you to signify to all such as you find desirous to enter
into Holy Orders; that I expect they send to me in writing, a Month at least
before Ordination-Sunday, their Names and the places of their abode, that I may
order Notice to be given of their intentions at the Parish-Churches where they
live; that so any who have any impediment to object, why they should not be
admitted, may signify it to me. And I expect, that they all personally repair
to me, and bring with them such Testimonial of their Behavior for the three
years last past, as the Canon requires; on Wednesday in Ember-week, or on
Thursday morning at the latest; that I may have sufficient time for the strict
and careful examination of every one of them; remembering those dreadful words
of St. Paul, Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
Sins, keep thy self pure.

FINIS.

