ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY CONCERNING MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL EXHIBITED
To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the
Diocese of ELY BY THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD FRANCIS By Divine Permission
LORD BISHOP of ELY.

In the Second Year of His Translation for His First Episcopal Visitation.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes. M.DC.LXXXVI.

The Charge of the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
HAving received a Copy of this Book, you are required to repair to your
Minister, to hear all these Articles deliberately read over to you; duly and
diligently to consider of them; and by his Advice (and if need be with his
Concurrence) to Present all and every such Person or Persons of your Parish, as
have committed any Offense, or made any Default, mentioned in these Articles or
any of them; or which are vehemently suspected for the same: wherein You are to
deal uprightly and impartially, all Affection and Favor, all Hatred and
Malice, all hope of Reward or Advantage, and fear of Displeasure set aside;
signing such your Presentiments with your Hands.

The Form of their Oath.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully, according to the best of your Skill and
Knowledge, to Present such Things and Persons (inquired of in these Articles)
as to your knowledge are Presentable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm.
So help you God, and the Holy Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry, etc.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, with the Ornaments, Furniture, Possessions, and
Revenues thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church, and Chancel decently kept for God's honor? Are the
Roofs, Walls, Windows and Pavements well repaired? are the Ten Commandments,
Lords Prayer, and the Creed drawn out in fair Letters in convenient places? and
are the King's Arms set up.

II. Have you a Font of stone decently covered for Baptism? a comely Communion
Table at the East end of the Chancell? a comely Carpet of silk or fine stuff,
with a fair Linen Cloth to spread upon it, a fine Napkin, a Silver Cup for the
Wine, a Patin for the Bread, and one or more Flagons of Pewter, or richer
Metal for the Administration of the Lords most Holy Supper?

III. Are your Reading Desk, and Pulpit conveniently set up, and placed for the
use of Public Prayer and Sermons? Have you two Common Prayer Books in Folio
last set forth by Authority, your Bible in Folio of King James's Translation,
and a decent Surplice for your Minister to wear in the time of all public
Ministrations?

IV. Have you a Parchment Register for Christnings, Marriages and Burials? and
another of Paper for the Names and Licenses of such Strangers as at any time
preach in your Church or Chapel? and a Book wherein are entered the
Churchwardens Accounts every Year? Have you a Chest with 3 Locks for the said
Books, and the Keys kept by the Minister and Churchwardens, and other Church
Furniture, and a Box for the Poors Alms?

V. Have you a Table of the Prohibited Degrees of Marriage hanging up in your
Church, and a Bier with a decent Herse-cloth for the Burial of the Dead?

VI. Is your Churchyard well Kept and Fenced to keep out beasts? Are any Doors
made into it, any Trees cut down, or encroachments made upon it?

VII. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe Lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicaridge? and
is a Copy of the same delivered into the Bishops Registry?

VIII. Is the House and Outhouses of your Minister in good and sufficient
Repair? Does he preserve the Gardens, Orchards and Glebe belonging to him
without Embezelling, Changing, or any way Damnifying them?

IX. But especially whereas in Our late Parochial Visitation, We took
particular notice of several Defects, Neglects and Disorders relating to the
Premises, and soon after issued out an Injunction for the speedy Repairing,
Redressing, and right Ordering of the same; You are hereby required to produce
at our Visitation the said Injunction, and there to certify the Particular
Amendments that have been made in obedience to the said Injunction, or the
Names of such Persons through whose default it has not yet been fully and duly
observed.

TIT. II. Concerning the Clergy.
I. IS your Minister (so far as you know, or believe) in Holy Orders, according
to the Rule and Form of the Church of England? Has he been legally Admitted to
the Cure of Souls in your Parish? or is He known, or suspected to have obtained
his Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal, or Undue practice?

II. Did He within two months after his Induction upon some Sunday, or Holyday
publicly and openly read the 39 Articles, as also the Morning and Evening
Prayer according to the Act of Uniformity Car. 2.14. and did He within the time
there limited make the Declaration required by the said Act, and read the
Ordinary's Certificate of his Subscription to the same?

III. Is your Minister constantly resident upon his Benefice, and does he live
in his Parsonage, or Vicaridge House, or (his Residence being legally dispensed
with) does he provide a sufficient Curate, licensed by the Bishop, and does he
allow him a competent Stipend?

IV. Does your Minister or his Curate in Reading the Morning and Evening Prayer
and the Litany, on all Sundays and Holydays, and all other Days appointed by
the Church, in Administering the Holy Sacraments, Solemnization of Matrimony,
Burying of the Dead, Churching of Women, and all other Offices of the Church
duly observe such Order, Manner and Form, as is prescribed in the Liturgy and
Canons of the Church without omission, alteration, or addition of any thing?
And does He in performing all and every of these wear the Surplice constantly
with a Hood, or Tippet befitting his Degree?

V. Does He administer public Baptism at the Font, without a Basin? does He
sign the Infant baptized with the sign of the Cross? does he Baptize any at
Home but in case of real necessity, and that without Godfathers and Godmothers,
requiring moreover that the Child if it live be afterward brought to the
Church, to have the said Baptism there solemnly certified in such manner and
form as the Church appoints in the Office of Private Baptism? does He baptize
publicly without Godfathers and Godmothers, or does he admit Parents for such
to their own children? And are there in your Parish any Persons of riper years
yet unbaptiz'd through his default?

VI. Does He administer the Lords Supper so often, and at such convenient times
that the Parishioners may communicate Thrice at least every Year (whereof
Easter to be one) does He exhort them diligently to the frequent Receiving of
the same, does He warn the Negligent, does He admit any scandalous and profane
Persons, or give it to any that refuse to receive it Kneeling?

VII. Does He marry any persons under age without consent of Parents, or any
others without Banns or License, or in any other place then the Church, or at
any other time then between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the Forenoon?

VIII. Does He (upon notice given) visit the Sick? does he instruct, comfort,
conferr and pray with them? does He upon their confession, repentance and faith
(being thereunto desired) absolve them, does He keep secret such their
confession? does He (when desired) give them the Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body
and Blood, and if they have ability, move and stir them up to pious and
charitable deeds?

IX. Does He refuse Christian Burial to any except persons Unbaptized, or
Excommunicate, or that have laid Violent hands upon themselves?

X. Has He admitted any women begotten with child in adultery or fornication,
to be Churched without License from the Ordinary?

XI. Does He every Sunday preach himself, or procure some Licensed Preacher so
to do, or read one of the Homilies set forth by Authority?

XII. Does He constantly at the beginning of Sermon move and exhort the People
to join with him in Prayer, in such manner and form as is appointed by the
Church in the 55th Canon, and no otherwise?

XIII. Does He in his Sermons four times every year teach and maintain the
Kings Lawful Authority over the State both Ecclesiastical and Civil, against
the Pretenses and Usurpations of all Foreign Power? Has He been known or
observed to teach Sedition, or Faction directly against His Majesty, His Laws
and Government, or indirectly to cast out Seditious Glances against the Civil
State, or Government Ecclesiastical?

XIV. Does He preach and maintain (as far as you know or hear) any new and
strange Doctrine contrary to Gods Word, and the 39 Articles of this Church?
Does He teach any thing to be religiously observed and believed, that is not
agreeable to the Scriptures, and what the Catholic Fathers of the Ancient
Church have gathered thence?

XV. Does He diligently instruct and examine the Younger Sort in the Church
Catechism? and does He take care to bring, or send them so instructed to the
Bishop for Confirmation?

XVI. Does he declare to the People every Sunday the Days of Fasting and
Abstinence, the Holy Days and other Solemn Days that have particular Services,
which (if any such there be) are in the Week ensuing to be religiously kept and
observed?

XVII. Does He upon some Sundays or Holydays read publicly in the Church, the
Book of Canons once every Year, and the 39 Articles twice, to the end that the
People being well acquainted with the Doctrine and Discipline of our Holy
Mother the Church of England, may continue steadfast and obedient in the
Communion of the same?

XVIII. Is He (together with the Churchwardens) careful in Registring (as the
Law requires) the Names and Sirnames of all such in your Parish as have been
Baptized, Married, and Buried, and the same transcribed to return every year
into the Bishop's Registry?

XIX. Is your Minister one that is studious of the holy Scriptures? Does He
keep to His calling, abstaining from all Trades, Occupations, and Labors not
befitting His Function, from all apparel, that is excessive or any way
unseemly, or unsuitable to His Calling either at home or abroad, does He
refrain from the acquaintance, and company of persons, that are Excommunicate,
or any way Scandalous? Is He of a Chaste and Sober, a Peaceable, and Exemplary
Conversation? Or is He noted, or suspected for Incontinency, Gaming, Swearing,
Drinking, for frequenting Inns or Taverns, or any House of ill Report, or
Notoriously guilty of any other thing contrary to Godliness, or particularly
misbecoming His holy Calling?

XX. Does He in His Sermons deliver such Doctrine as tends to Obedience, and
the Edisying of the Auditory in Faith and Religion, without intermeddling with
matters of State, not fit to be handled in the Pulpit?

XXI. Does He Labor diligently to Reduce Popish Recusants (if there be any in
your Parish) from their Errors? And does He every year present the Names of
such, as are not Reducible, to His Ordinary, if they be above Thirteen years of
age.

TIT. III. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. ARE there any in your Parish that are blasphemers of the Majesty of God, or
scoffers at the Christian Religion, or that derogate from the Authority, or the
Sufficiency of the Scriptures, or deny any of the Articles of the Christian
Faith?

II. Are there any that deny the Church of England to be a true, and
Apostolic Church, and to have in Her all things necessary to Salvation? Or
that affirm the XXXIX Articles to be Erroneous in any part, or such as cannot
with a good conscience be subscribed to?

III. Do any in your Parish affirm, or teach that the form of God's worship
contained in the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, is
corrupt, superstitious, unlawful, or repugnant to Scripture? Or that the form
of Consecrating, or Ordaining of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons is
Antichristian, or repugnant to the Scripture, or to the practice of the
Primitive Church?

IV. Do all your Parishioners (having no Lawful impediment) duly resort to the
Divine Service and Sermons in your Church, on Sundays, or other days and times
appointed by Law? Do they come in the beginning, and not depart before the
Blessing? Do they demean themselves reverently there, uncovering their Heads,
kneeling at the Prayers, standing up at the Hymns, at Glory be to the Father,
etc. At the recital of the Creed, and reading of the Gospel, and at what other
parts of the Service it is required?

V. Are there any in your Parish that resuse to send their Infant Children to
be Baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? Or do they send
them to be Baptized in other Parishes? Or are they Baptized after other form
then is appointed? or are they kept unbaptized longer then is allowed? Or are
there any of riper years, as yet unbaptized? Or any that have been Baptized
privately and not afterward brought to the Church with Godfathers and
Godmothers according to the Rubric?

VI. Do any Parents or Masters of Families neglect or refuse to send their
Children or Servants to Church, to be instructed in the Catechism? Or to have
them, being so instructed, presented to the Bishop for Confirmation? Are there
any so instructed and confirmed, and of due age, that come not to the Lord's
Supper Three times in the year at the least, of which the Feast of Easter to be
one? Or any that forsake their own Parish to receive it elsewhere?

VII. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? Are there any Wills, or Testaments of Persons dead within your Parish,
that be yet unproved? Or any Goods Administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary?

VIII. Are there any in your Parish that are unlawfully married within the
Degrees prohibited? Or that being Lawfully married, and not Lawfully Divorc't,
do yet separate one from the other, or that being Lawfully Divorced have
married any other?

IX. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church, in time of Divine Service, upon some Sunday or Holyday? Or do they
come decently apparelled, and make their Offerings according to custom?

X. Are any in your Parish known, or reputed to be common Swearers, Drunkards,
Adulterers, Fornicatours, Incestuous persons, concealers, or harbourers of the
same? Are any noted to be Railers, unclean, or filthy Talkers, sowers, or
maintainers of Sedition, Faction, or Discord among their Neighbors? Do any use
Enchantments, Sorcerys, or Witchcrafts? Have any been detected of such
Notorious crimes? Have they done Penance for the same, or Commuted for it? What
sums of Money have been received upon such Commutations, and how have they
been bestowed?

XI. Do any stand Excommunicate for any such crimes? How long have they stood
so, and do any converse with them familiarly before they are reconciled to the
Church?

XII. Have any in your Parish quarreled, stricken, or done any violence to
your Minister? Have they disturbed, or molested Him in His Ministerial Office?
Have they Libelled, or spoke any slanderous words against Him to the scandal
of his vocation, have they reproached, or menaced, or any way wronged and
abused the Churchwardens for doing of their duty?

XIII. Do any refuse to pay their Easter Offerings, or other dues to your
Minister, or to contribute to the Rates assess'd for the repair of your Church,
or Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging?

XIV. What Gifts, or Legacies have been given to Pious uses in your Parish,
which in whole, or in part are either utterly defrauded, or not employed to the
right use according to the Will of the donour?

XV. Are your Seats, and Pews in the Church decently kept, and are the
Parishioners placed in them without offense and contention?

XVI. Does every one abide in his own calling whereunto he is called? viz. Does
any Layman that is not duly Ordained openly read Common Prayer, or execute
any Ministerial Duty in your Church? Or is there any Clergyman, viz. any in
holy Orders, who does voluntarily throw off the habit, and desert the
profession of a Clergyman, and use himself as a Layman only, without taking
any care of the Church of God?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAve you a Parish-Clerk duly chosen by the Minister, of the age of Twenty
years at least, of a sober and honest behavior, and sufficiently qualified in
Reading, Writing, and Singing, and making the several Responses and Suffrages
in the Liturgy? Does he duly attend Him in all Divine Offices? Does he (or the
Sexton) open and lock the Church-doors at due times, keep the Church clean, and
caresully look after all things committed to his charge? Does he ring or toll
the Bells at the accustomed hours, that the people may have sufficient warning
to come to Church? Does he upon notice given toll the passing Bell, that the
Neighbors may thereby be put in mind to recommend the soul of the dying person
to the grace and mercy and peace of God? Does he diligently attend the duty of
his place in every respect? Are his wages duly paid him, or who withholdeth the
same from him?

II. Does he meddle with any thing not appertaining to his Office, as Churching
of Women, Burying of the Dead and such like?

TIT. V. Concerning Hospitalls, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons and Midwives.
I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School? Is the
Revenue thereof rightly employed, and do the Masters, and Governors, and
Members of the same behave and demean themselves according to the Godly
Ordinances, and Statutes of their several Foundations?

II. Does any man keep a Public or Private School in your Parish, that is not
Licensed by the Ordinary so to do? Is He a Man of a good Life? Does He come to
the Church Himself, and cause His Scholars so to do, and there to behave
themselves orderly, and reverently? Does He diligently instruct them in the
Church Catechism, and teach them good manners, modesty, sobriety and obedience,
as well as other good Learning?

III. Have you any Physician, Surgeon, or Midwife in your Parish that
practice without License?

TIT. VI. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
I. HAve any Ecclesiastical Judges, or Officers within this Diocese upon any
payment, or composition that you know or have heard of, suppressed, or let go
unpunished any fault, or offense presented to them by the Churchwardens, or
any others?

II. Have any of them received, or exacted any extraordinary Fees, or other
Rewards or promises, directly or indirectly for Granting Letters of
Administration to one before another, or for allowing large and unreasonable
Accounts of Executors, or Administrators, or for discharging them without
Inventary or Account, to the defrauding of Creditors, Legataries, or those who
are to have Portions?

III. Is there a Table of Fees hung up every Court-day in some public place of
the Court, or Registry? are any larger Fees taken and exacted for Wills,
Administrations, or any other things then are set down in the said Table?

IV. Does any Judge, or Officer in the said Courts vexatiously Cite any person,
protract any Causes, or any way pervert Justice for gain or reward?

V. Does any Ecclesiastical Judge speed any Act in any Cause privately of
Himself, and not in presence of some public Notary or Actuary?

VI. Is there any excessive number of Apparitors in this Diocese? Have any of
them under pretense of Authority, Cited or summoned any person unlawfully, or
have they taken any reward for the concealing of any offense, or fault, or
avoiding of the punishment of the offenders? Do they take, or require any
unaccustomed Fees? Have they threatened any to prosecute them, if they had no
reward, and do they Summon any without a Citation first had?

VII. Has any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer, Advocate, Register, Proctor,
Clerk, or any other Minister to the said Courts belonging, any way in their
respective Offices abused themselves, or oppressed and agriev'd His Majesty's
Subjects contrary to the Law and Canons in that behalf provided?

TIT. VII. Queries to be answered by the Ministers concerning the
Churchwardens and Sidemen?
I. ARE your Churchwardens every year chosen in Easter-Week, and after the
custom and manner of the Parish?

II. Have the last and former Churchwardens given up their Accounts before the
Minister, and Parishioners? Are their Accounts allowed, or have they falsify'd
their trust? Wherein? And how much?

III. Do the Churchwardens diligently observe who are absent from Church? Do
they take all possible care that such Absenters of themselves do not profanely
spend the Lord's day, and other holy Times in Taverns, Inns, Tippling and
Victualing-houses, especially in the time of Divine Service? Do they in the
Church during all the said time, see that the Parishioners present behave
themselves peaceably and reverently, and that all things be done decently, and
according to order? That the Font, the Communion Table, the Reading Desk, and
the Pulpit with all the Furniture and Utensils thereunto belonging, be kept in
such good order and beauty as best becomes God's House and His Holy Ordinances
therein Administered? That the several Books, Registers and Chests required by
Law, be at the charge of the Parish provided, and from time to time renewed,
and supplied as there is occasion?

IV. Have they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen, now Sworn to give in a true
answer unto all these Articles of Enquiry in all their several Titles) taken
sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with You
their Minister for your faithful Assistance?

FINIS.

