The Charge of the Churchwardens and Sidemen:
HAving received a Copy of this Book, you are required to repair to your
Minister; to hear all these Articles duly and deliberately read over to you;
duly, and diligently to consider of them; and by his Advice, (and if need be,
with his Concurrence) to Present all, and every such Person or Persons of your
Parish, as have committed any Offense, or made any Default, mentioned in these
Articles, or any of them; or which are vehemently suspected for the same:
Wherein you are to deal uprightly, and impartially; all Affection and Favor,
all Hatred and Malice, all hope of Reward, or Advantage, and fear of
Displeasure set aside; Signing such your Presentiments with your Hands.

The Form of their Oath.
YOu shall Swear, Truly and Faithfully, to Execute the Office of Churchwarden,
according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL.

EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen, of every Parish,
within the Diocese of Exeter, At the Primary VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend
Father in GOD, JONATHAN, By Divine Permission, LORD Bishop of EXETER, In the
Year of our Lord, 1689.

LONDON, Printed, MDCLXXXIX.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Within the DIOCESE of EXETER.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels; the Fabric Furniture, and Ornaments
thereof.
1. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, kept in good and sufficient Repair? Are
the Utensiles and Ornaments fairly kept, and preserved from Spoil, Abuse, and
Profanation? And all things so decently ordered as becomes the House of God?

2. Has the Steeple, or Tower, or any other part of your Church, or Chapel,
been pulled, or fallen down? Or have any of the Bells, Lead, or other
Materials, or Utensiles, formerly belonging thereunto, been Imbezelled, sold,
or made away? And by whom?

3. Is there a decent Font of Stone, fixed in the Ancient and usual Place in
the lower part of the Church, for the Administration of Holy Baptism, and a
comely Table for the Holy Communion, placed in the Chancel where it ought to
be, with a Carpet of some decent Stuff, and a fair Linen Cloth to cover it,
at the time of the Administration of the Holy Eucharist? And have you a fair
Chalice or Communion-Cup with a Coves, and a Plate or Paten for the Bread, and
a Flaggon for the wine, to be used in the Holy Communion? And are they used in
these Holy Services only?

4. Have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat or Pew for your
Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit with a comely Cloth, and Cushion;
a Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volume; and a Book of
Common Prayer, (Established by the late Act of Uniformity? Have you likewise
the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, first set forth in the Year of our Lord, 1603. by the King's
Authority? And a Printed Table of the Degrees, wherein Marriage is Prohibited?

5. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his public: Ministration in the Church, provided and Washed at the Charge of
the Parish.

6. Have you a Register-Book of Parchment wherein the Names and Sir-names of
all Persons Married, Christened, or Buried within your Parish, are duly
Registered from time to time? Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein
are duly Recorded the Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted
at any time to Preach in your Church or Chapel? As also a third Book, wherein
are Entered the Churchwardens Accounts for every Year?

7. Have you a Chest or Coffer wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all the
aforesaid Furniture in safe Custody? And another with a Hole in the upper part
thereof, placed in the most convenient part of the Church, that the
Parishioners may put their Alms into it? And are both the said Chests secured
with three several Locks and Keys; one Key remaining with the Minister, and the
other two with the Churchwardens, severally.

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard; the Houses and Glebes; the Tithes, and
other Dues belonging to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently Fenced and Decently kept from all
Profanation and Encroachment? Has any Person made any Door into it out of his
own House or Ground? Who, and how long since?

2. Is there a House belonging to your Parson, Vicar, or Curate? And is the
same, with all the Outhouses thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient
repair? Has any one Encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close belonging to
your Parsonage, or Vicarage-House? Or changed, or removed the Ancient Marks and
Bounds of the same.

3. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
Also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? And
is there a Copy of the said Terrier and Note delivered in, to be laid up in the
Register Office? Have any of these been withheld from your Minister? And when,
or by whom?

4. Have any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage, or
Vicarage, been alienated, taken away, or Exchanged for others, and by whom, and
when has the same been done; And how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage
damnified thereby, in the the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe, or
have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning the Clergy.
1. IS your Minister (so far as you know, or believe) in Holy Orders, according
to the Rules of the Church of England? Is he Lawfully admitted to the Cure of
Souls in your Parish, as you believe or have heard? Or is he reported or
suspected to have obtained either his Orders by any undue Practices, or
Benefice by any Simoniacal Contract?

2. Did he within two Months after his Induction, publicly in the Church upon
some Sunday or Holyday, in the time of Divine Service, Read the Thirty Nine
Articles of the Church of England, Established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his Assent thereunto? Did he within the same time, upon some
Lord's Day, publicly read the appointed Morning and Evening-Prayers, and
thereafter declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of all things in
the Book of Common Prayer, contained in the Form prescribed by the late Act of
Uniformity?

3. Is there any Chapel or Chapels of Ease, or Parochial, belonging to your
Mother Church? If so, at what distance are they, and how are they ferv'd and
provided for?

4, Has your Minister any other Ecclesiastical Benefice with Cure? And how far
distant from you, and in what Diocese? Is he generally Resident among you? And
when he is Resident, does he constantly live in his incumbent House? Has he
any Curate usually to assist him when Resident? And when Absent, on due
Occasions, does he provide one, able, sufficient, and Conformable to the Laws,
and Orders of the Church of England, and duly Licensed by the Bishop?

5. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, read Divine Service on all Sundays and
Holy Days; and the Litany (at least) on every Wednesday and Friday; and
publicly Administer the Holy Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist, at
least three times a Year, at the three Great Festivals, and perform all other
Ministerial Offices, and Duties, in such manner and form, as is directed by the
Book of Common Prayer, lately Established, and the Act of Uniformity therewith
Published?

6. Does he on the Lord's Day give notice of the Holy Days, and Fasting-days in
the Week following, that the People may be put in mind, and incited to resort
to public Prayers in the Church upon those Solemn Occasions? And does your
Minister and Parishoners observe the Yearly Prayers and Perambulation in
Rogation Week, for preserving the Bounds of the Parish, and desiring God's
Blessing upon the Fruits of the Earth?

7. Does he himself constantly every Sunday (unless in case of sickness, or
other reasonable impediment) Preach in your Church or Chapel; or procure a
Sermon to be so Preached by some other Licensed Preacher; or one of the
Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest, or Deacon?

8. Does your Minister diligently examine and instruct the Youth of your Parish
in the Church Catechism, as in the Rubric at the end of the said Catechism is
Directed? And being thus prepared, and of convenient Age, does he take care to
Present them to a Bishop to be Confirmed?

9. Does he refuse, or neglect to Visit, Comfort, and Pray with the Sick, or to
Bury the Dead? Does he delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in real danger
of Death; or Baptize them in any other Place than the Church, when there is no
such danger? And when they are (in case of necessity) thus privately Baptized,
does he cause them afterward, if they live, to be brought into the Church, and
certify the Congregation of the Form of Baptism used in Private, and proceed
thereupon in all Points, as in the Office of Private Baptism is directed?

10. Has he presumed to Marry any Persons in Private Houses? Or such as being
under Age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first
Published on; three Sundays, or Holy Days in the Church? Or at any other Hours
than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning? unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do, granted by such Authority, and in such Form as the
Canons direct?

11. Is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, of a sober, unblameable, and exemplary
Life, given to Hospitality and Alms-deeds? Is he in his Apparel, and in his
whole outward guard and Dress, grave and decent, as the Canons of the Church
require? Or, on the other side, is his Carriage and Conversation in any kind
whatsoever disorderty, or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus
Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners,
1. IS there any Person in your Parish that lies under a common Fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Any common Drunkards,
or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's Holy Name? Or any that are noted to
be Railers, unclean, or filthy Talkers; sowers or maintainers of Sedition,
Faction, or Discord among their Neighbors? Or in sum, any whose Life and
Manners are contrary to Godliness, Peace, and Honesty?

2. Do any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holydays, follow their Bodily, or
ordinary Labor? Or compel, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops
kept open, or Wares sold at such times? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or
other Victuallers, and fellers of Beer and Ale, suffer any Persons to Tipple or
Game in their Houses upon those days?

3. Have you any among you, that be denounced and declared Excommunicate? How
long have they been so? And do any of your Parish keep society with them,
before they be reconciled to the Church and Absolved?

4. Are there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife, who are within the
Degrees Prohibited? Or any that being lawfully Divorced, have Married again? Or
any that being lawfully Married, and not separated, or Divorced by Course of
Law, do not co-habit together?

5. Are there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay the just dues to
your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, or pay the Rate Assessed upon
them, for the Repair of your Church, or Chapel, and for the providing of such
Books, Furniture, and Ornaments, as be requisite for the Performance of all
Divine Offices there?

6. Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons Dead in your Parish, that be
yet Unproved? Or any Goods Administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary?

7. Is there any strife, or contention among any of your Parish, for their
Pews, or Seats in your Church? Or have any of them erected new Pews in your
Chancel, or in the Body of your Church, or Chapel, without leave from the
Ordinary?

8. Do you know of any that have Abused the Churchwardens of your Parish, by
giving them evil Words for Executing their Office, or to dishearten and deter
them from it, as by Oath and Duty they are bound?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel, a fit Parish-Clerk, Aged 21.
years at least, of Honest Life and Conversation, and sufficiently able to
perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he duly chosen by your
Minister? and Licensed by the Ordinary? And does he diligently attend your
Minister in all Divine Offices; audibly making and repeating, the Responses
and Suffrages, as in the Liturgy he is directed?

2. Does he, or your Sexton, (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be Locked, and opened at
due times? Does he keep your Church or Chapel, clean from Dirt, Dust, Cobwebs,
and other Annoyance? Does he Ring and Toll the Bells at the due and accustomed
hours, before Morning and Evening Service, that the People may be warned to
come unto the Church?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,)
Surgeons and Midwives.
1. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free-Shool? Who was
the Founder? Who is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue?
What Stipends belong to the Governors, or Masters of the same? Is the same
Ordered and Governed in every respect, as it ought to be? And are the Revenues
thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder, and the
Tenor of such Statutes and Ordinances, as have been made in pursuance of the
same?

2. Have any Living, or Dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, given any Gift or
Legacy, by Will, or otherwise, to the use of your Church, or Poor, or of the
Parishioners in general? How is it settled, and in whose hands? And is it, or
has it been misimployed, or disposed of to other Uses?

3. Does any Man keep a public or private School in your Parish? Is he allowed
so to do by the Ordinary? Is he of sober Life and honest Conversation, and.
conformable to the Doctrine and Discipline Established? And does he teach his
Scholars good Manners, Sobriety, Modesty and Obedience, as well as other
Learning?

4. Does any Man or Woman in your Parish take upon them to practice Physic, or
Chyrurgery? Or any Woman to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without being
first Examined and approved, and thereupon Licensed by the Ordinary? Or does
any Woman take upon her to keep a School, and teach Girls, or young Women, not
being duly allowed so to do?

TIT. VII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens and
Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish duly chosen by the joint consent of
the Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by the Minister, and the other by
the Parishioners? Or as the custom of the Parish is?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church, or
Chapel?

3. Do they take care that no misbehaviour or disorder be done by Men, Women,
Servants, or Children, in your Church or Chapel, during the time of Divine
Service?

4. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of Bread and of Wine, according to the number of
Communicants, at the Parish Charge?

5. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church, or Chapel, to
enter their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose, together
with the Name of the Bishop that Licensed them to Preach in this Diocese? And
do they permit no other to Preach?

6. Have they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) taken sufficient time to draw
up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your
faithful Assistance?

THE Ministers of the respective Parishes are required to give in a List of the
Names of all such as they have Catechized and Prepared, and do judge fit to
receive Confirmation, and to present it to the Bishop, together with the
Persons to be Confirmed, before the Visitation begins.

FINIS.

