THE CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS Magazine, OF Spiritual Weapons.

Wherein all degrees of Soldiers may be Completely Armed with Zeal and Courage
(from the Al-sufficiencie of the Lord of Hosts) to encounter with the Goliahs
of our Times.

As also Armor of Proof against the Three Arch-Enemies of Mankind, viz. The
Fesh, the World, and the Devil.

By a well-wisher of the Cause of CHRIST.

2 Chronicles. 32.6, 7. Be strong and Courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the
King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more
with us then with him: with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our
God, to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves
upon the words of Hezekiah King of Judah. Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

Printed at London, by G. Bishop. 1644

The Christian Soldiers Magazine of Spiritual Weapons.
2 Chronicles. 32.6. Be strong and Courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the
King of Assyria, etc.


IN these words Christian Courage is cried up, and all sinful fear is cried
down. Even all kinds of dismayings, which put men upon sinful shifts in
troublous times. For which every true Christian is to labor to dissuade both
themselves and others, under the consideration of Gods command; who as
frequently forbids all distracting and distrustful fears, as murder and
Theft, etc. Besides the consequences are very mischievous to our selves, both
in souls and bodies, to others, by our ill example, and greatly dishonorable
to our God. I will not deny, but grant, The strongest Champion, and stoutest
Commander that ever drew sword, being he is but a man, is sometimes subject to
be over-powred by them. David, a man after Gods own heart, and a most Valiant
Warrior of undaunted magnanimity, he complains of his own shivering Fitts.
Psalm. 55.3. Fearfulness and trembling is fallen upon me, and an horrible
dread has overwhelmed me. And in another place, he said; I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. And Paul, when his friends persuaded
him not to go up to Jerusalem, answered with a most undaunted courage and
resolution, What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart? for I am ready not to
be bound only; but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord JESUS,
Acts 21.12, 13. And yet the self same Paul says, Without were fightings,
within were fears. 2 Cor. 7.5.

Our Savior complains even of his own Disciples, crying out, O ye of little
faith, Matthew. 8.26. And again, Where is yuur Faith? Luke, 8.25.

This is caused sometimes by divine dissertions, Psalm. 30.6, 7. Thou did hide
thy face, and I was troubled, etc. And sometimes through the black Inditements
which Satan is apt to set before men's eyes, if the Lord but allow him that
liberty. As the depth of their danger, and the fierce anger of God against sin,
etc. Yet notwithstanding, every Christian may get good ground of hope out of
Gods Word. Yea, even the most timorous may gather strength in the most
troubleous times. It is very observable, what strength David got against such
shivering fits. When he said. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people,
that have set themselves against me, round about: Psalm. 3, 6. It may be
objected, that this was but a supposition of David's, l^ke Peter's, who said to
our Savior, though all men should forsake thee, yet will not I: but if David
had been pu^ to the trial, as Peter was, he would have fallen as ^^ully as he
did. Ans. Nay, but he was in present danger then he spoke these words, as it
appears here, verse. ^.2. and yet he said, I laid me down and slept, and rose
up again, for the Lord sustained me, verse. 5.

Object. O but there is a great deal of difference between the faith of David,
and such a poor weak wretch as I am.

Ans. We have all the same spirit of faith which he had. 2 Cor. 4.13.

Object. He had great knowledge and interest in the Promises of God, and
therefore well may his faith be far stronger then mine.

Ans. Have not all the people of God an equal rite to all the Promises? No
sin shall have dominion over you, To. 6.14. therefore no sinful fear. The
self same faith that David had, all the Saints of God have an Interest in, and
we may expect as great a degree of the assistance of Gods Spirit, as David did,
having the self-same grounds for our Faith, that he had for his. And our
Ordinances, which through Gods great mercy we yet Enjoy, are altogether as
good. Jesus Christ, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever.

Means to be used, to get rid of these sinful fears.
1. Labor to make sure of your Interest in heaven, Jo. 14.1. Let not your
hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. verse. 2. In my
fathers house are many Mantions, etc. I go to prepare a place for you.

Our Lord himself has given us his own example, and he has now found the
experience of this truth; he^ endured the Cross, dispising the shame, and is
now set down at the right hand of God. Heb. 12.2, 3, 4.

This was it which steeled Moses his faith, and made him esteem the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward. Heb. 11.26.

The Saints also took with joy the spoiling of the goods, knowing that they had
in heaven a better and a more enduring substance. Heb. 10.34. All we have is
not here; We have something out of the reach of those cursed Cavaliers. It is
worth our observing, that in heaven is Substance, here are but the shadows,
shells, husks; there are the kernells, and the sollid grain. That is, a
better substance, these reach only the outward man, they come immediately from
God himself. And which is best, in inioying that, we have communion with our
God. All that is here, are but like snow-balls, which melt in the hand, Prove.
23.5. Will thou set thy heart upon that which is not? Riches take to themselves
wings, and fly away, etc.

But we have in heaven a better and a more enduring Substance.

It was the saying of a holy man (who is now with God) There is but one short
life between us and a crown; and when this momentary life is ended, we shall
enjoy an incorruptible Crown of glory unto all eternity. Labor therefore for
Spiritual Purity. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.8.

2. Labor to set your judgments right concerning those things that occasion
your sinful fears. In the night time we are apt to think that thieves are
coming into our houses to rob us, when our friends are coming to visit us.
Matthew. 14.26, 27. When the Disciples thought they had seen a Spirit on the
water, and thereupon cried out through causeless fear, the Lord is pleased to
show them their error, and calls unto them, saying, It is I, be not afraid.

Can there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. Inform
your selves, that the Lord does overpower all those men that come against you.

2. All that which seems to threaten our ruin, can reach only to the outward
man. Luke 12.4, 5. My friends, fear not them that can kill the body, etc.

3. They have but a little time allotted them, and allowed to vex and trouble
you. And then follows Eternal joy. These light afflictions, which last but for
a moment, cause unto us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory,
etc. 2 Cor. 4.17.

4. That very time is determined by God, both for the beginning, continuance
and end, Isay 51.12, 13. I, even I am he that comfort thee; Who art thou,
that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man,
which shall be made as grass. And forgetest the Lord thy Maker, that has
stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundation of the Earth, and have
feared continually, every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he
were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the Oppressor, etc.

Lastly, all things whatsoever befalls you, shall be for your good in the end,
Rom, 8.28. Doubtless goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, says the Prophet David. Psalm. 23. last.

Directions or means, by which the Servants of God may free themselves of
sinful fears in the time of the deepest dangers.
1. By diverting the stream another way. As Physicians, when they would stanch
bleeding at the nose etc. use to let the Patients blood in some other part of
the body, so Gods people, to cure themselves of this ill humor of sinful
fear of men, should get the fear of God settled in their hearts, Luk 12.4, 5.
Isa. 8.12, 13. Fear ye not their fear nor be afraid. But sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your fear and let him be your dread. And he
shall be for a sanctuary, etc.

2. Do not feed your fears nor fancyes with such thoughts as are apt to
terrify and affright you, Isa. 33.18. mention is made of meditating terror.
Isa. 51.12, 13. The Lord cheeks such fearful ones, and incourages them in his
comforting of them.

3. We should take up our thoughts with a more taking fear; which is to be
gathered from the consideration of that dreadfulnesse which is in God. As
suppose a King be angry: though the wrath of the King be as the roaring of a
Lion, much more fearful and terrible is the wrath of God. who would not fear
thee O King of Saints, etc. Ier. 10.7. His wrath reaches the soul and burns to
the nethermost Hell. O It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, Heb. 10.31. For our God is a consuming fire, Heb 12. ult.

4. This is affected by stocking up the original of sinful fears by the very
roots, whereof there are chiefly two or three. 1. An inordinate love to the
things woe are in danger to lose, as riches and honor, and the things of this
life, which perish even with the very using. Ier. 45.4, 5. The Lord comfort
Baruch in this regard. Promising to give him his life for a prey. 2. An
inordinate love of liberty and life, but Christ's Champions should shake off all
base sinful fear in regard of these things. And learn of zealous Paul not to
count our lives dear unto us so that we may finish our course with joy. etc.
Act. 20.24. 3. Distrustful suspicions concerning our own present condition. As
fearing overmuch least the Lord is now filling up a cup of his wrath and making
me to drink deep of it. But remember David reasonning with himself in the like
case, and say with him, Why art thou so full of heaviness O my soul, and why
art thou so disquieted within me? still trust in God, etc. Psa. 42.5. and 11.
The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall I fear, the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid. Psa. 27.1.2, 3. 5. Walk
exactly, and carefully keep at a distance from all sins against Light and
against Conscience. Adam so long as he kept himself free from sin, was not at
all subject to these fears, but as soon as he fell into sin, immediately
the poor man betakes himself to vain shifts, and runs among the trees of
the garden, thinking to hide himself from God, Genesis 3.9, 10.

Caine, After he had committed that horrible sin in murdering his Brother, was
afraid without any sense or reason, that whosoever met him, would kill him,
when as his brother was dead, and there was no man else of whom he needed to
stand in fear. Genesis 4.14.

6. When upon reconciling of Conscience and the Word of God, it appears we
are guilty of sins, we must labor to get rid of all. As Jobs friends advised
him. Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles. For then shall thou lift up thy face
without spot: ye^, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear, etc. Take the
example of David. Psalm. 51. From the Word of God, labor to see the height,
the depth, the breadth and the length of the sin that lies heaviest upon your
Conscience, and labor to do your utmost to make up the breach, and to cure
the wound from the bottom.

7. Flee to the Throne of Grace. For God alone can quiet the heart. Nehem. 6.9.
Psalm. 3.3.7.

For Direction herein, Take the example of Jacob. Genes. 32.9, 10, etc.
1. Labor to make it appear with a clear Conscience, that you are in Gods
way, as he did, being afraid of his Brother. verse. 9. And that it is for his
Cause, that you go forth to the help of the Lord against the mighty.

2. Humbly and thankfully acknowledge God to be the Author of all mercies and
favors, which you Enjoy.

3. Humbly acknowledge your self unworthy to receive any favor at the hands of
God. verse. 10.

4. As he pleades the promise of God, verse. 12. So do thou tell the Lord.
Lord, thou have said, thou will forgive my iniquities, and remember my sins no
more, that thou will love me freely, that thou will cast all my sins into the
bottom of the Sea, that thou will heal all my back slidings, etc.

5. Make good I beseech thee now these precious Promises to me: hold on
persevering in prayer and other duties, notwithstanding all the checks and
controulments, as Jacob did, ver. 26.

6. Take heed thy eye and heart be not taken off from Christ, in flying to the
Throne of Grace: for Christ is an Alsufficient Mediator, and Gods Favorite,
able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, and be thy sins
what they will, or can be, there is virtue and efficacy enough in his most
precious blood, to wash them all away. Nay, thou can not commit so much sin
as he can pardon, etc.

7. Add to all this, the exercise of precious faith, Psalm. 112.7.8. David
says, The heart of a Godly man is fixed, trusting in the Lord, etc. Prove.
29.25.

Rules to be observed in relying upon God.
1. Labor to apprehend from the light of Gods Word by the help of Faith, so
much in God, as is sufficient to sink all sinful and slavish fears. For it
is not sufficient to say, I believe in God, with all my heart, or I put my
whole trust and confidence in God, but we must get firm and grounded footing
for our Faith to rest upon, from the word and Promises. Isa. 12.2 3.

Behold God is my Salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation. Therefore
with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of Salvation. Moses saw him that
is invisible. Hebr. 11.27.

2. Labor to see how the Promises may imbolden you to come up to God for help
and succor in time of need. Psalm. 56.4. In God I have put my trust, I will not
be afraid what flesh can do unto me.

3. Be imboldned by the mediation of the Lord Jesus to present with confidence
all your suites and supplications before the Throne of God. Jobn 14.1. Let not
your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me, otherwise
selfe-sinfulnesse and self-unworthinesse will utterly discourage and affright
you.

Lastly, Come unto God Improving your former experiences of his mercies in
delivering thee from dangers, and freeing thee from troubles. David said I have
slain a Lion and a Bear, etc. And that God which has delivered me out of the
mouth of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me from
this uncircumcised Philistine.

And have not we been many a time wonderfully delivered from heart-shaking
dangers, by the powerful hand of the same God. O how should this encourage us
still to rely upon him, even in our greatest straights.

Call to remembrance the mavelous mercies, and miraculous victories and
deliverances from the bloody hands of those merciless men at the Battle in
Kenton field, at Causeham Bridge, at Branford, and especially now of late on
Hessammoore near York, Each of these requiring a large Volume to set forth to
the full the manifold more then mavelous works of our most mighty Lord God
of Hosts, who when the Enemy came in like a flood, by the Invincible force of
his spirit lifted up a Stander against them. And have a special care for ever
hereafter to honor this God by casting all thy care upon him, for undoubtedly
he cares for you and will not fail thee nor forsake thee.

A Prayer purprsely penned for the use and help of such Soldiers on whom the
Lord has not bestowed that gracious Spirit of Supplications, etc.
O Almighty Jehovah, who have styled thy self a man of war, thou Lord of
Hosts, even the God mighty in battle, more terrible (in thy wrathful
displeasure expressed toward thy ingorrigible enemies) then all armies with
banners; thou that art that God that have formed and fashioned me in my mothers
womb after a fearful and wonderful manner, and by whose appointment I am
come into this world, both to do and to suffer whatsoever thy determinate
Counsel, and secret decree (more unchangeable then that of the Meades and
Persians which alters not) has preordained from all eternity concerning me,
before whose awful Majesty, in the presence, not only of a company of thy
elect Saints on earth, but also of thy glorious heavenly Angels. I have
solemly promised and vowed at the time of my admission to partake of the
Sacrament of baptism (being a sign, and (as I hope and firmly believe a
seal unto my poor soul, of thy most free and gracious acceptance of me to
be a member of that mystical body, whereof my sweet Savior Jesus Christ is
the most holy head that I would manfully fight under thy banner, against sin,
the world, and the devil, and continue thy faithful soldier and servant unto
lives end, etc. Now that it has pleased thy Divine Majesty in a special
manner so greatly to honor thy worthless creature, as to call me forth among
other thy servants to make good my said solemn Vow, which though to my hearts
great grief, I have often broken, yet now thou requirest, and strictly
chargest me not to defer any loner to pay it, in that thou have brought me
hither to the help of the Lord against the mighty, O let thy mighty hand and
stretched-out arm be now and evermore my defense: Teach thou my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight, and cover thou my head, also the heads of all other
thy warriers in every day of battle: strengthen the weak hands, and the
feeble knees of thy servants, say thou unto the faint hearted be strong and
very courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King, etc. nor for all his
huge host, but assure both me and them that thou art with us to fight our
battles, or thine own rather, and that thou will maintain thy own Cause,
and avenge the quarrel of thy Covenant, and then we need not doubt but there
are more with us then with them, For if our God be for us, who can be against
us? Do thou not see, O Lord God, all their secret hell-bred Plots, their
cursed contrivances, and damnable conspiracies, which those children of Beliall
combine together uncessantly to vent their devispight, not only against thy
poor people, but even against thy secret self, and against thy anointed my
sweet Savior the Lord Jesus Christ: Do thou not hear, nor take notice of
their horrible Oaths and Perjuries, their beastly blasphemies which they
continually (and more abundantly of late then formerly) belch in thy very face:
O Lord I know thou do; Are not all their unparraleld imprications and
selfe-soule damnations noted in thy book? my God I know they are. O the long
suffering, and the invincible patience of the omnipotent Lord of heaven and
earth who has these wretches in his hand, and can grind such broken Potsheards
to powder at his pleasure, and stamp them under his feet as mire: yea, and
hurl them all into hell fire at his pleasure: Lord, is not the iniquity of
these Amorites yet full? when will thou cloth thy self with zeal as with a
cloak? thou have long since begun to smite them; O when shall it once be that
thou will also make an end? how long will thou delay to consume that man of
Sin with the brightness of thy appearance? how long deferreth my righteous
God to power out all the full Violls of his vengeance upon that scarlet whore
of Babylon which has made all the Nations of the world drunk with the
poysonfull cup of that deadly wine of her fornications. O when will the
righteous Judge of the whole world sit upon his Royal Throne and make
inquisition for all the Innocent blood that has been powered forth in so great
abundance by those Irish Rebels, English Miscreants, and Romish Papists,
Athiests, and devils incarnate, that (like their father) are full of wrath,
and still some out great fury, which, I hope presages, and is an eminent token
of their speedy perdition, and that they have but a short time to reign upon
earth. I remember Lord thou have said, That whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shead: Father, shall I be the Executioner of that thy most
equal, just, and righteous decree. I beseech thee grant power, strength,
Christian-curage, and undaunted magnanimity unto thy servant to do valiantly,
for the vindication of the glory of thy great Name, which has so long been
blasphemed by those Heathens. I desire to be isntrumental for the setting up
of the Kingdom of thy dear Son my sweet Lord Jesus Christ, though I my
self be made the lowest and meanest part of his footstool: Nay Lord, I pass
not what becomes of this my corruptable carcass, neither count I my life dear
unto me, but shall think my self highly honored, if thou will enable me to
lay it down freely and cheerfully for thy sake, who did not stick to pour
out all thy most precious blood, yea, and thy very soul too for me a worthless
worm. Grant me therefore a sufficient measure of thy grace to go through this
great and weighty work thou have called me unto, and then behold Lord here I
am, dispose of me as thou please.

Also I most humbly and earnestly beseech thee, great and glorious Lord God, on
the bended knees of my very Soul, to vouchsafe thy blessing abundantly to all
our Hosts and Forces, both by sea and land, be thou thy self Lord Admiral and
Lord General; Sit at the Helm, steering the course of our Navey in the great
Deepes, and if any foreign foe be making any preparations to invade this poor
perishing Land, good Lord be pleased either to take them alive in their own
devices, which their hands have made, or else by the same Almighty Power,
whereby thou overwhelmedst that proud and presumptuous King Pharaoh and his
huge Host, do thou overwhelme them, and all their Engines and Instruments of
War in the vast Ocean, infuse likewise I heartily pray thee into the hearts
of all our Commanders in chief a double portion of that Spirit of magnanimity
which thhu bestowest upon thy Worthies of old, that like David, Joshua, Jeptha
and Sampson, etc. they may show themselves very zealous for their God, and may
slay some of them their thousands, and others their ten thousands of thine, and
thy peoples implacable enemies, laying them flat on the earth, with heaps upon
heaps, and never ceasing to pursue them, until they have utterly destroyed
them.

Lord root out every accursed thing from the Camp, and let nothing remain
amongst us, that may any way offend the eyes of thy glory, to provoke thee to
depart away from us. And for Jesus his sake, suffer neither us, the Worthies in
Parliament, the Synod of Divines, the Common Council of London, nor any
Committees, any way employed about the affairs of this tottering, and almost
overthrown Island, to give themselves rest, until they have found out that new
National sin, or those crying capital Abominations, what ever they be, that
has prevailed so far with thy Majesty, as to bring that great Evil upon us, in
making thy Israel to fly before, and turn their backs upon their enemies: find
out every Achan among us, and discover thou every Treacherous dealer speedily
in the whole army, for they have dealt very trecherously in the Covenant of the
Lord of Hosts. And good Lord, I pray thee, Command our Rulers to take speedy
order ( Joshua like) that such troublers of the Israel of God, may be troubled
themselves, without any longer procrastination; That so the heavy wrath of God,
so grievously kindled against his own people, and threatening the utter ruin
and total subvertion of this woefully wasted Kingdom, may be appeased, and
Justice being impartially executed by our faithful Phinehasses, the Plague may
be stayed, the destroying Angel may be commanded to put up his sword into its
scabbord, the Lord may be pleased again to be merciful unto us, in lifting up
the light of his Countenance upon us, granting unto us that great blessing of
Peace with Truth, even that Peace of, and with our God, which passes all
Understanding; And our Land may have rest from all our enemies. All which, with
whatsoever else particularly thou of thy infinite mercy know to be needful
for thy unworthy Servant, this whole Nation, or any other of thy poor people
all the World over, I humbly beg and crave at thy merciful hands, only and
alone for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom with thy own Sacred Majesty, O Father
of Mercies, and the most holy Spirit of Grace, mercy, Peace and Truth, be
ascribed from the bottom of my heart-root, all possible glory, h^nour, praise,
thanksgiving and obedience, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS

