THE Divine Warrant OF JNFANT-BAPTISM. OR VI. ARGUMENTS FOR Baptism of Jnfants
of Christians. VIZ. I. Infants of Christians are rightly judged in the Promise
of Propriety in God. p. 1. II. Infants of Christians are rightly judged to be
of the Church. p. 20. III. Infants of Christians are rightly judged meet for
Baptism. p. 25 IV. The sealing of the Promise to Infants of visible
professors, has been the practice of the Universal Church ever since God added
seals to the Covenant. p. 30 V. The profit of Baptism is great to the Infants
of Christians. p. 36 VI. The Promise was sealed by the initiall Sacrament
aforetime to Infants of Visible Professors, both Jews and of the Gentiles. p 38


By JOHN CHURCH, M. A. Minister of Seachurch, in the County of Essex.

Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins. -- For the promise is to you, and to your CHILDREN, and to
all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Act.
2.38.39. LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for George Calvert, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the Half Moon in Watling street, near Austins gate.
MDCXLVIII.

To the sober-minded Reader.
HAving read this short Treatise, we find the Divine Warrant of that Quod autem
apud simplicem vulgum disseminant, longam annorum sertem post Christi
resurrectionem p^aeteriisse, quibus incognitus erat pae^o^aptismus, in eo
foedissime mentiun^ur* Siquidem nullus est Scriptor tam vetustus, qui non ejus
originem ad Apostolorum seculum pro certo referat Calv. Inst. l. 4 c. 16. sect
8.
ancient Ordinance of Christ, viz. Infant Baptism, so clearly, compendiously
and solidly proved therein, not by Ecclesiastical Tradition Anabaptistas,
Duraee, Scripturarum armis opprimimus, quibus solis haeretici superantur. Si
enim nulla nobis arma suppeterent, nisi haec (viz. Ecclesiae Traditiones) quae
tu commemoras, nae Anabaptistae nostrum impetum non valde reformidarent;
Whitak. contra Du^ae. l 8. sect. 80. p 197. in fol.
, but by Scripture-demonstration, that we do heartily commend it to thy serious
perusal, wherein thou may discern that Infants of Christian Parents are true
Denizons of the visible Church and Kingdom of God; having just right to, and
interest in Gods Magna Charta or Covenant of Grace; though some enemies to
them, and to the Truth, have of late, but in vain, attempted to void and
overthrow their Title. Many learned Tractates of this subject have been already
published; if their prolixity, or polemical contendings for this truth against
Anabaptistical or Catabaptistical fancies, deter or discourage thee from
reading them: yet this invites thee, being Dogmatical, rather then Polemical;
and not tedious, but compendious. Here thou have (as they say) an Iliad in a
nut-shel; much in a little; the strength of former Writers Arguments, (for the
Legentibus brevitas ejusmodi plurimum p^otest, dum non intellectum legentis and
sensum liber longior spargit, sed subtiliori compendio id quod legitur tenax
memoria custodit; D. Cypr. Praefat. in Testam. ad Quirinum.
help of memory) extracted and contracted with select additional notions of the
Authors inserted. All are thine, that the Truth of Christ may abide in thee.

FRAN. ROBERTS, Pastor of the Church at Augustines, Land. JOHN GEREE, Minister
at Faith's.


To the right Honorable, and most noble Lord, Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord
Rich, Baron of Leeze, etc.
Right Honorable,
IT was hoped, not long since, that the time was come, in which God would
gloriously exalt his Truth, and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth; for God
seemed to appear more for us then ever in our, or our forefathers days: In
assembling so many Worthies in Parliament; in calling an Assembly of so able
and worthy Divines; in bringing the Nation into the bond of a Covenant, to root
out Popery, Prelacy, Errors, Heresies, Schism, and all that is contrary to
sound doctrine; and in subduing the public enemies of Truth and Peace.

But our iniquities have separated between God and us, and our sins have hid
away his face from us; We looked for light, and behold darkness: God has let
loose men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, who resist the
trurh, and bring in damnable Heresies, and many follow their pernicious ways.

The abounding of Errors, (and in particular, the spreading of Anabaptism,)
calling all to contend for the faith, has compelled me (contrary to my
intentions) to make public this defense of Tanto magis pro infantibus loqui
debemus quanto minus ipsi per se loqui possunt. August
Poedo baptism, which is the fruit of some hours, spared from my other studies.

I am bold (Right Honorable) humbly to dedicate these my first fruits to your
honor, and with all observancy to subject them to your judicious censure.

That which has made me thus presuming, is your singular goodness, and
unparalleld humility, which makes you worthily had in honor of all.

Artaxerxes, the Persian Monarch, received, with a cheerful countenance, a
present of water of a poor labourer, when he had no need of it, accounting it
the part of a truly Noble and generous spirit, to take in good part small
presents offered with an hearty affection, as well as to give great things
liberally.

This small present (most Noble Lord) is presented with an entire affection, to
one as truly Noble and generous as Artaxerxes.

Your unfeigned love to the truth, manifested by your constant cleaving to it,
(even in this hour of temptation, which is come upon us, in which many are
turned aside after Satan;) Your care to place able and faithful Pastors over
people, where you have opportunity to do God this service, and casting honor
and respect upon such in these times, in which they are cast down, and filled
with contempt: Your great fidelity to your Country, and your many heroic
virtues shining in you; Make it our duty (who are Ministers of the Gospel) to
celebrate your due praises, for the honor of your noble deservings, and the
encouragement of others to walk in your pious steps.

That your honor may be preserved in safety in these sad divisions of the
Kingdom, receive a daily increase of honor, and continue faithful to the death,
that you may receive the crown of life; shall be the prayer, until death, of
him, who is your Honors

Humble and Devoted Servant Josiah Church.

VI ARGUMENTS FOR THE BAPTIZING OF THE Infants of Christians.
ARGUMENT. I. The Infants of Christians are rightly judged in the promise of
propriety in God, therefore they may be baptized.
THE Antecedent I prove by ten Arguments.

Genesis 17.7, 12
no less then to actual professors: Therefore the Infants of Christians are
rightly judged to be in that promise.

The Consequence I prove by four Arguments.

Argum. 1. That promise of propriety in God was not a specialtie: which I
prove by seven Arguments.

1. It was not peculiar to Abraham and visible professors, for it was sealed by
the initiall Sacrament to the infants of such: neither was it peculiar to
Abraham and his natural seed, for it was sealed by the initiall Sacrament to
the infants of visible professors of the Gentiles, no less then to them; no
difference was to be made; the stranger was as one home-born, Exodus 12, 48, 49
and there was one Law for both. Nor yet was it peculiar to that Church State,
it being a National Church. 1. Promises of propriety in God are not to any in
reference to a particular Church only, either National or Congregationall,
but in reference to the Catholic Church to which they appertain. 2. Visible
professors and their Infants were judged in that promise before the existence
of a National Church. 3. Visible professors and their Infants which were of
other Nations, were judged in that promise. 4, Since the dissolution of that
Church State, Christians are said to be Children of the Promise after the
manner of Isaac, Gal. 4.28
who was in that promise as an infant of believing Parents, before he was in it
as an actual believer.

2. That promise was a Catholic promise, the most eminent promise of the
Covenant of Grace, which was a Catholic Covenant, therefore it was no
specialty, but the blessing of Abraham which was to come on the Gentiles by
Christ; Gal. 3.14 Romans 11.17 Romans 15.8, 9
and the fatness of the Olive tree in which they were to partake, and the
promise which Christ came to confirm, that the Gentiles might glorify God for
his mercy.

3. Promises of propriety in God are no specialties, for God is a God to his
in every age, upon the same terms during the Covenant, by which he gives
propriety in himself.

4. That promise was given to Abraham as father of all the faithful of every
Nation, Gen 17, 5.
and a public person representing them in every age, and not only as father
of the Jewish Nation only, and therefore no specialty.

5. That promise was an everlasting promise, and not to end with the
dispensation and some temporary promises of it. Genesis 17.7.
1. This is expressly affirmed of it. 2. God is a God to his in every age upon
the same terms, Mal. 3.6
he changes not. 3. Visible professors and their Infants are alike in every
age, and there is nothing in them Iam. 1.17
inconsistent with propriety in God in one age more than in another. 4. That
promise is not taken away by the coming of Christ, for since he finished the
work he came to do, Romans 11.28
the Apostle says, the Children are beloved for the Fathers: and parents
becoming visible professors, their children were judged by the Apostles to be
in the promise with them, and denominated holy, Act. 2.39 1 Cor. 7.14 Esa.
61.8, 9 Ier. 30.20
as aforetime: and it was prophesied, that when the Jews shall be graffed in
again (which shall be by virtue of that promise) the offspring shall be
accounted blessed with the parent, and that the children shall be as aforetime.

6. Though a priority in God may be yielded to the Jews and their seed, yet a
sole propriety may not. The Jew was the elder sister, and Christ's first bride,
and they had the first hand-sell of Free Grace in a Church Way: but they and
their seed never had the sole propriety in God, Gentiles becoming visible
professors did partake in it, and their Infants: whosoever feared God, Psalm.
128.1.3
his Children were Olive plants as well as theirs.

7. The former part of that promise (I will be a God to thee) is undenyably
common to all believers.

Therefore that Promise being not a specialty, the Infants of Christians are
rightly judged to be in it, as the Infants of the Jews were: for Christians and
their Infants have the same privileges, specialties excepted. Ephesians. 2.14
1. The Partition wall is broken down, and they are made one. 2. The breaking
off, was of incorrigible Apostates and their seed, and not of visible
professors and theirs: these suffered no loss by the breaking off. Romans 11.1
Ephesians. 4.
3. Christians have like precious faith, and their Infants are no more Infidels
then theirs were. 4. Christians in this dispensation are children of Abraham;
Luc. 19.9. 1 Pet. 3 Romans 8.17
Zacheus becoming a Christian is called a son of Abraham, and Christian women
daughters of Sarah; and therefore heirs of his privileges which were not
specialties; in Abrahami successimus haereditatem, and quae de illo dicta sunt,
in nobis and liberis nostris quadrant: Pet. Martyr. 5. Christians are in this
dispensation as Jews were in the former, they are called as they were, An holy
Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9 Tit. 2.14.
a Royal priesthood, etc. And every Nation receiving the faith as the Nation
of the Jews did, and in which there is a national agreement, in doctrine,
worship, and discipline, as was in the Nation of the Jews, is to be accounted
to the Lord in every age, Psalm. 22.30
even Egypt and Assyria with Israel, Isai. 19.25 Genesis 17.5 Posita causa
ponitur Causatum.
and may call Abraham Father, (who obtained the father-hood of many Nations,)
and may be accounted a national Church, no less then that nation was. 6. That
promise of propriety in God was to Abraham and the Jews, as Believers; and
promises to believers, as such, (if they be not specialties) appertain to all
believers as they do to any: Josh. 1.5. Heb, 13, 5
The promise of Gods presence with Joshua, is applied to all believers.

Argum. 2. As much love is manifested to the Infants of Christians in this
dispensation, as was to the Infants of Jews in the former; Christ in this
dispensation became one of them; the Infants of Jews had the promise, and of
Christians, the performance: Christ on earth commanded the Infants of such as
honored him to be brought to him, and with anger rebuked his Disciples for
despising the day of those small things, he embraced them, blessed them, Mark
10, 14, 16
affirmed that his kingdom was of them, numbered them with believers, Mat. 18
and taught that his Angels were their Guardians, and admonished those of riper
years to be like them in innocence, humility, Ephesians. 6.4
etc. commanded by his Apostles that they should be brought up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, etc.

Therefore it is not to be believed, that the promise of propriety in God is
rent away from the Infants of visible professors, and that they are without
God, Ephesians. 2.12
and without hope in this dispensation, as the children of Infidels are.

Argum. 3. The Infants of Christians are as capable of the promise of propriety
in God as the Infants of the Jews were, these are no less the seed of the
blessed of the Lord then they were: and there is not a greater absence of
actual faith and knowledge in these, then was in them, neither is there any
thing to render them incapable of it, which was not in Infants of Jews.

Argum. 4. The promise of propriety in God has no new conditions annexed: God
required no less faith and repentance in the former dispensation then in the
present; he indented with Abraham to walk before him and to be perfect, Genesis
17.1, 7
that he might be a God to him and to his seed: and Circumcision, the initiall
seal of that promise, Romans 4.11
is called the seal of the righteousness of faith: and they that were visible
unbeleevers, Isai. 1.10
though Jews, were no more accounted of then Sodomites and aliens.

Therefore the Infants of Christians being certainly no less in that promise
then were the Infants of Jews aforetime, they are rightly judged to be in it as
they were.

stranger was as one born in the Land: Exodus 12, 48, 49
Therefore the Infants of Christians are rightly judged to be in that promise.
1. The breaking off was of Jews and not of Gentiles. Romans 11.21
2. Christ by his coming spoiled not the offspring of his people of any
happiness enjoyed before, the offspring being as innocent as before. It is not
to be imagined that their condition is worse since his coming: Number post
Christum, factam esse deteriorem parvulorum sortem existimemus? Whitak. Cont.
Durae. p. 681. His loving embracing and blessing such, witness for him: Psalm.
55.21
he is not like David's friend, having words as smooth as butter, and war in his
heart. 3. The renting away that promise from the Infants of visible professors,
(there being no new degeneration in that species) argues a diminution of the
grace of God, which cannot be imagined without execrable blasphemy. 4. As
enlargement of privileges to Infants of visible professors is most congruous
to the present dispensation, so it is most probable; Ezra 10, 1, 44
for afore-time if one parent were an infidel, the children were not rightly
accounted to the Lords people: but since the present dispensation began, if one
Parent were a visible professor, 1 Cor. 7.14
the children were holy though the other Parent were an Infidel. 5. If in this
dispensation children of Christians are not to be accounted in that promise,
they are in a far more uncomfortable condition then the children of visible
professors in the former; and it was much better to be born under the Law then
under the Gospel, which is contrary to the common doctrine of the Scriptures.

Jews becoming Christians in this dispensation, their infants are rightly
judged to be in the promise of propriety in God. 1. The Apostles judged the
children of their Converts (who were most Jews) in that promise with their
Parents. Act. 2.39
2. It was prophesied, That when the Jews should be converted, and be as
aforetime, that their children should be as aforetime. Ier. 30.20
3. The breaking off was not universal, the tree was not broken down, Romans 11,
17
but only some branches were broken off.

Therefore the infants of Christians are rightly judged to be in that promise;
Romans 10.12
for as there was no difference in the former dispensation, between Jews and
Proselites, and the seed of either, so there is no difference in the present.

Acts 2.39


The promise in which they judged them, is that of propriety in God, taken in
the sense in which it was given to Abraham: which was, that he would be a God
to him and his natural seed, great and small, and to visible professors, and
their natural seed of every nation, in regard of external adoption and
privileges, so long as those of riper years did cleave to him by a visible
profession: also, to him and the elect, great and small (which are properly the
seed of his faith,) in regard of saving graces, and eternal life. That this is
the sense of that promise, experience and right reason teach; for the Jews were
not, neither are a people making a visible profession broken off, until a
general desperate Apostasy in those of riper years; and we know that the elect,
both great and small, obtain grace and glory.

The promise is not only of extraordinary gifts.

1. The promise is mentioned to Minister unto them hopes of salvation, to stay
them from the pit of despair, into which their rejecting and crucifying Christ
was like to praecipitate them: it had been a vain thing to mention a promise of
extraordinary gifts for that end, because extraordinary gifts are common to
them that perish, Mat. 7.22, 23
and are not saving gifts. 2. The promise, mentioned appertained to all called,
and to be called by the Gospel; but extraordinary gifts were given but to some,
and in the first times. 3. The promise included the children, to which
extraordinary gifts are of all most impossible. 4. The promise, with their
relation to it, is the only Argument used for receiving Baptism, which
extraordinary gifts are least Argumentative for, being the least matter
signified by it; also for repentance, to which such gifts are weak motives,
Mat. 7.22, 23
for these may be in workers of Iniquity. By children infants are necessarily
meant. 1. The word is (...), which primarily signifies infants. 2. These of
riper years are comprehended in those words (the promise is to you) for they
speak them to all that were pricked in their hearts. 3. The children are
mentioned as a distinct party from them that were called, and them that were
after to be called, who are said to be afar off, Ephesians. 2.13
which the Scripture speaks not of infants of visible professors. 4. The
restriction of the promise to children of riper years called, excludes all
infants of Christians, dying in infancy, from interest in God, and hope of
salvation, Ephesians. 2.12
which extends no further then the promise 5. It undermines the privilege which
infants of Christians have above the infants of Infidels, according to the
common doctrine of the Scripture, for the promise is to their children called
by the Gospel. 6. Most, to whom the Apostles spoke, were Jews, whose infants
had always been rightly judged in the promise. 7. They that restrain the
promise to children of riper years, must prove that those thousands of Converts
had no infants, and that their children were all actually called, and none of
them visible rejectors of Christ (which might probably be in so great a
multitude of children,) else it will be difficult to excuse the Apostle from
too great boldness in affirming an actual being of the promise to the children,
as to the Parents, without exception.

holy in this dispensation, therefore they are rightly judged to be in the
promise; 1 Cor. 7, 14
for they are denominated holy, because they are included in the Covenant;
Sancti dicuntur quia foedere includuntur. Ames. Bellar. Enerv.


1. Holiness of Regeneration, is rightly judged in such infants. 1. Because the
promise of Circumcision of the heart is to visible professors, and their seed,
alike. 2. Christians ought to hope, Deuteronomy. 30, 6 1 These. 4.13
that their infants dying are saved, which they cannot without judging them
Regenerate, John 3, 5
for none unregenerate can see the Kingdom of God, and none ordained to
salvation are called out of this life which are not first sanctified: Nemo
electorum e praesenti vita evocatur qui non prius sanctificatur, Romans 8, 30
Calv. 3. Infancy is no let of sanctification: Infants are as capable of the
habits of sanctity as men; if Adam had not sinned, they should have been holy,
in, and from the womb by original justice; and grace may be infused into them,
as well as original justice might have been propagated to them. It is
questionless, that many such infants are Regenerate, therefore we must
charitably suppose it of every individual; for when we come to particulars,
which dare we exclude, there being no visible difference? He is too hardy that
dares pass his peremptory censure of this or that particular, that it is
unregenerate.

2. A relative holiness is rightly concluded of all such infants; in relatione
ad deum sancti sunt, Ames. Which is a privilege some enjoy which are not
Regenerate, until a desperate Apostasy deprive them of it; they are accounted
to the Lords people, and have visible Communion with the elect in all
privileges which are not peculiar to them.

This twofold holiness is meant where Israel is said to be an holy people,
Deuteronomy. 14, 2 Ier. 2, 3
and holiness to the Lord: Some, which were not Regenerate, were the Lords in
the face of the visible Church, in facie Ecclesiae visibilis. 1 Cor. 7, 14
Also by the Apostle, denominating children of Christians holy, who judges of
such, as the children of visible professors were judged of aforetime, which
were called an holy seed, Ezra 10, 2 Esa. 22, 24
and compared to the vessels of small quantity in the Temple, which were no
less accounted holy then vessels of greater quantity.

3. Actual holiness (required in those of riper years) is in such infants only
potentially: It is not necessary to their being foederally holy (it being
impossible in them, nemo tenetur ad impossible) and therefore not to the
judging them foederally holy.

Object. The Apostle means only a matrimonial holiness, which is legitimation;
and the sense is, the Infidel is sanctified in the Christian by marriage, and
the copulation is not adulterous, for the children are not bastards but
legitimate.

Answer, The Apostle means a foederall holiness, and not a legitimation only,
which I prove by six Arguments.

Argum. 1. It is evident by the common doctrine of the Apostle, that he judged
the children of Christians holy, otherwise then by a matrimonial holiness only,
which is common to the children of Infidels: He taught, that the blessing of
Abraham was to come on the Gentiles by Christ, Gal. 3, 14
of which a principal part must be that propriety in God given to him and his
seed, by the Covenant, Romans 11, 16
that the Christian Gentiles were graffed in for Jews broken off, Gal. 4, 28
and did partake of the root and fatness of the olive tree, as they did; that
Christians were children of the promise after the manner of Isaac; Ephesians. 2, 14
that the partition wall was broken down; that the breaking off was not of
Gentiles, but of Jews, Romans 11.17. Romans 11 28.
and but of some of them: that the children are beloved for the fathers: That
there is the same faith in Christians that was in Abraham, and visible
professors aforetime, which was the condition obligatory of the promise of
propriety in God: That the main promises in the former dispensation were
confirmed by Christ, Romans 13.8, 9.
that the ^entiles might glorify God for his mercy, (of which the most eminent
was the promise of propriety in God including infants:) That children were in
the promise with their parents: Acts 2.39. Galat. 2.14
That there was an actual difference between the people of God, and aliens,
from the birth, etc.

Therefore he meant a foederal holiness, and not a matrimonial only.

Sanctification of the Infidel in the Christian, is not meant a legitimation
only, that they might live together in marriage without imputation of adultery.
For, 1. The Infidel is mentioned as merely passive, is said to be sanctified,
and not to sanctify; if only a legitimation by marriage be meant, the
Christian is sanctified in the Infidel, no less then the Infidel in the
Christian. 2. If legitimation only be meant, the term Infidel is impertinently
so often mentioned, which relates not to marriage. 3. By sanctification of the
creatures by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy.
a legitimation of them only, is not meant, that a Christian may possess and
use them without imputation of theft and robbery: For Infidels, which neglect
that means of sanctification, have a legal right to them, (as a matrimonal
right to their yoke fellows) yet all things are impure to them, even the use of
marriage, Titus 1 16.
though it be not adulterous: Matrimonia infidelium impura ut alia omnia opera,
non natura operum, sed vitio authorum: Pet. Martyr: Therefore by the holiness
of the children is not meant legitimation only.

unclean, are not meant only bastards: The Scripture denominates adulterous,
unclean, but not bastards, whose parents are not Infidels: Such as want
foederal holiness, Isaiah 52.1.2 Eccles. 9.2.
it denominates unclean, which it denies not of bastards; the Covenant was
sealed to them by the initial seal aforetime, and they were accounted to the
Church, though they were not advanced to offices in it.

Deuteronomy. 23.1, 3
Objection: Bastards were numbered with the unclean, as Moabites, Ammonites,
etc.

Answer: 1. Christ numbers Infants with Believers, yet Anabaptists allow them
not the denomination of Believers. Mat. 18.
2. Bastards, in the place mentioned, are numbered with those which want
foederal holiness, as Moabites, etc. If for this they are denominated unclean,
by unclean is meant wanting foederal holiness, and then by holy, must be meant
having foederal holiness. 3. The opposition of things in Scripture does not
always bring those things under one denomination. Acts 15.20
Fornication, Idolatry, and things strangled, and blood are numbered together,
yet Fornication and Idolatry are not to be denominated indifferent, nor things
strangled, and blood sinful.

And if by unclean, are not meant only bastards, by holy, are not meant only
legitimate.

holy, for legitimation only; Isaiah 52.1.2 Eccles. 9.2 Tit. 1 15 Mat. 15 26
but all that have not besides it foederal holiness it denominates unclean, yea
dogs: Therefore the Apostle denominates not children holy, for legitimation
only.

holiness to be legitimation only, renders the Apostle an underminer of the
privilege, which the children of Christians have above the children of
Infidels, from the time of the birth, Isaiah 61.8 9
and which they ought to be acknowledged to have, and a giver of no more to the
one then to the other, for children of Infidels, born in marriage, are
matrimonially holy; Hac ratione nihil plus tribueret liberis fidelium quam
infidelium. Ames. Infidelium filij si ex matrimonio procreentur, legitimi sunt:
Pet. Martyr.

But the Apostle was no under-miner of the privileges of the faithful, or of
their seed; therefore he meant not legitimation only.

holiness is meant legitimation only, the Apostle was mistaken about the
question proposed, which was not, whether their living together were not
adulterous, they being married each to other. For, 1. Such a doubt could not
arise in any, having any use of reason; all know, that living in marriage is
not living in adultery, and that children begotten in marriage are not
bastards. 2. It is granted (by those that interpret the holiness to be
legitimation only) that they believed that their children were not bastards,
how then could they doubt, that their living in marriage together was
adulterous? It is easier for a Christian married with an Infidel, to be assured
that the Infidel is his wife, then to know that the children that he has by
her are his children.

The Question was, Whether a Christian might, with a safe conscience, have such
intimate familiarity with an Infidel, as living together in marriage required,
the Infidel being a professed enemy of Christianity: For this was dangerous for
the Christian, and seemingly inconsistent with precepts given to Christians to
have no familiarity with Idolaters, but to separate from them, yea from
scandalous Christians, though orthodox, with whom familiarity might seem in
that regard more tolerable.

The answer is, The Christian having a lawful calling (being in marriage with
the Infidel) might continue with the Infidel: for the Christian had this
privilege by faith, and the Covenants, that he or she (in this case) should not
be infidellized by the Infidel, but preserved; yea the Infidel was (in some
sort) sanctified in the Christian, for the children born of them were not
Infidels but Christians, as aforetime the children of Jews were Jews, and not
Heathens.

If the answer were, that the Christian might live with the Infidel, because
the Infidel is legitimate by marriage, else the children were bastards, etc.
and nothing else were intended: it had been no more, then that a Christian
might live with an Infidel, as one Infidel with another, and familiarity with
Idolaters may be sinful in Christians, and pernicious to them, though no
adultery be committed. Such interpreters make the Apostle sectari minutias.

Object. If foederal holiness be meant, and the Sanctification of the Infidel
in the Christian, be a consequent of faith and the Covenant, then a believing
adulterer may live with an Infidel adulteress: For where the cause of
sanctification is, the effect will follow: Posita causa ponitur effectum.

Answer: 1. This inference has no proportion to the case about which the
Apostle speaks; which was the case of a Christian in marriage with an Infidel,
which was in those times common, one embracing Christianity, and the other
continuing in infidelity. If a Question had been propounded, whether a
believing Adulterer might live with an Infidel Adulteress, he would have
answered, silentio et contemptu. 2. He meant not, that faith and the Covenant
exclusively were the cause of the sanctification of the Infidel in the
Christian: 1 Timothy 4.4
As where he says, every creature of God is good if it be received with
thanksgiving, etc. He means not, that it is good without a legal right to it,
though it be received with thanksgiving (which is usual in thieves and robbers)
but in the case of civil right only: Zech. 11.3
One cause produces not the effect, una causa non producit effectum. 3. It
supposes a believing Adulterer living with an Infidel Adulteress, which is not
to be supposed: for a believer may fall into that sin, but living in it is
inconsistent with faith, Acts 15 9.
which purifies the heart: with Ecclesiastical Discipline, which, if despised,
the despiser is to be accounted an Heathen, Mat. 18.17 Job 31.11
and not a Christian: and with civil Laws, for it is an heinous crime to be
punished by the Judges. And if a defect of these happen, the Word of God (which
shall judge men at the last day) judges such to be without, Rev. 22.15
and such are to be accounted Infidels, no l^ss then the Infidels with whom
they so impurely live.

Genesis 17.7
like the former, the seed was named with the parent in the most eminent
promise of it; and the infants of visible professors had it sealed to them by
the initial Sacrament, so soon as seals were added to it; and in the present
dispensation of it, Acts 2.39 1 Cor. 7.14
the Apostles judged the parents and the children alike in it, and Christians
in their days doubted not of the holiness of their children; and it is the
doctrine of the Scripture, that the offspring is blessed with the parent,
Isaiah 61.8.9
and so to be accounted of all, until a visible breaking off for Apostasy, in
those of riper years: In adultis incipit omne malum.

Also, when, for a violation of Covenant, by those of riper years, there has
been a visible breaking off; the manner has been to reject the infant with the
parent.

Adam, and his were rejected alike for violation of the first Covenant, and the
Jews, and theirs, for the transgression of the second: Therefore the infants
are rightly judged in the promise with their parents.

Isaiah 13 18 Job 20.19 Exodus 20.5 Hosea 2 4. c. 9.16. c 13 16 Ezekiel 9 6
Psalm 109 Deuteronomy. 7.9 Psa. 103 17.18
to the fruits of their womb, with their children of riper years: Therefore the
promises are rightly judged to extend to infants of such as continue in the
Covenant: for the Scripture holds forth the goodness of God, to be of greater
extent to them which keep his Covenant, and theirs, then his severity against
them that break his Covenant, and theirs. It witnesses, that he visits the
iniquity of the fathers (which hate him) upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation, and that he keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him
to a thousand generations, and that he kept Covenant and mercy with the people
of Israel, and theirs, until those of riper years, of them, became incurable
haters of him, and would have done it for ever if they had continued in his
Covenant, for he is ever mindful of his Covenant. Psalm 111 5


Object. 1. By generations and children, infants are not meant, but children of
riper years, loving God, and keeping his Commandments.

Answ. The infants of such are necessarily meant. For, 1. Those terms include
infants. 2. In the places mentioned they are opposed to parents, and distinct
from those that visibly love God, and keep his Commandments. 3. Excluding
infants overturns the salvation of the infants of Gods people, which is by
virtue of such promises, and leaves them actually as hopeless as the infants of
Infidels, and enervates the comparison of Gods goodness, with his severity, for
the magnifying of it. 4. If only those of riper years be meant visibly loving
God, and keeping his Commandments, the sense is, his mercy is from everlasting
to everlasting, to them that fear him, and to them that fear him, which is
nugatory. 5. He shows mercy to children of Infidels, Ezek^el 18.
which coming to riper years, visibly love him. 6. By children in the other
part of the Antithesis, he means, infants, and not only such as coming to riper
years hate him visibly, as their fathers. For, 1. God punishes visible
Idolators, not only to the third and fourth generation, but for ever: Quis
nescit deum visitaturum impiam generationem, impiorum patrum in perpetuum.
Rivet. in decal. 2. God visits their own sin upon them. 3. Experience teaches
that God punishes the generations of Idolaters great and small, by taking away
the means of grace, and casting them out of his sight, therefore Infants are
meant in the latter part of the Antithesis.

God sometimes casts away the children of the godly, and shows mercy to
children of wicked men, he has reserved a liberty to himself, and has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens: Romans 9 18.
Deus servat libertatem in judiciis, and bonorum distributione.

Loquitu^ de ijs quae ut pluri^^um a^cidunt, Rivet.
The liberty reserved by God is not to be inquired into by us: the Scripture is
the rule by which we must walk, which speaks in such places as it usually falls
out: We ought to judge the generations of Idolaters mentioned great and small
to be those on whom God will visit the iniquity of the Fathers: and the
children of those that keep the Covenant to be those that God will show mercy
to, so long as those of riper years cleave to the Lord by a visible profession:
and if it happen otherwise to any individual of either, it is to us anomalous,
and we ought not to make rules of accidents: As in a case not unlike: the
Scripture says that the Evil doers shall be cut off, Psalm 37.9.
and that they which wait on the Lord shall inherit the earth: It sometimes
happens otherwise to some individuals: yet we ought to judge that the wicked
shall be cut off and that the righteous shall inherit the earth. Eccles. 7.15.
Solomon observed that sometime a just man perished in his righteousness, and a
wicked man prolonged his days in his wickedness: Prove. 2.21, 22
yet he judged that the upright should dwell in the Land, and that the wicked
should be cut off, and transgressors rooted out.



Inst. 1. The seed is named in the promise of propriety in God given to Abraham
(the great Father of the Faithful) as well as himself (in which promise it is
certain Infants were meant;) which promise was the most eminent of the
Catholic Covenant of grace, greater than which there was none; it may be
compared to the great tree which Nabuchadnezzer saw in a Vision, Dan. 4.11.12
Deuteronomy. 30.6. and 28.4.
whose top reached to Heaven, and fruit was much: all other promises are
branches of it.

Inst. 2. Psalm 37.26. Psalm 112.2. Job 5.25. Prove. 20 7. Psalm 1.2.28 Psalm
12^.3. Pro: 14.26. etc. Deuteronomy 5.29.
The seed of visible professors is named in the promises of Circumcision of the
heart, of Gods blessing, etc. as visible professors are; and men are exhorted
to love of righteousness, that their children may be blessed, and that it may
be well with them.

Object. By seed, infants are not meant, but children coming to riper years,
making a visible profession.

Ans. Infants are meant in the term seed. For, 1. Those promises were sealed
aforetime to infants by the initial Sacrament, as well as to visible
professors. 2. Infants are more properly the seed. 3. The seed is mentioned as
distinct, in those promises, from those of riper years, making a visible
profession. 4. Excluding infants is inconsistent with the manifold restriction
of those promises to the seed of the faithful, and it throws down to hell all
the infants of Gods people, Ephesians. 2.12.
for they that are strangers from the Covenant are without hope.

David hoped, that his infant dying (though illegitimate) was saved, 2 Samuel
12.13. 1 These. 4.13.
for he comforted himself with hopes of going to him, and Christians ought not
to mourn for their dead, as Infidels (who are without hope) mourn for theirs:
Nos certo scimus ex mente dei revelata non debere de suis mortuis contristari
sicut ethnici qui spem non habent: Ames. Therefore the infants of such are
rightly judged to be in the promise, for this judgment is the foundation of
Christian hope, which is not a mere Conjectural expectation without a promise,
but an expectation of a future promised good. Ephesians. 2.12. 1 These. 4.13. Mat 13
26.
Objectum spei est bonum futurum promissum. Ames. medul. and there is no hope
of them that are visibly out of the promise, such are to be judged dogs, which
shall be without,

Isaiah 61.8 9. Psalm 143 13.
therefore they are rightly judged in the promise of propriety in God, in which
blessedness consists.

There is not in such infants actual faith, nor shows of divine grace;
therefore they cannot be rightly judged in the promise, there being no ground
for a judgment of charity of them, which is a judging the best, that the words
and works of any may be interpreted, to signify.

Actual faith, and shows of grace are necessary in all of riper years, for a
right judging them in the promise, but not in such infants. For, 1. If Adam had
not sinned, infants had been visibly in the Covenant without actual faith, and
shows of grace. 2. Infants of visible professors in the former dispensation
were rightly judged in the promise without actual faith, and shows of grace,
though not any of riper years. 3. Actual faith is not necessary to the being of
such infants in the promise, as it is to the being of all of riper years in it,
and therefore, not necessary to the judging them to be in it. 4. The judgment
of charity of such infants, is the judging the best of them, that the promises
may be interpreted to signify.

All such infants are children of wrath by nature, as well as others, and in
infancy there is no actual difference between them and children of Infidels,
only there is a more likelihood that they are of the election, and there is
more hopes of them for the future, being born in the bosom of the Church, under
the means, they are in a nearer possibility, children of Christians are in
potentia propinqua, and of Infidels in potentia remota only.

Adam, there is no actual difference, they have the same birth-sin: but as the
children of Christians are children of a people in a Covenant of grace, they
actually differ from the children of Infidels, from the conception and birth.
The Apostle makes an actual difference between Jews, born of parents in
Covenant; and Gentiles, born of parents, strangers from the Covenant, and that
from the time of birth, Galat. 2.15
where he says, we are Jews by nature and not sinners of the Gentiles; and he
made an actual difference between the children of Christians, 1 Cor. 7.14
and of Infidels, denominating the former holy, and not the latter; which
actual difference is not properly called a birth-priviledg, because it is not
of natural generation (though contemporary with it) but of free grace, which
God is pleased to honor his people with, Deuteronomy. 10.13
and to deny others. He has chosen their seed above all others.

He has given precious promises to his people, and their seed, as of being a
God to both, Circumcising the hearts of both, blessing both, etc. but not to
Infidels, and their seed.

His manner has been to call the children of his people, Ezekiel 16 20 21
his children, born to him, but not the children of Infidels.

He has taken care of the children of his people, that they should be taught
to know him, and tru^t in him, Psalm 78.5.7 Ephesians. 6.4
and be brought up in his nurture and fear: but has visibly neglected others.

David acknowedges that he was his God from his mothers belly. Psalm 22 10
When the Ninivites repented at the preaching of Jonah, Jonah 4.11
he took an exact account of their children, and his bowels were troubled for
them.

He numbers the hairs of the heads of his people, Luke 12.7
and well may be judged tenderly to regard their children.

Also, God has required a difference to be made, by all, Isaiah 61.8, 9
between the children of his people, and the children of others; the one to be
accounted blessed, and not the other.

All infants of Christians are not in the promise; and which are not cannot be
discerned, during infancy: therefore we cannot judge any thing until riper
years.

species being named in the promise without restriction, and there being no
visible difference in the individuals, we rightly judge every individual, in the
promise, for we are not to make a difference where none is visible, as in the
case of actual professors all are not elect and regenerate, and in the promise
for life, many are Hypocrites and perish: In ecclesia plurimi sunt hypocritae
qui nihil habent praeter titulum et speciem Christi: Calv. Yet we rightly judge
the individuals elect and regenerate, until the contrary appear in any: by this
rule the Apostles walked toward the children of Christians, they affirmed them
all to be in the promise with their parents, Acts 2.39 1 Cor. 7.14
and denominated them all holy. 3. A certain knowledge of any individual, that
it is in the promise for life, even of actual professors, is not attainable by
us, God only knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19
ours is a judgment of probability, which may be of such infants (the promise
being to them without shows of grace) as well as of actual professors, giving
shows of grace. 4. Many infants, and actual professors, have been rightly
judged by men in the promise, who were not in it for life. 5. John baptist, and
the Apostles, never endeavored an exact knowledge of individuals, they applied
the promise without long inquiry, to many which were Hypocrites.

Therefore I conclude, that infants of Christians are rightly judged in the
promise of propriety in God,

Therefore they may be baptized. The Consequence I prove by three Arguments.



In the former dispensation, it was granted to all such, desiring it for
themselves and their infants, except to infants not eight days old, wanting
strength to endure it, and to women, wanting a natural capacity, or because it
was not administrable to them with modesty.

In the latter dispensation, John Baptist, and the Apostles denied not the
initial seal of it to any whom they judged to be in the promise. Matthew. 3.5
John Baptist gave it to Jerusalem, all Judea, and the region about Jordan; and
the Apostles to many thousands in a day, Acts 2
and denied it not any which were not visibly strangers from the Covenant, and
like to continue such.

Acts 2.38.39
therefore, they that are rightly judged in it may be baptized.

Orthodox Divines, and of the Reformed Churches, that baptism belongs to all
that may be rightly judged in the promise. To whom the Covenant belongs, to
them baptism belongs. Perkins. in Galat. p. 263. Omnibus de bet administrari
baptismus, ad quos foedus gratiae pertinet, quia est prima obsignatio foederis.
Ames. medul. p. 188. Baptism ought to be administered to all to whom the
Covenant belongs, because it is the initial seal of it. Baptism belongs to the
children of those which are discipled, by virtue of the Covenant. Whitak. Cont.
Duraeum. p. 685.

The Saxon Church baptizes such infants, because they judge it certain, that the
promise of grace appertains to them: Retinemus infantium baptismum, quia
certissimum est promissionem gratiae ad eos pertinere: Sax. Confess.

The Helvetian Church condemns Anabaptists, for denying baptism to such
infants, because by the doctrine of the Gospel such are in the promise. Helvet.
Confess.

To these many more instances might be added, which being consonant to the
Scripture, and right reason, soundly conclude.

The judgment of charity, that any are in the prom se, is not a sufficient
reason for administering baptism to them: there must be shows of grace for more
certainty.

John Baptist and the Apostles walked, in baptizing; they had no infallible
knowledge of the individuals, for they baptized Hypocrites, not a few.

A right to Evangelical promises is not the adaequate reason of baptism, for
the Jews were in the promise, Acts 2.38.39
yet not baptized without praeceding repentance.

Jews rejecting and crucifying Christ, and atheistically mocking at
Gospel Truths, ceased to have a visible right to the promise, until they
regained it by repentance. Also, they were a mixed company, to whom the Apostles
spoke, and not all Jews, Acts 2.8, 11
for they were of diverse languages: Inter illa millia hominum qui
baptizabantur, multi eo tempore confluxere ex omni natione. Ames. To which may
be added, they were adulti. 3. It is most probable, that repentance was in them
only in fieri, before their baptism, and that the Apostles accepted of
probabilities of it, and baptized them, as John is said to baptize some coming
to him (unto repentance: Matthew. 3.11
) It may be judged impossible, that repentance visible by fruits, was in all of
them, before baptism, there being so little space to manifest it; for
immediately after the exhortation to repentance they were baptized: there could
not be time to question every one of them apart, whether they repented: for the
day was but about twelve hours, Acts 2.15
and three hours of it were past before the Apostles began the Sermon, by which
they were pricked in their hearts: and that Sermon (consisting o^ so many
weighty points) must necessarily belong; also, they spoke many words after it
was ended, yet three thousand were added to the Church, Acts 2.40
by baptism, that day: Therefore, this so much pleaded against baptism of
infants of Christians, argues more strongly for it. These being grievous
Apostates, damnable rejectors of Christ, crucifiers of him, and Atheistical
mockers at the Gospel preached, miraculously confirmed with extraordinary
gifts, were (as it is most like) baptized upon probability of repentance:
Therefore, infants of Christians, guilty of no actual sin, may be baptized unto
repentance, etc. Si gravissimis delictoribus and in deum multum ante
peccantibus, cu^ postea crediderint, remissio peccatoru^ datur, and a baptismo
atque a gratia nemo prohibetur: quanto magis prohiberi non debet infans, qui
recens natus, nihil peccavit, nisi quod secundu^ Adam Carnaliter natus,
contagiu^ mortis antiqua prima nativitate contraxit. Cypr. Ep. ad Fidum. 4.
Being in the promise, is the only reason mentioned by the Apostles for baptism.
If any disable the Reason, he imputes not a little weakness to the Apostles,
and their Converts: for baptism being a Sacrament of a new administration of
the Covenant, newly begun, and (as it is most like) wholly unknown to many of
them until then, (many of them being strangers, living in remote parts: It was
wisdom in the Apostles to give, and in them to have a satisfactory Reason for
receiving it.

ARGUMENT. II. Infants of Christians are rightly judged to be of the Church,
with Christians of riper years, therefore they may be baptized.
Antecedent I prove by ten Arguments.

I. Infants of Christians are rightly judged in the promise of propriety in
God, therefore they are rightly judged to be of the Church, Ephesians. 2.12
for they only are aliens from the Commonweal of Israel, which are strangers
from the Covenant.

his Children. In the old world some were called the Sons of God, Genesis 6.2, 3
as children of his people: and the infants of Israelites were called by him,
his Children, born to him, Ezekiel. 16.20 21 Mal. 2 14, 15 Psalm 22.30 Jer 30.20
Psalm. 11.6, 16
and their lawful seed a seed of God And the Jews were accounted to him, great
and small in every age, until the breaking off; and the same was prophesied of
the Gentiles, when they should be converted, and of the Jews, when they should
be graffed in again; and the Psalmist calls himself the Lords servant, as he
was the son of his handmaid: Therefore such infants are rightly judged to be
of the Church, which is the House of God.

children of Christians holy: 1 Cor 7.14 Isaiah 4.3.
Therefore they are rightly judged to be of the Church which consists of such
as are rightly denominated holy: to which may be added, they are denominated
holy because they appertain to the Church. Quia ad Ecclesiam pertinent, hoc
nomine Apostolus eos sanctos praedicat. Pet. Martyr.

circumcision, Romans 3.30 Romans 15.8.
which was the Sacrament of initiation for that time, for which cause that
Church was called the Circumcision.

Therefore the Infants of Christians are rightly judged to be of the Church for
they appertain to it, as such infants did to the Church: Si rogaveris quomodo
silii Christianorum ad Ecclesiam pertineant, respondebimus, non aliter quam
filil hebraeorum, Pet. Mart. These may be as rightly judged to be of the
Church, as Infants of visible professors, of Jews and Gentiles were aforetime;
for faith was then no less required to Communion with the Church then now; Romans
4.11
Circumcision the Sacrament of initiation was called the seal of the
righteousness of faith.

the Kingdom of God to be of such: Mark 10 14.
Therefore they are rightly judged to be of the Church; for all that enter into
the Kingdom of glory are first of the Church, and all that are aliens from the
Church are without hope: Ephesians. 2.12
extra Ecclesiam non est salus: Christ is the head and Savior of that body
only.

Those Children were brought to Christ only for some bodily cure.

Si aegroti fuissent non prohibuissent. 2. There is not any intimation of a
bodily cure, desired for them, or wrought upon them. 3. The Kingdom of God
(the greatest of all blessings) is affirmed to appertain to them.

Those children were of riper years, capable of instruction, and not Infants.

infants sucking the breast are usually signified: (...) nominantur, quibus
verbis Graeci, infantes ab uberibus pendentes significant, Calv. 2. They were
brought to Christ in the Arms. 3. If they had been capable of instruction, the
Disciples had not any show of reason to hinder the bringing of them to Christ.

Only those which were like infants for innocence, etc. Were meant and not
infants.

Parvulos vocat et per aetatem infantes, et per simplicitatem morum adultos.
Mald.
Both Infants and such of riper years as are like them are meant: For, 1. the
intention of Christ in rebuking his Disciples for hindering them, was to declare
that he would have infants brought to him. 2. If only those of riper years,
like them for innocence, etc. were meant, Christ had not just cause of such
anger at his Disciples, for being against the bringing of infants to him, but
rather to approve them in it, and to have called for such as were like them. 3.
Interpreting Christ of those of riper years only, enervates Christ's reason for
bringing Infants to him, which was the being of the Kingdom of God of such; and
renders it as strong for bringing sheep and Doves to him, as infants of
Christians, for these are as innocent and docible, and the Kingdom is of such
as are like them. 4. Excluding of such infants from being meant; Neh. 6.1* Psa.
103.17.18 Rev. 20.6
overturns all hope of salvation of them. 5. [such] in scripture commonly
signifies the same persons, and them that are like them.

It is uncertain whether they were Infants of Christians.

Christians. For, 1. They brought not children for a bodily cure, but aiming at
an higher blessing, which may be argued from Christ's silence, of that which
concerned the body only, and affirming the Kingdom of God to be of such, it
being his manner to speak according to the hearts of those that came to him. 2.
Their zeal was great to bring them to Christ; it caused them to break through
all discouragements from his Disciples, and to wait for Christ's blessing: This
argues, that they more highly honored Christ then Infidels that knew him not.
3. Christ's great anger at his Disciples for rebuking, and his embraces of the
children, and affirmation, that the Kingdom of God was of them, Mat. 15 26
argues no less, for he called Aliens, and their children, Dogs: and there is a
deep silence in his word, of the appertaining of the Kingdom of God to any
children of Infidels.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. Isaiah 44.3
for the seed of visible professors is named in the promise of Circumcision of
the heart, and of the Spirit, as such professors are; and the Spirit is
promised to children, as children of the people of God: 1 Cor. 12.13 Ephesians. 4.4
Therefore they are rightly judged of the Church, for the Spirit initiates into
that body all in whom it is.

Disciples; those whom the false Apostles would have circumcised, Acts 15.1.10
the Scripture denominates Disciples, and they were infants of Christians, for
they urged Circumcision after the manner of Moses: Therefore they are rightly
judged of the Church, which consists of Disciples. Isaiah 8 16


they ought not to sorrow for their dead, as those which have no hope: 1 These.
4.13.
Therefore they are rightly judged of the Church, for they that are Aliens from
it are without hope, Ephesians. 2.12.
Christ being the Savior of the body only. Ephesians. 3.23.


Heathen and Dogs, (as some Anabaptists have judged them, calling baptism of
infants Lavacrum Canum: Mat. 15.26. Rev. 22.15
) Therefore they are rightly judged of the Church, for they which are without
are Dogs.

Infancy is no let to being of the Church; Christ, an infant, was head and King
of the Church, Matthew. 2.2
and children of visible professors, infants, were parts of the Church in the
time of the old Testament: Wheat in the grass is Wheat, though Tares are never
Wheat: So infants of the Church are Ecclesia in herba, the Church in the bud,
though not infants of Infidels: and if infancy were inconsistent with being of
the Church, it must also be inconsistent with salvation: Therefore infants of
Christians are rightly judged of the Church, (as infants in the family are
rightly judged parts of the house, to which they appertain) notwithstanding
infancy. 1 Cor. 12.13
Therefore I conclude, that infants of Christians may be baptized; for baptism
is the Sacrament of initiation into the Church, and the ordinary way of
entrance into it: as it is confessed by the most learned and rational of the
Anabaptists; by it the Apostles initiated all that they judged meet to be added
to the Church. Acts 2.41 Acts 8.38


For this cause, Orthodox Divines, and Churches, have approved and practiced
baptism of infants of Christians. Ideo baptizantur nostri pueri (sicut veterum
circumcidebantur) quia extra ecclesiam deputandi non sunt. Pet. Martyr. i. e.
Therefore our children are baptized, (as of old, such were circumcised,)
because they are not to be judged without the Church. Pet. Mart. Although
baptism be a Sacrament and repentance of faith; we affirm that infants ought to
be baptized, because they are judged, with their parent, in the Church of God.
French. Church. Confess. Cur non per sanctum baptismum qui sunt peculium et in
Ecclesia dei, initiantur? Helvet. Confess.

Communion with the Church ought not to be denied to any which are rightly
judged of the Church, (except in the case of scandal) which never occurs in
infants of Christians.

The unavoidable want of baptism is not, yet the denial of baptism to any is,
an excluding of them from Communion with the Church, and keeping them visibly
without, baptism being the ordinary way of initiation into the Church, and sign
of it. Baptismus est signum initiationis quo Cooptamur in Ecclesiae societatem.
Calv.

ARGUMENT. III. Infants of Christians are rightly judged meet for Baptism,
notwithstanding the absence in them of the Faith, Knowledge, etc. necessary in
all of riper years, judged meet for Baptism, who ought to be discipled b fore
they are baptized, Adultos infideles, prius oportet Cat^ch^menos esse quam
baptizari: Bez. in 1 Cor. 7.14. Therefore they may be baptized.
THE Antecedent I prove by ten Arguments.

Jews and Gentiles in the former dispensation, were rightly judged meet for the
initial Sacrament (which was Circumcision:) Therefore the infants of Christians
in this dispensation are rightly judged meet for the initial Sacrament (which
is Baptism,) for the initial Sacrament in the former dispensation, signified,
the Circumcision of the heart, and was a seal of the righteousness of Faith,
Deuteronomy. 30.6 Col 2.11, 12 Romans 4.11
no less then the initial Sacrament in the present, and none of riper years
were rightly judged meet for it, but such as are now judged meet for baptism.

Kingdom of God to be of such, Mark 10.14
and that those of riper years must be like them if they be meet for the
Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.2
and not that such infants must be like those of riper years if they be meet
for it: Therefore such infants are rightly judged meet for baptism, 1 Pet, 3.21
it being the initial Sacracrament of it, and the first Ceremony to be used
about those which are saved.

holy, notwithstanding the absence of that faith, knowledge, 1 Cor. 7.14
etc. which is necessary in all of riper years, that they may be denominated
holy: Therefore such infants are rightly judged meet for baptism.

Lords Children, and a seed of God, etc. Ezekiel 16.20.21 Malachi 2.15 Matthew.
28.19 Galathians 3
Therefore they are rightly judged meet for baptism: It being the Sacrament of
putting his name on his children, and outward sign of adoption: Baptismus est
externum pignus adoptionis: Whitak.

Mark 10.13
and to be blessed with his own hand, and he blessed them with the choicest of
blessings: Therefore such are rightly judged meet for the washing of baptism by
the hand of his servants.

Dedicated to the Lord. For 1. It has been a practice of his people graciously
accepted of him. Deuteronomy. 29.11
In the days of Moses the people devoted their little ones, with themselves, to
him by a solemn Covenant, and their pious act was accepted, Jeremiah 2 3 Ezekiel
16.2^ Joel 2* 16
the Lord accounted them holy, great and small, and called their children his
children; and called for such of them as sucked the breast, to bear a part in
days of humiliation, for transgressing the Covenant, with their parents. Anna
desiring a son, 1 Samuel 1.24
made a vow to give him to the Lord all his days, and God heard her desire, and
accepted the performance of her vow: The Psalmist affirms, Psalm 22.10
that he was cast upon the Lord from the womb, and that God was his God from
his mothers belly: Christ, on earth, commanded little children to be brought to
him, and such as were brought he embraced and blessed: Oblatos humaniter et
benign accepit, solennique benedictonis ritu eosdem patri consecravit. 2. The
infants of Christians are peculiarly the Lords, with their parents, in which
regard the Apostle denominates them holy, for that is rightly called holy that
peculiarly belongs to him: 1 Cor. 7.14
Sanctum di^itur quod deo peculiariter devotum et consecratum est. B^z.
Therefore they may be rightly dedicated to him: for the reason, why the first
born in Israel were in a special manner to be dedicated to the Lord, was
because they were most peculiarly his. 3. The absence of shows of divine grace
in such infants is no let of a solemn dedication of them to the Lord; for
infants of Gods people, in the old Testament, were (by such ways as the people
of God then had) dedicated to the Lord without them, and infants of Christians
are denominated holy in the new Testament without shows of grace, which are
necessary in those of riper years; nor yet is the dedication of infants of
Christians any Argument for baptism of infants of Infidels, for the Scripture
is silent of their holiness, for which cause they are not visibly the Lords,
and the Lord never required of them that refused to devote themselves, a
dedication of their children to him: Therefore such infants are rightly judged
meet for baptism; for it is the Sacrament of Dedication to the Lord in the new
Testament, Mat. 28.19
by which the party baptized is solemnly consecrated to him, and his name is
put upon him, that he may be accounted his; and the outward sign of adoption;
for in the instant of Christ's Baptism, the voice from Heaven was, Mat. 3.17
this is my beloved Son, declaring the meaning of that sign to be the glorious
privilege of sonship; Gal. 3.26, 27
and the Christians in Galatia are called Children of God from their baptism.

Insunt actu primo non secundo, in semonte non in mess, in radice non in
fructu. Tilen. For this was rightly judged of the infants of visible professors
aforetime, in regard of the initial Sacrament, which signified the Circumcision
of the heart, and was a seal of the righteousness of Faith, in the time of it,
no less then baptism now is; Therefore such infants are rightly judged meet for
baptism.

Psalm 119.122 Deuteronomy. 30.6. Mat. 18.19
He is a surety for his people for good, and he has given his Word for their
seed, that their heart sha ^ be circumcised, and has promised to do for his
people, and theirs, What ever they shall ask for themselves and theirs; Isaiah
22.24
and expects that his people should not only depend upon him themselves, but
also hang upon him their offspring and issue, which the faithful have done
with desired success, as the Psalmist witnesses, saying, I was cast upon thee
from the womb, Psalm 22.10
and thou art my God from my mothers belly: Therefore such infants are righly
judged meet for baptism, the ef^^cacy of which depends upon Gods blessing.
Robins. de relig. p. 76. 77. Who can give the grace signified before or after
baptism? Deus potest vel ante, vel post ba tismum, gratiam Communicare. Ames.
Bellarm. enerv.

Adam, Rom.5.19
so both have righteousness by imputation from Christ: the defects of both are
made up out of Christ's treasury; Col. 3.11
Christ is all in all, else it were impossible for infants to be saved:
Therefore infants of Christians are rightly judged meet for baptism.

Adam had not sinned, infants (though not any of riper years) had been rightly
judged to have original righteousness in them without shows, as now they are
rightly judged to have original sin in them, without shows of it; and Isaac,
and other infants, were rightly judged to have the grace of the new Covenant in
them without shows of it. 2. Visible grace does not necessarily praecede
initial Sacraments in all, they err that affirm it: Quidam rem temporis ordine,
signum semp^r praeire volunt sed falso. Calv. In those of riper years it ought
to have a praecedency, but not in infants of Christians; to these initial
Sacraments are profitable before they have visible grace, Romans 3.1, 2
which is evident in Circumcision: Adultis quidem nisi fidem propriam
attulerint, non est salutare Sacramentum: Parvulis vero, quia fidelium liberi
sunt, atque foeder^ includuntur, etiam si ad huc, propter aetatem credere non
possunt, est tamen salutare Sacramentum. Whitak. Contr. Durae. p. 682. Grace,
visible by effects, afterward supplies in them the present absence, as it did
in such in the initial Sacrament aforetime, and in baptism in the Sea, and in
the Cloud, which was the same in substance and signification with baptism in
this dispensation: Christ washed Peter (in whom there might have been actual
knowledge) for as much as he might know afterward the mystery of it; John 13 7*
much more may infants of Christians have the washing of baptism without actual
knowledge, the presence of it in them being impossible, and the absence of it
innocent: Baptism is called baptism unto repentance, as well as baptism of
repentance: Matthew 3.11
Therefore infants of Christians are rightly judged meet for baptism, though
they have not shows of grace.

Infants of Christians cannot p^rform the Covenant, to which they are engaged
by baptism, therefore they are not rightly judged meet for baptism.

Debtors to keep the Covenant according to the tenor of the administration,
Galat. 5.3
) yet had not abilities to perform it until afterward: Deuteronomy. 29.11
and the Israelites in Moses days engaged their infants with themselves in a
national Covenant, which they were not able actually to perform. Parents often
engage children in the cradle, actually knowing nothing, to perform duties and
pay debts when they come to riper years. 2. Performance, according to ability
renewed, is accepted with God: If Adam had not sinned, infants could have acted
nothing of the Covenant of works yet breach o^ Covenant had not been charged
upon them: Circumcision, a token of the Covenant, was accepted in infants of
visible proffessors in the time of it, Genesis 17.9.10. Isai. 38.18.19 2 Cor. 8.12
for performance of the Covenant, for it was called the Covenant: the dead
bodies of the Saints act not in the grave, yet they are not guilty of
transgressing the Covenant: God accepts what one has, and requires not what
one has not: Mark 14 8 Mar 12 42 43, 44
Christ says of the woman that poured the ointment on his head, she has done
what she could, and of the widow that cast in the two mites, she has cast in
more then all, for she has cast in all she had

If they are rightly judged meet for baptism, they may be received to the Lords
Supper: It may as well be given to infants as baptism, they being alike
insensible of both.

viz. the benefits of Christ's death in our Justification, Sanctification and
Glorification; yet the Lords Supper ought not to be given to such infants. For,
1. The Ceremonies of Administration, and outward elements in the Lords Supper,
are such, as that it cannot be given to such infants, which argues, that God
has intended the supper only for those of riper years. In the Administration,
of baptism passion only is required in the subject; it is a passive Sacrament,
as of old Circumcision was; the receiver acts not necessarily about it, but
suffers it to be done: But in receiving the Lords Supper actively about the
elements, is necessarily required as ^eeing with the eye, taking with the hand,
eating with the mouth, etc. and it cannot be given to any merely passive. 2.
Baptism i^ a Sacrament of initiation and entrance into the Church: Baptismus
est in ecclesiam in gressus. Calv. but the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of
progress in it. In baptism we are incipientes, but in the Lords Supper
proficientes: Heb. 6.1, 2
Baptism is the first Ceremony used about those that are received into the
Church: He that may be matriculated, may not therefore take the degree of
master, and he that may be taken into the lowest form in the school, may not
therefore be caught up into the highest; and because a scholar is not meet to
be of the highest form, it follows not, therefore he may not be in the lowest:
They which cannot be judged meet for baptism are not rightly judged meet for
the other Sacrament; and they that are rightly judged meet for baptism, are
not, therefore, necessarily judged meet for the other: no uncircumcised person
was meet to eat the passover, neither were all that were circumcised, Exodus
12.48
therefore, to eat the passover: Some were a time expectants, and a special
preparation was required in those that were to eat it.

ARGUMENT. IIII. Sealing the Covenant by an initial Sacrament to infants of
Gods people, has been the practice of the universal Church ever since God
added seals to the Covenant of grace. Ergo,
THat it was the practice of the Church in the time of the old Testament,
(notwithstanding some omissions and intermissions) cannot be denied. And that
it has been the practice of the Catholic Church in the present dispensation
of the Covenant: I conclude from two Propositions, which I will prove.

Propos. 1. The sealing of the Covenant to the infants of Christians by baptism
(the initial Sacrament of the present dispensation) was the practice of the
Church in the Apostles times: This I prove by four Arguments.

the most eminent Promise of the Catholic Covenant of Grace with the universal
Church. 2 Sealing the Promise by an initial Sacrament, is not only in reference
to a particular Church, either National or Congregational, but principally in
reference to the Catholic Church, for initial Sacraments primarily respect it:
this is evident in that Baptism is mentioned as a Sacrament of initiation into
that body. 3. 1 Cor. 12 13.
The dissolution of that Church state did not dissolve the sealing of that
Promise by an initial Sacrament to all Infants, Romans 21 17.
for there was a breaking off only of some branches, and not of all; and
therefore some are in statu quo prius, and of right to enjoy such privileges
as were not specialties, but common to the species: therefore the method used
aforetime was observed in their days.



They affirmed the children in the Promise with the parents: denominated the
Children of Christians holy: taught that the blessing of Abraham was come on
the Gentiles by Christ: Acts 2.39. 1 Cor 7 14. Gal 3.14. Rom 11 17.
and that Christians were graffed in for Jews broken off, etc. therefore the
Promise was sealed by the initial Sacrament to Infants with their Parents (as
before time) in their days, for such as they judged such things of the initiated
by Baptism.

them and all theirs, Acts 16.15 33 1 Cor. 1.16.
even their whole households at their request (of which diverse instances, as
sufficient witnesses that it was their practice are left upon the sacred file
of the Word) which was the method used aforetime in the initial Sacrament. Gen
17.


By households must be understood the discipled of them by preaching of the
Gospel, and not every individual, Exodus 12.48.
for in those times there were in Christian Families often Infidels, which ought
not to be baptized.

Genesis 17.12, 13 Exo 12.48, 49
Abraham was required to circumcise all his males born in his house and bought
with his money: likewise the Converts of the Gentiles, in whose families some
doubtless were Infidels, and refused Circumcision, such might depart the
family, and were to be cut off from it; Genesis 17.14.
and all the rest (having a natural capacity) great and small were circumcised.

The like was the practice of the Apostles in baptizing households, for the
order that they gave concerning Infidels in Christian families, was, that they
should have liberty to depart the family, 1 Cor. 7.13.
though tied to it by the strongest relation: and there is great reason to
conclude that they baptized the rest, great and small. For 1. it was an ancient
known custom in the Church, for religious Parents to devote their Infants with
themselves to the Lord, and to undertake the bringing them up in the fear of
God: 1 Cor. 11 16.
and ancient pious customs of the Church they honored and followed. 2. They
judged the Children with the Parents in the Promise, and foederally holy. 3.
They had been sharply rebuked by Christ for despising the day of those small
things and sent to learn of them innocence, humility, etc. and taught that the
kingdom of God was of such, as well as of actual professors. 4. There is
nothing in the Apostles Commission inconsistent with sealing the Promise to
Infants of Christians by Baptism the initial Sacrament: For that which was
given them in Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20
was, that they should Disciple the Nations (which were (...)) baptizing and
teaching them to do all that Christ had commanded; which was the method used in
the former dispensation; Abraham and all of riper years were Discipled before
the sealing of the Covenant by the initial Sacrament: yet was the Covenant
sealed to Infants of visibl^ professors by the initial Sacrament, which was a
seal of the righteousness of faith. 5. Isai. 22.24.
Infants are essential and most innocent parts of the family, the offspring is
the glory of the house.

Calvin affirms that there is no Writer so ancient which does not refer the
original of Baptism of Infants to the Apostles days: Nullus est scriptor tam
vetustus qui ejus originem ad Apostolorum seculum pro certo non refert; Calv.
instit. l. 4. c. 16. 8.

Origin affirms that the Church received instruction to baptize Infants from
the Apostles: Ecclesia traditionem baptizandi parvulos ab Apostolis accepit:
Orig. l. 2. in Roman. c. 6.

Dionysius says that it was delivered by the Apostles that Infants should be
baptized: Ab Apostolis traditum fuit ut Infantes baptizarentur: Dionys.

Augustine mentions it as a custom of the universal Church received from the
Apostles; and says, it were not to be received if it were not Apostolical:
Consuetudo matris ecclesiae in baptizandis parvulis non esset omnino credenda
nisi Apostolica traditio esset: August.

Propos. 2. Baptizing Infants of Christians has been the practice of the
universal Church from the times immediately following the Apostles days, and it
has been held by the same a divine institution long before the man of sin was
revealed: Zanchy (whose testimony is honored by all of sound judgment)
witnesses that the Catholic Church never doubted of Baptism of Infants of
those that might be judged of the Church: De Infantibus eorum qui de Ecclesia
esse judicentur, Ecclesia Catholica nunquam dubitavit: Zanch. in Ephesians. p. 226.

In the second Century, about the year 143. Higinus Bishop of Rome appointed
godfathers and godmothers to undertake for Infants in Baptism, Willet in Romans
c. 6. controv. 6.
which argues that Baptism of Infants was in use then and before.

Augustine lived in the fourth Century, and he called it the custom of the
mother Church.

Origin living in the third Century, mentions it as the practice of the Church
received from the Apostles.

And the first Sect opposing Baptism of such Infants, as an Innovation, Popish
figment and delusion of the devil, sprang up in Germany but in the sixteenth
Century.

Some omissions and intermissions of Baptism of Infants, in the first times,
argues not that it has not been the practice of the universal Church, nor that
it has not been held as a divine institution: For in the time of the Old
Testament there were omissions of Circumcision in evil times, and intermissions
for many years; in the times of the travels of the Israelites, Joshua 5.
it was intermitted the space of forty years: yet Circumcision was the
practice of the Church in the Old Testament, and held by it a divine
institution.

The reason of those omissions and intermissions of Baptism of Infants, and
that some were expectants until riper years, was not because Baptism of Infants
was accounted sinful and a delusion of the devil, for it was not so judged:
Cyprian (who lived in the third Century) affirms that the Baptism of Infants
was (in his time) approved in a Council of (66) Bishops, nemine contra dicente:
Epist. ad Fid.

In a Council at Millain, it was decreed that whosoever should deny Baptism of
Infants should be Anathema: Quicunque parvulos baptizandos negat Anathema sit:
Council. Melevit.

The reason why Tertullian urged delay of Baptism until riper years, was,
because many baptized Infants of Infidels as well as of Christians; Jun.
Constantines Baptism was delayed out of a desire to be baptized in Jordan where
Christ was baptized: and some lived among Infidels and could not enjoy it for
their children; and some among Heretics and could not have it rightly
administered; and some their Parents were Infidels during their Infancy,
therefore they were not baptized until riper years: Some delayed Baptism until
death, because of an erroneous opinion, that after Baptism there is no
remission of sin: Baptismum tum demum suscipiam, cum (...) viciis et
iniquitatibus de sistam etc. Some were baptized in riper years, because having
been baptized by Novatus the Heretic, they thought they had not been rightly
baptized: and some, because they would be baptized by Donatus, thinking those
only rightly baptized which were baptized by him and his party.

Prelacy has been in the Church ever since the first times, yet it does not
follow that it may be continued: so neither does it, that Baptism of Infants is
to be practiced because it has been long in use.

Prelacy has not been in the Church from the first times as a divine
Institution, as Baptism of such Infants has been. It is certain that Prelacy
was not an Apostolical Institution, for the Apostles subjected the spirits of
the Prophets to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14, 32
and not to a single Bishop: and the Government of the Churches to Elders in
common, Acts 14 23. Act. 20.25.28
not advancing one over the rest, and this at their departure from them never
to see them more; and Elders and Bishops were all one, they called the Elders,
Bishops. Hujusmodi principatus nondum natus erat, cum primum incepit postea
quam adempti Apostoli erant. Brightman.

Jerome affirms that Bishops and Elders were one, and that the Church was
governed by a Council of Elders, and that Bishops obtained the pre-eminence
above Elders by Humane Custom and not Divine Institution.

Episcopus and Presbyter unum sunt: antequam studia in religione fiebant,
communi Presbyterorum Concilio Ecclesia gubernata fuit: Hieron. in Tit. 1.
Noverint Episcopi se Presbyteris majores consuetudine magis quam domini^ae
dispositionis veritate; Idem.

Ammonius in the fourth Century (a man of eminent piety) dismembered himself
and fled because he would not be a Prelate. Socr. l. 4. c. 18.
Likewise Evagrius about the same time fled for the same cause.

Ambrose being chosen Bishop by an universal vote of the people of Millain,
denied utterly to be Bishop, and by no importunity would yield his consent,
Socr. l. 4. c. 25.
until Valentinianus the Emperor commanded him to be created Bishop, volens
nole^s. And his refusal was not from excess of modesty, but knowledge, that the
Church had been and ought to be governed by Elders.

Eccl sia seniores habuit, quorum sine Concilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia,
quod qua negligent a obsoleverit nescio, nisi forte doctorum desid a aut magis
superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri: i.e The Church had Elders, without
the Council of whom nothing was done in the Church, which thing by what
negligence it grew out of use I know not, unless perhaps through the sloth or
rather pride of the Teachers, whilst they alone would be thought somewhat.
Ambros. in 1 Timothy 5.

Therefore I conclude, that sealing the Promise to Infants of Gods people has
been the practice of the universal Church ever since God added seals to the
Covenant of Grace, and that it is no Innovation or Popish figment: and that it
is intolerable presumption in those that so censure it, for to despise any
pious custom of the universal Church, and to judge it evil, is insolent madness.
Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae non est spernenda, August. Insolentissimae infanie
est existimare non recte fieri quod ab universa Ecclesia fit: Idem ep. 111.

ARGUMENT V. The profit of Baptism is great to the Infants of Christians,
therefore they may be baptized.
THe Antecedent I prove by six Arguments.

Romans 3.1, 2.
a Sacrament of Faith and Repentance) was great to the Infants of Gods people:
Therefore the profit of Baptism is great to the Infants of Christians: For
Baptism is not less profitable then Circumcision was, neither are such Infants
less capable of the profit of Baptism then such were of the profit of
circumcision.

consecrated to the Lord, Matthew. 28.19.
and his name is put upon them: Per illum consecramur patri, filio, and
spiritui sancto, eorum nomina super baptizatos vocantur: Ames. Medull. p. 187.
Therefore the profit of it is great to such Infants, for it is no light matter
to be consecrated to him and called by his name. Deuteronomy. 28.10.


1. Cor. 12 13.
for Baptism is the Sacrament and ordinary means of initiation into it:
Therefore the profit of it is great to them; Isai. 65.4.7.
for it is a great privilege to have a visible standing in the Church: This is
evident by the contrary; the visible breaking off of the Jews and their seed
that they should no more be accounted to the Church then Infidels, was the
greatest evil that ever befell them: and Excommunication, which is a visible
casting out of the Church, is a dreadful thing; it is a delivering up to Satan,
and a putting the party visibly in his Kingdom, in which all visibly are that
have not a visible standing in the Church.

into Christ's death, Romans 6.3.
for Baptism is a visible participation of it by way of initiation: Per modum
initiationis: Ames. Medul. p. 188 (as eating things offered to Idols is
fellowship with devils; 1 Cor. 10.
) By it the unspeakable benefit of Christ's death is absolutely sealed to as
many as stand to the agreement: Therefore the profit of it is great to such
Infants.

Matthew. 3.11.
It is called Baptism unto repentance: Eo ad serium dei colendi studium non
mediocriter stimulamur, Gal. 5.3.
Calv. as Circumcision was in the time of it an engagement to serve the Lord
according to the tenor of that Administration: Therefore the profit of it is
great, Isai 49.1, 5. Psalm 58.3.
for God has formed us to serve him from the womb, and we are apt to go astray
from the womb.

of whom the Kingdom of God is, and necessary as a means: 1 Pet. 3.21,
Baptismus est necessarius ad salutem, non tantum ut res praecepta, sed etiam
ut salutis medium ordinarium, Ames. Bellar. enervat. Therefore the profit of
Baptism is great to the Infants of Christians, the Kingdom of God being of such.

Baptism is a means of the salvation only of those that have Faith and the
answer of a good Conscience, and not of Infants.

answer of a good Conscience are necessary only in those of riper years, that
Baptism may be effectual to them for Salvation, and not in such Infants, for
these are not necessary in them to salvation. 2. Baptism is compared to the
Ark, and is said to save, as the Ark saved from the flood of waters, in which
some had a temporal deliverance (which was a type of, 1 Pet. 3 21.
and help to eternal salvation) which yet after perished.

It is uncertain whether any individual Infant shall receive any profit by
Baptism.

John Baptist and the Apostles could not say of any individual, this man shall
be baptized with the holy Ghost and be saved: They baptized Individuals, as
David prayed for his sick Child, namely, 2 Samuel 22.12.
because he did not know but the Lord might hear him; he said, who can tell but
the Lord may be gracious unto me that the Child may live? and there is ground
of hope of the effectualness of Baptism in the Infants of Christians as well as
in actual Professors, because God has promised to be a God of the seed of his
people, and to circumcise their hearts, and has commanded them to hang upon
him their issue and their offspring, Isai. 22.24.
and required them to be accounted a seed that he has blessed, Isai. 61.8, 9.
and has declared that the Kingdom of God is of them, etc.

ARGUMENT VI. The Promise was sealed by the initial Sacrament aforetime to
Infants of visible Professors, seeking it for ^h^m, both Jews and of the
Gentiles, therefore it may be sealed to the Infants of Christians by the
initial Sacrament.
THE Consequence I prove by six Arguments.

Genesis 17.7. Heb. 8 7. Ephesians. 2.14.
for that promise was faultless, and it was no part of the partition wall
broken down by Christ. 2. Infants of Christians are as faultless as the infants
of Gods people in the former administration, undeniably included in it:
Therefore it may be sealed to the infants of Christians by the initial
Sacrament in this dispensation.

Jewish Church State: For it was not peculiar to that Church as a national
Church: For, 1. That promise was sealed to infants by the initial Sacrament
long before the existence of a national Church, Genesis 17.
and to infants of strangers, which were not of that Nation. 2. Sealing the
promise by an initial Sacrament is principally in reference to the Catholic
Church, for shows of grace are sufficient to it, Acts 8.36, 37 c. 10.47
though the parties have not joined themselves to any particular Church; and
one that cannot be rightly judged to be of the Catholic Church, cannot have
the promise rightly sealed to him by an initial Sacrament, though he be a
Member of a particular Church.

Fides et resipiscentia non magis am constituunt foedus dei, quam tempore
Abrahami. Ames. The seal is changed, but not the Faith: Sacramenta sunt mutata,
non fides. August. God indented with Abraham to walk before him, and to be
perfect, Gen 17.2
before sealing the promise to him by the initial Sacrament, Romans 4.11
and that Sacrament was called the seal of the righteousness of Faith; yea, a
greater measure of Faith might seem necessary aforetime, Heb. 11.13 Romans 13.11
for they were to behold things afar off, which to us are nearer, and there was
a vayl of Ceremonies upon things, which are to us open and naked: Therefore the
promise may be sealed to Infants of Christians in this dispensation by the
initial Sacrament.



Nulla actio externa requiritur ut in alijs Sacramentis. Ames. Yea, it is more
facil and common in the Administration, and needs not a restriction to the
male, as that aforetime did. 2. It is the same Sacrament in this dispensation
that the other was in the former: Sacramentia illa in signie diversa, in rebus
paria. August. For, 1. They are both initial Sacraments of the Covenant of
grace. 2. They are both the first Ceremonies used about those that may rightly
be judged to be in the promise, and accounted of the Church. 3. As Circumcision
was rightly administered to those only that might be accounted to the Church, so
is Baptism: Nemo extra ecclesiam baptizandus. Cyp. Ep. ad Januar. 4. As
Circumcision was the only ordinary way of entrance into the Church aforetime, 1
Cor. 12.13 Exodus 12.48
so is baptism. 5. As no uncircumcised person might communicate with the Church
in the passover, so no unbaptized person did eat the Lords Supper in the
Apostles times. Acts 2.41, 42 Gal. 5.3.
6. As Circumcision was an engagement to observancy of the Covenant, according
to the tenor of the former Administration, so is Baptism an engagement to
observancy of it according to the tenor of the present; it is called Baptism
unto repentance, and of repentance; Matthew 3.11 Luke 3.3 Romans 6: 3 Ephesians.
4.1, 5
and the Apostle argues against living in sin from Baptism, and for an holy
life becoming the Gospel: and Luther reports of a Virgin that repelled all
temptations to sin with baptizata sum: i. e. I am baptized. 7. As Circumcision
was a sign of mortification, and putting off the body of sin, Deuteronomy. 10.16 Col.
2.11 Romans 6.3 Col. 2.12
so is Baptism: We are said to be buried by Baptism with Christ; and that
Baptism should be the sign hereof in this dispensation, it seems to be foreseen
by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jeremiah 4.14
who calls Circumcision of the heart, washing of the heart from wickedness. 8.
As Circumcision was an external seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4 11
1 Samuel 17.36 Genesis 34.14
so is Baptism. 9. As Circumcision was a sign, distinguishing the people of God
from Infidels, so is Baptism. 10. As Circumcision sealed both temporal and
spiritual promises, so does Baptism: for in the Covenant in this dispensation
are both, as well as in the former, and Christians have Christ, Matthew 5
Matthew 6.33 Romans 8.32
and all other things by the same Charter. 11. Circumcision, of right, ended
when Baptism began to b^ an initial Sacrament, for Christ's Circumcision was the
period of it, and it ceased to be needful so soon as John began to baptize,
Luke 16.16
for the Law is said to continue but until John. Lastly, The Apostle plainly
teaches, that Baptism is the same Sacrament to Christians that Circumcision was
to Gods people aforetime: Col. 2. 11, 12
Demonstrat id esse baptismum Christianis quod antca fuerit Judaeis
Circumcisio. Calv. instit. Arguing against the continuance of Circumcision, in
this dispensation, he uses two Arguments, which argue no less. For, 1. Christ
being come (who was the body of the old shadows) they of right ceased. 2. That
Baptism was now the sign of our mortification, for which Circumcision served
aforetime: Ostendit quod adempti sumus eam in Baptismo. Aquin.



1. The abolishing Circumcision (the initial Sacrament aforetime) is no
Argument against it, as the abolishing of Sacrifices used aforetime in making
solemn Covenant with God, Psalm 50.5
is no Argument against solemn Covenant with God in the time of the Gospel.
For, 1. Circumcision was a distinct thing from sealing the promise, and only a
ceremony of it for a time. 2. The outward sign is ceased, not the substance
signified by it: Circumcisio suum habet externum, quasi corpus mortale; et suum
internum quasi animam immortalem, prius aboletur non posterius, Zanch. The
sealing of the promise is not ceased, for seals are added in this dispensation
to the Covenant. 3. Baptism the initial seal, is more facil to Infants then
Circumcision was, which was the initial seal aforetime.

2. Nothing appears in John Baptists Commission, inconsistent with sealing the
promise by the initial Sacrament to Infants of Christians; he mentions an
alteration of the ceremony, but no change of the subject, John 1.33
nor yet in the execution of his Commission is there any thing apparently
against it. If it be alleged, that he preached repentance before he sealed the
promise to any by the initial Sacrament. I answer; so also was the Gospel
preached aforetime, Galathia. 3.8
before the promise was sealed to any by the initial Sacrament, yet it was
sealed to the Infants of Gods people by the initial Sacrament. If any plead,
that men confessed sins, and showed signs of grace, before the promise was
sealed to them by the initial Sacrament: I answer, no less did Abraham, and all
of riper years, in the former dispensation, before the sealing the promise to
them by the initial Sacrament thereof. Also, John Baptist (who best understood
his Commission) affirmed, that he baptized with water unto repentance, Matthew
3.11
which is consistent with Baptism of Infants of Christians.

3. It does not appear, that Christ (the Author of the now initial seal) did
abolish the sealing the promise by an initial seal to Infants of Gods people.
For, 1. He brake down only the partition wall, of which the promise of
propriety in God, and sealing it by an initial Sacrament to Infants of Gods
people were no part, though Circumcision (the initial seal for a time) was a
part thereof: Christus leg^m a Mose latam, non sustul^t, nisi quatenus gentes a
Iudaeis separabat: Rive^. in decal. 2. Abolishing the former initial Sacrament,
he instituted another more facil to Infants. 3. There is no more in Infants of
Gods people, in this dispensation against it, then was in such Infants
aforetime. 4. He with anger rebuke his Disciples, for despising the day of such
small things, and gave them nothing in Commission inconsistent with it; for the
sum of their Commission was, that they should Disciple the Nations (which were
strangers from the Covenant, Mat. 28.19, 20
) baptizing them and teaching them to do all things which he commanded, which
was the method God used himself in the former dispensation, Genesis 17.1
for he discipled Abraham before he sealed the promise to him, and his males,
by the initial Sacrament of it. All that can be soundly concluded, is, that all
of riper years should be discipled before baptism: Sensus est, qui adult a sunt
aetate, ante sunt instituendi quam baptizandi; non si se rumpant aliud ex hoc
loco ostendent. Calv. And that the Apostles repulsed Christians desiring
sealing the promise by the initial Sacrament to their Infants, Acts 2.29 1 Cor.
7.14
does not appear; but the contrary is rather to be believed, for they judged
children of Christians in the promise, and foederally holy as well as their
parents; and baptized Christians, and all theirs (where it was desired;) of
which sufficient instances (as witnesses) are left us upon record.

Therefore I conclude, that the promise of propriety in God, being sealed to
Infants of Gods people in the former dispensation by the initial Sacrament
thereof: It may be sealed to Infants of Christians in this dispensation by the
initial seal of it.

The Covenant sealed aforetime to Infants of Gods people by an initial
Sacrament, was much differing from that whereof Baptism is the initial
Sacrament, for that was not purely Evangelical, but a mixed Gospel Covenant,
consisting partly of Evangelical promises, appertaining to Believers, as such;
and partly of domestic and civil promises, both which were sealed by the
initial Sacrament of that time, which, for that cause, might be administered to
some which could not be rightly ju^ged Believers: But the Covenant whereof
Baptism is the initial Sacrament, is purely Evangelical; consisting of promises
belonging only to Believers, as such.

Galat. 3.17
and then it was not mixed with it, but only annexed to it.

2. The difference was only in the dispensation, and not in the substance of
the Covenant; the Covenant of which Circumcision was the initial Sacrament, was
as purely Evangelicall, as this, whereof Baptism is the initial Sacrament; for
the Gospel is said to be preached unto them as well as to us, Galat. 3.8 Heb.
3.19 Matthew 5.5 Matthew. 6.33 Rom 9.^2 Ezekiel. 36.25 30
and the temporal promises were Evangelical, and belonged to Believers, as
such, for because of unbelief many obtained them not. Also, there are temporal
promises in this dispensation, and the people of God have Christ, and all other
things by the same Charter.

3. The promises sealed in the former dispensation were principally spiritual:
Certo certius est primarias promissiones sub veteri testamento spirituales
fuisse. Calv. Heb. 11.13
For the Fathers had temporal things little in their eye, they sought a better
Country then Canaan; Rom 15.8 9
and Christ (who is called the Minister of Circumcision for the confirming the
promises made to the Fathers) did not restore to the Jews temporal things; when
he came, the Romans did tyrannize over them, and he brake not their yoke from
their neck, and not long after their Country was utterly destroyed. Also the
Gentiles that did not take hold of that Covenant are said to be without Christ,
hope and God. Yea, Ephesians. 2.12
spiritual promises only were sealed by the initial Sacrament to many Infants;
for the promise of Canaan, and other civil and domestic promises were not
sealed by it to Infants of Converts of the Gentiles, for these things did not
appertain to them, but to the natural seed of ^braham. Also, only spiritual
promises were sealed by it to Infants dying in infancy, and if these were not
sealed to them none were, Rom 3.1, 2
and their bodies were wounded, and their souls were not profited, and
Circumcision was a punishment, and no benefit, which is contrary to the
Scripture.

Circumcision was administered to some, to whom the Covenant did not extend, as
to Ishmael, and others; and it was not administered to some, to whom the
Covenant did extend, as to Melchizedeck, Job, Lot, Infants not 8 days old, and
women.

Genesis 17.10
and the token of it, therefore might not be carried beyond it. Also, Ishmael
was rightly judged in the Covenant when he was circumcised, (though he was not
in it for life, as appeared afterward,) for he was the seed, and of the family
of Abraham, and not then actually broken off.

2. It is uncertain, whether Circumcision were instituted in the days of
Melchizedeck, Job and Lot; and if it were, it is uncertain whether the
institution of it came to their knowledge, they being removed far from Abraham:
and if both these could be known, it is uncertain that they were not
circumcised, and certain that they might have been circumcised, and most
probable that they were, if that there were not some lets, and in such cases
some of the Israelites were not circumcised, Joshuah 5.5
for Circumcision was intermitted forty years in the wilderness.

3. Infants, not eight days old, had a dispensation, not having strength to
endure, and women, not having a natural capacity, or to prevent the
transgressing the bounds of modesty in circumcising them, or perhaps it was
denied that sex for a chastisement, because the woman was first in the
transgression of the first Covenant.

In the former dispensation all the seed of Abraham's flesh, were his seed, and
therefore they might have the promise sealed to them by the initial Sacrament:
But in this, only such as have Abraham's faith are to be accounted his seed,
which Infants not having, they cannot be accounted his seed, therefore they
cannot have the Promise rightly sealed to them by the initial Sacrament.

visible faith, cannot be accounted Abraham's seed, yet Infants of Christians
are rightly accounted his seed without it. For 1. the S^ripture speaks expressly
that the faithful are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their off spring
with them. Isa. 65.23.
2. The Converts of the Gentiles and their Infants aforetime were rightly
accounted the seed of Abraham, Exodus 12 49.
the stranger was to be accounted as he that was home-born: and it must be
granted that they were to be accounted the seed of his faith, for they were not
the seed of his flesh. 3. The most learned and rational of the Anabaptists
confess that elect Infants are Abraham's spiritual seed, yet there is not in
them visible faith. 4. The Lord calls the Infants of visible Professors, his
Children; and their seed, the seed of God: Eze 16.20, 21 Mal. 2 15. Ma^k 10.14.
therefore the Infants of such may be called the seed of Abraham. 5. Christ on
earth affirmed the Kingdom of God to be of such, therefore they may be
accounted to Abraham's family. 6. Christ numbered such with believers, and the
Apostle judged such to be in the promise, and denominated them holy: therefore
they may be accounted the seed of Abraham's faith. 7. They cannot be denominated
Infidels because they have not visible faith; as they cannot be denominated
unreasonable, because they have not visible reason, nor dumb because they speak
not; it not being the time in which they may, and ought to have visible faith:
Vt aliquid privatum dicatur, eo tempore quo adesse debuit forma, absit: The
Anabaptists must either account them to Believers, or to Infidels, or a third
party; which if they do, it will be needful that they bethink themselves of a
third place for them (a limbus Infantum) when they dye. 9. Perkins in Galat. p.
263. affirms it the ancient received doctrine of the Church; that their being
born in the bosom of the Church (which is Gods family) of his servants (which
take hold of his Covenant) supplies in them the absence of visible faith; and
the ancients did abhor the accounting them Infidels: Absit ut ego dicam non
credentes infantes, August. de Baptis. and judged them Heretics that did not
account them to Believers: Inter credentes baptizatos parvulos numerabis, nisi
vis esse hereticus; August. ad Pelagium.

2. The sealing of the Promise aforetime by the initial Sacrament to Infants
and others, was to them primarily as the seed of Abraham's faith, for such as
were visibly wicked, so that they could not be accounted to the seed of his
faith, Isai. 1.10. Je^. 9.25.26. Amos 9 7.
were no more regarded of God then Sodomites, Ethiopians, Ammonites, etc. and
they were visibly out of the Promise for life (though they were Abraham's
natural seed) as well as Gentiles; and many of them obtained not the temporal
Promises given to Abraham. The being Abraham's natural seed was no privilege to
such as were notoriously and incorrigibly wicked, Matthew. 3.9.
that they could not be judged the seed of his faith.

There was an express Commandment aforetime for sealing the Promise by the
initial Sacrament to the Infants of Gods people: But there is no such
commandment in this dispensation, but the practice of baptizing Infants is
upheld by weak Arguments from the Old Testament.



1. What express commandment can they show for despising of dignities, and for
insurrections of private men against Magistrates, which was their practice in
Germany? Magistrates (though unrighteous) are called gods and sons of the most
high, Psalm 82 6. Exodus 22 28. Romans 13.1. 2 Pet. 2 10. Jude 8.
and reviling of them is forbidden, and subjection to them commanded, and
despising of them made a character of an Heretic.

2. What express Commandment can they produce for unchurching all reformed
Churches, and pronouncing them Antichristian, for baptizing Infants of
Christians?

3. What express Commandment can they show for railing accusations they bring
against all faithful Ministers, which labor in the Word, Ier. 3.15.
and feed people with knowledge and understanding, (many of which God has used
in the conversion of many souls to him) because they baptize Infants of
Christians? Jude 9.
The Angel dared not bring a railing accusation against the devil, and they that
despise faithful Ministers are despisers of Christ, 1 These. 4.8. Luke 10 16


4. What express Commandment can they show for preaching of private men without
abilities and authority? Mechanic fellows (not trained up in the study of
divinity) they allow to be preachers, of whom it may be rightly said, which
Jerome complained of some, docent priusquam discant, i. e. they teach before
they have learned themselves: and which the Apostle before him of some, they
desire to be teachers, 1 Timothy 1 7.
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm; and they account
their babblings and railings the only Gospel, as Montanus did the dreams of his
two harlots, Prisca and Maximilla. They all take upon them to be preachers;
Sumunt sibi omnes praedicandi officium; Gasti. In the Apostles days all were
not Prophets, they taught that Christ gave only some Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.29.
Ephesians. 4.
and some Pastors and Teachers, and that none might be a Preacher except he
were sent (that is, Romans 10.14
had authority rightly conferred upon him, and abilities given to him; 1 Cor. 7
20
) and that men must abide in their callings: 2 Cor. 2.16
and they thought none sufficient enough for preaching the Gospel, much less
not such, as neither were trained up for it, nor yet extraordinarily gifted:
Also Christ (who had the greatest abilities) took not upon him to preach until
he was called to it: until the voice from heaven, Heb. 5 4 Mat. 3 17 Mat. 28.19
this is my beloved Son, hear him: and his Apostles, besides abilities, had a
commission to preach the Gospel.

It was a great sin in Jeroboam, to suffer common people to execute the legal
Ministry, 1 King. 12, 31
and private men met with exemplary punishment from Heaven for meddling with
it, 2 Cor. 3 8.
and the Ministry of the Gospel is much more glorious.

The taking away Prophets and Teachers from people, Isaiah 3.^
is threatened as a heavy judgment, and much lamented: but if common people can
prophecy and teach, what punishment is it?

5. What express Commandment is there for stripping and dipping silly women?
which has occasioned the death of some, and the defiling of others?

6. What express Commandment can they show for liberty to hold erroneous
opinions, and to divulge them, which they call Liberty of Conscience? but is
indeed Licentious Error.

Deuteronomy. 29.14.5
In Moses days the people covenanted, not only that themselves present, but all
of them absent, with themselves, should walk after the Lord, which they could
not have done, if men ought to have such a liberty: Josiah and the people made
a solemn Covenant to seek the Lord, and he caused the people to stand to it: 2
Chro 34.32 2 Chronicles. 15.13. Deuteronomy. 13 1.12
and Asah made a law that if any did not stand to the Covenant he should be put
to death; and lest not liberty for people to dissent: God by Moses commanded
that false teachers should not be tolerated: and it was prophesied that great
severity should be used against teachers of lies under the Gospel. Zech 13.2.4^


Genesis 17.
When God instituted Circumcision, he gave no liberty (if any should scruple it)
to do otherwise, every male that was not circumcised, was to be cut off.

In the moral Law, the stranger (in the Jurisdiction of the people of God) is
not permitted to enjoy his opinion in following secular employments on the day
which the Lord has sanctified: Exodus 20.
Nulli cohabitanti permittitur Sabbathi dissolutio. Lippom. Nehemiah threatened
to lay hands on the Merchants of Tire, Neh 13 17. to 22
if they would not desist from such business on the Lords day.

The liberty of Conscience, which we have by Christ, is only to hold the truth,
and not a liberty to hold any error, though it be conceived by men a truth: the
holy Scriptures and not men's phansies are the touchstone by which opinions are
tried: Gal. 5.13.
and Christian liberty is no occasion to the flesh.

To these many more might be added, for which to bring an express Command, or a
sound collection from Scriptures of the Old or New Testament, would be found
very difficult.

II. There is no necessity of an express Commandment, for sealing the promise
to the Infants of Christians in this dispensation by the initial Sacrament, as
was for sealing it to the Infants of Gods people by the initial Sacrament in
the former; for Circumcis^on, in the former administration, was the first
initial seal added to the Covenant, and there was nothing for direction in the
use of an initial seal before it: Also, Circumcision was very painful, and
seemingly as dangerous for tender Infants, and to humane reason uncomely; it
was a yoke too heavy to be born, and therefore, not the least part of the
partition wall which kept out the Gentiles, Acts 15.
for which cause there was a great necessity of an express Commandment.

3. The express Commandment was not the principal reason of circumcising
Infants, and others, but the Covenant: Circumcisi olim Infantes propter foedus
erant. Whitak. Contr. Durae. Circumcision was called the Covenant, and the
token of it, Genesis 17.10, 14
and not the Commandment; and the contempt and wilful neglect of it was called
the transgression of the Covenant, and not of the Commandment: and despisers
were threatened to be cut off, for violation of the Covenant, not of the
Commandment, etc.

Arguing from Circumcision for Baptism of Infants, is the way to introduce
Judaism, and to subject the Church again to the whole burden of Jewish
Ceremonies: and it justifies the Papists, who argue for an universal Bishop,
from the high Priest among the Jews, and for sacrificing Priests, linen
garments, etc. from the custom in the Jewish Church.

Judaism, nor yet to a justification of the Quisquillian toys of the Papists
for it is neither arguing for the Ceremonies of the Jewish Church, nor for the
fooleries of the Popish Synagogue, but for privileges which the faithful may
expect by Christ, of which those Ceremonies were prenunciative, and are ceased,
not because they were evil, but because we have the substanc and truth of them,
which is much better, Non quia damnata, sed quia in melius mutata, August. It
cannot be rightly argued from the high Priest in the Jewish Church, that there
must be such an universal Bishop as the Pope, for no such thing was intended by
that type, but Christ was the substance of that shadow, who is our great high
Priest, Heb 4.14
nor from the other Priests, that there ought to be sacrificing Priests under
the Gospel, for (if that any thing were typified by them) it was a faithful
Ministry under the Gospel, to prepare people for the Lord, Romans 12.1.2
that they may be presented to him living sacrifices, holy and acceptable, and
by their linen garments innocence and righteousness, with which the Ministers
of God ought to be clothed. The Apostle argues from the sacrifices in the
Jewish Church, the offering up of our selves, Romans 12 2 Heb. 23.25
and the sacrificing of praises, which he calls the calves of the lips, etc.
And from sealing the Promise by the initial Sacrament to Infants of Gods people
aforetime may the sealing of the Promise by the initial Sacrament to Infants of
Christians in this Dispensation be rightly argued: Sealing the Promise being
the substance of Circumcision and benefit intended by it; and such arguing has
no color of setting up Judaism, for arguing for the thing signified tends not
to the introducement of antiquated Ceremonies.

Therefore I conclude that orthodox Divines and reformed Churches have soundly
concluded B^ptism of Infants of Christians, from Circumcision of Infants of
Gods people aforetime: from which many of them have argued for it: as learned
Whitaker: Infants were circumcised of old time for the Covenant, therefore, for
the same cause they ought to be baptized: Circumcisi olim Infantes propter
foedus erant, ergo propter eandem causam baptizandi, Whitak. Contr. Durae. p.
685. Also Calvin; for as much as God was pleased to grant Circumcision, the
Sacrament of Repentance and Faith to Infants, it cannot be absurd if now they
are partakers of Baptism: Cum Circumcisionem poenitentiae and fidei
Sacramentum, Deus Infantibus communicaret, non absurdum si nunc Baptismi
participes fiant, Calv. etc.

This Argument from Circumcision is filled with the scorning and contempt of
the Anabaptists, but if it appear in its full strength against them, it alone
is able to put to the rout, the most numerous Army of them: Huic argumento non
omnes Anabaptistae resistent; Whitak. Contr. Durae. p. 685. They are like the
fish called (Sepia) which casts out a great deal of black ink in the water to
darken it, that she may glide away the more easily from the hand that else
would take her; they think, by the multitude of their scoffs and jeers at it,
to elude it, and escape from it.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.
April 12. 1648.

