ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY concerning Matters Ecclesiastical, For the
Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the Archdeaconry OF BERKS: At
the VISITATION of the Worshipful JONAS PROAST, M. A. Archdeacon of BERKS,
Holden in the Year of our Lord God



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, All. Dom.

The Form of a Church-warden's Oath.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, according to the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm. So help
you God, and the Contents of this Book.

The Sidemen's Oath.
YOU shall Swear that you will be assistant to your Churchwardens in the
execution of their Office, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God.

ARTICLES of Visitation and Enquiry within the Archdeaconry of BERKS.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1. IS your Parish Church, or Chapel, Can. 85
kept in good and sufficient repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with
Lead, Tile, or Slat; the Windows well Glazed, the Floor well Paved, the Seats
well Fastened, and conveniently placed; and all things decently ordered, as
becomes the House of God? 2. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover
thereunto, Injun. Eli. Can. 81.82. Rub. Com. Pray. Can. 23.
standing in a convenient place toward the lower part of the Church, for the
administration of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel a decent Communion
Table for the administration of the Lord's Supper, with a Carpet of Silk,
Stuff, or fine Woollen Cloth, and another Covering of white and pure Linen to
spread thereupon? And have you a fair Communion Cup or Chalice, with a Cover of
Silver, and one or more Flaggons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? 3.
Have you in your said Church, or Chapel, Can. 82.
a convenient Seat or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service in; a Bible
of the last Translation in a large Volume, Can. 83.30.
and two Books of Common Prayer; established by Act of Parliament, 1662, both
well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies, set sorth
by Authority; a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a Printed
Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? 4. Have you a comely large
Surplice, Can. 58.
for the Minister to wear at all times of his public Ministration in the
Church, provided, and duly washed, at the charge of the Parish? 5. Have you a
Register-Book of Parchment, Can. 70.
wherein to Register the Names and Sirnames of all such Persons as are Married,
Christened, or Buried within your Parish, together with the Names and Sirnames
of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, expressing the day, month,
and year of all such Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? 6. Have you likewise
another Book of Paper, Can. 52.
wherein to record the Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted
at any time to Preach in your Church, Can. 84.
or Chapel? as also a third Book, Can. 89.
wherein to write down the Churchwardens Accounts, together with a strong Chest
with locks and keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the
forementioned Furniture in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier with a
black Hearse-cloth, for the Burial of the Dead? 7. Are there any Funeral
Monuments erected since 1640, without License from the Ordinary?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fensed, Can. 85.
and decently kept? Has any person encroach'd upon the same, or made any Door
into it out of his own ground or habitation, without allowance from the
Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down? how long since? by whom?
and to whose use and benefit? 2. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the
Glebe-lands, Gardens, Can. 87.
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage? As
also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as do belong thereunto?
And is the House of your Parson, or Vicar, and the Outhouses in good repair?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the Morning and Evening
Service, Can. 14.21.68. Rub. Matr. Visitat.
administration of the Holy Sacraments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of
Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and
pronouncing God's Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the Forms and
Words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any addition, omission,
or alteration of the same? Burial. Comminat.
And does he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service,
as are appointed in the said Book, so far as you have observed? 2. Does your
Minister at the reading or celebrating any Divine Office in your Church, or
Chapel, Can. 58.
wear the Surplice? 3. Does he observe the Holidays, and Fasting-days, Can. 64.
Rub. Com. Pray.
as also the Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as in
the Common Prayer Book, or by the Ecclesiastical Canons is appointed, giving
notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church in time of Divine
Service, upon the Sunday next before? And does he constantly read the Litany on
Wednesdays and Fridays weekly? 4. Has your Minister been licenced to Preach by
the Bishop? If so, does he constantly (unless in case of sickness, Injunct.
Elis. 19. Can. 48. Can. 49. Rub. Com. Can. 45. Can. 46.
necessary absence, or other impediment) himself preach in your Church or
Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday, or if he be not a licenced Preacher, or being
so licenced, be hindered by sickness, or otherwise as aforesaid, does he procure
a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a licenced Preacher, or one
of the Homilies set forth by Authority, to be there read by a Priest or Deacon,
lawfully ordained? 5. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your
Parish in the Church Catechism, Can. 59.61. Can. 66. Injunct. Elis. 44.
and prepare and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by the
Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Papist Recusants (if any such be
inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church
of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to
the government thereof? 6. Does he refuse or neglect to visit the Sick, Can.
67.68. Rub. Com. Can. 29.
or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any
Child past Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers
default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Does he baptize any without
Godfathers, or Godmothers; or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or
God-mother to their own Children; or baptize them without the sign of the
Cross? 7. Has he at any time (as you know, 13 Elis. 12. Injunct. Elis. 13.
Can. 72, 73. Can. 62. Rub Matr.
or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical
Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into Parties and Factions, to the
disturbance of the public peace and unity of the Church or State? 8. Has he
Married any person without License, unless the Banns have been first published
on three Sundays or Holidays, in time of Divine Service, in the Church where
the said Persons dwell? 9. Has he Married any, so Licenced, at any
unseasonable times, and not between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the
Forenoon; or in any other place than the Church, or Chapel, where one of them
dwells; and in time of Divine Service; or at the times forbidden by the ancient
Canons? 10. After the Banns have been. thrice published, has he married any
under the Age of one and twenty years, before the Parents or Governors have
personally, or by sufficient testimony, signified their consent to the said
Marriages?
TIT. IV. Concerning Parishioners.
1. IS there any person in your Parish that lies under a common fame or
suspicion of Adultery, Can. 109.
Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards, Swearers, or
Blasphemers of God's Word in your Parish, or any that are noted to be Railers,
unclean and filthy Talkers, or sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord among
their Neighbors? 2. Do any in your Parish upon the Sunday follow their bodily
and ordinary Labor, Injunct. Elis. 34.
or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold? Or
do any Vintners, Inn keepers, or other Victuallers or Sellers of Beer, or Ale,
suffer any persons to Tipple or Game in their Houses upon those Days? 3. Are
there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant Children to be
baptized publicly in the Church, Rub. Bapt.
unless in case of urgent danger? Or do they send them to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after other Form than is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time than the Church allows? Are there any Infants, or
more aged persons, in your Parish as yet unbaptized? 4. Have you any among you
that are declared Excommunicate, Can. 65.
for any crime committed? How long have they been so Excommunicated? 5. Are
there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife, Can. 99.
who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced
have married again: Or any that being lawfully married and not separated, or
divorced by Law, do not cohabit together? 6. Are there any married Women in
your Parish, Rub.
who after the delivery from the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their
public Thanksgiving to God in the Church? and when they come so to do, do they
come decently apparelled, and make their Offerings according to custom? 7. Do
any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of England?
Rub. Com. Can. 92.
And are there any Wills and Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that be
yet unproved? Or any Goods Administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary?
Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons,
1. HAve you belonging to your Church, or Chapelry, Can. 91.
a Parish Clerk aged 20 Years at least? Is he of honest life and conversation;
and sufficient and able to perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing?
Is he chosen by your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all divine
Services in your Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? Or who withholdeth the
same from him? 2. Does he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in
your Parish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, Can. 67.
that they be locked and opened at due time: And does he keep the Church, or
Chapel, clean from dust, cobwebs, and other annoyance? Does he toll or ring the
Bell at the accustomed hours before the beginning of divine Service, Morning
and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when
any person is passing out of this life, does he upon notice given him thereof
toll a Bell as has been accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned
to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of God?
TIT. VI. Queries to be put to the Ministers, concerning the Churchwardens and
Sidemen.
1. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, Can. 81.
by the joint consent of the Minister and Parishioners? or one of them by the
Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? 2. Have the former and last
Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the Parish, Can. 89.
and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining in
their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church, or
Chapel? 3. Do they suffer no misbehaviour or disorder to be done by Men, Can.
18.
Women, Servants, or Children in your Church, or Chapel? Are they careful that
none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they
permit no Dogs, or Hawks to be brought or come into your Church, to the
disturbance of the Congregation? 4. Do they against every Communion appointed
in your Church, Rub. Com. Can. 20.
or Chapel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good
Wine, according to the number of Communicants? 5. Do they cause all Strangers
that preach in your Church or Chapel, to subscribe their Names the same day in
a Book provided for that purpose; together with the Name of the Bishop that
Licenced them to preach in his Diocese? And do they permit no other to preach?
6. Have they (being now sworn to give in a true answer unto all those Articles
of Enquiry, Can. 119.
in all their several Titles) taken sufficient time to draw up their
Presentiments, and therein consulted with you their Minister, for your faithful
assistance?
TIT. VII. Concerning Schools, School masters, Physicians, Surgeons, and
Mid-wives.
1. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Ordinary? Does he keep School in the Church, or
Chancel? 2. Does any in your Parish practice Physic, or Surgery, or any
Woman take upon her the Office of a Midwife, without License from the Ordinary?
FINIS.

