ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry, EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens
and Sidemen of every Parish in the DIOCESE OF GLOUCESTER; In the Second
Triennial VISITATION of the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD LORD BISHOP of
GLOUCESTER, An. Dom. MDCXCVIII.



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, An. Dom. School.

The Oath of the Churchwardens.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge, and
present such Things and Persons, as you know to be Presentable by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. So help you God.

The Sidemens Oath.
YOU shall Swear that you will be assistant to your Churchwardens in the
execution of their Office, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God.

ARTICLES of ENQUIRY for the Visitation of the DIOCESE of GLOUCESTER, School.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels.
1. IS your Church or Chapel in good and sufficient Repair, in the Roof, Walls,
Windows, Floor, Seats and Doors? And also the Chancel, to whomsoever it
belongs? 2. Is there a stone Font with a Cover, standing in the usual place?
Is there a decent Communion Table standing in your Chancel, covered with a
Carpet in time of Divine Service, and with a fair linen Cloth when the
Communion is administered? And have you a silver Communion-Cup with a Cover, and
one or more Flagons, and these only kept for that Use? 3. Have you a large
Bible of the last Translation, two Books of Common Prayer as Revised 1662, a
Book of Homilies, a Printed Table of Degrees of Marriage, a Book of Canons made
1603, and a decent Surplice, with other Necessaries for your Church, provided
at the Charge of your Parish? 4. Have you a Parchment Book, for Registering all
Christnings, Weddings and Burials, and are they duly Registered, and the Book
kept according to the Direction of the Canon? And is there a Transcript thereof
sent Yearly to the Chancellor's Office, as the Law directs? 5. Have you a Book
for entering Parish Accounts, and are they yearly audited? Have you an
Inventory of the Plate, Books, and other Utensils belonging to your Church? And
is this duly transferred from one Churchwarden to another?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebe and Tithes belonging to your
Church.
1. IS your Churchyard well fenced with a Wall or Rayles, decently kept free
from Anoyance? Have there any Encroachments been made, or new Doors opened into
it? And when? 2. Is your Minister's House, and the Outhouses belonging
thereto, in good and sufficient Repair? Have any of them been demolished or
damaged, or the Bounds of them changed, or removed, without Authority from the
Bishop? 3. Have you an exact Terrier kept in your Parish-Chest of all the
Houses, Outhouses, Glebe-lands, and other Dues belonging to your Minister,
according to the Rules sent you by the Chancellor? And is there a true Copy
thereof in Parchment sent into the Bishop's Registry, attested under the Hands
of the Minister and Parishioners?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister Resident among you? If not, does he keep a sufficient
Curate? And what Salary does he allow him? 2. Does your Minister serve more
than one Church in a Day? If so, how far distant is each from the other? And
are the Incombes of each Church so small as not to afford a Competency for two
distinct Ministers? Express the Value of each Church. 3. Is your Minister a
Person of sober and godly Life? 4. Does your Minister reverently read Divine
Service on Sundays and Holy days, and does he Preach at least once every
Sunday? 5. Does your Minister administer the Lord's Supper so often, that every
Parishioner may receive it at least three times every Year, giving Notice of it
the Lord's Day before? Does he keep wicked Livers, and such as appear not to be
in Charity with their Neighbors, from the Sacrament, giving an Account thereof
to the Ordinary? 6. Does he diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechism, and endeavor to prepare them for Confirmation? Is he careful
to visit the Sick, baptize Children, bury the Dead? And does he use the Form
and Words, the Rites and Habit prescribed in the Common Prayer, in the
Administration of the Holy Sacrament? 7. Has your Minister knowingly Married
any under Age, without the consent of Parents, or without Publication of Banes,
or License legally obtained from the Chancellor of the Diocese? 8. Does your
Minister duly read in time of Divine Service the late Act against profane
Swearing and Cursing, on the 4 Lord's Days appointed by the Act of Parliament,
and has he openly read the KING'S late Proclamation against Debauchery and
Profaneness?
TIT. IV. Concerning Parishioners.
1. DO your Parishioners reverently demean themselves in the Church, during the
time of Divine Service, and Preaching God's Word? 2. Do any of your Parish lie
under a notorious Fame, or common Suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or
Incest? Are there any common Drunkards, Swearers, Cursers or Blasphemers of
God's Holy Name; any filthy Talkers, Revilers, sowers of Sedition among their
Neighbors? 3. Are there any that profane the Lord's Day, by following their
Callings, by using of Sports, going to Alehouses, or lying idly at home in the
time of Divine Service, or that under pretense of Liberty of Conscience,
totally neglect the Worship of God? 4. Are there any that refuse to pay their
Easter-Offerings, or Church-Rates, made by the Churchwardens, after due Notice
given? 5. Has any Legacy left to pious Uses been misspent, concealed, or
embezel'd, by whom? 6. Do you know, or have heard of any in your Parish, that
having the Presentation of any Ecclesiastical Living, have made any Contract
for Money, or for any part of the Tithes or Glebe belonging thereunto? 7. Are
any Wills concealed, lost, or neglected to be proved? 8. Have you an Account of
pious and charitable Gifts belonging to your Parish, kept in the Church Chest,
according to the Instructions sent you by the Chancellor of the Diocese? And
have any been lately given, that are not yet Registered?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1. IS your Parish Clerk of sober Life and honest Conversation? Able to
discharge his Duty in reading or singing the Psalms? Does he duly attend the
Minister at Church, and are his Wages justly paid him, according to the Custom
of your Parish? 2. Is your Sexton (if any) careful to keep the Church clean and
decent, does he lock up the Church Doors in due time, and toll or ring the
Bells as occasion requires?
TIT. VI. Concerning Schools and Hospitals.
1. WHat Schoolmaster, public or private, is in your Parish? Is he Licensed
thereunto? Does he teach his Scholars the Church-Catechism? Does he bring them
to Church on Sundays and Holy days, to be Catechized by the Minister in the
public Congregation? 2. What Hospitals, Almshouses, or Free-Schools have been
founded in your Parish? Are they managed according to the Founder's Gift? Are
their Rents and Salaries duly paid, and do you know of any Abuses committed
therein?
TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens.
1. ARE your Churchwardens duly Chosen according to the Custom of your Parish,
with the Consent of the Minister. 2. Have the last Churchwardens given up their
Accounts, and delivered the Overplus to the succeeding Officers? With all the
other things that belong to your Church? 3. Do they provide against every
Communion a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and good Wine? 4. Do the
Churchwardens dispose of the Offerings at the Communion, without the Consent of
the Minister? And is that Money entered into a Book? 5. Do your Churchwardens
lavishly spend the Parish Money at Visitations, in Feasts and Riotous Eating
and Drinking?
ADVERTISEMENTS.
1. THE Minister of each Parish, whose Duty it is to endeavor, what lies in
him to suppress all Vice and Profaneness, if he sees his Churchwardens to make
no Conscience of their Oaths, may, and ought to present Notorious Crimes and
Offenders. 2. The Churchwardens are to take Notice, That if they neglect their
Duty, in presenting Offenders, they are to be proceeded against in the
Ecclesiastical Court, as in Cases of wilful Omission and Perjury.
EDW. Gloucester.

Instructions to make new and exact Terriers, at least once in 20 Years, to
preserve the Rights of the Clergy from pretended Exemptions, and unjust
Compositions; and to ascertain the Bounds of their Glebe, by reason of:
Alterations that may happen in that space of time, both in Men's, and Places
Names.
1. YOU are to express what Houses belong to your Minister, how many Bays of
Building, what Outhouses, Barns or Stables, what Orchards and Gardens, and the
quantity thereof? 2. What Glebe-lands belong to your Minister? How butted and
bounded? Of what quantity? Whether Arable or Pasture? Whether any have been
changed, and for what? By whose Authority, and by whom detained? And whether
the Church has suffered any Detriment thereby? 3. What Lands or Estates
pretend to be Tithe free, and upon what account as you have heard? What
Compositions are there in your Parish? And what do the pay in lieu of full
Tithes? 4. What are the Customs of your Parish in Tything? As for Mortuarys,
Offerings, Aftermoate, Agistment, Herbage, Milk, Calves, Lambs, and the like?
What Beast Pastures, or Right of Common are due to your Minister? 5. What
Tithes belong to the Impropriator? What to the Vicar? What Stipend is due from
the Impropriator to the Curate? What Portions of Tithes are due to, or from the
Church? 6. What Augmentations have been added to your Church, since the 12th
Year of K. Charles the Second? How are they continued, and by whom paid
according to the Act in the 29th of Charles the Second, for the confirming and
perpetuating Augmentations made Ecclesiastical to small Vicaridges and
Curacies? 7. This Terrier thus made in Parchment, one Copy is to be laid in the
Parish Chest, and the other sent into the Bishop's Registry. And the Minister
is to take Care herein; for none shall be received without his Approbation,
under Hand and Seal.
Richard Parsons, LL. Dr. CHANCELLOR.

Instructions for an Account of Charitable Gifts, to prevent the Abuses, and
Concealment thereof.
1. YOU are to mention what Lands, Goods, Stocks of Money, Tenements, Pensions,
Rent-Charges, or other things that have been given to any Pious Use, within
your Parish. 2. What are the Uses designed for such Gifts? Whether for
Reparation of the Church, Preaching of Sermons, Relief of the Poor, Education
of Orphans, Binding out of Apprentices, or the like? 3. How are such Gifts
secured? Where are the Evidences, Bonds, Deeds, Wills, or other Conveyances
kept? In whose Hands is any Money trusted, is there good and sufficient
Security, and is your Minister acquainted with the Management thereof? 4. Have
any Charitable Gifts bestowed on your Parish been lost, detained, or
mis-employ'd? By whom, and in what manner have you been wronged? Specify at
large. 5. You are to mention if there be any Free School, or Hospital within
your Parish, by whom Erected, and how Endowed, and who are the present T^^stees
for the same? 6. Have any Charitys been given to your Parish since the last
Account, 1683? 7. If you have no Charitable Gifts as yet bequeathed to your
Parish, certify the same under your Hands by the time appointed?
The Minister and Churchwardens are ordered to call a Parish-Meeting sometime
before Michaelmass next, to consult how to make a Terrier of the Minister's
Dues, and an Account of all Charitable Gifts according to these Directions, and
to send a Transcript thereof in Parchment into the Bishop's Registry by the
First of October next, and to keep the other Part in the Parish-Chest. If these
things are already complete in your Parish-Chest, send a Certificate thereof by
the First of October next under the Minister's Hand. If they are wanting, the
Churchwardens are hereby admonished to procure them by the time prefixed, with
the Minister's Hand thereto; or else the Churchwardens will be proceeded
against in both these Cases for Contempt.

Gloucester May 14. School. Rich. Parsons, LL. D. Cancel. GLOUCEST.


