TWO TREATISES THE FIRST, THE Young-Mans MEMENTO. Showing How Why When
We should remember GOD. OR The seasonableness and sutableness of this Work to
YOVTH.

THE SECOND, Now if Ever.

PROVING 1 That God gives Man a Day. 2 That this Day often ends while the means
of Grace continues. 3 That when this Day is ended, peace is hid from the Soul.


Being an Appendix to the former Treatise.

Both by John Ch^shull, Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed by A. N. and are to be sold by F. Eglesfie^d, at the Marygold
in St: Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

The Rock of Ages, or a Treatise of the eighteen Attributes of God, twelve of
them communicable, and six incommunicable, being the substance of sundry
Lectures, by Thomas Larkham M. A. sometime of Trinity College in Cambridg.

Vestibu um lingue latin, in 8. by William Du-Gard master of Merchant-Taylors
School.

The English Rudiments of the Latin tongue in 8, by W. Du-Gard.

Schools probation in 8, by W. Du-Gard.

Satan at Noon, the Second part, by Christopher Four Minister of Reading.

Hero^es on the golden verses of Bethogaras, teaching a virtuous and holy life,
by Jo. Hall of Gray's Inn Esquire.

Danger of being almost a Christian, by John Chishu^^ Minister of Tiverton in
Devon.

Young-Mans Memento, by John Chishull.

Natures Good night, being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of the blessedness
of departed Saints in their immediate enjoyment of God in Glory, by Joseph Row,
in 4.

A^poligetical Letter to a person of Quality, in 4, by Joseph Hall Bishop of
Norwich.

THE Young-mans Memento,
ECCLESIASTES 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
THe words I have read, are an exhortation seasonable and suitable enough, in
that they point particularly at some, but include and concern all; they are
almost the last breath of the Preacher; and we know if a good Orator has been
pleading in a case of importance, he usually draws up things of the greatest
weight in the conclusion, that if many particulars should be lost, yet the last
words of the Sermon should stick.

They are the main use of this Text which he had preached upon; which he
proposes, Chap. 1.2. Vanity of vanity, says the Preacher; vanity of vanities,
all is vanity; and proves in the following Chapters by words of Wisdom and
Experience two weighty considerations to endear the doctrine to us. He shuts up
the proof, Chap. 11. verse. 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them
all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they are many. All that
comes is vanity. And the last argument which he uses, is from the ending and
concluding of all these things; there is a certain night of evil and sorrow
which will follow the brightest day which we do or can enjoy in the world; if no
troubles come with it, yet there is enough comes after it to blast it in our
thoughts. From hence he proceeds to Application, and it is to Young Men, Chapter
11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes: This is not a complying with, but a confuting of the vain foolish
resolutions of youth; by this he derides their thoughts, and withal gives them
a preservative or antidote against such madness. Know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment.

In my Text, we have,

1. The duty, in the whole words; In which which first, the Act, Remember.
Secondly, the Object, Creator.

2. Here is the adjunct of Time, First, more generally, In the days of the
youth. Secondly, more specially, now.

Let us weigh the words themselves, Remember, if we take it in the sense of the
Philosopher, for the exercise of the Memory, it then includes three things.

First, an exercising of the intellectual faculty of the Soul, which is
Conservativa specierum, whereby we do receive and keep the forms and
impressions of things, and of Truths in our understandings, and so all those
manifestations of God which are made out to the soul.

Secondly, An exercising of the Sensitive part of the Soul, in keeping things,
and Actions, and Providence which are past, whereby we register the things
that God has done, either for, or against us and others.

Thirdly, It contains that which they call Reminiscentiam, which is an
endeavoring to call to mind, or recover those things which are fallen from the
Memory, which are not razed out of the intellectual part of the soul, being
there habitually, but from the sensitive part only: for the present we do not
remember them; but I shall show you the use of this in the scripture; there it
is taken more largely.

1. It signifies sometimes to muse upon a thing, Ps. 62.6.

2. Sometimes to prize, or esteem, or value a thing, Eccles. 9.16.

3. Sometimes to trust in a thing, or person, Ps. 20.7.

4. Sometimes it includes all the service of God, Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12.

Indeed the signification of it is, or may be various; it may be used to
express any motion or affection which is usually joined to our knowledge, or the
exercise of it. Verba cognitionis non solam and nudam (...) sed vivam and
efficacem significant. A man may be said truly to know no more then he knows
with affection, and impression; so remembering, which is nothing else properly
but a setting this knowledge at work, and reviving of those notions which we
have of things, includes not only the act of the Memory, but the Will: for
this is usually moved one way or other by every motion of the Understanding.

We find very often the motions of the Will and Affections set forth by this
word in the Text, Heb. 11.15. Truly if they had been mindful of that Country
from whence they came out, i.e. if they had desired to return again, they might
have had an opportunity.

Jon. 2.7. When my soul fainted in me, I remembered the Lord. This is such a
remembering, says Junius, as does not only bring God to our thoughts, but
carries the whole soul with the greatest intention to mind him, with the
neglect or contempt of all other things. So it is used to express the greatest
affection and favor of spirit that may be found amongst Gods people, Cant.
1.4. We will remember thy Loves, more then Wine, (i.e.) we will take pleasure in
thy loves, and embrace the thoughts of it above all things. So that to remember
God, is to do that which we ought to do, when we remember we should desire him,
exercise our thoughts and meditations strongly about him, and delight our
selves highly in it. Nay remembering does not include only the inward acts of
the soul, the motion of the Will and Affections to such an object now presented
to the Understanding; but it takes in the outward acts too, because the outward
behavior of a man is suited to those impressions which are within. Thus
Ahashuerus his rage against Vasti, is expressed by this phrase, Hester 2. (...)
He remembered Vasti, (i, e.) he talked of her unkindness and rebellion, and
resolved to be revenged of her. Thus the wickedness of Israel, and her whoredom
in her old age is expressed, by a remembering of the whoredom of her youth, Ez.
23.19. Then persons are said to remember any thing when they express the same
in their actions, and do that which speaks out the thoughts of their hearts; so
that to remember God, is to do that which becomes a people to do, who do
remember God; to have God in our mouths, and God in our lives, this is properly
a remembering of God; so that the exhortation here is very full and large, and
may be taken either to be,

1. Of the same extent with that conclusion, v. 13. and a discovery of the fear
of the Lord, wherein it does consist, viz. in a serious constant eying of God.
Or

2. The Text is one Branch of the means prescribed to attain the fear of the
Lord: which is a setting the Lord before us; the other Branch he handles
before; (viz.) the considering of the vanity of the world, and all things in
it; and upon these two considerations of the vanity of the Creature, and the
excellency of the Creator, he persuades to the fear of the Lord; and he
presses them both in order to that conclusion, verse. 13. Fear God, and keep
his Commandments; intimating, That the neglect of God, and of his ways, did
arise from a mistake of the world, and from a forgetfulness of God; therefore,
Remember thy (Creator.)

Qu. Why does he close this title for the Lord, and to present him thus to our
considerations?

A. First negatively, not because this is the most excellent Title or Name of
God; for God has other Names and Titles more glorious then this, although this
be full of glory.

Secondly, Nor that he would bound the thoughts and spirit of man within this
knowledge of God, but would allow him to travel farther then the work of
Creation, as into the works of Providence, and into the works of Redemption,
wherein God has as it were laid the Top-stone of his glory.

Thirdly, He chooses this consideration of God, as being most suitable to the
subject of his Discourse; he had been discoursing of the vanity of creatures,
and beating men off from them, and in opposition to them nothing more suitable
to be set up then the Creator, that they might not fall into that horrid
wickedness too common in men's spirits, mentioned Romans 1.25. Of loving and
serving the Creature more then the Creator.

Fourthly, He mentions this name of God more then any other, because from hence
did follow an universal argument, which reached all sorts of people; this was a
relation which all stood in toward God; he might not have argued from
providence so well; for then it would not have been so strong to the poor as to
the rich; nor from Redemption; for then the unconverted, or the doubting Soul
could not have made equal use of it with those who saw their interest, and knew
it in him through Christ; but as a Creator he stands related to all, good and
evil, rich and poor, high and low, young and old, Jew and Gentile; so that he
that had least from God, had his being, and God as a Creator challenged respect
and service from him; and if he had no more knowledge of God, yet herein he was
to remember God; and if more, then not only as a Creator, but in all his
glory; as verse the thirteenth, Fear God, and keep his Commandments. Thus the
duty; Now the Adjunct of time.

1. In the days, not in a few spare hours. but in the days; and not in a day,
but indefinitely, to exclude none, it must be a constant, a continued work,
every days work; and the nights must not be excluded; for this day is made up
of Morning and Evening; Night and Day do but fill up this.

2. As in the days, so not in what days thou will allot for it, and set
apart; it must not be put off until thy latter or last days, but it must be in
the days of thy youth.

3. Nor will to morrow, or the next day serve the turn, but it must be this
day, the present day, and time is now.

Of thy youth, or of thy choyces; the word here translated Youth, comes from
(...) Elegit, hence is (...) Electus, Juvenis, Quasi ad omnes operas selectus:
and (...) the word here used, The choice or choosing age; the choice then runs
thus, When thou art choosing a suitable object for thine eye, or for thy heart,
toward which all thy afterdesignes shall bend, Oh then think upon God, and
consider whether he be not the best choice.

The wise man in the Text, and the verse preceding, mentions three parts of
Man's life, and expresses them by distinct terms, though in the translation the
two latter are confounded. The first (...)
signifies the New ^orn child. The second (...)
the time betwixt (...)
infancy; and maturity; the same word is used to express the twilight, or
mixture of light and darkness that is betwixt the time of the night and the sun
rising. These says he are vanity, not only vain in the sense that every part
of a man's life may be called vain, but vain in comparison of the third part,
which follows in the Text. These two parts are empty and void, there is nothing
to be expected or found in these, because in them we make no choice, but are
pleased with every toy. Present things delight the childish age; we do not fix
our spirits upon this or that, as our chiefest good; we drive no designs for
hereafter. But when these vain empty days are past, then comes the third
part, and this promises something; (...) Juventus; aetas selecta.
this is a choice precious hopeful time in comparison of the former; yea indeed
it is almost the only hopeful time of a Man's life; for if he lose this time,
it is ten to one that ever be prove good; for now he begins to fix upon some
thing or other, toward which he bends afterward all his endeavors; he sets up
a Summum bonum, when he comes to days or years of discretion; then he begins to
weigh and value things, and is not contented with what he was, when he meets
with any thing of a a more valuable consideration. Now says the Wiseman, that
thou art come to thy riper years, and art weighing things in this balance in
order to thy settling and fixing thy spirit upon that which shall appear most
considerable, now Remember thy Creator, put him in one scale against all them,
and let reason and Judgment determine whether he be not to be chosen before
all things; see whether his excellency will not weigh down all these vanities,
but do it in the day that thou art choosing, and when reason and judgment are
quickest, and least engaged, least the engaging of these blind thee, that thou will not see the scale when it turns. We have a Scripture which will give much
light to this, Heb. 11.24, 25. Moses when he came (to years) refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs Daughter, and chose rather to suffer with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; when he came to weigh
and consider things, and to make his choice, then he refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs Daughter, then he threw away the Court Honors and Pleasures
but it was in judgment, he chose rather to suffer with the people of God; he
saw something of greater importance to him. Before this time he was pleased well
enough with Egyptian toys and trifles of the Court, but now comes his choosing
time, he must be seted in his spirit, and he weighs all, and upon a serious
survey of both sides, he throws away the Rattles which he had played withal
before, and he makes another choice; he chose rather to suffer. Thus we have
the sum of the words, in the days of thy choice.

Here is a second word to make it more full. In thy choice days, in the days
that thou art fittest for Meditation or Action, then set the Lord before thee;
do not put off the thoughts of God till a time when thou shall be altogether
unfit for him, and his Service, till a time wherein thou will be fit for
nothing; these are the choice days, and thy youth is the choosing time. We have
the same word, which in my text is rendered youth, read chosen men, 2 Samuel 6.1.
David gathered together the chosen men of Israel, the choicest and fittest men
for action; now thou art fittest for the Service of the Lord; and this sense
seems to correspond much with the text; for it agrees much with that which is
but a Paraphrase upon these words, before the evil days come, when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them; Do not say in thy heart, I will try what the
world will afford me now, and when I have sucked the breasts of her consolation
dry, and there no more to be had there, then I will try what is to be had in
Religion, what the ways of God will yield; this Religion is a thing only fit
for old Men and Women that have nothing else to do, whose palats are grown old,
and cannot relish or taste the delights which youth affords, or whose memories
are grown weak, and have forgotten the pleasures of their past days; these may
begin to think of Heaven now their blood is grown cold, and their senses fail
them, that they can hardly distinguish between sweet and bitter; when we have
worn out our selves in the world, and crippled our Bodies, and worn out our
Senses in turning every stone, and sucking every flower which will afford us
any comfort, then will we creep to our Closets and cloister up our selves there
too, and spend the remainder of our days in praying and sighing; but for our
youth, you must excuse us; we will take this time to our selves to eat, drink,
and be merry, and put death and Judgment, and every troublesome thought from
us. O say not thus in your heart, but in your choice days begin thus work; for
no day nor time is too precious for the Lord.

I have now briefly opened the words, I shall propound such Observations as
will naturally flow from them.

1. That every man has a choice, or choosing time.

2, God expects that at that time we should choose him.

3 It is a great advantage to begin with the Lo^d, before we are too far
engaged in other choyces.

4. Remembering and considering, or setting God before our eyes, is a great
Duty, and a great help toward the fear of the Lord.

5. No time so fit for this great work as the youth.

I shall not handle all these distinctly, but shall dravv them into one grand
Conclusion, and in handling that, I shall touch and clear up all these as
branches of that great Truth which lies in the words, which is this.

DOCTRINE.

That nothing conduces more to the fear of the Lord (as a means on our part)
then a seas nable and timely setting him before our eyes: A serious and a
solemn calling forth of the Attributes of the glorious God, and comparing and
weighing them with the vanity of the creatures, does wonderfully conduce to the
ballancing our spirits, and to the setting and fixing them upon God as our and
chiefest good, and at least to overawe our spirits with a fear of him, if not
to draw forth the heart unto a love of him. For it is very clear, that all the
wickedness amongst men does arise from a forgetfulness of God. David renders a
reason of the wickedness of his enemies, Psalm. 54.3. they did not set God
before them; For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after
my soul: they have not set God before them. And in that forementioned place,
Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12. the Lord clearly expounds disobeence and forgetfulness of
himself one by the other. I shall not spend time in proving this Truth
generally, but shall divide my discourse into these four parts.

1. To enquire how and what of God is to be set before our eyes, to help
forward this work.

2. How the setting of the Lord before us does further this fear in our hearts.

3. How to keep the Lord in our eye when we have him there.

4. Why the young man especially must set upon this duty.

For the first, How and what of God is to be set before our eyes, to help
forward this work.

Answ. I Will begin with that in the Text, Consider him as thy Creator; this does
surely reach thee; this reaches Angels, and Men, and Devils; in In ipsa voce
creatoris occultum habetur Argumentum; look to thy very being, or to the beings
of thy Creature-enjoyments, and Nature will tell thee by these, That God is to be
feared, that thou do ow him homage and service; think what God may challenge
from thee as thou art his Creature; the Apostle condemns the Heathen that they
did not walk up to this light, Romans 1.21. Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God. God complains from hence of unjust measure from his
people, Ezekiel. 16.18, 19. Thou have set mine Oil and mine Incense before them;
my meat also which I gave thee, fine flower, and oil, and honey wherewith I
fed thee, thou have even set it before them for a sweet savor, Hosea 2.8. For
she did not know that I gave her wine and oil, and multiplied her silver and
gold which they prepared for Baalim. And may not the same complaint be made
against us, That we offer up our time, and strength, and parts to the World and
Sin, and Lust, and Satan? Did they give you these things? Are these your
Creators? Did ^hey give you your being? or your estate? or your precious time?
May we not say to all these as the Apostle said, Romans 8.12. We are not debtors
to the flesh, nor to the world, nor sin, we owe them nothing; no, but we are
debtors to God; we owe him our time, and strength, and parts, and estates, and
lives, and whatsoever we have, or are; for of him and from him are all things,
to him therefore be glory. Not to fear, love, and serve God, is to blot out the
notion of a Creator out of our hearts, and to forget we are creatures.

Secondly, Consider him in his Power; This is frequently in Scripture made an
argument to fear the Lord, if we look to his power over the creatures; so David
often, Psalm 86.8, 9, 10, 11. Among the gods there is none like to thee, O God.
neither are there any works like unto thy works, verse. 9. All Nations whom thou
have made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy
name, verse. 10. For thou art great, and do wondrous things; thou art God
alone. We see David makes choice of God to fear and serve him; because of his
greatness in the works of his hands; he concludes, That surely God was able to
do great things for him also.

Secondly, if we consider his great power, especially over us. Christ makes use
of this, Matthew 10.28. Fear not them which are able to kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell. Does the world call for thy service, or does this or
that great man's lust call for it? If thou do refuse them, can they revenge
thy neglect of them at that rate which the Lord can? Can they deal with their
despisers as the Lord does with his? Psalm. 5.17. The wicked shall be turned
into hell, and all the Nations that forget God; Or can they reward their
servants as God does his? Have they the Keys of the grave, and Heaven, and Hell
at their girdles? Have they a power suitable unto his?

Thirdly, Consider how infinitely the Lord is above all thy services; not
taking this into consideration breeds so many put offs; men think any thing
good enough for God, the very dreggs of their time and strength, the weak and
the lame will serve him, and a little of that too; but did thou consider the
vast disproportion that is betwixt God and thee, thou would not think all
thy time too much, nor the choicest of it too good for him who is infinitely
above all that thou can offer up unto him, Psalm 16.2. My goodness extends
not to thee; whatever thou give him, thou can not enrich him, thou can
not add unto him; nay, when thou have given him all, thou have given him
nothing worthy of him; thou have very little reason to boast, but rather to
wonder that the Lord will give thee leave (such a poor wretch) to take his Name
into thy mouth. If this consideration were kept in all duties and addresses
unto God, it would make us more frequent in duties, and more serious; it would
check those vain thoughts of men, who think the last hour soon enough, and the
shortest hour long enough, and the slightest service good enough for the great
and infinite God, who shall one day despise their image, Psalm. 73.20. As dream
when one awaketh, so, O Lord, wh^^ thou awakest thou shall despise their Image.

Fourthly, Consider how the Lord stands upon points of Honor; his Name is very
precious, and he will exalt it either in your souls, or upon them; although you
may think it a slight thing, and what injury or wrong is it to him if I go on a
little longer, and enjoy this lust or that? the Lord has made such proffers to
thy foul in Christ, that the world cannot parallel, and he stands upon point of
Honor in this case; Most he wait and be put off? and every base Lust, and
every lying vanity entertained, and his Service laid aside? May not I say as
Isaiah to Ahaz, Isa. 7.13. Is it a small thing to weary men, but you must weary
my God also? A man will not endure this that has any spirit of a man in him,
that has respect to Honor, he will not put it up to be laid aside, and so his
inferiors accepted upon unworthy terms, when he is put off, who offered terms
more honorable and advantageous? the Lord calls this a double evil, Jer. 2.11,
12, 13. Has a Nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods? but my people
have changed their glory for that which does not profit. Be astonished O ye
heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord,
ver. 13. For my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that
will hold no water. It was one evil, and very dishonorable to God, that his
people did forsake him; it was a blemish which the Heathen did not cast upon
their gods; but it was a double dishonor to God that they went off upon bad
and base terms. Remember all you that are invited daily to come to Christ, and
yet come not, notwithstanding those glorious proffers which he makes to souls;
and you that pretend to come, but come not in good earnest, your hearts are
going another way; O see that you go off upon good terms. God will one day make
you know to what loss you go off when you leave him, and how much he takes
notice of the dishonor you cast upon him, by going off to things so infinitely
beneath him.

Fifthly, Consider the Mercy of God in Christ; this is the great Argument to
draw the Soul unto God; these are the cords of a man, the winning argument to
prevail with an ingenuous spirit; I am sure they are strong arguments to
Saints, if not to men; Paul knew the weight and strength of this kind of
arguing, when he ventered so much duty upon it as the giving up all to Christ,
Romans 12.4. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that you present your
bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service.

Now that I might help this consideration to its full weight and value, I shall
divide it into two parts.

1 Consider External and Temporal Mercies; these are Motives; What is there
that thou do enjoy but it is Mercy to thee? and the least of all these has a
voice if thou could understand it, and it importunes thee to look up to him
from whence is every good gift, Acts 14.17. Nevertheless he left not himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness: They bear
witness that God is merciful, although I do not think with some, that they
bear witness of Christ, and of special pardoning mercy by him.

2. Consider, God has more mercy, that he might have more fear; he has
Spiritual mercies for your souls, Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with thee, that
thou may be feared. It is impossible that the true fear of the Lord should
be planted and advanced in the heart without this consideration; this mercy is
pardoning mercy, it is Soul mercy; other considerations with this are useful
to balance the Spirit; but this is principally attractive; this is the very
door of the fear of the Lord; where this is shut, there is no way unto
repentance. Jerem. 2.25. But thou saidest there is no hope, for I have loved
strangers, and after them I will go. And Chap. 18.12. And they said there is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart. If God had no mercy for men, it would be vain to
persuade them to fear; if men had not some kind of hope, they would be
hellishly wicked.

And that I might yet advance this Motive in your Souls, take these particulars.

1. He is willing to be reconciled to thee although he can destroy thee, 2 Cor.
5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ, that you be reconciled to God; he has ways enough
to make thee stoop without wooing of thee, and can dash thee in pieces when he
pleases; yet he beseeches thee, he entreats thee though he has no need of
thee, but thou have need of him; what need has God of thee more then of the
Heathens, or Indians, or Turks, who know him not? he could as easily have
invited them as thee; at this day he invites thee, though thou art as the
damned (thy nature is as corrupt as theirs, and thy sins as great as others)
before they were cast in there, Romans 3.22, 23. There is no difference; for all
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. O what impression should these
have upon thy soul, if thou would give them their full allowance upon thy
soul in meditation!

2. He moves them to fear him by his mercies; he might require it by his power
without mercy; he might have called for as much duty, and have given no
encouragement at all unto it; but beloved, what heartensnaring language does he
speak, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. The Lord might have chosen
another manner of Style then this.

3 He offers thee better terms then thou art like to meet withal elsewhere;
the world cannot bid so fair, nor perform so faithfully as he does. See that
Promise which the Lord makes to the returning sinner, Isa. 55.1, 2, Ho, every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye,
buy and eat; yea come buy wine and milk without price verse. 2. Wherefore do ye
spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and
let your soul delight in fatness, etc. Search and find where the Devil, the
World and Sin promises, and when and to whom he gives such a thing as is held
out attainable in following God.

4 If thou have tasted of mercy, thou can not but acknowledge that it is an
engaging thing, Tit. 2.11.12. For the grace of God that brings Salvation,
has appeared unto all men, teaching us that denying all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world.

5. If thou pretendest to Saintship, and are not drawn by mercy, surely thou
have a frame of spirit much different from the Saints of old; for the love of
God constrained them, 1 Cor. 5.4. they had beseeching spirits, which were very
much affected with such arguments, as I showed you, Romans 12.1.

6. If these are not persuasive motives, how then art thou under that promise,
Hos. 3.5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter days.

7. Is it not reason that thou should do Gods work, when he has provided
one to do thine? he has sent a Christ unto thee, who offers himself to be thy
life, and thy strength; and he tells thee, That he has left Heaven for a time,
that he might come down, and make such an offer of himself to sinners; and will thou not leave a little of the world to offer up thy self to him? Shall the
kind proffers of Christ in the Gospel meet with no returns? Can thou do less
then offer up all that thou have, or art, as a reasonable sacrifice to him, who
so freely offers thee himself in his Son to be thy righteousness, wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption? In a word, to be all and in all to thy soul.
Can thou deny him thy time, who offers thee Eternity? Is thy present time,
and condition, and ability too good to give out to him who offers thee more in
Christ then thy present condition is able to bear, more then can enter into
thine heart to conceive? Reserve nothing from him of thy little, who gives thee
with a reserve for this reason, because thy present condition is not capable of
all he intends thee.

Sixthly, Consider how quick the Lord is with some men to cut them off without
giving them many warnings, or suffering them to grow up to such a measure of
sin as he does others, as he did Nadab and Abihu; And that Gods coming to
Judgment will appear quick when ever it comes. 1. Though thou may have a
smooth time in sin, yet when that time of pleasure in sin is past, it will seem
very short. Ask the old man, and he will tell that his Youth was quickly gone,
and Age came suddenly upon him; Is not the life past like a tale that is told?
If God should suffer thee to live a full age, and then cut thee off in thy sin,
would not thou seem to go down quickly into hell?

2. If you compare the time past with Eternity; God is not slack concerning his
coming, says the Apostle; you will find him quick enough when he comes. Art
thou come, say the spirits, to torment us before the time? as some say, before
the end of the World, and I exclude not that; but how did the Devil know the
end was not yet? But it intimates that although the Devil had so many thousand
years to tempt, yet he thought it too soon to be troubled.

3 He may be quick in that he will be unwelcome; and unwelcom guests, when ever
they come, will come too soon.

4 When he comes latest, he will come before thou look for him; he will
come unawares, and so will be quick with thy soul; notwithstanding all this
patience, the evil servant said not I have no Master, nor that his Master will
not come, but he delayeth his coming, Matthew. 24 48, 49. this was the cause of
his ungodliness. But what says Christ? The Master of that Servant shall come in
an hour when he looks not for him; these supposed delays on Gods part, breed
delays and neglects on our part, Matthew. 25.5. while the Bridegroom slept, the
good slept as well as the bad; it is a consideration for Saints, as well as for
sinners, to quicken up their spirits, and to stir them up to a serious minding
of God. The Apostle lays down a very good preservative against this, James
5.9. Grudge not one against another brethren; behold the judge stands before
the door; at the door of your houses, at your Shop doors, at every Tavern door,
and Alehouse, as thou passest in at thy Chamber door, at the door of every day,
and night, and providence, and he is ready to come and call thee to account
without any warning: Not some Officers or Forerunners, but he himself is
coming without notice, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the
day of God? the setting this day near us, is a quickening consideration to rouse
up the Saints.

Seventhly, Consider the patience and forbearance of the Lord; and if thou do
rightly weigh them, they will be sufficient Motives to this great work of the
fear of the Lord. The wise man does conclude it as an evidence of a wicked
heart to take advantage to himself from the forbearance of the Lord Eccles.
8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the Sons of men is fully set in them to evil; and the Apostle
argues it at least an argument of an ignorant, if not a stubborn spirit, Romans
2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance and long
suffering not knowing the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? He draws
out this Dilemma with which he galls every one that refuses to return under
mercy and patience; either thou despisest the goodness, thou have a
God-despising heart where ever thou art; or at last if we put a fairer gloss on
it, and the best which it will bear, thou have an ignorant heart, which does
not understand the natural tendency of every dispensation of God, and
especially this under which thou art, this of patience and forbearance. Here is
a consideration which reaches every soul this day before me. And therefore lay
it home; you are all under the patience of God, at least now.

If this consideration do not quicken up to duty, pray read impartially the
frames of your spirits in those words last read unto you: And to help this
Consideration forward, pray think in your selves what a base unworthy thing it
is to make the great Jehovah to wait upon such a vile wretch as thou art, that
he must follow thee at thy heels like a Drudge while thou followest thy
pleasures, and walk in ways which he abominates. Christ used it as a mighty
Argument to the Spouse, that he had waited upon her all night, Cant. 5.2. My
undefiled for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night: It was too long for him to wait a night; but how many nights and days
has the Lord waited on some of you? How have thou suffered him to follow thee
from Alehouse to Alehouse, and from Tavern to Tavern, and there he has checked
thee; and from thence to thy Bed, and from thence to the Tavern again, and from
thence into thy Employment, and from thence to the Ordinance, and has there
convicted thee? and yet thou think it nothing to make the Lord wait as a
Drudge at thy heels to this very day; is not this very unworthy dealing with
the great God? Nay consider what will be the end of all this; this patience and
forbearance of God will cost thee deer which thou do abuse; it will be said
when God upon account will charge thee with so many days Attandance, so long I
waited upon thee in Providence, and so long in ordinances, and you made a
Drudge of me, made me to follow you from one Alehouse to another, and from one
Tavern to another, and here I checked you, and in your Chamber, and upon your
sick-beds, but all this attendance was slighted.

How will thou come off? Do thou think not to account for this? will it not be
a heavy account, when all the patience and forbearance of God will come in
against thee? then you shall understand that saying common amongst us, but
little considered and less applied, Laesa patientia in furorem vertitur.

Eighthly consider, Although patient, yet he is just; and although he seem slow,
yet he is sure; and without peradvanture he will call thee to an account one
day for all thy ways and works whether good or evil. The necessity and use of
such a consideration as this we find, 2 Corin. 5.10.11. For me must all appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men. He propounds this as an
engaging Motive to the Saints, to seek for, and to keep a clear sight of their
interest in God, or to such a walking before him as may be acceptable to him
through Christ.

And in the second place he lays it down as a pressing consideration to those
who are acquainted with the Lord, and with his dispensations, to mind other men
with these things, and to use all means by persuasive ways to draw them out of
the snares of the Devil; and from this argument he presses to a speedy
repentance. Acts 17.30, 31. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but
now commands all men every where to repent. Verse. 31. Because he has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that
man whom he has ordained. I wish that this consideration might come as near to
you, as it did to Felix, Acts 24, 25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix trembled; only thus, that it may have
better success, that it may not be so soon shaken off from you as from him. I
am sure it is such a consideration that if it were well and seriously weighed,
it would be a great help to balance thy spirit when most vain. This we may see
by the use that the wise man makes of it, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in
thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou that
for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. He propounds it to him
that was resolved to have no other Counselors but his own eyes and heart, to
the young man in the midst of his madness; intimating, that if there were any
thing that would prove a remora to his spirit, when he was under full sails of
vanity, this was like to do it. If any Cable was strong enough to hold the ship
in these rough Seas, it was this, Remember thou shall come to judgment.

Ninthly, Consider the Lord in judging shall not only judge men for sins of
commission, but sins of omission also; and this shall condemn men before the
Lord in the great day. We find the servant condemned for not improving his
Talent, Matthew. 25.25, 26, and 41, 42. verses. We have the Judgment of the
great day passing upon this Indictment; not that sins of commission should be
left out; but first, either to show that if men did but truly measure
themselves by omissions, there was enough to condemn them.

Secondly, Or because it was not questioned among the Jews but sins of
commission would be charged, and therefore Christ is silent in that point.

Or thirdly, He insists only upon this as by a surplusage of reason, inferring
the other; that if men should perish for not doing good, what should become of
those who did evil?

Fourthly, to meet perhaps with those who contented themselves with a negative
righteousness, to meet with the Scribes, and Pharisees, and civil persons.

Fifthly, That he might condemn that sin of persecution; if men should be
damned for not comforting the Saints, what shall become of those that did
persecute them?

Tenthly, Consider that the Lord in judging will not only judge men for outward
acts, but for thoughts; also, that the Lord searches and tries the Reins and
Heart, and knows thoughts. I need not prove it; I hope it is granted on all
hands; and if this be granted, it will follow as I have propounded, that the
Lord judges for these things, or else why should he search to know them: But
if it be not plainly deducible from thence; then consider, that it was part of
the Lords charge against the old World, when he proceeded to judgment with it
for sin, in such a severe manner, Genesis 6.2. And God saw that the wickedness of
man was great upon the earth, and that every imagination of his heart was only
evil continually. He makes use of the wickedness of the thoughts,

1 As a reason of that great plague.

2 As an argument of the greatness of the sin of man; and when the Lord calls
men to repentance, he does not only invite them to leave their outward gross
Idolatries and wicked practices, but he invites them to come in, and leave
their evil thoughts behind them, Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts. Now if we did but remember that the Lord
is the Judge of our thoughts, it would help to set a hedge about them; and til
this be done, how can the great work of remembering the Lord prosper with us?

Eleventhly, Consider the Holiness of God; it is counsel from the Lord him
self, Levit. 19.2. Say unto all the Congregation of Israel, Ye shall be holy,
for I the Lord your God am holy; Pressing to holiness, he uses this as the
chief, if not the only Argument; for I the Lord your God am holy. And David
presses the same thing in other terms, Psalm 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God,
and worship him at his footstool, for he is holy. A world of wickedness does
arise in men's hearts from the mistakes which men have of God, Psalm 50.21.
These things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self. There was nothing made the Heathens more
bold in sin, then the Fables of their Poets who fastened all manner of
wickedness upon their Gods; when they heard how their Gods committed Adultery
and Rapes, they thought they might sin by a Law; and there is a mavelous
pronenesse in men, to take up such thoughts of God as may serve to strengthen
themselves in sin. There is a necessity of removing such vain and gross
conceits of God, in order to the setting up of his fear in our hearts; and
there is nothing more needful to be set up then this, viz. the holiness of the
Lord; for we frame the worship of God according to the apprehensions we have of
him. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; such as Gods name is to
us, so will his fear be in us, and such worship will he have from us. If we
know him by the name of his holiness, then we shall be careful to sanctify
that name in his worship; worship the Lord in the beauties of holiness: this
leads you to the tenth verse, where he says, his Name is Holy; and therefore
concludes no worship suitable to him but that which is in the beauty of
holiness. Oh if we did but carry deep apprehensions of Gods holiness with us
into all duties and employments, how would it aw our hearts, and cast a luster
and glory upon all our actions? the glory of Gods holiness would appear in
every thing we set about.

Twel^thly, Consider that God compares our actings in spiritual things, with
our actings in carnal or civil things. If this were thought on, it would put
men upon seriousness in the things of God; see how the Lord upbraids Israel for
want of this frame, Mal. 1.8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it
not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now to
thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee or accept thy person, says the
Lord of Hosts? the Lord takes it unkindly and in great disdain, when we are
circumspect and careful in our behavior before men, and careless or less
wary and watchful toward him; do thou study the frame of thy spirit as much
when thou come before the Lord, as thou do thy outward garb when thou art
to appear before some great man? do thou consult as much before hand for thy
acceptance, as thou would in a case of life and death with thy Governor?
Thou think when thou have any thing to present to him, it is never well
enough; but any thing for the Lord, if it be but the lame and the blind; a
blind devotion, a few lame Prayers and Services, that have never a good leg to
stand upon; these are presented in haste to the Lord, and thou think it is
all well enough; and do thou think that the Lord will let all these things
pass by without comparing them one with another? Is it not upon this ground
that the Apostle exhorts believers after this manner, Romans 6.19. As you have
yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity:
even so now yield your members servants unto righteousness and to holiness. It
is not enough that thou art willing to do some things for God; but art thou as
willing to do as much for him as ever thou were for thy self, for sin, and
lust? Do thou think that when thou have served them night and day with the
heat and fervency of all thy affections, that he will be put off with a cold,
sleepy, drousie profession? Will he not say, See such a man pretends to
Religion, to act for me: did he act so heavily and drousily for sin? does he
act so for himself in things of self-concernment? Away with such pretenders,
says the Lord, that will not act for me at the same rate that they have acted
for the world, and for themselves, and their own lusts.

13. Consider what an honor it is to be employed for God, to be called the
servant o^ the most High. David envied the very Sparrow that built about the
Altar when he was shut out; and will thou shut out thy self when God calls thee
to such honorable employment? Psalm 84. the people of God who have known how to
value their relations to God, have valued the very worst things of Christ, and
the least employment for him above the best things in the world, as in Moses,
Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's daughter,
choosing rather to suffer with the people of God then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, verse. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
then the treasures in Egypt. And in David, Psalm 84.10. For a day in thy Courts
is better than a thousand. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of my
God, then to dwell in the tents of Wickedness. Art thou seeking and thirsting
after honor, and honorable employments? behold here it is, to remember thy
Creator, to be busied about him, and for him; thou art never like to get so
much honor and repute at the last by serving sin and Lust, as thou may get
in serving the Lord, Romans 6.21. What fruit had you in those things whereof ye
are now ashamed? for the end thereof is death. You have the two Genuine and
Natural fruits of sin, Shame, and Death; and to this we may oppose that of the
Wise man, Prove. 3.16. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left
hand riches and honor, Prove. 4.8. Exalt her; and she shall promote thee; she
shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her.

14. Consider his great bounty to his Servants. You shall always hear them that
are sincere with him, speak well of him, yea very largely of his freeness and
fullness to their Souls. I might compass you with a cloud of Witnesses, if I
should call in all the Saints in the Old and New Testament, to speak out their
experience, (which they would willingly do to commend their Lord and Master to
the world) but I shall only call in two or three to speak for all the rest.
Genesis 32.10. says Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and
of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy Servant; for with my staff I
passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. He found when he had
cast up his accounts he was paid with an overplus; it would be too long a
story to hear David tell how good he had found God; you have him largely
speaking of the bounty and goodness of God to his Soul, Psalm. 34. upon which he
spends the whole Psalm: yet while he was speaking he feared that men would
hardly judge aright of this by hearing; they would apprehend more by tasting;
he calls therefore upon men, verse, 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good;
blessed is the man that trusts in him. God is better known by experience then
by notion; he would persuade them not to content themselves with hear-sayes
that God was good, but desires them to make trial of him, and of his ways;
certainly David knew the force of this Argument to draw Souls to be more and
more in love with God. Ps. 66.16. Come and I will declare what God has done
for my soul; hearing how liberal and free the Lord is to others, encourages
us to expect great things from him also, specially if we find him generally so
free. We know a Servant is very ambitious to serve a free Master, and if he be
generally free to all his Servants, it encourages him to expect something in
his service; if he hears every Servant in the Family to commend him, and cry up
his bounty. Thus it is with God; all that are his Servants in deed speak very
freely of him; David gives a notable hint of this. In his Temple does every one
speak of his glory: he lays this down I suppose as an argument to press to
this duty; he had used many others from the Works of God, he draws one from the
practice of his Saints because they do speak well of him and tell large
experimental stories of his glory.

15. Consider his faithfulness in his Promises; he is yea, and Amen with Souls,
he is at a word; what he promises he gives, and much more then what we can
expect. David uses this as an argument, because there is no unfaithfulness in
him; there was never any Soul that ventured on any promise of his, that ever
found him worse then his word; nay when he promised, and that very largely too,
and by them has heightened the desires and expectations of his people, he has
reserved to himself a liberty of coming in beyond their expectations, 1 Cor.
2.9. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them which love him. If
these considerations were faithfully laid together, and seriously weighed and
applied to our spirits, would they not persuade us to draw that conclusion
which we find upon the same account, Jer. 10.7. Who would not fear thee, O
King of Nations? and if we do not learn the skill of setting the Lord in such
considerations as these before us, we shall never excel in his fear.

The second Head follows; How this considering and setting God before us, does
make way for, and advance the fear of God in our hearts. I shall explain this in
the ensuing particulars.

First it serves to balance and six the vain, light, and frothy unconstant
spirit of man: it helps much to the putting his heart into a serious frame by
setting the glory of the great Omniscient and Omni-present God before him; men
will be more circumspect in their behaviors, when they conceive themselves to
be in the presence of some great one; the want of this makes men vain and vile
in the World, Psalm. 73.11, 12. And they say, how does God know? and is there
knowledge in the most high? Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the
world, they increase in riches; does God know? say they, we are not under the
eye of the Lord; and therefore we need not trouble our thoughts about him; and
what follows? these are the ungodly; ungodliness in practice must needs follow
those that have cast the thoughts of God far from them; but would not much of
the vanity of our spirits and the formality of our hearts be beaten down, if we
could but set the glory of the Lord this day before us? if we did consider with
whom we have to do in Worship; would it not advise us to seriousness in our
addresses to him? surely it would be a curb and check to the vanity of men's
spirits, which does now wonderfully increase through the neglect of a due and
serious remembering of the Lord.

Secondly, It would much help forward the fear of the Lord, by humbling and
abasing of us before him. Humiliation is the very ground work of holiness here;
and as this work thrives in the Soul, so does the work of Sanctification
prosper in and upon us; therefore whatsoever does conduce to the perfecting or
advancing the work of humiliation in the Soul, must needs help forward the true
fear of the Lord, and the work of Sanctification; but there is nothing that
does more naturally humble the Soul then a true sight of God. This we may see,
Isa. 6.5. Then said I, Woe is me, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts. And in Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self in
dust and ashes. We see how one glance of God did work upon them; how much more
would a continual frame of beholding God in his glory, and as he has been
presented, bring creatures down to lie in the dust? O therefore if you would
have much of the power of Sanctification, study the Soul humbling and abasing
Truths and Attributes of God; it is a seasonable advice to our times.

Thirdly, it crucifieth the World, and keeps that always under a cloud before
us; and how necessary this is to the furthering of the fear of the Lord, let
those speak who have much to do in the world, and any thing to do with their
own hearts; they shall find, that the faster the world dies to them, the more
they shall live to God. The soul never thrives better in Spiritual things then
when the world and the glory of it is veiled to it; for then the affections
have liberty to Spiritual things, and the World has less influence upon them;
now this serious consideration of God, helps on these two ways.

1 By drawing our hearts to look through the Creature unto God. Or,

2 By directing us to look down from God upon the Creature. If we take it the
first way, then it crucifieth the World, by leading the Soul through the
visible to the invisible glory of God, Romans 1 20. For the invisible things of
him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; it suffers not the
Soul to stick and loyter in the surface of any created glory, but it strives to
comprehend him who fills this and that Creature with his glory. The Soul uses
the Creature as a man uses a pair of Spectacles to look through them; and he
is not busy eying them, though he looks steadily upon them, but he is taken up
in eying the letters and words, and things which he discerns through them; this
is the true use of the Creature to look through it, and not to be bounded and
terminated in it; and the Soul that sets the Lord much before him, learns thus
to pass through every thing unto the Lord, who is the center of his thoughts;
and by doing so the affections are fixed with the glory of God, and it takes
little notice of the Creature which it passes by, having a more excellent
object in his eye.

If we consider it in the second way propounded, then it crucifieth the world;
thus it looks down from the Lord to the Creature, and so it beholds it at a
disadvantage; and this view of the Creature either lessens it, or darkens it;
as we see, if a man behold any thing from the top of some high Tower, it seems
very small to him, what it does to him that stands level with it; so it is with
men that converse with God, and walk with God, they behold the Creature afar
off, and much beneath them, and they seem not so bigg to them as they do to
those who stand upon the earth; for by this means the Creature is darkened; as
we find by example, That if a man looks steadily on the Sun, he shall find a
mist upon every thing that he beholds immediately after; so let a Soul that has
been contemplating, and considering the goodness and glory of God, take a view
presently of the Creature, and how cloudy and misty will it appear?

Fourthly, It stirs up choice breathings, and longings after God, and the
enjoyment of him; the Soul by lying on God in Christ, begins to see him as the
only desirable one, the choice good, the suitable and the satisfying good, and
from hence proceeds choice breathings after him; see one of these, Psalm 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his temple. Here was one that was enamoured after God,
and his ways; he had seen so much of the beauty and excellency of God that he
was wonderfully taken with it, and would wish to spend all his days in the
beholding of it; this frame we find the Disciples in when they had but a
glance of the glory of Christ, Matthew 17.4. Master, it is good for us to be
here; and these experiences beget choice breathings. David would spend al his
time not only in beholding but enquiring also; beauty discovered begets
breathings suitable to discoveries* The more God is seen, the more desired; he
did not dream of a contemplative life as some do, wherein we should be only
busied in beholding, and be freed from enquiring; he desired no such
perfection. We do not find so many choice breathings of any of the Saints
recorded as of David; and indeed there is enough spoken of him, to testify him
to be a man of the choycest affections; and one reason of this was (as I shall
afterward show you from hence) he was a constant eyer of God, he was still in
his thoughts; from hence did so many sweet breathings flow; see a few of them,
Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I
come and appear before God! There is panting and thirsting after God; yet he
goes higher in his affections, Psalm 84.2. he longs, yea even faints, and
yet he exceeds, Psalm 119.20. My soul breaks for the longings that it has
unto thy Judgments. What manner of breathings were these after the Lord, and
after his ways! all these did flow from an experimental taste of God, and the
excellency of his ways; and when the Soul has found out the sweetness of the
presence of God, and his ways, it will no longer be contented with broken
cisterns which will hold no water; it will not live upon that which is not bread,
and which satisfies not, but it flies to God and Christ, and nothing else will
satisfy the soul, Isaiah 55.1, 2. It says to it self, as the Lord says,
Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness; there is bread and water,
and marrow, and fatness* I will up (says the Soul) to my Fathers house, there
is bread enough and to spare. Oh, if we did but eye the Lord more, we should be
more acquainted with those choice breathings of the Saints.

Fifthly, It begets an assimilating love; the discoveries of God made out and
fastened upon the Soul, in a constant and serious frame of eying God, do
wonderfully move the Soul to love, raise very strong affections, and these do
strongly carry the soul after likeness and conformity to the good which we see
and know of God; the Soul would fain be like him, and does by degrees grow into
the Image and likeness of that beauty and glory which it beholds in the
Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory. Souls that
are much conversant with God in Christ, and are much in admiring and beholding
God in him, do grow much (although perhaps insensible to themselves) into the
Image of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, It makes Souls active and fruitful; good thoughts make way for good
desires, and they for good actions; how much of time, and of the man do vain
and unprofitable thoughts take up? and what is the fruit of them? Psalm. 10.4,
6, 7. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God;
God is not in all his thoughts; he has said in his heart, I shall not be
moved, for I shall never be in adversity. Verse. 7. His mouth is full of
cursing, and deceit and fraud, and in his tongue is mischief and vanity. Vain
thoughts make way for wicked designs and practices; shut him first out of thy
thoughts, and next deny him in thy works; so on the other hand, the eying of
God feeds and furnishes the soul with sweet Meditations of him, and the fruit
of such meditations in a fruitful conversation, Psalm. 1.2, 3. His delight is in
the law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night. And he
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his
fruit in his season, and his leaf also shall not wither. He joyneth these two
together; as Jacobs Ewes did conceive by eying the Poplars, so does the soul by
eying God.

Seventhly, It brings in a sweet experimental knowledge of God, which is as
fatness unto the soul. Now nothing does so glue the soul to God and his ways,
as this taste and relish which the soul gets of them; and the sweetness is
gotten very much in meditation, Psalm 104.34. My meditation of them shall be
sweet. When he had spent the whole Psalm in beholding the ways and works of
God, he draws this conclusion, My meditation of him shall be sweet; He would
not lay aside the thoughts of God; when he had ceased speaking, he would then
to another duty which should yield him no small comfort; and what sweetness this
was he does excellently express elsewhere, Psalm 63.5, 6. My soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness; my mouth shall praise thee with joyful
lips. Verse. 6. When I remember thee on my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches. And in the connection of the fifteenth and sixteenth verses of
the one hundred and nineteenth Psalm. you shall find delight as a fruit of
meditation on the things of God; I will meditate on thy precepts, and have
respect to thy ways. Verse. 16. I will delight my self in thy statutes, and will
not forget thy word. The heart that sticks close with God, and carries him much
in his eye and thoughts, is never weary of beholding of him; all other Objects
do breed a loathing and weariness in the soul; but it is not so here; the
longer a soul converses with God, the more delight it has in him; enjoyment
breeds hungrings; and those being always satisfying, but not satisfied, breeds
an inconceivable delight in the soul.

Que. 3. How shall I do to keep the Lord in mine eye continually?

Ans. I shall lay down some quickening considerations, which will both engage
us, and assist us in this duty, and then give some practical directions to
further it.

First, Consider that God has an eye continually upon thee, and this will help
thee always to eye him; we know that if we are in any company, and observe
amongst all the persons one who does particularly observe us, we are engaged
much in our eyes to that party; we shall hardly forbear eying such a one as we
observe to eye us; thus it would be with us, if we did but consider that the
Lords eye runs too and fro, and observes exactly all our ways, it would help us
much to seriousness, as being in his presence. I shall propound a few
Scriptures to show you what use they make of this consideration; for I am
confident that there is very little use made of it on all hands; what manner of
men should we be, if we did but walk up and down as a people who are always
under his eye? we should be more mindful of him, if we thought he did more mind
us. David makes the same use of this consideration which I bring it for, Psalm
thirty four, and the fifteenth, The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; he
brings this unto the young man to press him un^o the fear of the Lord, Verse.
11. Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
He lays down the duty in general, and branches it into two particulars, and
presses all with this, The eyes of the Lord, etc. There it is principally used
to the Saints, and we find this very place quoted by the Apostle, 1 Peter 3.12.
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers. And the wise man makes it an universal argument to all sorts,
but especially to the young man, Prove. 5.20, 21. And why will thou my son be
ravished with a strange Woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.
Nay, presses from hence not only circumspection in our actions, but in our
words too; to watch the tongue, to weigh every word that comes out of our
lips, Prover. 15.2, 3. The tongue of the wise man uses knowledge aright, but
the mouth of fools pours out foolishness. The eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good; he is advising to a discreet and wise
ordering of words, not only to speak according to knowledge, but also according
to discretion, to do and speak every thing and word seasonably, and suitably,
and to edification; and this he urges from this, Thou art under the eye of the
Lord; and what sad effects the want of this consideration has brought forth,
let the Scripture, beside our sad experience, declare. Hear what account David
gives of this, Psalm 10.11. He has said in his heart God has forgotten, he
hides his face, he will never see it. He rips open the heart of the wicked,
and shows the reason of his practical wickedness. We have the very sinews of
sin that strengthen the hands of wicked men; They slay the widow; and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless, yet say, the Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard it. If thou would therefore be found walking
in an even path, and avoid the steps of the wicked, keep thine eyes upon God;
and that thou may do this;

First, Consider that God will eye thee whether thou eyest him or no: its the
commendation of a picture when it is drawn so that the eye of it is upon thee
wheresoever thou stand to behold it; the Image of God is rightly drawn upon
thy soul when thou see his eye is always toward thee.

Secondly, Consider that thou live no longer then whilst thou art present
with God, and God with thee; whilst thou walk without God in thine eye, thou
lie under a cloud, and a damp is upon thy spirit; coldness and deadness must
needs seize upon thy heart when it is withdrawn from the eye of the sun, Psalm.
16*11. Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is fullness of joy;
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore; As the Epicure said, A man
does live only whilst he does enjoy his pleasure; So may I say, Thou do live
no longer then thou art with God. See what the Apostle says of such as are
strangers to the life of God, they have a name to live but are dead; or if thou
art not altogether dead, yet thou live only in the root, as the tree does in
winter, when the leaves and fruit fail; who can tell whether it be alive or
dead? there is little difference between a dead one and that; So indeed it is
with the people of God; whilst they neglect this great duty, there is little
difference betwixt carnal people and them.

Thirdly, Consider how thou art engaged to this duty as thou professest thy
self a Christian: it is thy duty as a Professor to walk as Christ walked. He
that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. If thou would know how he walked, consult with Psalm. 16.8. I have
set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be
moved: And if you doubt whether this be meant of Christ or not, see Act. 2.25.
For David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for
he is on my right hand that I should not be moved. You see the fruit which is
from hence; stability in the ways of God; therefore he had assurance that he
should not be moved.

Fourthly, Consider this was David's frame, and therefore not only imitable,
but attainable also, Psalm 25 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, Psalm
139.17, 18. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the
sum of them! If I should count them, they are more then the sands; when I
awake I am still with thee. Why should not this engage us, and encourage us to
endeavor this thing? seeing that the Saints of old have attained unto it, why
should we not go and do likewise?

Fifthly, Consider such a frame of spirit is very dear unto the Lord; and a
People that so live are very precious unto him; he sets much by such a people,
who carry him much in their eye, Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name. God will be sure to think upon those for good, who think
much upon him; the Lord enters their names upon the List for preservation,
takes special notice of them; Not that we should think that the Lord has any
need of a Register to keep things in remembrance; but that the Lord might
hereby (speaking after the manner of men) give his people good assurance that
they should not be forgotten by him; that whoever were neglected in an evil
day, these should be provided for; these are his Jewels as he calls them. Now
we know if a house be on fire, a man will run and catch the Jewels that he has
in his house, or the Children that he has, and save them from the flames; Thus
will God save his precious ones. Oh here you may see how good it is to have God
in our thoughts; for one thought of him shall not be lost; God will not only
cause their prayers to return into their bosoms, but their thoughts shall come
home at such a time.

Sixthly, Consider such a frame will be very sweet unto thee; thou will find
it at present a very choice frame of spirit, to have God much before thee;
David found sweet refreshments here, when he could not find any comfort from
any visible thing; he then had it in his thoughts within him, Psa. 94.19. In
the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm
139.17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum
of them? David seems to be ravished with the sweetness of the thoughts of his
heart; he does as it were, travel with a desire to express that sweetness
which he found in the very thoughts of God; and because they were
inexpressible, he propounds this in a question to the Lord, who only was able
to give an answer, How precious are thy thoughts, O God! The worldlings
thoughts, or the wantons thoughts, or the voluptuous man's thoughts are not,
cannot be half so sweet unto him, as the thoughts of God are to a soul that
sincerely converseth with him.

Seventhly, Consider that the more thou conversest with God, the sweeter will
his name and ways be unto thee; when thou have once made entrance into this
duty, and have tasted the sweetness of it, thou will not know where or when to
end. David speaking in commendation of the ways of God, has this expression, I
know no end thereof. And in that Psa. 119.96. I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. He speaks out eminently his
experience in this thing; that he had seen an end of the perfection of every
way but of this. A man may find something sweet in creatures, but he shall
quickly come to the end of it; only in the ways of God he finds a large field;
there is room enough for his soul; he may travel all his days in them, and
never find an end of their perfection here. He was like the L^viathan taking
his pastime in the mighty waters; the man that sets his hearton any thing
beneath Christ, shall find his bed too short to stretch himself upon; he
crowdeth his soul into a narrow room and place where he cannot be at rest; but
the soul that is busied about the Lord in meditating upon him, has a large
place to walk in; there is no end of his glory, nor of the sweetness of his
ways. We may say of them truly, as the wise man says in another case, The eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. They were not only
David's work, but his recreation, Psalm 119.111. Thy testimonies have I taken as
an heritage, they are the rejoicing of my heart: And this exceeding sweetness
which he found in the thoughts of God, did multiply his thoughts. Psalm 139.17.
How precious are thy thoughts, O God! and the soul multiplies the thoughts
according to what they yield of delight unto it, as the Be often falls on that
flower which yields the most honey.

Eighthly, Consider how thou have carried the world in thine eye constantly for
many days, and months, and years without intermission; thou did never walk
up and down but thou did carry thy worldly thoughts with thee; either
thoughts of profit, or pleasure, or preferment, thou have carried them to thy
bed, and brought them from thence again, they have companied thee sleeping as
well as waking; thou have had no leisure for God, nor for a serious thought of
thy soul, no not so much as under an Ordinance; how many vain, base thoughts
have thou brought to the hearing of the Word, and to other duties! there has
been no time nor place wherein thou have been free from carnal thoughts: Oh now
study to keep thy heart, thy thoughts as close to God, as thou did then to
the world; carry as much of God now with thee into the world, as thou did
then bring with thee of the world into the things of God; it is but reason that
thou should follow God with the same affections and desires that thou did
then follow thy pleasures and profits; with what face can we profess that we
love God, and that our thoughts are upon him, when he is lower in our thoughts,
or less in them then other things either are or have been? See the Apostles
Argument Romans 6 19. I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of
your flesh; for as you have yielded your members servants unto uncleanness, and
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness. May I not use the same? is it not a reasonable
thing, and plain to the judgment of man, that you should honor God as much in
your thoughts as ever you dishonored him, and give up them to him, as you did
formerly give them up to sin and vanity? now remember what the frame of thy
spirit was when thou were vain, thy thoughts constantly so; there was not room
for one serious thought of God, when thou were carnal and worldly, and set upon
thy pleasures, thy thoughts were all that way, and always such. O now think it
not enough to begin to be serious; but be as serious for God as ever thou were
for the world and sin. Make it thy business and thy design; now labor to keep
thy thoughts as busy about the Lord as ever thou did about any thing in the
world; remember the Lord expects a proportionable acting that we act for him,
at the rate that we did against him.

Ninthly, Thou will never repent of living near the Lord, when thou come to
dye; the time which thou have spent this way, in e^ing the Lord, and thy
fore-thoughts which thou have had of Eternity will never trouble thee in that
hour, where thou will mourn only for those hours which thou have spent without
God in the world, when other men shall tremble at the thoughts of death and of
eternity, and at the remembrance of God whom they have not known nor considered
nor yet cared to know; then thou shall rejoice in him whom thou have known, and
loved, and hopest to see, with whom thy thoughts have been long before; when
death shall come to surprise others, it shall deliver thee; and when God shall
come as a stranger, and an enemy to them, he shall be as a long-experienced
friend to thy soul; then thou shall reap the benefit of thy retirements which
men called melancholy thoughts; and he whose thoughts were not as thine, will
wish his end might be as thine. When Oecolampadius lay on his deathbed, asking
a friend that came to visit him what news he brought, and he told him none?
well says he then* I Will tell you news. When all were in expectation what it
should be, or how he that had been confined to his chamber, could tell them
news, Brevi ero apud Christum Dominum, says he; I shall shortly be with
Christ; this was good news to that good man, whose heart had been for him
whilst living, and now rejoiced that he should be more with him dying; And
indeed the consideration of this did so much affect him, he turned all
discourse into this; when they asked whether the light did not offend him
because of his weakness? he l^id his hand on his breast, and said, Abunde lucis
est, here is much light. It is remarkable that of Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. For I am
now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: what comfort he
takes in considering how he had spent his time for God, and how much that
consideration did facilitate his assurance; and he adds this as a fruit of
well-doing, to love the appearance of Christ: But for a wicked man who has
lived all his time ignorantly, or idly, or profanely, either doing his own
things, or other, or evil things, and not regarding the things of the Lord,
will he rejoice at the appearance of Jesus? there will be a horrible crying when
Christ comes at midnight, and finds them secure, and employed in the works of
the night, in surfeiting or in drunkenness. It will be with such as it was with
Pope Adrian, who cried out, O my soul, whither art thou going! thou art going
where thou shall never be jovial nor merry more. O my soul whither art thou
going! Men do generally shake off these thoughts; but when they come to dye,
they are easily confuted; they live now as if there were none to outlive them
but their wives and children, as if there were no God, nor no soul to survive;
their very lives speak the very language of the great Turk when he was dying,
and his Doctors told him he must prepare to go to another world; Is there
another world when I am dead? he thought all had died with him; language fit
for those filthy Dreamers of our days, those superannuated hypocrites, who have
worn out all their profession of Religion, who say men dye as Cats and Dogs,
and therefore they live like Beasts. But as an Antidote against the evil of
their ways, carry this along with thee, Labor to do those things now which
thou would wish thou had done when thou come to dye, and leave those
things undone which thou supposest will not yield comfort in that hour.

Having laid these things down as considerations to quicken to the duty, I
shall give some practical directions to guide you in it, and to further Souls
who would willingly have their hearts set in such a constant frame for God.

First Direction. Have an eye upon thine own heart, and that will constantly
administer occasions to thee of looking after God; thy wants, or enjoyments,
temptations or deliverances, hopes or fears will advise thee to draw nigh to
him; not considering the present frames and tempers of our hearts, makes them
so little Godward; if we were acquainted with our selves, we should be
lessestrangers to him. That man is happy who carries so much an eye over
himself as to know in what frame of spirit he is; That man shall never defer
his going to God, for want of an errant; for his own self observation will
furnish him for matter of duty, either for meditation or action, and the
variety of change with which his heart is clothed will checker his whole life
with prayer, and praise; God is not like to be far from that man's eye and
heart, who is not far from himself, who is conversant at home. If you will be
found in a good and constant frame for God, labor to know thy present frame
whatever it be: the knowing of the frame of thine own spirit does much conduce
to the bettering of it. But if thou look not after thine own heart, but
let it run at random, thou art not like to find it much with God; a heart
not watched, is lost.

Secondly, When thou have gotten acquaintance with thy heart, and find it
wandering from God, labor to engage it as much as thou can to this duty; lay
the weight of the duty before thee, with the excellency, necessity, and benefit
of it, with the danger of neglect, and see what thou can bring thy heart
unto, and try whether this will not engage it to be more with God. We have a
notable passage for our direction in this case, Jer. 30.21. He shall approach;
for who is he that engages his heart for God? God promises to bless the
desires and endeavors of such as take some pains with their hearts in this
thing; I see says the Lord such an one, what pains such a poor creature takes
to draw his heart to me, and how he tuggs and labors at it. Well says the
Lord, does he so? and cannot he for all this bring his heart to it? Does he
complain of the difficulty of the duty? I will cause him to draw near; Jor I
have seen how he has labored to engage his heart. David has an expression
very full, to show how much he had to do with his heart to draw it to God, or
keep it close with God, I have forced my self to keep thy statutes. The word
that is here translated to engage, it signifies to engage by covenanting, or to
become a Surety for any one; so it is used, Genesis 44.32. Thy servant became
Surety for the Lad, so that he intimates that often covenanting with our
hearts, and often covenanting for them with God, is a means to keep them intent
upon him; and though when we have done all, we are too weak to deal with our
hearts, yet God takes notice of those who deal most with their hearts, and
blesses it unto the design which they drive, which is to draw near unto him.

Thirdly, Observe those clouds which do most of all take God from thy eyes, and
watch against them, and where thou meetest with that which has once proved a
snare to thy Soul, and a vail betwixt God and thee, walk with a holy fear, and
wait for a double portion of Grace at such a time; What is it that does lead
thy spirit? Is it thy employment, thy recreation, thy passion, thy cares of
this world, thy carnal relations or companions? it is something thou meetest
withal often, or is it something thou do but seldom meet? if it be a
constant snare, then thou have need to be always watchful because of that; if
it be such a one as seldom molests thee, be sure thou be very careful, and
consider how much grace thou have need of, to wade through that which has once
spoiled thee. A man that is robbed by the way side, will still remember the
place where he lost his Purse, and will be sure to look well about him when he
passes that way again, and go provided to defend himself; if we did but weigh
every condition, and what temptations are in it, or may be in it, and then
consider what grace is needful to bear up a Soul in the same, it would
wonderfully help our spirits to a senious watchfulness, and constancy. I am
now to go forth in my employment, and I find my spirit is ready to be too eager
and intent upon the things of this present world, that I can hardly keep God in
my eye; how great care should I have now of my heart! it is almost every day
lost in that Wilderness in which I am now traveling; I am now to go to my
meat, yet I find that in eating and drinking it is hard to set God before me;
how shall I do for proportionable grace for this? So I am going into such
company where I have lost my heart, and the remembrance of the Lord; oh now for
suitable grace to this condition. Thus if we would weigh the inconveniences of
every condition, and watch against them for hereafter, it would wonderfully
help us against a drowsy dead frame of heart.

Fourthly, Call thy heart often to account where it has been; how little with
God, and why so; and by this means thou shall find out every backdoor that thy
heart has to steal out at from God in a day. David propounds this amongst his
directions to further and to engage men in the fear of the Lord, Psalm 4.4.
Commune with thine own heart in thy bed; do it on the bed, then thou may be
still and quiet; thou can not plead an excuse from distractions; then thou
may argue it out, and have leisure enough to do it; this employment, nor
that, will not call thee off. Do it on the Bed in the end of the day, not to
exclude other times and seasons, but especially do it then when the work of the
day is done, then call thy heart to account, as Masters use to do their
Servants when the work is over; and this time is the most fit and seasonable
time for this duty, because in the evening time thou may find that which in
the morning thou could not foresee; the morning is for the engaging and
preparing; but the evening for examining the heart; for those holes at which
thy heart escapes from thee, in the day, thou could not discern; but in the
evening by perusing thy heart thou may easily discover. A man goes about his
house and views it in all parts, but cannot tell where the Theif should break
in, or go out, and is very secure, thinks himself strong; but when the house is
broken open, and his goods taken away, he traces the Thief by his foot, and he
finds which way he is escaped, and he labors to fortify that place which he
did not suspect before; so perhaps it may be with some of us, we take a view of
our Souls in the morning, and we think all is well; we go forth in the
strength of resolution to keep close with God, but the house is broken open,
and the heart is gone by some back door, which we neither did nor could
foresee: The way to find out this escape, is, to view the house after it is
broken open; and by this means thou may find that it is easier to find a
gap then to foresee it, and when thou have found it, get it shut; by this
means thou may in time find out every door and hole, at which thy wandering
heart goes out from God in the day.

Fifthly, Take heed of walking contrary to thy own light; for the sinning
against that will bring forth cursed effects, which do directly destroy this
frame of spirit which I am pressing to.

The first is this; It blindes the Soul, and by this means in time it will be
so that thou will want an eye to watch thy wandering Soul, and when thou have
put out thine own eyes, thou art like to be a sad Watchman. If we consult with
that of the Apostle, Rom 1.22. because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish heart was darkened; we shall find that there is no speedier
way to lose our light then to sin against it; the very Heathens sinned away
that light they had; and if thou sinnest against more light, thou may lose
more; a sinal injury done to the eye makes a man see the worse for a time at
least, if it do not endanger the losing it; walking contrary to thy light in
small things, may dis-enable thee to see great things for a time; labor so to
walk, as fearing to sin away that light in which thou desire to behold God
and thine own soul.

Secondly, walking contrary to light, although in small things, does estrange
the heart from God; every sin seeks a shelter, but especially sin against light
loves not to behold the light; we do not love to look much on them whom we
cannot behold without a blush. Guilt newly contracted, and fresh in our eyes,
does estrange the soul from God; the creature is unwilling to behold him; as we
see in Adam, he hid himself; especially if it arises from sin against light, no
sin does so much separate from God as this; the sense of the sin of our nature,
or the persuasion that we have committed sins of ignorance, are not such
interrupters of communion with God, as the sin against light; for although they
do humble us before God, yet they do not stir up such a fear and shame in us as
this does, which obstructs our addresses to God; and the reason is plain; for
when a man has done an injury to his neighbor ignorantly, he can easily go
and excuse it; but when he has no excuse to carry with him, he is then hardly
persuaded to draw near. I appeal to experiences of Saints concerning this
Truth; whether it be not a hard thing to look upon God, when guilt sticks fresh
on the soul? I am sure David found it thus, Ps. 40.12. Mine iniquities have
taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up.

Sixthly, Remember that in the midst of all thy designs and endeavors in this
thing, that thou live not upon them, but upon Christ; neglect no duty which may
facilitate this great duty, but remember to believe as if thou did use no
means. Live upon the strengthening promise; for it is the work of Christ to
bring over the heart first to God, and it is his work to keep it close with
God. This is the great Gospelpromise, and we are to wait for the fulfilling of
it in the use of means, Jer. 31.33. After those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people; And Jer. 32.40. God has promised to
heal the backslidings of the soul, after promises and endeavors, and
engagements, and backsliding thoughts, and revolts of the he^rt; thou can
not keep up with God, see what God says, Jer. 3.22. Return to me ye back
sliding children, and I will heal your backslidings; And in Hos. 14.4. I will
heal your backslidings, I will love you freely: See, what precious promises
are these for souls to take hold of: We find how difficult it is to keep close
to God; lay these to heart, take these promises and melt them into petitions;
who knows but that the Lord may do great things for thee, if thou will wait for
him in the promise, when he puts out his greatstrength, and communicates a kind
of omnipotency to poor souls? what is there too hard for him who knows how to
use a promise as a promise? I hint this, Because I find many souls to abuse the
promises of God strangely, and therefore reap but little comfort from them;
they take the promises and turn them into trials, and only examine themselves
by them, and neglect the very end of the promise: As for example, they take a
promise, and say, God has promised such and such things in Christ to his
people, as to put his Law in their hearts, and to keep them from departing from
him, and to heal their backslidings; but I fear it is not so with me, I do not
find these things in my heart, therefore I can take no comfort in the promise.
This is a wronging of the Promise, as much as if thou should say, I will
believe God when I see his word fulfilled, and not before. The Promise was
given thee to comfort thee, and to support thee, when nothing else could; when
the Sun is clouded, and thou see the want of these things, which the promise
holds forth, then thou art to believe and rely on the promise; this is to use
it as a promise: If thou do this, thou shall find them mighty through Christ,
and him near at hand to help thee in all thy streights; And be sure remember
this, that the use of the promise must not take thee off from other means
prescribed; neither must other means take thee off from the promise; but in the
use of all means herein lies the great strength, in the strengthening promise.

Seventhly, Labor for an experimental taste and knowledge of God in Christ;
this will be the sweetest and surest means to keep the soul intent upon God;
Where your treasure is, says Christ, there your hearts will be; now no soul
can make God and Christ his treasure, but the experimental soul; he that has
not tasted how good the Lord is, cannot set his heart upon him so as to make
him his portion and inheritance; But the soul who has had a taste from God,
and seen what engagements are from thence to keep close to God, Phil. 3.7. to
14. Paul quickly cast away all when he had tasted of Christ; but what things
were gain to me, those I accounted loss for Christ: his senses were
spiritualized, and he does not content himself with a taste, but he would
comprehend; but I follow after, that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus; he endeavors to that, So reaching forth to these
things which are before, verse. 13. and he presses to the mark, verse. 14. All
these show how an experimental relish of the goodness of God does engage the
heart to him. David hints thus much, that there was nothing more conducible to
the fear of the Lord, then this taste of him, Ps. 34.8, 9. O taste and see that
the Lord is good; blessed be the man that trusts in him. O fear the Lord ye
his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him: He calls upon to taste
and try how good God is, and then to fear him; Plainly implying, that if he
could persuade men to make trial of God and his ways, he should engage some of
them to fear him, from the experience of the sweetness of them; and the
Apostle makes use of this as an argument to press after growth in grace, 1 Pet.
2.2, 3. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow
thereby, if ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: Intimating, that it could
not be but they who had any experience of the grace of God, and of his goodness
in Christ, must needs be hungring and thirsting after more communion with God;
if you would therefore keep up your hearts close to God, seek for a taste, look
out for experimental knowledge; it is this that will endear God to your souls;
If we did labor to set up more precious and high esteem, and honorable
thoughts of God in our hearts, we should endeavor to break through every
condition to him. What is it that draws the carnal heart after the world, but a
kind of sweetness which his earthly distemperate palate tastes in it? What is
it that made Israel long so much to go back again into Egypt? was it not the
garlic, and the fleshpots, and because they had tasted of these, and seen the
Land, and the fruitfulness of it? they were going into a Land of which they had
heard, but had not seen; therefore they often wished themselves back again; and
therefore the Lord commanded Moses to send out some to search the Land, that
they might bring of the fruit of it, Numb. 13.21. And they brought a cluster of
Grapes, of the choicest to commend the Land. Thus it is with us, whilst we make
a profession without experience, it is no wonder that our hearts keep not close
to God; we pretend to follow God whom we know not; but the world we know, that
is always with us; we have experience of the sweetness of it, and what it
yields; therefore we cleave more to that, then to the Lord, until he sends us a
cluster of the first ripe grapes, some first fruits of the Kingdom of Heaven;
If we have not a little of Heaven in our way to Heaven, we shall never seek it
with intention of spirit.

Eighthly, Labor for a clear sight of interest; Pulchrum and meum, Beauty and
propriety do very much engage the heart; things that are beautiful are (very
much) attractive; but if we have an interest in them they seem the more
beautiful. It Is a great help to consider of the excellency and goodness of God
and of his ways, above and beyond the World and the pleasures of it; but when
we can consider God in relation to our selves, then he is much more comely and
glorious; when we can say not only God is good, but My God is good. Propriety
does wonderfully knit, and glue the heart (we see) to its object in all things;
and so it will in spiritual things; an interest in Christ revealed and cleared
to the Soul, does marvellously engage it to him, and quickens it in its acting
heavenward; see for this Colossians 3.1, 2, 3, 4. If ye be then risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God; set your affections on things above, not on things of the earth;
for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ who is
our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. The Apostle
argues strongly with them unto a Spiritual life, and constant frame of
breathing after Christ and Spiritual things, from their interest in Jesus
Christ, which was very clear, and without scruple to many of their souls; and
we have the same improvement made of this which the Apostle exhorts to here,
Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven from whence we look for the Savior
the Lord Jesus Christ. An interest in Christ draws the Soul much toward
Heaven, to be constantly looking for it, and into it, and this causes the Soul
to bend unto it: That Soul cannot be long a stranger to Heaven, who knows a
Savior there: O labor therefore to keep your interest clear and plain, if you
would keep your hearts constantly active, and yearning toward Heaven.

Ninthly, Follow thy Prayers, and consider what becomes of them; if thou do
so, they will carry thee much to God; consider in the day what thou did
pray for in the morning, and in the night what thou did ask in the evening,
and live as one that waits for returns; this will be an excellent means to
keep thy heart busy with the Lord either in a waiting believing frame for
something thou have sought of God, and is not yet given in, or else in a
thankful frame for some answer of prayer. As you are before prayer to sum up
your wants, so after the duty consider of your Petitions, and What you have
sought of God for the day, and wait for suitable returns. Have thou prayed for
a holy humble heart, for an active frame of spirit, for strength against such
particular corruptions or temperations? how does the Lord answer thee in these
things? What returns has this day brought forth of prayer? if any, then there
is way made for another duty of praise; if it has brought forth none as yet,
then there is work for faith to live upon God, and to wait for him until he
return and speak peace. This was David's excellency when be had prayed, and
spread his want before the Lord, he had not done with them, but he waited to see
what would become of his prayer. Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the
morning O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look
up. Here is a double care in praying to hit the mark; to study his wants, and
after prayer I will not lose what I have prayed for, for lack of looking after
it; I will wait to see what answer the Lord will give to me, according to that
Psalm. 85.8 I will hearken what the Lord God will speak; and like a beggar that
comes to the door and in begging opens his condition, present^y he listens to
hear whether any answer him from within, or what manner of return is made; or
as a man that has made an adventure to Sea, waits still to hear what is become
of the Ship, whether she came safe to the Harbor, whether she was bound, and
he is still waiting for some good news of a safe return of adventures; why
should not men look as much after their prayers? they are their adventures to
Heaven, I am sure there are many of them lost for want of looking after; Men
think it is enough if they have been a little warmed, or enlarged in the duty,
but look not after their hearts nor prayers after, whether God answers them or
not; and this is a great reason of the unconstancy in the frame of the people
of God. If we could but follow our prayers as worldly men do their designs, we
should seldom let the Lord go out of our eye; if we could but consider our
Petitions, and our present tempers, and compare them, would it not mind us
when our hearts are out of frame? this is not the frame of spirit which I
begged of God this day, I sought other things of God when I was before him:
suerly this is not an answer of my prayers, they are lost this day for ought I
can see; I do not find that humility, self-denial, heavenly-mindedness, that
watchfullness, zeal, etc. which I prayed for this day. O did I pray for such a
cold, drousie, dead frame of spirit as now I am under? If these kind of
reasonings were taken up, they would serve to bring our spirits into praying
frames again when they are fallen.

Tenthly, Keep an eye and an ear open unto Providence; they will hint much of
God to thee; he is wonderful in his goings; and in every condition if thou art
an observer of God, thou shall find a rod or a staff, and either of these will
administer occasion of drawing nigh to God; if thou have a desire to keep the
Fire constantly burning upon the Altar, thou need not to want fuel to keep
it alive: every Providence and Dispensation of God will (if well and wisely
improved) afford thee something to keep thy heart flaming toward God.

Eleventhly, Lose not the Book of the Creatures that is always open before
thee, and in it much of God to be seen: although he be not fully revealed in
them, yet something of him you may find there the very Heathens saw something
of God in Nature, Romans 1.20. and surely thou may read enough in the Book of
the Creatures to prevent those Atheistical thoughts which abound in men's
spirits, and are the very floodgates as I have showed you, unto practical
wickedness; thon may suck out something out of one Artribute, and something
of another; and although all these are too weak to declare the Father, yet he
being revealed in Christ, these may be Memento's to thee, because they are
always before thee. I may say as Christ said once, Me you have not always with
you, but the poor you have. You have not Christ always nor Saints, nor
Ordinances always, but the creatures you have always with you, these are
constant Preachers, and therefore fit remembrances. Psalm 19.1.2* The Heavens
declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork; day unto
day utereth speech, and night unto night shows knowledge David learns much out
of this Book of Nature, the Creatures taught him knowledge by conversing with
them, and observing God ^n them; and it is observable, that he mentions such
Creatures as are most frequently known, such as every man converses withal; he
pitches not upon the great and mighty works of God in the depths, he does not
send men to the Leviathan to inquire for this knowledge; every man cannot find
him out; neither does he send men into the Wilderness to find the Lion, or the
Elephant, or the Ostridge, or any of those creatures little known to men,
neither does he send men to the Seas, because many are strangers to them; nor
to the Earth, because the Seaman who has lost the sight of the Land, should
not say he had lost his teacher; but he sends to the Sky and to the Firmament;
this is seen or known by Sea or by Land. But you will say, When the day is
gone, then the night wraps up the Firmament in a Mantle, and takes it away from
our eyes; what shall we converse withal then? he answers this; Then thou have
the Night; that is a creature; and who-ever thou art, and wherever thou art,
thou have Day or Night, Light, or Darkness, and these teach knowledge; thou
can not want an Instructor, or one to mind thee of God, so long as the Book
of the Creature is before thee; and this he proves, is never shut night nor
day; but always legible, and in every page there is something to mind thee of
the glorious God; and surely David got abundance of knowledge and choice
affections by observing the Creation, and had many sweet frames of spirit, and
choice breathings from hence; and when God was about to instruct Job, and to
furnish him with an holy and humbling knowledge, he opens to him this book of
Nature, and showed him abundance of his glory there; and although he speaks of
many Creatures to whom we are strangers; yet of many again which are not; so
intimating that there was enough to be seen of God among the Creatures most
usual and best known to us, to mind us, and to affect us with the Majesty of
the Lord.

Twelfthly, Compare those days and hours which thou spendest with God, in
thine eye and thoughts, with those which thou spendest without him, and try
which of them do bring thee most comfort; examine thy heart in thy bed, at the
end of this day; compare a day wherein thou have walked in a sweet, holy,
humble frame, wherein thou have walked with an active spirit for God, with
another day wherein thou have bin cold and dead, and formal, and careless of
thy heart, and forgetful of God, and weigh the fruits of these two days
walking together, and see whether there be not a vast difference betwixt these.
What joy and rejoicing was in the midst of thy thoughts? those days and hours
were sweeter then these which have been spent in vanity; will thou not conclude
I had more peace with my spirit, and spiritual joy, and rejoicing after every
day so spent? yea the very remembrance of those hours does yield some sweetness
to me now when I think of them; but these hours which have been spent without
God, Oh they are burthensom to my soul when I remember them; I will therefore
return and study to keep close with God, in whom is all my strength and
comfort, for it was better with me then, then now.

Having now finished these three Queries, I come to the fourth and last.

Fourthly, To inquire why the wiseman directs this to the young man rather then
any other? Methinks I hear the young ones saying, This is not counsel fit for
us; it is a yoke not suitable to our necks; we are tender and not fit for the
yoke as yet; he might well have spared us, and given us the liberty of our
youth, before he had put us upon such hard and difficult service as this.

I shall endeavor now to answer such secret Objections, and to show the equity
and reason of the Preachers exhortation; and I shall be the larger in this
thing, from these three moving Considerations, which have put me on this
discourse.

First, Because of that common plea which is found in the hearts of young ones;
they say as those did by the Prophet, It is not yet time.

Secondly, Because the Lord has cast me into a place where there are abundance
of young ones, and I fear but a small company of so many that are seriously
engaged in their hearts to the Lord and to his ways.

Thirdly, Because I find very little encouragement from old ones; I see every
where that God brings in few of them; they are so settled on their Lees that
there is no shaking of them. It is the observation of all men almost in these
days, that where the Gospel is preached, the success and encouragement is
chiefly, if not only, on the hearts of young ones; we see that God puts but
little of the new wine of the Gospel into old bottles; they are so tainted with
their superstition, their carnal compliance, formality, and luke warmness, that
God does generally cast them aside as unusefull; the time is now coming when
the Lord is making good that word, Rev. 22.11. Let him that is filthy be filthy
still; Let them that have cleaved to their superstitions and will worship, do
so still; let those who have profaned Sabbaths, and Ordinances, do so still;
and let those who have sat Sermon proof, and Judgement-proof, and Mercy proof,
sit so still. Me thinks the Lord is saying so to abundance in this place, who
have not been moved, nor wrought upon, nor changed by all the gracious
pleadings of God in the Gospel; and he is now calling in to himself a
generation of young ones to hear his name in this place; and therefore my
speech shall be principally to you, the youth of this place to persuade you to
set seriously about this work of God, and your poor souls. It is to you that
the Lord calls at this time.

Quest. Why should the youth be set a part especially for God?

Answ. For these Reasons. 1. Because God has made choice of this time,
typically in the Law, in the first born, Exodus 13.2. Sanctify unto me the
first born; whosoever opens the Womb among the Children of Israel, both of
Man and of Beast it is mine. God has commanded this for himself, because it is
the best of our time, as the first born was the prime of the strength, Genesis
19.3. Ruben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength,
the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Now in regard of this
it was accounted a great loss to lose the firstborn. God puts this as an
ingredient into that plague in Egypt, Exodus 4.23. And I say unto thee, let my
Son go that he may serve me, and if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will
slay thy Son, even thy firstborn. Oh how do men bring this plague upon
themselves, who destroy their firstborn? their youth, the beginning of their
strength. It is as bad as the sacrifice of the Israelites who offered their
Sons and Daughters to Devils.

Secondly, The Lord typifieth this in their first fruits, Exodus 34.26. The
first of the first fruits of thy Land thou shall bring into the house of the
Lord thy God: Exodus 22.29. Thou shall not delay to offer the first of the ripe
fruits, and of thy liquors, the firstborn of thy Sons shall thou give unto me.
Nay, the Lord was so exact and punctual in this, that he would have no exchange
made, Ezekiel. 48.14. And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor
alienate the first fruits of the Land, for it is holy unto the Lord.

Here may be a Query raised, Why the Lord would not sell those, and yet would
suffer, nay commanded that their sons shall be redeemed? Exodus 34.20. All the
firstborn of thy Sons shall be redeemed, and none shall appear before me empty.

Ans. 1. To show how much Equity and Reason there was for that Law, that it is
made here with a proviso against any charg.

2 There was mercy in redeeming the one, and the not redeeming the other.

3 The Lord by suffering the Sons to be redeemed, did enjoy the ends of that
Law; for they were only redeemed from death, they were still his.

Now I say, as God would not have an exchange in this case, so it is vanity in
any of us to think of compounding the business with him; he will have the
beginning of thy strength; do not thou say, I will give him the dregs of it; say
not the latter days are good enough; for he has chosen the first; and if thou
would be accepted with him, observe his choice: Observe the first Offering
that we read of, Genesis 4.3, 4. Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an
offering to the Lord, and Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, and the
Lord respected him and his offering. One brought fruits, the other the first
fruits, and he respected the one, and not the other; and yet this was before
the special Law of first born, and first fruits; which shows that it was not
ceremonial but moral, and so continues for ever, as a standing rule for a
creature to offer up the first and choicest of everything to God.

Reason 2.
This is the choicest of thy time, therefore fittest for such designation, most
agreeable to the great work of the Lord; which will appear if you consider
these following particulars.

First, Thy affections are ripe and flourishing; and if thou do now give up
thy self to the work of the Lord, thou may in all probability be
serviceable to him; but in thine old age, all thy affections will be weakened;
especially those which should most of all render thee serviceable to God.

2 Thy Affection of Love, and Joy, and Zeal, Desire and Hope, which do most of
all quicken souls, and honor the work of God in their hands, these will be all
fallen, and there will be nothing left but weakness, and faintness, and fear,
and passion, and peevishness; and how will these things honor the Lord? O it is
very necessary that we should have an eye to our Affections in the great work
of God; for if these be lost, the glory of the work falls to the ground; for
the affections are the very hands that lay hold on Christ, and the feet that
run after him, and the instruments with which we work for him; lose not this
time if ever thou would take a time wherein God may be glorified by thee.

Secondly, Now all thy senses are freshest and quick, and thy soul most active,
and thou art best able to taste of that sweetness which is in the ways of the
Lord; and although the sweetness of the ways of God do not consist in
satisfying the senses external, neither is godliness (as the Familist makes it)
a sensual life, yet when the body is decayed, and the soul weakened, as to all
its exercises, the soul is not deprived only of the relish which it had of
carnal things, but even of spiritual ones also; the reason why we shall enjoy
so much more of God in Heaven then we do, or can do here, is, because our
bodies shall be fitted to our souls; we shall have none of the encumbrances of
flesh, and weakness, and indisposition through sickness and old age, which now
do hinder us; and therefore it must needs follow, that the better the soul is
Organized and fitted for action, through the strength and vigor of all the
faculties, the more capable it is of communion with God, and of tasting the
sweetness that is in his ways. Bring a man that is sick and weak never such
precious and pleasing meat and drink, he affects them not, because his palate
is weak, and he cannot taste the sweetness that is in them. Old Age is the
sickness of Nature; then she begins to be feeble, and it cannot be expected
that the soul can act at the same rate either in Naturals, or Spirituals, which
it did when it was in the midst of its strength; A man cannot do so much work
when his assistants and servants are all gone from him, as he could when he had
them all at command; the soul wants many of her attendants, they are dead, or
drousie, and very useless; every member of the body, and every faculty of the
soul is very weak and lame, and there is little expected from them. If ever
thou would highly put a difference between the ways of God, and the ways of
sin, and thou would relish the sweetness that is in following the Lord
Jesus, make trial in thy youth, whilst thou art in the prime of thy strength;
for the breasts of his consolation are full, and require much strength to draw
them, they are of so pure and spiritual a nature. If thy senses were so quick
and comprehensive as Adams were in innocence, yet there is more then enough in
the Lord Jesus, and in his ways to exercise them, and to satisfy them; David
speaks largely of his experience in this thing, Ps. 19. They were sweeter then
the honey, and the honeycomb. And in Psalm one hundred and nineteen, he
commends them beyond all other good things, and speaks elsewhere of this; he
sets out the fullness and variety of sweetness which the ways of God afford by
this expression, Rivers of pleasure. Psalm 36.8. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the
rivers of thy pleasures. We may have another much like to this, Psalm 16.11. In
thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. O what a great mistake is there amongst many, who refuse to give
their youth to the Lord, because they cannot spare that from their pleasures;
they think that the devoting that unto the Lord would be the spoil of it; let
not Saten delude any of your poor souls thus any more; there are pleasures at
Gods right hand, and rivers of pleasure for Souls to drink of who follow Jesus
Christ, when the summer brooks which Satan leads you to will all be dried up.
Le thim not draw you off from God, with a pretense that there is no pleasure to
be had in him; but whenever he draws you after pleasures, tell him how that you
have heard, That the w^y of God are sweet, and that you will make trial of
them, whether they are so or not, whilst you are in the midst of your strength,
and best able to distinguish betwixt sweet and bitter, good and evil; and when
thou have gotten but a taste of the sweetness of the ways of God, thou will
have an answer at hand for him; when he comes and tells thee, Thy youth is
fittest for pleasure, tell him then it is fittest for God at whose right hand
are pleasures everlasting, which thon wilt never more exchange for his
deceivable lusts.

Thirdly, Now thou have an opportunity to deny thy self for Jesus Christ, and
to commend the ways of God unto the world, and to set a high price upon them
for the enjoyment of Christ in them, when thou do deny the vain pleasures of
sin when thou may enjoy them; what a low value do thou set upon Jesus
Christ, and the ways of the Lord, when thou will follow him at no other time,
but in that which in thy own judgment is fit for nothing else, although in
truth it is most unfit for that? This cannot bean act of selfdenial, when we
will never come to God til we have nothing to deny, or part withal for him; thou
can not then say that thou forsakest any thing of the world to come unto
Christ, when it has already forsaken thee; what pleasure will thou deny to
follow God in thy old age, in that day when thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in it? here will be no room left for self denial in many things, but now it lies
in the way evidently to make out thy self-denial; for now whilst thou art in
the strength of thy days, and many temptations to enjoy the world, and many
ways to enjoy it also; now to renounce all, and come into Christ, will be an
eminent act of self-denial; all men will say, lo here is one who has left
all to follow the Lord; and will not this beget an high esteem in men of the
ways of God, when they shall fee thee prizing it above all profits, and
pleasures, and preferments, and Friends, and Companions? when they see thee
casting these under foot, when they are to be enjoyed; will they not say,
Surely there is much sweetness in the ways of God, that this man denies himself
in all these things to follow them; If ever thou would honor the ways of
God, and set them up high in the hearts of men, and be eminent in this act of
self-denial, lose not thy youthful days, but begin to follow the Lord Jesus
whilst the world and the pleasure of it are following thee; so shall thou be a
true Disciple of the Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, The work is great which thou art called to, and therefore fittest
for thy youth; we know that we use to single out the morning for the choicest
employment, which requires greatness of strength, and parts; and truly the work
of the Lord is in this sense a morning work; for it will call for the vigor and
strength of thy affections; Strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24.
Philip. 3.14. I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. Men do wonderfully mistake the ways of the Lord, when they
think that the sleeping doting age is good enough for him; truly this is
according to those conceits and fancies which they have of the worship of God;
and their thoughts are so low, because they are so much strangers to it; but if
such souls were set truly about the work, they would find it so much above the
strength they have (when strongest) that they would easily be convinced of the
vanity of making delays, and putting it off til a time when they must expect
less. Oh what folly is there in men's hearts! and how little reason will those
delayers have to stand by them at the last day? when they delay the workbecause
it seems hard and difficult, and yet they put it off to a time wherein it must
needs be much harder then now it is. Friends, take heed of this folly, it is
too common amongst us: It is against reason and against our practice in all
other things, and if the devil had not a great power over men this deceit of
the heart would be discerned; we see men will not do so in other things; they
will study the season proper to every work but this of their souls; the
Husbandman will not put off his Summer work till Winter, nor his Winter work
til Summer; he will choose to do the work that is most painful and laborious
before the heat of the day if a man walk by the Sea wall and find a small breach
that is made in upon the Land, he will not pass it by, and say let it alone
until the next week or year; for says he, it will grow much bigger by that
time; he will not make delays when he is sure that delays will make more work;
let us but study the seasons for our souls as they do; let us do every thing to
the best advantage; the work is great, begin when thou will; but the longer it
be before thou begin it, the more difficult thou will find it, and the less
strength thou will have to go through with it; therefore begin in thy youth.

Fifthly, It is a long work, and therefore calls for the morning of thy Age; he
that would run this race should set out early. We know if a man have a long
Journey to go, or a Race to run upon some forfeiture, he will covet for as much
of the day as it is possible for him to enjoy, he will set out very early by
the first appearance of day; if we did but know what it is to be a Christian,
we should not think our day too long to spare any of it from our work,
especially of our choycest hours.

Three things makes this work long.

1 Want of knowledge, we have many things to seek after.

2 Want of experience in those things which we have in notion.

3 Much employment.

First in regard of knowledge, we should begin betimes; how many things are we
ignorant of? the Gospel is full of Mysteries, and the Worship of God is a
Mystery, and we know but in part when we know most, and yet may always know
more then we do; If we consider our Natural estate, we are ignorant of every
truth of God as it is in Jesus; we know nothing aright, 1 Cor 2.14. The
natural man cannot perceive the things of God; therefore seeing there is no
true knowledge of God, and of Spiritual things, till we set our faces and
hearts Heaven-wards, we had need begin betimes. If we look to our
afterknowledge, which is a fruit of conversion, it is so weak and imperfect,
and there is so much ignorance in so many of the things of God, that then we
should say, O that we had begun sooner with God! then might we have been
teachers of others, whereas now we have need to be taught the very principles
of Christ; if we begin at the first hour of the day, yet we shall find the work
so long in this regard, that when the night comes we shall acknowledge that the
day has not been large enough; or we have not been active enough to be
acquainted with every Mystery of the Lord, and we must leave some things to
learn when we come to Heaven.

Secondly, In respect of Experience; how many things are there which we get in
notion, which we are content withal, and seek not for the experience of it?
this requires much time to seek after the experience and power, and conformity
to those truths of which we are convicted in our judgments; thou may learn
many things in a Notional way in a short time; but experience of all these
things is not so soon obtained. The Physician reads many things, and they seem
rational to him; but this seems not enough to him until he gets some experience
of these things, til he has made trial of them; it will require much time for
thee to put every truth so to the touchstone as to be able to speak to it from
thine own experimental Knowledge; and this will advise thee to begin betimes
with the Lord.

Thirdly, In regard of employment; O when thou come into Christ, thou will
find abundance of work to do, too much for the little time that is allotted
thee; if thou look upon those without, to labor to bring them in to Christ,
thy bowels will sound toward them, and thou will say in thy heart, O that I had
come in sooner, that I might have pitied those poor souls sooner; in regard of
those who are within, there are some weak, and they call for thee, When thou
art converted, then strengthen thy brethren; some are doubting, and call for
thee to comfort them; some are fallen, and call for thee to restore them; yea
the strong as well as the weak have need of thee; O there is work enough for
thee to do amongst the Saints, if there were none in the world, if thou had
Methusalem's Age to spend. And seeing Jesus Christ has so much work for poor
Souls to do, is it not pity that thou should defer thy coming, when the
Master has need of thee! O that we did but love our work as well as that
precious Servant of Christ did, who wept when he was to dye, because he should
go where he should do no more work, but should only receive his wages! if he
mourned that he was to leave working so soon, we should much more lament that
we began so late.

Reason 3.
Because this is thy choosing time, the day of thy choises; this is thy
Market Day, and thou art now about to provide for hereafter. As the Husbandman
when he goes to a good Fair, or Market, he goes up and down to see where he may
buy a good penniworth, that he might stock his ground for the year following;
and when he has once bought for his turn, he looks not how the Market goes,
nor what others do; now thou beginnest to leave the childish age, which is
trifled away with toys, and thou beginnest to look toward hereafter, what thou
may fasten upon? What will be most beneficial for the time to come; now thou
bethinkest thy self how to spend thy ensuing days; be very wary, take heed
thou do not make too rash a choice; walk up and down the Market, and see who
sells the best penniworth; Satan will have his shop open betimes, and he will
offer thee great things if thou will believe him, the pleasures, profits, and
honors of the World; but take heed of a hasty Market; have an eye to Jesus
Christ, and see what terms he offers to thee, whether he do not offer better
things upon better terms: And to press this duty close up-

First, Consider how dangerous it is to forget God now in thy choosing time;
lest afterward pre-engagements to the world blind thee that thou see not, or
prejudice thy spirit that thou see with disadvantage; or bias thee that thou will not follow what thou see of the things of God; when once the creature is
engaged in his Affections to a former choice, it is a very hard thing to draw
such a soul off upon any terms almost; if thou losest this time of thy youth,
thou losest thy choycest opportunity, because now thou may be free in
respect of many engagements which hereafter may draw thee from following of
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Consider that if thou should be brought over unto the Lord
afterward, when this choosing time is past, it will be hard to convince men
that thou followest him out of choice; they will rather judge it to be out of
necessity, if thou look not toward God till thy old age, they will say it is
because thou have nothing else to do at this time; or they will say it is the
custom of old folks to be a little religious; but if thou give up thy youth
to follow the Lord, al men will say thou do it out of choice; This man has
chosen the way of the Lord, who had many other ways to go, and all pleasant,
but he forsakes them all, and has chosen the ways of God; it was a clear
evidence that Moses chose the Lord and his ways, when he embraced them at such
a time as he might have enjoyed the honors and privileges of Pharoahs Court;
By faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharoahs daughter; choosing rather to suffer with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. If he had staid til he had been old,
and til the Court had been weary of him, and had cast him out, there would have
been no notice taken of his closing with Israel; but now it appeared plain an
act of choice.

Thirdly, We find that men have seldom above one choosing time; and if this time
be lost, and they not settled upon God, it is a thousand to one but they are
lost; although the Lord may and does call some at every hour, yet he calls most
at the first, few at the third, fewer at the ninth, and fewest at the last.
Matthew. 20.1, 2, 3. He went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his
Vineyard. And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent
them into his vineyard; and he went out about the third hour, and saw others
standing idle in the Marketplace. We find, he went out intentionally to hire
the first time, but the rest seem brought in casually; And therefore Christ
called one at the last hour, that none should despair, and he called but one,
that none upon that might presume; take hold of youth while it is in being; old
age mny never be to thee; or if it be, yet thy heart may be settled in youth,
and hardened to thy former engagements which have caused thee to pass by the
Lord, and it is a wonder if he do not pass by thee afterward; we find very
few brought in to God in the last hour of the day.

Reason 4.
Because delays are full of, dangers we find few of those many who allot the
Lord a time for this great work hereafter, that do ever see those days they
speak of; the Lord ordinarily surprises such souls as are full of To morrows;
How did the Lord seiz upon that evil servant at unawares who said but in his
heart, The Master delays his coming? nay the Lord does not only declare that
such men may be ^urprised (which were danger enough in running but the hazard)
but he has allotted them this punishment for their dilatory thoughts, that
they shall surely be surprised; all those delaiers who are resolved to put off
God and Conscience to such a time and such a year, may read the Judgment
pronounced against them in that of Matthew. 24, 48, 50, 51. and if that evil
Servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, the Lord of that
Servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Reason 5.
Because delays are full of folly; it is folly to be careless and full of
delays, because our times are full of uncertainty; it is folly which thou will
not be guilty of for thy Body, and yet thou will profess it for thy Soul; if
thou were sure a Thief would come such a night, though thou did not know the
hour, thou would watch every hour; but thou art not so wise for thy Soul,
thy uncertainty makes thee careless; because thou do not know the month, nor
year when God will call to Judgment, therefore thou say in thy heart, not
this week, nor this month, nor this year, and from hence thou growest
careless, and art surprised in the conclusion.

Secondly, It is folly to set a time to our selves which God has not set
before us, he says To day if thou will hear my voice, and thou say, I will
not hear till to morrow; he bids thee remember him in thy youth, and thou
say, old age shall serve the turn; what folly is this, to set a time that
thou have no assurance of? God has made thee no promise that thou shall enjoy
to morrow, neither has he made thee any promise of acceptance to morrow; but
what says the Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.2. To day is the accepted time.

Reason 6.
Delays are full of deceit; a delaying heart is very deceitful, it is a very
gull, a cheat, it speaks one thing, and intends another all the while, its
excuses and delays are always deceitful; it will appear thus.

1 It deceives thee, in telling thee that the work is easy, and thou may do
it as well in old age; and therefore why need thou trouble thy self so
early, and lay out the prime of thy days in it, when the dregs of it will serve
as well* Here it lies; for if thou set about this work, thou will find it
a hard work which as I have showed will call for all thy strength.

2 It deceives thee, whilst it tells thee, that thou art willing to the thing,
but not to the time; as if the difference were not so great betwixt God and thy
Soul as indeed it is. Thy heart tells thee that thou art willing to come to
Christ, and thou approvest of, and love the ways of God; only thou can not
yet close with them; when indeed it is the very thing as well as the time which
thou do dis-rellish, and the enmity against God and his ways is discovered by
thy delays, as well as in others by a gross denial; were not they who stayed
behind upon pretended occasions as well judged enemies? Luke 14.16. as they who
said plainly, that they would not have Christ to reign over them? And if ever
thy heart were reconciled to the ways of God, thou would make no delays; the
thing being once resolved in good earnest, thou would not at all stick at
the time.

3 It deceives thee by concealing thine inability from thee, which is daily
increased by thy delays; the longer thou deferrest thy coming in to Christ,
the weaker thou growest in soul and in body. Qui non est hodie, etc.

4 There will be no end of delays; the same reason thou have to put off
seriousness from thy Soul to day, thou will have to morrow; thou say to
morrow will be time enough, and thou will say so again to morrow; if thou had
an eternity to spend here, thou would spend it in delays. Modo and modo non
habent modum.

Reason 7.
Thou will have one Temptation the less to answer, if thou come in now to
Christ; and this is ordinarily one, it is now too late; he that said always
before, It was too soon, will as soon as thou art in good earnest tell thee,
That it is too late; therefore labor to prevent him in this, let him not have
any room for such an Objection against thy Soul; some souls have smarted
bitterly under it. Make no more delays, nor put-offs; for the fewer of these
thou make, the less has he to build upon. When ever he comes to persuade
thee to defer the work of the Lord a little longer, Consider, his design; if
thou yield to this Temptation, he will build a Battery upon it against thy Soul,
if ever it look really toward Christ; and he will terrify thee most with those
delays which he has tempted thee to. It has been a hard block to some poor
souls to get over, Oh, it is now too late; oh, if I had come in to Christ at
such a time, when I was under such and such Convictions, at such a Sermon, or
such a Providence, if then I had hearkened to Christ, I had been accepted; but
now I fear it is too late. O take heed that thou do not administer occasions
to Satan to lay such a block in thy way; begin betimes, and the sooner thou
do begin, the less advantage will he have in this point against thy soul.

Reason 8.
Because we find that those who have began with God in their you^h, have
attained to a great eminency in the things of the Lord. As to begin with Moses,
he began with God in his youth, in the prime of his age. Heb. 11.24. By faith
Moses when he came to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter;
and to what height did he grow in knowledge and experience of the Lord? How did
God honor him, in giving him such a wonderful discovery of himself in those
days? Exodus 33.11, 19. And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks to his friends. ver. 19. And he said, I will make all my goodness
pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee. God
seems to grant him as much as he was capable of on this side Glory, as much as
he could bear, if God should have let out more of his glory upon him, it would
have consumed him.

Secondly, See how Samuel proved in the ways of the Lord? with what repute and
honor he lived and dyed amongst the people of God? and he was one of these
early beginners with God? we find that the Lord called him betimes and
established him for a Prophet in his very Childe-hood, as you may see at large
in the first Book of Samuel, chap. 3. Now how eminent this man proved with God,
in regard of his long acquaintance with God; he proved great in prayer, he was
a prevailer with God, and therefore David names him as the great Artist this
way, Psalm. 99.6. Samuel amongst those that call upon him. And the Lord honored
his memory for this, when he was in the Grave, Jerm. 15.1. Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me; the Lord brings in these two early beginners together
and says, If any were like to prevail with me, it were these my two old
friends, who took up aquaintance with me from their youths. We know friendship
is dearest and most engaged when it is begun in Childehood, and continued to an
old friend.

Time would fail to tell you of David how eminent he was for God, who grew
wiser then his Teachers, and how soon he began with the Lord. And of Jeremiah,
and John, who were sanctified in the Womb, and what measures of knowledge and
grace they had; and of Timothy, who was instructed from a child in the
Scriptures, and how serviceable he proved to the Churches; surely it is not in
vain that the Scripture takes so much notice of the commings in of so many
Saints, and that we find the most eminent of them are mentioned, and to have
given up their youth to God. And if we would go by circumstances, we should
find that many others of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, if not all,
were called in to give up their Names to God very early; I am sure it is enough
to engage us to begin with him in the morning, if we would attain to that
height they did.

Reason 9.
There is a promise to those that seek the Lord early, but there is none to
those that seek him late; mistake me not, I would not weaken the hands of any,
if God move any old sinner to look after Christ. I do not say but that there is
a promise for them that return at whatsoever time it be; a promise to him as a
seeker, but not a particular promise to him as a late seeker. But there is a
promise particularly to the early seeker, Prove. 8.7. They that seek me early
shall find me; And from hence the Apostle presses men to take hold of the
opportunity Heb. 3.7.13. And to day if you will hear his voice;; but exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened through
the deceitfullnesse of sin, and the Prophet presses the very same; Isa. 55.6.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near; the
Lord is near thee in the Promise, and especially to you young ones; because he
is near you in the particular Promise, whereas he is near others but in the
general promise. O therefore be persuaded to seek him whilst he is thus near to
you.

Use of Caution to young ones not to lose this time; for we may say of youth as
David says of the Soul, What shall a man give in exchange for it? there is no
price or ransom sufficient to redeem it from God; the following days if thou
were sure to enjoy them and give them up to the Lord, are not a valuable
consideration for thy youth, nor will any time be so acceptable to God as this.
See how the Lord prizes youthful affections, Jer, 2 2.3. Go and cry in the
ears of Jerusalem saying, Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness
of thy youth, the love of thine espousals when thou wentest after me in a
Wilderness in a Land that was not sown. verse. 3. Israel was holiness to the
Lord, and the first fruits of his increase, all that devour him shall offend,
evil shall come upon them says the Lord. Times which may follow are either
uncertain or not acceptable with God, or not so advantageous to this work, Joh.
9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day, the night
comes when no man can work. Night will come, and then there will be no
working; evening will come, and it will be bad working; but it is good working
whilst it is day, whilst it is noonday, when thou have light upon light, a
double light; the Hebrews express noon by such a word that signifies two
lights.

All these considerations laid together may help us to draw this Conclusion,
Lament. 2.27. It is good for a man to bear his yoke in his youth.

2 To old ones who have neglected, and lost this precious time of their youth;
O go home and mourn over this great loss, the loss of your precious and
choysest time of your youth; go to your Closets, and weep over your deceitful
delaying hearts, which have cheated you so often, and put so many
stumbling blocks in your ways, that you have not found a time to be serious for
God, to this veryday: You had need go and shut your doors upon you, and beg
earnestly of the Lord, that he would accept of you at last; and be very
serious, and never give the Lord over until he has given you some evidence of
owning those dregs and relics of the time, and strength which Sin and Satan
has left you; you have need of abundance of grace to bring you over, and to
accept of you when God must go in an extraordinary way of grace toward your
soul.

Secondly, Redeem the time that is lest, let none of that be thrown away, after
the rest, 1 Pet. 4.3. For the time past of our lives may suffice us to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lust,
excess of wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominable Idolatries.

The end of the First Part.
Now if Ever. Or an APPENDIX TO The Young-mans Memento.

Delivered By Jo. CHISHULL, At Tiverton in Devon.

Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lef^ any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while
he may be found, call ye upon him while he is nea Printed at London by A. N.
for F. Eglessield, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Mary-gold in Paul's
Churchyard, 1657.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Coplestone Bampfield, Baronet.
SIR,
I Have presented these few Sermons to you; not for their shelter (for a
Patrons name cannot defend the Author from the censure of the Reader) but for
your advice. Although you cannot want my counsel (having enjoyed many
advantages above others, in education, of godly counsel, and good Examples) yet
your age does, seeing you are now in the day of your choices: and if you need
none, yet I owe to your self and Family, whatever may be conducible to your or
to their good; the engagements which former days have laid upon me to serve
the Family of Poltimore, are as fresh upon me as ever, and I should gladly
embrace any opportunity of manifesting this.

The Stock of Prayers which your dear Father (whose memory is precious among
the Lords people) has put up for you, the many Counsels which you have
received from your Governors and Tutor, in former and latter years, with the
continued Prayers, Exhortations, and Examples of some very near you, give great
hopes that you may stand up in your honored Fathers place, and with his Title
and Estate inherit that interest which he had in the hearts of them that fear
the Lord. If what I have tendered to you, further or quicken you unto this, I
have my end and my joy.

Above all things beware of delays, the danger of those you shall easily find
by perusing of what follows; vouchsafe to read it seriously, and accept kindly,
as it is offered out of faithfulness and affection, by him who is, Sir,

Tiverton, Aug. 24. 1654. Your obliged Servant, Jo. Chishull.

Now if Ever.
LUKE 19.42. Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.
THese words are some of those which the Lord Christ sighed out, when he beheld
and considered the sad and lamentable condition of careless Jerusalem; His
speech is broken, as if he had spoken out one, and wept out another part of his
mind; but such imperfect Language serves to express sorrow to the life; It is
easy to see the heart of Christ through these Lines, and you cannot but see
him here to be a Man of sorrow. Neither are the streams more visibe then the
Fountain from whence they did arise; you need not go far to search for the
Head and rise of this River; look but upon the eye of Christ, see where it is
fixed, and you shall not more easily see that he weeps, then for whom he weeps;
it was for Jerusalem, who had slighted and forsaken her own mercies, outlived
the day of her Peace, and was now under a double sentence of Death, viz
Spiritual and Temporal; and although Jerusalem rejoiced in her prosperity,
yet he that saw what was written over her head, drops these few words
(interrupted and broken through abundance of tears) to show, that the ruin and
misery of Her and of poor sinners goes near his heart.

Many things have been proposed and handled from these words, which I shall not
now touch. I purpose to mention now no more of that which has been spoken from
them, then will serve as an Appendix to the foregoing Discourse I shall draw up
all that I intend in these three Propositions.

1 That the Lord does afford men under the Gospel day or time to make and
secure their peace with him.

2 That this is very uncertain (as to us) and unknown, but it often determines
and ends whilst the means of Grace do continue amongst us.

3 When this day is past and over, peace and the things of peace are hid from
the soul.

These three Propositions are built upon these three things, which lie clear in
the text. 1. Israel had a day. 2. This day was now past and gone, yet the means
continued; the Gospel was not yet carried away. 3. Notwithstanding they had the
means, yet peace was hid from their eyes.

For the First of these, I shall prove, First, that God does give men a day,
wherein they have more advantage then at other times, to secure their
everlasting peace and interests.

Secondly I shall come to enquire wherein this day does consist; That men have
a particular day, is easy to discern from hence that the Lord is so often urging
sinners in Scripture not to let slip the golden time which he calls the acceptable
day, or day of Salvation; see what use the Apostle makes of this Heb. 3.7, 13,
15. Does not the Author speak there as if Salvation did depend upon the
improvement of a day? Does he not strongly intimate unto them that there, was
no way to prevent their future ruin, but to be careful of their present day!
And the Holy Ghost declares the same truth to the same intent by the Prophet,
Isai. 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near. That exhortation is pressed by these two motives.

First, That although the Lord was now to be found, yet there might be a time
when he would not be found.

Secondly, That he might be farther off from them then now he was; they would
find him at another time as it were out of hearing.

See what use the Saints have made, and what notice they have taken of this
Psalm 69.13. My prayer (says David) is to thee in an acceptable time. He that
was resolved to take all advantages in his address to God, knew well enough
that this nick of time was none of the least. God loves those who take the
first opportunity, whether it be the morning of the day, as Psalm 63.1. or the
morning of life, which is youth, Eccles. 12.1. or the morning of the means, who
embrace the first tenders of Christ which are made unto them, as those who were
called at the first hour.

Further, see what notice the Lord takes of this, when he answers Christ in
this manner, Isai. 49.8. In an acceptable time have I heard thee, in a day of
salvation have I helped thee. As if he should have said. Thou speedest well
because thou come in a good hour, in the season of Grace, when I was in the
vein to show mercy; God has his day of salvation, and his time of hearing, and
if you will have it you must come in the nick of time. You know Petitioners must
wait their opportunities, they must come in seasonable hours, or else they are
lke to miscarry.

This may in general serve to prove that there is such a privileged day. I
shall now open the particulars of it; I shall show you many helps and advantages
that many men now have who shall perish, and many have had who are now in Hell.

First, They have the Gospel preached amongst them, which is the word of
Reconciliation, 2 Corinthians. 5.20. Jesus Christ who is the Mediator betwixt God
and Man, is declared, and the way to Life and Salvation by him is preached
plainly, that there is no other name given under Heaven, etc. Acts 4.12. It is
and has been often told them, that if they will believe, they shall receive
remission of sins, Act. 10.43. but if not, they shall dye in their sins* John
3.18.

Secondly, As Christ is, and has been preached amongst such persons, so he is
and has been preached without any difference or respect of persons; there is no
difference put betwixt noble and ignoble, rich and poor, strong and weak, wise
and foolish; yea no difference betwixt sinners as to the degrees of sin, great
or small, from the least to the chiefest of sinners.

The Gospel has been, or is offered so to men that nothing can exclude them
from the benefit of it, unless they exclude themselves by rejecting of it. And
that I may make this plain, consider

1 They have the same conditions laid down which others have and had, who are
now in Heaven; God did not prescribe harder terms to the one then to the
other; Believe and repent were the terms which one refused, and the other
embraced.

Secondly, They have the same promises to encourage them, which drew them to
Christ who are now in his bosom. I do not say, that they took the same
encouragement from such promises; how many souls has that promise drawn to
Christ, John ^.37. He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out? and is not
this promise in thy book also? How many souls have ventured upon Christ from
the support which they had by that word, Isai. 42 3. He shall not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax? And is not this a word for thee,
if thou had any will at all to come to Christ?

How many has that word drawn to Christ, which we find, Isai. 55.1, 2. yea
such as could apprehend no good at all in themselves, who upon this word have
gone without money in their hand, as boldly as if they had not gone to beg but
to buy? And have not all these things been spread before many who are now in
hell, to persuade them to look toward Christ? It must needs be said, that the
reason why such came not to Christ, was not because they had no encouragement,
but because they had no mind to come.

Thirdly, They have, or had the same ground to believe that those had who
believed to the saving of their souls; they had the truth and faithfulness of
God, which is the ground and reason of every ones believing. The faith of the
Gospel is not a believing that God has particularly elected thee to eternal
life, or that Christ dyed for thee in particular; But it is a believing that
God is ^ue, and that the Record which he has given of his Son is true. From
hence we have this expression, John 3.33. He that believes has put to his
seal that God is true. And unbelief is described notably, 1 John 5.10. He that
believes not makes God a liar. Not that a Believer cannot know and believe
his interest particularly in the death of Christ, or be certain of Election;
but the Gospel calls upon us to prove these things, and infer them by reason and
experience. Yet here ye must not think that Faith lies only in assent of the
understanding only, but also in the consent of the Will; I speak here of it
only as it respects the former.

How do many content themselves with giving a general assent to the truth of
the word of God, and yet they deny the great and main truths of it, and make
God a liar in the great things which he has spoken concerning eternal life!
Many men pretend that the reason why they stir no more for salvation, is
because they know not whether they are elected or not, or whether Christ dyed
for them or not. But alas, there is something else really at the botttom. They
believe not the Record which God has given of his Son. If they did believe
what God has spoken concerning men's natural and spiritual estates, concerning
Christ and sin, Heaven and Hell, they would look about them; But although
these men believe not, yet it will appear that this foundation was laid for
them also, even the truth and faithfullness of God, into which the faith of all
the Lords people shall be resolved. God proposed such terms of eternal life,
annexed a promise to them; The Elect closed with these terms, and relied on the
truth of God to make the promise good, and was not the truth of God engaged as
much to the one as to the other, in case they had rested on it?

Fourthly, They have and enjoy the same means. God preaches to them by the same
messengers; he does not send one wiser and more learned, or more holy to preach
to those who are or shall be saved; and one weak and insufficient, or less
convincing to preach to those who perish: But they often hear the same word
together from the same person. Christ bids his Disciples enter into the house
where the Son of Man was not, as well as in to the house where he was, Luke
16.5, 6. and Christ wrought the same works before the Pharisees, that he did
before the Disciples.

Fifthly, the Gospel in offering Christ unto thee, says nothing of Election,
makes no difference betwixt elected and not elected. It speaks not to the Elect
as Elect, but as fallen, as sinners, as poor lost undone creatures, and so it
speaks to thee, and to all. The Gospel says nothing to thee of election until
thou have past over the first work of Believing; and if thou art not elected,
yet this cannot properly be a reason of thy rejecting Christ; for the Gospel
made no difference betwixt thee and Elect ones in offering Christ unto thee.
Secondly, neither did thou consider thy Non-Election in thy rejecting Christ;
Who told thee that thou were not Elected? Nay thirdly, Thou did think that
thou were Elected, and yet did not look after Christ.

Sixthly, They have such terms proposed, that if they did come up to them,
they should be saved: Although the Lord has purposed not to ^ave some men, yet
we must not conceive that God wills that they should not be saved upon any
terms; he wills their salvation so far as they will the terms of salvation. If
they would comply with the way and means which he has proposed and
prescribed, i.e. Believe and repent, they should be saved; upon such terms as
these God wills every man's salvation. Revel. 22.17. And let him that will,
come. if he will come up to the terms of Christ, he shall have of the waters of
life, whoever he be.

There is a great difference betwixt Gods willing man's salvation upon Gospel
terms, and his Electing men unto salvation. For whom he Elects, he absolutely
determines to save out of the good pleasure of his will. He appoints the means
as well as the end, he resolves to give faith and Repentance to such, to
incline their hearts, and to convert them to himself. Thus he wills the
salvation of the Elect.

But he wills the salvation of all men otherwise, viz. upon such and such
terms. If they will make use of such means as he gives them, and come up to
his terms, they shall be saved; otherwise not. Nay, he gives them so much as
to leave them inexcusable at the last day, and to make it evident that he wil'd
their salvation more then they did. It will be then clear, that had many men
willed their salvations upon those terms which the Lord did, they had been
saved?

Quest. But how does that appear?

Answ. Thus; God was willing to give thee salvation, if thou would turn to
him. But thou did never will it upon such terms. Mat. 13.14, 15. Thou were
willing to be saved, but it was if thou might keep thy old Lusts still; thou
would not buy salvation at so dear a rate as Conversion. So that we may say,
that the reason why many a man is not saved, is not because God would not, but
because they would not. There were terms proposed by the Lord, and there was
nothing that parted the Lord and them, but their wills. As in the case of the
young man in the Gospel, whose estate parted Christ and him. Was it not his will
that undid him? Dare any say, that if he had come up to the terms of Christ,
he had not been saved? Christ made him a firm promise upon a condition which
only parted Christ and him, Mat. 19.21. And what was it that undid Israel?
Psalm 81.13. Oh that Israel had walked in my ways, etc. Did Israel suffer
because God was not willing to bless and prosper them? Surely no; But because
Israel did not seek it in the way which God was willing to bestow it. Had they
willed their peace in the way that the Lord willed it, they had had it. And so
in the Text, did wicked men will their own salvation, as the Lord does, they
should be saved.

Seventhly, They have some inward means and helps to make their day of peace
the cleerer. The Spirit of God does strive with them in his word and works, and
sollicites their return, but they will not obey it. Genesis 6.3. Thus the Lord
strove with the old world until he was weary. This was it which Stephen charged
upon the Jews, Acts 7.51, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. To this we may
add that of 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. God did not only preach by Noah whilst he was
preparing the Arc, but by his Spirit also, convincing them of sin, and
warning them to repent. Now that you may see how far the Lords affords inward
means as well as outward to many that perish, I shall lay down these few
particulars.

First, He inlightens their understandings which before were wholly darkened,
and gives them the knowledge of many Gospel truths, yea sometimes in such a
manner and measure, that they are able to teach and instruct others, and to tell
others what is to be done, when yet they themselves will not do what they
direct others unto, Romans 2.19.20. Thus Judas and Demas had such gifts and
knowledge, as made them for a time serviceable to others, yet they served not
the interest of their own souls.

Secondly, He shows them the equity of his ways, so that he cannot but
confess that what the Lord requires is just and reasonable, and so also what
he threatens, and yet they have no will to do the same, Romans 1.32. The Heathens
were convinced that God would judge their ways, and he would punish them with
death, and they could not deny the justice of this sentence; How much more are
many convinced strongly of this, who live under a searching Ministry? To this
we may add that of Romans 2.18. Thou approvest of the things which are
excellent. God inlightens them so far that their judgments are for him, though
their affections are for the Devil and sin.

Thirdly, He moves so far sometimes until he stir up some kind of
resolutions in them, and Conscience grows so hot that nothing will quiet it but
making of promises to do something in answer to such Convictions, Acts 24.25.
Thus Felix quieted his Conscience when it was in a flame, by telling it he
would hear Paul and it another time.

Fourthly, He moves so strongly upon the heart of a sinner, that he cannot be
quiet unless he do something for the present in obedience to that word which
is set close to him by the Spirit of God. Thus Herod heard John Baptist, and
did many things, Mark 6.20.

Fifthly, He squeezes a sweetness out of his ways upon their spirits
sometimes, so that they are convinced that it is good following of God. Thus
the stony ground received the Word with joy. Matthew. 13.20. And They tasted of
the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.4. They had some peace in their spirits, and comfort
in the hope that sin was pardoned, and this seemed a sweet thing to them.

Sixthly, He gives them some taste of the powers of the World to come, as
Balaam had, Numb, 23.10. He had strange Convictions of the powers of the World
to come. He ^avv that a man's happiness did not lie in the things of this life;
But there was another life which was principally to be cared for, and looked
after; He knevv that the people of God had a happiness reserved for them in
that life which was more then all the pleasures of this. He knevv that they
would be the happy men who had feared and loved the Lord, yet he loves not
them although he desired their Condition; He would have cursed them for wages,
yet he desired to be blessed with them. Thus you see God goes far to stir
those who are not saved.

I have now shown you wherein a wicked man's day consists, and how far it
does extend, to outward and to inward helps and means; whilst these things
continue which I have showed you, it may be said, It is day with them.

But as this day of theirs seems to be some what clear in respect of means;
yet it is a very uncertain day, whose length is only known to the Lord. For
he causes the Sun to rise and set at his pleasure; And although we cannot by
the exactest Calculations find out precisely how long or short this day is to
particular souls, yet we may lay down General Rules, and make such Scripture
proposals, as may help men very much in judging concerning this Gospel day; at
least I doubt not but to show you so much as will clear this truth, or Second
Proposition, That a sinners day may end whilst he injoyes the outward means of
grace.

Sometimes the Lord brings the nigth upon a people by taking a way the means of
grace wholly from them. When the Sun sets, it must needs be dark; and if the
Gospel were taken quite a way, he world would be as dark as Hell. But I intend
not to insist upon the proof of this. I shall grant that a sinner may have all
the choice outward helps that can be enjoyed continued to him, and yet this day
may be over. And that will appear

First, Because God may withdraw the Convictions of his Spirit from him,
notwithstanding he injoyes the word; the Lord may say, as Gen 6.3. My Spirit
shall strive no more with this man: And alas, when God has withdrawn his
Spirit from the world, to what purpose is it?

Secondly, No only so, but the Lord does hold them from seeing and
understanding those things which concern their peace, as he held the Disciples
from knowing him whilst he talked with them; so does he these men from knowing
any thing savingly. Romans 11.8, 10. God has given them a Spirit of slumber,
etc. When God has plainly convinced of the truth of his Gospel, and solicited
their return by many moral persuasions, and stirrings of Conscience, and they
will not receive the truth in the love of it; He then does not only withdraw
the light which shined convincingly upon their Consciences, but he dos hold
their eyes from seeing, or puts the truths of his Gospel into such a dress that
they should mistake them. Therefore says Christ, Matthew. 13.11, 13. I spoke to
them in parables. Thus says the Lord to his Word and Messengers; Go and speak
to such a people concerning their peace; but I will cast such a vayl upon plain
truths, that they shall not understand what is plainly spoken to them for their
good Compare Isai. 6.9. with Isa. 29.10. and tell me whether God does not take
up such resolutions as this, That the people who would not see at one time,
shall not see at another. And how far are such a people from night, judge you?

Thirdly, He sometimes hardens their hearts, and makes them heavy by that word
which in it self is a word of healing and softning. He has said, the word
shall not go forth in vain, and return empty. It shall do something, either as
a savor of life or of death; but because they have refused the word as it
offers life, God in just judgment makes it a killing word to them: as we may
see Isaiah 6.10. it is a sad thing when the Lord shoots the Gospel as poisoned
arrows against the soul, which will surely kill; yet this the Lord often does
against such as have rejected the saving offers of it; as we may see, Isaiah
28.12, 13. The Lord gave them line upon line, and precept upon precept, that
they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, etc. But the Lord never
deals thus with a people, but for sins against his word, that he might by his
word punish their disobedience to it.

Fourthly, He delivers them up to their own carnal loose hearts to commit sin
with greediness, Romans 1.28. As they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to are probate mind, etc. When the heart is once
grown hard and fat, that Convictions and Reproofs come not at it, or when it is
past feeling, as they were who are mentioned Ephesians. 4.19. the next thing is a
giving up of themselves to all wickedness; When God gives men over to their
lusts, men will quickly give themselves over to them. You have a very full place,
which shows that God does thus give up some men. Secondly, Why he does it; and
Thirdly What the effect of this is. Psalm 81.11, 12. It is said, that God gave
them up to their own lusts. Secondly, The reason of this is, Because they would
not hearken to, and embrace the Lord and his counsel. And thirdly, The effect
of this was, they walked in their own Counsels. The raines were no sooner laid
on their necks, but they ran away from God.

Fifthly, God goes so far with some, that he will not punish them for sin
here; he will not lose one stroke more upon them, he will not afford them those
outward means of humbling which he affords to many others. As he says of
Israel. Hos. 4.13, 14. Your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses
shall commit adultery; I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery. Oh it is a sad judgment,
and a dreadful, when God says of such a soul, I will not visit him here for sin,
let him be unclean still, let him be a vile wretch still, a drunkard, a liar, a
blasphemer, a Sabbath-breaker still, I will seem to take no notice of it, I will
not reckon with him til I have him in Hell, and then I will reckon with him for
all together. Acts 14.16. Acts 17.30. Let him go on, and prosper, and flourish
in his body, and estate, he shall not be crossed as other men are, that he may
bless himself and fall. It is one of the saddest and sharpest of the judgments
of God that can befall a poor creature, not to feel the smart of sin here. To
lie under this judgment, that he shall find the sweet of sin only. Oh let me
tell you, it is a great and manifest token of Gods displeasure, and that he is
implacable when he suffers thee to go on quietly in a way of sin, and neither
smites thee by his word, nor yet by his providence, but lets all things go to
thy mind, and thee go after thy lusts.

Sixthly, God gives them up to strong delusions, so that they who would not
believe the Word and Conscience when they spoke truth to them, shall asterwards
believe every delusion of Satan, every forgery of their own corrupt hearts, and
every deceit of sin. See that of Isai. 66.4. I will choose their delusions
says the Lord, because when I called they did not answer, but chose the thing
in which I delighted not. This is a dreadful place for such as will not hearken
to, and obey the truth, when they are convinced of it; see another to confirm
this, 2 These. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth that
they might be saved, for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that
they should believe a lie, that they might be damned, etc. Oh such a word
should make men upon whose consciences God is stirring, afraid to dally with
it. May not the Lord say to such, If you will not listen to the truth to day,
you shall listen to a lie to morrow? I will give Satan leave to tempt, and I
will give thee up to believe whatever he shall propose; Because thou would
not believe me for thy good, thou shall believe him for thy hurt and ruin.

Seventhly, They may and do often fall back from most or all of those
Convictions, which they had upon their spirits of the things of God, which I
mentioned before, whilst the Spirit strove with them: as for example;

First, For the knowledge which they had of the truth of God, they may believe
manifest lies, in opposition to them, 2 These. 2.11.

Secondly, Their Judgments may be so corrupted, that they may pass against
those things which they did approve of; they were in their Judgments for
holiness, now they may be for sin. Mal. 3.15. They call the proud happy; and
whereas before they did approve of things which are excellent, yet now they
think it a vain thing to serve the Lord; and they say with those Apostates
Mal. 3.14. What profit is there in serving the Lord?

Thirdly, Whereas he had some convictions under the Word, and he made many
promises to reform, yet now he may be past feeling, as they were Ephesians. 4.19.
His Conscience is past all tenderness and remorse, and he is seared with a hot
iron, 1 Timothy: 4.2.

Fourthly, He may lay afide that which he had taken up of the form of
Godliness; whereas while God followed him with Convictions, he used to do
something that savoured of Religion, and to associate himself with those who
made a profession; but now let them go by themselves, he is not to be found
amongst them. Mal. 3.15, 16. As soon as the Prophet had taken notice of the
apostasy of some, he adds presently; Then they that feared the Lord spoke often
together: As if he should have said, You might afterward have found the Saints
by themselves; these men were not to be found in their meetings.

Fifthly, Whereas he had a sweetness in the performance of duty, he forgets
that, and returns to lick up his old vomit again, and that is sweeter to him
then ever Religion was; and the reason of this is, because he had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12. And although they might forget this pleasure
while Conscience was heated, and find some pleasure in the ways of God, by the
allaying this heat of Conscience; yet Conscience being quiet and cool again,
they lose the pleasure which they apprehended in the ways of God, and embrace
the pleasures of sin afresh.

Sixthly, Whereas they had some Convictions of the powers of the World to come,
and some sad thoughts of Eternity were darted into their spirits, that they
could not be quiet, the love of the present world, the profits, pleasures and
honors of it eat up all these, and they forget that there is such a thing as
Eternity to be provided for, and they live only as if they were to live to this
present World.

Seventhly, Such men do not only fall back from their Couvictions, and seeming
work of Conversion, but they go forward in wickedness, perhaps not known or
practiced by them before. This we find mentioned, 2 Pet. 2.20. Ifaster they
have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are entangled therein and overcome, the latter end
with them is worse then the beginning; for etc.

Men that have gone far in a profession of Religion, and seemed to have some
power upon them to reform them, yet the Corruption of their wills overcomming
the light and Convictions which were in their Consciences, and finding
themselves at liberty, they are more vile then ever. They are worst at last, as
is not only asserted here but, in that Parable, Mat. 12.43.44.45. If the
unclean Spirit be cast out by the power of Conviction alone, he will return to
his old habitation, he will come and see who keeps house, and if it be empty in
respect of grace, and garnished only with a profession, and with natural
abilities, he will enter again, and he will bring company enough to guard for
the future, and they shall be none of the best, seven Spirits more wicked then
himself. Perhaps he was a drunkard, or swearer, or Sabbath-breaker; But as he
troubled himself about Religion; so he troubled not the professors of it. But
if he fall back to these sins again, its ten to one but he proves a scoffer or
a persecutor of the ways and people of God. See an instance, Mal. 3.14. There
where some who pretended to holiness, but when they fell off, Obs. First, They
did not only lay aside such duties, but struck at them. Secondly, They scoffed
at such as walked humbly with God. Thirdly, They joined and so took part with
the worst of men. They call the proud happy. Apostates seldom stand as Neuters.

Thus I have I hope cleared the two first propositions, you have seen it both
day and night with the wicked. I come now to speak of. The Third Proposition,
viz. That when this day is past and over, the things of peace are hid from the
soul. This is so easily deducible from the two former, that I need not speak
much to prove it. If a day be set to treat with persons, and upon terms to
conclude a peace, if they stand out this day, and do nothing, the Commission is
out of date. Thus says the Lord, I gave Commission to my Messengers, to
Conscience, and to the Word, to plead and strive with you about an agreement,
and ye would not; Now the time is over, Conscience and the Word have no
Commission to treat with thee again; for I am resolved against peace now.

Thus God dealt with Jezabel, Rev. 2.21. I gave Jezabel space to repent, says
he; But she repented not; I am now resolved to take another course with her, I
will call her, etc. If the day end any way, Peace must needs end with it. When
God works as I have shown you, and they come to that pass, as has been
declared we may easily Conclude, Peace is hid.

First if God withdraw from the soul, and give over stiring, Corruption must
needs carry it. When God takes away those Convictions which did restaine and
bridle the man, he will doubtless then follow his own lusts, and take fill of
sin, commit it with greediness. But you see it evidently, God has said, my
Spirit shall not always strive with man; Such a man has desired to enjoy his
Lusts quietly, and I am resolved he shall have enough of it; and where will such
a man stop, whom God will not hinder? or when will he return, whom God will not
draw? Corruption will doubtless Lord it in such a soul.

Secondly, If the Lord leave stiring wtth the soul, Satan will have his will
upon it. If the Lord withdraw his inward workings, Satan will draw near, and he
will fill up the House; If Christ rule not, he will. Paul sets out the
Condition of poor souls who are without Christ thus; 2 Timothy 2.26. Satan leads
them Captive at his will; and Ephesians. 2.2. He says they walk according to the
Prince of the power of the Air (i. e.) according to his mind. This is the
Condition of every Natural man. Satan has gotten such a power over them, that
they do what he Commands. But besides this power which Satan has in men
naturally, here is a Judiciary delivering up of Souls to the power and will of
Satan when their day is over. Many who are under the first power of Satan may
be recovered, but such as come thus under his power are irrecoverably lost and
undone, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost,
(...). Not to such as are lost in Adam, as all men are who are naturally in a
lost Condition, of which yet some at least shall be repaired; But such as are
appointed to be destroyed, who are lost past Hope. In a word, when a man's day
is over, he is lost, and peace is hid from him upon a twofold account.

First, In respect of God. He withdraws the light and resolves never more to
have to do with such a poor Creature in a way of mercy, never to whisper one
word of conviction, or of Counsel more to him concerning his soul, and then
he that is filthy must needs be filthy still; who will be faithful to that
man's soul, or show him the misery of his Condition or the folly of his waves,
whom God will Counsel no more? The Sun is set, and the day must needs be
done.

Secondly, The day being done, peace is hid in respect of himself, because he
had no eyes to see the things of peace; They were but shut before, either out
of prejudice, or neglect, or wantonness, but now they are put out, or sealed
up, so that they shall be opened no more; and then although the Sun shine never
so Bright, yet the eyes being put out, he lies under an impossibility of seeing
the things of peace. This is as clear as the Sun when it shines, from that of
John 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because he had blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, etc. Thus the day of grace and peace you see
may be over unto men, although the Gospel in respect of the public
administrations do continue as clear as ever. Thus we find it was with some
of the Jews in Isaiahs time, as I have shown you from Isa. 6.9, 10. Yet was he
the most Evangelical of all the Prophets. And thus it was in Christ's time;
many who lived under the Richest dispensations of the Gospel (who heard and saw
Christ, who spoke as never man spoke, and did what never any did) yet were past
seeing, and Christ says expressly at last, That he did not intend that they
should see, Mat. 13.10, 11, 12.

Before I come to apply these truths which have been proved, I shall clear them
from some mistakes or misapprehensions which might arise.

First, Some will say, Does not that which has been spoken strongly infer that
Christ died for all?

Answ. The Gospel has plainly and fully declared that Christ died for sinners,
and all sinners without exception are invited to come to him, and take freely
of the waters of life, and the promise of Acceptance is clear. None shall be
refused who will come to him. So that upon this account we have as much liberty
in preaching the Gospel, and can give as much encouragement to sinners, as if
we did preach universal Redemption; for then men could have no surer footing
for faith then the word and promise of God, who cannot lie, and this word they
have now; He that believes shall be saved.

Secondly, Who can say that Christ died not for him in particular? thou have no
Negative; But the Lord has left thee a foundation for hope, yea and for strong
Confidence, if thou do not turn thy back upon Christ. That he died for
sinners, is clear; that thou art one is as plain; and if thou approvest of the
terms of the Gospel, if thou desire to partake of the benefit of his death
upon the terms of Believing and Repenting, thou may undoubtedly have it. If
thou will come, God keeps open house, and thou may assure thy self of thy
welcome. So that as to thy encouragement to come in to Christ, it matters not
whether he died for many, or for all; or whether for thee in particular or not;
for without all dispute He came that all they that Believe might be saved: And
they who say that Christ died for all, acknowledge that his death saves none
but upon these terms. If thou have a will to Believe and Repent, thy
encouragement is as good as any can be given thee: But if thou have no will to
these things, it is no matter whether he dyed for thee or not, for thou shall
be damned without all Controversy. He that believes not shall be damned; so
say we, and so say they who believe that Christ dyed for thee in particular.

Secondly, But does not this which has been said suppose that man has a free
will, and power to believe and repent, and convert himself? Because you say he
may be saved, if he will come up to the terms proposed.

Answ. No. This Doctrine which has been delivered, has no such foundation.
But I shall lay down as safely and as cautiously, yet as plainly as I can, what
we are to conceive of the abilities and will of man in this point.

First, It supposes that men who perish do not do what they can; they do not
exercise and improve that power which they have. I suppose the difference
betwixt Natural and spiritual abilities is discovered in the Parable of the
Talents; He that had the single Talent hid it, when they who had double Talents
improved them. Mat. 25.20, 24. Although we may by following Scripture
expressions safely say, that the Natural man's Abilities fall short in spiritual
performances, yet we cannot say, He has no power at all in these things. He
may do more good then he does, and he may do that which he does better,
although he can do nothing well. It is very hard to say how far he can go,
although we can show how far he cannot go. The abilities of nature must be left
like a Terra incognita which has not bin travailed over; Because never any
natural man did go so far as he was able to go for God.

Secondly, It supposes that no man did ever perish who did his utmost to lay
hold upon salvation by Jesus Christ. He who has given such encouragement, as
to say that he would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
will not refuse any who have labored with all their might and strength to come
to God by him. He that says, he will in no wise cast out them that come,
doubtless will not cast off those who take such pains to come. He that has
said to sinners, James 4.5. Draw near to me, and I will draw near to you, will
also make it good, and meet those more then half way, as he did the prodigal
Son, who desire to return to him. We have a notable scripture for this, Jer.
30.21. He shall approach unto me; for who is this that engages his heart to
approach unto me? As if the Lord had said; Do you not see how such a one tuggs
and labors with his heart to draw it Godward, and yet complains that when he
had done what he can, all will not do; his heart is full of backsliding. I will
not suffer such a poor soul to stand off; I will cause him to approach. God
has made an absolute promise to those who labor for Heaven, and take pains
as it were for life, Hosea 6.3. Then shall ye know if ye follow on to know the
Lord, etc. And the Lord says elsewhere: Then shall ye find me, if you seek me
with all your hearts.

Object. But you will say; is it not said Luke 13.24. Many shall seek to enter,
and shall not be able.

Answ. It is said, many shall seek, not strive, (i. e.) they would enter if it
could be with ease. The soldier who dare not or will not venture his life in a
storm, would seek for a way to enter without labor or hazard.

Secondly, Many may strive (as well as seek) but not to the uttermost; and they
have no reason to charge God with the loss of their souls, when they have not
put out their abilities to the utmost.

Thirdly, Many strive much, but not in Gods way, as the Scribes and Pharisees
did, and as the Papists and many Legal persons do, who do not strive in Christ
and for Christ. But there was never any that did his utmost for life in the
Gospel way, that did miss of it.

The Lord did never give any poor soul occasion to say; Lord, thou have
propounded such a way for poor sinners to come to life and salvation, and thou
have commanded us thus to seek it, and behold I would, but thou would not; I
have done my utmost on my part, but thou have failed on thy part.

Thirdly, It supposes that no man did perish for want of power, which had a will
to Believe and repent. When ever the will of a poor Creature did come over to
God, there did always come with it a sufficiency of grace to lead him through
all the works of grace. Although there were not abilities suitable to the will,
yet they were some way suited to the work of Conversion. Not that I do think
with some, That the will of man moves first in the improvement of his abilities,
and that the Lord then steps in with more grace and strength as a Reward of
this. But I believe that God does by his special grace move the will, and sets
that (with what he has given already) to work, and where he does by his free
grace excite what he has already given, he does assist that with more. God is
first in the work of Conversion, and his grace moves the will; Psa. 110.3. In
the day of thy power thy people shall be willing. And when God does begin in
the will to move that toward Christ, he will not suffer the work to fail for want
of power to carry it on. God never starves his own work. Phil. 2.13. He works
in you to will and to do: There is a necessary Connection betwixt the will and
the deed. If the Lord (in his free grace) give the Will, he will enable to do,
if not what we should, or would, yet what he will accept of.

Fourthly, It supposes thus much; that it matters not whether thou have such a
power to Believe and Repent, which some plead for. For if thou have a Will to
Believe and Repent, thou shall not miscarry for want of power. Follow thy will,
and thou may expect power confidently from the Lord. But if thou have no will
toward these things, and art resolved not to make use of what thou have, it is
no matter whether thou have more or less. If thou have no power of thy self,
yet if thou have a Will, the Lord will not let thee stand out for want of power.
And if thou had all this power in thy hand, and have no will to employ and
improve it for thy soul, it is all one as to thy salvation. Thou shall perish.

Fifthly, It supposes that the Lord does not condemn men for what they cannot
do (although they cannot do what he commands) but because they will not. God
commands thee to Believe, to repent, to be humbled for thy sins, and to make
thee a new heart, to forsake thy very evil thoughts. Thou can no more do
these things, then the Blackamore can change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots, Jer. 13.23. But this is not that which will damn thee, that thou can
not do them, but this will be thy condemnation, that thou would not do them?
-- It is true; if thou were sensible of thine inability, thou might plead a
cannot now, and make good use of it thus; Lord thou have commanded that I
should keep thy righteous judgments. But I cannot. Oh that my ways were so
directed, etc. Thou have commanded me to make me a new heart, Ezekiel. 18.31. But
I cannot. Therefore Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a new heart, and renew aright
spirit within me.

Thou have commanded me to Believe, but Lord I cannot, I find abundance of base
unbelief within me, Mar. 9.14. therefore Lord help my unbelief. Thou have
commanded me to wash and make me clean, but I cannot; I can as soon wash off
the spots from the Leopard; Ez. 36.25. Therefore sprinkle clean water upon me,
and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow, Psalm 51.7. Thou
have commanded me to love thee with all my heart, and with all my strength; But
I cannot; I find much of the love of the world creeps into my heart, and
intercepts my affections, and I am full of Backslidings. Jerem. 32.40. Therefore
Lord put thy Law in my heart, that I may not depart from the; in a word, Thou
have commanded me to cease from evil, and to do good. But I cannot, for I find
(Romans 7.23.) a Law in my members rebelling, etc. Therefore Lord deliver me from
the sin of this body, or from this body of sin. This is the use thou
should make of thy cannot, and thus improved and pleaded out with God in
time, it might be of singular advantage to thee. But it will be vain to think
to lay up this plea by thee until the last day, and to think to stop Judgment
by it then. For the Lord will proceed with thee upon other terms, and so will
frustrate such a plea as this is; For he will not condemn thee because thou
could not, but because thou would not believe. And when thou art found
guilty of stubborn and wilful disobedience, it will be in vain to plead
inability. Thy weakness was the reason why thou could not believe; but it
was not the reason why thou would not believe. If ever thou would have
pleaded insufficiency, thou should have done it whilst there was time for it,
when it might have been removed. The business then to be proved will be that
thou would not believe, and for this thou shall be condemned. John 3.19. This
is Condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more
then light.

Sixthly, It supposes that a man's cannot is from his VVil not. Therefore he
cannot because he will not. There is a Twofold Cannot in unbelievers. A first
and a second. The first is while the day of grace does continue, of which I am
now to speak, and this is from his corrupt will. While God is offering to him
terms of peace and reconciliation, he is wilful, and shuts his eyes, and ears,
and will not see nor hear what is for his good.

There is a second Cannot which follows this, a Judiciary Cannot. When man has
shut his eyes, and therefore could not see the things of his peace, the Lord
seals them up, and says, From henceforth thou shall not see any thing for thy
good; this is a dreadful Cannot, and when men come to this, they are almost in
Hell. But I am to speak of the former of these, (which is so much the more
fearful because it leads to this) the Cannot which arises from a man's own will:
the will and affections blind the Understanding, and therefore he cannot see;
The corruption of mandoth most of all appear in his will, for this is the very
seat of it, from whence it issues forth into every part of him, and defiles
the whole man; the will is the Ringleader in good or evil. And that is not
misled by the understanding, until the understanding has been seduced by that.
A man is first prejudiced against spiritual things, he wills them not, and
therefore he sees not the excellency that is in them. Thus the will blindes the
understanding, and that leads the will aside, and so the blind lead the
blind, till both fall into the d^tch. Thus we see daily by sad experience, how
men's passions or interests do blind them, that they do not see things as they
are. Men love or hate things, and then they judge them to be good or evil
according to their affections.

The Natural man hates the ways of Godliness, and then fancies them to be hard
and unpleasant; he judges them foolishness, because they cross his lusts,
which have gotten his affections, and therefore he cannot receive them. Again,
he loves his lusts, and therefore he fancies that they are comely and pleasant,
he is not willing to see the deformity of sin. Like some fond Mother, who do
ates so much upon her child, that she will hear no evil of it; she is so
blinded by affection that she cannot see faults. Thus it was with Balam, who
(although he had assurance that Israel should be blessed and not cursed) would
feign persuade himself (through the extreme love of the wages of iniquity) that
he might curse Israel from such or such a place. So also is it with men,
although the word of God fly in their faces for sin, and tells them, that if
they let it not go, their souls shall go for it; yet the love of sin and their
extreme unwillingness to part with it, puts them upon studying some excuse or
other for it, and they would fain persuade themselves that there cannot be so
much danger as is pretended in keeping this or that sin. So that the reason why
they see not the evil and danger of sin, is because they are not willing to
see. They are not willing to see what surfeiting and drunkenness will cost
them, that they shall have hunger and thirst for them in Hell. They do not
willingly see what the Lust of the eyes, the Lust of the flesh, and the pride
of life will cost them; that those flames of Lust shall be turned into flames
of fire.

They are loath to see what covetousness, pride, or oppression, etc. will come
too, and therefore they consider not the danger and nakedness of their poor
Souls. And who is so blind as he that will not see? Surely such a blindness
cannot be pleaded before the Lord, When a man is corrupted in his affections,
it is hard to set his judgment right; For such a man will see nothing that
might weaken his former opinion. Thou love thy corruptions, thy bosom lust;
the Word bids thee cut it off, if it were a Right Hand, and pluck it out if it
were a Right Eye* nay it bids thee do it without d^lay. The Devil persuades
thee that thou need not be so strict, thou may spare one Lust, the Lord
will pardon thee in this one thing, or if thou must cast it away, it is time
enough yet, hereafter will serve the turn. Now although the Scripture be plain;
and reason tells thee, that if it were possible for thee to be saved, and yet to
keep one Lust, or that another time might serve turn to part with it, yet it
were the safest way to part with every Lust, yea and that presently also; yet
the Love that thou bear to thy Lust does blind thee, so that thou will see
or hear nothing to the prejudice of it. Thou art like the deaf Adder that stops
his ear, and refuses to hear, Charm the Charmer never so wisely, Psalm. 58.5.
Some say of the Adder that she is deaf on one Ear, and stops the other to
prevent charming: others say that she lays one Ear close to the earth, and
stops the other with her Tail.

It is true thou can not hear. But what is the Reason of it? is it not
because thou have stopped thine ear; And thou can not see; but is it not
because thou will not? thou have shut thine eyes. But will this be a good plea?

It is observable that two Evangelists quoting that passage in Isaiah Chap.
6.9. The one says, Joh. 12.40. They could not because he had blinded their
eyes, etc. But another gives the reason of it from their unwillingness to
embrace the truth Math. 13.14, 15. For their eyes they have closed etc. So that
laying both together, It is plain, that sometimes men cannot because they will
not: sometimes again they cannot, because God says they shall not. But the
second is a punishment for the first.

Thus far I have shown you what kind of Natural abilities this doctrine
supposes in the Creature; I shall add a few things to show you what kind of
freedom it supposes in the will.

It supposes that the Lord leaves the Will free, I mean the will of the
Natural man (i.e.) he dos not determine or incline them to Evil, but leaves
them to their own choice, whether it be of good or evil, of life or death,
light or darkness. if he should move them to Evil, that could not be true of
the Apostle, James 1.13. God tempts no man to evil. Therefore the Lord tells
Israel that he had set life and death before them, that they might choose one.
And the reason why men do not choose life when it is set before them rather
then death, is not because the will is not free, but because it is corrupted and
depraved; For without controversy the Will is so far free, that what ever a
man wills or chooses, he does it freely, the will cannot be forced. But let me
not be mistaken here, as if I were pleading for that which some do make to be
the liberty of the Will. They would have the Will of man to be free from
corruption, and void of Enmity to God and his ways, and to stand indifferent
betwixt good and evil. Now I do not say that the Will of man is not corrupted;
but I say that the Will has an Essential Freedom; and this may very well be;
for it may be more prone to Evil then to good through corruption, and yet loose
none of its Essential Liberty.

Consider therefore the Freedom of the Will does not consist in an indifferency
to good or evil, as some would have it, who place the Will of man Naturally
betwixt these two without any inclination to one more then to another. And
indeed, they who lay the whole weight of Salvation upon the Will of the
Creature, must prove this, or they prove nothing: For if man's Salvation does
depend wholly upon his will, as to the perfecting of it, and that Will be
biased by Natural Corruption, there is great and eminent danger of such a man's
miscarrying. But although the Will be left free, and not determined to Evil by
the Lord, yet I shall show you that there is no such freedom of Will as many men
dream of, viz. Never any man did stand equally poysed betwixt good and evil.

First Them. Adam in the state of Innocence had freedom of Will, if ever any had
it, yet he did not stand thus at an indifferency betwixt good or evil. But with
the liberty of his Will he had a holy inclination to good. He had a holy
disposition to good, yet withal a power to choose the contrary. And this
inclination to good, was of the perfect freedom of his Will. But if the freedom:
of the Will did consist in an indifferency to good or evil, then it must follow,
Either that Adam had not a free Will, or that Adam had not the Image of God. For
such an indifferency to good or evil, could not consist with the Image of God.
For wherein was he like to God, if not in his Will? And if that were inclined no
more to good then evil, wherein was he like to God? surely he stood inclinable
to good, although not unchangably; so that although there was a holy
disposition in Adams heart to good, yet this did not take away the freedom of
it; he willed good the more freely; and for evil he had a liberty to choose it,
as he did being tempted.

Secondly, Man in his fallen estate has not such a kind of freedom of Will as
consists in the indifferency of it to good or evil. For besides the liberty
of his will, there is corruption in it inclining and byassing it to Evil, which
yet he freely wills. And that there is such corruption in the will of man, is
plain, in that the Scripture excuses no part, and principally it charges
corruption upon the VVil. Nay to show how much the VVil is inclinable to Evil,
he calls the Lusts of men the Wills of the flesh and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.2.
intimating that such abominations as they have lived in, had their rise
principally from the corruption of the Will, which did lead to such things.
Hence I suppose it is that evil things are called our own things, and the ways
of sin our own ways, Acts 14.16. He suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways, (i. e.) in ways of sin and vanity. Hence also the Lusts and loose
practices of the Gentiles are called the Will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3. To
show that their very hearts and affections were in such ways and works, and
that what they did was not so much from any thing without, as from the strong
and steady bent of their own Wills: Nay the Apostle to show more fully the
corruption of the Will, makes but one will betwixt carnal men and the devil,
Ephesians. 2. Compare the second verse with the third. He says in one, they walked
according to the course or inclination of the World, and in the other he says,
they walked according to the Prince of the powers of the Air; They fulfilled
the Will of the devil and their own at once; And indeed Natural men do incline
to evil as he does, only their wills are changeable and may bow toward God, but
his is unchangably fixed on evil: so that by this it appears the natural man
has no such freedom or liberty of Will as as was mentioned. God has left it
free, but his own corruption has not left it indifferent to good or evil, but
strongly inclines it to the latter: And if the natural man stood in such an
indifferency to good or evil, it is very strange that the Holy Ghost should
speak so of the whole lump of Mankind, Romans 3.10, 11, 12. There is none that
seeks after God: there is none that does Good, no not one. It is strange that
none should choose the right way, if they stood all indifferent.

Thirdly, We see the renewed man stands not in such an indifferency; For grace
which does not destroy the liberty of the will, inclines it to Good. We find
that the will renewed is the very seat of Grace and holiness, Romans 7.18. To will
is present. And the same Apostle says, With my mind I serve the Law of God.
Surely by his mind he properly means his will: that was strongly moved toward
God, and he could see grace there, although he could see it no where else, ver.
18. In my body dwells no good thing Saints see grace in their wills, which does
support them against the corruption which they see in every part beside. And by
the Rule of Contraries, if grace be most in the Regenerate Will, Corruption is
most in the Unregenerate Will; but this the Natural man will not take notice of.
so that its manifest that although Man in Innocence, in his fallen, and in his
renewed state, had liberty in their Wills, yet none of them had that liberty
which consisted in an indifferency to good or evil.

First, For Adam in innocence had liberty to choose good or evil, but he was
disposed and inclined to good. Eccles. 7.29. God made man upright.

Secondly, Man fallen chooses evil rather then good, Genesis 6.5. The thoughts of
his heart are evil, only evil, and that continually.

Thirdly, Man in his renewed state, although he has a corrupt part in him, yet
he is more inclinable to good then evil. His Will is principally for God. So
that these things considered, we may Conclude that a Man's Cannot is from his
Corruption. And if Paul complained of a Cannot, Romans 7.18. when yet his Will
was not indifferent but manifestly inclining to good; surely we do Nature and
the Natural man no wrong to say of him, that he cannot, because of his
Corruption which does strongly dispose his Will to evil. It is strange that
Saints complain of a Cannot, who have grace in their Wills, and yet many will
not allow such a Cannot in the Natural man, who has nothing but Corruption in
his Will.

Having now shown you these things, there lies another scruple to be answered,
which is this; Does God go so far as has been hinted, to make a day of Grace
for them that perish, and have they all outward helps in common with them who
are saved, and have they so many inward helps as have been mentioned.

Qu. Wherein does the work of God upon his Elect differ from his workings upon
these whilst their day continues.

Ans. The difference lies principally in this; That all the movings and workings
of God upon wicked men, are not upon their Wills to bring them over to himself;
but they are upon their understandings, their Consciences, and sometimes upon
some of their affections. But the principal work of God upon his Elect is upon
their Wills, they come over first and fastest unto God.

The Lord goes thus far with those whom he converts not; W^l, says he, I will
prove you by illumination, I will show you many of the truths of the Gospel, and
you shall see what belongs to your peace, so far that thy judgment shall be
for Heaven. Nay I will shake conscience also, and that shall rise against thee by
way of conviction, thou shall see the danger of thy estate in this condition,
and I will break in upon thy affections; thou shall find, not only fears of hell
and wrath to solicit thy return, but also some joys in complying with my
word and ways. But as for thy will, I will leave that to its freedom, let it
choose what pleases it best; now let it take life or death, they are both
before it. And now if the will were indifferent when Judgment and conscience,
and some of its affections are for Believing and Repenting, it would surely
strike in, and all these would engage and bring it over to Christ. But
notwithstanding all this, the Will falls back, and chooses vanity and sin, which
pleases it best, because of the corruption which is in it. So that whiles
corruption remains in the Will, it spues out this knowledge and these
convictions, and runs on to folly, which it has chosen. Romans 1.28. They did
not like to retain the knowledge of God in their hearts. Whatever comes in to
check the soul in the way of sin, is an unwelcome guest, so long as the will
remains corrupted and tainted, and the will casts but the light of the
understanding, and the convictions of conscience, as the mariners do pump out
the water which breaks in upon them. Balaam had a clear knowledge of the
happiness of the Saints, but his Will was for Covetousness.

Felix had a clear conviction of judgment to come, but his will was for his
corruption, and therefore he resolves to stop the mouth of Conscience by
sending Paul away. The will deals with the light of truth as the sore eye deals
with the sun, shuts the window to keep it out because it offends. John 3.17.
Men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. They are
set to do wickedly, and they resolve to do it quietly.

But when God works upon his Elect, he begins with their wills, he sets them at
work, and when this begins, the whole man soon follows. For the will commands
all, it bids one go, and it goes; and another come and it comes; and though the
Lord does thus work upon the Will, yet he takes not away the liberty of it. But
what the soul wills it wills freely, and his principal distinguishing works
lies in these three things.

First, he takes off the prejudice that was in the Will, and that aversness
which was in it to spiritual things. Before, Corruption did lead it against
light and Convictions, now it is otherwise. This was the first work upon Paul,
Act. 9.4.5. Christ took off the prejudice he had against the ways and people
of Christ; why persecutest thou me, says Christ, these are my ways and my
people. Then Paul cries out, Lord what will thou have me to do?

Secondly, The prejudice of the Will being removed there is an easier and
fairer way opened to spiritual things, the soul sees execllency now, where it
saw none before; and so the understanding gets more light, and is the better
able to guide the Will. How did Paul see the truth and Harmony of Scripture to
prove Christ to be the Son of God when his prejudice against him was removed.
Act. 9.22.

Thirdly, He does not only remove prejudice, and gives it more light, but he
does also sweetly draw the Will by a persuasive power: So that although it comes
necessarily, yet it is freely. Therefore says David, who had experienced this
work of grace upon himself, Psalm 110.3. In the day of thy power thy people
shall be willing. When God does manifest the power of Grace, it is mostly to be
seen in the Wills of his people. You have a manifest proof of this, Jer. 31.18,
19. After I was turned I Repented. And what was that turning, but such a power
as I have shown you moving the will. And he acknowledges his repentance to be a
fruit of his turning to God, or rather of Gods turning him. What is it that
David prays for, is it no more then illumination or conviction, Psalm 119.36.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. And what does the Spouse pray for but
this? Cant. 1.4. Draw me and we will run after thee. Does she pray only for a
moral drawing? Surely no. She was convinced of the excellency of Christ, and of
following of him before, as is plain by the 2d and 3d verses. But she prays
for more effectual grace in her will, and indeed here lies the maine of the work
of grace. For should God let in never so much light and plain Convictions, and
yet suspend his influence from the will, that would hang behind, and the soul
would be left out of Heaven. It would be sad with Gods people if things should
be left depending upon their wills, and their wills left to themselves. And if
there were no more but a Salvability or possibility for all men to be saved,
and this did hang upon their wills embracing or not embracing the Truth
according to their Liberty; then, although some would say, here is hopes that
every man might be saved, yet there were a stronger probability, that no man
might be saved. For this must be granted.

First, that as all have liberty to choose, so they have liberty to refuse, and
so may all be lost.

Secondly, They are all corrupted, and very likely they may be biased by that,
and led aside from the truth.

Thirdly, They are tempted, and it is Ten to one but this may turn the scale,
if the Will stand indifferent; it is a strong probability that Corruption and
Temptation together will weigh down the scale.

Fourthly, Satan prevailed over Adam when he had more grace then we, and none
of those corruptions which we have; therefore he may prevail over every
particular man il he stand upon his terms.

Fifthly, He often prevails over the people of God against their wills, which
are inclined to good, and by grace disposed for it; How much more may he
prevail over those whose wills at best are but indifferent, but as has been
proved are corrupted.

But some will say yet farther; if there be such a difference betwixt the work
of God upon the Elect and others, and God does afford that to one which he does
not to another. Qu. How shall all men be left without excuse? shall not those
that perish have somewhat to say for themselves, in as much as the Lord did not
work upon them as he did upon others?

Answ. No. Because first he leaves them the casting voice; he goes so far
with them until it comes to this, whether they will believe and repent or not;
it lies now upon the motion of their wills. If thy Will did move Heavenward, thou
should be saved; if it move otherways, thou art lost. The main thing which
stands betwixt thee and Heaven, is thy corrupt will.

Secondly, Thou have as much from God to move thee to look Heavenward, as thou
have from Satan to lead thee on in sin. For thou have light, and Convictions,
and many moral persuasions from the Lord, and thou have no more from Satan; He
cannot force thee, he can but persuade; and thus the Lord deals with thee many
ways Nay, thou see oftentimes more reason to come off from the world, and
thy Lusts, and to follow Christ, then thou do to continue in them, and yet
thou go against these persuasions.

Thirdly, Thou do follow thy light in all things, except the things of thy
soul, thy will follows thy understanding in all carnal things, in profit,
honor, and advantage, but it goes contrary to it in the things of thy soul.

Fourthly, Thou can not plead thine inability, because thou think that
thou have ability. Thou think thou can Believe and Repent at pleasure, yet
thou do not set about it, thtrefore thou art inexcusable. As these Jews
were, John 9.41. Because you say you see your sin remains.

Fifthly, Thou abusest so much power as proves that had thou more thou
would abuse that also. He that wilnot use that which he has, would not use
more if he had it. Therefore thy not having enough cannot excuse thee. Luke
16.10. He that is unjust in a little is unjust in much. Therefore may it be
said of thee as it was of them, Luke 16.31. Neither would they Repent if one
rose from the dead. So may I say; if thy Will be against Repenting and
Believing, if Angels should come from Heaven, and the damned should be sent
from hell to preach to thee, thou would not believe.

Having dispatched these, I come now to the use of what has been laid down.

Use. Is it so then that men have a day, Then how justly will God condemn such
Gospel sinners at the last day? God will be justified when he speaks, and clear
when he judges, but especially when he deals with such as obey not the Gospel.
If that Judgment shall be acknowledged just which shall pass upon the Heathen,
because they did not walk up to the light of Nature, which was the only light
they had. How much more will thy sentence be just, who does not obey a light
which is far greater then this. Thou had so much light as to make it day to
thee when it was night with them: You never heard that any man's Condition who
lived not under the Gospel, was called day, but night and darkness, as appears,
Math. 4.16. It is said the people sat in great darkness before Christ came and
preached to them. And Ephesians. 5.8. They were called darkness. But if they perish
who fall in the night, woe be unto thee if thou fall in the day. Consider of
this I beseech you, all you who live under the Gospel. What will you be able to
say for your selves at the last day when Christ shall plead the case with you.
When he shall point out some of you before men and Angels, and say, Behold
these are the men and women that would have none of me, nor my ways. Time was
that I offered them life and salvation, but they would not have it upon my
Terms, but now they shall not have it upon any Terms. They chose their Lusts
before my ways and Statutes, and now I will choose their ruin and destruction.
These poor souls shall have that charge laid against them, which is brought in
against Jezabel, Rev. 2.21. I gave them space to Repent, and they Repented not:
And what answer can be given to this? Will it not fall heavy when the Lord shall
say; You cannot say that I took the first advantage against you. No, I waited
long, and you had your time, you were not gathered until your iniquities were
full ripe, through my patience, and your perverseness. Wherefore if all these
poor wretches should join together to petition for one drop of mercy, it would
not be granted unto them; If they should lift up their voices together, and
wept bitterly as Esau did for the blessing, yet they should not prevail,
because they come too late. Such souls shall be more miserable then Esau was
for although he came too late, and the chief blessing was gone, yet he had a
lesser instead of the greater. But these who will not have it when it is
offered, shall not only lose the blessing, but shall be cursed instead of being
blessed. Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed. And what can be more just then
this, that they who would not receive the blessing when it was offered them,
should now have a curse instead of a Blessing? And what a Gall will this be to
their hearts to consider how much they have lost for how little, and what
fools they were to neglect that blessedness which is now lost, but did once
lie at their feet. Although every condemned sinner shall be sent to Hell
convinced of the Justice of the sentence under which he lies, yet none shall go
with such shame and confusion to Hell, as those who have had such a day as has
been declared.

Use 2. If there be such a day, and thy salvation depend upon thy closing with
the Gospel, and the offers of it, or thy rejecting of it. Then let not your
heads be so much busied about those things which when thou have found out thou
may be damned. Thou pretendest that thou art much busied about enquiring
whether Christ died for all or not, and that this is a point of such
concernment that thou can not believe unless thou art satisfied about it.
Alas when thou have gotten the greatest satisfaction that may be, thou art as
far from Heaven as now, and thou may perish notwithstanding. For if thou
believe not, if thou art not regenerated and born again, whether he died for
thee, or not, thoushalt be damned. It were more profitable abundantly for thee
to spend that time which has been spent in this study in inquiring after the
terms of the Gospel. Study Faith and Repentance, Self-denial, and the taking up
of the Cross, Go and learn what the meaning of this is; Unless a man be born
again be cannot enter into the kingdom of God. I remember there were some who
came to Christ with such a question as this, and although it were not
altogether useless, yet because it might have been more practical, he slighted
it, and them that brought it unto him, Luke 13.24. Are there few (say they)
that shall be saved, Christ would not answer this, lest he should give them
encouragement to multiply needless questions to him: But he advises them to
Enter in at the straight gate. It were better to be laboring to get in our
selves, then to be busy to know how few or how many shall go in, when it will be
all one to us whether they be more or less, if we be excluded.

Thus again many will busy their heads more about pleading out the abilities
of the Natural man in the things of God, then they do in employing and
improving what they have for God. It were doubtless much better for thee to
spend thy time in the improvement of thy abilities for God, and for thy Eternal
good, whether they be more or less, and in praying for an increase of them,
then to vindicate and maintain that to be great which thou make little use
of. For whether thy abilities be more or less, yet if they be neglected, thou
shall perish with them.

Use 3. If there be such a day, etc. then complain not for want of power until
thou have been sensible of, and mourned over the want of a will; for this is the
first and principal want of the soul. It is true, A man in his Natural
Condition does want power, yet it is not properly that he wants, but he rather
wants a will; for he has power to do more then he will, it cannot be said that
want of power stops him, because he goes not to the end of that which he has;
therefore he cannot complain justly and say I cannot, unless he were come so
far as he can. When thou art gone so far as thou can possibly, then thou
may complain of thy Cannot; And it may be a good plea. But whilst thou
may go farther, do not complain of thy Cannot; it is thy Will not which holds
thee back. Those complaints are but excuses, and God will so cast them back upon
thy teeth at last. Thou say as the sluggard did who is not minded to leave
his bed, I cannot go, there is a Lion in the way; But how does he know what is
in the way when he lies in his bed? so say thou I cannot, but thou do not
try whether thou can or not. Thou do not attempt it, or at least very
carelessy. The plain English of this is, thou will not; yet thou deceivest tby
self by complaining thus of thine inability, and would have thy will excused,
as if there were no fault in it.

Wicked men have gotten a trick to steal the complaints of Gods people, and
they take them into their mouths very improperly. For although the people of
God who have wills to do more then they can, may complain properly of their
cannot, yet this belongs not to thee; for thou can do more then thou will.
Complaints of inability do sit the mouths of none but the people of God,
because it is not the want of VVil, but of power which stops them. Therefore
they can say; Lord we would be more spiritual and more holy, we would do more
then we do, but we cannot. God has discovered unto them the corruption of
their Wills in their former estate, and has humbled them for it, and he has
showed them how far they did fall short of their abilities formerly, and laid
them in the dust for it, and now the stream of their wills is turned, and they
run out infinitely after God. But for thy part thou were never humbled for the
Corruption of thy VVil, thou art not therefore fit to complain of a cannot. How
can thou without shame complain for want of power, when thou have not gone
to the end of what thou have. Go and learn what it is to be humbled for want of
a vvil for God, and when thou have mourned for want of this, then thou may
next be pitied when thou complainest for want of power, but until thou have
used all means in thy power, and reach, thou have no reason to complain of a
Cannot; but when thou have done this, then thou may take up this complaint;
Lord, thou have commanded me to do thus, and thus, but I cannot. Behold I have
sed the means, it sticks not at my VVil, for I have given al diligence, but it
sticks for want of power. Lord I would if I could.

This is intimated in that Plea which Paul makes, Romans 7.18. How to perform
that which is good I find not; As if he would say, I do not plead a Cannot for
excuse, for it is not an idle one. Though I cannot do what good I would, yet I
am not content with willing it, but I am seeking to do it, but I find not to
do it, though I enquire after it with all diligence. Saints do not fail of the
good they would do for want of Endeavors, but thou ceasest from endeavors and
pleadest a Cannot, before thou have used this. Thy plea is a mistake, and there
is a delusion in it; it fits not thy mouth, go thy way home, and study thy will
not, and mourn over that; but leave this complaint to those to whom of right it
does belong.

Use 4. If there be such a day* Then labor to improve thy abilities without
trusting to them; strive, as knowing that without striving thou shall not be
saved, and yet look unto Christ as having done nothing thy self. Cast away all
selfe-confidence. Run, for he that runs not shall not obtain, yet look for
all from free grace, knowing it is not he that wills, nor he that runs,
but God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. If thou do perish, it is through thy
own default, because thou do not what thou may: But if thou art saved, it
is not for any thing wrought by thee, but for the free mercy of God in Christ.
This is a great mystery to man, he cannot tell how to act in the way of
salvation without relying upon what he does. If it be not (says he) in my power
to Believe and repent, why should I act? And if it be in my power, why do you
advise me to deny my abilities? Hence come two great miscarriages amongst men:
They run into the extreme on either hand. Some have such high opinions of the
abilities of the Creature, and take the work of salvation to be so much in the
hand of Man, that they know not how to deny themselves in their own actings and
wisdom in spiritual things. They give God the honor of putting them into a
possibility of being saved; But they take the honor of perfecting their
salvation to themselves.

Others lay the work so upon God, that they excuse themselves from doing any
thing. Alas (say they) we are weak, and what can we do? If he will convert us,
we shall be converted: These will not know the Doctrine of Duty. There are few
that will bring the Doctrine of self-denial and duty together; That will work and
yet deny their works; expect God in a way of striving, and yet not rest upon
endeavors. But to these I say, Although you cannot do enough to save you, yet
you may omit enough to damn you. Therefore improve your abilities, lest ye
perish for neglecting them.

To you who rely upon your own abilities, I say, The denying of your own
abilities will do you no harm; for esteeming of them as little, does not make
them less; but going out of your selves to God may make them more. I say in a
word to all, You have a day. If in this day thou do not lay hold of eternal
life, thou shall be damned because thou would not. But if in this time thou
do embrace the terms of Christ, and lay hold on peace, it is not because
thou would, but because he would. He did stir up thy will and abilities, and
did give in fresh supplies, or else thou had perished. Let therefore what you
have heard of the abilities of the Natural man provoke you to go as far as it
is possible for such a one to go; and let that which you have heard of his
inability keep you humble, and teach you to cry after Christ in the language of
that poor man, Lord help my unbelief. Join self-denial to all endeavors, be
active and humble, Conscientious to use all that thou have for God and thy
soul, and yet look upon all as being nothing, and then thou have learned this
truth aright.

Use 5. If so. Then let all the people of God admire his distinguishing grace,
who has not only extended his common, but his special mercy to them. He has
given others enough to leave them inexcusable, and enough to aggravate their
Condemnation, but he has given you enough to convert you. It was mercy that
God gave others the Gospel, and the offers of it, But what mercy is it that he
has inclined your hearts to embrace the same being offered? He gave them a day
to seek, but he set this day apart to seek thee. He set life and death before
them, and left it to them to choose. But the Lord himself chose for thee the
better part. He wrought upon their understandings or consciences, but he moved
upon thy Will. He gave thee a Will to thy power, yea and beyond it, who had
abilities before beyond thy Will. Here lies the great differencing work of grace
which thou may never forget: He wrought in thee to Will and to do of his good
pleasure. So that although they who obeyed not the Gospel were condemned
through their own Wills, yet thou were saved through the good pleasure and Will
of God, who made thee willing in the day of his power. Who has made thee to
differ? Is it not the Lord? oh take heed of diminishing the grace of God. When
thou deniest the distinguishing acts of it, you do eclipse the Glory of it. So
much as you take from the Corruption of the Will, so much you take from the
eminency of grace. Let those who pretend to Regeneration bless the Lord, not as
having received grace in Common with others, but as having received grace in
special above others. Even as they did, Rev. 5.9. They bless the Lord for
redeeming them out of the tongues, and out of the Nations, etc. That God
vouchsafed more to them then to those amongst whom they lived. Oh you may say,
It was mercy that God offered us Heaven upon any terms; and if he had gone no
further, it had been enough to convince us that he was gracious. Oh but he has
given us what he never gave them, viz. hearts to believe and close with his
gracious tenders, or else we had withstood them also. He gave them the Law, but
he put it in our hearts, all our desires after grace are from his
superabounding grace, and what we are more then others, that we are from what
God did vouchsafe unto us more then unto them. It is not from the improvement
of the same Talents and means which he had with others, nor from a Compliance
with that general Gospel grace which was given to them and us; But it was from
additional mercy; this was distinguishing mercy; It Is by this grace that we are
what we are. So we can say as the Apostle, Gal. 4.9. Although we know God, yet
it is more proper to say we are known of God. Therefore let him have the honor
of his own work upon your hearts, in converting and turning them to himself;
let the work be acknowledged his from the beginning to the end of it; look on
him as the author and finisher of your faith. If God has moved thy heart
toward himself, and has met thy endeavors with success, and thou art able
in thy experience to say, it is good to draw nigh to God, take heed of setting
up an high opinion of thine own free Will, as if that had moved God, rather
then God had moved it; as if what thou have were rather the recompense of
improved Abilities, then the fruits of Gods distinguishing Grace. If ever you
would honor free grace, keep up in thy heart a deep sense of its
distinguishing acts.

Use 6. If it be thus, Then above all things look to your Wills, and try them
whether they be set for heaven and holiness or not; And in pursuing this mind
these three things.

First, Get a through sense of the Corruption of thy Will naturally and of its
indisposition to Good. For want of the knowledge of the malignity of the will
causes deep security amongst many; they think their hearts are as good as any,
when indeed the reason why they account them good, is because they did never
yet study the evil of them; and many poor souls go blinded to Hell with the
Good opinion of their own Wills.

Secondly, Go to the Lord and entreat him to take the work into his hand; if
the business of thy Salvation be left upon the motion of thy Will, thou are
lost. Tell him that thou have found which way the Will of man does naturally
bend, and if he should leave thy Will to it self thou art likely to make the
same choice that others have done who have been so left. Tell him, thou have so
much Experience of the Corruption of thy Will, that thou dare not trust it,
nor venture thy Eternal interest upon it. And whereas others dispute to get the
work into their hands, do thou pray as hard to get it into the hands of God.

Thirdly, Above all things beg a Will of him. Pray earnestly that he would not
only put forth his power in Illumination and bare Convictions, but that he
would reveal this power in bringing over thy Will to himself. Plead out this
above all, that he would Convert thee that thou may be Converted, that he
would Incline thy Will unto his Testimonies, and that he would draw thee that
thou may run after him. And tell him often, that thou standed in need of
nothing more then a Will for him, and if this be not given in thou art lost.
Follow the Lord with continual complaints against the Corruption of thy Will,
and never leave him till he set up his Image in that, till he has bowed that
to his Commands, and when thou can say, his Will is thine, and thy Will is
his, then thou art a happy Man or Woman.

Application of the second Doctrine.

This day is not measured by the length of our lives, but the means outward or
inward.

Learn hence that there is more hopes of a people although ignorant and
profane to whom the Gospel is coming, then of those who are more knowing, from
whom the Gospel is departing. Gods withdrawing of public means and helps of
this nature speak his displeasure against a people eminently, and tell us
plainly that there is but little hopes of such. When the Gospel is coming into
a dark ignorant profane place, and declares that God has a people there, and
the day is dawning to them. But when it is going away from a people. It either
argues that God has no people there, or none more to gather, or that his work
is almost done. It argues that the Gospel has been abused or slighted, and
that the day of grace is drawing apeace to an end to such a people.

Secondly, it in forms us that they who live unprofitably under means are in a
far worse condition then those who live without means. There was more hopes
of the F^gtree although it were unfruitful before it was dressed, then there was
afterward: Before it was dressed the keeper of the Vineyard was in hope that
if it were dug it would bear fruit, but when the means was used, and no good
comes of it, it leaves him hopeless.

Thus when we see men wicked and profane, who live without the Gospel, we say,
oh if God would vouchsafe these poor souls the Gospel, there were hopes of
them: But we know not what to say, nor how to hope comfortably concerning those
who continue the same persons they were, notwithstanding the Gospel which is
vouchsafed them: There is more hopes of a drunkard and swearer in the dark
Corners, where they have not the light of the Gospel, then there is of such who
continue in these things in the very light of the Gospel. For there is hope of
the drunkard and swearer who has lived in darkness, that his day is not yet
begun, and that God may give a day yet. But we fear that many of you who
continue drunkards and swearers, etc. have past your day, that is, worn out,
and yet your souls are not healed.

Thirdly, See here a sad mistake under which many poor souls do lie. Some there
are upon whose hearts the word of God has made some impressions, and they have
been under some Convictions of Conscience, and they have had some trouble for
sin, and some fears about their Eternal state: But these convictions are now
abated, and their trouble for sin grows less and less, and they come into a
calm they know not how, and they bless themselves in this, as if things were
much better then they were. But alas they see not that this is the closing up
their day, or of their eyes; they are now quiet indeed, and can sin with less
trouble then formerly; the Word comes not near them, and Conscience holds her
peace; but this is a miserable sign of a declining soul; look to it you who
measure the goodness of your condition by the quietness and calmness of it,
not by your experience of the soundness of it. Consider that all things were in
peace and quiet whilst the strong man kept the house, and that strong man is
the Devil; when Christ came and knocked at the door of thy Conscience it made
some disturbance, and the Devil began to bustle and make a noise, but so soon
as Christ withdraws, he lies down in his place again, seeing all things safe;
as you know if you come to a house in the night and knock at the doors, the
Dogs will bark, but when the noise is over, and they perceive you are gone,
they will lie down in their kennels again; so is it in this case, when Christ
comes near unto thee, and knocks by convictions, and thou art awakened, and
seem to offer at the ways of Christ, and make a show of reformation, then
he roars upon thee and troubles thee; but if he see that thou art willing to
lie still, and Christ withdraw, then Satan will be quiet also, and so thy
convictions cease; consider (you that bless your selves in the cessation of
convictions and checks of conscience) that the night is the stillest and most
silent time, but it is the darkest; So may this time of quiet be the night of
thy soul, when the former time of thy conviction was thy day. And do thou
rejoice that thy day is gone, and that night is come upon thee? oh if thou
did but know what thou have lost in loosing a faithful convincing conscience,
thou would rather sit down and mourn over thy loss, then rejoice in thy
peace; sin prevails over thee and thou art quiet, the word smites and thou
feel it not, duties are neglected and thou art not troubled; oh is this a
peace to bless thy self in* art thou joyful because quiet? surely thou have
little cause.

But you will say; Is it not our duty to rejoice in the peace of conscience? and
do not the people of God do so?

Answ. It is one thing to have peace of conscience, and another thing to have
quiet of conscience: An enemy comes and appears before a city, and gives it an
alarm, and perhaps he withdraws without storming of it. Upon the withdrawing
of the enemy there is quiet, they are freed from the fears of a present storm;
but there is no peace concluded betwixt them, and the enemy perhaps is but
withdrawn to thy loss. If they had come to a treaty and Articles of agreement
had been drawn up, and the enemy had departed upon these, then they might have
rejoiced in their peace: but a wise man will not say such an enemy is at peace
with us; only they are quiet for the time: but there is no cause to be secure
concerning such a one so long as an enemy; perhaps he is but stepped back to
take a better advantage, as we find he did with Christ, he left tempting of
him, that he might tempt him the more dangeroussy. Oh therefore enquire whether
your quiet calm estate arise from the slumbring conscience, or from the treaty
with it, and agreement; Has it been harkened to, and answered, and pacified. An
enemy may sleep sometimes in his Tent, and he makes no noise, not because he is
reconciled, but because he is asleep, yet a sleeping enemy is an enemy, and
thou may know it when he awakes, that it had been better that he had been
kept waking; if thy quiet be from the sleepiness of thy conscience, not from
the satisfaction of it, thou shall find it had been better it had never
slumbered, that it will awake like a Giant, and set upon thee with so much the
more fierceness. It is one thing to have troubles of conscience removed by
satisfying the conscience, and another thing to have them removed by searing
the Conscience. A man is in a Lethargy, and he lies still and feels no pain,
he complains not, but his friends stand weeping about him, because they know
not whether he will awake again or not; but they weep not over one that is in a
sleep, because they know that rest is sweet, but the other dangerous, and often
deadly: Thus the case is with thee. Thou art now quiet, and Conscience smites
thee not, thou complainest not; oh but thy godly friends and relations mourn
over thee, they stand by thee as a dying man. Oh says one, I had hopes of my
Husband, or my Wife, or my child, or my friend; he or she was under some
Convictions for sin, and it seemed to me his eyes began to open, and he
strugled for life; I saw an outward change for a time, and I hoped it would be
a real effectual work, but oh my hopes are almost dead, I see that conscience
begins to be quiet, and he begins to be careless, and see how he is by little
and little sliding back into his former ways; oh I am afraid he will fall into a
spirit of slumber, and go to hell in it. I had abundantly more hopes of his
condition when he had less.

But these very souls which mourn over thee, rejoice to see another soul quiet:
they are glad to hear of the comforts with which God has comforted some poor
doubting souls, because they see that such souls came by their peace in another
way. Their peace is like natural sleep to the body, it refreshes their souls,
and they are the stronger and the more lively for God, but thine is a disease,
and spends and weakens it. God has given them peace by sprinkling their
consciences with the blood of Christ. But thy peace is from the hardness and
insensibleness of it, thou art almost past feeling.

Secondly, It is one thing to measure our condition by our peace, and another
thing to measure it by the soundness of this peace. A carnal and wicked man
measures his condition by the presence or absence of peace and trouble; If his
conscience be troubled, and there be any impressions made for sin, he judges
that condition sad, and he labors all ways possible to take off such trouble.
As Felix, as soon as ever the word made him tremble, he sends away Paul that he
might be quiet. Because he does not see the good which may follow such a
trouble. But a gracious heart counts his condition the better for such troubles
at first, and counts it a mercy that God would any way awaken him, and although
he lie under many fears, yet he expects much good from such troubles, and would
not be rid of them, but upon good grounds: and although he does pray constantly
to be delivered from those troubles, yet he would not have been without them
for the world, neither would he go back to his former condition, though he were
sure thereby to be rid of his troubles.

Again, when a gracious soul does get peace, he does not content himself barely
with peace, but he examines what manner of peace he has gotten; whether it be
a holy place yea or no, whether it be better then his trouble; for, says he,
although I wanted peace, and I sought for that, yet the Lord-knows that was not
all I sought for. I sought for holiness, and for communion with God, and f I
know my heart. I had rather be kept without peace in my spirit, and yet close
to God, then come nearer to peace and to go farther off from God. Therefore
unless he can see his peace is a holy gracious peace, accompanied with the
fruits of the spirit, and with communion with God, it will not please him; but
if the heart be carnal under trouble, it is careless under a calm, and so it
has freedom from the storm it is enough. It is a mistake therefore when you
say that the people of God do measure their conditions by the peaceableness of
it. No no, they measure it by the goodness and soundness of the peace that they
have, and they suspend their joy til they have proved and tried their peace.

Thirdly, You mistake the peace of the soul; for it does not consist in a
freedom from conviction of sin, nor in a cessation of the tenderness of
conscience, and a loss of the sense of the evil of it. But it lies in the
evidence of the pardon o^ sin, which is spoken in to the conscience, by which
it answers all objections that are brought against it. For the people of God,
who have most of this peace, have all these things yet remaining; Their peace
stands with all these, but thine is built upon the absence and want of these.
As first, a gracious heart has peace, yet it has convictions of sin. 1 John
1.8. If we say we have n^ sin, and. Nay he has more convictions of sin then
before, he sees more sin in himself then ever he saw in all his life. Job
42.5, 6. I have seen the Lord, I abhor my self; and Ezekiel. 16.63. You shall
be ashamed and confounded, when I am pacified toward you. Yes this does not
break his peace, because he sees sin and pardon together, and the peace does
not lessen the sight of sin, but makes it plainer to him. But your peace is
only in the cessation of Convictions; you see not sin as you did, and
therefore you are not troubled; if thine eyes were open, and thou did see thy
sin as the people of God do, it would revive thy troubles again. Thy peace is
false, because it consists not with conviction; if thou had a true peace,
it would heighten thy Convictions, thou would see more sin then ever yet
thou did, and those more clearly which thou have seen already, Romans 7.9. When
the Law came, sin revived and I dyed. This is spoken of Paul after he had
obtained the pardon of sin; and he that before saw nothing blameworthy in him
self saw afterward nothing but a body of sin and death.

Secondly, The soul may be charged for sin, and yet have peace. He may be
charged by God as Israel is, Ezekiel. 16. But this is to humble it. It may be
charged by its own conscience; as Paul, Romans 7.18, 19. In my flesh dwells no
good thing.

He may be charged by Satan, as we find that he is ready to charge the people
of God, and tempt them to doubt of their interest. But yet the soul may have an
answer to all these in the blood of Christ. A soul may have notwithstanding all
that is alleged, peace with Paul, Romans 8.33, 34. and stand out and say, though
I am daily charged, and I cannot but charge my self, yet who shall condemn? it
is Christ that has dyed. So that you see a Believers peace consists with
these things. But thy peace is in this; Time was that thou were troubled for
sin, and thou could not eat or drink, or sleep quietly for it, but now
you thank God it is otherwise. God began to charge thee for sin, and conscience
was stirred, and thou were afraid, and perhaps Satan began to charge thee too.
For when God begins to charge for sin, to mind it of Christ, Rev. 3.17. then
the Devil he charges to drive the soul to despair, Jerem. 18.12. And you shall
see whether the hand of God or Satan be most in the trouble by these two
things; whilst the trouble continues; you shall know by observing whether the
desires after Christ, or the fears of wrath and hell are the greatest; when the
Trouble ends you shall know by the continuation of such desires after Christ.
For if Gods hand be most In such troubles for good, he will keep up the soul
after himself when the trouble is over. But if Satan's hand be principal in
them, then they lose all those seeming desires which they had after Christ. Oh
you who have lost your seeming zeal for God with your troubles of conscience,
Consider, it is to be feared, that Satan only troubled to keep thee off from
Christ, he saw that God began to stir in the Word, and he thought it was time
for him to stir also; But when he saw that God began to cease striving with
thee, and thou beganst to grow cold again, he ceased to trouble thee also, and
hence is thy quiet: if Satan should but stir again, he would shake thy peace,
and this he would do if he saw any danger of losing thee, but he knows this
peace is a likelier way to hold thee then such a trouble; But Gods people have
a peace in despite of all his molestations.

A believers peace does not destroy the tenderness of his conscience, nor his
sensibleness of the evil of sin: for he is more sensible of sin, then he was
before; he sees the evil of it more, though the danger be not so much. He is
sensible of the smallest sin, and there is no sin which he now does account
so; when he was under terrors of Conscience he looked upon his gross sins,
and his fears did arise principally from them, but now he looks upon his
secret sins, and his grief is for them. So that he says when a temptation
comes, how can I do this thing and sin against God?

But the carnal man's peace is much built upon his insensibleness, he sees the
evil of sin less then he did, he feels Conscience less, and conscience
feels sin less; a little thing will not trouble it now, and therefore he has
peace. But I tell you, this is a mistaken peace which is built upon these
things; For you see Gods people keep these, yea increase some of them as their
peace is established; But if thou had not lost these, thou had not found
peace; and it is a miserable peace which is gotten by the loss of the
tenderness of the Conscience.

Fourthly, The people of God would judge themselves for the loss of their
troubles, if experience were not left in the place of them: the freedom from
trouble would trouble them; they would count it a very il change in their
Condition to change trouble for peace, if they could not experience another
change with this in their souls. Such a soul would say, Time was that my
conscience was awakened, and I was sensible of sin, and when I did step aside
I was troubled, and I could not be at quiet for want of the evidences of Gods
love, and of my eternal interest; but how is it now? there is a calm in my
spirit; but if my condition be as bad as it was when I was first troubled, if
my troubles be abated, if my condition be not altered, oh then my condition is
much worse; so much the worse by how much the more quiet it is. But here is
that stays the souls of Gods people, and satisfies their spirits. Oh says
such a one, I find blessed be God a change in my soul, suitable to this change
from trouble to peace. I find I was much troubled before for my sins, But I was
ignorant of Christ. But blessed be God he has revealed him to me for pardon.

I did perform duty before, but I rested in it, blessed be God for the change,
I can do it now and deny it. I was troubled before for the neglect of duty, but
I am now more grieved for the want of Gods presence in a duty. When I was
troubled before, I fled to my duties for ease, but now I go to the promises for
it. I was troubled before because I looked upon God in a covenant of works, but
now I look upon him in a covenant of grace.

When I was troubled, then I looked upon my gross sins only, but now I look
to my secret sins, and I mourn over that which no eye sees. I was troubled
because I was afraid of hell, and I could apprehend no pardon for my sin, but
now I am troubled for sin which I am sure is pardoned. I was in much horror of
conscience, and I cried out I shall be damned, and my trouble made a noise, yet
now I have another manner of trouble for sin, it is as burden some and a
bitter to me as ever, and I hate it more then ever, and now I mourn for it, and
melt away in the confusion of my face under the discovery of Gods free pardon
of my sin. Whilst I was in trouble, that kept me close to duty, although it
did not make me love the duty, neither did it mortify my corruption; But I
find now that my peace kept me close to duty also, yea and it makes duty sweet
to me, and it does carry me more after holiness then my fears did. For then I
did study so much reformation as might serve to quiet my conscience, but now I
labor to be holy as God is holy, 1 John 3.3.

Thus the gracious soul by comparing his present peace with his past troubles,
is comforted by the experience which is lest instead of such and such troubles,
under which it was formerly: And if it could find none of these, or such as
these, it would judge it self for the loss of such troubles, although thou
do bless thy self for this, that thy troubles are over, and all is quiet,
but all this while thou have no experience of a change in thy soul.

Fifthly, Saints judge it better to be troubled for sin, then to walk quietly
in it; and they had rather want a little peace themselves, then that sin
should have too much: It is sin has gotten peace, thou have none; sin has
leave to be quiet in thy soul. Thou were troubled for thy drunkenness, thy
swearing, or thy uncleanness, or thy scoffing, and thy Sabbath-breaking, and at
the neglecting of duties; because of these things Conscience would not let thee
be quiet; but now God has said to Conscience, let him alone, he loves these
sins, though he pretends to be troubled for them, let him go on, and enjoy
them quietly; and now thou art a drunkard again and quiet, a swearer and
quiet, an unclean person and quiet, a Sabbth-breaker and quiet, thou layst
aside duties, and yet are quiet; oh let me tell thee if the people of God were
to choose, (although they would not be in thy Condition for a world) yet if
they must choose one, they would rather be under thy former troubles, and
thereby to be kept out of the Alehouse, and thereby be kept to reading, and
prayer, then have thy peace which opens a way to al thy former loose practices
again. They judged thee in a better Condition, and had more hopes of thee when
thou were under trouble of spirit and did make Conscience of sin, then now,
that thou have a peace which gives thee liberty to sin as in former times: The
people of God would not have thy peace for the world.

Lay all these things together, and thou will easily see that thy peace is not
to be joyed in, and although it be true that Gods people do account a quiet
Conscience a great mercy, yet it is not such a quietness as thine is, neither
is it a bare quietness which they rejoice in, but the goodness of the
Conscience: But thine is such a quietness as is a Curse, and arises from a
Judgment of God in blinding thine eyes, in hardening thine heart, and
withdrawing all his Gospel light from thee: There was a difference betwixt the
people of God and thee in the time of trouble, and so there is a vast one now;
when they were under trouble of Conscience, yet they had a good Conscience,
although it were not quiet; now they have a good Conscience and quiet, so that
is much better. Thou had an evil Conscience when it was troubled, it was but
awakened, it was not sanctified. But now it is quiet and evil, it is the
worse. For although it were not then renewed, yet being enlightened it did
perform its duty to thee in some measure, which now it neglects, and so thy
latter end is like to be worse then thy beginning. Therefore oh man or woman,
who have concluded that it was better with thee then formerly because thou art
quieter, thou art under a sad mistake; for thy Condition is not grown better,
but thine eyes are grown worse.

Fourthly, if the day end under means, oh then what reason is there to shake
off security, and to give diligent heed least any thing slip by us that we
hear. Men are ready to say to the Word, as Felix did, Come another time: But
it is a question whether God will wait upon thee any more or not; perhaps
he will give a Commission to his Messengers to speak no more, he will send them
to another people. Or if it do come again, it may never come with that heat
and light that it comes now to thee; the Word which i^ n^w a spirited Wor^, may
be a dead co^d Word ever after to thee. Felix put off the Word when it came in
some power; He might have heard many Sermons before he met with such another.
Oh let not the probability of enjoying the means make thee secure under it.
Thou say pehapes, if thou were likely to have no more of it, thou would
then listen to the present word, and the Convictions of it. Oh but what if thou
were sure yet to enjoy the Word, art thou sure to find it a Convincing Word?
thou may have it then; but if God has withdrawn the inlightning convincing
power from it, what difference will there be betwixt thee and him that has no
word? oh how little is this considered and minded by the greatest part of man!
they hear as if they were sure to hear again, and as if there were no danger
of being lost under the Word; they say they have the means, and there is no
such have, if we here it not to day, we may hear it to morrow; we shall have
the same Word then, which we have now, and it will be well if we listen to it
then: But though you should have the same Word, and the same persons which
speak the Word to you then, yet you may find it as another thing to you then;
the Word may be now a Convincing Word, there may be some spirit and power in it
now, and then it may be otherwise to thee; God may have withdrawn all
convincing quickening comforting power from it, and then it will seem to thee
that it is not the same Word that it was; thou may hear the same things which
stir thee now, and not be moved at al, and then if God be withdrawn from his
Ordinances, it is all one as if he had taken them away too.

Oh take this into your Consideration you who do enjoy a constant Ministry,
and have the Word constantly preached to you, listen to it as if it were
departing from you; for though the Word it self continue, yet if the Spirit
depart from it; thy soul is undone. If you had but a little time to live, or
but a little time to hear the word, thou would be persuaded to look after
it. But oh these may be true, one or both; but suppose neither be true, that
thy life be not short, nor the means short, yet let me tell thee, the time in
which God will strive with thy soul may be short, yea very short. There is a
prefixed time set for thee to come in to Christ, which if thou passest over, if
thou did live to Methuselabs age, and had the choicest means under
Heaven, yet thou should not be converted. If thou had an assurance that
any time in thy life would serve the turn, yet thou have no reason to delay;
for thy life is very uncertain, and short for this great work: But the means is
more uncertain; thou art not sure that the Gospel shall always sound in thine
^ars. Oh but Gods striving with thy heart is most uncertain; for who knows how
soon he will give over to struggle with thee? Thy life is a very inconsiderable
thing, because of the shortness of it, it is but a moment in comparison of
eternity; Oh but the day of grace is a short thing in comparison of thy life.
Take heed of carelessness, as if thou did know that thy day of grace would
bold to the last day of thy life.

We never read that conversion and death met together in one day, save to one
man, which was the Thief on the Cross; it was to one, to prevent despair in
them whose eyes are then opened; and it was but to one, that none might presume
upon such a time before it come.

If such a day, and it has such an end, and it leave men under such an
irrecoverable condition, then take hold of the present time, while it is called
to day; Because thou art sure only of the present, there is a night coming
when no man can work, not only a night of death, but a night of spiritual
slumber, wherein thou shall walk up and down, with eyes blinded, understanding
darkened, affections alienated from God, Conscience seared with a black mark of
ruin and perdition, upon thy soul; when thou shall not only be without sense,
but past sense, past seeing, and past feeling, and past hopes: when thou shall
think that thou see, and yet see not, and think that thou perceivest, and
yet shall be blind as the Mole, having no true understanding of God, nor of
thy own condition before him. Oh when this night comes upon thee, woe unto
thee, thy work must needs lie behind for ever, If you could but foresee such a
thing as this is, and did believe indeed that it would come upon thee, would
thou not lay aside all delays, and bethink thy self of improving this inch of
time which thou have for Eternity.

I beseech you all therefore in the Lord, be persuaded to consider of this
thing, it is a great thing that I am treating about, lay it to your hearts, and
lay about you as those who have but a little time to mind a great business.

Think of these things.
First, Some think themselves too great to think on such things, they have
great cares and many encumbrances.

Secondly, Many think they are not great enough, when they are risen to such a
height in honor or estate, then they will mind it: and some too young, another
time will serve. All these put it off to another time. A deathbed, there they
appoint Conscience to meet them and debate the business.

Two great general Deceits run through men's hearts.

First, They pretend that they will comply with the Gospel; Few will say in
plain terms, We will not have Christ reign over us, or, We will never hear any
more of this matter, but they will appoint another time, as they judge most
convenient, not considering that the time they dream of, may not come at all,
or if it does it may be no time for this; the time for this work may be past.

Secondly, They act for the world, as if their being rich and great did depend
upon a day; but as if the business of their souls had no dependence on the
advantage of time; but the Scripture speaks otherwise, it has set thee a day
for thy soul, which if thou neglect thou shall lose; but for the world, that
may be had in the last place. Matthew 6. First seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof. Great men, mind this, you have but a day, you may
neglect the time, and God will be as strict with you as others in this, and you
have many hindrances, and less helps then others. Therefore not many rich, etc.

Secondly, To poor; you have a day too, although not to be rich and honorable,
yet to be happy, if you neglect it not.

It is a word of exhortation to you al; to old ones, you have spent a great
deal of time, and what provision have you made for Eternity? If your day be
not over, yet you cannot expect, that yours will last long, you cannot expect
to enjoy many days in the flesh, and if this be a truth which you have heard
from the Word, you are in a great deal of danger, and it is high time for you
to awake.

2 It speaks also to you that are Young ones, and bless your selves in the
prime of your days, and beginning of your strength; it speaks to you in that
of the Wiseman, Ec. 12 1. Remember now thy Creator.

Do not say, In my old Age, no, but do it in thy Youth; nor yet, I will do it in
my Youth, but not yet; but set about it now. I say to thee as Christ did to
Judas, What thou do, do it quickly. Do not say, Thy Years are but few yet,
and thy days are but begun; for ought thou know the day of Grace may be
almost done, although the days of thy life are but begun; this Gospel-day is
nearer to an end then thou art aware of: thou have no assurance of life, but
much less assurance of this; if You did believe this, how would it rouse up
your spirits, and provoke you to take heed of every opportunity for your souls?

5. If it be so, then take heed of slighting convictions, and the struglings of
conscience, for these are the critical times of your lives, then you are near
to making or marring, now is the time or never. And although thou art called to
be serious t all times, yet more especially now thy eternal happiness lies at
the stake; and when God begins to struggle with thee, it will be seen in a
short time whether thou will be eternally happy or miserable. This part of thy
life is like to those Critical days which Physicians observe, when either the
Disease abates, and breaks, or kills: So now, either thou will grow better or
worse after this, either the day will break, and darkness will fly away and
scatter or else the night will begirt thee, and thy darkness will be much
blacker then it was. Have a care therefore all you who come to the Ordinance
and find any stirrings upon your Consciences, lest you neglect this time.

First, Because now God is near unto you, I may draw an exhortation out of the
Apostles words, Acts 17.27. Now feel after God if happily you may find him,
for he is not far from you; he is now with you, and in you, by his
enlightening and convincing power, now is the time if ever for such a word to
take place, as we have, Isa. 55.6. Seek him whiles he may be found. If ever
God were near you in a way of mercy, it is now; he is not only near you by his
Gospel, but in it, he comes in it, and with it; he sends the spirit with the
Word, if thou do flight these motions, thou may never find him so near
thee; if he once go out of his Word and leave thee without a convincing light
and power, he then will go further and further from you, and then we may say,
Woe to you, when God is departed from you, Hos. 9.12. This is one of the first
steps of Gods forsaking Souls, when he forsakes the Word under which they sit,
and it is in order to that dreadful sentence, Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye
cursed, etc. O therefore as you would not hear that dreadful Sentence then,
fear it now; lose God now, and thou art like to lose him for ever; But if thou
would keep him now and possess him then, so keep and cherish his
Convictions: take heed of slighting these, for it is a slighting of God, and if
thou slight him while he is near thee, thou will drive him further off quickly.

Be more careful now then ever, because the day spends apace, it hastens away
more then ever; you know when the sun comes at the highest, he declines apace;
when the days are at their length, they do shorten quickly, and when it is
noon, the sun hastens to his bed. This time of Gods stirring with thee by
Conviction is as thy Noonday; if thou slight that, thy day will decline apace,
it will not be long ere it be night, therefore while it is not only day, but
noonday, work; for there is but a little time betwixt Noon and Night. Nay let
me tell thee, thy day of Grace is not like the Natural day, or year. You know
that the sun is as long descending as ascending, and therefore the afternoon
is as long as the fore-noon: But it will not be so with thee; thou may have
a long morning, and a short noon, and a speedy night. It may be long ere God
does begin to strive with thee; he may let thee live twenty, thirty, or forty
years before he comes thus near thee; all this while is but as thy fore-noon;
and then he may come near thy Conscience, This is the noon of thy day, and here
he may continue struggling with thee for a year, a month, a week, a day, nay
perhaps but one hour, as with Felix, with whom God strugled but one hour in one
Sermon: and if thou will not now hear, the night shall gather upon thee, and
thou shall be shut up under darkness, God will resolve to struggle but a little
while, and he will not be so long in departing as he was in coming; but if noon
be past, night comes suddenly; he may be long a coming, but quickly gone from
thee.

3 Be more careful now because God proportions the length of our day to the
clearness of the means which thou enjoyest, and to the strength of thy
Convictions. If God give men lettle means, then he allows them the more time;
if he gives them more means, he gives them the less time for this great work.
I do believe, that under the Law when things were dark, and in former days,
when the Gospel was but little preached to what now it is, God did give men a
longer and larger space for Repentance then he does now, Matthew. 3.10 he waited
longer upon sinners then now he does or will. And as he proportions to the
means, so to our Convictions. If he do strive much with a Soul and cause
Convictions to fall thick and strong upon it, it is an Argument that he intends
to contend but a little while with that soul if he slight them. He will speedly
convert that Soul or harden it. As we see in Felix, God did strive but a little
while, but it was in a notable way, he made him tremble, but we do not find
that he did strive any more after that fit was over. We see something of this
in Nature, those places and people who lie directly under the sun, and have
most of the heat and fervor of it, have not so long days in summer as they
who live more remote from in; as we in England have longer days at Midsummer,
then they that live under the Line; and they in Scotland have longer then we:
So it is like to be with thee, if thy means be choice, and thy convictions
strong, thy nay is like to be shorter; have a care therefore that thou do not
slight the one, or the other.

4 Be careful now, because thou do not know whether ever God will strive any
more with thee, if now thou slightest these, these may conclude thy day, and
seal up thy condition; thou have no sooner an intimation by these that thy day
is begun but thou have a hint that it may be ending. The same word which begins
to open thine eyes, tells thee, that it is not long ere they may be shut again.
God stands at thy heart and knocks, he promises thee, That if thou will open he
will come in, but he does not promise thee to continue knocking; if thou will
open says he, I will come in; if thou will not open, I will be gone. I will leave
thee. Say not to the Word, Come again, for perhaps it will never come so again;
God will not have thee deal so with thy neighbor, Prove. 3.28. and do thou
think he will be dealt so withal? Is it not a great Mercy that he will come once
to thee? Is it not a base and unworthy thing for thee to think that the great
God of Heaven and Earth should waith upon such a vile wretcht as thou art? Nay,
is it not just that the Lord should resolve to offer thee life no more, and
that be should disdainto follow thee any longer, who have refused him once, and
again? therefore be careful, because convictions slighted provoke the Lord to
withdraw them, and once withdrawn it is a question whether ever they will come
again.

5 Be careful now, because if this day be lost, all is lost, it is such a loss
as include in it all other losses; it is the loss of God, of happiness and
comfort of thy Soul, of eternal life, of that salvation which thou have perhaps
hoped for. It is a loss not to be supplied, because when this is past, comes a
night, and in it no man can work or walk This night is a very black night
indeed, there is no light in it at all. God made a lesser light to rule the
night, as well as a greater to rule the day; he did not leave the night wholly
destitute; so that although the night be not a time to travel in, yet if a man
be cast behind in his journey, he may find his way by the light of the moon, or
stars; these do borrow a light of the sun, and they do help in his absence, and
give notice that he is not wholly gone: But this night has no light to rule
it; darkness, blackness of darkness rules in it; There is no working in this
night, because no light; the word which is left behind gives no light to the
foul when God has withdrawn; he carries away all light with him, all true
saving light; so that a man shall never see any thing aright. He leaves no light
in providence, in Ordinances, in afflictions; they do not all of them bring a
man to see God, or his own condition aright: But all these things do become to
the Soul as those false fires in the night, which do lead men out of their way.
The word does but harden the heard, and blind the eyes, and mislead men, and
fill them with false presumptuous hopes, which when they awake will deceive them.
O now if there be a day, and after this day a night, and this night may come so
suddenly, thou do not know how soon, and this night have no provision for it,
how great folly and indiscretion is it for to spend the light of this precious
day, and to neglect those stirrings of God upon thy conscience, by which thou
art ^olicited to return to him! Now and Ever, Now or never.

6. If so, then if it be time for some, I am sure it is high time for others;
if it were time for them to awake, because salvation was coming nearer to them,
then I am sure it is time for them to awake from whom salvation is departing,
Romans 13.11. There is no dallying with light when it comes, because it is
uncertain how long it will continue; but there is much less reason to dally
with that which is certainly going. There are some that are but in the morning
of this day, others are in the noon of it, others again in the wane of it; Now
if he that has but seen the morning of it, may soon be benighted, and he that
has the light of the noon may soon be overshaddowed with darkness, and no man
has reason to be secure because of his day; how much less shall thou,
because in all probability thou art near to night. O therefore, you who have
spent much of your time, and have lived long under the means, and yet you are
either without any Convictions, or have almost lost those which you have had,
if there be any spark of light or affection found stirring in you, blow it up;
resolve now to improve that little time that is left; you may possibly do more
by that inch which is left, then by all that thou have enjoyed already; a
little time spent for God, and for the interest of thy soul, may be of more
advantage to thee, then the many Months, and Years, which have been laid out
for the profits, honors, or pleasures of the World; and that I may quicken you
to this, Consider, that as every one has an uncertain time to look after this
great work, and it is very uncertain how long or short the day of Grace will be;
so there are many of you who certainly have but a short time, by all signs and
tokens you are upon the very borders of darkness and death, You have the
Symptoms of a people who are even come to the last hour of the day; if your day
be not quite done, it is almost; and although we cannot expressly say of
particular persons that your day is over, neither would I preach it if I could,
yet we may, and show you in what danger you are, that we may warn you. I shall
lay down some things which do speak a people near to the night; I beseeeh you
go along with me, and make application to your own hearts, and see whether
these things do concern you or not, and how far.

Signs that the day is near done.
First, When persons remain ignorant under the means a long time, and having
great means for Conviction, yet slight all; this was Isreal's case, Numb. 14.11.
God calls this a provocation, when they had enjoyed so many testimonies of the
power, and of the truth of God, and yet they would not listen to him, they
would not be obedient; the means of Conviction had been so plain and clear,
that God could not bear their unbeleef any longer, he threatens therefore to
disinherit them. O has not this been your case? Have you not enjoied the Word
in that plainness that you might easily have bin convinced long since of your
Pride, covetousness, Uncleanness, Drunkness, Sabbath-breaking; nay, thou
might have seen thy unbelief, and the irregeneracy of thy heart; thou have
had things so planly brought home to thee, that if thou would have used thy
Reason, and have suffered conscience to speak, thou had been convinced of thy
lost condition long ago; and yet thou go on in those things which the Word
condemns, and tells thee That thy ways are not the ways of Gods people; yet thou
go on carelessly and securely, and cryest peace, peace; this is a
provocation. Thou have been plainly shown what Formality is, and what Unbelief
is, and what are the signs of a Regenerate and unregenerate condition, that if
thou would but make application to thy self, and bring the Word and thy
condition together, thou could not but see that thy condition is dangerous;
yet thou will not be convinced, thou will not examine and try thy heart and come
to a result concerning thy Soul; strong security after much plainness in
Preaching, and clearness in the means of Conviction, speaks a people near to
hardening, and that their day is almost at an end.

2 When men have clear Convictions of the Truth, and of their condition, and of
their duty, and yet hold the truth in unrighteonsness, Romans 1.18 (...) such as
forcibly hold the Truth, and inslave it, will not suffer it go its own way; the
Truth bids them do one thing, and they would do another; they have will of
Conscience that would go for God, that would be for Prayer, and for reading the
Word, and for hearing; but there is the will of their affections, and that is
for the world, and for the Ale house, or for this pleasure, or for that lust;
so that these men draw their consciences after them, as you lead a Dog in a
slip, he must go your way by force. They have gotten so much of the knowledge of
the truth to convince them that it is their duty to pray in the Family, and in
the Closet; and conscience minds them of this, and sollicites them to go this
way, and to begin the day thus; but the affections they go after their
covetousness; the thoughts of his Calling comes in, some design for profit calls
him off, and he goes away and slights conscience; or the thought of his
pleasure comes to him, and he must attend that, so that he imprisons the truth
under unrighteousness; and although conscience goes grudgingly up and down, and
grumbles at him while he is in the Alehouse, or in his calling in his
pleasures, or elsewhere, and tells him that he should have been doing something
else that while; yet it is all one, he keeps it under like a slave, and drags
it after him, while he satisfies his Lust.

Such as these are mentioned in two Scriptures; the first is he that keeps it
in a Negative unrighteousness, or an unrighteousness of omission, Luke 12.47.
who dos not follow the truth in those things which are clearly revealed to him,
it is said, that he shall be beaten with many stripes.

The second is, he who holds truth in a positive unrighteousness, or an
unrighteousness of Commission, who does not only refuse to follow the light and
truth into those duties which it would lead him unto, but runs against the
clear light and truth into the contrary practices, which the light and truth do
abhor; These are spoken of, Romans 1.32. Such men carry a conviction of the
justice of that sentence which God will pass upon those who walk in such ways,
and yet they both do them and delight in them; and if you observe how these men
came to the height of wickedness, it was first of all by not walking with and
after their light, that they came so boldly at last against it, verse. 21. Thus
you see, that this contradicting and forcing the light and truth received into
the understanding, borders on this night, for you see it is presently added,
after he had given an instance of such as did thus hold the truth in
unrighteousness, that they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened, verse. 21. God punishes this perverseness of the will with
blindness of mind, and it is fit that he who would not use no eye should have
never an eye. O now bring this home to your own souls.

Be there not many of you who walk in the Omission of known duties, such things
as you cannot but be acquainted withal? How many prayerless Families be there
here, and yet the master of the Family knows it is his duty topray with, and
for his Family, and to instruct and command them concerning the fear of the
Lord? How many prayerless souls be here, that seldom or never seek the Lord in
private? O if I should run through particular known duties, how many should we
find guilty? and if Conscience would stand, it would say, This is a known duty,
and yet I live in a constant or general neglect of it; I Will name but one, and it
is a great and plain one, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, whether ye be in the
faith or not. It is a word spoken to such as had been owned for Saints; there
were many strong probabilities that they were such, yet these are advised to
make diligent search into their hearts, and to bring themselves to the
touchstone. But do you do so? How many be there here that never spent a serious
hour in all their lives in debating this question, whether Christ be in them or
not? they think it is enough to believe that God is merciful, and that they are
Christions; and it is a shorter way to believe then to prove it. It is every
man and woman's duty solemnly to search the scripture, and to search their
hearts, and bring these two together, and then come to a serious resolution, Is
Christ in me or not of a truth? But are there not many here that are so far
from searching the scripture in order to this work, that they will not make use
of those things which do immediately concern their condition when they are
brought to their hands out of the word? how long would it be ere such souls
would search the scriptures themselves to find out the state of their souls,
who will not make use of them when so plainly proposed; take heed of holding the
truth thus in unrighteousness, in neglecting those duties which lie so plain in
the wo^d.

2 Bring the second also home, and take heed of swearing, drunkenness, lying,
cheating, add defrauding, of pride, uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking, scoffing;
these things cannot but be with some conviction; and although thou say, God
has mercy for these, yet God says he has wrath, and his wrath is revealed
from Heaven against all such who hold the knowledge and truth which thou have of
thy duty, under such unrighteousness.

3 When men have had strong convictions of sin, and these have made some
Reformation in their lives and conversations, and have given great hope of
their conversion, and afterward they have fallen to gross pollutions again. 2
Pet. 2.20. the case is stated there very clear; First, there were persons who
had been gross sinners, they had walked in the pollutions of the world, suppose
those of drunkenness and uncleanness; but these had gotten so much of the
knowledge of Christ, that they had escaped these pollutions, they fled from them
as it were. But these entangled again, not with other sins of another nature,
as the people of God may be and are, who are troubled with secret inward
corruptions, such as the world takes no notice of, and as they were never
sensible of before; as Spiritual pride in duties, and vain thoughts etc. they
are not entangled with these, but with the same sins which they had escaped.
And that is not all, for a child of God may be entangled in the same sins
again, that is for one act of sin, or the like, as David and Peter were. But he
says, they are overcome, Satan prevails so far over them, that he carries them
back to their former accustomed drunkenness and swearing, uncleanness, and the
like. If once it be thus with them, there is little hopes of them, you may
judge what the latter end of them will be, it is worse than the former. Those
men are so visibly and suddenly changed by the strength of bare convictions,
and have not grace in the heart as well as knowledge, are in a miserable
condition, because they seldom hold it out long, and when they do fall back, it
is a thousand to one but they fall foulely; and when souls fall thus into their
old sins which they had escaped, it is a thousand to one but they are held
under them, and grow worse and worse to the end. We have a notable passage,
Matthew 12.45. They enter in, and dwell there, they take up their rest there.
The unclean Spirit went up and down seeking rest, and could not find it; But
now he enters, and has what he was seeking for, as intimating in that he
pitches here to take up his abode. Relapses in the distempers of the body are
more dangerous then the first violence of the disease; and so are such relapses
dangerous to the soul, for if thou art a relapsed drunkard, Swearer,
Sabbath-breaker, etc. thou art in no more danger then those who have always
been such, and there is more hopes of recovering one who never had any
conviction, nor pretended to any reformation, then of such who have by the
light and knowledge of Christ escaped these, and are now returned again to
their vomit, and wallowing in the mire.

4 When men after a high profession of Religion, and of giving up themselves to
Christ, fall back to worldly interests, and mind and care for that, with neglect
of the ways and people of God, whom they have closed withal before. Every one
who has made a profession of Religion, and deserts it, dos not fall into open
profaneness and loosnesse, it is possible they may retain so much of the
light of Nature, and the word, as may restrain them from gross evils, and yet
they may lose all the heat and warmth which seemed to be in their affections to
the things of God; so that although they will not follow God and his people, yet
they will not tread in the footsteps of the profane, but they strike in with
the civiler part of men, who do not openly oppose the ways of God, although
neglect them, and they are for the world, and their care is how to be great,
and rich; Religion must lie by to attend upon this; they are not such who bring
forth no fruit, but they bring forth nothing to perfection, Luke 8.14. They
pray sometimes, and hear, but the cares and love of the world will not let them
do any thing well and perfectly, it eats up the heart of every duty, and in the
end choaks their profession. As we see it is with the Corn, it grows up with
the thorns, next the thorns overgrow that, and lastly the thorns destroy it; So
is it with such men's profession. First, it grows up with the World, and the
love and cares of it; he prays, and he hears, and he does many things which he
did not do before; but all this does not crucify him to the world, he loves
that as formerly, and his heart goes out strongly after it; yet his convictions
being fresh and strong, his profession holds with the world. Afterward as his
convictions begin to grow weaker, and fainter, the World prevails, and he is
less and less in the duties of Gods worship, and he begins to plead excuse for
his remisness, and slightness in the service of God; he cannot spare so much
time for prayer and hearing from his Calling; his employments are many, and
therefore that cannot be expected from him which is from others. Now the world
has gotten above his profession, and in a little time it choaks it, it dies
away and comes to nothing. Thus it was with Judas, he had a covetous heart all
the while he followed Christ, but at last it got ground of him, and he was
bought out of all for thirty pieces of silver; and thus Demas forsook the
service of the Lord in the Gospel, when he met with an opportunity of embracing
the present word. 2 Timothy 4.10. How many be there in these days which have lost
and given up all their profession of Christ this way, and have turned back only
to mind the things of this present life? But such souls who fall off with Judas,
and Daemas to the World, seldom return to Christ, the day of grace seems near
at an end to such as these. Take heed that there be not found among you such as
these are, who after the pretended giving up your selves to the Lord, do fall
back to mind earthly things. Ph. 3.19. It is a sad sign that God intends to
give such their portion in this life.

5 When men have sinned away their Convictions, and conscience grows quiet;
this must needs be a symptom of a declining day, because the more stupid and
gross conscience grows, the nearer men come to hardness of heart, and this is
called in the Scripture, a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. it is the very mark and
brand of a Reprobate, of one who is set apart for ruin. There is a light in
the heart of every natural man, which does direct and counsel him, until such
time as it be extinguished, but if it be not followed it will go out by degrees,
Romans 1.21. But to this light the Lord gives in the light of the Word, and some
help of the Spirit, and if God do in judgment send a darkness upon the spirits
of them who did not follow the first, what will follow in proportion upon them
who quench this light, and put it out? that they may sin with more quiet.

As soon as light breaks in upon the understanding, especially if it be from
the workings of the Spirit, although in its common workings it makes conscience
to stir, and that makes a head as it were, against sin, it will not suffer the
sinner to go on quietly, and if Grace be not let down upon the will, that
labors to cast out this unwelcome guest out of the soul, because it cannot
quietly enjoy its beloved sin; and there is a great contest for a time betwixt
light and corruption, the Conscience and the Will, who shall carry it; perhaps
Conscience while it is under fresh convictions seems resolute, and will not give
him leave to commit any known sin with quiet; but at last corruption prevails
and carries it; yet not all at once; it gets a little liberty for such a sin
which seems to be small, and then for another, and so by degees Conscience grows
weak and feeble, and corruption stronger and stronger; and that is fulfilled,
Romans 1.28. That because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge,
therefore he gives them up to reprobatenesse of mind; they were weary of the
knowledge of God in their hearts when they had it, they could not swear, and be
drunk, etc. so quietly, because of it, as they desired, and therefore they
desired to be freed from the burden of it, and now it is just with God to take
it from them. And what does such a dispensation of God speak concerning such a
poor Creature? does it not say, Let sin have his course? Does it not say, Let
this man go on, and let none stop him until he come in hell? These souls are in
a sad condition, being under the judgment which is written, 2 Cor. 4.4. The
god of this world has blinded their eyes. Thus it is with them who do not make
much of Conscience, but they slight it, and grieve it, until they harden it,
and when they have put out the eyes of it, they go whither they will, but they
are not like to go to Heaven. The conscience is brawny, and hard by such hard
usage, as some men's hands are which are used to hard labor; and certainly the
sins which are against conscience, do by degrees take away the tenderness of
it; and the more it is put to, the less it feels, until it comes to be past
feeling, and then it is past hope. The nearer Men and Women come to such a
condition; the nearer they are to ruin; the loss of convictions is near the
loss of thy soul.

6 When persons after a profession of Religion, and some trouble for sin, take
up such principles as do strengthen them in sin, as too many in our days have
done. It is dangerous when men sin against light, but it is more dangerous when
that which they call light, by which they walk, leads them to sin. It is sad for
men to be led aside by the unruliness of their affections against conscience,
which would hold them back: but it is worse when they have no more conscience
of sin, and they have sucked in such principles as keep conscience quiet, whilst
they fulfill their lusts. The Devil is very cunning, and what he cannot doby
troubling the soul with the sight of sin, and by presenting the terrors of the
Law, he effects by bringing a false unsound peace into it, which may strengthen
it in the way of sin. The Devil would that men should have no peace, or else a
sinful one; and therefore we have seen, that when some consciences have been
awakened, the Devil who has had a great hand in their troubles, has laid a
plaster to them, which has been far worse than the disease. As for example;
some are troubled with the thoughts of the day of Resurrection and Judgment,
now whereas they ought to have improved these troubles, to the getting of a
share in the first Resurrection, he has distilled this into them as a
principle which they have greedily embraced, That the Resurrection is past
already; and these things of Resurrection and judgment, they are things only
done within us. This is a short way to shake off the sad thoughts which did
arise from the consideration of such a day, and these do exceedingly well serve
for Satan's purpose.

Some troubles arise from the want of communion with God in Ordinances, be
cause the soul finds little sweet in them, and it hears that Gods people have
communion with God in these; Satan observes this, and he presently lays a
plaster, but it is a dangerous one; he tells them, That they may enjoy it above
and without Ordinances best of all, and this takes off their trouble by taking
away the duty.

Some are troubled with the sense of guilt which lies upon them, from the
Omission of duties, and Satan has a way ready to take off this also, by
persuading them that they must not act until they are acted; for if God will
have them act he will act them, and therefore it is not their fault if they do
omit such duties, and therefore they should not be troubled for it.

Some are troubled because of sin, Conscience is opened for sin past, and grows
very fearful of sin for time to come, and for a time perhaps they are troubled
for this; but the Devil studies their trouble, and he has a plaster, which he
applies, and it has taken some poor deluded souls (viz.) there is nothing sin
but what a man thinks is Sin, and that there is no law but the spirit within a
man, and that is to be his guide and his rule, and whatsoever this man does is
no sin, if it agree with his light; it is no matter whether it agree with the
scripture, yea or no.

Some are troubled, because they cannot tell whether the workings in their
hearts be the workings of God, or some delusions, and workings of their own
hearts; perhaps they have been under a searching Ministry, who has opened to
them the counterfeit works of Hypocrites, and Conscience has been a little
startled at these things. Now to take off this, Satan persuades them that God
works all in man; yea good and evil, light and darkness is from God, and so
there is no difference nor distinction, save to the Creatures apprehension.
These and many more such devices has Satan, to heal men's trouble of spirit, so
that he may by it strengthen their hands in sin; and when they are come thus
far, they are in a dangerous condition, for they seldom return again.

The Men and Women which are in such a case, are like those Lepers spoken of,
Levit. 13.44. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean, the Leprosy is in
his head. If Corruption have gotten into his Principles, such a man is not
only unclean, but utterly so, and without all hopes of cleansing; for there is
nothing left for the Word to take hold of.

Therefore Christ intimates the same thing in that, Matthew. 6.23. If the light
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? It is the more dangerous
because it is in the place and stead of light, it is that which thou followest,
and is to guide thee; therefore says Christ, in Luke 11.35. Take heed that the
light in thee be not darkness. That man is sad who wants light, but he is worse
who follows a false light; He that is ignorant of God, and his ways, and was
never enlightened, is miserable; but more miserable is he who has been
enlightened, and has now forsaken the light of the Lord, to follow the
delusions of Satan, and corrupt principles instead of light; it is a manifest
sign that Satan has the leading of this man to perdition. Thus I have shown
you the sad evidences of approaching night; remember I do not speak positively,
and absolutely of these things; I do not say, when I see men fall thus, and
thus, that their day is past; but these are sad symptoms that it is even at an
end. When the Physician sees the symptoms of death in the Patient, he looks on
him as a dead man, according to the course of nature; but yet has some hopes
while there is life that he may recover, although he sees no reason for it from
the Patient: He has perhaps seen some recovered in an unusual way, and when
they have been past hopes. So it may be in this case, although men have these
spots and tokens upon them, yet we dare not be positive. God does go sometimes
in unusual ways, and beyond the common experiences of his people, but we have
little reason to expect such things in his dispensations. God may let men go so
far, and fall so foully, that al his people may bestartled at it, and conclude
him a vessel of wrath, and yet when such a soul is gone to the very borders of
hell, and there is nothing expected but his dropping in; then may the Lord say,
return; Christ may come at the very Midnight, and it may be the darkest time of
all, before the breaking of the day. But this is not Gods usual way, so that we
cannot say to this man, or to that. Thy day is over; yet we may have such
grounds and footings for our fears of some men, as may seldom deceive us. I
cannot say, that the day of Grace is past to any one of you in particular, yet
I am confident it is past to many here; and I doubt my fears concerning some
opposing hardened sinners, and some Apostate professors will appear at last to
have too much footing. I could wish that the day of Grace were like to be as
long to you, as you think it to be, but I am sure out of what has been spoken
from scripture, it is plain, That it is a hidden, uncertain, and oftentimes a
short day; and therefore what I say to one, I say to all, Harden not your
hearts while it is called to day; and more esp cially you, who by all signs and
tokens seems to be near unto darkness.

But some poor souls may say upon the hearing of these things, I fear my day is
past, I have had Convictions under the Word, and I have made strong
resolutions, but I have not answered them, I fear I have lost my day, when I
lost these.

Ans. Art thou convinced of thy lost estate now, and of thy need of Christ? Are
former convictions revived, do they come to thy remembrance afresh, and do they
make fresh and full impressions upon thy heart, so that thou do now walk
under the weight and burden of sin? O if God does open conscience afresh, and
set it a bleeding under Old and new Convictions, it is a sign he has not shut
up the day; it is a sign he has not drawn away the Spirit from the Word; but
he has set an edge upon it, and it is like a two-edged sword, it cuts on every
side, it enters deeper into the soul than ever it did; this is a great argument
that the day is not over, when there is more light put into the Word for thy
soul then formerly. Again, it is a sign that he has not done with thee,
because he puts in more light and tenderness into thy Conscience; if he had
wholly lest thee, he would have lest the Word, and Conscience, and have struck
the one dumb, and the other blind, or deaf, and have put thee in a condition
past feeling, yet let me tell thee, that notwithstanding these stirrings of
Conscience thou may perish; for these are not things to be rested upon; God
follows many men with convictions whom he never converts. There must be more
than thy Convictions to show for Heaven, for these are poor things alone, and
do speak thus much (which is to my purpose) that thou have now an opportunity
in thy hand, and there is hope concerning thee, because God is yet treating
with thy Soul about the great affairs of Salvation.

2 Art thou convinced of the evil of not listening to former Convictions? Do
thou see, and art sensible how great an evil it is to lose them? Do thou see
into what danger thou did run thy soul, by slighting the first offers which
the Lord made thee? and how miserable thou had been if he had taken the
advantage against thee, to have gone away, and to have returned no more with
convictions of thy lost miserable estate; thou might have been now in Hell.
And whereas thou art now awakened by the word, thou might not have been
awakened until thou had awaked there; Art thou sensible of these things, and
art thou now able to justify the Lord, if he had denied thee the least beam of
light for thy Soul here? and can thou now bless the Lord for affording thee a
fresh sight and sense of thy condition? this is a sign thy day is not over; for
such kind of workings as these are found in the hearts of the people of the
Lord, when they have their Consciences opened afresh, after such slumbers
wherein they had lost the sight and sense of their own conditions; ordinarily
such Souls smart for the neglect of former convictions, and are humbled for not
following them. And they are lain down before God in acknowledging his mercy,
in not taking advantage against them for those things; and they are much in
blessing him; for coming near them again in his Word, although it be not in a
way of comfort; they bless him for convincing and awakening light; can thou
do thus? then thy day is not yet past.

3 Does thy former loss of convictions make thee more willing now to come in to
Christ, and to close fully with him in all things, and to labor after a serious
redeeming of the time to better advantage? does former carelessness lay
engagements upon thy heart to future watchfulness? do you say as the Apostle
does. 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past may suffice to have been careless and negligent
of my own soul, and disobedient to the Gospel, and to the checks of Conscience;
as for that which remains, it is little enough for the great work of serving
the Lord, and making my Calling and Election sure. Now enquire, Do thy present
convictions work thus? do they put thee upon more close and constant pursuance
of God, upon endeavoring to walk close with him, and to redeem time for him?
this carries yet more light of evidence with it that thy day is not over.

4 Do thou find a difference betwixt these convictions, and those which thou
had formerly? That there is more of the stirring of the will and affections in
these than were in them. There is a great difference betwixt the stirring of
the conscience, and the stirring of the Will, Conscience may be awakened, and
that may move a man strongly after reformation, and the will and affections may
move him after his lusts all the while; and where conscience is awakened, and
the Will not changed, there the Devil may steal these troubles away upon false
grounds, he has many ways to quiet such men's consciences; but if the Will be
moved truly toward God, there is no way to quiet that, but by the enjoiment of
its end, which is, the enjoyment of God. Therefore the main thing by which we
should judge of the work, and so of the day of Grace is this; by laboring to
enform our selves aright, what difference there is betwixt these and former
convictions, and whether these be better than they or no, which did die away,
and whether there be more of the will and affections in these than in those we
formerly had, for every work is so much the better as it has more of Will in
it, which is indeed the seat of Grace.

Q. How shall I know whether my stirrings are of my Conscience, or my Will?

A. I might give you many things, but I touch it now but occasionallie,
therefore I shall confine my self to these three short directions: Observe thy 1
Troubles, 2 D^sires, 3 Endeavors.


First observe thy Troubles, whether they be most for the sense of sin, or the
apprehensions of wrath; if conscience be only awakened, that eyes only the
wrath to come, and thinks of nothing else but of escaping, and it takes not sin
into consideration, but as it is forced by the necessary connection betwixt that
and judgment; but if the will and affections be wrought over in this trouble,
then the greatest trouble is because of the evil of sin, as it dishonours God,
and as it hinders the Soul from communion with God, and the soul is troubled at
the presence of that, and studies how it may be rid of that. Sin is a heavy
burden to a sanctified will, but wrath is the only burden to an entangled, but
not renewed conscience.

2 Observe thy Desires, What do they run out most after. Christ or Comfort,
Peace or Purity? if the trouble be only a forced trouble from conscience, then
the Soul dos ordinarily look no farther then the present trouble, and how to be
rid of that; it is peace that conscience looks after; but if the Will be moved,
that must have something else besides Peace, it is not a calm wilserve the
turn, it must have Christ, and communion with him, or nothing will satisfy.

3 Look to thy endeavors, when are they strongest and most vigorous, and drawn
out most after heaven and heavenly things? in thy troubles, or in thy calms? I
have observed some, that when they have been under trouble, and terrors of
Conscience, they would then be very stirring, and seem to take much pain for
Heaven; but when Conscience is a little quieted, they lay aside their Religion,
and there is no more noise of it; this is a sign that their stirrings were
barely from Conscience. But other Souls, whose wills were wrought upon as well as
their Consciences, have been more active and stirring in the ways of God, as
they have gotten more peace and assurance of Gods love; and there is a clear
reason for such different effects from their quiet; because quiet and peace was
the thing which the inflamed Conscience sought for, but the sanctified will and
affections sought for another thing; and although a little Peace may satisfy
Conscience, and take off the edge of it, this will set an edge upon the
affections; that which calms Conscience, quickens the sanctified Will; for every
relish that it has of grace or peace makes it seek for more. Try your selves
by these things, and if you find that your Convictions are accompanied with the
stirrings of the will and affections, be of good hope, for thy day of grace is
not over, if thou have a will for God, if he strive, and you grow more tender
and sensible, fear not to follow thy convictions, and to lay hold of the
Promises which suit with thy condition. Let former convictions neglected humble
thee, but let them not discourage thee.

But withal take this word of advice, and so I shall conclude.

1 Take heed of thy Heart, lest it deceive thee; thou have had such stirrings
which did look like a work of grace before, but they have died away; be jealous
of these, lest they should do so also. Thou know how subject the heart is to
grow cold, and to shift and put off Convictions, and when it is under them how
seemingly willing it is to convert, and return to God; how ready to make
promises and vows to God, and how ready to forsake all these again; it has
cheated thee once already, therefore watch it as a deceitful thing, the way not
to be deceived, is to expect it, or at least fear it.

2 Resolve to take the more pains, because thou have lost so many precious
opportunities, knowing, that if thou art not nearer to happiness and eternal
life then other men, thou art farther off, and thou had need labor to redeem
what thou have lost.

3 Believe not Satan, who says thy day is over, for he knows it not, and he is
a Liar from the beginning. There is abundantly more hope of thee who lie
under such fears, than there is of one who lies and lives in sin, and says his
day is not yet past. Satan ordinarily tells men, that the day is past, when it
does begin to shine upon them, and he tells them who are in darkness, and in the
night, that it is day, and it is time enough for them.

4 Prize thy Convictions highly, and look upon it as a great Mercy, that God
will at last look upon thee a poor sinner, an old sinner, an old slighter of
convictions, an old back-slider. O what a mercy is it to thee that that
dreadful passage is not made good upon thy soul, Prove. 14.14. The back slider
in heart shall be filled with his own ways. God might have said to thee, when
thou did cast off Convictions at first, and when thou did back-slide from
the reformation which thou did begin. Be filled with backslidings, thou
shall have thy belly full of them, thou shall never have any more help to
return. O what a mercy is it, that after all this he should begin to recover
thee, and set thee a fresh about the work of returning to Christ?

5 Be much in blessing God for what he has done, that he has vouchsafed again
to visit thy Soul from on high, and to stir up thee again, when perhaps many
that are in Hell were in thy case formerly; God has taken advantage against
them for slighting the Word, and Conscience, and he might have done so with
thee, if he would have dealt exactly with thee. Who is it that makes thee to
differ? Is it not the Lord? To him therefore be given all honor, and glory,
and praise.

FINIS.
Reader these Books are in the Press
ANthologia Biblica, or a Methodical distribution of divine Scriptures, under
several heads which will serve for a common place Book, a Concordance, and a
Commentary; together with a Praxis, discovering the manifold uses and
advantages thereof, in Fol. By that Reverend Divine Mr. John Clark of Fiskerton
near Lincoln.

A learned Comment on the Epistles of St. Paul, by David Dixon, translated into
English by William Retchford Minister of St. Albans.

Englands Advancement, a very useful piece of rare secrets in Physic and
Chyrurgery; by Tho. Collings Practitioner in Physic.

FINIS.

