Saint Chrysostom HIS PARAENESIS, Or Admonition wherein he recalls THEODORUS
the fallen. Or generally An Exhortation for Desperate sinners.

Vincenti datur Manna, torpenti relinquitur multa miseria. T. A. Kempis.
Translated by the Lord Viscount Grandison Prisoner in the Tower.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Sign of the George near Cliffords
Inn in Fleet Street. 1654.

To the Reader.
I Should not have the vanity to believe any thing of my own worthy the
Press: but being concerned much in this treatise, I undertook he translation;
and with some pains renewed my long discontinued acquaintance with the Greek,
to render Saint Chrysostomes meaning into this plain English. It was writ with
passion to his fallen friend, and I am very confident it may be beneficial to
many, whose case is not unlike this of Theodorus. I wish it may, and that it
may not be looked lightly on as mine, but with more serious eyes as the
counsel of that reverend father whose it is. I am certain there can be nothing
more appositely said to men in a desperate course of life, then what may be
found here. I propound nothing of my own to any man, but such an excellent
cordial as this I could not take alone, I desire it may be to others, what I
pray it may prove unto my self, that in this time of misery (though we are
liable to all other losses) we may lay certain hold on the better part which
cannot be taken from us.

Yours GRANDISON.

TO MY NOBLE LORD THE EARL of CLEAVLAND.
MY LORD,
SInce I first began this translation, your Lordship has still encouraged me to
go on with it, and when I had ended it, I could not but think it unfirnish't,
till I had prefixed your name to it. I have always told your Lordship that I
had no vanity to own my imperfections: and if I thought my confidence to print
this Treatise a fault, I would smother rather then publish it. But having most
seriously weighed the content and satisfaction the original brought to my
self, after I had taken the pains to translate it, I resolved to make it
communicable to as many as please to read Saint Chrysostom in my English. And
though it particularly aims at fallen Theodorus, and as at him, so at every
dissolute person; the most opinionated reserved men may read it, and perhaps
sometimes find themselves not a little concerned in it. For it most particularly
treats against desperation; which is a disease liable to the greatest
confidence. Especially when the very same men (who have had the severe
curiosity almost to blind their brethren with plucking the motes out of their
eyes) shall be brought to consider the beams that are in their own: so great
and just often proves their doom, who are not forewarned by our Savior not to
judge lest they be judged.

My Lord, This treatise of the holy Father, signally invites us to be our own
Physicians: and sincerely to arraigne our souls before the face of Heaven; it
instructs us how to prize the beauties God has endowed our minds with, unless
we soil them with our own negligence; it teaches us to prefer the care of
our souls above all earthly alurements though baited with the most tempting
delights; and may well then be a fit mission from a Prison to those in the
greatest liberty; for men in restraint (while they are most forbid vanities)
begin to know then most truly what they are; for all deceiving delights
possess us like the Devil; they take our wits from us; but the correcting hand
of God, whilst we are in the troubles and miseries of this world, prepares us
for a better; and here we shall find weapons and arms fit for the fiercest
conflict of that nature, here (my Lord in this translation which I dedicate to
you with that infinite desire I have ever to be esteemed

Your Lordship's Most faithful servant GRANDISON.

AN EXHORTATION TO DESPERATE SINNERS, Taken out of St. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM In his
admonition to falling THEODORUS.
CHAP. I.
SAint Chrysostom passionately describes the great esteem and value we ought
to have of our own souls, and on that Basis he raises this Fabric of this
Treatise, to persuade Theodorus plunged into extreme sins, and bewitched with
the vanity of dissolute life, to return to Virtue and Piety, in which he had
once been a most eminent example.

Who will give water to my head? and to my eyes a Fountain of tears? I take up
this lamentation at a far more seasonable and needful time, then when the
Prophets sorrow for the Jews, made him so passionate a Mourner. For although I
determine not to bewail the desolation of many Cities, or Kingdoms: I esteem
the necessity of my grief much more urging, that am to deplore the loss of thy
most inestimable Soul, more to be prized, and therefore more to be lamented
then many Nations: Whose dignity, though never so swelling in the additions of
vast riches, and innumerous numbers of people, could not make them equal to
thee? Eccle. 16. For such is the esteem of one man embracing the will of God
above ten thousand transgressors. What then were infinite millions of those
Jews in the balance with thee before thy sad fall? Wherefore let no man blame
me, if I double the bitterness of the Prophets lamentation, desiring (thus
nearly concerned) to make my grief exceed his. And though I bewail no sacked
City, nor sinful men subdued by a conquering power; the subject of my tears
exacts a deeper sorrow. It is a most sacred soul, whose ruin I regret; a soul
forsaken, and in a most deplored condition, God's own Temple demolisht and
raz't. A Temple so sacred, as Christ himself took pleasure to inhabit there,
while he governed alone unrivaled by the possession or dominion of sin or
vanity whatsoever. How did the glorious beauty of thy soul excel all the
magnificence and pomp of this World? whose only Ornament was our Lord JESUS,
the World's Savior, and Redeemer. Where is this beauty banished? Where consumed
it? in the rage and flames certainly of that hellish Fire, which every
temptation thy too easy soul yields to bring with it; for prepared art thou
by the Devils malice for thy destruction.

What honest and ingenuous man could abstain from mourning, perusing cordially
the Prophets lamentation. When he speaks of those barbarous sacrilegious hands
which profaned the Holy of Holies, committing every thing that was dedicated
to the honor and service of God. The Cherubins, the Ark, the Propitiatory, the
Tables of stone, the Golden Urne. And is not thy fall of much more sorrowful
consequence, when all these were in a manner Types of thee, but representations
of that greater excellence thy soul was once enricht with. Thou were the more
sacred Temple, though not resplendent with Gold or Silver; Yet refulgent with
the grace of the Holy spirit: Who had within thee in stead of Cherubins and
the Ark, God the Father, Christ his Son, and the holy Comforter. But (alas) Thy
glories are perished, and thou become a very Wilderness, wild and desolate,
stripped and naked, robbed and spoiled of all thy riches and sumptuous Ornaments,
which were once so miraculously and divinely eminent in thy pious life, that
they were above humane faith, these (I say) are ravished from thee, and (more
to augment our sorrow) we see thee ruinated like a desert full of dangers,
which no body undertakes to keep. Thou have no Virtue left to bar the doors
against assaulting temptations, but lie open to every corruption, and wicked
determination of thy fancy. Whether it be pride, or lust, or drunkenness; or
avarice what sin soever the Devil commands to storm thee, there is nothing
that defends the breach, nothing that guards thy unmanned soul: Yet once how
much of heaven had thou in thee whilst (like it) the purity of thy thoughts
was inaccessible to all manner of ill. Me thinks I speak wonders, not to be
believed by those who see thee in this thy forlorn and desperate condition,
which makes me pray, lament, and mourn continually, that I may see thee return
again, to thy former integrity, and piety, which may perhaps seem to humane
apprehension impossible; but all things are easy in the hands of God. For he
it is that lifts the beggar from the dust; and exalts the needy from the
Dunghill, that he may sit with Princes, even with the Princes of his people.
He it is that makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother
of Children. Ps. 113. On this infinite and unsearchable love of our God to us,
build thou thy hopes, and thou will find an impossibility, a strange incapacity
within thy self to despair at any time, grace still working in thee to change
thy heart into better, and better desires? For if the Devil had the power to
pluck thee from so eminent a top and glory of Virtue, into this Abyss of
wickedness: Much more easily can our Omnipotent God raise thee up again,
restore thee to thy former liberty and honor, and and not only set thee free
from this base captivity, but make thy happiness greater then ever yet it was.
Only I beseech thee resolutely to break all snares that shall be laid in the
way of thy return. Let not thy hopes which are so full of certainty, be cut off
by any destructive fear, or timorous persuasion; lest those punishments light
on thee which are due only to the desperately wicked. For neither the number
nor the greatness of our sins does absolutely condemn us to a condition
irrecoverable. But resolved settlednesse, and an intolerable composedness in
impious ways, are the sure manifest signs of a soul so fallen, that it shall
never rise again. Wherefore Solomon does not speak generally of every man who
transgresses: Pro. 18. but names that wicked man, who when he comes into the
depth of evil, contemns his mercy. It is only a wicked purpose never to leave
sin that plunges men into this dangerous Gulf of despair, and iniquity, from
whence they can never so much as look back, and much more difficultly return.
For the deceiving weights of wickedness lie like a heavy Collar on the neck
of the soul, and forcing our eyes upon the Earth, forbids them to look up to
our Lord that made them. Know then it is the part of a generous and truly
daring Christian spirit, not to endure the Tyrants yoke; valiantly to combat
and destroy those officious guards, his watchful malice sits over us. And with
the Prophet, to acknowledge our obedience there only, where it is only due;
saying with him, As the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us: have mercy on
us, Lord have mercy on us, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt. Ps.
123. These are divine exhortations, these are the doctrines of the most
heavenly Philosophy, we are filled with contempt, we are shaken with infinite
violent storms of sad events. Yet shall not this debar us from looking up to
our God, and imploring his assistance: Nay, till our Lord has granted our
Petitions, we must put on the confidence of importunate beggars, and not let
our prayers cease til our requests are granted. This is the true Character of a
pious daring soul, not to be baffled from his hopes by the violence of ill
success: not to start out of the way or go back, because as yet he has not
found the expected issue of his prayers, but to endure to the last, till the
Lord have mercy on him according to the precept and example of the Prophet
David.

CHAP. II. The Devils endeavors and practices to undermine our hopes, and
raze the Foundation of our eternal happiness. The comparison betwixt a dying
body, and a perishing soul; with an exhortation to be courageous in our
conflicts with the Devil.
THE wily subtilty of Satan aims at nothing more then to inveigle us in a
Labyrinth of despair; still feeding our natural tottering inclinations with
change and variety of doubts, and once unsettled, we are his certain prey; for
irresolution excludes us from our expectations in Heaven, and relyance upon the
benignity of our most merciful God and Father; it violently and too insensibly
drives us from our hopes, our surest Anchors. By it we lose the very essence
of our lives, the guide which leads us to God, the Pilot which steers our
forlorn and shipwrack'd souls into the Haven of Salvation. For resolution and
a constant hope, never fail of assurance in the end; by hope (says the word)
we shall be saved, that will to the last preserve us. Hope is a strong and
Golden Chain let down to us from Heaven, taking fast hold on it, we learn to
subdue our souls most desperate rebellions; Which our benign Lord finding us
sure linked to it, has promised to raise and lift us by it, above all the
dangerous billows of this present miserable life. Whilst he (who through
idleness neglects to make his hold sure to this golden Anchor) sinks and is
certain to drown, and perish in the deeps of his own wickedness. Which Satan
that subtle Fox so well know's, that he then makes his Hel-Harvest, when he
sees us laden with sin, and overprest with the weight of our guiltiness, this
is the time he so diligently watches for, then falls he on us, and presses our
declinings with arguments of the immensity of our offenses; and deceives us
with his cunning aggravations. Then suggests he to our souls horror and
despair in their extremes, as there were no salvation left to us, and the
doors of mercy were locked against our cries for ever; And once in this
dejected and base low condition, how prone and precipitate is our descent into
Hell, forced still violently downwards by unresisted desperation, having weakly
lost our hold on hope, that Golden Chain, we sink perpetually in the deepes
both of sin and misery. Thus is it with thee ( Theodorus) who have cast off thy
obedience and subjection to a meek and merciful Lord, quite rejecting his
commands, and art become a slave under the outrageous Empire of that Tyrannous
enemy to mankind, who never rests day nor night from ensnaring us our selves to
fight against our own hopes and expectations of Heaven. Thus have thou flung
off a light and easy burden; freed thy self from a merciful yoke, to fasten
thy neck in linkes of Iron. And what is both base, and ridiculous: have laid a
Millstone (the Asses burden) on thy own shoulders. What will thou think to do
in the future, that at present suffers thy most miserable soul to be swallowed
in this impetuous Gulf of lusts: Nay, that wilfully has brough a kind of
necessity on thy self, which continually compels thee to fall into deeper
extremes?

The woman in the Gospels when she had found her lost groat, called all her
neighbors together to partake of her joy with her; saying, Rejoice with me
because I have found the lost groat. Lu. 15. 8. Thus will I call your friends
and mine together, but to a different end and purpose. I will not bid them
rejoice with me, but grieve and weep, lament, be truly sorrowful and mourn
with me. For our loss is grievous and insupportable, greater then if we had
lost never so great a treasure, or Magazine of Gold or Diamonds; For we have
lost a friend not to be valewed, who sailing with us through this vast Ocean (I
know not by what means) is fallen overboard, and sunk into the bottomless
Gulf of perdition. If any man should offer to dissuade me from my
lamentations, I would answer him with this passionate expression of the Prophet
Isaiah, Let me alone, I will weep bitterly, you cannot comfort me. Is. 22. Such
is the sorrow which draws this flood of tears from my eyes. Such a sorrow as
doubtlessely would not shame Saint Peter or Saint Paul to own it, though in
such excess, as they denied themselves all consolation or persuasion to the
contrary.

They who deplore the natural decreed death of the body, No comparison betwixt
the death of the body and the soul.
may perhaps find co^forters, who by the strength of reason and argument may
without much labor restore their d^ooping spirits to settledness and
tranqulity; and by religious precepts gently quiet and palliate their griefs.
But who can plead against his just deploring, who laments the death of a soul
fallen into perdition, dead in sin and pierced with ten thousand arrows,
venomed with Hells malicious poison, the beauty, form, and grace of most
eminent Virtues, and devotions lost, and extinct in him. These administer
matter justly to provoke lawful and lasting tears. What flinty heart? What
rockie soul could in an agony so moving forbear lamentings, or entertain an
apparition of any delusion, should forbid him his just sorrow. At the fall of
the body it is humane, though not altogether rebellious to weep. At the falling
of a soul, the extremest lamentation is the greatest evidence of the truest
piety. He who had on Earth possession of Heaven, in so much as he contemned,
abhorred, and laughed at the vanity of the World, he who beheld the greatest
beauty but as a statue of stone, or a fair picture; That he who despised Gold
as dirt, pleasures and vanity as mire; He it is who most unexpectedly falling
into a raging fever of burning lusts, has lost his comeliness, and his courage,
is now turned a slave to his own bestiall appetites. Shall not we then grieve
for him? shall we cease our lamentations till he return to himself again? it
is no more then our duty, and tie of Christian charity, if we have any sense of
pity or humanity in us. What (alas) is the destruction of the body, but an
accomplished course in the order of nature? yet such a loss finds daily
mourners and lamenters. What ought we then to do for his perishing soul, which
manifestly appears resolved on eternal damnation, if our prayers bring him not
to repentance, but that he finish his course in obstinate sinning, and
obdurateness of heart. For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the
grave who shall give thee thanks? Psalm. 6. How great a sin then is it against
the rules and Laws of charity, not to resent with the greatest pity a soul
thus everlastingly perishing. Violent cries, and abundance of tears cannot
possibly recall the dead; But frequent experience teaches us, that a soul
dying here in sin is not wept for in vain; For the humble requests of
brotherly charity plead so effectually before the Throne of mercy, that many
hardened in obstinate impenitency, have melted into floods of tears, and have
owed thee thanks for their contrition to the importunity of other men's prayers.
And by such means, many both in our days and the days of our forefathers,
who have deserted the paths of righteousness, and run headlong astray out of
the ways of piety (which is a spiritual dying) at length have risen again
with such heavenly alacrity, their fall so hid and obscured by the glory of
their rise, that they have purchased the palm of recompense, and crowned with
the wreath of victory, have triumphed Conquerors on earth, till they were
summoned to be numbered with the blessed for all eternity. Yet infinite such
examples prevail not with a man who wilfully continues in the flames and fires
of his lusts; Such a wretched perverseness withstands his recovery, and pleads
an impossibility of mercy against him. But if he chance to get a little way out
of the fire, and by degrees leave it still farther behind him, the dimnesse
which the flames caused will be taken from his eyes, and then how plainly will
he discern the way of salvation to be accessible and very plain, smooth, and
easy, having obtained grace for his guide. And conquered those Troops the
Devil laid in ambush for him. But he who wants the courage to undertake the
combat, in vain desires the conquest. He may that is wilful stay and burn in
the fire, nay, shut the doors against himself that are open for him. And
whatman who is thus sotishly his own enemy, can design any thing nobly and
virtuously? Wherefore this our common enemy makes it his only business, leaves
nothing unattempted which may render us diffident of grace and mercy. Nor needs
he much labor to compass that his end, if we lie prostrate at his feet; and
take no counsel or resolution, or order the battle against him, it is an
easy conquest to overcome us. But he who violently breaks his fetters, and
betakes himself to the use of his strength with courage; He (I say) who in so
desperate a condition allows himself no cessation, but with a continual
violence maintains the battle against him, though he have before lost the day
a thousand times, shall then recover his losses, and gloriously triumph in his
enemies overthrow. When he who is dejected with despair, and permits his
spirits to fail and languish, can never hope for conquest; how can he overcome
who makes no resistance at all, but fearing the encounter lays down his arms,
and submits to his enemy.

CHAP. III. Gods mercy to the greatest sinners, an argument against despair.
THE mercies of our Lord so infinitely exceed our transgressions, that
meditating on them, they cannot but greatly consolate our drooping spirits, and
arm us with courage against those temptations we ought strongly to resist,
lest they overcome our trust and confidence in God. I mean those stupid
apprehensions of the unpardonable immensity of our own guilt, as if God were
not able to forgive us our sins being so great and so many, that to our
imaginations they exceed the saving promises of his mercy. Oh let us take heed
of such desperate persuasions as these? oh let us be careful that such thoughts
as these, do not quash and annihilate our hopes, let not the Devil delude us
with an opinion that our Lord is merciful indeed; but extends that goodness
only to small offenders, to those only who have provoked him but with a few
and those small faults. For suppose a man justly branded with all the marks of
those infamies and shames which are due to the greatest reprobates; One who had
committed all those wicked acts, which most certainly unrepented fail not to
shut the gates of Heaven against them who transgress so highly in them. And
withal, we must grant this person to be no stranger to the truth, but to have
been one of Christ's Church. Whatsoever was the cause of his fall? Whatsoever
the inveterate malice of the Tempter had changed him to be, either whoremaster
or adulterer, nay, perhaps Sodomite: Were he thief, drunkard, or common
calumniator, one who had hugged all these sins with appetite and delight, nay,
had made it his serious study to contrive his ends and hellish satisfaction in
them? For my part I would not be Author of despair to such a wretch as this: no
though he had continued in them many years. For it is impious blasphemy to
reflect upon the anger of God, as if he were therefore displeased that we might
be hardened, for then we justly should relinquish our hopes, if we were assured
the flames of his wrath set on ^^^e by so many sins, were not to be
extinguished with the tears of true repentance. But we must look with more
believing eyes on his mercy, and admire the excellency of his justice and his
clemency, who in his punishments is quite free from passions, and
perturbations; And any one, but wilfully blind offenders, may plainly see,
that our Lord has no delight or contentment in his revenge, but takes exceeding
pleasure in his love, and tenderness, which is infinitely intent on our good.
Be thou therefore of good courage, confidently and undauntedly rely upon the
hopes of thy restoration to grace and happiness, in spite of all the
machinations of the Devil. Let him not deceive thee and possess thee with so
horrid an opinion; as that God should at all delight in the punishment of
sinners; For he is a most indulgent Father, carefully fond of us, and directing
all his actions toward us for our good, even in the depth of our malice
against him, unwiling (is he) and loath to see the increase of our
perverseness. But of his own Fatherly compassion keeps us off from contemning
and despising his mercy. If any one voluntarily of his own free motion forsakes
the light, who can accuse the light for that man's darkness, does not he want
the benefit of that light through his own folly, and wilfulness? So he that
disdains submissively to adhere to the omnipotent power of God, and to live in
the light of grace which illuminates all true believers, suffers not by the
goodness of that power, (which is the original Fountain of all blessings) but
the unrulinesse of of his own rashness, and stupidity which so wilfully
brought him into his own ruin and destruction. Our merciful God sometimes lets
us see the rod to frighten us; but draws it back and puts it up again, that his
children may be sensible of his averseness to revenge, and of his infinite
propensity to allure and attract them to himself. So a discreet Physician
afflicts not or troubles himself, at the raging distempers of a man frantic,
but is himself the patient when he works the cure. He treats him gently, he
courts him into his own health; and though the mad man fly in his very face,
he uses meekness with art and skill, and unmoved endeavors to palliate the
violence of his disease; though perhaps he be justly enough incensed to leave
off the cure. And as the distempered man recovers his senses, the Physician
increases his joy, and prosecutes his intended cure, having never returned
peevishness for fury, but laying aside all self-respect, applied himself
wholly to the good of the lunatic. So our Lord (when we arrive at the
extremest madness, and rage in sinning) takes no revenge of us even in the
height of that fury, but like our careful Physician, most charitably applies
his mercies, which are his medicines, to cure our madness, not any thing
reflecting on those wild passions we provoke him with. This is a truth to be
justified by the testimonies of all right minded Christians, who daily find the
effects of his clemency, and the records of holy writ are full of examples,
teaching us the verity of it.

CHAP. IV. The example of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, a coherence to the
preceding Chapter.
WAs there ever any one so great a Monster as Nebuchadnezzar, that King of the
Babylonians? And yet I believe the records of all ages cannot produce the man
to whom God revealed himself more apparently, both in his power and his
mercies. Observe his story, how at first he honors the Prophet of the Lord,
even to the adoring him, commanding sacrifice to be offered to him as God. Then
see how at last he returns to his own old pride, which puffs him up to
believe that he his self is the God to be only worshipped; and who exalts not
him above God is cast into the fiery Furnace. Behold the infinite mercy and
love of our Lord, who forsakes not this strange beast, (for such was he rather
to be esteemed then a man) But still follows and pursues him with his favors
in his most irrational rebellions, calls him back with profers of grace, and
loving invitations to repentance. First showing him his omnipotency by the
miracle in the fiery Furnace; then by the strange vision which the King saw,
and Daniel interpreted. Wonders able to move a Rock could not mollify his
harder soul. To these the Prophet joins his pathetick counsel; Wherefore O
King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and redeem thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it may be
a lengthning of thy tranquillity. Dan. 27. What say thou? thou opinator of
thy own wisdom and happiness? Can thou return yet? can thou repent after
this thy strange fall? Is thy diseast so desperate thou dare not hope for a
recovery? Can no wisdom regulate the passions of a mind so troubled? The
dumb-struck King has no answer left, he is now denuded of such apologies, he
might have made for his purgation in those times he scarce knew who created
him, and was ignorant of his power, whose omnipotency had placed him in that
seat of Majesty, though in that very darkness he might well have seen and
resented both the power and providence of the Almighty, in those great things
he had done for him and his progenitors. But after God had (convinced, and
called, him to true heavenly understanding) manifested himself unto him in such
evident demonstrations of his wisdom and praescience; as he did in the
discovery and overthrow of all the diabolical delusions of the Magicians, when
he had opened and displayed all the colors of their cunnings and deceipts. God
rests not here, but proceeds yet farther with him. For that dream which the
Magicians, the Astrologers, the Caldeans, and the Southsayers could not
expound; in the which were those things (as they confessed themselves) exceeded
humane learning; this vision God interpreted to him by the mouth of a boy. The
youth Daniel unriddles what surpasses the wise men's knowledge: The miracle so
convinced his judgment; That he did not himself believe alone, but proclaimed
and promised that faith through the whole world, imposing it by his edicts on
all Nations. If before this illumination of grace by miracles reconciling him
to faith, he were unworthy his indulgence, though he knew not God; much more
unworthy of it was this wretched King, when he had seen him in these wonders
which our Lord wrought purposely to call him, when he knew his Omnipotent
power, and ratified his belief, by declaring and imposing it on others: without
all doubt, he (that so much honored the Lords servant) professed no mock-faith,
but really believed in that God whose Prophet he was; nor had he enjoined it to
others, if he himself had not been first truly convinced in his soul, that it
was that truth to which the whole world owed their obedience; yet falls he into
Idolatry against the persuasions of his soul, and his own confession to Daniel,
when he answered him, Of a truth it is that your God is a God of Gods; and a
Lord of Kings, and a revealer of secrets, etc. Dan. 2. 47. He that of late
prostrate on the ground, adored the servant of God: is at last possessed with
such a fury against them, that he commits them to the fiery Furnace, because
himself they would not worship as their God. And pray observe the sequel. Did
not our Lord think you (as he so justly merited) punish the Apostate. No! he
begins anew with him, and gives him still greater arguments of his Deity;
indulgently and like a like a loving Father reducing him from his stupid
arrogance to a modest knowledge of himself, and an humble obedience to him.
And what was more to be admired, God never showed his omnipotency and love more
to him, then in this trial (for certainly the greater the miracle was, the
greater ought his faith to have been) therefore our Lord did never more exalt
his convincing powers, then in preserving the children flung bound into that
fiery Furnace, which the Tyrant himself had kindled with most malicious and
studied fury. The flames burnt to so great a wonder, that they threatened
quicker destruction then the beholders imagination could fancy possible. Which
God most meekly suffered to increase to the height of miracle, that so
manifesting his greatness in his wonders, he might strike him with fear and
terror, to reclaim him and startle his obdurate heart from that obstinate
denial of him, and what he had done for him. The Tyrant stands insulting ore
the innocent sacrifices prepared for his rage, he laugh's and rejoices to see
these unparalleled flames still increase, which without the Almighties
permission could not have burnt or been a fire at all; But God contradicts not
his desires, showing his power moderated by his wisdom, which renders the
attempts of his Enemies against his servants vain and ridiculous, when they are
at the greatest height. And that the flames might not be thought fictitious or
fantastic delusions; he lets their power be seen in consuming the men,
commanded to cast his Servants into the Furnace. What power can be compared to
the command of the Almighty God; to whom the nature and essence of every thing
that has being is obedient, and to him which made them out of nothing return
their nature, and become what he would have them, as did this fire whose flames
devoured the bodies of the Officers which cast them in; yet added beauty and
luster to the children who walked in the very midst of them, unconsum'd and
untouched. Nay, they returned from out of the fire triumphant ore the flame?
and with such Majesty as Kings out of their stately Palaces, marched they out
of the Furnace? No man affords the King one look, every ones eyes are fixed
upon this unparalleled object. Neither his crown, nor Royal robes with all the
Ornaments of his stupendous Pomp do move the peoples admiration, as did the
beautiful appearance of those faithful Children, who seemed rather to have
suffered the punishment of a dream then to have past through substantial and
real fire. Their hair, the lightest catching part of their bodies (not so much
as singed) remained as perfectly entire, as if every hair had been harder then
an Adamant, while the flamedevouring heat consumed all about them: Nor do thou
consider that alone, but likewise how insensible of any pain in the middle of
the Furnace they continually discoursed, whilst the standers by every moment
expected their dissolution; Yet are not the spectators only filled with this
wonder; but as far as letters could carry it, the astonished world believed it
with amazement, whilst the unconcerned and ^mov'd Tyrant (who had on less
reasons published his former edicts to command the World the worship of the
true God) passes this neglectedly by, and peruses his old impieties. Nor did
our Lord for all this, power out the full Vialls of his wrath upon the head of
this desperate wretch; but proceeds in his purpose to reclaim, both by dreams
and the warnings of the Prophet. And when nothing prevails to reduce him, then
he brings his rod forth, though not as a revenger for his past sins, but to
prevent his future calamities, by taking away the remaining rancor of his
inclinations. For God destroyed him not utterly. But after a few years
discipline and correction, restores him to his former honor. The punishments of
our merciful God make us no losers but exceeding gainers in the end, and are
to be reckoned as his greatest blessings, when they bring us to a sure
confidence in Christ Jesus our Redeemer, and a sincere repentance for the sins
we have committed against him.

CHAP. V. That sincere repentance is always acceptable to God, declared out of
holy writ by example, precept and parable.
HOw surpassingly great is the kindness, and love of God to us? who never
(after the greatest provocations) rejects our sincere repentance, though we sin
most maliciously against him, if we most humbly return to him; his sweet
embraces are ready to receive us; Nay, though we should be unwilling, he often
contends with our perverseness, and forces our recovery; Nay, helps the
defects of our falling inclinations, with his preserving grace which raises us
above our selves to pious desires, which he both gives, and prepares their
reward. What greater argument can there be of the benignity of an incensed God,
then when we have provoked him to anger, to accept of our sorrow? and though
our repentance be not so long and so full as it ought, though it want something
of the circumstances of form, and time, or other properties; our Lord helps us
in our humiliations, and sends his blessings on very weakness and
frowardness. As in the Prophet Isaiah you may find it. He went on frowardly in
the way of his heart. I have seen his ways, and will heal him. I will lead him
also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Isaiah 57. 17, 18.
Let us remember the story of that most wicked King (who by a woman's persuasion
had given himself over to all abomination) when he once repented, and putting
on sackcloth, acknowledged his sins; he so moved the compassion of God, that he
escaped all those evils which then threatened him. For God spoke to Elias upon
his submission, saying, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me, I will
not bring this evil in his days. 2 Kings 21. 29. And after him Manasses
exceeds all the former Kings in madness, and Tyranny; he overthrows the Law,
shuts the Temple, sets up the worship of Idoll's to confront the Majesty of
God; outstripping all that went before him in wickedness. 2 Chronicles. 33. He
after his repentance was received into the number of Gods elect friends. Had
Manasses when he saw the deformity of his impiety, despaired of his
restoration to grace, and believed an impossibility of his change to a new
man; he had certainly never partaken of those blessings afterward befell him;
but when he weighed how little the excess of his sins was, put in the balance
with Gods immense, and infinite mercies; he cast the the fetters off,
wherewith the Devil had made him fast, became Conqueror, and finished his good
course. Nor has the Scripture furnished us with these examples alone, to
preserve us from splitting on the dange-Rockes of our own hardened hearts. But
by his commands, God calls us continually, and forewarns us of our destruction.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the day of
temptation in the Wilderness. Psa. 95. 8. 9. This day to us may be any day of
our life from the tenderness of our youth, to the extremity of our age. We
must imagine the Lord always speaking to us, and calling us to him, who
proportions not his mercies to the circumstances of time, but the affections of
our hearts. The Ninivites had not many days for repentance, and to pray to God
to forgive them their crying sins; yet could a little portion of one day blot
out all their iniquities: and in how short a time was Paradise assured the
thief upon the Cross? In how small a time did his contrition purchase him
Heaven, even before Christ's followers and Apostles? Many have obtained the
honor of Martyrdom, and purchased Crowns of glory, in less then few years,
in a few days, nay, some in less then one day. Let us be always and in all
conditions undejected, and cheerful, confident and assured in our souls of
Gods infinite mercies which will entice and allure us to prepare our
confidences for such a tenderness, as will dread and abhor sin, as will
make us shake off our infirmities, and violently suppress the malice of
temptation; Our own election will lead us into better paths with Gods assisting
grace; ways quite contrary and opposite to our lusts, such as God commands us
to walk in, such as he rejoices to see us tread in, whose end is rewarded with
eternity, to which course the shortness of time can be no obstacle, for many
that were last have got to be first in this spiritual race by the eager
feavour of their desires. Our fallings are not our miseries, but this is our
calamity, when we are sunk under the weight of sin, that we lie under the heavy
burden, and never strive to rise again; that we sleep under it, and those
little intervalls we awake, dispute our souls into despair, against such as are
thus sottishly bewitched to their own destruction; the Prophet cries out in the
heat and height of passion, Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away,
and not return? Why then is the People of Jerusalem slidden back by a
perpetual backsliding? They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. Jer. 8.
4. Whoever it is that wilfully refuses, humbly and with his whole heart to
accept the grace of the spirit offered him, after his wandering from out of the
ways of God, is concerned in this of the Prophet. For it cannot be said he
fell who never stood; or that he went out of it who never was in the way. Many
things to confirm this truth, are evident in parables and other manifestations
of holy writ. That sheep which was lost from the nintynine, and after found and
brought back to the rest; Mat. 18. 12. what did it signify but the going
astray, and the return of the faithful? For the sheep belonged not to another
Shepherd, it was of the same flock; and under the same Shepherd: it wandered
through the Mountains, and the deserts, it strayed far from the fold; And
what? did the Shepherd neglect the wanderer? No, he brought him back, nor did
he angerly drive and beat it before him, but laid it on his own shoulders,
and so brought it home. Observe the best Physicians how in some fierce and
dangerous diseases, they please, and humor their patients, dispensing with the
set rules of their art, to comply with these distempers; so God uses not the
fierceness of his wrath against the greatest sinners; but his meekness heales
them, he applies the gentle cure of his compassion; like the good Shepherd
he lays them on his own shoulders, like the Physician he heales them with
forbearance; lest they wander for ever, lest their wounds prove incurable.
Next follows the parable of the prodigal to justify this truth: Luke 15. 12.
Who when he had run into extraordinary exorbitancies wilfully, and on purpose,
by his own folly wandered to purchasing shame, and misery, (whilst his brother
stayed at home ever pleasing his Father) he that was rich, free and nobly
borne, became more despised then the worst of his Fathers hirelings; Yet at
last was restored to his former honor, and repossest of his Fathers favor.
Had he in that miserable condition despaired of life, and those enjoyments he
afterward found, he had nere known blessing, but had perished perhaps in the
Wilderness with famine, of all deaths the most miserable. But because that he
repented (that he trusted to the hopes at his return of his Fathers
forgiveness) see the change of his base and abject condition; he is thus
restored to his Fathers favor, clothed in a rich garment, and better treated
then his brother, who had never transgrest. For says the brother: So many
years have I served thee, and never transgrest thy commands, and yet thou never
gave me a Kid, that I might make merry with my friends; but now this thy Son
is returned, who has devoured thy substance, thou have killed the fatted Calfe.
Out of this parable, and the precedent discourse may be collected the great
efficacy of repentance.

CHAP. VI. That we ought carefully to cleanse our souls from the filth of sin:
which must by no means be slighted or neglected, since in this World we cannot
presume on to morrow, every thing is so subject to mutability. And then the
pleasures of the Earth being so short, and quickly vanishing; That we ought to
fix our thoughts upon that eternity, in which we shall be crowned with glory;
or plagued in torments.
HAving before our eyes so famous and eminent examples of Gods inviting
benignity to stir us up to repentance, with such ample assurances of his
mercies to the truly penitent; Our duty is, not to waver as uncertain of his
assisting grace, but resolutely to attempt the encounter, when we are assured
of such irresistible aid to second us, as the power, and favor of our
omnipotent Lord. Do not his merciful calls summon us? Let us go on with
courage. Let us say, We will go to our Father, etc. like that prodigal. For if
we approach our selves but one step toward him, our God will draw us nearer,
so far is he from refusing us. But we are a generation that wilfully depart
from the Lord, and on set purpose forsake his ways, designing our selves to
perdition. Yet says our Lord, Jer. 23. 23 I am a God at hand, and not a God a
far off; and again he speaks by the Prophet, do not your sins separate you, and
make this division betwixt you and me. Are they our sins which hinder us? are
they the blocks which lie in our way to eternal happiness; Let us remove them
by the force of prayer and humiliation, that we may approach nearer to our
Lord. Set before our eyes Saint Paul's treating the Corinthian, and apply to
this present discourse. 1 Cor. 5. A Corinthian an eminent person, had committed
such a sin as the like is hardly named amongst the very Heathens; He was of the
faith of Christ's family, and some believe he was a Priest. What followed this
fall of his? Did St. Paul cast him off as a reprobate from the hopes of
salvation? not at all. For in his first and second Epistles to the Corinthians,
he expostulates with them, because they had not received him into repentance.
ver. 7. 4. In all which treating with them, he manifestly declared that there
was no sin so heinous, but God has appointed a conditional pardon for it, that
the diseases and distempers of our souls are to be cured by penance, their
proper medicine and purgation. ver. 5. Deliver such a one (says he) to Satan
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the Apostles language before his repentance, in
the time he stood excommunicated; but after his repentance says Saint Paul, To
him that is such a one, this rebuke suffices that is given of many. 2 Cor. 6.
Wherefore he wrote to them to comfort, encourage him, lest Satan should get an
advantage over him: In like manner, the entire Nation of Galatia (after they
had embraced the faith; after miracles wrought amongst them; after they had
overcome many temptations against their belief in Christ Jesus) at length fell
into infidelity; yet recovered their fall. He therefore that gives you the
spirit (says he) and works miracles amongst you, Gal. 3. 5. Certainly they
had many temptations whom he so teaches. ver. 4. Have you suffered so many
things in vain? yet in vain? These people after a great encreate of a strong
faith in our Lord, committed a heinous offense, they alienated themselves from
Christ, of which he seems to speak to them. Behold, I Paul tell you, that if
you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. 5. 2. And again, who
ever of you are justified by the Law, are fallen from grace. ver. 4. From so
dangerous a fall, how lovingly and friendly he strives to preserve them. My
little children whom I travel withal again, until Christ be formed in you.
Gal. 4. 19. Here he declares that in our worst estate, Christ may be renewed
and formed in us. For he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may
turn from his wickedness and live. Eze. 18. 12. Return then to our Lord (most
dearly beloved Theodorus) and perform his will, that would so have it. For
this end he created us, for this we were made, to bestow on us the glory of
eternity, to give us the Kingdom of Heaven, not to fling us into Hell, or cast
us into those flames, which were indeed made for the Devil and not for us. Our
Savior declares this to us* when he says to those on his right hand. Come you
blessed of my Father; Possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the World, Mat. 25. but to those on his left hand, Depart you cursed into
fire everlasting which was prepared (he does not say for you) but for the
Devil and his Angels. ver. 41. You see then Hell was not purposely made for
us, but for the Devil and his Angels. And that Heaven was appointed for us
from the beginning of the World. Shall we then render our selves incapable of
infinite honors, and felicities by eternal providence and favor determined
us, and not make our selves ready to enter the Bride-chamber with the
Bridegroom. This preparation is only possible in this World, here it is that
we must put on our wedding Garments, that we must dress our selves in the
robes of contrition and repentance, and though we may be often disordered in
our atttire, and contract again the filth, and deformity of our sin, there is
hope left, as long as the waters of repentance may yet cleanse us; but if we
neglect it to day, we know not how late it may be to morrow; the end and term
of our life is forbid the curiosity of our knowledge; and when we depart
hence, it will be too late to expect any good, though we repent with all the
passionate humility that can be imagined, it will not profit us; though we
gnash our teeth, howl horridly, and fill that Hell we are in with our
complaints, till they reach the Heaven we complain to, we shall not be the
better so much water as would cool our tongues. Luke 16. 16. Remember Abraham's
answer to the rich man, there is a great Chaos betwixt you and us. Let us lay
hold on mercy while we may; Let us now acknowledge our Lord humbly, faithfully,
and sincerely as we ought. For while there is life, there is hope by
repentance; and the benefits that never fail to accompany it, are ready for
us; it is a physic for the sickest languishing soul, nay, a most sure remedy,
but it calls not the dead back again, it is a salve cannot be applied to their
wounds who suffer in Hell, where there is no cure, from whence there is no
redemption; though in this World the last and weakest of our days render us
not so desperately ill but this Sovereign balm may cure us. Wherefore the
Devil uses all his power and subtlety to plant desperate apprehensions in our
souls, seeing the mercies of our Lord are free and open to the least
repentance that is hearty; and never let us it pass unrewarded. As he expresses
his propensity to charity in the Gospel. Even he that gives a cup of cold
water to one of these in my name, shall not lose his reward, says Christ, Mat.
10. 42. and the same Christ's promise is, that he who repents him of the sins
he has committed, though his repentance be infinitely beneath the merit of
retribution, the mercies of our Lord will find him out, for the least good in
us though never so small, the benignity and compassion of so merciful a Father
will not neglect. He (who searches our sins with that severe curiosity, that
our very words and thoughts shall be arraigned at the day of judgment) much
more carefully search and look upon the least good we do. So infinitely his
mercy and love to mankind exceeds his revenge. He is a God of so great mercy,
as he will remember his bounty to the least good in us, as well as his severity
to the least ill. Wherefore if thou find thy strength so to flagge and fail
thee, when thou attempts an enterprise so difficile to our natural corruption,
as is a real repentance, which is the total change of our inclinations, and
depraved appetites: yet do not faint in thy undertakings, and weakly fall from
trusting in the promises of a God that will never forsake thee; but begin by
degrees to stop the superfluous humors of this disease, which so debilitates
and infeebles thee; then art thou ready for this spiritual combat, the
victory will soon follow, when thou have once valiantly resisted the fury of
the assault. But if like a coward thou dreadst the first appearance of the
Enemy, it is no wonder if every thing seem difficult and hopeless to thee.
Before attempts and trials, the most feasible and facile things that oppose,
may possibly look full of danger, and horror, which once resolutely attempted;
our confidence and our courage of our banished fear, and stupid weakness will
assure us of those victorious wreaths which are prepared to incircle the
Temples of all true Christian soldiers. The Devil himself was fearful to
lose his Conquest, even over Judas himself, he keeps him down with despair,
knowing that repentance and contrition might have turned the day for that lost
wretch: For it is truth, and it must be confessed, (though it almost exceed
belief) that sin of Judas went not beyond the possibility of pardon, could he
but have repented.

Wherefore I pray and beseech thee to drive away, St. Chrysostom's application
to Theodorus.
and expel all these deceits of the Devil from thy soul; that thou may
enter this Port of salvation. I expect not at an instant that persuasions can
give thee leave to think thy self so soon lifted up out of the pit of
destruction to the possession of a Crown of glory; it were too much presently
to believe, as thy condition has made thee, (though to God nothing be
impossible) Therefore all that I desire of thee, is, to stop here, and add no
more to thy former transgressions, that thou would turn thy eyes another way,
and not let them rest fixed on the dotage of thy beastliness, to let us see
that thou have gone in those crooked meanders, have quite tired thee; and thou
beginst to be refresht, and recover thy strength in better paths: and art thou
thy own hindrance? Do thou not know that many have dyed in their
drunkenness, their lusts, and other sinful delu^sions of this age? Where are
some now, who lately traced the streets in pride, who fed their parasites with
dainties? and clothed themselves with the finest silks? they that presumed
the walks they went in? what is become of all this pomp and pride, is it not
vanished, is it not past over like a dream? Their costly feasts, their
jollities, their compleasing mirths, and laughings had their period, and are
now no more; their vanities, their uncheckt thoughts, and uncontrould
liberties, their delicious and insatiable luxuries are all fled. What are
become of those pampered bodies so studiously observed, and fed so lusciously:
Pray look into the grave: Contemplate on their dust, and ashes, on the worms
devoured them, the deformity of their charnell houses, then sigh, and bewail
that folly which took so great a care, to preserve so little a nothing. And
would to God this destruction there terminated where their ashes are consumed.
But turn thy eyes from the grave, and worms there devouring them; and reflect
on that everlasting fire that can never be extinguished, on that gnashing of
teeth, that utter darkness, on those streghts and irremediable afflictions
declared to us in the Parable of Lazarus and the rich man (who once was
clothed in purple, and the Lord of unvalew'd treasures, of riches that had no
end) and at last became so destitute of all necessaries, that he could not
purchase one drop of water to cool his tongue when he suffered in flames of
fire, and was condemned to the bitterest cruelties of all torments. And how
miserable a soul then is that, which thinks pleasures, and the vain lights of
this World to exceed the gain or Prophet of a dream? suppose a man were
condemned to work in Mines of Metalls, or doomed to undergo some harder
punishment; and then fancy this miserable creature sunk under his labor, and
fallen asleep; next in that sleep imagine him to have a dream possessing him
with the delusion of all pleasures and content: which when he awakes are with
his sleep fled; how little ows this poor soul to this mockery of felicity. And
truly, that rich man's happiness on Earth, was no more then such a kind of
dream. If we consider how little it lasted, and how it concluded, in
bitterness, and dreadful punishments, in everlasting fires. There is no
meditation so necessary to one besotted to his appetites, as it is to compare
one fire with the other, the burning of the lusts with the eternal flames
which are their decreed punishment; and he is worse then mad that will not
quench the one to eschew the other. For there is such nicety and dependence one
on the other, insomuch that he who puts out the present fires of his
concupiscence, is certain to avoid the eternity of the future; but if the
catching flames last till they are joined, they are never to be extinguished:
and unrepenting souls departing this life, presently unite their sinful fires,
with the revengefull flames appointed them in Hell for all eternity. Now then
consider how long thou can possibly presume on the continuance of these
felicities thou here enjoyst. When thou can not promise thy self any length
for thy life; fifty years were a great space to be assured of; but indeed we so
little know our ends, that we cannot tell but this evening may be our last;
how then can we rely upon so many years; Time is uncertain, nor can we assure
our selves any thing of the future. And were it so that we were certain of a
long life, the pleasures still are uncertain we might expect in it, which
sometimes are with us and again in the twinkling of an eye. But were a long
life assured thee, and thy pleasures to last with it, that no chance or fortune
had power to interrupt the continued course of thy contents, which should be
still equal to thy desires; What a little would this be to everlasting ages of
bliss, or eternity of punishment? And hereafter we must expect the like
everlasting durance of both joy and sorrow which soever be our lot: though here
delight and sadness have their vicissitude: in the World to come neither shall
ever end: And as both for continuance are endless; so in the extremities of
value both incomprehensible.

CHAP. VI. Hell fire exposed to the terror of the impenitent, with the
torments, and eternity thereof.
O Vainly deceived man? most foolishly and sottishly deluded sinner? who (when
thou heardst speak of Hell fire) believe those dreadful flames prepared for
the vengeance on thy impenitency ^o be no other, then some material pile that
soon with it is own violence, will of it self consume into ashes. Thou must
believe in time, (or thy experience will teach thee too late) what those fires
be, which are prepared in Hell for the Devils and his Angels there, and for
thee (unless thou sincerely repent) they are immortal unconsuming flames,
flames that shall never extinguish or die. So that in fine, the very damned may
promise themselves eternity, but it will prove the perpetuity of endless
shame, pains, and confusion. While the blessed shall be clothed with
immortality, but together with infinite joy, and incomprehensible glory. O vild
impenitent wretch, meditate on what thou art for ever forfeiting; a Crown of
immortal honor and what thou art assured to purchase with thy obstinate
impieties! Endless miseries, and plagues; torments in fires can never possibly
consume, which shall always last, and still supplied, ever increase, and never
diminish, or extenuate. No man's tongue (be he never so eloquent) can teach us a
way to comprehend the true knowledge of such unspeakable horror. Yet in this
(as in other things impossible to be certainly known) we may regulate our
conjecture by the experience we make on things of less moment. As for
example, suppose thy self in an overheated Bath; thy skin scalding, thy
veins, and sinews shrinking? Or burning in a violent fevour, at the
insufferablenesse of these pains thou may give some probable guess, and
after think thou on Hell fire: Thou will of necessity allow neither Bath or
fever possibly to be endured by the greatest and most invincible fortitude;
and argue thy self into an apprehension by degrees of the fearful horror thou will have, when for thy sins thou art flung into a torrent of merciless flames
issuing from that dreadful tribunal where the vengeance on impenitency is
prepared. There will be howling, and gnashing of teeth, punishments neither to
be suffered nor redrest, or comforted; for no body shall help them. So vain and
fruitless will be those lamentations which cannot avail the lamenters any
thing, when their complaints can profit them nothing: Their torments still
increasing with their desperation, in a place where their eyes can fix on
nothing to promise comfort, for what shall they see there but the damned, their
companions, and a vast desolation. Next to add to the horror of eternal
punishments, know that these fires there, as they can never dye, neither can
they afford light; for they are most peculiarly, and properly described to be
utter darkness. Consider what it is thus to suffer in horrid and loathsome
darkness, with terrors, affrightings, and tremblings in all thy members this
must needs cause; then the infinite multitude of thy tortures (which will fall
on thee faster then violent fleakes of snow upon the earth) shall cruciate thy
soul. In so hideous and overwhelming a manner, that humane capacity can not
well comprehend how it is possible for the soul of man to bear them, and not
utterly consume and annihilate in so fierce and devouring destruction. To make
which more evident and plain to our understandings, we may call to remembrance
what frequently happens in this world we are now in: How many men have fallen
into violent diseases, and those as lasting as violent, but neither their time
nor force had the power to their souls dissolution till the decay and ruin of
their material corruptible bodies: the substance of the soul being proof
against the keenest arrows of death; Even so shall it be at last with the
miserable bodies of the damned, which will be changed into a substance that the
fiercest flames shall never be able to consume; and though man be composed of
such materials as now cannot resist the violence, but yield to the conquest of
assaulting pains; when the cursed immortality of the body shall be equal to
that of the soul, both together must suffer to all eternity. Thou ought (
Theodorus) rightly to consider this undeniable truth, and not to give way to
any fantastic dream that would persuade thee, any end, or period can be
proposed to the eternity of their sufferings, who shall be thus prepared for
everlasting fire. And what are the pleasures, the delights and vanities thou
puts't into the contrary balance to weigh against so heavy a doom? How short
the time of their continuance compared with eternity? Could thou suppose that
Hells torments were to end in a hundred or two hundred years, the fury of them
for such a space might prudentially affright thee from that dissolute and wild
life thou art so besotted to; Then certainly the thought of their eternity must
needs deter thee; and to press this nearer to thee, I beg of thee to lay
thy hand to thy heart, and answer me, whether thou can or not exchange
blessings and pleasures eternal, for as everlasting punishments? or forfeit an
inestimable weight of glory for a dream? and all the reputed happiness of this
life are no better? What fool would be content for one pleasing moment to lead
all the rest of his life in misery? who is there so sottish, as would
wilfully forfeit all his peace for a minutes pleasure? yet thou do far
exceed such frantic beasts in thy madness. But alas I dilate in vain upon
thy dotage till it forsake thee, thou art deaf to persuasions while thy ears
are stopped with thy delights, or wilt, if thou hear, think them liars that
call the sweets, so please thee, what they really are, bitter and noisome. But
when by the merciful deliverance of our Lord, thou art freed out of the toyls,
thou will with patience hear me treat of the malicious cunning that deceived
thee with those snares: Wherefore I deferr to tell thee the malignity of thy
disease, till I see thee recovering. Now let us fancy pleasures to be really
the things they seem, and that the delights of this world have nothing of gall,
or bitterness; But what then (I pray) shall we say of the punishments attend
them? how shall we avoid them? whither shall we fly to escape the wrath that
follows them? They that now rejoice and triumph in the shades of seeming
content, shall not with their greatest fortitude be able to endure the least
punishments of those many prepared for their vengeance. And how little time
well spent in prayer and unfaign'd hearty penitence, might save them from those
torments, and bring them to those joys prepared for the blessed? Such is the
clemency and mercy of our God (who so earnestly loves mankind) that he has not
appointed a long time of conflict with Satan; the War last's no longer then
the short space of this fleeting life, which is but the twinkling of an eye
compared with those infinite ages to come, wherein we shall be crowned with
glory for ever. And this will add infinitely to those things the damned shall
suffer, when they remember their great neglect of that little time they had to
repent in, and at how easy a rate and low a price they sold and betrayed
themselves into everlasting thraldom. Let us then awake, and rouse our selves
out of this lethargy of sin, lest this sad doom be ours. And let us have and
do it whilst the time is yet, that we may be received into mercy and favor,
while there is hope, and that salvation may be had, before repentance be too
late; for they who idly and sloathfully wallow in the mire of their iniquities,
shall not only endure these, but far more intolerable torments. Since it is
not to be expressed in the most artificial terms of eloquence, how great those
tortures are which are prepared for the damned in Hell. But if it were only to
lose the joy and blessings of Heaven: the thought alone of so great a loss
(though we were after to perish like other beasts) would be insupportable, it
would bring with it so just cause of sorrow, such affliction, and tribulation,
that were no other punishment ordained for sinners, that it self should be
sufficient to reduce us from our wicked ways, and might terrify us more then
the apprehension of all those torments that threaten, and affright us, and we
may most assuredly expect, unless we truly repent.

CHAP. VIII. Of the beatitude of the Saints glorified in Heaven, pressing
Theodorus farther to amendment, by arguing that Heaven is rather to be sought
after then Hell to be feared. The glory of one being a more moving object, then
the terriblenesse of the other.
FRom this caution given thee ( Theodorus) of the unspeakable pains of Hell; I
would raise thy contemplations to the most necessary, most admirable, and
ravishing delight thy soul can possibly fix it self upon; which is to employ
thy curiosity in search of the Knowledge of the joys of Heaven, for though the
dignity of that blessed state be not within the compass of the most accurate
expression, and far exceeding the delineation of the acutest wit: yet my
advice presumes to invite thee to conceive as much of it as is allowed our
humane judgments to comprehend: And as far as we are taught and instructed
by holy writ, our contemplations have liberty to soar into the felicities of
Heaven. Isaiah the Prophet expresses them thus. The ransomed of the Lord shall
rejoice and come to Sion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Isai.
35. 10. 51. 11. What can be more happy then such a life? There you shall never
fear poverty, or sickness. There shall be neither oppressor, nor oppressed; No
troubsome tormentor, nor any one tormented; No man angry or vexed, nor any
repining at another displeasure; No proud man swelling in abundance, nor any
person dejected and mourning for his necessities; No man contentious for
principality or power; nor any one lamenting under the persecution of a
superior? There all the tempestuous passions of our minds shall be hush't in a
perpetual calm. All things shall be peace, joy and gladness; all things
serenity, and tranquillity. There shall be eternal day, brightness and light;
Light as far excelling the splendour of the Sun, as that does the blaze of a
torch; for it shall never be hid with the vail of night, never be obscured in
clouds and darkness: yet (though so exceeding lustrous) withal so temperate,
that it shall neither burn nor scorch. No night nor evening shall the blessed
know, no scorching summer, or chill winter, no change of seasons shall molest
them, every thing is so ordered in a settled constancy, and so appointed for
their fruition, whom grace and repentance shall fit for it: They shall feel no
old age, nor the evils of it, there shall nothing remain subject to
corruption, but every one be crowned with incorruptible glory, and what exceeds
all already said, the blessed shall then enjoy eternally the company of Christ,
with his Angels, Archgels, and all the glorious hoasts of Heaven; contemplate
on the skies in that excellency they appear now to our eyes, behold the
beauties there? No star in the firmament shall in thy beatitude outshine
thee, which will be, when all things created shall be refined into greater
abundance of glory, and exceed themselves as they are now, as much as the
purest Gold (which seems to give light to the air, and captivate our humane
sense) does the complexion of lead. So shall all things created (as they shall
then be refined) excel themselves in their glory. For as blessed Saint Paul
says. The creature also it self shall be delivered from the servitude of
corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. Romans 8. For
now in our flesh we suffer many things liable only to the corruption of the
body, which nature in the body it self shall be changed into incorruptible, and
that together with the soul become immortal, the soul it self possessed of more
beauty, and greater excellency. And where then can thou dream of any jarre
or discord may happen? what ruins, or what destroying civil dissension, when
an eternal inviolable love shall knit the Saints of Heaven in one knot, and
make them one soul. The dread of the Devil shall be no more; no more threats,
no more snares, no more death; the body it self shall be immortal, and the
soul quit her fear of a far more terrible destruction. All apprehension of
ills that may befall us, shall for ever dye; and it will be with our happy
souls, as with the heir to a King, who in his infancy and minority is kept
severely, and educated under fear, and the lash of a Tutors discipline, lest
remissness in his education might let him fall into unprincely wildness, and
render him, by having no government of himself, incapable of governing others,
and inheriting his Fathers dignities: but growing in years, and increasing in
virtues, becoming the Royal Majesty of a Prince, he is then let loose to the
guidance of those engraftments becoming his high calling, and a full possession
of his liberty: He is clad in purple, and his Temples circled with a Diadem;
the fears and menaces of the masters of his younger years are no longer his
terrors; but every thing serves his magnificence, and complies with his
happiness and pleasure: so at the consummation of bliss shall it be with the
Saints of God, whom as his beloved children here he keeps under the rod of
affliction, to fit and prepare them for those immortal honors, and crowns they
shall inherit in the Kingdom of Heaven. No assimilation indeed is sufficient
to give us a guess at those transcending joys, nor can the Arts of eloquence
express them: But let our thoughts ascend to that mount, where our Lord was
transfigur'd: and behold him there shining as he then did with the eyes of
devout contemplation: and yet there we shall not find one full entire figure of
the perfect glories of the world to come; that appearance being such as was
fitted for the discerning of our natural optics. As appear by the words of
the Evangelist. His face did shine like the Sun, Mat. 17. that is, like to that
body which it self is subject to corruption, but the glory of incorruptible
bodies shall be of a nature far excelling that, which mortal eyes shall not
be able to look upon; to behold the which, we shall have incorruptible and
immortal eyes. On the mount, though there not appeared not greater light then
was probably possible for them to have beheld without detriment to their sight:
yet that they endured not: For they fell on their faces. Tell me (I pray) If
any one should lead you into a glorious Theater, and present your eyes with the
sight of a gallant number of persons clothed in Gold, and adorned with all
curiosities of value: And amongst them should show one infinitely exceeding the
rest in glory, and power, who were able to bring thee into the happy number of
that society, would thou not be obedient to all his commands, to purchase
such a glorious felicity: Let thy soul fly up to Heaven on the wings of holy
meditations, and view their Theater, whose glory consists in the assembly of
far more transcending persons; whose ornaments exceed the luster of Gold and
Diamonds; whose beauty excells the very light of the rays of the Sun: There is
the seat of Angels, Archangells, Thrones, Dominions, and Powers, and of what
far excells them: For of the Kings of Heaven and his glory, all tongues must
be silent, or not presumptuously attempt so unequal a task, so much does he
superexcell all expressions, so transcendent are his Luster, Glory, Splendour,
Majesty, and Magnificence. And (tell me) how great madness it is to lose, and
forfeit so infinite blessings, only for the satisfaction of abusing a little
time. What if we were to die a thousand times in a day? to endure the torments
of Hell it self for a season? Would it be too much for us; when the reward
would be see Christ coming in his glory, and our selves received into the
number of the blessed for ever. Observe what blessed Saint Peter says. Mat.
17. 4. It is good for us to be here: if he (who saw but in a manner the shadow
of the glory to come) emptied his soul of all other thoughts, to give up the
possession, to the contentment and joys of such a sight; What shall we say,
when not the shadow, but the real truth of that happy vision shall possess
our selves? When the Chambers of Heaven shall be opened, and we behold the
King of Glory himself, not obscurely as in a glass, but face to face, not
barely with the eyes of faith, but as he shall be then manifested in truth
unto us. Their spirits are base and abject, who rejoice they have escaped Hell,
out of the apprehension of the horrors of it. It is to be accounted certainly a
greater torment then any is in Hell it self, to lose Heaven and the glory of
it. So pressing a calamity it must needs be to the damned, to think of the
loss of Heaven, that certainly it will punish them more then the pains of
Hell. Our eyes wander with amazement after their happiness whom we see great
in Princes favors, and wonder what possibly they can want, who partake of the
counsels of the mighty, and share with them in their honors; to them we allow
the fulness of all happiness, and adjudge our selves miserable, if we want
any thing our emulations can receive to contribute to their happiness. Though
perhaps our condition may exceed theirs, if we consider the the lubricity and
unstablenesse of fortune. How slippery they stand who are tottering on the top
of pinacles: how uncertain their honors be, and greatness, whose duration
cannot be secured beyond the fate of battle, or the ruins of domestic envy.
Certain it is: All the pomp of the Earth will have a period; And it is vanity
to fix our souls on any imaginary happiness in this world. But what we look
for from God our Lord, whose reign shall be for ever, whose Kingdom has no
bounds. Isaiah 40. Who possesses not a part, but the whole compass of the
Earth. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out
Heaven with his span; who sustains all things with his power; to whom all
Nations are nothing, and are reputed as a drop of water. He it is whose power,
and mercies can only make us eternally happy. Let the immensity of the joys
then, which are the determined portion of the blessed, argue our souls into a
true apprehension of them, and let us more dread the loss of future
happiness, then all the terrors of future pains; and more abhor to be
excluded out of the doors, and not admitted into the quire of the Angels, and
the blessed Saints of Heaven; then to be doomed to eternal flames.

CHAP. IX. Of the day of judgment.
THE terrible and mighty King of Heaven and Earth shall not come to judgment
drawn by white mules, or appear to the condemned in robes of peace, and crowned
with a diadem of mercy. But how he then will come the tongue of man cannot
express, you can have no surer evident rule for you, then out of the Prophets
thundering forth the terrors of his approach. Psalm. 50. ver. 3. Our God shall
come and shall not keep silence, there shall go before him a consuming fire,
and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him. He shall call the
Heavens from above, and the Earth that he may judge his people. The Prophet
Isaiah dilates thus on this dreadful appearance. Isaiah 13. 9. Behold the day
of the Lord comes, cruel both with anger and fierceness, to lay the land
desolate, and to destroy the sinners out of it; for the stars of Heaven,
Orion, and the constellations there, shall not give their light. The Sun shall
be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.
And I will punish the whole Earth for their evils, and the wicked for their
iniquity, and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay
low the haughtiness of the terrible. And those that are left shall be more
precious then fine Gold; such a man shall be more esteemed then a precious
stone of Ophir, for the Heavens shall be shaken, and the Earth shall be removed
out of her place, for the anger of the Lord of Sabbath in the day when his
wrath shall come. And in another place the same Prophet, The windows of Heaven
shall be opened, and the foundations of the Earth shall be shaken: the Earth
shall be utterly broken down, the Earth shall be clean dissolved, the Earth
shall be moved excedingly, it shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, it shall be
removed like a Cottage, and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it,
and and it shall fall, and not rise again: Isa. 24. 18. For their iniquities
have prevailed against them. To these add the Prophet Malachi; Behold (says
he) the Lord Almighty comes, but who shall abide the day of his coming? and
who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers soap, and he shall sit as a refiner of silver and gold. Mal. 3. 2. And
again (says he) the day of the Lord comes consuming like a furnace, and it
shall burn them up. Mal. 4. 1. And they who are proud, and all that do wickedly
shall be as stubble; and the day comes, (says the Lord Almighty) it shall
leave them neither root nor branch. And to the same purpose does the vision of
the Prophet Daniel alarm us with the terrors of that day. I beheld (says he)
till the Thrones were placed, and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment
was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his Throne was
a flame of fire, and his wheels burning fire: A fiery stream issued out
before him: Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him. The judgment was set and the Books were opened.
Dan. 7. 9. And a little after, thus speaks the Prophet, ver. 13. I saw a
vision in the night, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds
of Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before
him: And there was given him Dominion and glory and a Kingdom; that all
People, Nations, and languages should serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion which cannot pass away, and his Kingdom a Kingdom which cannot be
destroyed. ver. 15. I Daniel was grieved in my spirit, and the visions of my
head troubled me. Let us consider these menaces of holy writ: and instruct our
souls how in that day the glory of Heaven shall be revealed, the clouds shall
separate, the whole firmament open; parting like a curtain before a screen,
and discovering to us the Majestic prospect within: which will fill all things
created with fear, amazement, and horror. Then shall the Angels themselves be
full of fear, with the Archangells, Thrones, and ^owers of Heaven, not for
themselves, but because their fellowservants are brought to judgment, and to
give their strict account of their past life in this world. For if they (under
whose tutelage we are) grieve at the judgment pronounced against one sole City
under their charge, what will be the general affrights and horrors, when the
Son comes against the whole world: for though themselves they know, exempt from
the danger, they will have a sense of them brought before a Judge, whose
alseeing eye needs no proof of witness, or accusation. Who will force the
guilty to accuse themselves, and lay their own offenses open, when every
delinquent to Heavens justice shall produce his own deeds, his words, and
thoughts to condemn himself? Will not this mighty and just severity of our Lord
astonish the very powers of Heaven themselves. If it had not in it the horror
of an inundation of a river of fire, and those terrible affrighting Angels,
ministers of his justice, which assist the fury and rage of his revenge: How
would it move men to see the workmanship of the same creation, called some to
be highly preferred and honored; Nay, had in great admiration while others are
blinded with disgrace, lest they should see the glory of God. Can you imagine a
more tormenting Hell then this? When the thought of that Heaven we have l^st,
will more sensibly cruciate our souls from the torments of that Hell we
suffer in. The infinite loss our wilfully erring and self-abusing souls bring
to themselves (in the forfeiting those excellent great blessings ordained them)
are impossible to be apprehended by thought, or in words comprehended. Sad will
be the experience of it to the impenitent. Wherefore (I beseech thee) set
before thy eyes the different ends of piety and impiety. Behold the impious
overwhelmed with horrors and unspeakable punishments: and even then when the
truly pious children of God shall be clothed with immortality, and eternal
glories: When the damned shall be delivered to cruel tormenting furies; the
blessed shall be adorned with crowns, accompanied with Angels, singing and
rejoicing before the Kings Throne; thus shall it be with them who on Earth have
done good and justice, and are found worthy of eternal life.

CHAP. X. The joys of Heaven prosecuted, give occasion to discourse of the
felicities and blessings God has promised our souls, the excellencies
Wherewith they are enricht with, and the vile contempt we have of them,
preferring our bodies their slaves before them.
THE joys of Heaven are beyond our dull perceptions, while we are laden with
earth; in vain it were to undertake labor of their description: Ineffable are
those pleasures, and delights, the great profits unvaluable, which will then
be ours in eternal possession, when we are received into the number of the
Saints glorified for ever. When the immortal soul shall be invested with her
own glory; and eased of all her yoakes in happy freedom, enjoy the pleasure to
behold her Lord. It cannot, it cannot (I say) be expressed how great the ecstasies
of her joys must be when she shall not only be ravished with contentments of
her glorious condition for the present, but rest likewise secured of their
eternity, that without lessning or decay, but rather with increase they shall
endure for ever. Nor is this happiness alone above expression: For no soarings
of the most elevated souls in contemplation can reach the high perfections of
those blisses. We may by the ways of weak comparisons give obscure guesses,
and such demonstrations the excellency of that glory only allows our
conjectures to practice on. Let us then seriously contemplate their conditions
we commonly allow happy in this world; let us make enquiry of their felicities,
who exceed in riches, power, or honor, in so great overflowes, that they scarce
believe themselves on Earth: Then let us weigh the certainty and permanence of
what they hold themselves thus happy in, and we shall find them possessed with
nothing but vanities, which will leave and quit them swifter then a dream. Nay,
imagine those pleasures lasting as their lives (which is the most you can allow
them) and yielding the fullness of that content they fancy who enjoy them, when
you find how short that time is of their being, you will confess them none.
And yet how much are worldings puffed up with these transitory delights? Will
it not then be infinite content and unspeakable satisfaction, to souls
arrived at the Haven of bliss, when (having choos'd the stormy Seas of this
troubled world) they shall be landed on the banks of peace, and tranquillity,
and enter possession of a Kingdom abounding with all joys, and pleasures,
honors, glories, and felicities without end. For in the narrow streights of
this world, he that possesses the largest inheritance, may be likened to an
infant within his mothers womb, so little is his liberty, compared with the
spacious fields of that heavenly paradise prepared for the blessed from all
eternity. And as those are embrions in the womb, having not yet the natural
benefit of light, till their legitimate and full birth, when they are brought
into the world, and participate even with their Parents (though in their first
clouts) the fullness and perfection of their Creation: So have not we the true
effects and ends of our redemption, till we see the day of our glory. And as
amongst them abortives, such will be the condemned sinners at the latter day
amongst men: abortives, though those never see the light of the Sun; never know
day: yet delivered from the cell of the womb, into the spacious world, have
the doom of a larger, yet to them a darker Prison, if we consider there is
that light for them they are incapable to enjoy. So, abortives, impenitents,
shall be delivered out of darkness into greater darkness, out of afflictions
into greater afflictions. But the mature offspring bearing his marks and
characters, shall be presented to the King of Heaven; then shall the mystery of
salvation be revealed to them, and they become fellows in glory with the
Angels, and the Archangells. Wherefore (my beloved friend) do not for ever blot
out those characters thou art signed with by Gods Holy spirit: Bury them not in
a loathsome abyss of sins. Raise up thy soul by repentance, which will refine
and beautify those thy excellent parts that are now besmeared and spatter'd
with the filth of a dissolute living; then will the luster of thy virtues dazzle
those eyes to whom now thou appear'st a cloud of vanity: The most excellent
beauty that is in man or woman, is no beauty, if not in relation to our
discerning them; and what to dotage our enamored senses, have admired them; we
must at the last confess them, subject to decay and ruin: But the beauty of
the souls exempt from that servitude to natures necessities, is of a more
excellent condition then that of the body in it is greatest pomp: yet are our
souls enjoyments more ours then are our bodies. So earnest and passionate a
lover of mankind is our Lord, whom he has so nobly honored, that things of
lesser value, (which carry little of greatness in them) he has decreed to the
Laws and necessity of a natural production; but has made us our selves the
workmen of better, and more glorious effects. Had the forming of our bodies
beauty been left to us; Our fantastic natures had taken too much care about
it, and we had utterly neglected the greater business of our souls. But
Divine providence having denied us the power, we may justly conclude our task
appointed us to be the care of our own souls. Since all the curiosity to make
our selves finer creatures then we are (which finds so many, so much employment
for their precious hours) is altogether fruitless: The nicer arts of colors
and curles to adorn us, looked into have made up nothing but a becoming
handsome lie. When so much time spent upon the soul, had really enricht and
adorned it with such beauties as will last for ever. And for all this how
little time should we allow the better part, if so be we had a full power to
accomplish our desire on the more ignoble; scarce any time would be spared upon
our souls, could we beautify our bodies as we desire, still should we be
decking and adorning the base and abject slave, whilst we neglected the soul
her Mistress and Lady with the laziest sloth, and meanest contempt. Therefore
has God taken the effect of this fruitless labor clean out of our power, if
we truly consider the end of it: But has given us the use of better, and more
profitable labors, and appointed their reward. For he that cannot truly
better and beautify his body, may do it to his soul, though never so deformed
with sin, by true contrition and repentance, making it not only the object of
good men's affections, and bad men's envy: But reduce it to the honor to be
beloved even of God our Lord, and King. This is it the Psalmist means, when he
says Psalm. 45. ver. 95. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is
the Lord, and worship thou him. Nay, such is the great benignity of our Lord,
that the vildest and most dissolute sinners may hope by repentance to regain
his favor, though they stand in the highest degrees forfeited to his anger,
and severe judgments: Which is very apparent throughout the Prophets: Ezekiel
thus pathetically aggravates her abominations fallen into a new unheard of
manner of whoredom, contrary to the custom of Harlots. They give gifts (says
he) to all whores; but thou give gifts to all thy lovers, and and hirest them
that come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom, and the contrary is in
thee from other women in thy whoredom, whereas none follows thee to commit
whoredoms, and in that thou give a reward, when as no reward is given unto
thee, therefore thou art contrary. Yet the mercy and grace of God calls her
home, thus given over to the abominations of her lusts. For he laid not this
captivity on her, having an eye to his revenge, and punishment on her
wickedness, but to convert her, and bring her into order by his corrections.
For would God have punished her as she deserved, she had been swallowed in
destruction. He had not brought her captives home, nor prepared for them a
better City, or a more glorious Temple then the old. Haggai 2. 9. The glory of
this latter house, shall be greater then the former, says the Lord of hosts;
and in this will I give peace says the Lord of Hosts. See thus often defiled
with her abominations, the Lord will not exclude this City from repentance,
nor shut the doors of his ^lemency against her. No, he will not, nor will he
forsake thee for ever, (though thy desperate condition by the suggestions of
the Devil would persuade thee to it) but with infinite desire and affection
receive thee into mercy if thou returnest to him; and he will lovingly embrace
thy soul again, though thus sunk in the deeps of wickedness. For no man, no
man (I say) though passionate even to madness, can so truly affect the greatest
beauty of the world, as our Lord does the soul of man; And if we look narrowly
into the daily expressions of his love to every particular soul, this truth
will show it self as clear to us as the light of the day: And the Scriptures
abound in testimonialls of this his infinite love to us. Observe in Jeremiah,
and throughout the Prophets, how the Lord has been wearied, nay, contemned and
despised by his; yet has restored the desertors, and placed them again in his
high favors, this witness he bears of himself in the Gospel; when he says:
Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy
children, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you would
not. And Saint Paul. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God (says he) was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed
to us the word of reconciliation: Now when we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled
to God. O let us lay these invitations to our hearts, and the minute we read
them believe the holy Ghost calling us. Nor let us think it enough that we
believe aright; for alas, infidelity is not the only bane of the soul; to
believe well availes us nothing, if we live ill; if we purify not our souls
from uncleanness, and bid a farewell to that lewdness of life, which so
incenses the mighty anger of the Lord against us. Because that the fleshly mind
is enmity against God; for it is not obedient to the Law of God, neither can
be. Romans 8. 7. The concupiscence of the flesh stands like a separating wall
betwixt our souls and mercy, which we must utterly raze and destroy, or never
hope to have a free passage to that happy reconciliation, which will crown our
souls with triumph and honor; and make them lovely and acceptable to God
himself. Thou art now bewitched, with thy Hermion's: face, and think nothing
in the world comparable to such an excess of beauty; believ'st the Earth bears
nothing like it; thy self (if thou please) may be far more lovely then
she, nay, excel her more then stars of Gold and inestimable workmanship do
images of clay and dirt. If men are naturally amazed, and ravished with the
sight of some extraordinary beauties; how will they be extrasied with the
splendor of a soul in glory. For indeed the substance of the greatest
beauties (though in a greater excellence of composure) is the same with the
meanest and most contemptible things of nature. And are nourisht by the same
means, and subject to the same decay, if not preserved by most common,
contemptible and inferior supplies. What is the inside of her killing
glittering eyes? What lies under that sweet and lovely outside of thy Hermion's
surpassing graces, or her purpled cheeks? If thou art once redeemed from thy
dotage, thou will confess the greatest beauty but a Sepulcher fairly whited
and painted over, every thing within it being decreed to the certainty of ruin
and dissolution: for there is nothing so lovely that turns not into loathsome
putrefaction. But what was that former grace and beauty (whilst thou were in
thy integrity) in which thou did so infinitely excel? that was of another
composition: above all the glorious things of this world, as much as the Heavens
exceed the Earth in splendor: nay far more glorious then the Heavens
themselves: for though the soul be undiscernable, and we are altogether
strangers to her excellencies we may behold her in the elevated expressions of
those, whose pious zeales have left their attempted descriptions, to inflame us
with the favor they had to possess their thoughts with so amiable desires, as
the contemplation of future glory, which they have several ways aimed to
know, especially by soaring high as they were able, into the natures of
Angelical, and heavenly substances.

CHAP. XI. Saint Chrysostom continues (...) the glorious nature of the soul;
and from that excellence prosecutes his perswasives to Theodorus; still
striving to overcome the rebellions of his lusts with exhortation, and pressing
arguments.
HEar him whose desires would have shown the excellent substance of an happy
soul; but finding it unequal to all comparison, he betakes himself first to
illustrate it by an assimulation to the nature of metals, whose gross being was
too heavy in the purest of their extractions, to give him a sufficient hint and
light of it: thence he rayses his contemplations, and attempts his comparison
with the brightness of lightning; and next of Angelical bodies, whose
glorified essence he finds of a nature so abstracted from our knowledge, that
he cannot express the curiosity and subtilety of their essences, so
transplendent are they. And such shall the blessed be in their glory. Mat. 22.
They shall be as the Angels in Heaven, says our Savior to the Sadduces. In
fine, all examples derived from material things, can never express the beauty
of a soul. Heaven excells all the glories of the Earth, fire surpasses water,
the stars in luster excel the most precious stones; we may admire the
rainbow in Heaven, the violets and lillies, withal the pride and variety of
the fields, which are all nothing in a manner, if compared with the glories of
the soul; and those ineffable honors she shall be clothed withal in the day
of her bliss. Let us not forfeit so much happiness which a lively faith and
constant hope can secure us. Nay, for this we must wade through all the
inconveniences of this miserable world. 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. And as blessed Saint Paul teaches us, It is really easy to
bear the greatest afflictions looking to the reward of our sufferings; So is
it equally easy to overcome the petulant passions of our lusts, and the same
reward is appointed for both the conquests. For when I would draw thee from thy
dissolute courses, I invite thee not to dangers, nor the horrors of eminent
death, nor to perpetual plagues and scourges: to no afflictions abroad, nor
strife at hope; no prisons, or Irons, no hazard of shipwreck, no violence of
thieves; or thy own familiarsnares; no hunger, cold, nor nakedness, neither to
scorching fire. And alas, will thou dread my exhortations? I impose no bitter
task on thee, but on the contrary, earnestly desire thee to set thy self free
from a most tyrannical captivity. And when thou art ransomed from this bondage
of thy sins, to the happy liberty thou did once enjoy: thy eyes opened to
behold what true bliss is: Thou will confess the merited pains of a dissolute
life, the unquiet and tormenting afflictions of a mind, given over to carnal
lusts; and what the happiness and content of such a godly life is, as thou
did formerly lead. It were no greater wonder that an Athiest, who believed
no resurrection from the dead, should lie lulled in his lethargick bestialitie,
without any sense of his condition. But that believers, that Christians (who
look after, expect and foresee what is decreed both to the good and bad) for
them to live thus miserably unconcerned in their own calamities, nothing at all
awakened with the remembrance of their future hopes or fears is most heavy, dull
and senseless stupidity. When with their lips men shall profess themselves
believers, but look into their ways, they are by many degrees worse then
infidells, and commit greater abomination then they. For amongst the very
heathens themselves, there cannot be greater monsters in sins then are some
Christians: Nay, what is more (which should severely advise us to amend)
amongst them, there are often eminent examples of lives led morally, so well
that they are fit to be looked upon for our instruction; with what shame then
shall we cover our faces, when the actions of heathens and aliens to God may be
precepts. Merchants who have suffered great damages and losses, fall not from
their hopes, but try the Seas again, though there be the same danger of
storms, and shipwreck, which they know their greatest skill and care cannot
sometimes avoid. And shall we base unworthy cowards that suffer by sin and
wickedness, not dare the recovery of our lost souls, nor attempt our future
preservation, though we fall into dangerous lapses, being we know we are
forbid to despair in the greatest extremities. When indeed no evil has power
over us unless we willingly our selves consent unto it. And why remain we then
so insensibly stupid? why use we not our hands in this combat, but lie as if
they were tied behind us, or what is worse, (if they are employed) it is
against us our selves; what madness is this? that men entering the lists to
fight their adversaries, turn all their blows upon themselves. The Devil
lies in ambush for us, diligently observing the advantages he has over humane
weakness to make us destroy our selves. We must have courage then with
undaunted spirits to meet the cunning assaltant on every attempt against us, or
with our own negligence and careless fears he ruins us for ever. As thou art
fallen ( Theodorus) so likewise fell blessed David; he to adultery added the
heinous murder of innocent Uriah: But what followed? did he lie under the
burden of his iniquities? did not he attempt to rise again, but overcome by
Satan lay prostrate to his fury? No! he courageously resumes his arms against
his enemy? and fought him with so prevailing courage, that his children after
him were the trophies of his victory, and received the benefits of his
conquest. For when Solomon his Sonn's heart was turned after other Gods by
means of his wives, 1 Kings 11. When he went after Ashtoreth the Goddess of the
Sidonians, and Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, etc. When he
had with all his abominations provoked the Lord, it is recorded in holy writ,
that for David's sake, God rent not his Kingdom from him. ver. 11. I will
surely rend thy Kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant;
Notwithstanding, in thy days I will not do it, for David thy fathers sake, but
I will rend it out of the hands of thy Son. Howbeit I will not rend away all
thy Kingdom: but will give one tribe to thy Son, for David my servants sake.
So likewise in the days of Hezekias, though he himself were a just man, does
the Lord allege the same cause of his mercy to Jerusalem. 2 Kings 19. 34. I
will defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for David my servants
sake. Thus did the Lord continue the remembrance of David's hearty penitence; to
show us how effectually true repentance finds access to the tribunal of
Heaven. This servant of the Loreds disputed not against his redemption; had he
had the desperate opinion thou seem to be of now, that he could not be
reconciled to God: He would have said perhaps; God has done me mighty honors;
he has chosen me into the number of his Prophets, has given me Empire and
Dominion over my brethren; and delivered me out of mighty dangers; and how can
I hope for his mercy, whom after so manifold blessings I have thus infinitely
offended. Had the Prophet permitted such desperate conceptions to overcome him,
he had not only excluded himself from Gods favor in that his sad condition
at the present, but had blotted out the remembrance of all his former life. As
the wounds of the body neglected, grow altogether incurable, so those of the
soul, if we seek not for their remedy, lapse us into eternal perdition: yet
such is our folly, that in the least distempers of our bodies, we refuse no
pains, no troubles, but submit to any tortures art can prescribe for our
recovery, but obstinately werefuse the medicines of our sick souls: nay, though
we are so ill, that we are beyond all cure, with what a longing desire we are
attentive to what the Physician speaks, in the last extremes willing to hear
of comfort. But in the disease of our souls we despair, and languish before
we see reason for it, since the most dangerous wounds there are not incurable.
And where the nature of the sickness is really desperate: we continue our
hopes; but miserably despair where there is no need: And where we are
absolutely forbid it, we are wilfully diffident, putting on the vanity of a
confidence when it is ridiculous and beyond all hopes: but such is our natural
fond inclination to our bodies, that we look on their decays with horror and
affrightment, and in the hazards of our precious souls, are sottishly
insensible. Me thinks in such a state, those words of Christ may awake our
heavy dull spirits. Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill soul: but rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in
Hell. If these be not prevalent with thee, to persuade thee as yet to return to
thy integrity, I shall labor in anguish and affliction of soul for thy
deferring so long, so acceptable and necessary a task as thy reforming thy
life, but I cannot utterly despair of thee, though thou wilfully do so of thy
self as yet; for I should be then guilty of thy own folly and peevishness by
my distrust. Which is a sin I will not commit: For (though I see thee strangely
fallen) I will still trust in Gods mercy and grace to thee, and doubt not but
to see thee in a happy condition, cleared and purged of all that fatal
malignancy thy careless soul has now contracted; and behold thee perfectly
reconciled to virtue, godliness, and the favor of God.

CHAP. XII. The story of the Ninivites repentance, the proeme to Saint
Chrysostomes farther urging Theodorus to his conversion, collecting thence,
that greatest sinners may return to God: he prosecutes his persuasions,
alleging that many so converted, have become the best and most zealous people.
THE Ninivites hearing that threatening, and sharp crying out of the Prophet
Jonah (Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed) were not so
discouraged and dismayed at so terrible warnings of their approaching
destruction from the fierce anger of an incensed omnipotent God, but they would
yet trust to his mercy. Though the decreee of his vengeance was not
conditional, but positive, Niniveh shall be destroyed without admittance of
any clause to foment a hope in them, for the words of the Prophet were not
disjoynted, but a plain and direct sentence of judgment; yet they submit with
humble penitence. ver. 9. For (say they) who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not. ver. 10. And
God saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways, and God repented
of the evil that he said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. See
how those barbarous, rude, and mad people apprehended their imminent
destruction: and togther understood the possibility of their deliverance,
having their hearts set upon his infinite mercy, in his greatest wrath and rage
against them. Let us then (that are Christians, and nursed up in the knowledge
of our Lords benignity, who are instructed and disciplined in his word; and
know many the like examples) stir up our souls to sincere repentance; and not
be less then them in our confidence of his goodness, and mercy For he it is
whose sacred spirit has told us. Isa 55. 8, 9. That his thoughts are not our
thoughts, neither are our ways his ways. For as the Heavens are higher then
then the Earth, so are his ways higher then our ways, and his thoughts then
our thoughts. Servants of men err from the duty they owe their masters, and
commit foul faults against them, yet if they grow sorrowful, and recant that
disobedience, they are again received into their masters good opinion, and
sometimes with advantage of preferment: God our gracious Lord and master,
(whose thoughts and ways exceed those of men) will deal as favorably; Nay,
far more mercifully with us. If the intent of his creating us, had been to damn
us, then thy despair were reasonable and just, nor could thou do otherwise
then doubt of salvation, when none were prepared for thee; But God having made
thee out of his goodness, and created thee to good ends no less then that thou
might enjoy everlasting happiness, (and to that intent his great works
continue in thee, if thou wilfully deny not to perceive it) what should make
thee thus diffident, or in the least to mistrust his mercy? When we have the
most incensed him, then ought we most carefully to look to our selves? most
diligently and courageously to resist all issuing temptations present, and most
bitterly lament our easy yielding to those past which so miserably overcame
us; so shall we be able to give a manifest testimony of our perfect change.
For nothing more provokes our Lord then our obstinacy and denial to return
into the right way. For to do ill is but humane weakness, to persevere
Diabolical malice. Consider how horrid a thing it was, which we read in the
Prophet, that Judah called back in the race of her vild whoredoms, would not
return to the Lord: Jer. 3. 7. And I said, after she had done all these
things, turn thou unto me; but she returned not. The Lord strives with us, to
show how mercifully he is inclined to our salvation, many are his promises to
those who return into the right way, forsaking the Meanders, and bypath of
iniquity: When he saw Isreal's promises of repentance, that they began to
prepare their hearts to fear him, and to keep his Commandments; his promise
was, that it should be well with them and their Children for ever. Wherefore
Moses joins the reward with the command, when he bids them to keep the
Commands of the Lord and his statutes, which he commands (says he) for their
good. Deuteronomy. 10. 13. And immediately before, he commands us to fear him, to walk
in his ways, and to love him. Which is most remarkable, that the God of Heaven
should earnestly seek their loves, who so wretchedly offend him. Wherefore
ought we to love him who desires to beloved of us, who woes us, and does us
all things to win our affections. Nay, who spared not his only begotten Son
for us, but gave him up, and delivered him to the ignominious death of the
Cross, that we might be reconciled to him. And what think you, so loving a
Father will do for them, he has purchased at so dear a rate. Nay, and what lies
on our duty, which is humiliation and repentance, even that he presses on us,
if we were not insensible of our own miseries (the evil of our own miseries)
the evil of our own condition would invite us to. As he speaks by the
Prophet. Isaiah 43. 26, Tell thy sins first, declare thou that thou may be
justified. Which the Lord speaks, desiring to make our affections vehement,
that so with freeness and openness of heart, we may deliver our selves up to
his merciful kindness. Infinite is this love of our Lord while we anger and
provoke him, while we abuse his goodness, and his patience, all this
ingratitude cannot extinguish his love, and when he lays open to us the
injuries we offer his divine Majesty, he does it but to dilate on his love,
and so to tie our affections nearer to him; and demands of us nothing but
penitent acknowledgment. If then to confess our sins unto him bring with it
so much comfort, as the promise of justification; how great will our joy be,
when our works are rendered acceptable in the sight of God, and all the filth
and uncleanness of them washed quite away. And if this way to him were not
accessible, after we erred and leudly strai'd from the paths of righteousness,
how few of many souls now glorified in Heaven, had ever seen their salvation.
It is worthy all men's observation, seriously to consider the return of many
desperate sinners, who after the reconcilement of their enormous souls to
grace, have strangely excelled in piety, and outshin'd those who were (in
comparison of them) unspotted and undefiled: For the same heat and violence of
theirs which made them rage in sin, has after their conversion turned into a
zeal as passionate in good and virtuous determinations, out of a true sense of
their guilt, and the merited judgments on their past iniquities. In this
excess did Christ resent the officious service of Mary Magdalen when he
answered, Simon, Luke 7. 44. Do thou see this woman? I entered into thy
house, thou gave me no water for my feet; but she has washed my feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss, but
this woman since I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet: My head with oil
thou did not anoint; but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment.
Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many, are fo^given, for she loved
much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little: and he said unto
her, Thy sins are forgiven. This is the Devils reason, both for his vigilance
and fears, that he has often known the greatest sinners, prove the sincerest
penitents. It is this makes him dread the losing of his prey, when he
perceives a conscience beginning to be struck with the sense of sin! O how he
fears and trembles at the very first step a transgressor makes out of his
snares, how he is troubled at our least inclinations to conversion. For they
who have once begun this happy course, can very difficulty be turned back from
it; the zeal of true penitence burns like a flame within us, till it consumes
our dross, and refines our souls to a greater purity then that of Gold tried
in the fire. We are driven with the horrid memory of our past sins, as if it
were with a violent wind into the Haven of virtue. And this is the reason that
great sinners often prove better then they who seldom fell; because their
undertakings is to be managed with greater fervor, and alacrity; the
difficulty in the beginning only deludes us, it seems a precipice at first,
too hard for us to clime off the bottom of impiety, to the top of piety; while
our feet are nailed in Hell, we may deem it impossible to get loose, and fly
to Heaven; Therefore we must boldly enter into this conflict, our resolved
penitence must storm the pass, though the enemy spit fire in our faces;
valiantly assault him, and thou have already overcome the impotent wretch; the
vanquished Devil flies thee, and leaves thee master of the field. O let us
begin this Heavenly journey, let us ascend into this Heavenly City, let us step
up the first stepps, and never look back; till we arrive at it, for there are
we appointed Citizens; there are our glorious dwellings designed us. For if
we (like forlorn souls) cast off our hopes, we shut the gates of Heaven
against our selves, and bind our feet in linkes of despair, the chain that
keeps Satan tied for ever. For despair at first flung the fiend into the
bondage he is confined to for all eternity.

The soul that once despairs, is never sensible of her own condition, weighs
not the danger she is in, but speaks and acts every thing in opposition to
salvation. As men quite frantic, fear nothing, are ashamed of nothing, dare do
any thing without apprehension of danger, will run into Seas, or fires, and fly
in their fits to the edge of precipices for security. So those sinners (who by
negligent obstinacy become desperate) run upon vices unheard of, abominations
never dreamed of, imminent death and damnation stop not the violence of their
courses, but still they wind themselves into wild Labyrinths, where they are
lost for ever. I therefore entreat thee ( Theodorus) before thou drownst thy
self any more in this thy drunkenness, manly to contend to get out of it;
Awake, recover and cure thy soul of this diabolick surfeit. If thou think
it too difficult presently to resolve, to leave it quite off, do it by degrees.
Though in my opinion, such excuses are childish, fond delays; and too much
show thy dotage on thy beastliness. For if thou tryest, thou will find it a
most easy mastery to cast those base suggestions, if a true knowledge and
disdain of thy infirm reasons back thee in the conflict. O let the blessed
contemplation on eternity prevail with thee, to accomplish this blessed
conversion. I beseech and pray thee by those virtues by which thou once did
so highly merit, by that former trust, and confidence in our Lord; to let us
see thee raised again to that top of virtue, where thou were once so eminent;
and from which thou fellest so miserably; Let us see thee recover the lost
strength and vigor of thy soul. Pity them that are scandalized and offended
at thy fall; Pity those who perhaps by thy example example run into the same
dangerous destruction, despairing of the ways of virtue, seeing thee forsake
them. Consider how great the grief and sorrow is, who dearly love thee. And
that this thy ruinating state can be joy or gladness to none but desperate
Atheists, and youths sacrificed to their lusts and sensualities; Return then to
thy former goodness, and piety; we thy friends shall be over full of joy to
see that happy hour. When thou have left them to contempt and infamy, who are
now Enemies to thy recovery; maliciously wishing thou may still continue this
dissolute life; Then will we triumph 'ore them, who gloried to blast thy
honor: and once assured of thy conversion triumphing, crown thee with
elogium's, when thy detractors shall blush and envy the truths our tongues
shall utter of thee. Add to this the benefits thy example may bring to other
falling souls; seldom it is, but such recoveries beget companions; and what a
joy will that be, when the splendor of thy reclaiming shall give light to
others to find the way out of the same darkness. Do not ( Theodorus) neglect
so great a good as may happen by thy return to virtue. And for pity deny not
our souls the joy we shall have for thee. Keep not us in this depth of
grieving for thee, but turn our suffocating lamentations into gentler melodious
aires of joy and exultation; Which will be full in us when we see thou have
forsaken the troops of Satan, and that thou art come over to the army of
Angels, and enrolled in the Militia of Heaven. Consider how infinitely
exemplary and eminent their glories be, who escape the toiles and snares of
Satan; how much they acquire of praise and reward, whose true repenrance brings
them home to the Lord, how indeed they seem to excel those who have appeared
always virtuous, as has been formerly demonstrated out of holy writ. So
Harlots and Publicans have gained the Kingdom of Heaven for the lot of their
inheritance, and many who were last, have obtained the preeminence to be the
first.

CHAP. V. Saint Chrysostom relates a story of Phoenix, a young gentleman of
his time, another of an Herm it, another of a Disciple of John's the Son of
Zebedeus, and of Onesimus, out of Saint Paul, with which he continues his
perswasives to fallen Theodorus.
I Will now relate to thee ( Theodorus) a story of mine own time, and of which
I my self am a witness; I knew a young Phoenix the Son of Urbanus; Who was
left a very young Orphan by his Parents, with a very great fortune in Moneys,
Land, and Servants. His education was suitable to his Estate, sumptuous and
noble, his studies most in the liberal arts, much addicted he was to music,
and all the most pleasing attractives of so green years. He on an instant
forsakes his more delightful studies, all his pomp of youth, and gaiety of
clothes, and clad himself with the coursest vestments he could get, putting
on the austerity of the most reserved religions. He betakes himself to the
Mountains, and most solitary retirements, spending his time in the highest and
most profound contemplations; He was always exercised in matters
unproportionable to the qualifications of so young a Philosopher; he soared to
the highest and most sublime studies, such things as were the labors of the
greatest proficients in Divinity, were his only employment; till at length he
decrees and dedicates himself to holy orders, for which he had the repute to be
very fit, and gave large testimonies of his sufficiency for his undertakings.
Every man began exceedingly to rejoice and wonder, that a young man so nicely
bred up in all plenty and delicacy, one sprung from so noble a stock, should in
the prime of his youth forsake the magnificence and delights of his large
fortune, and all that bewitched happiness, which deludes the fancy of most
men, to undergo so strict and severe a course of life; most admirable it was,
that not any temptation (of those many his condition and fortune afforded him)
could hinder his progress to the very height and greatest perfection of a
contemplative life. At which eminence, when he was arrived and justly become
all men's wonder, some of his own family esteeming this his resolution beneath
the dignity of his birth: make themselves the corruptors of his inclinations.
Their siren songs allure him into the waves of his former vanities: He
forsakes all his pious resolution; quits his solitary, and contemplative life
on the Mountains, and his happy solitudes, and now begins to fill the streets
with his train, and pomp; his multitude of horses, his superfluous retinue,
with thousands of other follies are every man's discourse; in fine, he grows so
dissolute, that he lives neither temperately nor circumspectly; But enflamed
with all violent and shameless lusts fell into most abominable courses. Every
good man (who sees his tribe of sycophants, and lewd villains stick soclose to
him) despairs of him, who had no Parents living to correct and curb the
enormities of his lascivious youth, which had the ill advantage of a vast
fortune to feed his extravagant inclinations. Some there were who calmly
expostulate with him, and urge him (though he forsook the severities he lately
had undergone) he would yet apply himself to his former more pleasing, and
delightful exercises; and bethinks himself how convenient it were more
carefully to look to his Estate, and the honor of his noble Family; these
things were often rung in his ears, and he denied not them the hearing, who
undertook the speaking. The goodness of his nature, and an innate modesty he
had often showed, encouraged some holy religious men to seek all means to get
into his good opinion, that so they might discharge their duties to God in
endeavoring to reclaim a person of whom they conceived so much hopes; to this
purpose they diligently and constantly watch and observe him: When they met him
abroad, their custom was to salute him with all respect, all love and
kindness, which he at first but slighted; Yet these compassionate men,
infinitely ambitious to preserve his perishing youth, would not be moved at his
behavior, or put by the good of their intentions, having still their eyes fixed
upon the mark they so coveted to hit, they would not be put off from the
resolution they had to redeem this lamb from the wolfes jaws by some means
or other, which at length, with much study and patience they performed. For in
the end he became something moved with their civilities, and a little to
wonder at their behavior to him, (being conscious that his ways were not at
all agreeable to their liking.) In so much, that if he spyed them a far off,
he would leap from his horse and reverently meet them with his eyes fixed on
the Earth, and with a grave serious attention, and hearken to what they said,
till in process of time, his respect to them continually increasing, he ever
treats them with such becoming gestures, as were due to their good intentions,
and Divine callings. By this artifice of theirs, they restore this young man to
the grace and favor of God, and breaking all those nets entangled him, reduced
him to his own peace of soul, and to the love of Heavenly wisdom, and true
piety. In which he grew so eminent, and far excelled others; That no man
could dream he ever had led so vain a life, when they saw him so exceedingly
reformed. For having now learned by experience, what the dangerous baits of
loose and ungoverned appetites were, he distributes all his riches amongst the
poor, and needy. And thus he frees himself from all worldly incumberances,
removing all lets and obstacles that lay in his way to that Haven whither he
directed his course, and where at length he arrived, and became a rare and
most exquisite pattern of devotion, and true piety: thus fell this noble youth,
and thus recovered he the eternal happiness of his soul.

Another after an exemplary patience, The Hermet.
and many hardships in his Hermitage (who with one single companion, had lived
in a Cell to a very great age, and there led a most Angelical life) at last by
the malice and subtlety of the Devil, fell into idleness and ugly dreams,
into sluggish and yauning desires, and gives Satan the opportunity to surprise
him. Who fires him with lust after a woman, he burns to have one, though he
had seen none of the sex for many years, that is, from the first day he entered
into his solitude. First, he asks his companion for delitious meats, wine,
and Junkets, threatening him (unless he got them for him) he would himself
break the ties of his vows, and go to the next Town, and fetch them. Which he
did not out of a true longing for wine, or those delicates, but made this
pretense for his farther lewd purposes; his companion attempts him with all the
persuasive cunning he could, but finding him wilful in his resolutions,
promises him to get those things he desired to satisfy his appetite, lest it
might occasion him to run into greater sins. Which he perceiving, and seeing
his intents like to be frustrated; began to deal plainly with him, and says he
must himself to the Town. His friend (who in vain strove to hinder his
strange madness) yields his consent to that too; but following him a far off,
observes whither he goes; And at length spies him enter into a brothell; where
he learnt out that he had got a woman into his embraces: which when he knew,
he stays abroad in expectation of the Hermits return.

The old man after his lewd conversation, comes from the brothell. This
companion meets him and receives him into his arms, and kisses him extreme
kindly, never questions him what had past, but desires (if he had satisfied
his appetite) that he would return to the Cell. This great meekness in his
friend brings the poor Hermit to a perfect sense of the grievous sin he had
committed, and a great shame for it; thus with passionate compunction, and
contrition of heart he follows his friend to the Mountains, lamenting still
by the way his inconsiderate licentious fall: Comes thither, he shuts himself
into a little room of the Cell, locks the door, which after he never opens but
to his companion who brought him his bread and water; he charged his friend
likewise when any one asked for him to deny him, and make an excuse as if he
slept; He found his companion very willing to assent to this; he then shuts
himself up close, and there spends his whole time in fasting and prayers, and
devotion, cleansing his soul from the guilt and filth of his abominable
transgression. Not long after a great drought invades the neighboring Country:
When all the inhabitants had in vain bewailed this calamity, one of them was
commanded in a dream to go to his recluse, desire him to pray for them, and
that then the drought should leave them. He went and took his neighbors with
him, and coming they found the Hermits old companion alone; who told them the
man they sought was dead. They return to their prayers again; and again had the
same answer by the vision in every thing like the former; then more resolutely
they demand the Hermit of his friend (who was yet unwilling to confess the
truth) till they conjured him to show them the man, affirming with vehement
asseverations that they knew he was not yet dead, but that he lived. He heard
them thus earnest, and guessed that the secret compact betwixt him and his
friend was now revealed; he conducts them to the place where the man was, where
they found the doors locked fast against them, and immediately they broke down
the wall, and rusht in all upon him, where kneeling at his feet, they declared
the particulars of the command they had from the vision to him, requesting his
prayers that they might be freed from the drought. He at first denies them,
affirming his unworthiness to be far below the confidence to believe he could
obtain any such blessing from God: For he had yet the horror of his old fault
before his eyes as fresh as it had been then committed. At last (when they
declared all which had happened unto them) overcome with their importunities,
he was persuaded to pray for them; and as soon as he had prayed the drought
ceased.

What also became of that young man who was the scholar of John the Son of
Zebedeus in his youth; The schooler of John, In Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 5.
c. 2.
and turned afterward for a long time a leader of thieves and robbers: yet it
so fell out, that he was received at the last again by the holy hands of the
blessed old man; out of the Caves and denns of Robbers, he returns into the
ways of religion and piety. This thou art not ignorant, of his thou know as
well as I: For I have heard thee admire the meekness, sweetness, and
tenderness of the good old man; when the story has been related how he first
kissed his bloody hands, and after that earnestly embraced him* and by this
softness reduced him to his lost goodness. So blessed Paul did not only
receive Onesimus that unprofitable vagabond, that thief converted to goodness,
but thought him fit to be honored with honor equal to his Masters. Philemon
10. I beseech thee, says he, for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
bonds: Who in times past was to thee u^profitable: but now profitable both to
thee and me. Whom I have sent again; Thou therefore receive him who is my own
bowels: whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have
ministered with me in the bonds of the Gospel: But without thy mind would I do
nothing: that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly:
For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him
for ever. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved,
especially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh and in the
Lord. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him, as my self. In the
contrary case, St. Paul writes thus to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 12. 21. And
lest when I come again my God will bring me low amongst you, and that I shall
bewail many which have sinned amongst you, and have not repented. And again he
tells them 2 Cor. 13. 2. As before I foretold you, I foretell you, that if I
come, I will not spare. Do thou not understand whose lost condition it is he
so bewailes; it is their? whom he will not spare; it is not those sinners whom
he brought to repentance by his holy precepts; but those who were obstinate
and would not lend their ears to his divine dictates. And this as I foretell,
so I foretell you of Saint Paul's was writ for all posterity of Christians. For
though the blessed Apostle be not present with us as he had been with those
Corinthians, nor writ immediately to us: yet Christ is present with us, who
then spoke by him. And we are deeply concerned in this sharp menace; for if
we presumptuously persevere in sin, he will not spare us, but will severely
punish us, both in this world and in the world to come. Let us prevent his
wrath, and turn the face of his anger from us, in confession of our sins, and
let us power out our hearts before him. Eccles. 21. 1. My Son (says the Son of
Sirach) have thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former sins.
Let us not stay for an accuser, but our selves accuse our selves, and so
preventing him we shall render our Judge the more merciful to us. Thou will
say, thou do confess thy sins, and that thou deemst thy self miserable
above measure. I believe thee. But I must entreat more of thee; that thy
amendment justify thy sincerity. For so long as thy confession is not from thy
heart, that thou do not accuse thy self severely with a purpose to reform
them; thy sins will grow greater, and lie the heavier on thee. For no man
brings his undertakings to a true perfection, who prosecutes them not with
alacrity and due observance. Would any man that sowes fling away his seed but
in expectation to receive the fruit there of? Who ever propounded to himself
(if he were wise) to labor in vain? and get no reward for his pains Can he
likewise who sows hypocritical, tears, prayers, and confession of his
transgressions, (without a lively hope and confidence in Gods mercies) ever
think to refrain from his sins? no! he must needs still remain under the curse
of desperation. For as a husbandman who once despaires of his croppe, neglects
to prevent the destruction of his Corn: So he who sows a seeming repentance,
though with tears in his deluding eyes; yet expecting no profit by it, will not
at all take care to banish those malignant inclinations from his soul which
utterly destroy his reconciliation to God. Alas, what is it to repent, if we
persevere in our wickedness? Eccl. 34. For when one builds (says the
Scripture) and another pulls down, what profit have they but labor? He that
washes himself after touching a dead body, if he touch it again, what avails
it him? So is it with a man that prays and fasts for his sins, and goes
again and does the same, who will hear his prayer, or what does his humbling
profit him? No! who ever diverts from righteousness to sin, the Lord will
prepare for him a sword. Proverbs 26. 11. And as a dog returning to his vomit
becomes odious: so does a fool, who by his own wilfulness renewes his sins.

CHAP. XIV. The sum and conclusion of this treatise.
IT is not sufficient for a perishing soul barely to accuse it self of sin:
but the substance as well as the form must concur for the efficacy of
repentance to justification. Our contrition must bear a manifest account of
our shame, and detestation of sin with a solid resolution against all relapses.
Hypocrisy is a mask so easily put on, that it is ordinary and common
throughout the whole world, seemingly to condemn our selves of our evil ways,
infidells do it with much appearing detestation of their iniquities. Many men
and women in the very scene while they are acting their wickedness, will
acknowledge their baseness, when they consider the following shame: though
they determine not to seek after gathering the fruit of true repentance, or
diving home to the perfections and ends of confession which are amendment, and
resolution. Vain and of no effect are those acknowledgements, which proceed
neither from compunction of soul, nor are accompanied with tears truly bitter,
and heartbreaking contrition which are the only evidences of a resolved
change. And yet there is something like this in the world which is not it,
there are some demure Devils which speak like Saints, making their hearers
believe by their grace and elegant setting forth themselves, they are what they
never intend to be; While they seek only the reputation, and honor to be
accounted good: Which is the most easy delusion possible; for who can judge of
that which is presented to him in contrary colors, for the crime would not be
the same if another man knew the truth of it, and how to tell it: as when the
offender delivers it for such as he would have it believed. There are another
sort of dull sinners, who are so senseless grown with their despair, and
closed with the deadness of their condition, that they respect neither good
opinion, nor bad, and will tell stories of their own shame, with as much venom
as their detractors would: believing their glory the greater the more wicked
they make themselves. God forbid I should live to see thee like any of these;
either a demure Hypocrite dissembling the righteous man, whilst thou art rotten
within; or so vile a wretch as would not be content to sin, unless he had the
pleasure to boast of it.

What thou art chiefly exhorted to by my counsel (my beloved Theodorus) is to
pluck up by the roots from the very bottom of thy heart all diffidence in
Gods mercy, and all despair. Now let us inquire what is the root, and mother of
despair. It is a stupid faintness of man's heart; a deprivation of courage in
our spirits; which may most properly be called not only the root, or mother of
desperation, but the nurse of it. As putrefaction in a dead carcass breeds
worms, and those worms increase in that putrefaction; so mutually does his
faintness of heart combine with that despair it self bred, and is the nursing
cause of its increase. So do they alternately administer nutriment to all the
incurable plagues of our soul; It must then be thy part to overcome this dull
stupidity atd faintness in thee, and thou will find that having resumed a
Christian courage, and resolved confidence in God: Thy despair will quickly
vanish: For he that faints not, cannot despair, and he that abjures not his
hopes of salvation cannot faint; or cowardly submit to his own eternal
destruction. Thy resolution must part with these associates benumbed
faintness, and dangerous despair. For where these keep possession, the soul
loses her uniformity, and graceful essence; becomes every thing, turns into
every monstrous shape that variety of sins can put upon her. And who is he we
may truly judge to be in this sad condition' It is thus answered; it sometimes
happens, that a man may repent and seem to correct some of his known and
grossest enormities; and in the mean time sins again, goes on still
insensibly increasing the weight and burden of his former transgressions,
whose guilt is never perfectly taken away, till absolutely amended; and this in
time proves the greatest cause of desperation; This is truly to build with the
one, and pluck down with the other hand: and on this he must always think
seriously who by entire reformation intends his souls good. For if we look not
to the scales, all our good deeds, our prayers, and our tear^s will prove too
light, if such a continual weight of sin through our negligence be crept
into the contrary balance; and from hence will follow our eternal damnation.
But let us still be exercised in good deeds, and the conscience of discharging
our duties according to our power will be a coat of male upon us, and bear off
all the darts and arrows of Hell's malice, that they shall not be able to
harm us. For such is the favor of God to good deeds, that they who have done
some good on earth, and yet escape not the severity of condemnation, shall have
their pains mitigated, and find some consolation even in the cruelty of
torments. But he who never did any good deed, and can give no other account but
of a wild reckoning of a life still continued, and ended in sin, what tongue
can express the extremity of torments that forlorn soul is condemned to.
There will be at last a trial of good and bad deeds; if the former weigh down
the scales but a little, they will very much secure the owner; nor will he
suffer punishments equal to the ills he has committed. But the weight of sin
without any counterpoise of virtue sinkes us into the deepest abyss of Hell.
Nor does this discourse alone aver this: For the records of holy writ most
amply testify the same. The Evangelist Saint Matthew shows it. Matthew. 16. 27.
He shall render (says he) every man according to his works. Nor in Hell
only, but in Heaven also shall there be difference of reward. John 14. 2. In
my Fathers house are many mansions, says our blessed Savior. And again, 1
Cor. 15. 41. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the the Moon, another of
the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in glory, so likewise in
the Resurrection of the dead. Let him who considers this value the expense of
his labor, and be continually employed in good deeds. If we attain not the
glory of the Sun or the Moon, we get to be little stars, if we discharge the
duty of good Christians so far as to get there at all. If we shine not in glory
like Diamonds, or like Gold, we may like Silver. But we must be careful we
are not found of materials fitter for the fire then a place in his Heavenly
mansions. And if we are not able to discharge the highest actions of
perfection, let us not neglect the due observance of lesser things which we may
perform. For it is most desperate madness to do no good at all, because we are
not in the state of the most excelling perfection. For as worldlings grow rich
by saving every little trifle, increasing their store, so are spiritual riches
attained by a circumspect laying hold on every occasion wherein we may serve
our Lord. It is wonderful and something strange to humane sense, that God has
appointed so great a reward as the Kingdom of Heaven to him that shall but
give a cup of cold water in his name? yet are men so foolish, that unless they
can atchieve the greatest, they neglect lesser matters which are likewise very
profitable. He that neglects not his duty in things but small in their
appearance* will learn to be able to perform greater. But he that is negligent
in a little, will be a weak discharger of greater duties. And to prevent this
humane inclination, Christ has left us great proposalls of certain reward for
things to be compast with very little trouble. What is more easy then to pay
the labourer his hire, which is but a part of thy own gain, and yet large are
the promises of our Lord for that. See then the way to lay hold on Everlasting
salvation, and enter into it; delight in our Lord, and pray incessantly unto
him, again, submit thy self to his easy yoke, take on thy shoulders the light
burden thou bearst in a more happy condition: and let the end of it prove
worthy the beginning of thy life. Do not, O do not despise such infinite riches
which freely flow unto thee: And they are all for ever lost to thee, if thou
perseverest to exasperate our Lord with those ill courses thou art in. For if
thou yet stopst the channells, and hinder'st this deluge in time before it has
made too great a breach; thou may repair thy losses to thy great advantage.
When thou have considered, and meditated seriously on this, as thou ought,
fling away the filth and mud, which hangs upon thy soul; rise from out of the
mire, wherein thou have wallowed. And see how formidable thou will be to thy
adversary, who believed he had cast thee down never to rise again, it will
amaze him to see thee again provoke him to the battle, surpised with thy
recovery, and astonished at such an undaunted resolution, how fearful will the
coward the Devil be to attempt again the ensnaring thee. If other men's
calamities be proper lessons for us; shall not all our own instruct us? I
believe that I shall see this shortly in thee, and that thou will appear in the
sight of Heaven a person restored to grace, a more excellent and clearer soul
then ever thou were, one that shall give testimonies of such perfection, and
integrity; that thou may be ranckt amongst the best men, if not preferred
before them. Only despair not, fall not again! This is my counsel; do thou
as my custom is: When ever I hear any thing from others may profit me: I make
no delay to embrace and follow it, and if thou receivest with a good purpose
these my admonitions, thy sick and languishing soul will need no other Physic.

FINIS.
Erata.
Page 1. l. 5. for this r. the l 7. of dissolute r. of a dissolute. p. 3. l. 4.
of sin r. of any sin l. 13. for, for prepared. r. so prepared. l. 20. for
committing every thing that was dedicated. r. committing every thing to the
flames that was dedicated. p. 6. l. 7. for intolerable r. in alterable. p. 9.
l. 5. r. linkd to. p. 12. l. 16. for rebellious r. religious. p. 14. l. 15. for
wretched r. wretches. p. 23. l. 1. leave out and promised. p. 24. l. 6. r. like
a loving father. p. 26. l. last, for peruses r. persues. p. 31. l 11. for
confidences r. consciences. p. 44. l. 28. r. delights for lights. p. 46. l. 17.
for again r. gone again. p. 60. l. 7. r. there appeared not p. 62. l. 22. for
receive r. conceive p. 67. l. 11. for screen scaene. p. 70. l. 4. for undertake
labor r. undertake the labor. p. 72. l. 5. for choosed r. crossed. p. 79. l.
12. for Hermions r. Hermiones. p. 79. l. 17. for stars r. statues. p. 80. l.
7. for Hermion's r. Hermione's p. 84. l. 6. for hope r. home ibid. l. 23. for
greater r. great. p. 87. l. 3. for were r. wore p. 103. l. 13. Chap. is
entitled the 5. ibid l. 3. I knew a young Phoenix; r. I knew a young man
Phoenix. p. 104. l. 3. for religions. r. religious.

Reader, this multitude of faults in so small a treatise I can attribute to
nothing but my own ill hand which deceived the printer, which I entreat thee to
correct.

The Contents of every Chapter.
CHAP. I. SAint Chrysostom passionately describes the great esteem and value
we ought to have of our own souls, and on that basis he raises the fabric of
this treatise to persuade Theodorus plunged into extreme sins, and bewitch't
with the vanity of a dissolute life, to return to virtue and piety, in which he
had once been an eminant example. CHAP. II. The Devil endeavors and practices
to undermine our hopes, and raze the foundation of our eternal happiness. The
comparison betwixt a dying body and a perishing soul; with an exhortation to be
courageous in our conflicts with the Devil. CHAP. III. Gods mercy to the
greatest sinners, an argument against despair. CHAP. IV. The example of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, a cohaerence to the preceding Chapter. CHAP. V.
That sincere repentance is always acceptable to God, declared out of Holy writ
by example, precept and parable. CHAP. VI. That we ought carefully to cleanse
our souls from the filth of sin, which must by no means be slighted or
neglected, since in this word we cannot presume on to morrow, every thing is so
subject to mutability. And then the pleasures of the Earth being so short and
so quickly vanishing, we ought to fix our thoughts upon that eternity, in which
we shall be crowned with glory or plagued in torments. CHAP. VII. Hell fire
exposed to the terror of the impenitent, with the torments and the certainty
thereof. CHAP. VIII. Of the beatitude of the Saints glorified in Heaven,
pressing Theodorus farther to amendment, by arguing that Heaven is rather to be
sought after then Hell to be feared: the glory of the one being a more moving
object, then the terriblenesse of the other. CHAP. IX. Of the day of judgment.
CHAP. X. The joys of Heaven prosecuted, give occasion to discourse of the
felicities, and blessings God has promised our souls; the excellencies
wherewith they are enricht, and vile contempt we have of them, preferring our
bodies their slaves before them. CHAP. XI. Saint Chrysostom continues here the
glorious nature of the Soul, and from that excellence prosecutes his
persuasions to Theodorus, still striving to overcome the rebellions of his
lusts with exhortations, and pressing arguments. CHAP. XII. The story of the
Ninivites repenpentance, the proeme to St. Chrysostomes farther urging
Theodorus to his conversion, collecting thence that the greatest sinners may
return to God, he prosecutes his perswasives, alleging that many so converted
have become the best and most zealous people. CHAP. XIII. Sant Chrysostom
relates a story of Phoenix, a young Gentleman of his time; another of an
Hermit; another of a Disciple of John's the Son Zebedeus, and of Onesimus out of
Saint Paul, with which he continues his perswasives to fallen Theodorus. CHAP.
XIV. The sum and conclusion of this treatise.
FINIS.

