A MODERATE MESSAGE TO QUAKERS, SEEKERS, AND SOCINIANS, By a FRIEND And
Well-wisher to them all.

OR Some Arguments offered to clear up three points in difference betwixt them
and others, viz. the Baptism with Water, the Right of Administration in this
Age, and the Preexistancy of the Son of God to his being conceived of the
Virgin.

By JOHN CHILD.

Job 32.9, 10. Great men are not always wise neither do the aged understand
judgment, therefore I also will show my opinion.

1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

A Moderate Message to Quakers, Seekers, and Socinians, by a Friend and
Well-wisher to them all, etc.
IT is the common understanding of the Professors of this Age, that the
Quakers, (so called) do deny that Baptism with water is now a duty incumbent
upon Christians; and that the Seekers so called, do deny that any persons have
a right in this Age to Administer it, although they do grant it to be a duty;
and also that the Socinians, so called, do deny that the Son of God (out
blessed Savior, called Jesus Christ) had a Being or Existency before he was
conceived of the Virgin: Now, although my tenderness and respect toward them
all is not small (it being the natural Issue and ^es^^ts of my Principles, w^o
profess my self a Latitude man, ^o lov^ all mankind, more especially those tha^
^ppear to be (in their way) sincer^ Professors of Religion) yet I must crave
leave for Truths sake (though never so small) to show mine opinion to this end,
that we might arive at such an Oneness as at least to maintain some amicable
correspondency one with another, in order to a conviction by cool and sedate
Debates, without Exasperation and Railery (things undoubtedly hatched in Hell)
which never sprang from Michael) who, though Disputing with the Devil, the
greatest Heretic in the Creation, yet durst not bring Railing accusations
against him, but said, The Lord Rebuke thee: I do therefore coolly and kindly
say to all the three Sects of Men before mentioned, that I humbly conceive in
the three points stated, that they are out of the way, and besides the Truth,
and that Baptism with Water is now a Duty incumbent upon Christians, that there
is some, even in this Age, have a right to Administer the same; and that the
Son of God, our Blessed Lord and Savior, had a Preexistency to the Virgins
conception, for the clearing up of which, we offer these following Arguments
relating to each point in its Order.

Baptism with water in force to this day: proved as follows,

Moses is in force still even to this day. Major.


But Baptism with water was an Administration given from Heaven as a duty in
common to the Penitent or comers to Christ since the Ministration of Moses,
Ergo, Minor.
It is in force still.

This Argument as a fruitful Root yields us these five proper and useful
branches, (viz.) 1. That Baptism with Water was a Ministration from Heaven. 2.
That it was a Duty. 3. That it was a duty in common to the Penitent, or comers
to Christ. 4. That it was since the Ministration of Moses. 5. That it is in
force still, the proof of which (I think) establishes the Argument in all the
parts of it.

And first, That it was from Heaven we thus prove.

Major.
then it was of Men, or else John did administer it of his own head.

Minor.
But it was not from Men, neither did John administer it of his own head, Ergo,
It was from Heaven.



Major.
If the Ministration of water Baptism was of Men, and not from Heaven, then
there was some Author of it before John Baptist from whom he received it.

But there was no Author of it before John, from whom he received it, Minor.
Ergo, it was not from men.

Major is good; the Minor we prove thus.

If there was some Author or beginner of this Ministration before John from
whom he received it, then it is somewhere plainly and convincingly discovered.
But

It is no where plainly and convincingly discovered, Ergo, it was not so. And
that it was not of his own head, We thus prove.

Major.
But

It was not a bare Invention and Tradition of man, Ergo, Minor.
it was not of his own head.



Major
That which our Savior Christ submitted to as part of his work, was no
Invention or Tradition of men.

Minor
But our blessed Savior did himself submit to John's Baptism, Ergo, It was no
Invention of Tradition of men.

The Minor is ungainsayable, The Major we prove thus.

Major
then he had undervalued his own Authority, and opened a door for an Innovation
in Religion.

Minor
But our Savior did do neither of these, Ergo.

And that it was neither of his own head, nor from men, but indeed from Heaven,
we thus prove.

Major
and Sin and Rebellion to reject, undoubtedly was from Heaven for nothing but
the Authority of Heaven can constitute these two things (viz.) Sin and
Righteousness.

Minor
But it was Righteousness to submit; wickedness and Rebellion to reject John's
Baptism, Ergo, it was from Heaven.

The Major none will deny: the Minor is proved from plain Scripture, Mat. 3.15.
Jesus said unto John, suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all Righteousness.

The Scribes and Pharisees Rejected the Council of God against themselves,
in not being Baptized of John.

John to Baptize, then John's baptism was from Heaven. Major.


But God himself sent John to Baptize, Minor.
Ergo, his Baptism was from Heaven.

The Major can live without begging: and the Minor bares up it self upon this
immovable Pillar, Jo. 1.6.33.
John 1.6. v. 33. John says, God sent him to Baptize with water, from whence
we pass to the (Second) part of the Argument, (viz.) that it is a duty; for the
proof of which, we need do no more but borrow something from the eight Argument
already laid down, and that is this.

Major.
was doubtless a duty to perform.

Minor.
But men were charged with sin for the neglect of water baptism, Ergo, it was
their duty to perform; they rejected the Council of God, etc. In not being
Baptiz^d of John. And that it was a duty in common to the Penitent or comers to
Christ (which is the Third part of the Argument) we prove thus.

Major Mark. 1.5.
and the rest that refused, condemned for not doing of it, was a duty in Common
unto men.

But Baptism with water was Administered to Multitudes, and the rest that
refused, condemned for not doing of it, Ergo, it was a duty in Common, Mat.
3.5.6. All Judah and Jerusalem came to John to be Baptized of him, confessing
their sins, and they that refused, are condemned as rejectors of Gods Council.

Major.


That Ministration which Christ and his Disciples took up and followed after
John, was a duty in Common unto men.

But Baptism with water Jesus and his disciples took up and followed after
John, Ergo, Minor.
it was a duty in Common.

It Is said Jesus made and Baptized more disciples then Jo^n, Joh. 3.26.
though not by his own hands, but his disciples, John 4.2.

Major.
by an Authority Apostolical, both unto Jews and Gentiles, was a duty in Common
unto men.

But Baptism with water was Administered Minor.
in the name of Christ by an Authority Apostolical, both unto the Jews and
Gentills, Ergo, it was a duty in Common.

The Major we have no doubt of, the Minor is proved from these two plain texts,
Acts. 2.38. Be Baptized every one of you, etc. Acts 10.48. And he Commanded
them to be Baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Now that this was since the
Ministration of Moses there need be no proof, we therefore come to the last
part of the Argument which is the thing most Scrupel'd, (viz.) that it is in
force still, but before we enter upon the proof of it, we shall hit away one
objection.

Moses do not continue in force still, for Christ taught his disciples not to
take a staff nor to Sallute any by the way and the like; and none can deny but
this was from Heaven; yet not in force still, therefore Baptism might be of
the like Temporary consideration, and might end as this did with a
notwithstanding.



Which is done by these following Arguments.

John was a part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, then it is in force still.
Major.


Minor.
But the Baptism and ministration of John is a part of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, Ergo, the Baptism and ministration of John is in force still.

The Major is unquestionable, unless we shall suppose that a part of the
Gospel, as well as the Law, is made void; which to suppose, will bring us to a
Rock that we cannot discover now.

The Minor is plainly proved, Mark. 1. and beginning where the ministration of
John is plainly called the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, etc.

John be not in force still, Major.
then it is ended.

Minor.
But it is not ended, Ergo, the Baptism and ministration of John is in force
still.

Minor only requires help, and thus we afford it. Major.


If the Baptism and ministration of John be ended, then it ended at himself.

But it ended not in himself, Ergo, Minor.
the Baptism and ministration of John is not ended.

Major we have no doubt of, the Minor will bare up it self with a little help.

If John's Baptism and Ministry ended at himself, Major.
then it did so by Gods appointment, but it ended not at himself by Gods
appointment, Ergo, the Baptism and Ministry of John ended not at himself. The
minor proved thus.

John, Major.
then it did not end in him by Gods appointment. Minor.


But Jesus with his Disciples did observe and practice it after they received
it from John, Ergo, it did not end in him by Gods appointment.

Major is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, for if it had ended in John by Gods
appointment, then the keeping of it up still had been cross to it, and
consequently a Sin which our Savior would not have committed. the minor we clear
up after this manner

Major.
If Jesus with his Disciples did not practice John's baptism after they received
it from him. Then they did practice another Baptism after the same manner.

Minor.
But they did not practice another Baptism after the same manner, ergo, they
practiced the same that John did.

There is two Reasons to be given for this. First, because the Baptism ascribed
to Jesus and his Disciples is coupled with John's, without any signs or
circumstances of a contradistinction. Secondly, because the extraordinary
baptism with the Holy Ghost, by the power of Jesus, was not then come forth.
And there was none other but these two owned, and administered by Jesus and his
Disciples.

John's, Major.
after the same manner, (which is denied in the minor of the last Argument)
then it was the duty of the Subjects of the first to be baptized over again by
the Second.

But it was not the duty of the Subjects of the first baptism, to be baptized
over again by the second, Ergo.

Major.
to be baptized over again w^^h another baptism after the same manner: Then it
was the duty of Christ and his Disciples to submit to it.

But it was not their duty to be baptized over again after the same manner,
Ergo. Minor.


The reason of the major is, First, because it was a point of righteousness
which it became them to fulfill, as well in the second as in the first.
Secondly, because their practice in common duties and points of Righteousness,
was to be Exemplary; the minor proposition, which says, 'twas not their duty
to do so, is Illustrated by this Argument.



Major.
But they did not perform it, Ergo, 'twas not their duty.

Major.


Minor.
But no unquestionable evidence can be produced to prove that Christ and his
Disciples were twice baptized with a common and ordinary baptism. Ergo.

John, Major.
be Abrogated, then is the Doctrine of Repentance, Baptism, the confession of
Sin, and owning the Messiah, ceased and made Null.

Minor.
But these are not ceased and made Null, Ergo, that part of the Gospel relating
to the ministration of John is not Abrogated. The major proposition is clear,
for in that enumeration did the Ministry of John chiefly consist, and if it was
made Null, the duties thereof must cease, and if they were afterward set up
again, there must then be a fault committed either in making Null that which
was useful and good, or else in bringing in again an Abrogated and exploded
thing, according to St. Paul's rule, If I build again the abrogated and exploded
things I once destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor.

minor, that the Doctrine of Repentance, Baptism, Confession of Sin, and owning
the Messiah is not ceased and made Null. Take as follows.

If those duties contained in the ministration of John were abrogated and made
Null: Major.
Then it was done by some public and Ministerial Edict, proceeding from an
Authority either greater or equivalent to John's.

But it was not abrogated and made Null by any such edict and Authority, Minor.
Ergo, ir was not done.

The Major I think is unquestionable, for it was necessary that the Ministry
of one so plainly and fignally appearing to be by divine Authority, as not only
proved by Scripture, but confirmed of God by a voice from Heaven: should at
least have an Authority Equivolent to it to make it Null.

The Minor it thus made good.

Major.
it must then be done by Christ and his Apostles.

Minor.
But it was not done by Christ or his Apostles, Ergo, it was not made Null at
all, the reason of the Major is because none but these had so much as an
Authority Equivolent to John's, the reason of the Minor, that it was not done by
Christ or his Apostles is, because it was owned, approved and Taught by them in
all the parts of it afterward as is evident from these Scriptures, Mat. 4.17.
Joh. 3.26. Acts. 2.38. From whence we draw this Argument.

John's Ministrey, Major.
Then for certain they did not by any Public and Ministerial edict make it
void.

But they did own, approve, Minor.
and teach the same in all the parts thereof, Ergo, It was not by them made
Null. The Minor is proved by the foresaid texts, and further confirmed by these
following Arguments.

John Null. Major.
Then it is set forth in some part of the Divine Records. But there is no part
of the Divine Records do manifest any such thing, Ergo, it was not done.

John to be in force now as was then (even when John himself did Preach it)
Now, though this will not hold in all cases, namely, that if the reason of a
thing remains, then the thing it self must, where the things were before
abrogated, yet in this case it will hold, where there has been no such
abrogation, and therefore from these premises we frame this Argument.

Major.
then the Service it self remains still.

Minor.
But the Reason of the Service contained in John's Ministry remans still, Ergo,
the Service does so likewise: The Major we hope will face its Adversaries, and
keep its ground. The Minor we expect to be assaulted, which will find help at
hand from these considerations.

John's Ministry stands still upon Record, equally unabrogated with the other
parts of the Gospel.

Messiah upon his appearing in the Ministration of the Gospel, as there was
when he appeared in person; this I doubt not but that it will be readily
granted; why is there not then the same Reason there should be the like public
subscription to, and owning of Christ before witness now, as was then, how else
should we keep the Traditions as they were delivered to us by the first
Ministers of the Gospel, without detraction or disorder; and if there is not a
public subscription to Christ before witness, how shall the Disciples of
Christ be known; and if they are not known, how shall a witness be made for
him, or his Name be born up in the World? and if a witness for him to bare up
his Name in the World, (as a baptizing in the Name of the Lord Jesus does
plainly import) why then should it not be after the same manner that the
Example of Christ, and footsteps of his flock does lead to? and if any shall
say, because it is unsafe in these cold and Northern climates, the Answer is
ready.

First, many thousands have done it here in these Climates, and done it in a
cold Season with safety.

Secondly, If it has been the Lords pleasure to enjoin a stooping, and a
little hardship and self denial to be past through in the very entrance upon a
profession of him, it is not safe to say there is a Lion in the way to excuse
from it; and it is far less trouble to the Flesh then was Circumcision, which
was enjoined upon a severe Penalty, and that it ought to be in the same manner
prescribed by the first Ministers of the Gospel. Major.
Take this Argument to prove it.

service of Christ in one thing.

Then they may presume to do so in another, and a third, and so through the
whole discipline of the Gospel, into disorder and confusion.

But men may not presume to do any such thing, Ergo, Minor.
it ought to be done according to the first frame and pattern of things, as
they are left us upon Divine Record.

For if this be not admitted, why may we not in celebrating the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, use Flesh and Sauce instead of Bread, and Beer or Water
instead of Wine; and when we are minded to show our rejoicing in, or to mourn
and humble our selves before the Lord; to use a Fiddle instead of a Hymn, and
the mournful sound of a Trumpet instead of Prayers and T^a^s; or why may not a
kissing of the Cup do instead of drinking of the Wine? and cruming the Bread
into a Mess of Pottage stand for a breaking of it, and they that do so, say we
have celebrated the Lords Supper, and so bring the serious and grave worship of
a dear and dying Savior into a silly Pastime in some respects, and into a
Hodg-Podg, or Slibber-slobber in other respects, and by this means lay a fair
foundation for a total slighting and enervating of Christ's service on one
hand, or for a jumble or mixture of Mahomet and the Pope on the other hand, but
that such things ought not to be done, we prove in pursuit of our minor
proposition by these following Arguments.

32. Maj.
If men ought not to presume to alter any thing of the first frame and pattern
of things under the Law without special Tolleration, then they ought not to
presume to do so under the Gospel.

But men ought not to presume to do so under the Law, Ergo, the minor Minor.
is proved by the Sacred Text, See thou make all things according to the
pattern showed thee, Ex. 25.40. Heb. 8.5. The change or alteration of small
Ceremonies was accounted a Sin and punished, as carrying the Ark in a manner
differing from apointment, and a variation in a point of worship reputed to be
the offering up of strange fire, etc.

Major is clear by these considerations arising from this general head, viz.
That there is the same reason for the Establishment and contrivance of the Ways
and Methods of the Gospel, as there was for that of the Law; as first, the
Gospel had the same Authority of Heaven stamped upon it as the Law had; it is
said in reference to the most despised part of it, that God sent John to
Baptize, Luke 3.2. Joh. 1.6. v. 33.

John Baptist that he was greater than a Prophet, and amongst them that were
Born of Women, there had not arose a greater, who was the beginner of the
Gospel, from whom it was afterward confi^m'd, and carried on by Christ
himself, that great Minister of the Sanctuary, who in pitching of the
Tabernacle, and settling the M^thods of the Gospel, acted not of himself, but
from the Father, and in p^int of Dignity and Preheminency, was beyond both
Moses and John.

Magnacharta, the Laws of Natural Religion; we mean the Sacraments of Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord, and therefore no need to lessen or diminish them.

cheaper than the offering of Bulls and Goats, Oxen, Sheep, Heifers, and the
like.

Cor. 15. By which ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I Preached unto you;
which was, That Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures, and
which is lively set forth in the Celebration of the Supper; For as often as you
do this, you show forth the Lords Death till he comes.

Bell and the Dragon, of Baal and Belshazzer, when once the remembrance of
Right things are nigh worn out in the world, and then farewell to the true
Service of the Gospel.

those that shall change or diminish the Duties of the Gospel, as there is in
reference to those that should do so by the Law; and that our Savior tells us,
(in case they be saved) They shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven; from all which considerations we frame this general Argument for the
confirmation of the major Proposition.

Ergo.

More might be said upon this Argument if two things did not forbid, (viz.)
want of Time, and fearing to make the Book too Big, we shall therefore Answer
two objections and pass on.

John said, he was to Decrease, and Christ to Increase.

Mat. 28. Mark. 16.

John to Baptize, (2) by Christ's submiting to it, (3) by men's being highly
charged with sin that did reject it, (4) by Christ and his disciples after
owning and practiseing of it, (5) it is being a branch or duty of the Gospel,
(6) it is being joined with other lasting and Perpetual dutys, as Repentance,
Confession of sin, and owning the Mesiah, (7) from the reason of the thing: I
say if it was once a duty upon these grounds, and from these concuring
circumstances, then they must needs run a very great hazard that shall reject
and violate it upon so slight and uncertain a ground as one particular text
that does not d^clare it void, but is at most but interpretative, and admits of
another interpretation quite contrary to the opposite opinion, and that with a
great deal of more reason and probabillity; For by John's decreasing cannot be
meant his Ministry, unless we shall suppose that Confession of Sin,
Repentance, and owning the Mesiah, as well as Baptism, was to decrease, then
which there can be nothing more absurd; (to conclude) we think and say further
then, with much more probabillity, that not John's Ministry, but the great fame
and Master-ship of John was to decrease as to the having disciples called by
his name (the disciples of John) and the like, for after Christ's public
entrance upon his Ministry; as John did point and direct men to Christ as
their chief leader; so they were afterward taught by Christ to call no man
Master, but soly to own him, and be called the disciples of Jesus (not of
John,) And for this there is good reason to be given, but for the other, if
there was no more reason then that it is uncertain, it were sufficient; but we
further say; (to conclude John's ministry, was to decrease and be made Null upon
the appearance of Christ, as there is no reason to be plainly showed from this
Text, and as it is very unsafe to violate and reject a sacred duty upon so
uncertain a ground as a private interpretation of a particular text) that the
Interpretation is for me and a stranger, and therefore deservedly to be cast
out, and have no inheritance for the dispossessing of John's Ministry, which we
dismiss with this Argument.

John has been so Ratified and confirmed, Ergo, the Baptism and Ministry of
John ought not after so slight and careless a manner to be rejected and made
void.

And as to the Commission of Christ, Mat. 28. we Answer.

If any shall suppose that thereby the Baptism and Ministry of John was made
void. (1) That it does not plainly appear from thence, but is at most but
Interpretatively so therefore unsafe to rely upon in the ruin of a plain part
or Precept of the Gospel. (2) That the Commission aforesaid did not make void
the Baptism and Ministry of John, for these Reasons,

1. It Is not congruous to suppose that Christ should institute, and set up one
part of the Gospel to Enervate and make void another part of it, which John's
Baptism and Ministry has been proved to be.

2. It does not infallibly appear that the Baptism given in the Commission of
Christ, was different from that of John's as to matter, form, and subject, which
are the main parts of Baptism; and if there was some small difference in point
of circumstance, it will not be sufficient to prepondrate and outweigh a plain
and clear duty; and there can no plain difference be made to appear betwixt the
Baptism of John, and that given in our Saviors Commission, unless it be in the
use of words, viz. In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and this
amounts to these three things.

1. The setting forth the Existency of the Trinity, that Three such were.

2. The capacity and dignity of the Trinity, they were to Baptize in their
Names, which was a Witness or Testimony on the Ministers part, and a
subscription on the Submitters part, to the pre-eminence of this holy Trinity,
in opposition to the Instruction of any other, either as a Third Person to
seclude any one of these, or as a fourth to be equal with them in their United
Dignity.

3. The work and opperation they jointly intended to be concerned in; and more
than this is no subject of Baptism bound to believe and acknowledge in or upon
their Baptism: that is to say, The Being of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: The
Dignity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the work and opperation of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in carrying on the great design of the Gospel; and if these
words were not used by John in the Act of Baptizing, yet the thing was set
forth in his Ministry, and at the same time, while the Minister and Submitter
were together; and therefore we do affirm that John did in his Baptism and
Ministry direct into the same Faith as the Apostles by their Commission were to
Teach and Baptize into, (viz.) the Being, Dignity, and opperation of the
Trinity: And no man can be certain that our Savior did injoyne more in his
great Commission, or that the Apostles did make use of that very form of words
in the Act of Baptising: The conclusion then is, that for any thing that yet
appears, the Baptism contained in the Commission was, and was to be the same in
all points with the Baptism of John; and therefore from thence appears no
certain ground of an Abrogation. Indeed our Savior did do three things in
reference to John's Baptism by his great Commission; (1) he confirmed it by
commanding his Disciples to keep it up, and carry it on; (2) he adds perfection
and clearness to it by his great Authority, his short and plain Instruction
about the design of it, which was to bring his followers to subscribe to the
Doctrine of the Trinity in their submission to it. (3) he did further extend
it, by ordering of it into all the world, which John did not do; our Result is,
that neither the words of John, I must decrease, nor the Commission of our
Savior to his Disciples to Baptize, does fairly make Null the Baptism and
Ministry of John: from whence we offer this Argument.



But the Baptism and Ministration of John is fairly and infallibly proved to be
Gods Ordinance, and man's duty, Ergo, it ought not without the like ground to be
accounted Null and void; and if any shall still oppose what has been contended
for, I shall only state this question to be debated with them, and end this
first point by two short Arguments.

John, submitted to by Jesus, and after his Death owned and practiced by his
extraordinary Ministers, be put an end to or made Null.

John was by the Holy Ghost reputed and owned to be the way of the Lord, after
the Ascension of our Savior, then it is in force still: but it was so, Ergo,
Acts 18.25, 26.

John's ministry, then it is somewhere exempted. But Baptism with Water is no
where Exempted, Ergo.

And now let us see if we can find an Administrator. In this Enquiry after a
Minister, we will propose Three things.

1. To state what a Minister is in his make and constitution.

2. What does warrant him to Act or Perform the Work and Office of a Minister.

3. And then put it upon this fair Issue, viz. whether there be any under such
circumstances in this Age, that Renders the Persons fit, and the Ministry
warrantable.

Of these three Propositions in their Order: To the first of these,

1. We affirm that there is but two things necessary to the make or
constitution of a Minister. (1) Ability or Qualification to fit for it. (2)
Authority or Commission from God to empower to the performance of it: The
ability or qualification consists in two things; 1. understanding to know. 2.
utterance to divulge of report those things that may answer the ends of a
Ministry, in which respect there is these two things requisite, 1. To be able
to understand the divine Authority and truth of the holy Scriptures, (2) to
understand and report the sense and mind of God contained in them, in all the
weighty and necessary points of Religion; the reason of this is, because it is a
received truth that the holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation,
and therefore must contain all things essential thereunto, and ability to
Minister two things, will answer the end of a Ministry: and the truth is, these
two things are the very basis of all Christianity in the world, and the denying
or Removing of them is no less then the shaking of the very foundation and
ground work of Christianity all over the earth; for take away the Divine
Authority, and truth of the Scriptures, or the sense and mind of God in all
necessary points contained in them, and then resolve us by what means we shall
become Christians; the like dismal consequence follows upon the denial of the
qualification, for if none be able to understand and prove the divine Authority
and truth of the Scripture, then is all truth lost at once; for who can tell
whether it be the Alcaron, the Bible, the Leviathan, or some thing else. And if
none be able to understand the sense and mind of God, contained in the
Scriptures, in all weighty and necessary points, although the Scriptures be the
truth, yet we are never the nearer, because they are Scaled up so as none can
understand them and teach them; And then it Roundly follows, that none can hear
them, and believe them according to St. Paul's maxim, how shall they hear and
believe without a Preacher, and if none can hear and believe them, where then
is Christianity? it is all lost; and it must needs be a folly in men to make a
do about Godliness and Christianity, when there is none able to make out any
such thing; now upon admiting this Hypothesis to be true, (viz.) that Ability
or Qualification is every where wanting in this Age, let us lay the consequents
that follows thereupon altogether, and see how frightfully they look upon us.

1. The truth and Divine Authotity of Scripture cannot be asserted and proved.

2. The sense and mind of God contained in them cannot be known.

3. Then the world is left without a sufficiency to defend truth against
error, and Satan's party is the strongest side, for they have sufficient
ammunition to charge their minds withal against Christianity, Goodness, and
Virtue, but the Children of virtue have not any thing but the bare dictats of
nature to help themselves.

4. Christianity is a false and groundless denomination, for there is none able
to prove the Reality and good ground of any such thing.

5. There is no firm and standing rules of Religion more than the variable wits
and tempers of men admits of.

6. No light nor salt for the world, but what results from the heart and
invention of man.

7. No witness for God but what man shall see good with his own eyes, without
the help of an infallible perspective Glass, and none at all for Christ, for
his name must be shut out of the world, because the dictates of nature does not
Preach him.

8. No ground to suffer for the Religion of the blessed Jesus, because we are
not able to know whether there was such a man, or such a thing or no.

9. No External Motives to comfort under afflictions, because no ground of an
Immortality or life to come, which was only set forth and brought to light by
that Ministration called the Gospel, which no man is able to understand and
believe.

10. No such thing as true Faith or Church, for these are Fictions and fanciful
dreams, that there is no ground for their being knowable, not so much as their
very names.

11. No ground to look for, or expect Salvation hereafter, because no promise
of it understood by any in this Age, nor is it Infallibly determinable whether
that poor mean people that dare not swagger in Riotousness and Sin, or those
jolly and jumping Boys that can do any thing that they are prompted to, or
capable of, shall partake of it.

12. No dutiful care by virtue of any visible or known Precept over one
another Souls, and what then, and whither then? whether to die like Beasts,
and be no more, or to go to Heaven or to Hell is not determinable, because
nothing speaks to the Resolution of this Question, touching a Life to come and
place of Residence after Death, but a certain Book called the Bible, which the
Opinion opposed says, cannot be understood and taught but from such Premises
and Conclusions, Good Lord deliver every sincere Soul. Amen.

And the like Absurdities are ready to break in upon us like a Flood, if that
Principle be admitted: That though men are able to Teach and Instruct, yet
there is no ground and warrant for them so to do.

For first, then may all men lay it down, because it is a groundless and vain
thing, and the Devil and his Party may say to the most Pious, Painful, and
ablest Teachers of Christianity and Virtue, who has required this at your
hands.

2. It renders all gifts, both of understanding and utterance in the matters of
Religion and Christianity useless, for if there be no warrant for Working,
there is no Reward, and then what motive or encouragement to induce to it.

3. No ground to witness against wickedness, to reprove or convince Men and
Women for Sin, to teach Children to be Religious, or to bear up the Name of
Christ in the world.

All that suffered for a Ministry or public Witness, did foolishly, because
they had not the gift of Tongues, cannot work Miracles, want an immediate
Commission, or an Ordination by a Lineal Succession, neither of which is
Essential to the make or Instalment of a Minister, of which we would discourse
at large if it was convenient, and undertake to make good this proposition,
viz. that the command of God upon Divine Record, with the approbation, consent,
and regular choice of the People, (meeting upon a person of a competent
Ability) is sufficient for an Installment, where the four things before
mentioned are wanting. Now, if these two grand qualifications be granted, 1.
That Ability to prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, 2. To understand
and set forth the sense and mind of God contained in them in all weighty and
necessary points) and be sufficient for the make and constitution of a
Minister, then (where these are) may the ends of the Ministry be Answered in
all these following particulars.

1. They may be able to convince Enemies.

2. To lay a good foundation for the Souls of men to build upon for life.

3. To Refute grand and fundamental Errors.

4. To save the Souls of teachable and well disposed hearers.

5. To feed Gods household and build up his house.

6. To diffuse light so as to leave the obstinate without excuse and ability to
do these things, I think all will agree to be sufficient to answer the ends of
the Ministrey, upon which Supposition, that where there is such ability or
Qualifications, there is a true Minister in his make and Constitution; we
enlarge no further upon that, but descend to the second proposition, (viz.)



places, Persons of good, and in others thoughts, of very valuable abilitys,
are blamed and charged with sin for not improving their Talents, when all this
while the sault is in the people, who did never Regularly and solemnly (as the
Nature of the thing required) call them forth to that Employment, but because
this may be thought a digression, we return to our Task, and undertake to prove
a warrantableness for an improvement of ability from these considerations.

not only strongly binding, but perpetual, Eccl. 9.10. Luke 19.13. 1 Pet. 4.10,
11.

Pet. 1.18.19, 20.

Cor. 14.31.

Luke 10.2.

Ephesians. 4.29.

Mat. 5.19.

Tim. 2.2.

determined. So that there needs no new Truths nor Miracles to confirm them, 1
Cor. 3.11. Acts 20.27.

Let your light so shine, etc. Mat. 5.16.

Esa. 58.12.

2 Cor. 6.1.
and it reflects carelessness upon the blessed God, in not assigning of them for
the proper use and end when there was great need of it.

Ministered before it with good success and blessing, as John Baptist, the
Apostle St. Paul, Apollo, and the scattered Saints upon the Persecution of
Steven.

Syriack and Caldea, that therefore he may not do what good he can with his
Mother Tongue; and if he be not fit to go Ambassador into Foreign parts, he
may not serve his Country at home according to his ability, is not only
inconvenient and dangerous, but indeed against Nature it self.


if he does no more then such abilities renders him fairly able to perform. See
1 Timothy 4.6. And now we shall take leave to Argue a little upon the Premises.

Ergo.

the one, as for the other; the one as easy to be understood and unsolded as
the other, and no more still required for the one, then for the other: The
Argument from hence will be good, that the same pains taken, the same methods
used that inables for the greater, will undoubtedly do so for the lesser.

Major.
then is all the Christian world deceived in matters of the highest weight and
consideration, for all the Christian world agrees, that it is de facto true:
And therefore they believe and profess; but certainly all the Christian world
is not deceived, Minor.
and consequently like to perish; the conclusion then is that such abilitys are
or have lately been, and have a good warrant for their use and exercise, which
we make good as follows.

(viz.) the service of God and the Souls of men: upon which we argue, that
principle which undermines and makes void the design of the Moral Law, Major.
and renders the best and greatest abilitys of men useless and insignificant in
the matters of Religion, is absurd and dangerous not to be received.

But that principle that denis Authorty to men to be Ministers, Minor.
does so, Ergo.

Major.
of knowledge and skill for the good of others in things civil and mechanical,
then it is lawful and warrantable for men to do so in things Celestial and
Evangelical; if I may teach a man to learn his trade, to buy his clothes, to
get his living, to build and furnish a house for his convenience of Temporal
life, doutless I may, if able, teach men to know Christ, to serve God and to
get Salvation.

Minor.
But it is lawful and warrantable for men to improve the highest strains of
knowledge and skill in matters civil and mechanical, Ergo.

Major.
Then are they under no obligation to improve their Talents.

Minor
But men are under an obligation to improve their Talents, Ergo.

things, then they are under no obligation to serve God, and the Souls of their
Neighbors.

But they are bound to do both, according to power and opportunity, Ergo.



Then it is no sin to neglect both; but it is a sin to neglect both, Ergo.



But men are accountable for it, Ergo.



Then they shall not be condemned for it; but they shall be condemned for it,
Ergo, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43, 44.

word of God requiring, they have good Authority to perform.

1 Pet. 4.10.
But the express word of God requires men to minister that have ability, Ergo,
they have good Authority to perform it, Eccl. 9.10. Luke 19.13.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform, Phil. 4.8, 9.

Minor.
But to Minister in the things of God is good in it is own Nature, ergo.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

But to Minister in the things of God, is useful, profitable, and beneficial to
others, Ergo, Acts 18.27.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

Minor.
But to Minister is most effectual to suppress Sin, Ergo.

Major.
and comfort his Church, men have good Authority to perform.

But to Minister, Minor.
tends most thereto, Ergo.

Major
men have good Authority to perform, Can. 1.8. Phil. 4.9.

But to Minister the things of God, Minor.
the example of the best Ages leads to, Ergo.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

But a Ministry tends thereto, ergo, Minor.
Mat. 5.13.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

But a Ministry is most conducable thereto, Ergo, Luke 22.32. Minor.


Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

But a Ministry does so, Ergo, Minor.
Psalm. 43.3. Romans 2.19. chap. 13.12.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform.

Minor.
But a Ministry most tends thereto, Ergo, 1 These. 1.9.

Major.
men have good Authority to perform it.

Minor.
But to teach the least Commandments of God is so, Ergo, Mat. 5.19.

Heb. 3.12.

Minor.
But men have ability to exhort, Ergo.

Major.
they have good authority to perform.

Minor.
But men have so, Ergo, Mat. 24.45, 46. Acts 20.25.

Major.
they have a good Authority to perform, Jud. 20.

Word of God for the best advantage against Satan, they have a good Authority
to perform, Ephesians. 6.17.

Jude verse. 3.

Cor. 14.31. All may Prophecy, if in order, and not in confusion.

Jude 23. verse.

Jer. 15.19.

Jer. 23.21.22.

Gal. 6.2.



Pet. 3.15.

Ergo, Tit. 2.3, 4. Acts 18.26.

Tim. 4 6.

Major.
and Equivolent to Baptism, Then they have a good Authority to minister that.

Minor.
But they have a good Authority to minister things greater and equivolent, Ergo,
they have a good Authority to minister that.

If they have not as good Authority to Administer Baptism as things greater and
Equivolent.

Then they are somewhere exempted from it.

But they are no where exempted from it, Ergo.

And if the Baptism, and the ministry of it be out of date, let it be showed
plainly, for our minor Proposition calls for it, being an Universal Negative.

The conclusion is, if men are able to teach the Nature, manner, and end of
Baptism, and minister the same, they have as good Authority to do it as the
other Duties already mentioned.

Thus having made good a warranty grounded upon ability for men to Minister; we
come next to the Third proposition, (viz.) to put it upon a fair Issue, whether
there be any in this Age whose ability Renders their persons fit, and their
Ministry warrantable.

In answer to this inquiry, I shall offer but 3 things, because I would not
have this Tract grow bigger than a Pocket companion.

1. If there be no able and true Ministers in this Age, then there is no Right
or true Believers, because the faith of the Age is grounded upon a Ministry
delivered either written or verbal.

2. That this Age affords men as knowing and well versed both in Scripture and
Philosophy as any by past Ages (men Marvelously inspired only excepted) which
might easily be made out by Instances, if there was convenient Room to be
afforded.

3. If any shall deny that any persons in this Age have ability so to fit them
to be Ministers, as renders their ministry warrantable, let them set forth
their denial, and they shall be undertaken.

And so we come to the Third general head (viz) to affirm that the Son of God,
our blessed Savior and Redeemer was before or had a preexsistency to his being
Conceived of the Virgin, which we shall be but very short in: for the proof of
which, we levy these following Arguments.

Major.
then he had a Pre-existency to his being conceived of the Virgin.

But he was truly the first born of every Creature, Ergo, Minor.
he had a Pre-existency, Coll. 1.15. Heb. 1.6.

Major.
then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception.

But the Son of God our blessed Lord and Savior had a hand in the Creation of
the World, Ergo, Minor.
he had a Pre-existency, John 1.10. Coll. 1.16.17. Heb. 2.10.

John Baptist not only in preferency but exsistency. Major.


Then he had a Pre-existency to the Minor.
Virgins conception. John. 1.30.
But our Lord Christ was before John Baptist not only in preferency, but
exsistency, Ergo, he had a Pre-exsistency to the Virgins Conception.



Heb. 1.3.
But our Lord and Savior had no beginnings of days in some true sense and
considerable respect, Ergo, he had a Pre-exsistency.

Noah, Major.
then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins conception.

Minor.
According to that known maxim, Essence always preceeds operation: But Christ
went and Preached within the compass of the Age and days of Noah, 1 Pet.
3.18.19.20. Ergo, he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins conception.

David, Major.
then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins conception.

But Christ was the Root of David, Ergo, Revel. 22.16. Minor.


Abraham, then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception. Major.


But Christ was before Abraham, Minor.
Ergo, John 8.58.

Major.
then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception.

But Christ was High and Rich before he became low and poor, Ergo, Minor.
2 Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.6.7.

Major.
then was the glory of the Creation, ( viz. Angels and men) left a headless
Creation, and in complete till after the Virgin Mary, 1 Cor. 11.3. 2 Col. 10.

But the Creation was not left headless and incomplete, Ergo, Minor.
Christ the Head of it was before.

Major.
then the world was without a Mediator for the space of Four Thousand Years, or
42 Generations (the consequence of this Hypothesis, we want both time and room
to discourse, but at the first look of it, it bespeaks great caution and pause.)

But methinks a poor sinful world should not be without a Mediator so long a
time, Minor.
Ergo, the great Mediator of the New Covenant did Exist before.

Major.
by him, or to him, before the world began, Then he had a Preexistency to the
Virgins Conception.

But there was a Promise made in him, Minor.
by him, or to him, before the World began, Ergo, 1 Tit. 2. 2 Cor. 1.20.

Solomon, Maj.
Prove. 8.22.23. That was set up from everlasting, before the world was; then he
had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception.

But the Son of God is the Person there meant by Solomon, Ergo. Minor.


Michael, Major.
(so frequently spoken of in the holy Scriptures (that is set forth to be the
Prince of the Jews, and head of Angels) Dan. 10.21. Prove. 12.7. Be meant of
Christ the Son of God, then he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception.

But by the great Michael aforesaid is meant Christ the Son of God, ergo, Minor.
he had a Pre-existency to the Virgins Conception.

Israel in their Journey through the Wilderness, Major.
in the days of Moses, did both partake of him, and provoke him, then he had a
Pre-existency to his Being conceived of the Virgin.

But the Children of Israel did then both partake of him, Minor.
and provoke him, Ergo, 1 Cor. 10.4.10.



Joh. 17.5.
But he had a Glory with the Father before the world began, Ergo, he had a
Pre-existency. More might be said, but this shall serve.

POSTSCRIPT.
Five Short Arguments in favor of that Principle that concludes the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures; And the Authors Request to his Friend.

PROPOSITION.
Those that deny the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles to be the Words of
God, or to be of Divine Authority, are no Christians.

The reason of this Proposition is, because there is but one general way to
make a Christian, (viz.) an Information or conviction of the understanding and
judgment concerning the Existency, Authority, and Acts of Christ, And there is
but three ways for this to be done, viz. by immediate revelation, as a voice
from Heaven or the like; Authentic records, or the testimony of ordinary men;
the first of these is not now experienced; the last cannot do the thing;
therefore it must be the other, namely, Authentic Records; from hence we Argue.



But who so does deny the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles to be the word of
God, or of Divine Authority, does raze up the very ground work and foundation
of Christianity, Ergo.

The reason of the Major is, because there can be no such thing as Christianity
without a bottom, ground, or foundation.

The Minor thus proved.



But there is no other foundation of Christianity, Ergo.



But they cannot be proved so by any of these, Ergo.



But it cannot convincingly be made to appear, Ergo.



But there is none can by the works of Miracles or evidence equivolent make it
appear, Ergo.

The Minor is an universal negative that requires an Instance, and if any will
undertake to give it, let him come forth that he may be proved.

The Authors Request to his friend, is to over look weaknesses; because,

1. A new beginner.

2. No Scholar, and learning is such a thing that he thinks his great
unhappiness was; his missing so happy an education.

3. Has no Books to help him but that of Nature and the holy Bible.

4. Wants time suited to such undertakings, being taken off from that
delightful and necessary thing called study by the careful and Troublesome
concerns of the World.

5. If this be not liked of, I shall desire and be ready to be thankfully
Instructed into any better way.

6. If any shall contest with me about the premises, I beseech them to do it as
with a child, even a babe in Religion.

FINIS.
Three Questions offered to be disputed with John Bunion before any public
Audience either in City or Country, viz.




John Bunion or any such as he is may presume to break it.

This is to Certify.
That Those three famous Medicines mention^d in the Advertisement following,
for the better accommodation of such as live at a distance, are sold as
follows, by Mr. Robert Scott Millener over against the Cross in St. Albans,
and at his several shops in the places following, viz. At Barnet on Mondaies,
at Watford on Tuesdaies and at Hempstead on Thursdaies, and By Mr. Benj. Harris
Bookseller at the Stationers Arms in Sweetings Alley near the Royal Exchange,
London. By Mr. Richard Rooke distiller, at the Maidenhead in Golden lane. By
Mr. Mansel Grocer over against St. Giles Church in the fields, being all truly
prepared By W. Russel Professer of Physic, at the Sign of St. Luke in St.
Batholomews Close, London, who does undertake the Cure of most Curable
distempers, with as much ease, speed, and safety, and at as small a charge as
can in reason be desired.

These Books following are Printed for, and sold by Benjamin Harris, at his
shop, at the Sign of the Stationers Arms in Sweethings-Rents, at the East- end
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
1 WAR with the Devil, or the Young Man's Conflict with the powers of darkness,
in a dialogue, discovering the corruption and vanity of Youth, the horrible
nature of sin, and the deplorable condition of fallen Man, also a definition,
power, rule, and Conscience, and the nature of true conversion; to which is
added, an Appendix, containing a Dialogue between an old Apostate, and a young
Convert, by B. K. the third Impression.

2. Darkness vanished, or Truth in its primitive purity; being a Treatise of
laying on of hands, in answer to Mr. Henry Danvers, by B. K.

The Grand Impostor discovered, or the Quakers Doctrine weighed in the
Balance, and found wanting, in a Dialogue between a young Convert, and a
Quaker, by the same Author, B. K.

4. The Beauty, Vigor, and strength of Youth, Bespoke for God, in a Sermon
lately Preached to Young Men. By Thomas Powell Minister of the Gospel.

5. The Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven expounded, or an Exposition upon the
first 13 verses of the 25th. Chapter of Matthew by Hansor Knollis Minister of
the Gospel, in Octavo.

6. The accomplished Ladies delight, in Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and
Cookery. 1. Containing the Art of preserving, and Candying Fruits and Flowers;
and the making of all sorts of Conserving Syrups, and Jellies. 2. The Physical
Cabinet, or excellent Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery; together with some
rare beautifying Waters to adorn, and add loveliness to the Face and Body; and
also new and excellent secrets, and experiments in the Art of Angling.

7. Baptism discovered, plainly and faithfully a^cording to the word of God;
wherein is set forth the glorious Pattern of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
the Pattern of all Believers, in his subjection to Baptism; together with the
Examples of thousands who were Baptized after they believed. Written by John
N^rcot, a Servant o^ Jesus Christ, and of his Church.

8. Mentis Humanae, metamorphoses sive conversio, The History of the young
converted Gallant, o^ directions to the Reader of that Divine Poem, Entitled,
War with the Devil. By John Mason of Fordham in Cambridge-shire.

9. Anima Astrologiae, or, A Guide to Astrologers; being the considerations of
Guido Bonatus, and the choicest Aporismes of Cardans 7. Segments Englished; a
Piece long expected and promised in his last years Almanac 1675. being very
useful and necessary to all Artists in giving Judgment; and commended as such
by William Lilly, Student in Astrology.


