Christi servus etiam in summa Captivitate Liber; Anno 1659. aetatis 55.
All flesh is Grass, the best men vanity;
This, but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.
portrait

The Places and Times of his First Imprisonments under his professed Enemies
the PRELATES.
^. THe Tower of London, to which he was committed for his Histriomastix, Febr.
1. 1632. and censured, though Licensed. II. The Fleet, when his first Sentence
for his Histriomastix was executed, May, 7. 1634. III. The Tower of London, to
which he was re-committed from the Fleet, June 1. 1634. IV. Carnarvan Castle in
Northwales, to which by his second Sentence he was sent close Prisoner from the
Tower, August 5. 1637. V. Mount Orguiel Castle in the Isle of Jersy, (where he
was close imprisoned, when removed from Carnarvan,) January, 17. 1637. Whence
he was sent for and enlarged by the Parliament, November. 19. 1640.
The Places and Times of his Second Imprisonments under false Brethren and
pretended Friends.
I. HEll in Westminster by the Army Officers, for speaking his conscience and
discharging his duty in Parliament, December. 6. 1648. II. The Swan in the Strand
by the same Officers, for the same cause, December. 7. 1648. III. The Kings head
in the Strand by the same Power, for the same cause, Jan. 2. 1648. IV. Dunster
Castle in Somersetsh. where he was kept close Prisoner without accusation,
examination, hearing, by a Whitehall warrant under M. Bradshaws hand,
expressing no particular cause, and kept from Gods Ordinances, July 1. 1650. V.
Taunton Castle and the Lamb Tavern in Taunton, when removed from Dunster, by no
particular warrant, June 12. 1651. VI. Pendennis Castle in Cornwall, where he
remained close Prisoner by a copy of a Whitehall warrant under M. Bradshaw's
hand, mentioning no cause but Tauntons unfitness to restrain him in, from July
2. 1651. till Febr. 24. 1652.
2 Cor. 11. 23, to 28. In Labors more abundant, in PRISONS MORE FREQVENT, in
Deaths often, in Journying often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in
Perils by mine own Countrymen, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the Sea, in
Perils among false Brethren: In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

Lo here is the shade, but not Heroic mind,
And Public soul of him, who most unkind,
Unjust Restraints, Bonds, Pressures has sustained
From foes and friends; because he still maintained
Religion, Truth, Laws, Freedom, Justice, Right,
His Countries common good, with his whole might,
In all Ill Times; and never would once combine
With Lawless Grandees, these to undermine.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 10, 11, 12. 13. But thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of
Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, Persecutions,
Afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what
Persecutions I endured: But out of them all the Lord delivered me; yea, and all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution. But evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas, 1659.


