A FORM OF COMMON PRAYER, To be used upon the solemn Fast, appointed by His
Majesty's Proclamation upon the Fifth of February, being Wednesday.

For a Blessing on the TREATY now begun, that the end of it may be a happy
PEACE to the KING and to all his People.

Set forth by His Majesty's special Command to be used in all Churches and
Chapels.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University.

M.DC.XLIV.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

THE ORDER FOR MORNING PRAYER.
First the Minister shall say. CORRECT us (O Lord) and yet in thy judgment,
not in thy fury, least we should be consumed, and brought to nothing.


Then shall follow the Exhortation. DEarly beloved Brethren, the Scripture
moves us in sundry places, to acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and
wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of
Almighty God our heavenly Father, but con^esse them with an humble, lowly,
penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the
same, by his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times
humbly to acknowledge our sins before God: yet ought we most chiefly so to do,
when at such a time and occasion as this is, we assemble, and meet together, to
cast our selves down at the throne of his heavenly Grace, and to power out our
humble supplications, for the Averting of his heavy Judgments now upon us, for
the ceasing of this present bloody and unnatural War, and restoring a happy
Peace in this Kingdom. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as be here
present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the Throne of
the heavenly grace, saying after me.


The Confession to be said of the whole Congregation, Kneeling. ALmighty and
most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost
sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts, We
have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those things which we
ought to have done, And We have done those things which We ought not to have
done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us
miserable offenders Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults,
Restore thou them that be penitent, according to thy promises declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord; And grant, O most merciful Father, for his
sake, that we may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous, and a sober life, to the
glory of thy holy Name. AMEN.


The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone. ALmighty God, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has given power and
commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being
penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: he pardons and
absolveth all them which truly repent, and unfainedly believe his holy Gospel.
Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance and his holy Spirit, that
those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of
our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his
eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.


The Priest shall begin, and say. Our Father which art in Heaven Hallowed be
thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we fo^give them
that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation but, deliver us from
evil: for thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever.
AMEN.


Priest. O Lord open thou our lips.


Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Priest. O God make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord make have to help us.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.


Praise ye the Lord.
In s^ead of the Venite Exultemus, shall be used this Psalm composed out of
several passages in the Book of Psalms.
UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: Psalm. 28.1.
think no scorn of me, least if thou make as though thou hear not, I
become like them that go down into the Pit.

Hear the voice of my humble Petitions, 2.
when I cry unto thee: when I hold up my hands toward the Mercy seat of thy
holy Temple.

O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: Psalm. 74 v. 1.
why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture?

Lord, how long will thou be angry: Psalm. 79.5.
shall thy jealousy burn like sire for ever?

Has God forgotten to be gracious: Psalm. 77.9.
or will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure?

Lord where are thy old loving kindnesses: Psalm. 89.48.
which thou swarest unto David in thy truth?

O think upon thy Congregation: Psalm. 74.2.
whom thou have purchased, and redeemed of old.

Think upon the tribe of thine Inheritance: 3.
and mount Sion wherein thou have dwelt.

Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion: Psalm. 102.13.
for it is time that thou have mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.

And why? thy servants think upon her stones: 14.
and it pittieth them to see her in the Dust.

Be thou my Judge, O Lord, Psalm. 26.1.
for I have walked innocently: my trust has been also in the Lord, therefore
shall I not fall.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins, 2.
and my Heart.

Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: Psalm. 17.2.
and let thine eyes look upon the thing that is equal.

Show thy marvailous loving kindness, 7.
thou that art the Savior of them which put their trust in thee: from such as
resist thy right hand.

Call to remembrance, Psalm. 25.5.
O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindness which has been ever of
old.

For thy Names sake, 1^.
O Lord, be merciful unto my sin: for it is great.

The sorrows of my Heart are enlarged: 16.
O bring thou me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and misery: 17.
and forgive me all my sin.

Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy Righteousness, Psalm. 65.5.
O God of our salvation: thou that art the Hope of all the ends of the Earth,
and of them that remain in the broad Sea.

Which stilleth the raging of the Sea: 7.
and the noise of his waves, and the madness of his People.

Remember me, Psalm. 106.4.
O Lord, according to the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O visit me
with thy salvation.

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: 5.
and rejoice in the gladness of thy People, and give thanks with thine
Inheritance.

O let the sorrowful sighing of the Prisoners come before thee: Psalm. 79.12.
according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are
appointed to dye.

Comfort us again now after the time that thou have plagued us: Psalm. 90.15.
and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.

The fierceness of man shall turn to thy Praise: Psalm. 76.10.
and the fierceness of them shall thou refrain.

For God will save Sion, Psalm. 69.36.
and build the Cities of Juda: that men may dwell there, and have it in
possession.

O tarry thou the Lords leisure: Psalm. 27.16.
be strong and he shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: Psalm. 90.17.
Prosper thou the work of our Hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy work.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Psalms for Morning and Evening Prayer.
For Morning, For the Evening. Psalms 42 Psalms 77. 46. 80. 61. 85. 80. 126.
122. 132. 133.

The First Lesson for Morning Prayer, Isay 51. from the 9. verse to the end of
the Chapter.

Te Deum Laudamus.

For the Second Lesson, Romans 12. from the beginning of the 9. verse to the end
of the Chapter.

Benedictus.

The First Lesson for Evening Prayer, Isa. 54.

Magnificat. Luke 1.

The Second Lesson 1. Epist. John c. 4.

Nunc dimittis. Luke 2.29.

The rest to go on as it is in the former Fast-Book, with the addition of some
Prayers.

The Epistle Heb. 12. from the middle of the fifth verse, My Son, etc. to the
end of the 15. verse.

The Gospel Matthew* 5. from the first verse to the end of the 12. verse.

A Prayer drawn by His Majesty's special Direction and Dictates.
O Most merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely
afflicted by the Scourge of an unnatural War, do here earnestly beseech
Thee, to command a Blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for
the establishment of an happy Peace. Soften the most obdurate Hearts with a
true Christian desire of saving those men's blood, for whom Christ himself has
shed His. Or if the guilt of our great sins cause this Treaty to break off
in vain, Lord let the Truth clearly appear, who those men are, which under
pretense of the Public good do pursue their own private ends; that this
People may be no longer so blindely miserable, as not to see, at least in this
their Day, the things that belong unto their Peace. Grant this gracious God,
for his sake who is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

A Prayer for Peace.
ALmighty God, terrible in thy Judgments, but more wonderful in thy Mercies,
who turnest man to Destruction, and again, thou say, Come again ye children
of Men; we miserable sinners prostrate this day before thee; humbly confess
with Horror in our Hearts, and Confusion in our Faces, that every one of us
has, more or less, contributed to that vast heap of crying sins which has
now in so high a measure drawn down thy vengeance on us, that we have abused
thy Patience so long, till we have at last turned it into Fury, compelling
thee, by our often provocations to visit us in blood, to make us tear out our
own bowels, and by a strange unnatural War, raised we know not why, (thy
Justice and our Sins excepted) to become executioners of our selves, and so
to sin afresh in the very punishments of sin. But alas! what profit is
there in our Blood? or what Glory can come to thee by our Ruin? Let it
suffice, O God, that thou have thus far rebuked us in thine Anger; but consume
us not utterly, for we are all thy People. Say to the destroying Sword, It is
enough, and let it be no longer drunk with the blood of thine Inheritance: But
look down upon our unfeigned Humiliation, hear the Prayer which in the
bitterness of our Souls we power out this day before thee, accept of our
Repentance, and where it is defective, let thy Holy Spirit make it up with
Groans that cannot be expressed. Look upon thy Moses who stands in the gap,
beseeching thee to turn thine anger from thy People; remember what he has
suffered, and the heavy things that thou have shown him; and in the day, when
thou make Inquisition for Blood, forget not his desires of Peace, the
endeavors which he has used, and the Prayers which he has made to Thee for
it. Return all this, O Lord, with comfort into his Bosom. And since thou have
already wrought so much for him, as to bring these unhappy entangled
differences to a Treaty, take not off thine Hand, till thou have untyed every
knot, and cleared every difficulty. Send thy Spirit into their Hearts who are
entrusted with this great work, give them Bowels of Compassion toward their
bleeding, and expiring Country, strike a Sense into them of the Blood already
shed, and the Desolation to come, which threatens all if they prevent it not.
But above all, let thy Fear run through all their consultations, that
remembering the sad account, which in the last great day will be required of
them, they may lay aside every Sin, and every Interest that may divert them
from the ways of Peace, and by the guidance of thy Wisdom (for in this all
humane wisdom fails) find out those blessed Expedients as may restore the
voice of Joy and Peace into our Dwellings, in such a way, as may be most to the
Glory of thy Great Name, the Settlement of the true Religion so long professed
among us, the Honor, and Safety of the King's Sacred Person, and the Good of
all H^s People. Hear these our Prayers, and perfect this great work, through
the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Most just and powerful Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, we cannot but
acknowledge that the manifold miseries which have befallen us are the due
reward of our deeds, and that we have deserved that the things which belong to
our peace should still be hid from our eyes. For when of thy own free mercy
thou were pleased to grant us a long time of plenty and prosperity, more then
thou gave to any of the Nations that are about us, we became weary of our
happiness, and by our ingratitude pulled upon us those judgments which now
threaten desolation to this late flourishing Kingdom. And since the time of
our affliction thou have given us space to repent, and we repented not;
Iniquity has still more and more abounded. As heretofore thy mercies did not
allure us, so now thy judgments have not humbled us to a serious consideration
of our misdeservings. Now, O Lord, we find our selves entangled and wearied by
our own counsels; The troubles of our heart are enlarged; Our iniquities and
the punishments which attend upon them, are a burden too heavy for us to bear.
And therefore in the anguish and bitterness of our souls we return unto
thee, humbly beseeching thee, in whom alone is our help, to have respect unto
the prayers of thy servants. O shut not up thy loving kindness in displeasure,
let not thine anger burn against the sheep of thy pasture: But bind up the
breach of this people. Let the sighing of the prisoners come before thee,
Behold the tears of the distressed Orphans and widows, and of all such as are
oppressed and have no comforter. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou
forbear to command deliverances? Remember thy tender mercies which have been
ever of old, and save us as thou have done heretofore. Remember thy promise of
deliverance to those who call upon thee in the day of trouble. And when the
blood that has been shed by oppression calls aloud for vengeance, O then
hearken unto the voice of thy Sons blood which speaks better things; behold
the Lamb of God, who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities. And to this end regard the sincerity of thine Anointed, maintain
thy own cause, and preserve unto him that power which thou have given him:
bind his soul in the bundle of life, let mercy and truth preserve him, and
let his Throne be established for ever before thee. Bless them that are
peaceable and faithful in the land: And as for those that have risen up
against him, we beseech thee melt and mollify their hearts to the entertainment
of compassion and love; reclaim them to obedience, lay not their sin to
their charge, but guide their feet into the way of peace. Give to those that
have done wrong the grace to repent, and to those that have suffered wrong,
minds ready to forgive. And if any shall be averse from peace, O thou that art
the wonderful Counselor, turn their wisdom into foolishness, confound
their practices, and let their mischeife return upon their own heads. And
when thou have vouchsafed to give us that tranquillity which we beg at thy
hands, give us grace to embrace it with all thankfulness, to obey our
Governors, to live at unity among our selves, evermore blessing thy glorious
name which is exalted above all blessing and praise, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

