ARTICLES To be Enquired of, and Answered unto, BY THE Churchwardens AND
SIDEMEN of every PARISH: IN The Triennial Visitation OF THE Right Reverend
Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of St. DAVID.

In the Fifth Year of his Consecration.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.



THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE
'In Paradise the Tree
Of Knowledge was the pride;
By God's supreme decree,
The man who eat, then died.
But Heaven in mercy since
Does him who tastes forgive;
To know is no offense:
Now, he who eats, shall live.'
HENRY STEVENS of Vermont, FSA, etc 4 Trafalgar Square, London. 1882

The OATH to be Administered to the Churchwardens of every Parish.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, and shall diligently enquire and make true presentment of
such things and persons as to your knowledge are presentable by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. So help you God and the Contents of this
Book.

The Ministers of the respective Parishes are required to give in a List of the
Names of all such as they have Catechized and Prepared, and judge fit for
Confirmation; and to present it to the Bishop, together with the Persons to be
Confirmed, before the beginning of that Holy Office.

TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, the Fabric, Furniture and Ornaments
thereof.
I. Is your Parish Church or Chapel in the Walls, Roof, Windows and Floor in
good repair? are all things therein contained kept orderly and decently? when
the Floor is opened for any Burial, is it in short time after well paved again?
if not, by whose fault?

II. Has any part of the Church, Chapel or Steeple fallen, or been pulled down,
and when? has the Bells, Lead, Stone or any Materials been imbezled, sold or
alienated?

III. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover? does the Minister baptize
publicly there? have you a decent Table for the Holy Communion, placed where
it ought to be in the Chancel, with a decent Carpet and other Covering of white
cloth to be spread thereon at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper? and have
you a fair Chalice or Cup, with a Cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons?
have they been profaned or put to any common use?

IV. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew for Reading Divine Service, a Pulpit
with a comely Cloth or Cushion? are the Inhabitants of your Parish Welsh or
English for the greatest part? have you accordingly a large Bible of the last
Translation, two Common-prayer-books published by Authority Anno Dom. 1662, and
the Book of Homilies, and these not only Welsh but English? have you the Books
of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, the 39 Articles of Religion, a
printed Table of the prohibited Degrees of Marriage, a fair Surplice and Hood?

V. Have you a Parchment Book for Registring Christenings, Marriages and
Burials? is the same kept in all regard, according to Law or ancient Custom?
and is there a Transcript thereof sent yearly to the Bishop's Registry?

VI. Have you also Paper-books for the Names and Licenses of all Strangers
admitted to Preach in your Parish-Churches? for the Churchwardens Accounts, or
such Moneys as are collected upon Briefs, etc? have you a Chest with Locks and
Keys for the aforesaid Books and Furniture, and the Keys kept by the Minister
and Churchwardens? and have you a Bier and a decent Cloth for carrying the
Dead to their Graves? and have you a Box in the Church to receive the Alms of
charitable persons for the Poor?

TIT. II. Concerning Churchyard, Houses, Gleab-Land, Tithes, and Dues
belonging to the Church.
I. IS your Church Yard well fenced and decently kept from all encroachments
and profanation? has any Doors been made in it, or Trees cut down? and how
long since?

II. Is there, or have you heard of any House belonging to the Minister? is the
House and Outhouses in good repair? have any of them been pulled down or
defaced without license? have any encroach'd upon the same, or removed or
changed any of the ancient marks or bounds thereof? when, and by whom?

III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Gleab-Lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements and Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? have
any Glead-Lands been changed or taken away? have you a Note of such Pensions,
Rates, Tithes, portions of Tithes, Composition or any yearly Profits (within or
out of your Parish) as belong thereto? have any of the same been with held from
your Minister, and by whom, as you know or have heard? and is your Terrier said
up in the Bishop's Registry?

TIT. III. Concerning the Clergy or Ministers.
I. IS your Minister in Holy Orders and duly qualified? is he licensed by the
Bishop? has he been legally inducted, and read the 39 Articles? and has he
according to Law declared his assent thereto? is he known or suspected to have
obtained his Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal or undue practice?

II. Has your Minister any other Benefice or Cure? is he constantly (...) in
your Parish? and does he reside in the Vicarage or Parsonage house? does he
preach and officiate every Lord's day? or is he often absent? and how long? and
how is your Church served in his absence? does he provide for the Cure? and
what allowance does he make for the same?

III. Does your Parson, Vicar or Curate, in reading daily the Morning and
Evening Prayer, baptizing of Children, solemnizing Marriage, churching Women,
celebrating the Lord's Supper, visiting the Sick, and burying the Dead, tise
the Forms prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and observe all such Rites
and Ceremonies as are therein appointed? does he in performing all Divine
Offices in your Church or Chapel wear the Surplice and other Habits suitable
to his degree, if he be a Graduate in either of the Universities?

IV. Does your Minister often admonish the people not to defer the Baptism of
their Children, and that it is most convenient to Baptize them upon Sundays and
other Holy Days when most number of people meet together for the reasons
mentioned in the Rubric, and that without great cause and necessity none are
to be Baptized in private Houses? and when need compells, does your Minister
do his Office according to the form of private Baptism? and afterward if the
Child lives, is it brought to Church with Godfathers and Godmothers? and does
he certify the Baptism of the Child and receive it into the Congregation of
Christ's flock? does he observe the time appointed in the Rubric for that
Office, and do all other things prescribed?

V. Does your Minister celebrate the Lord's Supper so often that your
Parishioners may communicate three times at least every year? does he give
solemn notice thereof by reading the Exhortation appointed for that purpose?
does he in public and private Discourses endeavor to persuade his
Parishioners to frequent Communions? does he keep back them who through scandal
or any notorious crimes ought not to be admitted? and does he give the Bishop
notice thereof?

VI. Does your Minister diligently examine and instruct the Youth of your
Parish in the Church-Catechism? does he present them so instructed and prepared
to the Bishop to be confirmed? does he endeavor to reclaim and reduce all
Papists and Separatists (if any be in the Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England?

VII. Does your Minister presume to Marry any persons in private Houses, or any
under Age, without the consent of Parents of Guardians, or before Banns are
published three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church in time of Divine Service,
or at any other hours than between right and twelve in the morning, unless he
had license so to do? does he duly visit, comfort and pray with the Sick? does
he observe the directions as well as form of Prayer in preparing them for
Death, in giving them the comfort of Absolution and the holy Eucharist, upon
the humble and hearty desire of the person visited? does he give Christian
burial to all who dye not unbaptized, excommunicated or laid violent hands upon
themselves?

VIII. Does your Minister every Sunday declare to the people the days of
Fasting and Abstinence, and the Holy Days in the week following? is he careful
and exemplary in observing them? does he every year twice read the 39 Articles
and Book of Canons, that the people may understand and continue steadfast in the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England?

IX. Is your Minister sober, studious and peaceable, and of exemplary life? is
he grave, modest and regular in his behavior and apparel? is he in any kind
whatsoever disorderly or scandalous? is there any one in the Parish in holy
Orders who has laid aside his profession, or any unlicensed or itinerant
Clerk, or any one under suspension or other censures of the Church for false
doctrine or evil manners? if any such, how does he behave and comply himself?

TIT. IV. Concerning Parishioners.
I. ARE there in your Parish known, or found to be common swearers or
blasphemers of God's name, Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators or Incestuous
persons, or any that be noted to be profane persons, railers, unclean or filthy
talkers, standerers, sowers of strife, faction and discord among their
neighbors, or any Excommunicated persons?

II. Does every Parishioner repair to and in your Church or Chapel both in
time of Divine Service and preaching the Word of God, behave themselves
reverently kneeling at the Prayers and Sacrament, standing when the Creed and
Gospel are read, saying audibly with the Minister the Confession, Lord's-prayer
and the Creed, and making such answers as are appointed in the Book of
Common Prayer?

III. Are there any in your Parish who neglect the Baptism of their Children,
or refuse to send them to be baptized at the Church, except in case of
necessity? or do they send them to be baptized at other places or with any form
but what is appointed? or are there any persons unbaptiz'd in your Parish?

IV. Are there any married Women, who after their delivery from Childbirth,
neglect or refuse to be Church't and make their public Thanksgiving? Do any in
your Parish live as Man and Wife who are within the degrees prohibited, or any
that being lawfully married and not divorced by course of Law do not cohabit,
or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Do any refuse to pay
their East^^ Offerings of Duties, or to pay their Rates for repair of the
Church or any thing thereunto belonging?

V. Are any last Wills of persons departed concealed or not proved? did any
leave any Legacies to your Church or Chapel, or to the Poor, or any charitable
and pious use which has been misspent or misapplied?

VI. Have any Seats or Pews been erected in your Church or Chapel without
leave from the Ordinary? is there any dispute or contention about them? has
there been any disturbance, clamor or riot in the Church at any time upon that
account?

VII. Are there any in your Parish, who under pretense of Liberty of
Conscience, wholly neglect all public worship of God, neither going to Church,
nor any other Assembly, or who do not assemble together according to the late
Act for exempting Protestant Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England
from the penalties of certain Laws.

VIII. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? have they
certified the place of their meeting to the Bishop or such other as that Act
appoints? do they meet with their doors locked, barred or bolted during the
time of their meeting? have their Preachers subscribed the Articles of our
Religion (except those excepted in the Act) and taken the Oaths and subscribed
the Declaration therein required?

IX. Are there any who profess themselves to be in the Communion of the Church
of England who neglect resorting to their Parish Church upon Sundays and other
Holy Days, and omit receiving the holy Sacrament, being of years to receive it?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAve you a Parish-Clerk of at least One and twenty years of Age? is he of
good fame and honest conversation, and ability for his Office in reading,
singing and writing? is he chosen of your Minister? does he attend him in all
the Divine Services of the Church? are his wages duly paid him? and who
withholds them?

II. Does your Sexton perform his duty diligently, keeping the Church clean and
decent, in tolling and ringing the Bells at the due and accustomed times for
Morning and Evening Prayer, and all other occasions.

TIT. VI. Concerning Schole-Masters, Schools and Hospitals.
I. WHat Schole-master private or public have you in your Parish? is he
licensed by the Bishop? does he teach his Scholars the Church Catechism? does
he cause them to repair orderly to the Church or Chapel, and see that they
behave themselves there quietly and reverently all the time of Divine Service
and Sermon?

II. Has any Hospital, Almshouse or Free-schole been founded in your Parish?
is the Revenue and Use ordered according to the Founder's appointment and the
law of the Land?

III. What Legacies have any, living or dying in your Parish, given to the
Church or Poor of your Pari^^(...) ^re they settled and employed in their
Revenue and Use according to the Will?

IV. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery or Midwifery without
license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens, etc.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by consent of
the Minister and Parishioners, or one by the Minister and the other by the
Parishioners?

II. Have the former Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the Parish, and
delivered up the money remaining in their hands to the succeeding
Churchwardens, together with all other things belonging to the Church or
Chapel?

III. Do they provide against every Sacrament a sufficient quantity of fine
white bread and good wine for the Communicants? do they cause all strangers
that preach in your Church or Chapel to enter their names, with the name of
the Bishop that licensed them in a Book for that purpose? do they take care
that no persons stand idle, walk or talk together in the Churchyard during
Divine Service, or that no disorder or indecency be there?

FINIS.

