A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving, to be Used Immediately before the General
Thanksgiving, in all Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and Ten Miles about London, at Morning and Evening Prayer, as
often as there is Divine Service, and to be continued till further Order.

By Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXCII.

MAY 26th 1692.
LEt this Form of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING be forthwith Printed and Published,
to be used immediately before the General Thanksgiving, in all Churches and
Chapels within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles about
London, at Morning and Evening Prayer, as often as there is Divine Service, and
to be continued till further Order.

Jo. Cant.

A FORM of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING, to be Used immediately before the General
Thanksgiving, in all Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and Ten Miles about London.
ALmighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the World, in whose hand is power
and might, which nothing is able to withstand; It is to thee alone that we owe
our Deliverance from those many and great Dangers wherewith we were so lately
Encompassed. It is thou alone that command the Winds and the Seas, and they
obey thee: Thou take the crafty in their own Counsels, and turnest the wisdom
of the wise into foolishness.

But (Oh our God) as if this were a small thing with thee, thou have not only
saved us from our Enemies, but have delivered them into our hands, and given
their Majesty's Fleet a most Signal and Glorious Victory over them. Blessed be
God who has not turned away our Prayer, nor his Mercy from us, notwithstanding
our many and great Provocations; Therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy Name be the Glory. And give us (we beseech thee) that blessed
fruit of all thy wonderful Mercies, that we may turn every one from the evil of
his way, and may live as a People that have been the particular and visible
care of thy Providence: That so thou may still delight to do us good, and
that-out Arms by Sea and Land may be successful to the Establishing of Truth
and Peace in this and the Neighboring Nations; to the Glory of thy great Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

