THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE OF TRANSVBTANTIATION proved to be ancient and
Orthodoxall.

Against the sclanderous tongue of D. John Cozens a Protestants minister
auouching the said doctrine never to have been known, in the Church before the
Councels of Latteran and of Trent.

Aug. in psalm. 36. Tanto magis debemus commemorare vanitatem Haereticorum,
quanto magis quaerimus salutem eorum.

By how much more we seek the salvation of Heretics; by so much more we
ought to maKe the vanity of their lies appear,

Luther Epist. ad Io. Heruagium Typographu^. The sacramentaries began their
opinion of the sacrament with lies, and with lies they defend it.

PRINTED AT PARIS, M.DC.LVII.

TO THE READER
COURTEOUS READER As the cause of my first writing this paper was to satisfy
the Countess of Insiquin, and give her not only the true sense and meaning of
S. Austin, but also the belief of all Orthodox Antiquity concerning the real
presence of Christ in the holy Eucharist: so the reason why I now publish it,
is to inform those of the truth, who peradventure may have heard of a
conference which casually happened thereupon between my self and D. John
Cozens a Protestant minister. Which because it is related by some of his
friends with much partiality and prejudice to the truth, I am advised by
friends to publish it with all the most material circumstances wherewith it
was accompanied, or which were the occasion of it; whereby it will appear that
Luther the grand Patriarch of all Protestant Congregations never spoke truer,
then when speaking of the Abettors of the Sacramentarian doctrine (which is the
doctrine of the English pretended reformation) he said: Epist. ad Ioannem
Heruagium Typographu^.
The Sacramentaries began their opinion with lies, and with lies they defend
it: this I say will appear plainly by the following relation.

1. The Countess of Insiquin being trobled at her Honorable Lords being become
a Roman Catholic, and using all the means she could to draw him to return
again to Protestanisme, among other endeavors, she applied the industry of D.
Io: Cozens a Protastant minister, who to that effect wrote sundry papers to him,
wherein he impugned the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome over the whole Church of
Christ, as a doctrine crept-in since the Apostles times, and not warranted by
the authority of Orthodox Antiquity.

2. These papers the earl of Insiquin was pleased to send unto me, and withal
requested me to return an answer to them, especially to the authorities
alleged therein out out of S. Gregory the great and S. Cyprian against our
Catholic doctrine.

3. In compliance with my Lords request I drew a short answer, wherein I showed
first by the testimone of the Doctors own brethren that his urging of S.
Gregory's refusing the title of universal Bishop is very vain and idle and
grounded upon wilful blindness and Heretical obstinacy; because it is
cleerer then the sun, and confessed by the greatest scholars of Protestant
side, that S, Gregory, notwithstanding the foresaid objection, did claim and
exercise the Primacy of authority and jurisdiction over all Churches in causes
spiritual and Ecclesiastical, and therefore he terms the sea of Rome the
head of all Churches; the mother Church; the mistress of Nations, and
avouches them to be perverse men that will not be subject to her: and that S.
Peter was by God appointed over all the Church etc. These acknowledgments are
made of S. Gregory by Bale, Bulinger, Melanchton, the Centurists and other
Protestant writers against D. Cozens and his old worne-out objection, which
has been so many times already answered and refuted not only by our Catholic
Divines but even by Protestants. In so much that Andreas Friccius, a
Protestant, whom Peter Martyr styleth an excellent learned man writes thus in
confutation of this foolish objection saying: L. 2. de Eccles. cap. 10. pa. 570.
Some there be etc. that object the authority of Gregory, who says that such a
title pertains to the Precursor of Antichrist: but the reason of Gregory is
to be known, and it may be gathered from his words which he repeateath in many
Epistles, that the title of universal Bishop is contrary to and does gainsay,
the grace which is commonly poured upon all Bishops. He therefore that calls
himself the only Bishop, takes the Bishop like power from te rest. Wherefore
this title he would have to be rejected etc. But it is nevertheless evident by
other places, that Gregory thaught that the charge and Principality of the
whole Church was committed to Peter. And yet for this cause Gregory thought not
that Peter was the forerunner of Antichrist. Thus Friccius. So evident it is
by the Confession of this Protestant that S. Gregory himself claymed and
defended the Primacy of the Roman Bishop and Church over all other Bishops and
Churches whatsoever. And yet D. Cozens will be still urging against us this
objection of s. Greg: which proceeding does evidently convince him to be either
extreme ignorant and little verst even in his own authors; or else, (which is
much worse,) to have laid a side all shame and honesty being resolved to
maintain any thing though never so clear against his own conscience, so that
he may for base ends and secular interest deceive the unlearned.

4. Having showed that his argument drawn from the authority of s. Gregory was
of no credit even with the learned of his own school I went on declaring
how the minister abused S. Cyprian by disiointing, clipping, and confounding S.
Cyprians sayings that so he might obscure his meaning, which are the ordinary
shifts of Protestant ministers and are most inexcusable in D. Cozens, because
he wilfully perseuers in it, notwithstanding the notice which was lately taken
thereof in the very self same controuer^y by that learned Divine Mr. Thomas
Carre in his occasional discourses, and in like occasion by D. Thomas Vane in
his vindication of the Council of Latteran; both of them laying open his foul
perverting and corrupting of the fathers and the Council to his eternal shame
and confusion: for it cannot but appear to every indifferent man that the
minister is not so much a lover of truth, as he would feign appear to his
followers, but rather to be accounted of the number of those who love
darkness more then light falsehood more then truth.

5. These heretical slights being discovered, in the Minister I showed how the
places of S. Cyprian being faithfully cited make most clearly for our Catholic
doctrine seeing it is clear that he believed and taught that the Roman Church
was by divine institution the Principal and chief Church; that she had the
prerogative of being the mother Church of all other Churches; that the Primacy
or head-gouerning authority was by Christ given to S. Peter, and his successor;
and that his Chair, that is, the sea of Rome, is the fountain and head-spring
from whence do flow all the stremes of pure and infallible doctrine; is the
sun from whence all the stars of the firmament that is, all particular
Churches receive the light of verity; is the Origin and Center of unity, from
whence do issue all the Lines of Power and jurisdiction which go to the whole
circumference of the Eccleasticall Hierarchy.

6. Having returned this answer to my Lord of Insiquin; his Lady with in few
days after sent me another paper of her own hand writing wherein she had
collected out of some books of her own some sayings of S. Austin which she
conceived to make very clearly against our Catholic doctrine of the Real
presence of Christ in the Eucharist, telling me withal that she had shown
them to my Lord, and that he had said that he could not well tell how they were
to be understood, but that he did not doubt but that I could give a
satisfactory answer to them: which therefore she desired of me, and with what
speed I could.

7. Hereupon for my ladies satisfaction I drew the following answer: wherein I
first deliver some general Rules to be observed for the right understanding of
S. Austine or any other of the ancient fathers in the matter of the H.
Eucharist. Then applying the said Rules respectively to the places objected out
of S. Austine I show how they make nothing at all against our Catholic
doctrine. This done, I prove by clear places of S. Austin that his belief was
the same with ours concerning the real presence. And lastly in further
confirmation of our doctrine I add the aggreing consent of all Orthodox
Antiquity delivered by the fathers of every age from the days of S. Gregory
the great up to the Apostles, all of them expounding the Scriptures in favor
of our doctri^ and professing themselves to believe it, and beating witness
that it was in their times the belief of all Orthodox Christians and Churches
which they taught and governed. From all which I inferred and concluded against
the authors of those books and all Protestant Ministers that pretend to
Orthodox Antiquity for warrant of their doctrine, that they be most foul
impostours, and wilful deceauers and therefore of no credit nor to be believed
nor trusted in matters of religion.

8. This answer produced, I know ^ot how, a meeting with D. Cozens, and this
meeting a verbal contention about the sense of Antiquity concerning the real
presence of Christ in the Eucharist. For upon my coming to the Palais Royal to
present this Answer to my Lady, I was by and by after conducted by my Lord from
his own lodgins to D. Cozens his Chamber where I met my Lady with another
Protestant Gentleman. After the common salutes of Ciuility, occasion being
given me, I told him the cause of my coming then to the Palais Royal was to
bring my Lady an Answer which some three or four days before she had desired
of me to some authorities of S. Austin which etc. The Doctor replied, he knew
not what she had done, and that whatsoever it was, she had done it of her self
etc.

After some few words had passed between us about that subject, I began with
both their leaves to read my paper. But I had scarce ended the first. but the
minister interrupted me saying: my lady may read your answer another time; if
you have any thing to say against our doctrine, you may say it: that which we
believe is deliured by Gelasius and Theodoret two ancient fathers of the
Church; the rest did not disagre from them, and they agree with us (...) says
Theodoret.

9. I replied first that I came not to dispute about the meaning of Theodoret
and Gelasius, but to satisfy my lady concerning S. Austines sayings which she
had sent me, as making against our Catholic doctrine: therefore I desired
leave to read what I had made ready for that purpose. Here the Doctor cried
out as before, my lady may read you answer another time etc. And then my lady
showed a desire that it might be so, and said she would read my paper
afterwars and willed me to answer to Theodoret and Gelasius.

10. Hereupon I replied to the Doctor and said; first Gelasius is not the man
you take him to be: who is he then said the Doctor? not Gelasius the Pope, said
I, neither does he whosoever he be, make any thing against us, as you may see
in Bellarmine. Here the Doctor uttered against Bellarmine some scurrilous
language, (of which Heretical mouths are always full,) but I took little
notice of it, and went on saying and for Theodoret it is evident his meaning is
that in the Eucharist the mystical signs, that is, the otward form of bread
and wine after consecration remain in their own proper nature figure and
form as before; and not that they remain in the same substance of bread and
wine wherein they did inhere, before consecration.

11. The Doctor here repeated with some vehemence (...); in their substance,
in their substance, in their former substance. I answered (...), nature,
essence, yea and substance, does not only, and always signify substance, as it
is divided against accident, but also the true nature and essence of every
thing, as (...) does which word Theodoret does also use in the same place, upon
the same occasion, and in the same sense, and you will not deny but that
Acccidents have an intrinsecall nature and essence proper to themselves and
really distinct from the substance in which they do naturally inhere.

12. Here the Doctor to show what a deep Physopher he is, cried out with a
repetition: Accidentis est inesse, Accidentis est inesse. What then, said I: I
hope you will grant that Accidents have an accidental essence distinct from
the nature and essence of the substance wherein they in here. How then does
this accidentis est inesse Prove that Theodoret speaks not of the proper
nature and essence of the Accide^ts, when he says; the mystical signs
remain in their former nature etc.

13. Here that I might be permitted to read some authorities of the ancient
fathers which I had made ready to show my lady the sense of Orthodox Antiquity,
I said to the Doctor, we contend here about the meaning of Theodoret; the
argument which even now you made for your doctrine: Gelasius and Theodoret
taught this, the rest of the fathers did not dissent from them ergo etc. This
argument I say might be easily turned against you with much more efficacy: but
let us ex dato and non concesso suppose without granting that Theodoret and
Gelasius did favor your doctrine, and then I argue thus.

Faith relyeth upon authority, and therefore in matters of faith the greatest
authority must command our belief and sway our understanding: but the rest of
the fathers do evidently hold with us, and their authority is incomparably
greater, therefore we are to submit to it, and believe what they believed.

14. Here I was with much a do permitted to read some authorities of the
fathers. And the first I lighted on in turning to them, was this of S.
Gaudentius: The Lord and Creator of natures who of earth made bread, again,
(because he can do it, and has promised to do it,) of bread makes his own
body and he that of water made wine, now of wine has made his own blood.

15. The Doctor not looking, as it seems, for this authority and therefore
having no answer or rather shift ready for it, cries out, Gaudentius, who is
this Gaudentius? He is, said I, a grave father of the primitive Church, and was
Bishop of Brixia. A grave father? said the Doctor, he was some Heretic. Fie
Doctor, said I, will you offer to call Heretic a learned father, and Canonized
saint? Canonized? said he, by whom? By the Church said I. By the Church? said
the Doctor with scorn, by your Church. By that Church said I, which was ever
esteemed the church of God.

16. Here because the Doctor did not admit S. Gaudentius for an authentical
witness; that we might not decline from the maine question; without further
insisting upon this authority, I went to others better known the Doctor, and
cited S. Cyrill of Alexandria. Though now before I cite him, it will not be
amiss to make some reflection upon this most unchristian and detestable way of
declining the authorities of the fathers very familiar with the ministers of
the Protestant Kerke, when they are pressed with places that are so clear
against them that they cannot shuffle them over by any other Heretical
slights. For then you shall hear them, as even now you heard this minister,
break out into most disgraceful and reuiling language against the ancient
fathers of Gods Church, though never so learned and holy. So D. Bilson a known
Minister of the English pretended reformation, so far enrageth against S.
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamina and a learned father of the fourth age, for
rejecting all figurative glosses upon the words of Institution This is my body,
that forgetting all modesty and reverence due unto those gray headed times he
says: Bilson 4. part. p. 752. 753.
Epiphanius was a prating deacon of more tongue then wit, more face then
learning etc. which scurrilous insolency these Doctors learned of their grand
Patriark Luther, who, whenever he was pressed by his adversaries with the
authorities of fathers which he could not answer, was wont to break out in
these and such like profane speeches which declare him to have been more an
impe of Satan then a Christian: Luther tom. 2. wit: li. de seruo Arbitrio pa.
434. an. 1551. and see the same book printed 8. p. 72. 73 276. 337.
the fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the
Scriptures, and have erred all their life time and unless they were amended
before their deaths they were neither saints nor partaining to the Church. But
what christian will make any more account of such like lewd and unchristian
censures then of a thing that deserves all contempt: for what but wilful
ignorance and Heretical pride could have carried these men so precipitously
upon such an un christian censure of S. Gaudentins? S. Epiphanius, and the
father in general.

17. S. Gaudentius was a famous Bishop of the primitive times, never stained
with any error in faith, noted by any ancient or modern writer. He was so
eminent both for his learning and for his virtues, that, though he were under
years, he was by the persuasion chiefly of S. Ambrose chosen to succed S.
Philastrius in the Bishop rick of Brixia: and being then far absent in a
pilgrimage in the East and hearing of his election, he gave a rare example of
many admirable virtues not to be found among Protestant Ministers. For he
labored all that he could to decline that dignity, and for that end stayed
there in the East, till by the threats of an excommunication he was
constrained to return home and undergo that burden. The Doctor therefore
remains convicted of great ignorance, and of great temerity, and of being
greatly injurious to this ancient holy father, and remains obliged under pain
of damnation to make him restitution, and clear him from the foul sclander he
has laid upon him, and dispossess my lady of the evil opinion she has
conceived against so great a saint by his lewd and temerations language.

18. And this were enough to make any man that has a care of his salvation to
detest and abhor the Protestant spirit which carries men that are thoroughly
possessed with it, into such vast absurdities or rather sacrilegious impieties;
and to hate that religion which cannot be maintained, but by insimulating the
Orthodox fathers of the primitive times of heresy, and razing out of the
Calender of Gods saints such as the Church ever looked on as mirours of
sanctity. And to the contrary (which is as detestable as the other,) to
canonize for saints, and register in the number of worthy and reverend men,
the foulest monsters for their lives that ever the sun beheld. For, occasion
being given me by the Doctor to object Luther against him as a most vicious
man, and yet the first founder of the Protestant Kerke: the Doctor replied
saying: sir, you do Luther wrong; he was a worthy and reverend man. And yet if
there be any credit to be given to their own Ecclesiastical histories, to
Luther himself the bestwitnes of his own life and actions, this reverend man
was the foulest and lewdest Heretic that ever appeared in the Church of God.
Calvin apud Schlus. lib. 1. Theolog Call. fo. 126. Oecol. Confess. ad resp
Lutheri Rheg. l. contra Io: Hosium de Caena.
Does not Calvin say of him, that magnis vitiis laborabat he was infected with
great vices? Does not Oecolampadius affirm that erat superbiae and arrogantiae
plenus; he was puffed up with pride and arrogance? Does not Conradius Rhegius
avouch that for the same pride wherewith he does extol himself, God took
from him his true spirit, and in place of it, gave him a proud, angry, and
lying fpirit? Tom. 5. wittem. de matrim. f. 119 and Colloq. men's. f. 529.
Does no he himself with most horrid impudency relate the shamfull
exorbitances into which the rage of his lust carried him after he became an
Apostata from his faith and religious Order, and had yoaked himself with a
vowed Nun, so vshering his vocation to Protostanisme with the sin of
sacrilegious adultery, for which he deserved to be hanged by the imperial
laws? Does he not seek to justify these horrid crimes with fouler doctrine,
vbi supra and 2 wit. f. 328.
and acknowledge to have learned the doctrine of his pretended reformation of
the Devil; S^e H^spinian Histor. Sacram part. altera f. 131. and Manlius loc.
Comm. pa. 42.
and to have had all along after his revolt such intrinsecall and inward
familiarity and frindship with him, that he did often eat at the same table
and lay in the same bed with him, and as near unto him as to his Kate, that
is, to his sacrilegious whore? to be short, does he not confess both of
himself and the rest of his reformed ministers: Praef. in Proposi. de Bigam.
an. 1528. proposit. 62. 63. 66.
That lustful desires do burn in us we cannot deny, seeing by reason thereof
we are become infamous in the sight of our congregations? Such are D. Cozens
saints; fuch the first Apostles and founders of his Church; Luther the grand
Patriark a lewd Apostata friar yoaked to a Nun, instructed by the Devil:
Zuinglius a fyrebrand of Hell for his seditious and bloody spirit: Calvin and
Beza two most infamous Sodomits; Carolostadius a rude and savage man istructed
also by the Devil: Oecolampadius, Bucer, Bullinger, Peter Martyr and the rest;
all of them as foul and vggly as the fire of lust and other horrid vices could
make them. These are the first founders and raysers of the Protestant building;
these the first Apostles and preachers the pretended reformation, these the
models on which all the rest of the Protestant ministry are formed and framed
and of which they are living copies: such lips, such lettice: such, saints
such Churches.

19. S. Gaudentius being rejected as an insufficient witness of the faith of
those primitive times, I cited S. Cyril of Alexandria and the Council of
Ephesus. sec. 30. 31.
To which the Doctor answered this is just our doctrine: and then fell into a
contestation with my Lord of Insiquin about the Eucharist being a sacrifice:
and one while he avouched it to be a true and real sacrifice: another while
that it was a sacrifice only as it is a ^emoriall of the sacrifice our Savior
offered of himself on the cross. And indeed he delivered himself so
co^fusedly and so vnco^sta^tly, that he made it clear that he neither knows
how to define a sacrifice, nor what a true sacrifice means. And as to the
authority of S. Cyril, I leave it to any understanding Protestant to judge,
wheter Protestants do generally believe that the things offered on the Altar,
that is, the bread and wine, be by the power of life converted into the true
body and blood of our Lord, as S. Cyril cited 30. does believe and teach.

20. After S. Cyril I alleged S. Ambrose saying how many examples do we use
to prove that the thing is not the which nature has made but that which the
blessing has consecrated; and that the power of consecration is greater then
the power of nat^re: for by consecration the very nature it self is changed
etc.

21 The Doctors answer to this authority was, that that which was before
instituted and ordained by nature for the nourishment of our bodies, is now by
our Saviors institution designed to signify the spiritual nourishment of our
souls. I replied: it is clear S. Ambrose speaks of a change in nature, of an
intrinsecall, Physical change, of such a change as none but the omnipotent
power of the Creator can make in his creatures, which the deputa^^on and
designation you speak of does not do. Here I would have gone on citing the
authority of S. Ambrose to show that he speak of an intrinsecall, Physical
change. But the Doctor being now grown loud and clamorous, and having in that
heat of words said that the doctrine of Transubstantiation was never known
nor heard of in the Church before the Council of Latteran, my Lord of Insiquin
urged him to show where the Church was, that then opposed that pretended
error, and maintained the truth against that Council defining as it did. But
the Doctor came so short in satisfying my Lords demand, that verily, though he
did lowdly word it for almost a quarter of an hour, yet he did not utter any
one word that could satisfy any rational man to the Queree which which my Lord
urged against him very handsomely and very home. For he could not so much as
name any one Pastor of the Church that did show himself for the truth against
that Council and oppose himself as a wall for the house of God in defense of
the Catholic doctrine. He named indeed twice or thrice scotus, yet so as he
well appeared to be conscius of his being not able to make it good that Scotus
ever opposed the authority and definition of the Council of Latteran; and much
less that he could make him, who was not then borne, appear as a Church
opposing such a Council, as was that of Latteran which consisted of 1285.
fathers assembled from all parts of the Christian World, the Pope himself
Innocentius the third, being present, and the four Prtriarkes, two in person,
the other two by their Legates, themselves being hindered, the one by sickness,
the other by the difficulty of passing through the Turks dominions.

22. The Doctor having, as I said, vociferated for almost a quarter of an
hour, without giving any kind of satisfaction to my Lords Queree, he rose up
and made his excuse that his affairs would not not permit him to stay any
longer time; and so all taking leave one of another, we parted every one which
way his occasions called him.

23. Since this meeting, some of his friends have raised reports of great
victories gained by him; as in like occasions they did of the occasional
discourses which were held with him by that learned Divine Mr. Thomas Carre
about several Articles of our Catholic faith, and by D. Thomas Vane about the
Council of Latteran. But the victories he gained were over himself, not over
his adversaries, as the relation, which I have here made, does demonstrate.
For what was his insimulating S. Gaudentius of heresy, but a conviction of his
own ignorance and a confession that that ancient father believed and taught
that which the now Roman Church does believe and teach concerning the doctrine
of Transubstantiation? What was his saying to the testimony of S. Cyril and the
Council of Ephesus, This is just our doctrine, but an open acknowledgment that
he neither knows the doctrine of the English convocation creed, nor what S.
Cyrill and the Council of Ephesus does teach, nor what the Council of Trent
has defined? What was the exposition he gave to the testimony of S. Ambrose,
but an open professing himself to be a man that is carried away with wilful
obstina^y, See Reynerus c. 3.. tertia causa: and exeodem Illyricus: tit. de
Walden.. sui.
not guided by the love of verity? One of his brethren and as great a pretended
Gospeller, coming to translate those words of S. John v, c. 1. v. sui eum non
receperunt; his own received him not: took sui, his own, for the nominative
plural of sus, a sow, and turned it thus: the swine received him not. This
beastly Heretic might as well, and with as much reason defend and justify this
his profane exposition of Gods holy word, as D. Cozens can defend and justify
the sense he gives to S. Ambrose his words. Lastly what is his granting the
Council of Lateran to have desined and authentically declared the doctrine of
Transubstantiation to be an article of faith and a divine revealed verity
conveyed down to us by full tradition of the Church; and yet that we must
contemn it as an error upon Luther, Calvin and the rest of the Protestant
ministers word; what, I say, is this but to grant that to be a Protestant a man
must have his brains inuerted, and prefer the corrupt fancies, wilful
mustakes, and damnable lies of a few, new, Turbulent and f^ctious Apostatas
before the unanimous testimony of a world of learned, wise and holy men; and
that, in a matter of above 300. years before Luther or any of his lewd
associats were borne, and of which all those other holy and learned fathers
were eyewitnesses; as, what was the religion of the Christian world at that
time, what the doctrine of faith which their Ancestors every where professed
and delivered to them as an Apostolical Tradition and divine revealed verity
concerning the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist. These are the
vicctories D. Cozens has gained, to wit, over himself and over his Protestant
Congregation; which as they prove D. Cozens to be no Doctor of saving truth,
so they prove the religion which he does profess and teach to be most profane
and false and altogether grounded upon sclanderous lies uttered out of malice
against the Roman Church and truth of her Catholic faith.

23. Here again I cannot but beseech the Protestant Reader for the love he
bears to that sacred ransom of his soul the precious blood of our Savior,
that he will consider what a kind a thing the Protestant religion is which
relyes upon such Principles and which has no more certainty of truth, then it
is certain that the bare word of Luther, Calvin, swinglius, B^za and the rest
of that black-gard is to be preferred before the unanimous testimony of 1285.
fathers assembled together in general Council from all parts of the Christian
world bearing witness in a matter of fact of their own times, and above 300.
years before any of those other lewd Apostatas were borne.

24. Though that which has been hitherto related of the Answers which D.
Cozens made to the authorities of the fathers, and of the sclanderous untruths
he uttered against the Roman Catholic faith, do sufficiently declare him to be
a man of the very same stamp with all the rest of the ministry of the
Protestant kerke, that is, one that is always ready to say and unsay as shall
be most for the advantage of his cause and to utter any thing without remorse
that may prove disgraceful to the Roman Church, yet in this meeting he gave
upon several occasions two or three other strong proofs thereof much to be
observed by all those that suffer themselves to be deceived by him, and rely
upon his word and doctrine in matters of faith and religion. One is, that
whereas I had upon occasion affirmed of Luther that he denied S. James his
Epistle to be the word of God, D. Cozens denied this of Luther with as much
confidence as if he had had a face of brass. And yet there is nothing more
acknowledged by those of Luthers school then this, that Luther says of S.
James his Epistle that it is straminea epistola an epistle of straw and
unworthy altogether of an Apostolical spirit. In which respect, Luther in
Prolog. huius epistola.
In which respect, as also for other his horrible prophanings of Gods holy
word, L. de Sacram. fol. 412.
swinglius dorh style him a foul corrupter and horrible falsifyer of Gods word,
one that followed the Marcionites and Arians, that razed out such places of
holy writ that were against them.

Another argument of D. Cozens inconstancy in his assertions, and confidence in
impugning the known truth, is, that, after he had most boldly avouched that
the doctrine of Transubstantiation and adoration of the Sacrament was never
known nor practiced in the Church before the Lattetan Council, he presently
corrected himself as if he had been two favorable toward the truth and not
uttered a falsehood lord enough, and therefore to make it wider he said that
neither then was the foresaid doctrine defined by the Council, but afterward
by the Decree of Innocentius the third. And yet there can be nothing more clear
then that the whole Council did define the doctrine we speak of. For it is one
of the very first Heads or Articles of faith which the Council does define,
beginning the Decrees with firmiter credimus and simpliciter confitemur we
firmly believe and plainly confess etc. that the true body and blood of
Christ is truly contained in the Sacrament of the Altar under the forms of
bread and wine: Verum Christi corpus and sanguis in Sacramento Altaris sub
speciebus panis and vini veraciter continetur, transubstantiatiatis pane in
corpus, and vino in sanguinem potesta te diuina: Decreta: Council. Lat. 4. cap.
1.
the bread being by divine power transubstantiated into the body, and the wine
into the blood. Thus the Council. And yet D. Cozens is not ashamed to avouch
that not the Council of Lateran, but Innocentius the third defined the doctrine
of Transubstantiation. Neither is his impudence less intolerable in denying
the Adoration of the Sacrament to be more ancient then the Latteran Council;
for no Catholic Divine can now speak plainer then the fathers of the purest
times of the Church do for it, namely Theodoret, S. Austin, S. Chrysostom S.
Ambrose, S. Gregory Nazianzen and others whose authorities may be seen in
Coccius, Gualterus, and Bellarmine and are arkdowledged by Chemnitius, Chemnit.
exam. part. 2. page 92.
Parkins, Chrispinus, Bilson, the Centurists and other Protestant writers; and
Marbachius another Protestant author does confess it to be a Most ancient
custom, which the Church used in showing to the people the Eucharist to be
adored in the Mass etc. How then is the Doctor not ashamed to maintain such
foul and palpable untruths with so much boldness? Who would be a minister of
the Protestant Kerke seeing it is an office which no man can personate, but by
laying a side all regard to truth, and publish himself to be a mere
impostour, and seeing the building which he is to sustain is so ruinous, that
he cannot uphold it and keep it from ruin but by ruining his own soul, and
running wilfully into damnation?

25. And what man is there desirous of salvation that will not hold himself
obliged to abandon such a man as a most unsafe guide to heaven, yea as a
certain deceauer of souls and one of the number of those whom S. Paul says
are subverted and condemned by their own judgment, because it is evident that
he defends a cause, a doctrine, a faith, a religion which cannot be defended,
but by forging lies, impugning the known truth, and maintaining Principles
contrary to the light of nature and common reason, as has been partly already
she^ed, and will hereafter more fully and clearly appear by the testimony of
the ancient fathers bearning witness against him that in asserting ^he
Doctrine of Transubstantiation never to have been known in the Church before
the Council of Latteran, he does utter so madifest a falsehood that he remains
convicted either of much malice or of great ignorance; both which
considerations oblige all men to look upon him as a man of no credit in
matters of religion.

WE whose are names vnderwritte^ Doctors in Divinity of the sacred Faculty of
Paris, have perused the Treatise entitled The Docttrine of Transubstantiation
ancient and Orthodoxall. And we do testify that we have not found any thing
therein, that does not perfectly agree with the Catholic Roman faith, and
sense of Orthodox Antiquity and therefore we judge that it may be profitably
published for the clearing of the truth against the sclanderous tongue of D. Io
Cozens a Protestant minister who is said to have occasioned the writing of it,
by boldly affirming the Doctrine of Tra^substa^tiation never to have been
known nor heard of in the Church be fore the Council of Latteran. O LONERGAN
R. Nugent.

THE DOCTRINE OF Transubstantiation Ancient and Orthodoxall.
. 1.
FOR the right understanding of S. Augustine (and the same is to be said of any
other of the fathers,) we are to suppose that he being so eminently learned
does not contradict himself in doctrines of faith and the most important
mysteries of Christian Religion, this being a thing which even the meanest
writers, though in triuiall matters, do ever scorn as too clear an argument of
gross oblivion and wors inconstancy; though throw gods judgment, Heretics
have ever been liable to this reproach and shame and none more then the
sectaries of these times.

. 2.
SECONDLY to know assuredly what the fathers did believe and theach touching
any article of faith, we are to look into those their elaborate works where
they do expressly and professedly treat of that matter: there we are the
likeliest to find what their belief and practice was concerning it.
Protestants do very much decline from this Rule; all their endeauours are to
cull here and there all the obscure sayings they can find in other places of
the fathers, that by their strayned and violent constructions they may wrest
them to give a shadow unto their Heretical senses, and make their unlearned
followers believe that the Fathers were of their opinion and taught their
doctrine.

. 3.
AND in like manner if in any of all those plain sentences, which we allege
in proof of our doctrine there be any One word that can afford them matter of
Cauil, they will be sure to take hold of it, and contend without all shame and
honesty, though the Meaning of the fathers be there in it self most clear and
evident. But who does not see this way of proceeding in Protestant * Ministers
to be most injurious to the holy fathers; seeing hereby they will presently
appear even to every ignorant person to contradit themselves, and so lose all
credit and authority: for he that is once discovered to say and un say the same
thing, can be esteemed no better then either a wilful Liar, or at least a
person most forgetful and inconstant, and so of no credit at all as a witness
of verity; for who can give credit to a man whom he finds to be full of
contradictions! And in very truth this is all that Protestant ministers aim
at, to bring men into a high contempt of the fathers, whitak de sacra scrip pa.
670. 676. 678. 690. D. Bear. D. Morton Lubbertus and alij.
when they instance and urge against them their own contradictions, saying as
whitaker does: Basil fights with himself; Damascen is contrary to himself;
I oppose Chrysostom against Chrysostom; Let us not attend what Cyprian said,
but let us examine him by his own law. For were it not evident to them that
the fathers do condemn their opinions, and patronize ours, they would never
endeavor so fowly to, blemish them by urging contradiction with themselves,
which, as I said a fore, the meanest writers though in triuiall matters do ever
scorn.

. 4.
THirdly a most effectual and sure means to know what any one of the ancient
fathers believed and thaugt in any particular matter of faith, is the testimony
of the Pastors and Doctors of the Church of the same age, and of the ages
immediately following: for these being nearest to these fathers and some of them
eyewitnesses of their practice, and Hearers of their doctrine, are best able
to tell us what religion such and such fathers of their times professed.
Wherefore, if the Church, for example in S. Augustine time, and immediately
after, did take no notice of any new doctrine delivered by him concerning the
real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, we are not to doubt but that S.
Austine did agree in this point of belief with the rest of the ancient fathers
and with the whole Church, not withstanding some obscure places which per
adventure May befound here and there in him, and which to us now, so far off,
May seem to carry agreat deal of difficulty for their right wnderstanting:
and therefore Protestants can take no advantage against us from any such hard
sayings of the fathers, which to the unlearned may seem to make against our
Catholic Doctrine, for though they seem to make against the general received
doctrine of the Church, yet we are to believe that it is but seemingly only,
and not really, if the Church took no notice at all of it: for had they been
then understood so by the Church, it is certain she would have taken notice of
it, and opposed it, as we see she did in the case of S. Cyprian about the
doctrine of rebaptization.

. 5.
FOurthly for the vnderstanting of the fathers, we are to observe that they do
often times in the pharse of scripture call the blessed Eucharist bread, and
the Chalice wine even after Consecration. 1. Because the Elements were bread
and wine before. 2. See the like manner of shepec. Io. 2.9. Matt. 11.15. Luc.
7.15. Genesis 9.19. Exodus 7 12. Concedo solere quae mutata ^u^t vocari de nomine
pristino. Camier l. 10. de Euch. c. 22. Joan. 6. v. 35. 48 51.
Because they reserve the outward forms of bread and wine, as the Angels gen
18. are called men because they appeared in humane shape. 3. Because it
contains wnder the shape of bread the true bread of life, Christ Jesus. The
Eucharist therefore may be sometime called bread by the fathers in one of these
senses without making any thing at all against our doctrine of the real
presence.

. 6.
IN like manner the fathers do in a true and Catholic sense call the Eucharist
a Sacrament, a sign a figure of Christ's body and a remembrance of his passion.
It is a Sacrament, that is, as. S. August. defines it, a visibile sign of
inuisibile grace which does inwardly refresh and feed our souls. The external
forms of bread and wine are a sign of Christ's true body and blood contained
by way of food under them. It is a figure and remembrance of Christ's death and
passion, but to infer from hence, as Protestant Ministers do, ergo Christ is
not there really present, is as idle as this, Herod made a supper in rembrance
of his birth day to the Chief of Gelilee; ergo he was not present at it. We
therefore say that Christ as being in a different manner in the Sacrament, is a
figure and type of himself as offered on the Cross for our Redemption. What
opposition Protestants here make against the truth of Christ's being present in
the Sacrament; the same did Apollinaris and Marcion Make against the truth of
our saviors Humanity; because, forsooth, the scriptures avouch him to be made
according to the similitudi^e, shape, and likeness of man: and the same did
other ancient heretics urge against his divinity, because S. Paul intitleth
him the image of God, the Caracter and figure of his fathers substance. And as
the fathers then replied to both those sorts of heretics, that Christ had the
likeness of a man, and was a true and perfect man; was the image of God, yet
true God; the figure of his fathers substance, and the substance it self: so
we say to these new Capharnaites the Eucharist is a commemoration, a sign, a
figure of Christ's body and also his true and natural body; and that not only
the outward forms, but the very body of Christ as under them without
extension, and in a manner impassible, is a sacrament, sign, figure and
remenbrance of his body as offered on the Cross: for though it be the same in
substance, yet not in show and appearance, nor endued with the same qualities
of extension, circumscription, passibility and the like. Wherefore these manner
of speekes rightly understood do no ways prejudice or exclude the truth of
Chtists being really present in the Eucharist under the forms of bread and
wine.

. 7.
LAstly we must observe that there are three sorts of eating Christ insinuated
by the fathers of the Primitive Church: One is Sacramentally only, as when evil
men receive the Sacrament unworthily. For these though they receive the very
Sacrament, and in it the true body and blood of Christ; yet do they not receive
the true spiritual effect and fruict thereof which is grace and nourishment of
their souls.

. 8.
ANother manner of eating Christ is spiritually only; for that without
Sacracramentall receiving, good men by faith and grace do communicate with
Christ and participate the fruit of his passion. In this sense S. Austin says,
creed and manducasti, believe and thou have eaten, which manner of speech in
the fathers has no relation at all to the Orall manducation of Christ in the
Eucharist. Wherefore when your Ministers do apply such like sayings of the
fathers, where they treat of this spiritual eating Christ the bread of life
by faith and belief only, to the eating of Christ by the Sacrament; they do
wrong the fathers in perverting their meaning, that so under the shadow of
their authority they may freely vent their profane and Heretical doctrine,
abusing thereby the fathers, as all Heretics ever have done the holy scriptures.

. 9.
THe third manner of eating Christ mentioned by the Fathers is both
Sacramentally and spiritually, as all good Christians do when with due
preparation and disposition they receive both the outward Sacrament, and the
inward grace and fruit of it. To which manner of eating Christ by faith in the
Sacrament the sathers do frequently exhort us, and for that end, to cleanse the
soul, prepare the heart etc.

And therefore they call it spiritual food, the bread of the mind, the proper
nourishment of the spirit, because indeed the spiritual repast, and refection
of the mind is the chief and most souueraigne effect of this divine Ba^quet.
Nevertheless it excludes not, as S. Cyril notheth, but presupposes the
corporal eating from which, 20. in Joan. cap. 13.
as from the fountain and sea of grace the spiritual is derived. Hence
Tertullian says the flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ, that the
soul may be fattened with God. ^^de Resu^rect. carn. ca. p.


. 10.
APplying these observations respectively to the places objected against us,
you will easily understand the true meaning of the ancient fathers, and find a
solid answer to all that your ministers do most cl^amourously, and most
impertinently urge against us. The first place where Austin says: That which
you see is bread etc. you will find answered 5. And therefore the argument
which Protestants urge from this notio^ of bread, and which fox relates as a
kilcow, tow it: Fox page 1258. col. 2. n. 80.
that which he took blessed; that which he blessed, he brake: that which he
brake he gave; but he took bread; ergo he gave bread; This argument, I say, is
no wiser then this: that which Good took out of Adams side, Genesis 2.
was a ribb: but what he took, that he brought and delivered to Adam for his
wife: ergo (...) delivered Him a ribb for his wife.

. 11.
TO the second place, what do thou prepare thy teeth and belly? believe and
thou have eaten: you have an answer. 8. for S. Austin speaks non there of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, nor of those who receive it: but of the incredulous
Jews who had now given an express commandment to lay hold on our Savior,
(for he expounds the 56. verse of S. John cap. 11.) and he exhorts them to
apprehend him by faith, that is to believe in him and receive him for the
Messiah and Savior.

. 12.
When S. Austin says he that feeds with the heart, not he that grindeth with
the teeth etc. He does not deny the latter, that is, Sacramental receiving
the true body and blood of our Savior; but only signifyes that not he that
grindeth with the teeth only, can partake of the fruit of the Sacrament; and
that he that feeds with the heart without Orall eating, may benefit himself
by it.

. 13.
IN like sort I answer to the third place objected out of S. Austin; for he
only denies the wicked to eat of the bread of our Lord etc. because they are
not incorporated in his mystical body, or else because they do it not
fruitfully to the benefit of their souls; Psalm. 1.5.
as David says: The wiked shall not rise in judgment, because they shall not
rise to salvation but to damnation. Otherwise S. Austin does in many places
grant that the wicked do truly eat the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
though, as S. Paul says, to their judgment.

. 14.
ALl the other places that are or may be alleged out of S. Austin or any
other ancient Father may in like manner be easily answered by applying some one
of the premitted observations to them, if the said places be faithfully and
fully, without deprauation, corruption, addition, substraction, and such like
Heretical frauds and deceipts alleged. Which precaution I add as a thing very
much to be taken notice of, in order to a right understanding of the fathers:
for as it has ever been the Custom of all Heretics to deprave and corrupt
both the scriptures and the fathers; so none have been ever more guilty of
this heighnous crime then your Protestant ministers; for I dare boldly avouch
that there is not any one of your English Protestant writers, that does not,
(when he comes to cite the fathers for their doctrine against us,) most
notoriously corrupt, and falsify their words and sayings. So that whatsoever
you find in their books cited as the saying for example, of S. Austin or any
other ancient father, in proof and confirmation of their doctrine against us;
you have as much reason as any formerly ever had in like case, to mistrust
their fidelity, for it is most certain that Protestant ministers, and our
English in particular, have in this point laid a side all shame and honesty, as
may be seen in Morton, Usher and others, by any man that is so much a
scholar, as to be able to understand the fathers language, and will but take
the pains to confer the Cotations with their originals, for to any such
indifferent man it will manifestly appear that these Ministers do fraudulently
use the authorities of the ancient fathers merely to help a bad cause as well
as their wits Will serve the^, and not that they do verily believe the fathers
to be on their side against us, for this, if they be scholars and understand
what they read, they cannot but see to be most false; as I shall now
demonstrate by giving you the sense. Not only of S. Austin, but of all orthodox
Antiquity, beginning from S. Gregory the great, and so through all ages up to
the Apostles.

NOTE.
Here in the first paper which I made ready in answer to your objections, I
began with the testimony of S. Gregory: But because your minister did with much
confidence and boldness avouch that our Catholic Doctrine of the real
presence and of Transubstantiation was never received nor known in the Church
before the Council of Lateran; that you may clearly see how manifest an
untruth this is, I will begin from the age immediately before the Council of
Lateran, and show by the irrefragable testimonies of the writers of that, and
other ages between the Leteran Council and S. Gregory, that our doctrine of
transubstantiation has been ever believed and taught by the Pastors and
Doctors of the Church, as a divine revealed verity conveyed unto us through all
ages by full Tradition from Christ our Savior and his blessed Apostles. And
that I may proceed with more perspicuity therein, and demonstrate the truth
more conuincingly. I will first set down what the Church does propose by the
Council of Trent unto all Christians to be believed concerning it.

. 15.
THat then which the Church does believe and teach, concerning
Transubstantiation, the Council of Trent does deliver as follows: Because
Christ our Redeemour has said, that that was truly his body, which he offered
under the shape of bread; sess. 13. c. 4.
therefore it has been always believed in the Church of God, and the same
this holy Synod does now again declare that by consecration of the bread and
of the wine there is made a Conversion of the whole substance of the bread into
the substance of the body of Christ our Lord, and of the whole substance of the
wine into the substance of his blood; which Conversion is fitly and properly
called Transubstantiation by the Catholic Church. The Council does here
deliver three things. The first is the doctrine itself which the Council, (the
teaching part of the Church,) does here expound declaring the meaning of her
belief to be that in the Eucharist there is made a Conversion of the substance
of bread into the body of our Lord, and of the substance of the wine into his
blood, the Accidents of bread and wine still remaining in their proper nature,
and form, and figure as before. This is her doctrine, this the belief which
she does profess and teach, a substantial Conversion of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of our Lord, the outward forms of bread and wine still
remaining as before.

. 16.
THe second thing, which the Council does declare is, that the said Conversion
is fitly and properly called Transubstantiation by the Catholic Church. And
what man in his wits can make any doubt of this, that such a Conversion is
fitly and properly called Transubstantiation? Does not every schoo^e boy know
that Transubstantiation, according to the Etymology and proper interpretation
of the word, Beza de Coen. cout. westph. vol. 1. tract. 6. Geneu. 1582.
Hocquidem saepe d^ximus quodnu^c quoque repetam retineri non posse (...) in his
Christi verbis, Hoc est corpus meum quin Transubstantiatio Papistica statuatur.
Morton inst. sacr l. 2. c. 1. page 91.
signifyes a Conversion, a Transmutation, a Change, a Passing of One substance
into another substance; And if it be not so, why does Beza with sundry others
of his School, say that the property of speech in these words of Christ, this
is my body, cannot be retained, but the Papisticall Transubstantiation must be
established? Why does Morton the pretended Bishop of Durham say to us
Catholics: If the words (this my body,) be certainly true in a proper and
litterall sense, then we are to yield unto you (Papists) the whole cause; to
wit, the doctrine of Transubstantiation, corporeal and material presence,
Propitiatory sacrifice, proper adoration, and the like? Wherefore supposing
there be in the Eucharist a Conversion made of the bread and wine into the body
and blood of our Savior, this Conversion according to your own Divines may be
fitly and properly called Transubstantiation, seeing the words of our Savior,
according to these men, have no other proper and litterall signification. Which
is all the Church does here declare against our new Capharnaites, who
according to the Custom of all Heretics, deride and Cavil at the language of
the Church, when they are not able to say any thing against the truth of her
doctrine. Iud. Epist. v. 10.
But against these men who as S. Jude says, blaspheme what things soever they
are ignorant off; you may take notice first that the doctrine being supposed,
the word is so proper to express the same, that according to your own
greatest scholars, it cannot be avoided. Secondly, that all the venim they
spit against the use of this word not heard of in the Church before the Council
of Lateran, is the very same which other ancient Heretics did womit out
against these sacred words, Trinity, Consubstantiall, hypostasis, Person and
the like, which are now received by the Catholic Church to express more
particularly the Christian doctrine in those particular points which Heretics
did then begin to oppose. And so all they object from the not use of the word
in former times, proves only this, (which is a Confirmation of our doctrine,)
that before the time of Berengarius, [the first that moved open war against
the B. Eucharist,) the doctrine of transubstantiation had been believed and
taught in the Church as a divine revealed thruth for so many ages without
contradiction, no Heretikall that time lifting up his Head to hiss against it.

The third thing which the Council of Trent does declare and testify, is, that
this doctrine of Transubstantiation is Ancient and orthodoxall, that is, is the
same which the Pastors and Doctors of the Church have with one accord beleueed
and taught as an Apostolical Tradition, as a doctrine of faith which the
Apostles received from our blessed Savior delivered to their successors to be
by them conuayed down all along to Posterity. The proof of this truth is the
subject of all that here follows, and that I may more fully and clearly
demonstrate it I make this argument.

. 17.
IF the fathers of all ages from the Council of Lateran up to the Apostles, did
believe and teach that in the Eucharist the bread and wine is by consecration
converted changed, transmuted, transelemented, transmade into the body and
blood of Christ then the said fathers did believe and teach the same doctrine
of Transubstantiation which the now Roman Church does believe and teach.

But the fathers of all ages from the Lateran Council up to the Apostles did
believe and teach that in the Eucharist the bread and wine is by consecration
converted, changed, Transelemented, Transmuted, Transmade into the body and
blood of Christ.

Therefore the fathers of all ages from the Council of Lateran up to the
Apostles did- believe and teach the same doctrine of Transubstantiation which
the now Roman Church does believe and teach, and consequently the said doctrine
is ancient and Orthodoxall.

The argument is inform and therefore the premises being granted, the
consequence cannot be denied without manifest contradiction.

The mayor or first proposition is evident from the Council of Tre^t above
cited, where the Council does declare the meaning of the Church, and what she
does believe under the notion of Transubstantiation, to wit, that under the
outward forms of bread and wine there is by consecration made a Conversion of
the bread and wine into the body and blood of our Savior. Therefore if the
said fathers did believe and teach that in the Eucharist there is made by the
powerof Consecration such a substantial Conversion, they did believe and teach
the now Catholic Roman doctrine.

Werefore the whole difficulty of the argument does consist in the assumption
or Minor proposition affirming the fathers of all ages to have believed and
thaught the foresaid Conversion of the Eucharisticall bread and wine into the
body and blood of our Savior, which is, as the Council does declare, the
express doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Now this I shall demonstrate by the cleerest testimonies of the learned of
every age bearing witness thereof, as Interpreters of the scriptures; as
Doctors of the Church; and as witnesses of the Common belief of the Christian
world in the times wherein they lived.

In the 12. Age.. 18. Euthymius in Cap. 26. Matt.
Our Savior did not say, These are the signs of my body and of my blood; but
these are my body and my blood: wherefore we are not to regard the nature of
the things that are proposed, but to their virtue: for as he supernaturally
Deifyed, [if I may so speak,] the flesh which he assumed; so he ineffably
changes those things into his life-giuing body, and into his most precious
blood.

In the 11. Age.. 19. Theophylactus Archbishop of Bulgary in cap. 6. Ioannis.
THE bread which in the mysteries is not a kind of figure only of the flesh of
our Lord, but it is the flesh it self: for he did not say, the bread which I
will give is the figure of my flesh; but it is my flesh. For the bread by the
Mystical Benediction and Coming of the H. ghost (...) is transmade into the
flesh of our Lord -- But how does it not appear flesh unto us, but bread? that
we do noth abhor from eating it: for had it appeared flesh, we had nor been
so well disposed to receive it: but now our Lord condescending to our
infirmity, our mystical food appears unto us like those we are accustomed
unto. The like he says in cap. 26. Matt. and in cap. 14. Marc. where
expounding the words of institution, he says the bread is by ineffable
operation transmade, Transelemented into the body, into the powerful and life
giving flesh of our Lord (...).

. 20.
S. Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbery, who was the greatest scholar of his
age, and flourished above 150. years before the Lateran Council: l. de
Eucharist: contra Bereng. All asmany as rejoice to be called Christians, do
glory that in this Sacrament they receive the true body and true blood of
Christ, both taken of the Virgin-Aske all that have knowledge of the Latin or
our Language, demand of the Grecque, Armenian, or other Christians of what
Nation soever, and they do confess, all, with One mouth that this is their
faith -- The Church spread over all the world does confess that bread and wine
are put upon the Altar to be consecrated: but they be in time of consecration
after an incomprehensible and ineffable manner Changed into the substance of
flesh and blood. Howbeit it does not deny bread, but rather confirm it, but
that bread which came from heaven and gives life unto the world; that bread
which Ambrose and Austin in the same words call (...) that is,
supersubstantiall. We believe therefore that the earthly substances which are
divinely sanctified by Priestly ministry, be ineffably, incomprehensibly,
wonderfully, [the heavenly power working) Converted into the essence, of our
Lords body, the species or external form of the things and certain other
qualities being reserved; least men perceiving crude and bloody things should
have horror; and that the faithful might receive a more ample reward of their
belief; our Lords body it self notwithstanding existing immortal,
incorrupted, entire, incontaminate and without hurt in heaven at the right hard
of the father. So that it may be truly said, that we do receive the body which
was taken of the Virgin, the same, and not the same: the same verily according
to the Essence, and property, and virtue of the true nature; but not the same,
if you regard the species or outward forms, and other [Accidents] before
mentioned of bread and wine. Thus S. Lanfranck against Berengarius the first
Master of the Sacramentarian heresy.

. 21.
NOw, Madame, I beseech you, before you go any further, to compare the doctrine
of the Council of Trent above related. 15. with that which this ancient father
and glory of our English Nation delivers as the faith of all nations then
Christian; and see what difference you can find between them; and then
consider with your self whether you have not all the reason in the world to
look upon this minister as a man that deserves no credit in matters of faith
and Religion; since he dares with such a brazen forehead avouch the doctrine of
Transubstantiation never to have been known nor heard off in the Church
before the Council of Lateran; seeing this father above 150. years before the
Council reports it, in as clear terms as the Council of Trent, to have been
the faith of all Christian Nations; which truth will be much more confirmed,
and your ministers bold assertion confuted by the testimonies of worlds of
fathers yet more ancient.

In the 10. Age.. 22. S. Fulbertus Carnotensis Bishop, Epist. ad Adeodatum.
ITs is not lawful to doubt but that, at whose beck all things did presently
subsist out of nothing, if by the like power in the spiritual Sacraments The
earthly matter of bread and wine transcending the nature and merit of their
kind is changed into the substance of Christ; Commutetur
seeing he says; This is my body, this is my blood.

This father flourished above 200. years before the Council of Latteran, and he
does here acknowledge a substantial change, a change of One substance, into
another substance and says it was not then lawful to doubt of it nefas est
dubitare.

In the 9. Age.. 23. Paschasius Rathertus Abbot of Corby and one of the
learned of this Age, l. de Corp. and sang. Domini.
THe will of God is so efficacious and Omnipotent, that if he will a thing, it
is done. Wherefore let no man be trobled about the body and blood of Christ,
that in the mysteries the ^re is true flesh and true blood; since he would have
it so, who has created it: for he has done all that he would in heaven and in
^earth. And, Because he would, though here be the figure of bread and wine;
they are to be believed to be no other thing (according to the interiour] after
co^secratio^, but the body and blood of Christ. Hence truth it self unto the
disciples says. This is my flesh for the life of the world. And that I may
speak a thing yet more wonderful; it is no other flesh the^ that which was
borne of Mary, and suffered on the Cross, and rose out of the grave. It is I
say, the self same; and therefore it is the flesh of Christ, which is even to
this day offered for the life of the world.

And expounding the words of Institution he says: Catholics all bear witness
that the Eucharist is Christ's own flesh and blood. And though out of ignorance
some err; yet there is none as yet, who does openly contradict what the whole
world believes and confesses. And again: He (Christ) did not say thus when
he brake and gave the bread to them: This is, or in this mystery is a certain
virtue or figure of my body; but he says without fiction, This is my body: and
therefore it is This which he said; not that which every one faigneth.

. 24.
NOw, Madame, let us ask your Doctor who would feign seem learned in the
Records of Antiquity, whether the Protestant doctrine does agree with that
which this ancient father says, all Catholics and the whole world then
believed and professed? do Protestants now believe that in the mysteries there
is true flesh, and true blood? the same and no other but that which was borne
of Mary etc? That there is no other thing upon the Altar after Consecration but
the body and blood of Christ? That the weary self same flesh which rose out of
the grave, is even to this very day offered on the Altar for the life of the
world? Are not Protestants rather of the religion of those few who, this
learned father says, did then err out of ignorance, but did not, as
Protestants now do, oppenly contradict what the whole Christian world has for
so- many ages believed and professed?

In the 8. Age.. 25. S. John Damascen l. 4. de fide orthodoxa cap. 14.
AS Bread and wine and water be by the force of nature changed into the body
and blood of him that eats and drincketh them, and are made an other body
distinct from the former: so the bread and wine, and water proposed, are by
invocation and the coming of the H. Ghost in a miraculous manner (...)
Transmade into the body and blood of Christ. Neither are the (consecrated)
bread and wine the figure of Christ's body, but (...) the very deifyed body it
self of our Lord. For he did not say, this is the figure of my body: but my
body nor this is the sign of my blood, but this is my blood.

The Council of Trent does not deliver in plainer words the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, then this learned father has done above 900. years ago.
Where is then Doctor Cozens his deep knowledge in Antiquity? He must either
disprove this to be the saying of S. John Damascen, or confess his own want
either of knowledge, or of honesty or of both. And will you, madame, put the
eternal salvation of your soul into the hands of such a man?

In the 7. Age.. 26. Venerable Bede in cap. 10. Prior: ad Cor. ex Augustino
sermon. de Neoph.
IN the bread you shall receive the very thing which did hang upon the Cross;
and in the cupp you shall receive that which was powered out of the side of
Christ.

If this be true then the very thing which did hang upon the Cross is under
the outward form of bread; and in the Cup there is the true blood of Christ
which does imply the doctrine of Transubstantiation.

In the 6. Age.. 27. S. Gregory the great Dialog. 4. cap. 58.
HIs blood is poured into the Mouths of the faithful. Again: This Host does
singularly preserve the soul from eternal damnation: which host does repair
unto us by mystery the death of the only begotten, who rising from the dead now
dies not, yet living in himself immortally, and incorruptibily he is again
sacrificed for us in this mystery of the holy oblation.

. 28. S. Remigius in cap. 10. Prior: ad Cor.
THE flesh which the word of God the father assumed in the womb of the Virgin
and in the unity of his person, and the bread which is consecrated in the
Church are One body: for as that flesh is the body of Christ; so this bread
Transit passes into the body of Christ; neither are they two bodies, but one
body. Again: The bread which we break on the Altar is it not the
participation of the body of our Lord? verily it is consecrated and blessed by
the Priests and by the H. Ghost and then it is broken: when as now though it
seem bread, it is in verity the body of Christ.

Here we see the doctrine of Transubstantiation was believed and taught by the
fathers of this age. S. Remigius was a famous Bishop that flourished in the very
beginning of this Century. And Although English ministers may be as ignorant of
him, as Doctor Cozens was of S. Gaudentius: yet he is famously known for a
great scholar and an Apostolical man here in France, therefore let the
Doctor take heed that he use him more ciuilly then he did S. Gaudentius, and
east him not out of the number of the ancient Orthodox fathers among the
Heretics of those times.

In the 5. Age.. 29. S. Leo the great sermon. 9. de ieiun. Alens. 7.
YOU ought to Commumunicate of the Holy Table, that you doubt nothing at all of
the truth of the body and blood of Christ: for that is received with the mouth,
which by faith is believed.

. 30. S. Cyril Patriark of Alex. ad Calosyr.
THat we should not feel horror to see flesh and blood on the sacred Altar,
God condescending to our frailty flows into the things offered the Power of
life Converting them into the verity of his own flesh to the end that the body
of life may be found as a quickening seed in us.

. 31. The Council of Ephesians.
WE Celebrate in the Church the Holy, S. Cyril. Declar. Anathom 11 in Council.
Ephesians.
Quiekning and unbloody sacrifice. believing not that that which is set before
us, (to wit the Eucharist) is the body of some common man like us, and his
blood; but we receive it rather as the life-giuing words own flesh and blood
for common flesh cannot give life.

, 32. Theodoret Dialog. 2.
THe mystical signs after Consecration depart not from their nature, (...)
but abide still in the figure and form of their former substance, and may be
seen and touched as before. But are understood, (that is perceived by the
understanding) to be that which They are made [to wit, by consecration,) and
are believed, and adored, as being that which they are believed to be.

Here Theodoret does teach, 1. that the mystical, signs, [the outward forms
of bread and wine,] after consecration do not recede from their nature: but
remain still in the figure and form of their former substance, (to wit, of
bread and wine) 2. (...).
That there is a Change made, by the invocation of the Priest; and 3. such a
Change as brings in adoration of the things before us under the exterior
signs: before Consecration there are other things, objects of faith, things to
be adored, things which are believed and adored as being the very things which
they are believed to be; (...).
which therefore is not bread and wine but the body and blood of our Lord. And
this was the Custom of the Church in Theodorets days (...) to adore in the
Sacrament the flesh and body of Christ. So that, laying aside all strayned and
violent constructions which Protestants force upon his words, Theodoret is
plain for the doctrine of Transubstantiation,

. 33. S. Austine. l. contra Aduers. leg. and Proph. cap. 9.
WE receive mith faitfull heart and mouth the Mediator of God and man Christ
Jesus, giving us his flesh to eat and blood to drink, though it seem more
horrible to eat man's fle^h, then to slay: and to drink man's blood, then to
shed it. Here we have by the testimony of S. Austine, that the Church in his
time, and he too, did believe and practice the eating with the mouth, a man's
body a whole man, God and man, as the now Roman Church does believe and
practice, though to carnal men, not acquainted with divine mysteries, it
seemed horrible and inhumane, as it does now to our new Capharnaites, that is,
mis believing Protestants.

. 34. Again Epist. 162.
OUR Lord does patiently sustain Judas, a Devil, a thief, his betrayer: he
permits him to receive among the innocent disciples, that which the
faithful do know to be the price of our redemption. Now do the faithful know,
do they believe bakers bread to be the price of our redemption? yet S. Austine
says Judas received that which the faithful believe to be the price of our
redemption.

Again: His holy mother, as he relates l. 9. Confess. cap. 13. departing out
of this world, desired memory to be made of her at the Altar, from whence she
knew the holy sacrifice to be dispensed wherewith the indightment against us
was blotted out. She then believed that on the Altar was offered the
life-giuing body, and blood of our Lord.

. 35. S. Chrysostom Homil. de Ench.
AS Wax ioigned with fire is likened unto it, so as nothing of the substance of
it remains, nothing abounds, so here conceive the mysteries to be consumed
with the substance of the body of our Savior. Again Homil 83, in Matt. The
things set before us, are not the works of humane power, w^ hold but the place
of ministers, it is he [Christ] who does Sanctify and Change these thing. And
Homil. 24. Prior. ad Cor. That which is in the Chalice, is that which issued
from our Saviors side. This body the sages adored in the Crib: thou see it
not in the Crib, but on the Altar-Thou do not see it only, but also do
thouch it, thou do not touch it only, but also do eat it -- Think Wit
thy self what honor is done unto thee, Homil. 60. ad Popul. Antioch
and what a table thou art made partaker off: We are united unto, and fed with
that very thing, at which the Angels, when they behold it, do tremble.

In the 4. Age.. 36. S. Gaudentius Bishop of Brixia tract. 2.
THE Lord and Creator of creatures that of earth made bread, again (because he
can does it, and has promised to do it,) of bread makes his own body: and he
that of water made wine, now of wine, has made his own blood.

. 37. S. Ambrose de myster. init. cap. 9.
HOW many examples do we use to prove that the thing is not that which nature
made, but that which the blessing has consecrated; and that the power of
Consecration is greater then the power of nature: for by Consecration the weary
nature it self is changed. Thou have learned therefore that of bread is made
the body of Christ, and that wine and water is put into the Chalice, but by the
Consecration of the heavenly word it is made blood. And having alleged many
examples, as of Moses his rod change into a serpent, wat^er into wine he goes
on saying. Now if human benediction prevailed so far as to Change and convert
nature, what say we of the divine Consecration, where the very words of our
Savior are operative and do work? for this Sacrament, which thou receiuest,
is made by the word of Christ. If the word of Elias prevailed so far, as to
bring down fire from heaven; shall not the word of Christ prevail so far as
to Change the species or nature of the Elements? Of the works of the whole
word thou have read, that he said the word and they were made; he commanded,
and they were created: the word of Christ then which was able to make of
nothing that which was not, cannot he change the things that have being into
that which they were not? it is not a less matter to give new natures, then
t^o change them. Thus S. Ambrose: by all which it is clear that he speaks not
here of an accidental Moral change in use and office, not of an external
deputation of the bread and wine (corporal food) to signify spiritual
nourishment; butt of a Physical change; of a change in nature, of such a
change as none but omnipotent power of the Creator can make in his Creatures.

. 38. S. Gregory Nyssen. Orat. Cathec. cap. 37. (...) etc. ic transmade into
the body. (...).

WE do rightly and with good reason believe that the bread being sanctified by
Gods word, is changed into the body of God the word. Christ through the
dispensation of his grace enters by his flesh into all the faithful, and
mingleth himself with their bodies which have their consistence from bread and
wine, to the end that man being united to that which is immortal, may attain
to be made partaker of incorruption. And these things he bestows
transelementing by the virtue of his benediction the nature of the things that
are seen into it. Now to change bread into the body of Christ, to tra^selement
the nature of bread into the flesh of Christ really and substantially under the
remaining signs, and outward form of bread; is to Change and convert the
Elements of bread, that is, the primordiall and fundamental entities (the
matter and the form) whereof the nature of bread is compounded, and does
consist, into the body, and flesh of our Savior; which is the express
doctrine of Transubstantiation.

. 39. S. Cyril of Hierus^lem Cathec. 4.
HE (our Savior) changed once water into wine; and is he not worthy to be
believed of us that he has changed wine into blood; Cathec 1. The bread and
wine of the Eucharist before the sacred invocation of the adored Trinity were
simple bread and wine; but the invocation being once done, the bread indeed is
made the flesh of Christ, and the wine his blood. And Cathec. 4. with assurance
let us receive the body and blood of Christ; for in the form of bread the body
is given to thee, and in the form of wine the blood; knowing and believing
most assuredly, that that which appears bread is not bread though it seem so
to the taste, but it is the body of Christ; and that which appears wine is not
wine, as the taste does judge it to be; but the blood of Christ. Conceive it not
as bare bread and bare wine, for it is the holy body and blood of Christ: for
though the sense does suggest this unto thee; yet let faith confirm thee that
thou judge not according to the taste but rather take it as of faith most
certain without doubting in the least degree, that the body and blood is given
thee. Does the Council of Ttent it self speak plainer, and deliver in cleerer
words the doctrine of Transubstantiation, then the fathers of this age have
done almost 1300 years ago? do they not acknowledge a substantial Conversion
of the bread and Wine into the body and blood of our Lord? do they not
acknowledge it to be an object of faith; a great and unsearchable mystery; a
work wrought by the omnipotent Power and word of God? How inexcusable are then
your ministers who would make you believe the doctrine of Transubstantiation to
be no ancienter then the Council of Latteran.

In the 3. Age.. 40. The Author of the sermon. de Coena Domini.
(Which Calvin and Peter Mattyr acknowledge and cite for S. Cyprians) That
bread which our Lord gave unto his Disciples, being changed not in shape, but
in nature is by the omnipotency of the word made flesh: and as in the person of
Christ the Humanity did appear and the Divinity lay hid; so [heere] a Divine
essence does unspeakably pour it self into a visible Sacrament. Here this
Author does teach that as in Christ some thing was visible, something
invisible; so here in the Sacrament: the species are visible, the Deifyed
flesh is invisible; the nature of bread is changed by Gods omnipotence into
flesh and therefore is no more, here in the Sacrament.

. 41. Origin. Homil. 5. in Diverse. Lec. Eu.
When thou receiuest the incorruptible banquet, when thou enioyest the bread
and cup of life, and eatest and drinkest the body and blood of our Lord, then
our Lord enters under thy roof. Do thou therefore humbling thy self imitate
the Centurion, and say: Lord I am not worthy thou should enter under my roof
etc. for where he enters unworthily, there he enters to judgment to the
receiver. Here according to Origin we have that in the Eucharist there is one
that may be spoken unto, and called Lord; and that this Lord enters into those
also that receive him unworthily; into the wicked, but not into their souls,
therefore into their bodies, at the mouth, into that house which we carry about
us.

. 41. Tertullian. l. 4. cont. Marc, cap. 40.
THE bread taken and distributed to his Disciples he made it his body saying
This is my body. In these few words Tertullian delivers three things. First,
the r^all presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist. 2. The Change of one
substance into another substance, to wit of the bread into the body of Christ.
3. the Power and efficacy of his words fecit dicendo Hoc est corpus meum. He
made it his body saying this is my body.

In the 2. Age.. 42. S. Irenaeus l. 5. c. 32.
HE (Christ) took bread which is of the Creature, and gave tanckes saying. Thi^
is my body: and likewise he confessed the Chalice which is of the creature to
be his blood: and taught the new oblotion of the new Testament, which the
Church receiving from the Apostles does offer to God in all the world.

Again l. 4. cap. 34. How can they (those Heretics who denied our Savior to
be true God, and yet believed the Eucharist) be assured that the bread in which
tankes is given (that is the consecrated bread) is the body and blood of their
Lord, and the Chalice his blood, if they do not acknowledge him to be the son
of the maker of the world by whom wod does fructisy, fountains flow, the earth
brings forth grass etc.

And cap. 37. How if our Lord be the son (not of God,) but of another father,
did he rightly taking bread of the condition of the Creature which is according
to us, confess it to be his body? and how has he confirmed the mixture of
Chalice to be his blood?

Here S. Irenaeus does prove and establish the article of out Saviors being
the son of God, and true God, by the omnipotent power he does exercise in the
Eucharist by making the bread and the wine his body and blood for his
Confessing the bread to be his body, his Confirming the wine to be his blood,
was his pronouncing of the form of Consecration over them saying. This is my
body, This is my blood, which words were efficacious and practick, such as
these were fiat lux, let light be made; and by the omnipotence of his power he
makes them good; and therefore S. Irenaeus by them proves him to be the son
of God and true God, because they are such a confession such a confirmation, as
requires omnipot^nce in the speaker to make them good. And it is clear that S.
Iren^us does here supoose it to be the general received doctrine of faith,
that Christ is truly and really in the Eucharist and from this undoubted
article of faith and work of omnipotency believed to be in it, he proves him to
be God.

And l. 5. c. 1. Our savior confessed that the Chalice of the Eucharist was
(...) his proper blood, and affirmed that the bread was (...) his proper body.

Again l. 4. c. 34. The bread receiving the invocation of God (Consecration)
is no more common bread, but Eucharist (that is bread made heeuenly and
incorruptible by the invocation) consisting of two things, the earthly and the
heavenly, that is the species, and the Deifyed body of Christ.

. 43. S Justin Martyr Apolog: 2.
Which as himself does there testify was written Anno Domini 150. Non vt
communem panem u^ que communem p^tum haec summus, sed que madmodum per verbum
Dei incarnatus Jesus Christus saluator noster and carnem and sanguinem pro
salute nostra habuir; sic etiam per preces verbi Dei ab ipso Eucharistiam
factam cibum ex quo sanguis and carnes nostra aluztur, illius incarnati Jesus
and carnem and sanguinem esse edocti sumus.
We do not take these things as common bread and common drink, but as by Gods
word Jesus Christ our Savior incarnate had flesh and blood for our salvation;
so we are also taught that the food whence our blood and flesh by mutation be
nourished, being by the prayers of the word of God, by him made Eucharist,
(that is consecrated,) is the flesh and blood of the same Jesus incarnate.

Here S. Justin does not say, the blessed Sacrament is earthly bread, (such as
our fresh is nourished withal;) but that such food as our flesh is nourished
withal, being (...) consecrated and made Eucharist, is now after consecration
the flesh and blood of Christ; and that this was the belief of the Church in
those primitive times, which were the very next succceding the Apostles.

. 44. S. Ignatius the Disciple of S. John the Apostle: apud Theodoretum Dialog:
3.
THEY (the simonians and other old Heretics who denied our savior to have true
humane nature,) admit not Eucharist and oblations, because they do not confess
the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior which suffered for our firmes.

Here this holy father says those Heretics (who denied our savior to have
true humane nature,) denied the Eucharist, least by confessing the Eucharist,
which is the flesh of Christ, they should be enforced to grant that Christ had
true human flesh.

The Doctor cannot question this authority of S. Ignatius, being Theodoret,
upon whom he relyes, cites it: Besides, The Epistles of S. Ignatius, and this
ad Smyrnenses in particular, are cited by Eusebius, S. Athanasius, S. Hierom,
and Theodoret, who where nearer to those times, and therefore had better means
to know the truth in this particular, then we that are so many ages since, and
know nothing of those times, but by their means who succeed them immediately.
And these fathers are for these respects, and sundry others, of incomparably
greater authority, then all the Protestant ministers that ever were putt all
together; though we should suppose them to have some moral honesty and were
not such forgers of lies as they do prove themselves every where in their
writings.

. 45. S. Denis the Areopagite who was S. Paul's Disciple de Eccles. Hier. c. 3.
O Most divine and holy sacrifice open those mystical and signifying vailes,
wherewith thou art covered. Show thy self clearly unto us, and replenish our
spiritual eyes with thy singular and revealed brightness. To address such an
invocation to the Sacrament would be foolish and impious, if it were only
Bakers bread, and not heavenly, divine and living bread in it: for he does
invoke the Sacrament it self and does ask of it those things, which can
only be demanded of God. Therefore he believed that Christ himself God and man
was truly contained in the Sacrament.

The Doctor will peradventure run here to the old shift, and deny the
authority of this Book: but, as I said even now of S. Ignatius his epistle, so
I say here of this Book, and avouch that the authority of S. Gregory the
great, of S. Martin Pope and Martyr in Concilio Romano of Agatho Pope in his
Epistle to the Emperor Constantine the fourth, of Pope Nicolas the first in
his Epistle to Michael the Emperor, of the 6. General Council Art. 4. and of
the 7. General Council Art. 2. of S. Maximus, of S. Thomas and others is so
far above the authority of all Protestant Divines and Churches that ever
were, that these are to be by all wise men despised and contemned as the scorn
of the world for opposing so great an authority auoucling S. Denis the
Aropagite to be author thereof,

. 46.
HITHERTO we are come through all ages from the Concel of Latteran up to the
Apostles, showing the doctrine of Transubstantiation to have been believed and
taught by the Pastors and Doctors of the Church of God all along as a doctrine
of faith every where received and practiced by the Church: from whence by the
received Rule of S. Augustine it does immediately follow that for so much as
the original or beginning of this doctrine, [such is the Antiquity thereof,]
cannot be found, it is to be supposed it has its Original from the Apostles
themselves, which Rule, says D. Whiteguift the pretended Bishop of Canterbery,
Vviteguift Defen. page 351.
is of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Swinglius, Calvin and
Gualter and surely, says he, I think no learned man does dissent from them.
But that we may more fully demonstrate this truth and leave no age out, and
add to what we said the Apostolical credit together with the supreme and
souueraigne authority of Gods own word who is infinite truth, and therefore can
neither deceive others, nor be himself deceived; I will bring them in as
witnesses of the first age, who were the first masters of Christianity and
founders of the Church.

In the 1. Age.. 47. S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.23.
BRETHREN, I received of our Lord, that which also I have delivered unto you
that our Lord Jesus, the night wherein he was b^ be trayed, took bread: and
giving thanks brake, and said: Take ye, and eat, this is my body which shall
be delivered for you etc. The very same words and fact of our Savior are
recorded by S. Matthew 26. v. 26. by S. Mark 14. v. 22. and by S. Luck 22. v.
19. Our dear Lord had long before promised his Disciples to leave unto them
this most rich pleadge of his eternal love, saying; John. 6.51.
The bread which I (the some of God, your Lord and master, and Redeemer of
mankind,) will give you, (to be your food unto eternal life, and which shall
remain in you as a quickening and life-giuing seed for ever) is, (not that
heavenly bread made by the hands of Angels, but it is a food incomparably more
excellent, it is that which the Angels themselves do continually feed on and
are never satiated with looking and feeding on it, it is my flesh (which I
shall give) for the life (and salvation] of the world; and unless you eat
(this flesh of mine) the flesh of the son of man you shall not have life in
you: but he that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood, has (by right of my
promise, which never shall fail and therefore is as sure as present
possession) life everlasting; for I will most assuredly raise him (that shall
eat my flesh worthily) to life everlasting in the last day. For my flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: why? because He that eats my
flesh and drincketh my blood, abides in me and I in him. This was the promise
our dear Lord made unto his Disciples, and he being goodness and truth it
self, was as good as his word: and, as the Apostle and the Evangelists relate
in the places above cited, being now to leave the world and to make his last
will and testament He took bread into his sacred and venerable hands, and
gining tankes blessed it, and brake it and gave it to them saying: Take ye and
eat; for (...) This is my own very body, (...), that very body which is
given, delivered, broken, crucified for you; (...) This is my own blood, this
is the cup, or drink which is shed (...) for you, for many unto remission of
sins, This is my blood of the new Testament, This is the Cup the new
Testament in my blood which shall be shed for you, for many unto remission of
sins.

. 48.
BY these words it is manifest our Savior speaks of his own true body and
blood; of that body which was given, broken, sacrificed crucified for us, of
that blood which was shed for us: for many, for the whole world unto remission
of sins. The words are so cleeer on our side, for Transubstantiation, that,
as you have heard Beza Morton and other of the Protestant school confess,
they cannot be understood (...) in their proper and litterall sense, according
to the property of the words, but the Papisticall Transubstantiation must be
established; and Protestants must yield unto us Papists the whole cause, to wit
of Transubstantiation, adoration of the Sacrament and the like: So that our
Catholic Doctrine of Transubstantion is confessedly as ancient as the Gospel
it self, if the words of truth be true in a proper and l^tter sense; and will
any Christian say the words of our Savior be not true in the sense he spoke
them?

. 49.
HERE now Madame I desire you to make a stand, and consider with your self 1.
Wheter there can be any thing more in reason required for to establish the
verity of any doctrine of faith, then to hear Christ our Savior the Oracle
and fountain of truth delivering it in words that have but one proper and
litterall sense, and that have been all along understood and interpreted by
the Pastors and Doctors of the Church according to that one proper littera^
sense; yea and, if the greatest Divines of your own side may be believed, must
be so understood? 2. To consider wheter this doctrine of Transubstantiation be
not de facto such? The first part, to wit that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is delivered by our Savior in words so plain that they
cannot be understood in their proper and litterall sense, but the whole cause
will be ours, is the free confession^, as I have showed, of your Divines. The
second part, to wit, that the Pastors and Doctors of Gods Church in all ages
have understood and expounded thE words of institution for Transubstantiation,
and according to the proper and litteral sense of the words (besides their
testimonies which I have alleged in every age, and which do evidently
demo^strate their faith to have been the same with ours) your own men do
freely acknowledge it, saying universally (...) of the whole sum of our
religion: Duditius apud Bezam epist. 1. Adamus Francisci Marg. Theolo. p. 256.
Antonius de Adamo anatom of the mass p. 136. Bucer. scripta cruditorum aliquot
virorum de Caena Domini page 37. and see hospinian p. 1. page 292. Bucan. lot.
Came. p. 714. l. 10. de Euch. c. 2. Quaritur quid fit corpus meum, sanguis meus?
nos condide. and libe^e and libenter respondaemus (...) interpretandum In
cellat men sal cap. d^ Patribus Eccles.
If that be the truth which the Fathers have professed with mutual consent, it
is altogether on the Papists side. Transsubstantiation entered early into the
Church. We have not yet hitherto been able to know when this opinion of the
Real and Bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin. The fathers words
and sayings, are with the Papists, they are serviceable to Antichrist, and
over much varying from the Scriptures. The third, to wit, that our Saviors
words, This is my body must be understood according to their proper and
litterall sense; (besides the authority of the Church who is the best mistress
of faith and whom by Gods command we are to hear and obey), it is the express
doctrine of the greatest scholars that ever were in the Protestant school: It
is asked, says Cammierus what is, (or what signifies) these words, my body, my
blood? I answer, says he, ingenuously, freely, and willingly, that they must
be understood according to the propriety of the wotds. And melanchton, who for
his supposed worth in learning is esteemed by Lauatherus the phoenix of his age,
and of whom Luther gives this testimony saying: He far excelle^h all the
ancient Doctors of the Church, and exceeds even Austin himself, this great
Divine and father of the protestant Church says: Melanchton l. 3. Epist.
saying and Oecolamp. fol. 13. 2
There is no care that has more trobled my mind, then this of the Eucharist:
and not only my self have weighed what might be say on either side, but I have
sought out the judgment of the old writers touching the same, and when I have
laid all together, I find no good reason, that may satsfy a conscience
departing from the Property of Christ's word this is my body. So that here we
have by the testimony of most irrefragable witnesses, that our Saviors words
of institution this is my body, this is my blood must be interpreted (...)
according to their proper and litteral sense: and that being so interpreted
according to their proper and litterall sense, they do unavoidably establish
the doctrine of Transubstantiation which is believed and taught as a divine
revealed truth by the now Roman Catholic Church. Hence I argue thus.

. 50.
IF our Saviors words this is my body etc. be true and to be understood in
their proper and litteral sense; then the Papisticall Transubstantiation must
be established; and Protestants must yield unto us Catholics the whole cause,
to wit, Transubstantiation adoration and the like as both Beza Morton and
others grant.

But the said words of our Savior are to be understood according to their
proper and litteral sense, as Cammierus Melanchton and othet great Protestants
avouch; and the full consent of fathers does teach. Ergo the said words of our
Savior do establish the doctrine of Transubstantiation and the whole cause is
confessedly ours, by the warrant of Scripture, consent of fathers, and
confession of Protestants themselves.

52.
AGAIN: that is the truth in matters of faith, which the fathers of all ages
have with mutual consent professed. Otherwise it were but vain and idle to
dispute about their belief, unless their unanimous testimony were a Rule
which all Christians are obliged to follow in all doctrines of faith.

But if that be the truth which the fathers of all ages have professed with
mutual consent, it is altogether on the Papists side as Duditius in general,
and Melanchton in this particular point confess Ergo the truth in matters of
religion is altogether on our side.

. 53.
SO that we have from the free confessions of Protestants themselves that our
doctrine of Transubstantiation is as ^n ancient as the Gospel it self, if the
words of truth it self be true in a proper and litteral sense, and as they
have been understood and interpreted all along in all ages by the Pastors and
Doctors of God Church. Can there be any thing more in reason required to
establish the verity of any doctrine of faith, then to hear Truth it self
teaching it and delivering it in words that have but one proper, litterall
sense; and that must be understood and interpreted according to it? And to the
contrary can there be any thing more conuincing the opposite Protestant
doctrine to be damnably heretical, then this, that it cannot possibly be true,
if our dear Lord and Savior making his last will and Testament did speak
plainly and properly, and so as no man afterwads could groundedly raise any
doubts about the sense and meaning of his words.

. 54.
WHEREFORE, Madame, seeing our Catholic doctrine of Transubstantiation is so
notoriously descended from Christ himself through all ages to us by full
Tradition of the Church, by a conspicuous succession of Pastors delivering the
same from fathers to sons as a divine revealed verity, you may safely conclud
for the truth of our Catholic doctrine and say with S. Hilary expounding the
words of institution: There is no place left of doubting of the truth of the
flesh and blood of our Savior: for now both by our Saviors profession, and
our belief it is ttuly flesh and truly blood. Secondly against your
Sacramentarian Ministers; that they are men of no credit in matters of faith
and religion, seeing it is manifest that all they object against our doctrine
are forged lies: for what can be more manifestly untrue then that which your
Doctor does without all shame avouch, ^. ^. de Trinit.
to wit, that before the latteran Council, the doctrine of Transubstantiation
was not known in the Church.

. 55.
YOU will further see that all that these unconscionable men do clamourously
object against this divine mystery 'hath no more difficulty then what their
first Progenitors the murmuring Capharnaites conceived through their gross
and inhumane imagination and opposed against our Saviors heavenly doctrine,
forsaking thereupon his dear fociety; Job. 66.
as Protestants have since forsaken upon the same pretense the Communion of his
spouse the Church, justifying their horrid and sacrilegious revolt, as those
other carnal men did with this profane and impious excuse: How can this man
give us his flesh to eat? Job. v. 52.90.64.
This saying is heard and who can endure to hear it? But if they would open
their deaf ears to the voice of truth, and render themselves capable to
understand the things which are of God, by captiuating their understanding into
the obedience of Christ they would in the very same place of the Gospel find
these clear lights of truth, which would dispell all the clouds of their
infidelity and affo^d the^ full and satisfactory answers to all that wilful
blindness does object against a truth so clearly delivered by God in
Scripture; they would find, I say, v. 51. etc. v. 68. 69.
these verities; that this man, who promises to give his own flesh under the
form of bread, is the son of the living God, and that his words are the
words of eternal life insinitely efficacious and operative, that it is his
omnipotent and lifegiuing spirit that quickens and flows his operative
virtue into his Creatures, and produces therein an effect which is to manifest
the greateness of his power, v. 49. 50. 58.
and the riches of his glory in a far more wonderful manner, then ever Manna
did that most delicious food and bread made by the hands of Angels; that it is
as easy for him to descend from heaven upon our Altars, v. 61.
as it is to ascend thither where he was before: that as reason reaches only
to things that are probable in nature, so faith ascende^h to all that is
possibie to God, to all that he avouches, and therefore seeing he says the
bread which I will give, v, 51. v. 55.
is my flesh: my flesh is meat indeed, v. 53.
and, unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood you
shall not have life in you and the like, all that are docible of God, all that
are endued from above with the light of faith, do readily and firmly believe
it to be most certainly true relying on his infinite authority who can neither
deceive nor be deceived; and lastly, that the flesh, (that is, as Origin, S.
Cyprian, S. Chrysostom Thophylactus, Euthymius and others expound it, their
carnal understand of our Saviors speech about his flesh to be eaten in the
Sacrament,) profits nothing to salvation, but requires a more spiritual and
elevated understanding, unto which those dull, carnal and murmuring Jews had
been raised by the light of faith conuoyed into their souls by the heavenly
father had they not wilfully shut their obdurate hearts against him. v. 44 45. 4


. 56.
I Conclude therefore with S. Chrysostomes exhortation to you, saying: let us
give credit to God every where; Homil. 89. in matt.
let us not oppose against him, though what he says does seem to our senses
and our thinking absurd: let his saying master our sense and raison: let us do
this in all things and especially in the mysteries, not regarding alone the
things which ly before us. but holding fast his words we cannot be Cozened our
sense may easily be deceived; his words cannot be untrue, our sense is often
times beguiled. Seeing therefore our Lord has said, this is my body, let not
staggering nor doubt lay hold on us but let us believe it, and see it with the
eyes of our understanding: for nothing that is sensible is given unto us here
by Christ, but in se^sible thing indeed; yet all that he gives is insensible.
Thus S. Chrysostom. And I beseech you, Madame, to give ear unto him and
follow his advice and Counsel; much safer and securer to salvation then the new
pretended light of a few, vpst^rt, turbulent and factious Ministers, that have
nothing in them derseruing credit and authority* seeing they are by their own
brethren confessed to be foul corrupters and horrible falsifiers of Gods word,
So Swinglius of Luther, Carleile of the English Protestant ministers. p. 116.
144. Epistolae ad Joan nem Heruagium Typographu^.
lovers of darkness more then light, falsehood more then truth and who obtrue
upon their unlearned Proselites a doctrine, which, as Luther the grand
Protestant Apostle says, they began with lies, and with lies they desend it:
which I have alfo here demonstrated against your minister who was not ashamed
to avouch against the cleerest evidence of truth, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not known nor heard of in the Church before the Council
of Latteran, which assertion how false it is every one that can but read may
see, by turning first to the 15.. taking there out of the Coun- of Trent the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, and then comparing that doctrine with the
testimonies of the fathers of every age whom I have cited as interpreters of
the Scripture, as Doctors and Teachers of the Church, and as witnesses of the
common belief of the Christian world in their times, all of them delivering in
as express terms as the Council of Trent, that the belief of all Orthodox
Christians over the world then was, that in the Eucharist there is by
Consecration made a Conversion, a Transmutatiation, a Trans-elementation a
change of the substance of the bread and wine into the body and blood of our
Lord, which is the formal doctrine of Transubstantiation, and all that the
Church does propose to all Christian 1 to be believed as a divine revealed
verity. Unless it be that the Council declares that this substantial
Conversion is fitly and properly called Tranfubstantiation: Wherein that man
must extremely Cosen himself and declare himself to be altogether void of
common sense, that should offer to prefer the clamourous non sense of a
Protestant minister that knows not the proper sense and meaning of thousands
of Lattin words, before the judgment of a General Council consisting of
thousands of the learned of all nations then Orthodox and Chrstian especially
considering that Transubstantiation, as every school boy-knowes, according to
the Etymon and proper interpretation of the word, must signify a connersion and
change of one substance into another substance; and the Church, whose authority
is the greatest next unto the divine authority, has power to use, assign and
apply words not used before, to express more plainly the truth and meaning of
her divine and Apostolical doctrine against those that do oppose it with their
profane novelties, as the practice of the Church in all ages does declare
against the Rebels of light that moved worre against her in those times.

. 57.
I Shall not add here any more in disproof of your ministers foul Sclauders.
That which I have already said takes off their wizard, and is abundantly
sufficient to make them appear to any man that is deuested of prejudice and
passion, to be nothing but the foul impostures of Heretics who care not what
untruths they utter though never so much against their conscience, so that they
may but disgrac^ the Church of God and render her contemptible to men by
charging he with gross and damnable errors in doctrines of faith and religion
and by this persuasion draw ignorant people to contemn her authority and
forsake her Communion, and assume unto themselves the authority of judges in
matter of Religion, and this for secular ends and private interest.

Now for conclusion of this answer I beseech you Madame to cast an impartial
eye upon the pretended reformation, and consider the first authors of it, and
how they do defend it, and the effects which it has every where produced. The
authors you will find to be a rabble of most seditious and leu^d Apostatas;
the Doctrine they broached is full of sacrilegious blasphemies; the effects it
has produced, in all contries, licentious liberty, rebellion and other horrid
vices, all which does make it manifest to all that do not wifully shut their
eyes, that Protestanisme is not a reformed but deformed religion; and therefore
an open way leadging strayte to perdition; and that the ministers you credit,
are wolves dis^^^guised, false Prophets, deceiptfull teachers, unsent
messengers who preach their own foolish dreams and corrupted fancies for Gods
holy word and divine revealed verities; you may know them whose they are by
their pride, avarice, envy, vicious lives and ministers lying spirit, which are
Caracters given by Protestants themselves of their own ministry, but are
far from being testimonies of Gods holy spirit inhabiting in them, to teach
them all truth and lead them the ways of salvation.

That you may discover their fraud, avoid their snarres, and free your self
from their tyrrany, I beseech you Madam^, to make your recourse to the throne
of Grace with a deep sense of your salvation imploring his mercy in the above
cited words of S. Denis saying: Replenish, O Lord, our spiritual eyes with thy
singular and revealed brightness. And you may not doubt but that he will pour
into your soul the light of faith which is to bring you to the knowledge of
sauin truth, and with his grace enable you to embrace it and profess it: which
shall be the daily prayer.

MADAME Of your most humble and very sincere servant W.W.

An admonition for Doctor Cozens.
IF in replying to what is here alleged out of the fathers in proof of the
antiquity of our doctrine, he will show himself a Doctor and speak to the
purpose; and not a Deceiuer using heretical slights and fallacies to deceive
the ignorant; let him first reflect on the state of the question which is here
between us and Protestants; and let all he says dir^ctly tend to confute and
disprove that which we maintain to be ancient and Orthodoxall against him and
all other sectaries do that oppose us.

The Question is in a matter of fact, to wit, wheter the ancient fathers (the
Pastors and Doctors of Gods Church,) did not believe and teach the same
doctrine of Transubstantiation, which the now Roman Catholic Church does
believe and teach; that is, whether they did not believe and teach that in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist there is by Consecration made a conversion of the
substance of the bread and wine into the body and blood of our Lord, the
outward forms of bread and wine still remaining; which is the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, as the Council of Trent above cited. 15. does expressly
declare.

This being the question controuerted between us and the Nouelists of these
times; we maintain the affirmative, and avouch that the ancient holy fathers
of all ages did with one accord believe and teach in this point, what the now
Roman Church does believe and teach; and in proof thereof we have alleged the
testimonies which they give both of their own faith and of the faith of the
whole Christian world in their times; and that so fully, and in as clear and as
express words, as the Council of Trent it self does deliver the same; in
words, which taken in their proper and litteral sense, do formally avouch a
Conversion and Change of the substance of the bread and wine into the body and
blood of our Lord; in words, which cannot without manifest violence, be wrested
into any other sense, no more then the words of the Council of Trent. Wherefore
the Doctor, if he will say any thing at all to the purpose in opposition to
us, must either bring a greater authority as plainly and as expressly denying
and contradicting what the abouecited fathers do affirm and teach, (which he
will never be able to do, seeing there can be no greater authority on earth then
the unanimous consent of the fathers, and the testimony of the whole Catholic
and universal Church;) or else he must prove the fore alleged testimonies not
to be the sayings of those fathers unto whom they are ascribed: which will be
as hard for him to do as the former: for he may as well deny that there were
ever any such men as those fathers, as deny the cited books and authorities to
be theirs.

One of these two things the Doctor must necessarly perform to weaken our
assertion which maintains the doctrine of Transubstantiation to have been
believed and taught by the ancient Orthodox fathers of all ages. For what wise
man will not despise and contemn as the foolish and idle conceits of
Heretics, the feigned glosses, the senseless expositions the violent and
strayned constructions so manifestly contrary to the proper and litteral sense
of the words and to the plain meaning of the fathers, which Protestant
ministers do frequently make of their sayings when they are urged against them
as making clearly on our sides in their plain and litterall sense.

As we have clearly stated our doctrine of faith concerning Transubstantiation,
as it is proposed by the Council of Trent to all Christians to be believed; and
as we have demonstrated it by the full testimony of Orthodox Antiquity to have
ever been believed and taught by the Pastors and Doctors of the Church who
did, all, understand and expound in our Catholic sense our Savior promise Io.
6. and the words of Institution. So the Doctor to clear himself and his
Protestant congregation from the note of innovation and damnable heresy; must
first set down his doctrine clearly not obscurely; particularly, not
confusedly; in such a manner as all may know what they are to believe in
particular concerning our Saviors being really present or not present in the
Eucharist.

Secondly having clearly particularized his doctrine, he must produce clear
testimonies of the Orthodox fathers of every age from Luther up to the
Apostles, which do formally avouch the said Protestant doctrine, taking the
words (...) according to their proper and natural signification, in the sense
which they do offer immediately. Thirdly he must produce clear Scripture, that
is, Scripture which, taking the words in their plain and litteral sense, does
establish that doctrine Scripture that is clearly so expounded by the fa^hers
of every age up to the Apostles Scripture, and that chiefly of the Institution
which does affirm it formally, and was always so understood by the fathers.

This we have done in confirmation of our Catholic doctrine: and this the
Doctor must do for the establishment of his opinion, Otherwise he will never
prove his doctrine to be ancient and Orthodoxall nor she himself a scholar,
nor a lover of truth, nor free himself from the note of heresy, But this task
he will never be able to perform solidly and truly, and so as any man that is
but meanly conversant in the fathers, may rest sat^sfyed, and therefore he will
ever remain guilty of the grievous sin of schism t^ll he enter into the
Communion of the Roman Church out of which no man is saved.

FINIS.
ERROVRS OF THE PRINT corrected.
Error Read page 6. l. 7. thaught taught p. 14. l. 13. maud: mand: p 17. l.
18., blessed, he blessed. p 18. l. 4. Good God p. 33. l. 20. Christ then:
Christ; then p. 59. l. 13. Read: before consecration there is bread and wine;
after consecration, there are etc. p. 66. l. 5. Change Changed p. 75. l. 17.
Cany Carry p. 78 l. 3. dele, and blood ibidem l. ^9, of Cbalice of the Chalice
p. 91. l. 4. the some the son ibidem. l. 13. hards bands p. 120. l. 4. whose
they ministers they whose ibidem l. 7. dele ministers l. 10. sauin: saving p.
129. l. 18. the, instit: the institution


