ARTICLES TO BE Enquired of, AND ANSWERED UNTO BY THE Churchwardens and
Sidemen IN THE VISITATION OF THE (...) Anno Dom. 167^

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb in the Savoy. 167

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sworn-men.
YOu shall swear, that you, and evey of you, shall faithfully execute your
several Offices of Churchwardens and Sidemen, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws, so help you God, and the Contents of his Holy Gospel.

Articles to be inquired of, and answered unto, by the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, in the Visitation of the Right Worshipful the Archdeacon of
Rochester, John Warner Doctor in Divinity. Anno Dom. 167^
TIT. II. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for
the Roof, Window, Floor and Seats. II. Has any part of your Church or Chapel,
or Steeple? Can. 85.
been demolished or pulled down? what part and how long since? or any of the
Lead, Timber or Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way embezled or sold,
and by whom. III. Is there a decent Font of stone with a cover? and does the
same stand at or near the neither end of your Church in such manner as
anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the baptizing of Children? does the
Minister baptize publicly only in the Font? Can. 81.
Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent carpet, and
another covering of white linen to be spread thereon, at the time of
Administration of the Lords Supper? and have you a fair chalice or Communion
cup, with a cover, and one or more Flagons? have they been profaned by common
use? IV. Have you a convenient seat or pew, wherein to read Divine Service; a
Pulpit, with a decent cloth or cushion: 82.
a large Bible of the last Translation, 20.
and a Book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. 82.
83.
the book of Homilies set forth by Authority, 80.
and a printed Table of the degrees where in Marriages are prohibited, Stat.
and a book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; and a decent Surplice
and Hood. V. Have you a Register-book in Parchment of Christnings, 99.
Burials and Marriages? 58.
and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use. 87.
70.
VI. 52.
Have you a book of Paper to record the Names and Licenses of such strangers as
are admitted to preach in your Church or Chapel? and do such strangers
subscribe their names; as also a third book for the Church wardens accounts? as
also a chest with Locks and Keys, 70.
wherein to keep the said books, and the aforementioned Furniture?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since. II.
Can. 87.
Is the house of your Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or
bounds removed or changed? and by whom. III. Have you a true and perfect
Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? as also a Note of such Pensions,
Rate-Tythes, and portions of Tithes or other yearly profits either within or
without your Parish as belong thereunto? have any of the same been withheld
from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have heard.
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England. II. Has he been legally instituted and inducted
into his benefice? and did he within two months after his induction, publicly
in the Church upon some Sunday or Holy Day in the time of divine service read
the 39 Articles of the Church of England established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his assent thereunto. III. Is he resident among you? how many
weeks has he been absent from you without urgent necessity. IV. Has your
Minister a Curate? is he in holy Orders, Can. 47.
and conformable to the Laws of the Church? is he allowed by the Ordinary. V.
Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things, according to the rubric of the book of Common Prayer,
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith? without
either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other respect, or adding
any thing in the matter or form. 14.
VI. Does your Minister at the reading of Divine Service, 58.
wear a surplice and hood. VII. Does he observe the Holy days and Fasting days,
the Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as is appointed
by the Rubric. VIII. Is your Minister Licensed to Preach? if so, 45.56.47.
does he constantly (not having a reasonable impediment) preach one Sermon in
your Church or Chapel every Sunday? or if he be not Licensed, or be hindered,
does he procure one to supply his Office by preaching or reading one of the
homilies. IX. Does your Minister instruct the Youth in your Parish in the
Church Catechism, and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop.
X. Does he neglect or delay to visit the sick, Can. 59. Rubr. before confirm.
or to baptize any Infant that is in danger of Death? does he baptize any
without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be
Godfather or God-mother to their own children. XI. 67.
Has your Minister Married any persons without publishing the banes on three
Sundays or Holy Days? 69.
or has he Married any in private houses, or not between the hours of eight
and twelve in the morning, 62.
unless he had a License or dispensaton iso to do. XII. 72.
Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts, 73.
prophecyings or exercises not appointed by Authority, or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay-person hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of preaching, praying, thanksgiving, or humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided. XIII. Is your Parson,
Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and conversation; or is his
carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister.
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
IS there any in your Parish that makes profession of any other Religion, Act
for Uniformity. 1. Q. Elizab. C. 100.
then what is established in the Church of England; and that refuse to come
unto these public assemblies, Prayers or Service of the Church? if there be
any what are their names. II. Is there any person in your parish, that lies
under a common Fame, or suspicion of adultery, fornication, or incest? are
there any common Drunkards within your parish, or common sweaaers, or
blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be ra^^ers, unclean and
filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction, and discord amongst their
Neighbors. III. Do any of your parish upon Sundays or holy days follow their
bodily and orderly labor, or permit their Servants so to do; are any shops
kept-open, or wares sold, or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victualers
and sellers of Beer and Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their
houses upon those days. IV. Does every person in you Parish, duly resort to
your Church or Chapel upon Sundays or holy days, Can. 13.
and as well during Divine Service, as preaching the Word of God, demean
themselves reverently, 18.
uncovering their heads, kneeling at prayers, standing up when the Creed and
Gospel are read. V. R^br.
Is there any in your parish that refuse to send their Infant children to be
baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger: Rubr. of Bapt.
or do they send them to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they baptized
after other Form than is appointed? or are they kept unbaptized longer than is
allowed? or is there any Infants, or more aged persons as yet unbaptized. VI.
Is there any person in your parish of 16 years of Age, 112. Rub. after commun.
27.28.65.
who does not receive the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is
always to be one? does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other
Parishes? or do any strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it. VII.
Are there any in your parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of
your parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and
absolved. VIII. Are there any in your parish, Expressed in a Table set forth by
Authority. An. Dom. 1563. 99. 107. Rubr. Can. 85. Rubr. b.
who have been unlawfully Married, contrary to the Laws of God, or any that
being lawfully divorced have married again? or any that being lawfully married,
and not separated or divorced by course of Law do not co-habit together. IX.
Are there any married Women in your parish, who after their delivery from the
peril of childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in the
Church? and when they come so to do, do they come decently apparrelled, and
make their offerings according to custom? X. Are there any that refuse to pay
their duty for Easter offerings, or refuse to contribute to the rates made for
the repair of your Church or Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging? XI. Do
any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England?
and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your parish, that be
yet unproved? or any goods administered without a due grant from the ordinary?
did any dying in your parish, or elsewhere, leave any legacy to your Church or
Chapel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and charitable
purposes; what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XII. Is
there any strife and contention among any of your parish for their pews or
seats in your Church? have any new pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the
body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the ordinary? XIII. Do all
and every householder of your parish, Fathers, Can. 59.
Masters, Mothers and Mistresses cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentices, which have not yet learned their Catechism, to come unto Church
on Sundays and holy days in the Afternoon, obediently to hear and to be ordered
by the Master till they have learned the same.
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clarks and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clark, aged 21 years
at least? Can. 51.
is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his
duty in reading, writing, and singing? is he chosen by your Minister, and does
he duly attend him in all Divine services at the Church? are his wages duly
paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him? II. Does he diligently do
his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in tolling and ringing the
Bells before divine service? and when any person is passing out of this life,
does he upon notice toll a bell, that the neighbous may thereby be warned to
recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of God.
Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Chyrurgions and Midwives.
I. Can. 77.
Does any man keep a public or private school in your Parish who is not
allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? does he teach the scholars the Catechism of
Religion set forth by Authority? does he cause his scholars upon sun-days and
holy days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they
behave themselves quietly and reverently, during the time of divine service and
sermon. II. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Chyrurgery, or any
Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of Midwife without license from the
Ordinary.
TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners; Ca^ 89
or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners. II Have
the former and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the Parish, and
delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining in their
hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel. III.
You are further to understand, that according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.
YOU also are to Exhibit a Bill of Presentment to this Court, Rubr. at Commun.
of all and every the Offenders, in any of the matters mentioned in the
precedent Articles, and therein to take the assistance of your Minister.

FINIS.

