A FORM, OR ORDER OF Thanksgiving, AND PRAYER, To be Used In London, and Ten
Miles round it, on Sunday the 15th. of this Instant January, and throughout
England on Sunday the 29th. of the same Month, by all Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates, in their Respective Parish Churches, and Chapels, in Behalf of the
King, the Queen, and the Royal Family, upon Occasion of the Queen's being with
Child.

By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCLXXXVII.

A FORM, or ORDER OF Thanksgiving, and Prayer, To be Used in London, and Ten
Miles round it, on Sunday the 15th of this instant January, and throughout
England on Sunday the 29th of the same Month, by all Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates, in their Respective Parish Churches, and Chapels, in Behalf of the
King, the Queen, and the Royal Family, upon Occasion of the Queen's being with
Child.
This Service shall be the same with the usual Office for the Days above named,
except where it is hereafter otherwise Appointed.

At the beginning of Morning Prayer, the Minister shall Read these Sentences
following. I Exhort, that first of all Prayers, 1 Timothy 2.
Supplications, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings be made for all Men; for
Kings, 1.
and all that are in Authority, 2.
that we may Lead a quiet and Peaceable Life in all Godliness, 3.
and Honesty; for this is Good, and Acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

Whatsoever Ye would that Men should Do unto you, S. Mat. 7.12.
Do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

In the Place of [Venite Exultemus] shall be used this following Hymn. O Sing
unto the Lord a new Song, Sing unto the Lord all the whole Earth. Psalm. 96.1.


Sing unto the Lord, ver. 2.
and Praise His Name by Telling His Salvation from Day to Day.

For the Lord is Great, 4.
and cannot worthily be Praised, He is more to be feared than all Gods.

Glory and Worship are before Him, 6.
Power and Honor are in His Sanctuary.

Ascribe unto the Lord, 7.
O ye Kindreds of the People, Ascribe unto the Lord, Worship, and Power.

Ascribe unto the Lord, 8.
the Honor due unto His Name, Bring Presents, and Come into His Courts.

God stands in the Congregation of Princes, Psalm. 82.1.
He is Judge among the Gods.

There is no King saved by the Multitude of an Host, Psalm. 33.15.
neither is any Mighty Man Delivered by much strength.

But the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, ver. 17.
and upon them that Put their Trust in His Mercy.

Let all those that seek Thee, psalm. 40.19.
be Joyful and Glad in Thee, and let such as Love thy Salvation, say always, the
Lord be Praised.

O Think upon thy Congregation, Psalm. 74.2.
whom Thou have Redeemed, and Purchased of Old.

Think upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, ver. 3.
and Mount Sion, wherein Thou have Dwelt.

Thou, O God, Psalm. 68.28
have sent forth Strength for Us, stablish, O Lord, what Thou have wrought in
Us.

So We thy People, and Sheep of thy Pasture, shall Give Thee Thanks for ever,
and be showing forth thy Praise from Generation to Generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc,

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms. 21.127, 128.132. Proper Lessons. Genesis 17. to ver. 17. Proper
Lessons. Heb. 11. To be Added in the Versicles after the Creed. O Lord, save
the King.

And evermore mightily Defend Him.

Prevent Him with the Blessings of Goodness.

And make Him Glad with the Joy of thy Countenance.

O Lord, save Thy Servant, the Queen.

And make Her a Joyful Mother of Children.

Endue thy Ministers with righteousness, etc.

The first Collect instead of that for the Day. O Almighty God, the Fountain of
all Life, by whose only Gift it Comes, that Mankind is Increased; Blessed be
that Good Providence, which has Vouchsafed Us fresh Hopes of Royal Issue by our
Gracious Queen Mary; Strengthen Her, We beseech Thee, and Perfect what Thou
have Begun. Command thy Holy Angels to Watch over Her Continually; and Defend
Her from all Dangers, and evil Accidents, That what she has Conceived may be
happily brought forth, to the Joy of our Sovereign Lord the King, the farther
Establishment of His Crown, the Happiness, and Welfare of the whole Kingdom,
and the Glory of thy Great Name. Which We humbly Beg of thy Gracious Goodness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

At the end of the Litany, immediately after [ We humbly beseech Thee, etc.]
this following Prayer is to be used. ALmighty and Everliving God, We most
humbly Acknowledge, That in Thee alone We Live, Move, and have our Being; and
that Children, and the Fruit of the Womb are a Gift and Heritage that comes
only of Thee. We therefore devoutly beseech Thee to Preserve and Protect our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King James, and so Bless Him, that he may see his
Children's Children, and Peace upon Israel. We Pray Thee also for his Royal
Consort Queen Mary. Make her, O Lord, as a Fruitful Vine upon the Walls of his
House, and his Children like Olive-Branches round about his Table. Increase and
Multiply the whole Royal Family, That the King's Seed may Endure for Ever, and
his Throne be as the Sun before Thee. So We thy People shall Remember, and
Praise thy Name from one Generation to another, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

In the Communion Service next after the Commandments, the first Collect shall
be the same, as in Morning Prayer, O Almighty God, the Fountain of all Life,
etc. Then shall follow one of the two Collects for the King. The Epistle 1
These. 5. v. 14. to the 26. The Gospel. S. Matt. 5. v. 3. to the 13. After the
Prayer for the Church Militant, shall follow this Prayer. O Almighty God the
Blessed, and only Potentate, by whose Appointment and Blessing Kings Reign, and
Kingdoms are Established in Peace: We become Humble Suitors to thy Divine
Majesty in Behalf of our Dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES, That Thou would
Defend his Person in Safety, and Prosper his Reign with Honorable Successes,
and make his Name Glorious in the maintenance of Truth, Righteousness and
Charity; That under the happy Influence of his Government, We may All lead
Quiet and Peaceable Lives, in all Godliness, and Honesty. We Acknowledge, with
thankful Hearts, the great Mercy Thou have bestowed upon Him, and his Royal
Consort, and the whole Realm, in the apparent Hopes of farther Issue. Let the
Prayers of thy People Prevail, that our Hopes be not Cut off, nor our
Expectations Disappointed. Let Thy Watchful Providence Overshadow our Gracious
Queen, Preserve her Health, Support her Spirit, and Grant her an Easy, and
Happy Deliverance. And do Thou so Graciously Bless and Multiply the whole Royal
Family, That the Ages to come may evermore Rejoice under the Government of our
Sovereign and his Posterity; Which we earnestly Crave of thy great Mercy,
through Jesus Christ our only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Let this be Printed,

Sunderland P.

FINIS.

