ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED OF BY THE Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Parish within the Arch-Deaconry of (...), IN THE Ordinary Visitation Of
the Right Worshipful Doctor R^p^^^^ T^^^^k^^^^^^, ARCHDEACON of LINCOLN. In
the Year of Our Lord God, 166^*

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 166^*

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall well, and faithfully execute and perform your several Offices in
your Parish, and duly present such crimes, and offenses, as are punishable by
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Land, coming to your knowledge by fame, report,
or otherwi^^ (...) help you God in Jesus Christ.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY within the Arch-Deaconry of LINCOLN.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1.IS your Parish Church of Chapel, in good and sufficient repair, both for
the Roof, windows, Floor and Seats?

2. Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple been demolished or pulled
down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or sold, and by whom?

3. Is there a decent Fout of Stone, with a Cover? and does the same stand at
or near the nether end of your Church, in such manner as anciently and usually
Fonts have stood for the baptizing of Children? Is there a decent
Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and another covering of
whitelinnen, to be spread thereon at the time of the Administration of the
Lords Supper? and have you a fair Chalice, or Communion Cup, with a Cover, and
one or more Flagons?

4. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service, a Pulpit,
with a decent Cloth or Cushion, a large Bible of the last Translation, and a
Book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set
forth by Authority, and a printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are
prohibited, and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a decent
Surplice and Hood: And are the Ten Commandments, set upon the East End of your
Church or Chapel?

5. Have you a Register-book in Parchment, of Christenings, Burials and
Marriages? and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use?

6. Have you a book of Paper, to record the names and licenses of such
strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel? and do such
strangers subscribe their names? As also a third Book for the Churchwardens
accounts? As also a Chest with locks and keys, wherein to keep the said Books,
and the aforementioned Furniture.

7. Is the Table of the degrees of Marriage before mentioned, hung up in your
Church, in some convenient public place, where it may be seen in legible
Characters, by any who desire to read it?

8. Is the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments, and such sentences of
Scripture, as the Minister thinks fit, painted up within the walls of the
Church, Chapel and Chancel? Are the Kings Arms fairly painted and set up on
the partition betwixt the Church and the Chancel?

9. Are there any Funeral Monuments erected in your Church, Chapel or Chancel,
or otherwise, which stop up the windows? or though they do not stop up the
windows? whether or no were they erected since the year of our Lord, 1640.
without due license from the Ordinary in the behalf? present the names of the
erectors of them.

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since?

2. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license? Have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or
bounds removed or changed? and by whom?

3. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Gleve-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pentions, Ratetythes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or
have heard?

4. Is there such a Terrier as in the Article immediately aforegoing is
mentioned, given into the Registers Office for this Arch-deaconry?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

2. Has he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? And did he
within two months after his Induction, publicly in the Church, upon some
Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by Authority, and there publicly declare his
assent thereunto?

3. Is he resident among you? how many weeks has he been absent from you
without urgent necessity?

4. Has your Minister a Curate? Is he in holy Orders, and conformable to the
Laws of the Church? Is he allowed by the Ordinary?

5. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith?

6. Does your Minister at the reading Divine Service, wear and Surplice and
Hood?

7. Does he observe the Holy Days, and Fasting-dayes, the Ember-weeks, and the
yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as is appointed by the Rubric?

8. Is your Minister licensed to Preach? If so, does he constantly (not having
a reasonable impediment) preach one Sermon in your Church or Chapel every
Sunday? or if he be not licensed, or be hindered, does he procure one to supply
his Office, by preaching, or reading one of the Homilies?

9. Does your Minister instruct the youth in your Parish in the Church
Catechism, and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop?

10. Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, or to baptize any Infant that
is in danger of death? Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers,
or admit either of the Parents to be Godfathers and Godmothers, to their own
Children?

11. Has your Minister married any Persons without publishing the Banes on
three Sundays or Holidayes, or has he married any in private houses, or not
between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the morning, unless he had a license
or dispensation so to do?

12. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophesyings, or Exercises not appointed by Authority? Or does he or any other,
either Minister or Lay person, hold any Coventicles or Meetings in private
houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under
the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation, contrary to
the Laws and Canons in that case provided:

13. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer a man of a sober life and
conversation? or is his carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister?

14. Does your Minister every Sunday, Holiday, Thirtieth day of January, Twenty
ninth day of May, and the fifth day of November, distinctly, gravely, and
reverently, ^^ad the whole Divine Service appointed by the Book of
Common Prayer.

15. Does he after the Sermon, or Homily, read and perform the rest of the
Divine Service appointed to be read and performed, according to the said Book?

16. Does your Minister Catechize the younger sort of People, upon Sundays and
Holidaies, and after the Second Lesson at Evening Prayer, give notice before to
the Masters of Families, to send in so many of their Children and Servants, as
they shall think fit, to be so catechized? And does he catechize by the
Catechism set forth in the Book of Common Prayer?

17. Does he baptize any Children without signing them with the sign of the
Cross, according to the Book of Common Prayer?

18. Has your Minister married any Persons in the times forbidden to marry,
without due license in that behalf from the Ordinary? The times forbidden, are
from Advent-Sunday, till St Hillary-day, from Septuagesima-Sunday, till the
eighth day after Easter Day; and from Rogation, till Trinity-Sunday.

19. Does your Minister, year by year, solemnly keep the Thirtieth day of
January, the Anniversary day of the murder of the late King, and Martyr of
blessed memory, King Charles the First, being a day appointed for Humiliation
and Fasting: the Twenty ninth of May, the Anniversary day of Thanksgiving, for
the restoration of our gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second: and the
Fifth Day of November, as a day of Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the
Sun-power Treason? And does he duly read and perform the Divine service
appointed for those days?

20. Does your Minister, on the Sunday before, did the Holidays, and
Fasting-dayes, appointed to be solemnized, and kept the week following?

21. Does your Minister Preach, Baptize, or Administer the Communion in any
private House, except in case of necessity?

22. Does your Minister, thrice a year at least, whereof Easter to be one,
administer the holy Communion? Does he receive it himself kneeling, or
administer it to any person who does not kneel?

23. Does your Minister, upon Wednesdayes, and Fridayes weekly go to Church,
and there say the Letany?

24. The Minister is to assist the Churchwardens and Sidemen, in presenting,
and to present them, in case they omit any thing in their presentiments which
they ought to present.

25. Does your Minister administer the holy Communion to any Person, that
Person not kneeling, when he or she re^e^eth it?

26. Does your Minister (according to the Book of Common Prayer) when he
intends to administer the holy Communion, give warning thereof the next
Sunday, or Holy Day fore going* publicly in your Parish Church or Chapel, in
time of Ordine, Service? And does he on such Sunday or Holy Day so foregoing,
read the Exhortation by the Book of Common Prayer, appointed in that case to be
read?

27. Does your Minister when any excommunicate Person (whom he does know to be
so, or has been published so to be in your Church or Chapel) is within your
Church or Chapel, or intrudes into the same, or who will not go our being
required, Does your Minister in such case perform the Divine Service, or
Preach, whilst such excommunicate Person is so present? And does he not (as he
ought) desist, and forbear to perform such Divine Service, and Sermon, till
such Excommunicate Person be gone out of your Church and Chapel?

28. Does your Minister perambulate your Parish-Bounds in Rogation week, as is
appointed?

29. Does your Minister use and wear such decent Habit and Garments, as by the
74 Canon of the Canons of this Church, published in the Year 1604. are
enjoined, that is, Priests Gowns, and in their journies Priests Coats, and
within doors Cassocks, never appearing in Hose and Doublet only? And does he
wear any Coife, or wrought Nightcap, but only plain night-Caps of black silk,
satin, or velvet?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. IS there any in your Parish that make Profession of any other Religion,
then what is established in the Church of England? And that refuse to come into
the Public Assemblies, Prayers, or Service of the Church? If there be any,
what are their Names?

2. Is there any person in your Parish, that lies under a Common fame, or
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards
within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name, or any
that are noted to be Raylers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition,
faction and discord amongst their neighbors?

3. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidayes follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do? are any Shops kept open, or
wares sold? or do any Vintners, In-keepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of
Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those
days?

4. Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel upon
Sundays and Holidayes, and there decently and orderly, as well during Divine
Service, as Preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reverently, uncovering
their heads, kneeling at prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are
read?

5. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant Children to be
baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them
to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they baptized after other Form than is
appointed? or are they kept unbaptized longer then is allowed? or is there any
Infants, or more aged Persons as yet unbaptized?

6. Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age, who does not receive
the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes? or do any
Strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it?

7. Are there any in your Parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate
for any crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any
of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconcised to the Church,
and absolved?

8. Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married,
contrary to the Laws of God? or any that being lawfully divorced, have married
again; or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by
course of Law, do not cohabit together?

9. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to custom?

10. Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter offerings, or
refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or
Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging?

11. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? or any Goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

12. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

13. Does any person keep company with any Excommunicate person or persons,
after he or they be published excommucate in their Parish Churches or Chapels?
Does any person buy, sell, traffic, borrow, lend, or any other ways converse
with them, but in case of necessity.

14. Does any person refuse, or neglect to keep solemn, as a fasting-day, and
as a day of humiliation, the 30 day of January; the 29 day of May, and the
fifth day of November, every Year, as days of Thanksgiving, according as is
appointed? and does every Parishioner go to Church on those days, to hear and
perform the Service then appointed?

15. Do any of your Parish, who are married within the degrees of marriages
prohibited, cohabite together?

16. Do any come late to Prayers in the Church? Do the Parishioners remain
there with reverence, not departing till all the Service be done, and the last
Blessing in the Common Prayer Book be pronounced by the Minister?

17. Does any person neglect, or refuse to do due and low reverence when the
name of Jesus is mentioned, in the time of Divine-Service?

18. Does every one present at Divine-Service in your Parish Church or Chapel,
carry him or her self reverently, being every male uncovered in time of
Divine-Service, and Sermon, and every person standing up at the reading of the
Creed, and the Gloria Patri, according to the Book of Common Prayer, and
kneeling, and answering, as is there appointed?

TIT.V. Concerning Parish-Clarks and Sextons.
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clark aged 21 years
at the least: Is he of honest life and conversation, and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine-Services at the Church?
Are his wages duly paid to him? or who withholds the same from him?

2. Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine-Service; and when any person is
passing out of this life, does he upon notice, toll a Bell, that the neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of
God?

3. Does your Parish-Clark, or Sexton, every Wednesday and Friday, in due time,
toll a Bell, to call the People to Church, to come to Prayers with the Minister.

TIT. VI. Concerning School Masters, Schools, Physicians, Surgeons, and
Midwives.
1. Does any person keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? does he teach his Scholars the Catechism of
Religion set forth by Authority? does he cause his Scholars upon Sundays and
holidayes orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they behave
themselves quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine-Service and Sermon?

2. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery? or any woman take
upon her to exercise the office of a Midwife, without License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given uy their accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

3. You are further to understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficiently quantity of fine white-Bread, and good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.

4. Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen do their duty, in seeing decent order
kept in time of Divine-Service and Sermon, and that none be then covered? Do
they or some of them, take care that none be then drinking in Alehouses, or
tipling-houses, on Sundays or Holidayes, or stay in the Church Porch, or
without the Church, neglecting Common Prayer?

R^p^^^l T^^^^km^r^^^.

FINIS.

