PRAYERS to be used in all Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parochial Churches, and
Chapels, within this Kingdom, during this time of Public Apprehensions from
the danger of Invasion, and to be added to the daily Office both Morning and
Evening, immediately after the Prayers for the King, and for the Royal Family.
By His Majesty's special Command.

For Repentance.
ALmighty God and most merciful Father; We miserable Sinners do here humbly
acknowledge before Thee, That we are unworthy of the least of all thy Mercies.
We confess, O Lord, in the bitterness of our Souls, that we have grievously
sinned against Thee; that all Orders of Men amongst us, have transgressed thy
righteous Laws; that we have hitherto rendered both thy Mercies and thy
Judgments ineffectual to our Amendment. It is of thy mere Mercy, O Lord, that
we are not consumed; for which our Souls do magnify and bless thy Name. O God,
who have hitherto spat'd us, to the end, that thy Goodness might lead us to
Repentance; let it be thy good pleasure, to give unto us all that godly sorrow,
which works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of; that thou may
turn from thy heavy displeasure against us; and may rejoice over us to do us
good, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior.

Amen.
For the King.
O Almighty God, the blessed and only Potentate, We offer up our humble
Supplications and Prayers to thy Divine Goodness, beseeching thee in this time
of Danger to save and protect our most gracious King; Give thy Holy Angels
Charge over Him; Preserve His Royal Person in Health and Safety; Inspire him
with Wisdom and Justice in all His Counsels; Prosper all His Undertakings for
thy Honor and Service with good Success; Fill His Princely Heart with a
Fatherly Care of all his People, and give all his Subjects grace always to bear
Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, that both King and People joining
together to promote thy Glory, and conscientiously discharging their Duties in
their several Stations, may all give Thee Thanks and Praise for thy most mighty
Protection, and for all other thy great Mercies vouchsafed to Us, through Jesus
Christ thy Son, our Savior.

Amen.
For Peace, and Unity.
O Lord God, our only hope in time of need; Save and Deliver us we humbly
beseech Thee from all those Dangers that threaten us; Give Peace in our days, O
Lord, if it be thy will, and prevent the Effusion of Christian blood in our
Land; Reconcile all our Dissentions, and heal all our Breaches: Preserve that
Holy Religion we profess, together with our Laws and Ancient Government; Unite
us all in unfeigned and universal Charity one toward another, and in one and
the same Holy Worship and Communion; That with one heart and one mouth we may
glorify thy Holy Name, and show forth thy praise from Generation to
Generation: And this we beg for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved, in whom thou art
well pleased; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
now, and evermore.

Amen. The Collect appointed for the fifth Sunday after Trinity, and that for
the fifth after Epiphany, or either of them may here also be used.



His Majesty's Pleasure is, That these Prayers be forthwith Printed.

Whitehall the 11th day of October, 1688. Sunderland, P.

London, Printed by C. Bill, H. Hills, and T. Newcomb, Printers to the King's
Most Excellent Majesty, 1688.


