ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the DIOCESE of NORWICH.

In the Primary Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, ANTHONY, By
Divine Permission Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street, MDCLXXVII.

The Tenor of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens of every Parish.
YOU shall Swear uprightly and truly to execute the Office of Churchwarden
without Favor or Malice, hope of Reward, or fear of Displeasure, so far as by
Law you are bound.

So help you God.

The Side-mens Oath.
YOU shall Swear that you will be assistant to your Churchwardens in the
Execution of their Office, so far as by Law you are bound.

So help you God.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQVIRY Within the Diocese of NORWICH.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, Can. 85.
both for the Roof, Windows, Floor and Seats?

2. Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple been demolished or pulled
down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or sold, and by whom?

3. Is there a decent Font of stone with a cover? and does the same stand at or
near the nether end of your Church, Can. 81.
in such manner as anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the baptizing of
Children? Does the Minister baptize publicly only in the Font? Can. 82.
Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and
another Covering of white linen, to be spread thereon at the time of the
Administration of the Lords Supper? and have you a fair Chalice or
Communion-cup, with a cover, and one or more Flagons? 20.
have they been profaned by common use?

Can. 82.
4. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service? Can. 83.
a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cushion; a large Bible of the last
translation, Can. 80.
and a book of Common Prayer lately published, Stat.
Anno 1662. the book of Homilies set forth by Authority; Can. 99.
and a printed table of the degrees wherein marriages are prohibited, and a
book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; Can. 58.
and a decent Surplice and Hood?

Can. 87.
5. Have you a Register-book in parchment of Christenings, 70.
Burials, and Marriages; and is the same kept in all points according to the
ancient use?

Can. 52.
6. Have you a book of paper, to record the names and licenses of such Strangers
as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel? and do such Strangers
subscribe their names? As also a third book for the Churchwardens accounts?
Can. 70.
as also a Chest with locks and keys, wherein to keep the said books, and the
aforementioned Furniture?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? and how long since?

2. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license? have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or
bounds removed or Changed? and by whom?

3. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchyards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? C. 87.
As also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tythes, and portions, of Tithes, or
other yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong
thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom,
as you know, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

2. Has he been legally instituted and inducted into his Benefice? And did he
within two months after his induction, publicly in the Church upon some
Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by Authority, and there publicly declare his
assent thereunto?

3. Is he resident among you? how many weeks has he been absent from you
without urgent necessity?

4. Has your Minister a Curate? Is he in holy Orders, Can. 47.
and conformable to the Laws of the Church? Is he allowed by the Ordinary?

5. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the book of Common prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith? without
either diminishing in regard of preaching or in any other respect, Can. 14.
or adding any thing in the matter or form.

6. Can. 58.
Does your Minister saying the public prayers and administering the Sacraments,
wear a Surplice and Hood according to his degree?

7. Does he observe the Holy Days and Fasting-days, the Ember-weeks, and the
yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as is appointed by the Rubric?

Can. 45, 46, 47.
8. Is your Minister licensed to preach? if so, does he constantly (not having a
reasonable impediment) preach one Sermon in your Church or Chapel every
Sunday? or if he be not licensed, or be hindered, does he procure one to supply
his Office by preaching or reading one of the Homilies?

Can. 59. Rubr. before Confirm.
9. Does your Minister instruct the youth in your Parish in the
Church-Catechism, and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop?

Can. 67.
10. Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, or to baptize any Infant that
is in danger of death? Can. 69.
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

Can. 62.
11. Has your Minister married any persons without publishing the Banns on
three Sundays or Holidays, or has he married any in private houses, or not
between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the morning, unless he had a license
or dispensation so to do?

Can. 72.
12. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophesyings or Exercises not appointed by Authority? Can. 73.
Or does he, or any other, either Minister or Lay person hold any Conventicles
or meetings in private houses within your parish, for people of several
Families to resort unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving
or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

Can. 75.
13. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and
conversation? or is his carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. IS there any in your Parish that make profession of any other Religion than
what is established in the Church of England? Act for uniformity 1 Q. Eliz.
And that refuse to come unto the Public Assemblies, Prayers, or Service of
the Church? If there be any, what are their names?

2. Is there any person in your parish, C. 109.
that lies under a common fame, or suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or
Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers,
or blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or
filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction and discord among their
neighbors?

3. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holy Days follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
Wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers
of Beer and Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon
those days?

4. Can. 13.
Does every Person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel upon
Sundays and Holy Days, and as well during Divine Service, as Preaching the
Word of God, demean themselves reverently, uncovering their heads, Can. 18.
kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are read? Rubr.


5. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be
baptized in the Church, Rubr. of Bapt.
unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them to be baptized in other
Parishes? or are they baptized after other form than is appointed? or are they
kept unbaptized longer than is allowed? or are there any Infants or more aged
persons as yet unbaptized?

112. Rubr. after Commun. 27, 28.
6. Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age who does not receive
the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes? or do any
Strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it?

Can. 65.
7. Are there any in your Parish that be denounced and declared excommunicate
for any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? and do any
of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church,
and absolved?

Expressed in a table set forth by Authority Anno Dom. 1563.
8. Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married,
contrary to the Laws of God? or any that being lawfully divorced have married
again? or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by
course of Law, Can. 99.
do not cohabit together?

Can. 107.
9. Are there any married women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to custom?

Rubr. Can. 85.
10. Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter-offerings, or refuse
to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging?

Rubr. b.
11. Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? and are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? or any Goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

12. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

14. Do all, and every householder of your Parish, Fathers, Can. 59.
Masters, Mothers, and Mistresses, cause their children, servants, and
apprentices, which have not learned their Catechism, to come unto the Church on
Sundays and Holy Days in the afternoon, obediently to hear, and to be ordered
by the Minister till they have learned the same?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-clerks and Sextons.
1. Can. 91.
HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 years at
the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? are
his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him?

2. Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service, and when any person is
passing out of this life, does he upon notice toll a Bell, that the neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of
God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Surgeons and
Midwives.
1. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, Can. 77. 79.
who is not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary? does he teach his Scholars the
Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? does he cause his Scholars upon
Sundays or Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that
they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service
and Sermon?

2. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery? or any woman take
upon her to exercise the Office of Midwife, without license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Can. 89.
or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

3. You are farther to understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.

TIT. VIII. Concerning Ecclesiastical Offices and Fees.
1. WHat peculiar, or exempt Jurisdictions be claimed or executed in your
Parish?

2. Be there any Ecclesiastical Judges, or any Clerks and Ministers under them,
who do take or exact extraordinary Fees, against the Canons, or Tables which
set forth those Fees, which have come to your knowledge?

3. Are there to this purpose two Registers or Tables containing the several
Rates of Fees due to each Officer, Ca. 135.
the one publicly proposed in the Consistory-Court, the other in the Registry,
that every Subject may take view and notice thereof?

4. Ca. 134.
Do Clarks or others take any thing by way of gratuity for expedition?

5. Do you know or have you heard of any payment, composition, or promise made
to any Ecclesiastical Officer, for conniving at any fault committed, for
sparing any person, for misdemeanour for Ecclesiastical cognizance, concealing
of any Excommunication? what Sums have come to your knowledge, or be of public
fame? who are the delinquents.

6. What co^mutation has been given, by whom, to whom, for what offense? how
has it been employed?

7. Do any Ecclesiastical Judges speed any Act privately of themselves? Ca. 123.


8. What number of Apparitours be there in the several Jurisdictions? Ca. 138.


9. What bribes or exactions have any of them taken? Ca. 138.
Do they execute their office by Substitutes?

Ca. 107.
10. Are the Surrogates men of honest and sober conversation?

You also are to exhibit a Bill of Presentiments to this Court, of all and every
the Offenders in any of the Matters mentioned in the precedent Articles, and
therein to take the assistance of your Minister.

The Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the names of such of the
younder sort in their several Paristes, as they Judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed.

FINIS.

