ARTICLES TO BE Enquired of and Answered unto BY THE Churchwardens and Sworn
Men IN THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN Lord
Bishop of NORWICH, 1692.

LONDON:

Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1692.

Bibliography


THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE
'In Paradise the Tree
Of Knowledge was the pride;
By God's supreme decree,
The man who eat, then died.
But Heaven in mercy since
Does him who tastes forgive;
To know is no offense:
Now, he who eats, shall live.'
HENRY STEVENS of Vermont, FSA, etc 4 Trafalgar Square, London. 1882

The Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens of each Parish.
YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to Execute the Office of a Churchwardenn
within your Parish, and shall diligently Enquire and make true Presentment of
such Things and Persons as you know to be presentable by the Ecclesiastical
Laws of this Realm. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY, Unto which The Churchwardens or Sidemen are to Answer in
the Diocese of Norwich.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the things belonging thereunto.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, both in the Roof and Windows, Floor and
Seats, Can. 85.
in good and sufficient Repair; and are all things therein kept in an orderly
and decent sort?

II. Is there a Font of Stone in your Church or Chapel, with a Cover to it;
Can. 81, 82.
standing in the ancient usual place? Does your Minister there Baptize
publicly? Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel; covered in time
of Divine Service with a Carpet, and when the Communion is administered, with a
fair Linen Cloth? And have you a Chalice or Communion-Cup, with a Cover, and
one or more Flaggons? Have any of these been profaned by common use?

III. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service; a
Pulpit; Can. 80, 82, 83.
a large Bible of the last Translation; a Book of Common Prayer published 1662;
the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; a printed Table of the Degrees
wherein Marriages are prohibited; a Book of Canons; and a decent Surplice?

IV. Have you a Parchment Book for the Registring of the Day and Year of every
Christning, Wedding, and Burial in your Parish; and is it kept in all points
according to the Canon in that behalf? Can. 70.


TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging to
the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard well fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon it, or made any door into it? And how long since?

II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? Have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, and by whom?

III. Have you a true Terrier of all the Glebelands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of them been withheld from your Minister, and by whom, as you know and have
heard? And is your Terrier laid up in the Bishop's Registry?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister licensed by the Bishop? Can. 48.
Has he been legally inducted? And read the 39 Articles within the time by Law
appointed, and declared his Assent thereto? Is he defamed or suspected to have
obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonical compact? Stat. 13.
Eliz. c. 12.


II. Is your Minister constantly resident among you, and does he preach every
Lord's Day, Can. 43, 47, 48.
unless hindered by sickness or reasonable absence? How long in any one year
has he been absent from his Cure? who supplies it, during his absence? Does he
serve any other Cure besides, or has he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice?

III. Does your Parson, Vicar or Curate, Act of Uniformity.
in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the Holy
Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth,
Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, use the Form and Words prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer: and all such Rites and Ceremonies, as are
appointed in that Book, so far as you have observed? Can. 58.


IV. Does your Minister at the Reading and Celebrating Divine Offices in your
Church or Chapel wear the Surplice; together with such other Habit as is
suitable to his Degree?

V. Does he celebrate the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper so often, Can. 21 22,
26 Rubric before the Communion. Can. 59. Rubric before confirm. Can. 61.
that every Parishioner may receive it thrice at least in every year? And does
he keep back such as ought not to be admitted, giving an Account of them to the
Bishop?

VI. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism? And does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be confirmed by the Bishop?

VII. Does he refuse or neglect to visit the Sick; Can. 67, 69.
or delay the Baptism of any Infant in danger of death? Is there any Child past
Infancy, or other Persons grown up, who, through your Minister's Default, yet
remains unbaptized in your Parish?

VIII. Has he married any Persons in private Houses; Can. 62, 63.
or such as being under Age have not the consent of their Parents or Guardians,
or without Banes first published in the Church on three Sundays or Holy Days;
or at any other Hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, unless he
had a License so to do?

IX. Does your Minister declare to the People every Sunday, at the time
appointed in the Communion Book, the several Holy Days and Fasting days in the
Week following? And does he observe them?

X. Is he a Man of a sober, studious, Can. 74, 75.
peaceable and exemplary life? Is he grave, modest and regular in his outward
Demeanor and Apparel? Is he, in any kind, disorderly and scandalous?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. Does every Parishioner demean themselves Reverently in your Church or
Chapel, Can. 18.
during Divine Service and Preaching the Word of God; kneeling at the Prayers
and Sacrament; standing up when the Creed and Gospel are read; saying audibly,
with the Minister, the Confession, Lord's Prayer and Creed; And making such
other Answers to the Public Prayers as are appointed in the Book of Common
Prayer?

II. Is there any Person in your Parish who lies under a Common Fame, Can. 109.
or Suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards, Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's Name? Or any that are noted to be
filthy Talkers, Railers, Sowers of Sedition, Faction and Discord among their
Neighbors?

III. Are there any that refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings; or to
contribute to the Rates made for repair of your Church or Chapel, or any thing
thereunto belonging?

IV. Has any Legacy been left by the last Will of Testament of any Persons, to
your Church or Chapel, or to the Poor, or any other pious and charitable use?
Which has been misspent or embezzolled and by whom?

V. Are there any in your Parish, who under pretense of Liberty of Conscience,
wholly neglect all public Worship of God; neither going to Church, nor to any
Assembly that meet together according to the late Act for exempting their
Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the
Penalties of certain Laws?

VI. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? Act for
exempting, etc.
Have they certified the place of their Meeting to the Bishop, or such others
as that Act appoints? Do they meet with their Doors locked, barred or bolted
during the time of their Meeting? Have their Preachers subscribed the Articles
of our Religion, except those excepted in the Act, and taken the Oaths, and
subscribed the Declaration therein required?

VII. Are there any who profess to live in the Communion of the Church of
England, Can. 112.
who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, being of Age fit to
receive it?

VIII. Are there any living within your Parish, Can. 99.
as Man and Wife, who are within the Degrees prohibited?

IX. Do you know, or have you heard of any in your Parish, who having the
Presentation of an Ecclesiastical Living, has made any Simonaical compact or
gain thereby; either in Money, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes or Glebe
belonging to the Benefice?

X. Have any Pews or Seats been erected in your Church or Chapel, without
leave from the Ordinary? Is there any strife or contention about Seats in the
Church? Have any occasioned Riot, Clamor or Disturbance in the Church at any
time?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you a Parish-Clerk; Aged Twenty* Can. 91.
one years at least? Is he of an honest Life and Conversation? Able to perform
his duty in Reading, Writing and Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? Does
he duty attend him in all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly
paid him? Or who withholds the same from him?

II. Does your Sexton perform his Duty diligently, in keeping the Church clean
and decent, in tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service?

TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools and Hospitals.
I. WHat Schoolmaster, Can. 77, 78, 79.
private or public, is there in your Parish? Is he licensed by the Bishop?
Does he teach his Scholars the Church Catechism? Does he cause them to repair
orderly to the Church or Chapel on Sundays and Holy Days, and there see that
they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Servine
and Sermon?

II. What Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School has been founded in your
Parish? Are they so ordered in their Revenue and Use, as the Founders
appointed, and the Law of the Land allows?

III. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery, Midwifery, without
license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Can. 89.
Or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishoners?

II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up a just account of the
Money they have received and laid out for the use of the Church? Ibid.
And have they delivered up the Money remaining in their hands to the
succeeding Churchwardens, together with all other things belonging to your
Church or Chapel?

III. Do they provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or
Chapel, Rubric after Commun.
a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants, at the Charges of the Parish?

FINIS.

