ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED OF BY The Church-VVardens and Sidemen (with the
assistance of their Ministers) of every Parish within the ARCH-DEACONRY of
NORWICH, IN THE VISITATION Of the Right Worshipful Doctor WILLIAM GERY,
ARCHDEACON of NORWICH. In the Year of our Lord God, 1664

Sir Justinian Lewyn Knt, Official.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1663.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry, etc.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments and furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for
the Roof, Windows, Floor and Seats? II. Has any part of your Church, Chapel
or Steeple been Demolished or pulled down, what part and how long since; or any
of the Lead, Timber, or Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled
or sold, and by whom? III. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover, and
does the same stand at or near the nether end of your Church in such manner as
anciently and usually Fonts have stood for the Baptizing of Children? Is there
a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and another
Covering of white Linen to be spread thereon at the time of the Administration
of the Lords Supper; and have you a seemly Challice or Communion-Cup, with a
Cover, and one or more Flaggons? IV. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein
to read Divince Service; a Pulpit, with a decent Cloth or Cushions; a large
Bible of the last Translation; and a Book of Common Prayer, lately published,
Anno 1662; the Book of Homilies, set forth by Authority; and a printed Table of
the Degrees within which Marriages are Prohibited; and a Book of Canens and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a decent Surplice and Good for your Minister
to Officiate in? And are the Ten Commandments set up at the East end of your
Church or Chapel, and are the Kings Arms set up in some fitting place of your
Church or Chancel? V. Have you a Register-book in parchment of Christenings,
Burials, and Marriages, and is the same kept in all points according to the
ancient use? VI. Have you a Book of Paper, to record the Names and Licenses of
such Strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel, and do
such Strangers subscribe their names? As also a third Book for the
Churchwardens accounts? As also a Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep
the said Books, and the aforementioned furniture?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made a y Door into it, and how long since? II. Is
the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good repair?
Have any of them been defaced, or pulled down without license? Have there been
any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient Marks or Bounds
removed or changed, and by whom? III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of
all the Glebelands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to
your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tythes, and
Portions of Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within or without your
Parish) as belong thereto? Have any of the same been withheld from your
Minister, and by whom, as you know or have heard?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister legally Instituted and inducted into his Benefice, and did
he within two Months after his induction, publicly in the Church upon some
Sunday or Holy day, in the time of Divine service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by authority: and there publicly declare his
assent thereunto? II. Is he resident among you? How many weeks has he been
absent from you without urgent necessity? III. Has your Minister a Curate; Is
he in Holy Orders, and conformable to the Laws of the Church; Is he allowed by
the Ordinary? IV. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have
any, perform his Office in all things according to the Rubric of the Book of
Common Prayer, lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published
therewith? V. Does your Minister at the reading divine service, wear a Surplice
and Hood? VI. Does he observe the Holy days and Fasting-dayes, the Ember
weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as is appointed by the
Rubric? VII. Is your Minister licensed to preach; If so, Does he constantly
(not having a reasonable impediment) preach one Sermon in your Church or
Chapel every Sunday: or if he be not licenced, or be hindered; does he procure
one to supply his Office, by preaching, or reading one of the Homilies? VIII.
Does your Minister instruct the Youth in your Parish in the Church Catechism,
and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop? IX. Does he neglect
or delay to Visit the sick, or to Baptize any Infant that is in danger of
death; Does he Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either
of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? X. Has your
Minister Married any persons without publishing the Banes on three Sundays or
Holy Days, or License first obtained? XI. Has your Minister taken upon him to
appoint any public or private Fasts, Prophecyings, or exercises, not appointed
by Authority? Or does he or any other either Minister or Lay person hold any
Conventicles or meetings in private houses, within your Parish, for people of
several families to resort unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying,
Thank^giving or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case
provided? XII. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of a sober
life and conversation; Or is his carriage in any kind, disorderly, or
scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there any in your Parish that make profession of any other Religion;
then what is established in the Church of England, and that refuse to come unto
the public assemblies, Prayers, or service of the Church? If there be any,
what are their Names? II. Is there any person in your Parish, that lies under
a Common fame, or suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or incest; or is there
any of your Parish that are guilty of antinuptial Fornication; that have had
carnal knowledge of Husband or Wife respectively before lawful Marriage? are
there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common swearers, or
Blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be Raylers, unclean or
filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction and discord amongst their
neighbors? III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holy Days follow
their bodily and ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do; are any
shops kept open, or wares sold, or do any Vintners, Inkeepers, or other
Victuallers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game
in their houses upon those days, during the time of Divine service,
particularly on the 30th of January the 29th of May and the 5th of November?
IV. Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel,
upon Sundays and Holy days, and there Decently and Orderly as well during
Divine Service, as preaching the Word of God; demean themselves reverently,
uncovering their Heads, Kneeling at Prayers; standing up, when the Creed and
Gospel are read? V. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their
Infant-Children to be Baptized in the Church unless in case of urgent danger;
or do they send them to be Baptized in other Parishes; or are they Baptized
after other form then is appointed, or are they kept Unbaptized longer then is
allowed; or is there any Infants or more aged persons as yet Unbaptized? VI. Is
there any person in your Parish of 16 years of Age who does not receive the
Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Does
any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes, or do any
strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it? VII. Are there any in your
Parish that be Denounced and declared Excommunicate, for any crime committed,
How long have they been so excommunicated? VIII. Are there any living in your
Parish who have been unlawfully married, scilicet, Without publication of
Banes, or Lycense first obtained, or within the degrees prohibited? IX. Are
there any Married Women within your Parish who after their delivery from the
peril of Childbirth, efuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in the
Chur h, And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to Custom? X. Are there any that refuse to pay
their duty for Easter offerings, or refuse to contribute to the rates made for
the repair of your Church, or Chapel, or any thing thereunto belonging? XI.
Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the rites of the Church of
England, and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish
that be not proved; or any goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying within your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to
your Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other p ous, and
charitable purposes, what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?
XII. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their
Pewes or seats in your Church? Have any new Pewes been erected in your
Chancell, or in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the
Ordinary?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks, and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish Clerk aged 21
years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation, and sufficient or
able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church?
Are his wages duly paid unto him, or who withholds the same from him? II.
Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service; and when any person is
departing out of this life, does he upon notice Toll a Bell, that the
neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the Dying-person, to the grace
and favor of God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Chirurgions, and
Midwives.
I. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Ordinary? Does he teach his Scholars the Catechism of
Religion, set forth by Authority? Does he cause his Scholars upon Sundays and
Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they
behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service and
Sermon? II. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery? or any
Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of Midwife, without License from the
Ordinary?
TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners? II. Have the former and last Churchwardens
given up their Accounts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding
Churchwardens, the Moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other
things belonging to your Church or Chapel? III. You are further to
understand, That according to your Office, you are to provide against every
Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a sufficient quantity of fine
White Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants.
THE END.

