A Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the Prosperity of the
Christian Arms against the Turks, and especially for taking the City of Buda:
To be used publicly on Sunday the Twelfth of September in His Majesty's Free
Chapel of St. Georges Windsor, In the Collegiate Church of St. Peter's
Westminster, and in the Parish Church of St. Mary le Bow in the City of London.
The Morning Service shall be the same with the Common Office of the Day,
Excepting these following Alterations.
TO the Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses, Dan. 9.9, 10.
though we have rebelled against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the
Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he set before us.

Proper Psalms. II, XLVII, LXII.

Proper Lessons.

The first, 2 Samuel Chap. 22. Te Deum. The second, Heb. 11. verse 24. to verse
35. Benedictus.
After the Collect for the Day, let this follow.
O Eternal God our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art the
only giver of all Victory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and Thanksgiving for
the late signal Deliverance, and glorious Success thou have vouchsafed to those
thy faithful Servants, who have not been ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ
Crucified, but have manfully fought under his Banner. We adore and bless thy
Divine Goodness, that thou did not give them over as a prey to cruel and
bloodthirsty men; but have taught their hands to War, and their Fingers to
Fight, and have showed them a mavelous great kindness in a strong City. We
humbly pray that these, and all other thy benefits, may raise in Us, and in the
whole Church of God, a Spirit of Holy Joy, and Christian Charity, a Spirit of
fervent Zeal for thy Name and glory, and a steadfast faith and perseverance in
thy pure and undefiled Religion, through Jesus Christ Our Lord and Savior.
Amen.

In the end of the Litany after the Collect [ We humbly beseech thee, etc.] Let
the Collect be used (for Peace and deliverance from our Enemies.)
O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face or their enemies; we yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the Communion-Service,
The Epistle. 1 S. John Chap. 4.1.
BEloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye
the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is of God. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist,
whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the
world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater
is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. They are of the world:
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. We are of God:
he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears not us. Hereby
know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. Beloved, let us love one
another: for love is of God; and every one that loves, is born of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 28.18.
ANd Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and so, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.

After the Prayer (for the whole state of Christ's Church) Let these following
Prayers be used.
ALmighty and everliving God, who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in praises,
doing Wonders, who by miraculous Ways and Means, have raised thy Household, the
Church, building it on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone, who have promised to be with it
always even unto the end of the world, so that the Gates of Hell shall never be
able to prevail against it; Who by so many mavelous Acts of thy Providence
have graciously made good this thy Promise in all Ages, particularly at this
time did not give over thine Heritage to Confusion, but have blessed the
Armies engaged in this Christian War, crowning them with Victory and Honor. We
meekly beseech thee, O Lord, that we and the whole Christian World may make a
right use of these thy undeserved Mercies. To this end we pray thee to keep and
maintain all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors, in Peace, Amity and
Concord, that being strengthened by thy Grace and Power, with united Hearts and
Hands, in defense of thy Cause and Truth, they may wax valiant in Battle, see
their desires on their Enemies, and put to flight the Armies of the Aliens.
Preserve, O Lord, thy most holy Faith in those Kingdoms and Nations, where it
is already planted, restore it to its ancient Purity and Brightness where it
lies in obscurity, oppressed by Turkish Tyranny, and their abominable
Superstition. Enlarge its Borders into all Lands, that all the Ends of the
Earth may see the Salvation of Our God. Grant this O Lord, for the sake of Our
only Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall follow the third Collect for Good Friday.
O Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live; Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, and take from
them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word; and so fetch
them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ
our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Spirit, one God, world
without end. Amen.

And the Collect for the Fifth Sunday after Trinity.
GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in
all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

By His Majesty's Command, SUNDERLAND P.

FINIS.

