A COLLECTION OF PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS, USED IN HJS MAJESTY'S Chapel, and
in His ARMIES.

Upon occasion of the late Victories against the Rebels, and for the future
success of the Forces.

PVBLISHED By His MAJESTY'S Command, to be duly read in all other Churches and
Chapels within this his Kingdom, and Dominion of WALES.

Printed at OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

A PRAYER FOR THE PRESERVATION Of His MAJESTY'S Person, and for the Peace of
the Kingdom.
O Lord guard the Person of thy Servant the King.

Who puts His trust in Thee.

Send to Him and to His Armies help from thy holy Place.

And evermore mightily defend them.

Confound the designs of all those that are risen up against Him.

And let not their rebellious wickedness approach near to hurt Him.

O Lord hear our Prayer.

And let our cry come unto Thee.

O Lord God of Hosts who give victory unto Kings, and did deliver David thy
Servant from the pecill of the Sword, hear us, we beseech thee, most miserable
sinners, who do here power out our souls before thee, entirely desiring the
protection of thine hand upon thy Servant the King: let Him find safety under
the shadow of thy wings, and preserve his Person as the apple of thine own
eye. Suffer not that sword which thou have put into his hands to be wrested out
by the hand of man: but bless his Counsels with success, and his enterprises
with victory, that he may go on to be a terror to all those that oppose him;
and to be as the dew of the latter rain upon the hearts of all those who do
still remain Loyal to him. And O thou who take no delight in the misery of
one single sinner, spare merciful Lord, spare a great, though most sinful
Nation, pity a despised Church, and a distracted State, heal up those wounds
which our sins have made so wide, that none but thine own hands can close
them. And in the tenderness of thine unspeakable compassion hasten to put so
happy an end unto these wasting divisions, that thy service may be the more
duly celebrated, thine Anointed more conscientiously obayed, that the Church
may be restored to a true Christian unity, and the Kingdom to our former Peace,
and that for his sake who is the Prince of Peace, and that shed his precious
blood to purchase our Peace, even Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee O
Father and the blessed Spirit be etc.

A PRAYER OF THANKSgiving for His MAJESTY'S Victory over the Rebels at
Edgehill.
O Thou God of Hosts, who go forth with our Armies, and pleadest the cause
of thine Anointed against them that ^trive with him, We acknowledge with all
lowliness of mind, that it is not our sword, nor the multitude or Our Host
that has saved us, but it is thy hand alone that has disposed of Victory to
thy servant the King, that has covered His head in the day of Battle, and
has kept His Crown from being thrown down to the ground: Not unto us
therefore, not unto us, but unto thee, O God, do We give the praise, beseeching
thee to accomplish the great work thou have begun for us, to continue the
blessings of good success on the head of our Sovereign, and on His Army, that
the happiness thereof may flow from thence to the very skirts of His People;
to continue the fear and consternation which thou have already cast upon the
Hearts of those who have Rebelliously risen up against Him, to enfeeble their
strength, to infatuate their Counsels, to undeceive and disabuse the seduced
part of them, that they may know and feel, that to take up Arms against thy
Vicegerent, is to fight against heaven, that so by a timely and conscientious
submission to the just Authority of him whom thou have set over them, the
effusion of more blood may be prevented, the Peace of this distracted Kingdom
settled, Faction may be cast out of the State, and Schism out of the Church, to
the advancement of thy glory, the Kings honor, and the Peoples good. Grant
this, O God, for thy old mercies sake, which thou were wont to show unto this
Nation, that both Prince and People may join in giving praise to thee, who
live and raignest world without end. AMEN.

A thanksgiving for His Majesty's late great Victory over the Rebels in the
NORTH.
O MOST Mighty God, whose dwelling is above the heavens, yet humblest thy self
to dispose of all things done either in heaven or earth, who in thy
unsearchable judgments have suffered the Sheba's of these times to blow the
Trumpet of Rebellion in every corner of this Land, but withal have justly
turned this sufferance of thine into their Ruin; We praise and magnify thy
great and glorious Name, that having given of late to thine Anointed so many
pledges of thy Favor, thou have yet added to that heap of blessings a New and
Notable Victory over the Rebels in the North; Go on, O thou God of our
Salvation, go on, as thou have begun; leave us not, we beseech thee, till thou
have accomplished the great work thou have so apparently taken into thine own
hands; Pass by our personal sins, O Lord, though they cry loud, hear them
not, but look to the Righteousness of our Cause; See the seamlesse Coat of thy
Son torn, the Throne of thine Anointed trampled on, thy Church invaded by
Sacrilege, and thy people miserably deceived with Lies. See it, O God, (as see
it thou do) and vindicate what thou see upon the heads of those who lead
these wretches to destruction, till by their frequent overthrows (if nothing
else can possibly reduce them) thou have scourged them into obedience, and
tamed these Enemies of thine and ours into a desire of peace, that so having at
last subdued their hearts (which is the best of Victories) thy David may return
to his Jerusalem in peace, and thy people once more joy under his Government,
blessing thy goodness which has wrought this for us through the Mediation of
thy Son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be all praise,
and glory world without end. AMEN.

A Thanksgiving for His Majesty's late great Victory over the Rebels in the
West.
O Most Glorious and Powerful Lord God, without whose aid* and influence all
our strength is weakness, and our counsel folly: we thy unworthy Servants in
a grateful commemoration of thy frequent and often repeated blessings, with
humble and unfeigned hearts offer up to thee the sacrifice of praise, calling
Heaven and Earth to witness with us, that it is thy Power alone by which we
stand, thy Strength by which we prosper. Particularly we magnify thy holy
Name, O God, for that late great Victory, wherewith thou have graciously bl^st
our Sove^aignes Forces in the West, where thou gave not the day to the
strong, nor measuredst out success according to the numbers, but made the
weak chase the mighty, and ^n handful overthrow an host; showing by a^
evident testimony or thy presence, that the Arm of Flesh strives in vain, when
the Arm of God does fight the battle. In pursuance of this thy unspeakable
goodness, we humbly beg of thee, O Lord, to continue in all our dangers the
like special assistance to us, to break the spear of the Disobedient, and
melt the hearts of the Rebellious into water, to strike the minds of the
perverse, with a true touch of that Conscience, which they go about to stifle,
and a true sense of that duty to thine Anointed, which they labor to forget,
that we thy miserable and distressed people, may no longer groan under those
heavy Judgments, which our sins have pulled down upon us, but may at last be
reunited and knit in the happiness of a long wished for peace, and with one
mind, in the same true Religion, worship thee the only true God, and obey our
King whom thou have set over us: grant this, O merciful Father for thy dear
Sons sake who reigns with thee, and thy holy Spirit world without end. AMEN.

A thansgiving for the Queens Safe Return.
O MOST merciful Lord God, we farther render thee all Praise and thanks, for
that thou have been pleased to extend thy hand of deliverance unto the Person
of our gracious Queen; that thou have made her an instrument of so much good
to this Kingdom, and brought her safely hither, through so many dangers both by
Sea and Land. Lord make the King and his people daily more and more happy in
her, that as by thine especially favor she is already become the Mother of so
many hopeful Princes, so she may be daily fruitful in the addition of more
blessings to us, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, world without end. AMEN.

A hymn or general thanksgiving.
GLORY be to God on high, and in Earth Peace, good will toward Men. We praise
Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee; and at this time, in a
more especial manner, with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts, we
most humbly give thanks unto thee, for that thou have been pleased out of thine
infinite goodness, mercifully to look down upon the late low estate of our
gracious Sovereign; That thou have brought him from so much scornful neglect,
to appear so terrible unto those desperate Rebels, who dare yet stand in
Arms against him; That thou have blessed him with many, and those eminent
Victories, and particularly, for those great defeats which by his Armies thou
have given unto his enemies in the North, and in the West. O Lord God, heavenly
King, God the Father Almighty, O Lord the only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
continue these thy favors to us, and perfect, we beseech thee, that glorious
work, the happy Peace of this Land, which none but thine own strength can
finish. And to that end, Thou that take away the sins of the World, take this
foul sin of Rebellion from us; Thou that sit at the right hand of God the
Father, smite through the loins of those Sacrilegious men who have not spared
at all to profane thy house, and thy service; so shall we still bless and
magnify thy Name in the midst of the great Congregation; so shall we thy
servants never cease to be still praising thee and saying; Thou only, art holy,
Thou only art the Lord, Thou only O Christ, with the holy Ghost, art most high
in the glory of God the Father. To thee be all praise and honor, and glory
ascribed, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to be said during these times of Trouble.
O Lord our God, Merciful and Gracious, and abundant in goodness and truth,
who do according to thy will in the Armies of heaven, and rulest over all the
Kingdoms of the earth; in whose hand is power and might, and none is able to
withstand thy arm; we most vile sinners approach before thy Throne of grace,
bewailing those manifold transgressions that have provoked thy wrath and
indignation against us. We know, O Lord, that affliction comes not forth of
the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground, but it is thou that
with rebukes do chasten man for sin. We confess that we were a wealthy and a
careless Nation, and our Land was as the garden of Eden; our deliverances were
great, and thy blessings were multiplied; we dwelt alone without fear of
evil, and were become the envy of those that were round about us. Peace was
within our walls, and plenteousnesse within our palaces. But when we had eaten
and were full, and had waxen fat, we kicked against thee our Maker, who had
done so great things for us: our heart was lifted up and forgot thee our God;
and lightly esteemed the rock of our salvation. We loathed the Manna that
rained down upon us; our peace became a weariness, and we snuffed at our
happiness; we murmured against Moses in our Tents, and made light of thy
Anointed whom thou had set over us. Therefore have thou recompensed our ways
upon our own heads, and suffered our destruction to proceed from ou^ ^^lves:
our wickedness does correct us; our backsliding does reprove us; and our
iniquity is become our rain. Thou have broken upon us with a grievous breach:
thy anger has divided us, and thy fury has dashed us one against another.
Thou have mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst of us; and made us a
Nation void of counsel and understanding: in stead of peace thou have sent
bitterness, and have sent a fire into our bowels; and it is kindled round
about us. And now, O Lord, behold the sword is drunk with our blood, and we
are numbered to the slaughter: the high vvayes are unoccupied, and the
Travailers go through bypaths: our fields are divided, our inheritance is for
a spoil, and out substance to the robbers. We are become are proach to the
foolish people, and servants bear rule over us. The mean man is risen against
the honorable, and the fire out of the bramble devoureth the lofty Cedars; our
Women are cast out of their pleasant places, and the roab is pulled off from
the aged; there is no respect had to the Priests, nor favor to the Elders. Thy
Sanctuaries, even the excellency of thy strength, are profaned, and they have
defiled the places where thy honour^d welleth, and yet still the seat of
wickedness frames mischief by a Law; and it turns judgment backward, and
bids justice stand a far off; and devises deceitful matters against
those that are quiet in the Land. Nay there is a lying Spirit gone out into the
mouth of the Prophets; they prophecy falsely, and the People delight to have it
so, and they strengthen the hands of evil doers, that they turn not back from
their wickedness. Thus are we covered with a cloud in thine anger, and our
beauty is cast down to the ground. But, O Lord, shall thine indignation be
powered out for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? O pass by the
transgressions of the remnant of thine Heritage, and take away the rebuke of
thy People. O remove from us reproach and contempt and strengthen the spoiled
against the destroyers. Bow down thine ear, and consider the oppression of the
poor, the sighing of the needy, the groaning of the Prisoners, that are fast
bound in misery and iron. Lift up thy self because of the rage of thine
Adversaries: consider the desolation they have made in thy Courts, and all that
the enemy has done wickedly in thy Sanctuary. And yet still they are compassed
with pride, and cloth themselves with violence as with a garment. How long, O
Lord, shall they boast themselves in mischief? how long shall they decree
unrighteous decrees, and write grievousnesse which they have prescribed? O make
not a full end with us, but correct us in mercy, though thou leave us not
altogether unpunished. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and under
the shadow of thy wings shall be our refuge until this Tyranny be over past.
Disappoynt therefore the devices of the crafty; let not the Rebellious exalt
themselves any more, and suffer not the Tabernacles of the Robbers to prosper.
And as thou have begun to show thy servants thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: so continue thy marvailous loving kindness to those who put their trust in
thee. The Battle is thine, O Lord, thou have preserved us from the Arm of
flesh; yea it is thou that have wrought all our works in us, even when there
was no might against that great Company that came against us. When we were few
in number, and there was none to help us, then thine own Arm brought
salvation, and thy righteousness sustained us. O perfect therefore thy handy
work. Give salvation to our King, and deliver Charles thy servant from the
peril of the sword, bind up His soul in the bundle of life, gird Him with
strength to the battle, contend with those who contend with Him, subdue thou
the people under Him, and suffer no weapon formed against him to prosper. O
deliver him at length from the strivings of the people, and lift up his head
above his Enemies round about him, give him the shield of thy salvation, and
let thy gentleness make him great: put a stop at last to the madness of the
people: say to the destroying sword, it is now enough: send us a seasonable and
blessed calm: visit us with the joy of thy countenance, and make us glad
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us. O restore to us our
solemn assemblies: bring us back into thy Courts to praise thee, and let us
once more worship thee in the beauty of thy holiness. Save us O Lord, from
enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us. That so we may serve thee
without fear, living a quiet and a peaceable life, in all Godliness and
honesty, looking for the blessed appearance of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be all honor and praise,
world without end. AMEN.

FINIS.

