ARTICLES CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical; To be Enquired of within the
DIOCESE OF LINCOLN, AT THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in
God JAMES Lord Bishop of that Diocese.

Anno Domini 1697.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham Bookseller, at the Star in Ludgate Street.
1697.

The Form of the Oath to be Administered to the Church-VVardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOU shall Swear to make True Presentment, according to the Book of Articles
given You in Charge, as far as You know, and by Law You are Bound, without Fear
or Favor of any Person.

So help You God.

ARTICLES CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical, etc. IN The Diocese of LINCOLN.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and Chapels, and the Furniture belonging to them.
1. IS your Parish Church or Chapel well and sufficiently repaired, the
Windows glazed, 1. Canon 8^
not stopped up, the Floor evenly paved, and the Seats convenient for Kneeling
and Sitting, and the whole Church clean and Decent? 2. Is there in the Church
or Chapel a Font of Stone with a Cover to it, standing in the usual Place? 2.
Canon 81, 82.
Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, covered in time of
Divine-Service, with a Carpet of Silk or Stuff, and, at the time of
Administering the Holy Communion, with a fair Linen Cloth? have you a Patin
for the Bread, and a Chalice for the Wine with a Cover, and one or more
Flaggons preserved and kept for this Use, and not employed for any other? 3
Have you a decent Surplice for the Minister to use at the time of Divine
Service, 3. Canon 58.
provided and duly washed at the charge of the Parish? 4. 4. Canon 83, 80.
Have you in the Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Pew for the Reading of
Divine Service; a Pulpit with a Cloth or Cushion; a Large Bible of the last
Translation; Two Books of Common Prayer for the Minister and Clerk, well Bound;
The Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; The Book of Canons; A Printed
lable of the Degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited? 5. 5. Canon 70.
Have you a Register-Book of Parchment of the Day and Year of all Christenings,
Weddings and Burials in your Parish; Also a Book for the Churchwardens
Accounts, and a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep all the said
Books, and the forementioned Furniture?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebe, Tithes and Possessions
belonging to the Church.
1. 1. Canon 85.
IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and carefully kept with Walls, Pales,
or Rails, as has been accustomed? are the Trees therein preserved? has any part
of it been separated from it, or any Door made into it? 2. 2. Lindwood de
Eccles. Aediffi.
Is the House of the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the Outhouses
thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient Repair? Have any of the said
Houses been defaced or pulled down without License, and by whom? Have any
Encroachments been made upon the same, and by whom? 3. Have you a true Terrier
of all the Gleab-lands, Meadows, 3. Canon 87.
Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to the Parsonage or
Vicarage? Have you a particular of the Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portion of
Tithes, either within or without your Parish, and other yearly Profits
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? Have any enclosures been made in your
Parish to the Detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage; and converting
Arable Land into Pasture? Is your Terrier entered in the Bishops Registry?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister Episcopally ordained, 1. Canon 36.
and Licensed by the Bishop himself? Has he been legally inducted? and has he
Read the thirty nine Articles within the Time by Law appointed, and declared
his Assent thereunto? 2. Is your Minister suspected to have obtained his
Benefice by any Simoniacal Contract? 2. Canon 40.
3. Is your Minister constantly resident in the Parish? 3 Canon 45, 47.
does he Preach every Lords Day, unless hindered by sickness, or reasonable
absence? How long in any one year has he been absent from his Cure? Has he a
Licensed Curate to assist him in his absence or presence? and what Yearly
Stipend does he allow him? Does he supply any other Cure besides, or has he
any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? 4. Does your Parson, Vicar or Curate, 4. Act
of Uniformity.
in reading the Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the Holy
Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women, Burial of the Dead,
and Pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and
words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer? does he observe all such Rites
and Ceremonies as are appointed in that Book, so far as you know? 5. 5. Canon
53. Act of Uniformity.
Does your Minister at the Reading and Celebrating Divine Offices, wear the
Surplice, together with the Habit suitable to his Degree? And does he read the
Service with an audible and distinct Voice? 6. 6. Canon 21, 26.
Does he frequently administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, so often, as
that every Parishioner may receive it thrice at the least in every year? And
does he keep back such as ought not to be admitted, giving an account of them
to the Bishop? 7. 7. Canon 57, 61.
Does he diligently instruct the Youth of the Parish in the Church Catechism;
and when they are instructed, does he, as there is opportunity, present them to
be confirmed by the Bishop? 8. 8. Canon 67, 68, 69. Rubric. of Private Baptism.
Does he neglect or refuse to Visit Sick Persons? Does he delay to Baptize
Infants that are in danger of Death? Or being so Baptized and recovering
afterward, does he take care that they be brought into the Church with
Godfathers and Godmothers; that the Congregation may be satisfied of the
Baptizing thereof? Is there any Child past Infancy, or other Persons grown up,
who, through your Ministers default, remains yet Unbaptized in your Parish? 9.
9. Canon 62, 63. Injunct.
Has your Minister Married any Persons in private Houses? Or such as being
under Age, have not the consent of Parents or Guardians? or without the
publication of Banns, unless by a License duly obtained? Or at any other hours
than between eight and twelve a Clock in the Forenoon? Or, at any hour, any
Persons that are prohibited to Marry according to the Table of Marriage? Or
such as neither of them dwell in the Parish? 10. Does your Minister publish the
Holy days and Fasting days, 10. Canon 64.3. Jac. 1. c. 1.6. and 7. Gul. 3.
and does he read Divine Service appointed to be read those days? Does he on
the fifth of November yearly, after Morning Prayer or Sermon, read the Act for
Public Thanksgiving on that day? And does he read the Act for the more
effectual suppressing Profane Cursing and Swearing, four several times in the
year, on the four several Sundays appointed in that Act? 11. Is your Minister
Sober, Grave and Peaceable in his Behavior? Is he decent in his Apparel? 11.
Canon 74, 75.
Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a Common Gamester, a Swearer,
Railer or Quarreller? Is he vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any
Person either within the Parish or without? 12. Have you a Lecturer in your
Church or Chapel? Is he Licensed according to the Act of Uniformity? 12. Act
of Uniformity.
Does he, upon the first Lords day in every Month, read Divine Service, and
Perform what the said Act requires? Has he a Benefice with Cure of Souls
elsewhere? if he have, where and at what distance?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. DO the Parishioners when they come to Church or Chapel, behave themselves
reverently during the time of Divine Service and Preaching? 1. Canon 18. Act of
Uni-
do they Kneel at the Prayers and Sacrament, and Stand up, when the Creeds and
Gospel are read? Do they repeat the Confession, Lords-Prayer and Creeds with
the Minister, and make such other Answers as are appointed in the Book of
Common Prayer, and say Amen au^^bl^ at the ^oncl^sion of every Collect? 2 I^
there ^^y Pers^n in your Parish, 2. Can. 109.
who lies under a common Fame or Suspicion of A^ultery, Fo^nication or I^cest?
(...) there any common Drunkards, Swearers or Blasphemer of Gods Name? O^ any
that are noted to be filthy Talke^s, Railers, Sowers of Sedition, Faction and
D^sco^d among their Neighbors? 3. 3.5. and 6. Ed. 6.4. and 5. Gul. and Mar.
Are there any of your Parish, who, upon Sundays keep their Shops open, or
follow their bodily and ordinary Labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Or
do any Vintners, Innkeepers or other Victuallers, and Sellers of Beer or Ale,
suffer any Person, to tipple or game in their Houses on that day? 4. 4. Rubr.
after the Communion. Canon 85.
Are there any of your Parish that neglect or refuse to pay their Easter
Offering;; or to pay the Rates set for the Repairs of the Church or Chapel,
or any thing thereunto belonging? 5. 5. Canon 99.
Are there any in your Parish who live as Man and Wife, that are known, or
suspected not to be Married, or any Living as Man and Wife, who are within the
degrees prohibited? 6 Have any Legacies been left to your Church or Chapel, 7.
7. Canon 19. Act for exempt. Prot. Dissent.
Are there any that Loiter in the Churchyard or near the Church, in time of
Divine Service or Sermon? Or any that wholly neglect all Public Worship of
God, neither going to Church, nor to any Assembly pretending to Worship God
elsewhere, in Places licensed according to a late Act for exempting his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the
Penalties of certain Laws? 8. 9. 9. Can. 112.
Are there any who profess to live in the Communion of the Church of England,
who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, being of Age fit to
receive it? 10. Do you know, Simoniacal Compact or Gain thereby, either in
Moneys, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes or Glebe belonging to the
Benefice? 11. Have any Pews,
TIT. V. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers,
1. 1. Can. 127.
HAve any Ordinaries or Ecclesiastical Judges appointed Surrogates or
Registrars, that are Promoters or Assisters of Clandestine Marriages, or have
taken Rewards or Gifts for perverting Justice, or are noted for Intemperance,
Incontinence, or other Scandalous Vice? 2. Do any Ecclesiastical Judges,
Officials or Surrogates, 2. Can. 37.
grant Licenses to any Minister coming to reside in this Diocese to Preach,
Read, Catechize, or Administer the Sacraments, or to exercise any other
Ecclesiastical Function, unless he first consent, and subscribe to the three
Articles in Can. 36. in the Presence of the Bishop? 3. Do the said
Ecclesiastical Officers, is vacant, commit Sequestrations to honest and
sufficient Men, that do answer and account truly for the Profits during the
Vacancy? Are the Parishes provided with able Ministers during the Vacancy? 4.
4. Can. 123.
Do any Ecclesiastical Judges, speed any Judicial Act, without the Registrar of
the Court, or his lawful Deputy, or in their absence, without such Persons as
are allowed in that behalf? 5. 5. Can. 126.
Do the Officers in Peculiar Jurisdictions and Inferior Courts, exhibit the
Original Copies of Wills into the Principal Register-Office? 6. 6. Canon. An.
1571.
Has any Ecclesiastical Officer commuted' the Penance of any Delinquent
convicted? How has the Money been disposed of? 7. 7. Can. 135.
Has any Ecclesiastical Officer demanded and taken any unlawful Fees that you
know of?
TIT. VI. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1. 1. Canon 91.
HAve you a Parish Clerk aged 21 years at least? Is he of an honest Life and
Conversation? Is he sufficiently qualified to perform his Duty in Reading and
Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? Does he duly attend him in all Divine
Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? Or who with holds the same
from him? 2. Does your Sexton perform his Duty diligently, in keeping the
Church and Chancel clean and decent, and Tolling and Ringing he Bells, at due
times before Divine Service, as well upon other days, as upon Sundays?
TIT. VII. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, etc.
1. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, 1. Canon 77, 78, 79.
or Free School? who was the Founder, and is now the Patron thereof? Are the
Revenues thereof rightly Employed, according to the Intention of the Founder,
and the Statutes and Orders made concerning the same? 2. 3. 3. 3 Hen. 8.11.
Does any Man in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery, or any Woman
exercise the Office of a Midwife without License from the Ordinary?
TIT. VIII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. 1. Canon 8^.
ARE the Churchwardens yearly and duly chosen by the joint consent of your
Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and the other by
the Parishioners? 2. 2. Ibid.
Have the former and last Church Wardens given a true Account of the Moneys
they have received, and laid out for the use of the Church? And have they
delivered up the Moneys remaining in their hands, (if any be) to the succeeding
Churchwardens, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel? 3. 3. Canon 18.
Do they sufler no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by Men or Women,
Servants or Children, by walking or talking, or any other way, in your Church
or Chapel? 4 Do the Minister and Churchwardens provide against every
Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel a sufficient quantity of fine
white Bread, 4. Canon 20. Rubr. after the Communion.
and good Wine, according to the number of Communicants, at the Charge of the
Parish? 5. 5. Rubr. after the Communion.
Is the Money given at the Offertory, disposed of to Pious and Charitable Uses,
as the Minister and ChurchWardens think fit?
FINIS.

