ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical. Exhibted
to the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, of every Parish within the
Arch-Deaconry of WELLS. In the Diocese of BATH and WELLS.

And is very useful for all the Diocesses in England.

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens, and Sworn Men.

YOU shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall faithfully Execute your
several Offices of Churchwardens and Sidemen, according to Law, to the best
of your Skill and Knowledge. So help you God, and the Contents of his Holy
Gospel.

Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin in Warwicklane, 1700.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY Within the Diocese of BATH and WELLS.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1. Can. 2.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel, in good and sufficient Repair, both for the
Roof, Windows, Floor and Seats?

2. Has any part of your Church or Chapel, or Steeple been demolished or
pulled down? What part, and how long since? Or any of the Lead, Timber, or
Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezeled or sold, and by whom?

3. 28.
Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover? Does the Minister Baptize
publicly only in the Font? Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel,
with a decent Carpet, and another covering of white Linen, to be spread
thereon at the time of the Administration of the Lords Supper? And have you a
fair Chalice, or Communion Cup, with a Cover, and one or more Flagons? Have
they been profaned by common use? Or detained from their Sacred uses by any
Persons? And by whom?

4. 20. 82. 83. 80.
Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service, a Pulpit
with a decent Cloth or Cushion, a large Bible of the last Translation, and a
Book of Common Prayer lately Published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set
forth by Authority, and a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are
prohibited, Stat. 99.
and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a decent Surplice?

5. 58. 87. 70. 52.
Have you a Register Book in Parchment of Christnings, Burials, and Marriages?
And is the same kept in all points according to the Ancient use?

6. Have you a Book of Paper, to Record the Names and Licenses of such
Strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel? And do such
Strangers subscribe their Names? As also a Book for the Churchwardens
Accounts? As also a Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the said Books,
and the aforementioned Furniture?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any Person
encroached upon the same, or made any door in it? And how long since?

2. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? Have
there been any encroachments made upon the same? Or any of the Ancient Marks or
Bounds removed or changed? And by, whom?

3. Can. 87.
Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens, Orchards,
Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also a Note
of such Pensions, Rate Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other yearly Profits,
(either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the
same been withheld from your Minister? And by whom, as you know, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister resident among you? How many Weeks has he been absent
from you without urgent necessity?

2. Can. 47, 48.
Has your Minister a Curate resident in your Parish? Is he in Holy Orders, and
conformable to the Laws of the Church?

3. 58.
Does your Minister at the reading of Divine Service, or administrating the
Sacraments, wear a Surplice? 45, 46.
Does he constantly (not having reasonable Impediment) Preach one Sermon in
your Church or Chapel every Sunday? Or if he be hindered, 47.
does he procure one to supply his Office, by Preaching or Reading one of the
Homilies?

4. Can. 89. Rubr. before Confirmat:
Does your Minister instruct the Youth in your Parish in the Church-Catechism,
and prepare them to be confirmed by the Bishop.

5. Does he neglect or delay to visit the sick, or to Baptize any Infant that
is in danger of Death? 67. 69.
Does he Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

6. 62.
Has your Minister married any Persons without publishing the Banes on three
Sundays or Holidays, unless he had a License or Dispensation so to do? Or has
he married any in private Houses, or not between the Hours of Eight and Twelve
in the Morning?

7. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, 75.
a man of sober Life and Conversation? Or is his carriage in any kind
disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. Can. 109.
IS there any Person in your Parish that lies under a common Fame or Suspicion
of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your
Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name; or any that are noted
to be Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers, or Sowers of Sedition, Faction and
Discord among their Neighbors?

2. Expressed in a Table set forth by Authority. Anno Dom. 1563.
Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married, 39.
contrary to the Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully married, and not
separated or divorced by course of Law, do not Cohabit together?

3. Rubr. Can. 85.
Are there any, that refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings? Or refuse
to contribute to the Rates made for the Repair of your Church or Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging?

4. Rubr. 6.
Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish, that are yet
unproved? Or any Goods Administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary? Did
any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or any other Pious and Charitable purposes?
What were those Legacies? And how have they been bestowed?

5. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pew been erected in your Chancel, or in
the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning the Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1. Can. 91.
HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk aged Twenty one
Years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation, and sufficient or
able to perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister? And does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church?
Are his Wages duly paid him, or who withholds the same from him?

2. Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent? In
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service? And when any Person is
passing out of this Life, does he upon notice, toll a Bell, that the Neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying Person to the grace and favor of
God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools, Physicians, Chyrurgeons and
Midwives.
1. Can. 77.79.
Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish who is not
allowed thereunto by your Ordinary?

2. Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Chyrurgery? Does any Woman take
upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. Can. 89.
ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by the Minister, and
the other by the Churchwardens?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the
Parish? And delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their Hands, together with the Common Plate, and all other things belonging
to your Church or Chapel? Rubr. at the Communion.


3. You are farther to understand, that according to your Office, you are to
provide against every communion appointed in your Church or Chapel sufficient
quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of the
Communicants.

4. You the Churchwardens and Sidemen, are to maintain the Church in
sufficient repair, which is to be done by a Tax made by the Churchwardens and
Parish Overseers, and public notice given of the time and place where they
meet, and those that refuse, are to be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court only.

5. You are also to exhibit a bill of presentiments to the Court, of the
offenders in your Parish, and therein to take the assistance of your Minister.

FINIS.

