ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Within the Diocese of St. ASAPH, In the
First Episcopal VISITATION Of the Right Reverend Father in GOD ISAAC By Divine
Permission Lord Bishop of Saint ASAPH: In the Second Year of his Translation.

And Exhibited to The Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the
Diocese of St. ASAPH.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Clark, at the Star in Little-Britain, M.DC.LXXI.

The Tenor of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall Swear, diligently to enquire, and true presentment make of every
person of your Parish which has made any default, or offense inquirable
against the Kings Laws Ecclesiastical, and become known unto you: For your
direction herein, you shall duly consider all and every of these Articles given
you in charge; and neither Present, nor spare to Present any for favor or
malice, hope of reward, or fear of displeasure. So help you God.

Articles concerning Public Worship, Religion, and Administration of the
Sacraments.
ARTICLES. 1, 2, 3, 4.
ARE there any in your Parish that are guilty of Blasphemy against the Majesty
of God, or scoffers at Religion, or that teach that the Scriptures contain not
all things necessary to salvation?

2. Is there any that deny the Church of England to be a true, Can. 3.
and Apostolic Church, and to have in her all things necessary to salvation;
or affirm the 39. Can. 5.
Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops, and whole Clergy, Anno
Dom. 1562. to be erroneous in any part, or such as cannot with a good
conscience be subscribed to?

3. Is there any that accuse the form of Gods Worship in the Church of England,
contained in the Book of Common Prayer, to be corrupt, Can. 4.
superstitious, unlawful, or repugnant to the Scripture; Can. 7.
or the form of Consecrating and Ordaining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, Can.
8.
to be Antichristian, or repugnant to the Scripture, or to the practice of the
ancient Catholic Church?

4. Is there any in your Parish that forsake the Meetings of the Congregations
in the Church and public Worship, Can. 9 10, 11, 12.
and join themselves to Conventicles?

Concerning the Clergy and their Duty.
1. IS your Parson, Vicar, or Curate in Holy Orders by Episcopal Ordination
according to Law? Act (...) Uniform^^^.
has he been legally instituted and inducted into his Benefice? Did he within
two months after his Induction read the 39 Articles in time of Divine Service
in the Church, and publicly declare his assent to them? Has he read the Book
of Common Prayer, and declared publicly his assent and consent to the use of
all things therein contained, in the time limited, and in the manner prescribed
in the Act of Parliament last made for the Uniformity of Public Prayer, and
Printed before the Common Prayer Book? And has he publicly read in your
Church a Certificate of his subscription, declaring the unlawfulness of taking
up Arms against the King, his conforming to the Liturgy of the Church, his
disavowing the unlawful Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant,
within such time, and in such manner as is required by the same Act?

2. Has he obtained, or is he vehemently suspected to have procured his
Benefice by many, or any Symoniacal Contract?

3. Is he resident upon his Benefice? Can. 47, 48.
or if legally dispensed with, is his place supplied by a sufficient Curate, a
Licensed Preacher, and one allowed by the Ordinary?

4. And has such Curate a competent allowance according to the value of the
Living? and if he be resident with a Curate, does he himself once a month at
least read Common Prayer openly in the Church, and (if occasion be) administer
each Sacrament in due manner and form as the Liturgy prescribes?

5. Is he a man of a sober, Can. 74.75.
chaste, honest, and peaceable Conversation? is he careful to procure peace,
and make up breaches amongst his Neighbors? Does he endeavor according to his
talent to reduce Popish Recusants, Sectaries, and all other refractory persons
from their errors, Can 66.
by seasonable applications, sober Conferences, and calling in the advice and
direction of neighbor Ministers for his better assistance, when occasion
requires?

Act of Uniformity. R.
6. Does he read distinctly and reverently the Divine Service without
diminution, addition, or alteration, on Sundays and Holy days, and all other
times appointed by the Church? and if he have no reasonable hinderance, does he
(as commanded) every day tell a Bell, and invite the people to come and join in
prayer with him, Rubr. after Preface. Rubric. Can. 21.
and especially upon Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays read the Litany as is
required? Does he administer the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, so often
at least, and at such times as that every Parishioner may communicate thrice at
least in the year?

7. Does he give the holy Communion to any that live in any notorious sin,
Rubric. Can. 26, ^7.
or open enmity to their Neighbors, showing no sorrow or repentance for their
faults? or to any that refuse to receive it kneeling? and does he give an
account of such abstained by him to his Ordinary according to Law?

8. Does he on the Sunday, Rubr. before the first Exhortation.
or Holy Day before the Communion give notice thereof in the Church, and read
one of the Exhortations fitted for that purpose in the Common Prayer Book? and
when he sees the people negligent in coming, does he admonish them in the form
there also fitted for that occasion?

9. Does he administer holy Baptism at the Font publicly and not elsewhere,
unless upon weakness of the Infant, Rubr. before private Bapt.
or very urgent occasion? Does he exhort all to bring their Children to public
Baptism in the Church, unless in such cases of danger?

10. Does he take care that no Infant in danger want it, Can. 68.69.
that none depart unbaptized through his negligence or delay?

11. Does he baptize any without Godfathers or Godmothers, Can. 29.
or does he admit any to answer as such, who have not received the holy
Communion? Does he duly observe all the Kites and directions prescribed in the
Administration of this Sacrament by the Church in her Liturgy?

12. Does he in all his Ministrations observe the rules, rites, and directions
of the Church, and with reverence, decency, and gravity perform every office
(as occasion requires) wearing his Surplice, Can 58.
with a Hood (if a Graduate) as he is required by Authority and Customs of the
Church?

13. Is he careful to visit the sick, of what condition or persuasion soever?
Rubric. Can. 67.
Does he endeavor to prepare them for the due reception of the Holy Communion,
and exhort them to Charity and good works as the Church requires?

14. Does he (having no lawful impediment) preach one Sermon every Lords day in
his own Cure, or s^^e other adjoining; Can. 45.
not venting any newfangled, seditious, or false Doctrine? Does he in case
there be no Sermon, read one of the Homilies allowed by the Church? and does he
before his Sermon, move the people in the same form at least (if not in the
very words) laid down in the five and fiftieth Canon (declaring for what
mercies they are to give God thanks, and for what blessings they are to pray)
and exhort them to call upon God with him for them in the most comprehensive
Prayer of our Lord?

15. Does he diligently Catechize the Youth of the Parish every Sunday and
Holy Day after the second Lesson in the afternoon, Can. 59. Rub. post Catechism
by way of Question and Answer, and instruct them also in the sense and meaning
he shall find requisite? Does he by this and all other good means and
admonitions prepare them for Confirmation, and himself either bring or send in
writing under his own hand, the names of all such persons in his Parish, men,
women (if any such want it) and children as he shall find fit to be presented
to the Bishop, humbly to seek and ask the benefit of Confirmation from his
hands?

16. Does he bid and observe the Holy Days and Fasting-days, Can 64. Rub. post
Symb. Nicaenum.
and days of abstinence and other solemn days, for which particular Services
are appointed, giving notice of them to the Parishioners in time of Divine
Service the Sunday next before?

17. Does he in perambulation about your Parish use the Prayers, Thanksgivings
and Homilies accustomed in Rogation Week?

18. Does he celebrate Matrimony, Can. 62.
without first publishing the Bans on three several Sundays or Holy Days in the
Parish Church where such parties dwell, or at any time by Law prohibited,
without special License, or in any other place than the Church, or any other
hours than between eight and twelve in the forenoon, or betwixt persons
prohibited by the Law. or under the age of 21 years, without consent of their
Parents or Guardians?

19. Does your Minister admit any woman bringing forth the child of Adultery or
Fornication to be Churched, without License from the Ordinary: or suffer any
Excommunicate person to continue in the Church, during any part of Divine
Service?

20 Does he refuse to bury any brought to Church according to the form
prescribed, Can 68.
except such as die unbaptized, or are excommunicate Majori Excommunicatione,
and no man able to testify their repentance, or such as have laid violent
hands on themselves?

21. Is there a Lecturer in your Parish? Can. 53.54. Act of Uniformity.
is he Licensed by the Bishop? did he before his first Lecture read the whole
Service appointed for the day; and does he read it also upon his first Lecture
day of every month, wearing his Surplice? Does he any way endeavor to bring
the Parson or Vicar of the place into disrepute with his Parishioners?

Kings Proclamation annexed to the Canons.
22. Does your Minister in the Parish Church where he has charge read the Book
of Canons once every year, dividing the Book so as it may be conveniently read
on some two Sundays or Holy Days for information of the people in the
discipline and government of the Church, and their submission thereto?

23. Is there any man not in Holy Orders according to Law, Can. 76.
that presumes openly to read the Common Prayer, or execute any ministerial
duty in your Church? or is there any Clergyman in Holy Orders, that
relinquishing his Orders, lives as a Layman without any care of the Church, or
the duties undertaken and promised at his admission into Holy Orders?

Enquiries concerning the Parishioners.
1. HAve you any in your Parish, who wilfully and without lawful impediment
absent themselves from Morning, Primo Eliz. Can. 90.
or Evening Prayer upon Sundays, or other days and times appointed by Law, or
that come late, or depart before the Blessing? or are there any that upon those
solemn days employ themselves in their usual Trades or labors, or command or
suffer their Servants so to do? Does any Inn, or Ale housekeepers suffer any
person to drink, play, or tarry in his house (except in case of sickness) in
time of Divine Service? Do your Parishioners behave themselves reverently in
the House of God, Men and Youth being uncovered, showing reverence when the
Name of the Lord Jesus is mentioned, standing, and kneeling, and in all things
conforming to the orders, injunctions, and customs of the Church, with devotion
and due attention?

2. Are there any that disturb holy duties, by walking, talking, Pri. Eliz. Can
111. Can. 90.
or other rude or undecent behavior?

3. Are there any among you of understanding unbaptized, or any that refuse to
send their Children to Baptism in the Church publicly, Rub. of Baptism.
unless in cases of necessity; and in such cases, are they careful to procure
them due Baptism at home?

4. Are any in your Parish not Confirmed, Rub. after Catechism
or any of years of discretion that upon any pretense refuse or neglect it? or
any Parents, or Guardians that refuse to prepare their Children for, or to send
them to Confirmation? Or are there any Confirmed, and of the age of 16. years,
that come not to the Lords Supper three times in the year at least, of which
the Feast of Easter to be one? or any that forsake their own Parish to receive
it elsewhere? Can. 112.


5. Are there any Parents, Can. 59.
or Masters of Families that refuse to send their Servants or Children to be
instructed by their Minister in the Church Catechism according to order? Are
there any Popish Recusants or Sectaries that keep private Conventicles? or any
that entertain Sojourners or other guests that refuse to frequent the
Church Service, or the holy Sacraments as enjoined? or that labor to seduce
and draw others from the Religion in this Church established, Can. 110.114.
or that disperse Popish Books, or Writings of Sectaries, to make Factions, and
pervert the people?

6. Are there any in your Parish that injure the stock of the Church? Are there
any Legacies (bequeathed to the Church or other pious uses) perverted or
concealed, or otherwise employed than intended by the Donor? Are there any
Wills of Persons deceased concealed, or unproved, or any goods of persons dying
intestate administered without lawful authority?

7. Are there any that refuse to pay their rates to the repair of the Church,
Can. 80.
or the buying Books, or other Furniture requisite for the due performances of
the several Offices and Services of the Church?

8. Are there any in the Parish that live in Fornication, Adultery, any
Blasphemers, Depravers, or Impugners of the Christian Religion, or public
worship established; common Swearers, Drunkards, any Incestuous persons, any
joined in Marriage within the degrees prohibited, any Sorcerers, Witches, or
resorters to them?

Concerning Churchwardens, Sidemen, Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1. ARe your Churchwardens yearly, Can. 89.
and according to the use and custom of the Parish, chosen? Have the former
Churchwardens given up their accounts before the Minister, and delivered the
money, and whatever they had belonging to the Church, into your hands by Bill
indented?

2. Do any molest you the Churchwardens for presenting Offenders, Can. 115.
or in the execution of any other part of your Office?

3. Are you the Churchwardens careful to provide wholesome Wine, fine white
Bread against every Communion, according to the number of the Communicants,
with clean Vessels, Linen, and all Vtensils necessary for that sacred service?
And do you take care to keep the Holy Table from profane and vulgar usages?

4. Do you the Churchwardens take notice of, Act^ El.
and admonish such as come late to the Church Service, or depart before it be
ended; and such also that absent themselves? and do you cause to be levied upon
every one without just cause absenting himself, the sum of 12. pence for the
use of the poor, according to the Law?

5. Have you a Parish-Clerk of the age of 21. years, Can. 91.
of a sober, and honest behavior, and sufficiently qualified to assist and
attend your Minister in Reading, Writing, Singing, in answering the Hymns, and
several Responsals in the Liturgy? Is he chosen by your Minister, and is he
paid the accustomed wages, dues, and perquisites belonging to his place? Does
he keep the Church clean, and carefully look to the Books, and all things
committed to his charge? Does he upon notice given of any person passing out of
this life, toll a Bell to summon devout and charitable persons, to recommend
the soul of such dying persons to the grace and mercy of God?

Enquiries concerning the Church, its Possessions, Ornaments, and Utensils.
1. IS your Church or Chapel kept in good repair in all parts of it? Can. 85.
is the Churchyard sufficiently fenced? Are there any in your Parish that has
converted to his own use, wood, stone, or any other materials belonging to the
Church, or to the Parsonage, or Vicarage house?

2. Have you a decent Font of stone set in the ancient and usual place, for
administration of Baptism? Rubr. before Bapt. Can. 81.
Have you a decent Table commodiously placed in the Chancel, for the
Celebration of the holy Communion, with a decent Carpet to cover it, and a fair
linen Cloth over it at the Communion? Have you a silver Chalice with a Cover,
Rubr. before Com.
a Flagon of Pewter, or of purer Metal for the Wine, with a Plate for the
Bread, and a fair Linen Cloth for covering the Consecrated Elements?

3. Has your Minister a decent Pew for reading Morning and Evening Service,
and a comely Pulpit for Preaching, and both conveniently placed for the best
advantage to the people? Have you a perfect Bible of the largest Volume, and
last Translation, Can. 18.
two Books of Common Prayer for the Minister and Clerk to use in all Divine
Offices, the Book of Homilies, the Book of Canons and Constitutions: a Table of
the Degrees of Marriage prohibited: A Parchment Register-Book for Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials in your Parish? A Book for the Churchwardens Accounts,
and an Inventory of all things belonging to the Church?

4. Are the Ten Commandments and chosen Sentences of Scripture, Can. 8^.
the Lords Prayer, and Creed set up in your Church, according to the Canon?

5. Have you a strong Chest with three Locks and Keys, Can. 8^.
for the Alms of the Poor? and in one of those Keys in the custody of the
Minister? And another Chest for keeping the Books and other Furniture of the
Church?

6. Is the house of your Parson or Vicar, with all Out-house thereto belonging
kept in good repair? Is any incroachment by any upon any part of the Glebe, or
Demesus thereto belonging? Or have any Lands been alienated, or exchanged
without sufficient Authority? Have you a perfect Terrier of all Lands, Can. 87.
Meadows, Orchards, Gardens, Tenements, Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage? Or if there be none, do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen, with
your Minister, and other knowing and ancient men of the Parish, endeavor to
make one in Parchment, signing and subscribing it to be kept by your Minister,
with a Copy delivered into the Bishops Registry?

Enquiries concerning Schoolmaster, Physicians, and Midwives.
1. Does any in your Parish take upon him the office of a Schoolmaster, Can.
79.
either publicly, or in any private house, without License from his Ordinary?
Does he cause his Scholars to come to Church duly, to the public Worship of
God by Law appointed? Does he instruct them in the Catechism contained in the
Book of Common Prayer? Is he of parts and learning sufficient to perform this
charge?

2. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery, or the Office of a
Midwife without License from the Ordinary?

Enquiries concerning Church Officers.
1. ARE there any Ecclesiastical Officers, Can. 134.135, 138.
as Advocate, Register, Proctor, Apparitor, or other Minister of the
Ecclesiastical Court, that take or exact Gratuities, or unaccustomed fees for
expedition, or any other way abuse their place, or agrieve his Majesty's
Subjects: or extort any greater fees, than such as are allowed by the Table of
Fees ratified in the Year 1597? Is it set up in the Constory Court, and
Registers Office, and made public to the view and perusal of all that destre
it?

2. Has any Apparitor been vexatious under a pretense of Authority, by citing
any illegally, or upon frivolous causes? Or has he or the Register for any
Reward or Fee excused any from appearance before the Ecclesiastical Court, or
dismissed any person detected or accused, without the knowledge, and consent of
the Judge, or otherwise neglected or abused his Office for his own advantage?

3. Has any person paid any money for Commutation of Penance for any Crime of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance; and if so, how has it been disposed of?

An Admonition to the Minister and Churchwardens.
IF there be any other Crime not mentioned in the foregoing Enquiries, Can. 113.
of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you are to make presentment of it. The Minister
may join with the Churchwardens and Sides-men in the Presentment; and if they
refuse or neglect their duty, then the Minister (as the person who has the
Cure of Souls, and therefore should use his best care for the suppressing of
sin and wickedness in his Parish) may present alone, and may think himself in
conscience obliged to do it, as he destres the reformation of his Parish, and
the good of their souls. And as the faithful performance of this duty by the
Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen is an especial means appointed for the
prevention of disorders, sins, and impieties, so the guilt of its refusal and
the sad consequences of it, viz. all the vices, and disorders, and villainies of
an unreformed Parish lies at the doors of such Officers, and for which they
must give account to God the righteous Judge Almighty, and for which also the
sworn men are punishable in the Ecclesiastical Courts.

THE Ministers of every Parish are destred to give in the names of such in
their several Parishes as they judge fit to receive Confirmation from the
Bishop, and to present them to be Confirmed.

FINIS.

