ARTICLES OF VISITATION AND ENQUIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical,
according to the Laws and Canons of the Church of ENGLAND. EXHIBITED To the
Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the Diocese of ROCHESTER.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER, at his
Visitation in the year of our Lord God, 1666.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Coe, 1666.

The Oath of the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear that you shall diligently enquire, and faithfully present all
such persons that of late have been, and now are within your Parish, that have
offended against any of these Articles given you in charge, without favor or
affection to any person whatsoever. So help you God and the Contents of the
holy Gospel.

Articles of Visitation and Enquiries exhibited to the Church wardens and
Sidemen in the several Parishes of the Diocese of Rochester, by the R^ght
Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Roches^er, at his Visitation in the
Year of our Lord, 1666.
Inquiries about the Church and Churchyard.
1. IS your Parish Church and Chancel decently kept for God honor? Are the
Roofs, Walls, Pavements, and Windows well repaired? Are the ten Commandments,
Lords Prayer, and the Creed drawn out in fair Letters in convenient places: and
are the Kings Arms set up.

2. Have you made levies for the reparation of the Church, and other holy uses?
And are there any that refuse to pay the proportion laid upon them.

3. Have you a Font of Stone decently covered, standing toward the lower end
of the Church for the Administration of Baptism? Have you a comely Table
placed conveniently in Church, or Chancel for the use of the Lords Supper? Have
you a comely Carpet of Silk, or good Stuff, for that holy Table; with a fair
linen Cloth to spread upon it in the time of Administration: And have you a
handsome Cup of Silver for your Wine, and a cover of Silver to the same to put
the Bread on? And have you one or more Flaggons of Pewter, or better metal for
that use.

4. Are your Reading-Desk and Pulpit conveniently set up and placed for the use
of public Prayer and Sermons? And has your Pulpit a Cushion and comely
covering before it.

5. Have you in your Church the Common Prayer Books in folio, last set forth by
Authority? and have you a Bible in folio fairly bound of King James's
Translation? Have you also a decent Surplice (one or more) for your Parson, or
Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, to wear in the time of all public Ministrations?
and have you the Book of Homelies, and a Table of Marriage?

6. Are the Tombs, Monuments, Grave-stones of the Dead in your Church or
Churchyard preserved; and not suffered to be broken, taken down, or removed?

7. Have you a Book of Parchment, wherein be Registered the Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials in your Parish? Have you a strong Chest with three
Locks, wherein to preserve your Church Furniture, and a Box for Alms placed in
a fit place for the Relief of the Poor.

8. Is the House and Outhouses of your Minister in good and sufficient repair?
Does he preserve the Gardens, Orchards, and Glebe belonging to him, without
imbezling, changing, or any way damnifying them?

9. Is the Churchyard decently kept, and well fenced to keep out Beasts?

10. Have you a Terrier of your Glebe Lands belonging to your Minister? Have
any of the Glebe lands been changed for other lands; Or by whom is the said
Terrier brought into the Registry as the Law requires?

11. Is your Church and Churchyard kept from profane or Lay use, free from
Meetings of people for having any civil Courts or Military Employments; or
keeping of VVakes about the same, according as the Canon in that case
prescribes?

Inquiries about the Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer.
1. HAve the abovenamed received Episcopal Ordination according to the Laws of
the Kingdom?

2. Can you tell who did present your Parson or Vicar to his Benefice? Have you
heard or known that he came Symoniacally? Was he iuducted into his Benefice
before sufficient witness? And did he read the nine and thirty Articles before
or at Morning or Evening Prayer? And did he give his consent to them within one
month after his Induction into the Benefice?

3. Has he read the Book of Common Prayer as it is enjoined by the late Act of
Uniformity for public Prayer, Administration of the Sacrament, etc. on some
Sunday before the four and twentieth of August, 1662, or in case of impediment
allowed by the Ordinary, has he since performed the same? And did and does he
wear the Surplice while he performed that Office, and other Offices mentioned
in that Common Prayer Book?

4. Has he published his consent unto the said book on some Sunday before the
four and twentieth of August above named, or within the time limited b^ the
said Act openly in time of Divine Service? And has he subscribed to the
Decla^ation as it is expressed in the 77th page of the abovenamed Statute, and
manifested it to the Congregation openly?

5. Does he preach a Sermon on every Sunday, or procure a Sermon then to be
preached: or else sometime read one of the Homilies which the Church has
appointed?

6. Does he read the Service appointed for the Fifth of November, thirtieth of
January, twenty ninth of May? and does he keep the yearly Perambulation and
Rogation days before the Feast of our Lords Ascension.

7. If your Parson or Vicar keep a Curate? Is he of a godly Life, and
sufficient Learning? Is he allowed by the Bishop? And can you tell whether the
said Curate have a competent allowance according to the value of the Living.

8. Does your Parish maintain a Lecturer? Is he a virtuous and Orthodox Divine?
Is he Licensed by the Bishop? Does he read the full Divine Service of Common
Prayer once a month as the least, wearing a Surplioe?

9. Do you observe to your best understanding, that your Parson, Vicar,
Lecturer, or Cure te do preach the true word of God? or do they to their
Judgment, having consulted with other grave Parishoners, vent dangerous
opinions, derogating to the glory of God, and a pious life? Do they teach
sedition, directly against his Majesty? his Laws and Government? or do you note
that indirectly they cast out seditious glances against the Civil State or
Government Ecclesiastical?

10. Does your Minister celebrate the Lords Supper in the Church according to
the Service of the Common Prayer Book often every year? Does he repulse them
from it, that are scandalous by the sentence of the Laws? Does he Baptize the
Infants of his Parish according to the Service of the Common Prayer, using the
Cross; and upon warning given before, are they brought on Sundays or Holydays
to the Church, with Godfathers and Godmothers; and upon lawful Summons does he
Baptize them at home in case of danger and necessity.

11. Does he visit the sick at their houses when he is required upon lawful
Summons? Does he pray with them, exhort them to faith and repentance, and
comfort them? Does he give them the holy Communion, professing faith in Christ,
and sorrow for their sins, if they require it? and does he exhort them to
Brotherly love, and works of Charity, if they be able to bequeath a Portion to
pious uses?

12. Does he prepare the young men and Maidens of the Parish to be confirmed by
the Bishops? Does he marry none clandestinely, but at due hours in the Church,
and that upon Banes thrice published on Sundays and Holidays, or License
obtained from the Ordinary? And does he bury the dead according to the book of
Common Prayer?

13. Is your Minister, Lecturer, Curate, a man of sober, chaste, just,
unblameable life? And spare not to present him or them that are not every way
examples of Godliness.

14. Does your Minister with the Churchwardens, take care duly every year to
send in the names of all such in his Parish as have been Baptized, Married,
Buried* Excommunicated, that they may be enrolled in the Bishops Registry.

15. Does your Minister maintain peace with his Neighbors, and study to keep
them in peace as much as in him lies? Does he take diligent care to reduce all
Sectaries, Separatists, and Refractory persons, to the obedience of the
Doctrine and Government of this Church? And does he offer himself, being an
able learned man, to confer with Popish Recusants, to convert them, and to
bring them into the bosom of this Church?

16. Does your Minister Catechize young people each Sunday in the afternoon, as
the Canon requires? Does the Parents and Masters of Families within your Parish
send their Children and Servants to be Catechized by him. Present those that
refuse to do the same.

17. Does your Minister give notice each Sunday before, what holiday does ensue
the week after, that the Parishioners having notice, may resort to Church upon
those days? Does he also Read the book of Canons twice every year openly in
the Church upon Sundays, as the Law requires?

18. Is your Minister a non-Resident in his Benefice, and how long has he been
so? has he more Benefices than one? And does he maintain an able Curate,
Licensed, in the one, as the Law prescribes.

Inquiries about the Parishioners.
DO all your Parishioners of due age, resort the Divine Service and Sermons in
your Church on Sundays and Holidays, and on Wednesdays and Fridays in Lent,
according to Law?

2. Do they, or any of their Servants occupy them in bodily labors on Sundays
or Holidays? Do they open their Shops, and sell Wares on those days? Or do
Vintners, Victuallers, Innkeepers or others, receive any into their houses to
tipple and waste time idely on those days, except they be travelers, that are
upon a journey in necessary occasions?

3. Do your Parishioners in time of Divine Service; Sermon, or Homilies, behave
themselves reverently: Men and Youths with their Hats off, both Sexes giving
due attention, none disturbing holy Duties by talking, walking, removing, going
out, or using any other offense? And do they kneel, stand up, make answers in
time of Divine Service, as you find it appointed in the Rubricks of the
Common Prayer Book?

4. Are there any above the age of sixteen years in your Parish, and especially
that have been examined by your Master in the Catechism before, that do not
come to the Lords Supper to partake it reverently upon their knees three times
in the year at the least; the Feast of Easter, or the time thereabouts being
one?

5. Are there any in your Parish that keep their Children unbaptized? Inquire
diligently, and return the Parents or Governors names, the list of those
Children by such names as you can learn.

6. Do all Women as have been safely delivered, come to the Church in due time
to partake of the office of Thanksgiving, after the Orders of the
Common Prayer, and do such women pay their accustomed Duries?

7. Do your Parishioners bring their dead to be decently buried after the
Service of the Church, in their own Parish grounds? Or if they carry the Dead
away to be buried in some other place, whethat they be Lodgers or other
strangers? Do they first obtain leave of the Minister of the Parish usually
frequent other Parish-Churches, and absent themselves from their own.

9. Are there any that keep private Conventicles in their houses or abroad,
which are resorted to by those that are known or suspected for Sectaries, or
any way disaffected to the present Government of the Church of England?

10. Do your Parishioners pay their Tithes, Easter-Offerings and accustomed
duties, called Vicarage-Tythes, or by any other name, to their Minister?

11. Are there any Wills or Testaments of parsons dead in your Parish that are
not provided by a lawful Judge? Or do you know or hear of any goods administered
without due grant from the Ordinary?

12. What Legacies have been given to Pious uses in your Parish, which are
utterly defrauded or not employed to the right use according to the Will of
the Donor?

13. Are your Seats and Pews in the Church decently kept? And are the
Parishioners placed in them without offense and contention? have any built any
Seat within the Church, without license of the Ordinary. Present their names.

14 Are there any incestuous persons, or married persons within the degrees
prohibited by Law? Are any Adulteres, Fornicators, either in Fact, or by common
fame or report within your Parish? Any blasphemers, common swearers, Drunkards
or Sorcerers, or Resorters to Witches or Sorcerers. Present the same.

Inquiries about Church Officers and other Persons.
1. IF any Stranger come to preach in your Parish Church or Chapel, on Sundays
or Holidays, at Christnings, Funerals, Marriages, or any other occasion? Do the
Churchwardens demand to see his Orders and License to preach, which he had
from the Bishop: and if he can show none, do you inhabit him from preaching,
and enter the said ^^cense into the Registry, as the Law requires?

2. Do you suffer Excommunicated persons to be buried in any part of your
Church or Churchyard?

3. Does your Parish-Clerk or Sexton, (if you have any such) do their Duties
obediently and diligently? Are they of honest life and conve^sation? Is your
Parish-Clerk duly chosen by the Minister? And is he allowed by the Ordinary?
Can he write and read? Does he make Responsions to the Hymns and other
Suffrages of the Liturgy.

4. Is there a School Public or private in your Parish? Is the Schoolmaster
and Usher (if he have one) allowed by the Bishop of his Chancellor? Does he
breed his Schoolars Religiously? and does he teach them the Church Carechisme?

5. Have you any Physician, Surgeon, or Midwise in your Parish that practice
without Lycense?

6. Are your Churchwardens duly chosen in the week after Easter Day, and after
the custom and manner of the Parish? Do they take upon them the execution of
their Office without being first sworn by the Ordinary, as the Law requires?

7. Have the Church wardens who are to surrender their places upon the Election
of New ones, given up their Accounts to the Parishioners? and aae their
Accounts allowed by the ordinary? Or have they salsifyed their trust; wherein
and how much, present the same.

8. Also have your Churchwardens been diligent to repair the Church, to keep
it decent and comely? Have they preserved the Font for Baptism, sit and
handsome for that use? Likewise have they looked carefully to the
Cummunion-Table, to the Plates and all Utensils belonging to it? And have they
provided such sine whit^ Bread and good Wine as was fit for the Sacrament,
according ^y advice taken with the Minister.

Let the Churchwardens and Sidemen diligently, with the advice of their
Minister, what answers they will, and can give to all these particulars;
setting the fear of God, and the good of his Church before their eyes.

FINIS.

