ARTICLES To be inquired of in the Diocese of S. ASAPH. IN THE FIFTH VISITATION
Of the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of S. Asaph. 1642.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1642.

ARTICLES To be enquired of in the Diocese OF Saint ASAPH.
ARTICLES concerning public PRAYER, and administration of the SACRAMENTS.
FIRST, Depraving of the Book of Common Prayer and ceremonies.
Whether has any of your Parish spoken or declared any thing in the derogation
or depraving of the form of Gods worship in the Church of England, and
Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies set forth and prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer? 2. Item, Whether has any interrupted, hindered,
Disturbing the Minister in the time of prayer.
let, or disturbed the Minister to read divine Service, and to administer the
Sacraments in such manner and form as is mentioned in the said book: or
interrupted him in his preaching? 3. Children refused to be Baptized, or dying
without Baptism.
Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism refused to be administered to any
children borne in or out of Wedlock, their birth being made known to the
Minister of the Parish, and offered unto him to be baptized? 4. Private
Baptism.
Item, Whether have there been any children baptized in private houses by any
Lay-person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other Minister, but upon
urgent occasion, when the child was in danger of death? 5. Baptizing of Papists
children.
Item, Whether have the children which have been borne to any popish
Recusants, or begotten by them in your Parish, been publicly baptized in your
parish Church by your Parson, Vicar or Curate, or by whom were they baptized,
or where, to your knowledge? 6. Receiving of the Lords Supper thrice a year.
Item, Whether has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and
reverently administered every month, or thrice every year at least, whereof
once at Easter, within your Parish Church, to every parishoner being of
sixteen years of age or upwards?
Articles concerning the Church, the ornaments thereof and the Churches
possessions.
FIrst, Have you the Bible in the largest volume, the Common prayer book and
the Books of Homilies in the Welsh tongue? Have you a Register book in
Parchment, and a Table of the degrees prohibited in marriage? 2. Item, Whether
have you a Communion cup of silver, with a covering for it, a fair standing
pot of silver or pewter for the wine, a fair covering of silk or other decent
stuff for the Communion Table, a fair linen cloth to be laid over it, at the
administration of the Communion? 3. Item, Things appertaining to Churches.
Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for your
Minister to read divine service in, together with a comely Pulpit, set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same, with all other
ornaments necessary for the celebration of divine service, and administration
of the Sacraments and whether have you a chest for alms, with three locks and
keys, and another chest for keeping the Books and ornaments of the Church, and
the Register book? Whether have you a register book in parchment, for
Christnings, Weddings, and Burials: and is the same kept in all points
according to the Canons? And is the mothers christian name therein registered as
well as the Fathers? 4. Item, Whether is your Church or Chapel, Reparation of
Churches and Parsonage houses.
with the Chancel thereof, and your Parsonage or Vicarage houses, your Parish
Alms house and Church in good reparations, and are they employed to godly and
their right holy uses: if any be ruinated and wasted, in whom is the default?
Is your Church, Chancel, and Chapel decently and comely kept as well within as
without; and be the seats well maintained, the steeple and bells preserved, the
windows well glazed, the floor kept paved, plain and even, and all things in
orderly and decent sort? 5. Item, Fencing and keeing the Churchyard.
Whether be your Churchyards well fenced and kept without abuse: if not, whose
default is it? has any person encroached upon the ground of the Church yard:
have any used a place consecrated to holy use, Profaning and annoying the
Churchyard.
profanely or wickedly: have any quarrelled or stricken another in Church or
churchyard? or abused and profaned them with any unlawful games, as bowls,
Tennis, football, hand-ball, dancing and such like? 6. Item, Whether is your
Church full, Churches vacant.
or vacant of an Incumbent: if vacant, who receives the fruits thereof, and
who serves the Cure, and by what authority: and whether is it a Parsonage,
Vicarage, or Donative, or Appropriation? 7. Concealing of Church goods.
Item, What Legacies has been given to the use and benefit of your Church: how
have they been bestowed: who received them, and retains them without due
employment? does any detain or imbezel any of the Church goods, or any other
gifts given to charitable uses? 8. Alienation of tithes and profits of the
Church.
Item, Whether be not the profits, tithes, and other commodities
ecclesiastical, impiously and wickedly, to the dishonor of Almight God, and
prejudice of the sacred ministry, converted to the use and benefit of covetous
Patrons, and by them received and detained, and how long they have been so
used to your knowledge? 9. Item, Whether have there been made any bargain and
sale, exchange, or other alienation of the Glebe lands, or tithes of your
Parsonage or Vicarage, being presentative; without the consent of the Ordinary
and Patron? and if yea, specify the said lands and tithes so sold, exchanged,
or alienated, where it lay and lies, and how it was and is abutted, together
with the value of the same, and who made the same sale, exchange, or
alienation, and to whom was it made? 10. A Terrier of Glebe Lands and other
possessions of the Church.
Item, Whether have you the Terrier of all the Glebe Lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portion of tithes,
(whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your Parsonage, or
Vicarage, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish? and whether the
said Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Regestry, and in whose hands are any of
them now? and if you have no Terrier already made in parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence, you are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of the premises, and
make, subscribe, and sign the said terrier, as aforesaid.
Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers of Gods holy Word.
FIrst, Whether does your Minister distinctly, Observation of the form and time
of Common Prayer and Sacraments.
reverently say Divine Service upon Sundaies and Holidays, and other days
appointed to be observed by the book of Common Prayer at fit and usual times?
And does your Minister duly observe the orders, rites and ceremonies prescribed
in the said book of common Prayer, as well in reading public Prayers, and the
Letany, as also in administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony,
visitation of the sick, burying the dead, churching of women, and all other
like rites and offices of the Church, in such manner and form as in the said
Book of Common Prayer is enjoined? 2. Item, Does your Minister endeavor and
labor diligently to reclaim the Popish Recusants in his parish from their
errors, (if there be any such abiding in your parish) Or whether is your
Parson, Vicar or Curate over-conversant with, or a favourer of Recusants,
whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion? 3. Item, Does your
Minister, Curate, or Lecturer in his or their Sermons deliver such doctrine as
tends to obedience and the edifying of their Auditory in Faith, Religion, and
good life, without intermedling with particular matters of State, not fit to be
handled in the Pulpit? 4. Item, Preachers without License.
Whether is your Minister a Preacher licenced or no? if no, whether does he
take upon him in his own Cure or elsewhere, to expound any Scripture or matter
of doctrine? And if he be licensed, does he preach usually in his own Cure, or
in some other neighbor Church where no Preacher is? Or whether does he or his
Curate upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon, read a Homily, or some part
thereof according as he ought to do? 5. Preaching of false doctrine and new
opinions.
Item, Whether does your Minister publish in his Sermons any doctrine, which is
new and strange, and disagreeing froin the word of God, and from the Articles
of Christian faith and Religion, agreed on and published, Anno Dom. 1562. 6.
Item, Whether any victualling, tippling, or aleselling, have been used in your
Parson, Vicar or Curat his house, by themselves, or others dwelling therein,
and by whom? 7. Names of strange Preachers to be taken.
Item, Whether are any strange Ministers admitted to preach in your Church, who
do not before the Churchwardens subscribe their names in your book for that
purpose, the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had
License to preach: and is any one admitted to preach before he showed his
License? 8. Opposition of Preachers in their Sermons.
Item, Does any Preacher in your Pulpit particularly impugn and confute any
doctrine delivered by others his fellow Preachers, before he has acquainted
the Bishop of the Diocese therewith, and received order from him what to do
in that case? 9. Praying for His Majesty.
Item, Does your Minister use to pray for the kings Majesty, Clergy, Counsel,
etc. giving them their full titles? 10. Non-residence of the Minister
Item, Whether is your Minister Resident upon his Benefice, or absent; if
absent, by whom is the Cure served, the fruits received? Does your Minister or
Curate, serve any more cures than one? if yea, then what other cure does he
serve, and how far are they distant? 11. Item, Whether does he Catechize the
youth of his Parish, upon sundaies and holy days, before evening Prayer for
half an hour or more, in the Catechism set forth in the Book of Common
prayer? and whether do all the Parishioners diligently attend his catechizing:
and who refuse to send their children and servants to be catechized by him? 12.
Item, Ministers to call for relief of the poor and almesdeeds.
Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from time
to time call upon his parishioners to give somewhat according to their ability,
to godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their Wills? 13. Item,
Symony.
Whether is your Minister suspected or known to have obtained his Benefice or
spiritual promotion by any Symonicall compact, directly, or indirectly? 14.
Item, Demising of Benefices.
Whether does your Minister demise the profits of his Benefice to any Layman
above three years and is not resident there, and keeps no hospitality upon
his Benefice, being of sufficient value? 15. Item, Conferring with Recusants.
Whether has he, being learned and sufficient, conferred with the Popish
Recusants of his parish, endeavoring to reclaim them from their errors, and
presenting them being obstinate for their recusancy? 16. Item, has your
Minister or any other Preacher, Preaching in private houses.
made any Sermon, administered the Sacraments, or churched women in any private
houses, otherwise than is by law allowed? 17. Item, Curates not licenced, and
Laymen doing the offices of a Minister.
What Curates or Preachers do read Prayers or administer the Sacrament in your
Parish, without lawful license? or does any Lay man, not having holy orders,
presume to read public Prayers in the Church? 18. Item, Ministers forsaking
their calling.
Whether is your minister studious in the holy Scripture, and abstaineth from
mechanical trads, or labor not befitting his function, and from apparel
unseemely for his calling, and from gaming, swearing, and drunkenness, or such
notorious crimes: or is there any in your Parish, who have been admitted into
holy Orders either Deacon or Minister, does relinquish or forsake his calling,
and lives in the course of his life as a Layman?
Articles concerning Marriage.
FIrst, Marriage within Leviticall degree.
Whether be there any in yuur Parish that have married within the degrees of
affinity or consanguinity, by the Law of God forbidden? if any, what be they?
2. Private marriage, and without consent of Parents.
Item, Whether have any been married secretly in private houses, or without
their parents or governors consent signified, being under the age of 12.
years? 3. Married persons living apart.
Item, Whether do any persons lawfully married, live asunder unlawfully: and in
whom is the default? 4. Marriage without banes or license.
Item, Whether any persons (banes being not thrice published in the Church)
have been married without license; who were present at such marriages, and
what Minister married them? 5. Persons married out of their parishes.
Item, Whether any persons by license or without have been married in your
Parish Church, neither of them at that time dwelling in your Town? 6.
Recusants marriage.
Item, What Popish Recusants or their children have been married in your
Parish, in what sort was that matrimony solemnized, when and by whom?
Articles concerning Churchwardens.
FIrst, Election of Churchwardens.
Whether be the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishoners, and
whether has any taken him to be Churchwarden, being not so chosen: or has
any continued above one year in his office without a new choice? 2.
Churchwardens due account.
Item, Whether have any Churchwardens detained any of the Church goods, and
not made a just account of what they have received and expended? 3.
Churchwardens diligence in the Church.
Item, Have they been, and are they diligent in their office, to see decency
kept in the Church, and order in the time of common prayer, and administration
of the Sacraments, and that there be no disturbance: but soberness and
quietness in the Church?
Articles concerning the Parishioners.
FIrst, Profaning the Lords day.
Whether do any in your Parish profane the Sunday by unlawful games,
drinking or tippling in the time of common Prayer or Sermon, and by working and
doing the ordinary works of their vocation and trades? 2. Item, Impugning the
Rites of the Church.
Is there any in your Parish that do impugn or speak against the Rites and
ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use of them, and government
of this Church under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical officers? 3. Item, Reverent behavior at divine service.
Who in your Parish do come to the Sermon only, and not to divine Service, and
who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of divine Service,
devoutly kneeling when the general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read, or who do give
themselves to babbling, talking or walking, and are not attentive to hear the
Word read and preached? 4. Item, Are there any of your Parish, Leaving their
own Churches to go to others.
having a Preacher to their minister, that do absent themselves from his
Sermons, and resort to other places to hear other Preachers: or do any in your
parish communicate, or baptize their children in any other Parish? 5. Item,
Opening of shops upon the Sunday.
Whether do any in your Parish exercise any trade or labor, buy or sell, or
keep open shops, or set out any wares to be sold upon Sundaies and holidays,
by themselves, their servants, or apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the
said days? 6. Item, Whether is the 5. of November kept holy, Keeping holy the
fifth of November.
and thanksgiving made to God, according to the order set forth in that behalf?
7. Item, Are there any in your Parish that be, Adultery, Fornication, Incest,
etc.
or are commonly known or reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name,
drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, concealors or
harbourers of fornicators or adulterers: have any been detected of such
notorious crimes, and what penance have they done for the same? 8. Item,
Whether there be any In-keepers, victualers, or Ale-house-keepers within your
parish that admit unto orsuffer in their houses any person at the time of
commnn Prayer, or Sermon, upon any Sabbath day or holy day, and who they be
that hant such Tauerns, Innes, or tippling houses at prayer time? 9. Item,
Whether any markets or selling of any meat, or other wares be suffered or used
in your Church yard, or near the same upon the Sabbath day: and whether any
butchers, packmen, pedlers, or any mercers or other tradesmen within your
parish, open their shops, or make any common or open sale of their stuff upon
Sabbath days and holy days? 10. Item, What Recusant Papists are there in your
Parish, and whether do they or any of them keep any Schoolmasters in their
house, which comes not to Church to hear divine Service, and receive the
holy Communion: what is his name, and how long has he taught? 11. Item,
Whether has your Minister or any other of your Parishioners been at any
schismatic conventicles in any private house or houses within your Parish,
and there have conferred about any private orders for prayers, preaching or
expounding the Scriptures contrary to the book of common Prayers and the laws
established in that behalf? Or whether any lay men have then taken upon them
to expound the Scriptures or preach? if so, you shall present them all.
Articles concerning Schoolemastees, Physicians, and Chirurgions, and
Parish-clarkes.
FIrst, is there any Schoolmasters in your Parish, that teaches publikly or
privately, not licenced by the Ordinary? does he teach any Papist or Sectaries
children that come-not to Church? And does he instruct all his Scholars to
learn the short catechism by Law established, contained in the book of common
Prayer? Is he a Graduate and sufficient to teach? 2. Item, Physicians not
licensed.
What Physician or Surgeon is in your parish unlicensed, and being not a
Doctor of Physic in either of the Universities, does practice Physic? And
what ignorant persons have left their trade, and taken upon them to profess
Physic or Surgery, and who be they that so abuse the people? and do any
in your parish take upon them to heal and cure men, or cattle, by charms,
spells, witchcraft, or any other unlawful ways or means? 3. Item, Have you a
fit parish clarke, Parish clark.
aged twenty years at least, of honest life, able to read and write? are his
and the Sextons wages paid without fraud: if not, then whose default is it? by
whom is he chosen? Is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to the
Minister? does he meddle with any thing above his office? does he keep the
Church clean, the doors locked? Is any thing lost or spoiled by his default,
and does he execute his office duly?
Articles concerning Ecclesiastical offices.
FIrst, Exceslive fees.
Whether be there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within this Diocese, that take and receive, or exact any
extraordinary fees for any cause? whether have your Churchwardens and Questment
concealed any abuses or offenses punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court: and
whether such offenses being presented, are suppressed and unpunished? 2. Item,
Table of fees in Court.
Whether is there not a table of fees in the Court of the consistory, allowed
and subscribed by the Judge and Register of the Court of Consistory, Anno Dom.
1597. and the same every Court day hung up in some public place of the Court
and Registry? 3. Abuses in Apparitors and Sumners.
Item, Have any Apparators or Sumners, under pretense of authority, cited or
summoned any person unlawfully, or has taken any reward for the concealing of
any offense or sin, or the avoiding of punishment of the offenders: and who
be they that have done so? Or do they take any fees not accustomable? Have
they threatened any to prosecute them if they have no reward? and do they summon
any without a citation first had?
If you know any other default or crime, of Ecclesiastical cognisans, you are
to present the same.

The Minister of every Parish may join in presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen; and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the persons that should have the chief care for the suppressing of sin
and impiety in their Parishes) may present the crimes aforesaid, and such
things as shall be thought to require due Reformation.

FINIS.

