Good Counsel come from Scotland: OR, A Solemn and Seasonable WARNING To all
Estates and Degrees of Persons throughout the Land: For holding fast the League
and Covenant with England, and avoiding every thing that may prove a snare and
tentation to the breach thereof:

By the COMMISSIONERS of the General Assembly.

Edinb. 19. December. 1646.
THe Commission of the General Assembly Ordains this Warning to be forthwith
printed and that thereafter it be sent to Presbyteries; Requiring them,
immediately after the receipt thereof, to cause every Minister of their number
read the sarne distinctly and explain is to their people upon a Sabbath day in
their several Kirks, and that they report account of their diligence with the
first conveniencie: Appointing in the mean time, that to morrow the same be
read in all the Kirks of this City.

A. Ker.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1646.

To the READER.
REader, Thou have here presented unto thy view a Warning-piece full of Reason,
Honesty, and Piety; not at all savouring or smelling, as if composed, or backed
by Episcopal Common Prayer Book men, or such who peep up for the Covenant, and
yet both Anti-Parliament, and Covenant. But in a simplicity of Soul, driving
on the same Interest and design first propounded, and yet necessary
judiciously to be prosecuted. And though Streams may corrupt through the
several Earths they pass; Honor, or the hopes of it, may catch one, profit
another; and the Reins let loose, make the more courser extravagant: Yet see
how clear the Fountains are! Here Is not, one for this, another for that, a
third for neither, but all for one and the main. The Great man's smiles,
designs, with hope of reward, has not warpt these Worthies, much less made
one run into the extreme of Whimsies on one hand, nor into a way of Bitterness
and Gall on the other: but Zeal is mixed with Love, and desire of Union, not
urging Uniformity: For increase of which Union shall ever be the Prayer of

Thine, and the most unworthy of ENGLAND's Servants.

A Solemn and Seasonable WARNING To all estates and degrees of Persons
throughout the Land:
By the Commissioners of the General Assembly.
Edinburgh, 17. December. 1646.
THe conscience of our duty, and of the great trust reposed in us, suffers us
not to be silent* nor to connive at the present Dangers which may justly be
apprehended and expected from the enemies of this Cause and Covenant; who
although they cannot in this conjuncture of time appear in the same manner as
formerly they have done, yet having retained the same principles (while they
seem to lay aside their former practices) do in a more covert and dangerous way
still drive at their own ends: And as Satan is neither sleeping nor idle,
though he appear not always as a roaring Lion: so these who are inspired and
acted by him, have their wheels still moving, though sometimes they make no
great noise. Wherefore, that we may truly and faithfully contribute what is
incumbent to us, for preventing or removing any occasions of new troubles or
differences between the King and his People, in both or either of those united
Kingdoms, or between the Kingdoms themselves: And lest the Church of Christ,
and the true Reformed Religion be again tossed with another, and perhaps a
greater tempest in the deepth, after we seemed to be near the harbor: We have
found it, not only competent to our place and calling, but necessary for us
(according to former laudable presidents both old and late) to emit this New
seasonable Warning to the People of God in this Land, and to all estates and
degrees of men therein: Whom we exhort, That first, and above all things, They
apply their thoughts to make peace with God, To take notice of the remaining
and renewed tokens of divine displeasure against the Land, To tremble at the
remembrance of former, and appearances of future judgments, To lament after
the Lord, To lie low before the Throne of Grace, To cry mightily to heaven for
dispelling that cloud of sin which seperateth between our God and us, and for
turning away that cloud of wrath which hangs over our heads. There is cause
to be humbled and to repent, as for all our iniquities, So for the too little
assistance which has bin given to such as have born the heaviest burden, and
suffered most in this Cause; And for the too much compliance with and
indulgence to many who have been active in the late execrable Rebellion. We
know that none can reach the perfection of their duty, neither will the Lord
reckon with his People according to his Justice, but spare them who walk in the
integrity of their Spirits, as a man spares his own son, So that they may
rejoice in his mercy, not withstanding of their short. comings, wherein they do
not allow themselves; But wilful neglects are just grounds of a great
controversy on the Lords part, and of deep humiliation on ours: And we
conceive that the sailings of many are such because the Word of the Lord is a
burden unto them; And though they walk in the ways of their own heart, yet
they say they shall have Peace. We would have none that are thus guilty, to
account light of it, and say, Is it not a little one? Every duty whereto we are
obliged in the Covenant, is of great consequence, and breaches even in smaller
things prove inlets unto more grievous revoltings.

When we consider how many who were once open opposers, or secret underminers,
being received to the Covenant, yet remains disaffected to the ends of the
same: We cannot but think that we walk in the midst of shares, and that
mysteries of iniquity work amomgst us, which may produce most sad and
lamentable effects, unto the prejudice of our Religion and Liberties.
Therefore, Because God has no greater quarrel against a Nation then that of a
broken Covenant; Let all who fear an oath, remember the vows of God which are
upon them, Watch and Pray, and take good heed that they be not cheated nor
charmed into a violation of all, or any of the Articles of that sacred and
Solemn League and Covenant: And let these especially be observed and avoided,
who do, or shall endeavor a division and breach between the Kingdoms, or the
making of any factions or parties contrary to the Covenant, under pretense of
preserving the King and his Authority, whilst they do not constantly and
sincerely prosecute and press our frequent desires of His subscribing the
League and Covenant, and giving satisfaction in all things to the just desires
of both Kingdoms; Which underhand dealing can prove nothing else, but an
abusing of His Majesty for men's own designs: We wish that none suffer
themselves to be deceived by any false glosses of the Covenant, under which
some may possibly urge the keeping of it, so as to draw us into a certain
breach thereof, and press the defense of the Kings Authority and of Religion,
to engage us in those ways that would tend to the ruin of both: We are not
now to press the want of full satisfaction in the much desired work of
Uniformity, as the ground of a breach between the Nations; Though we still
conceive, this Nation will never be wanting to prosecute that work to the
untermost of their power in all lawful ways, according to the League and
Covenant

These Kingdoms after many fervent Supplications and faithful endeavors of all
the Lovers of Truth and Peace, have been happily united into a League and
Covenant, which to this day has been kept inviolably notwithstanding of all
the opposition of open Enemies, and plotting of secret Underminers; And we are
confident, that none but such as have hearts full of Atheism and Treathery,
will attempt the violation thereof, in whole, or in part; And that if any shall
do the same, They shall expose themselves to the Curse of Almighty God, who
will be avenged upon all that Swear falsely by his Name. We know that men of
perverse minds, wanting the fear of God, and measuring all things by their
own ends, may conceive of it as alterable, or at least that all the Clauses or
Heads thereof are not so to be stuck upon, but that some one or more may be
dispensed with upon civil advantages: But we have not so learned Christ or his
Word; Both Nations have Covenanted with God, and each of them with another, in
things most lawful and necessary for the preservation and good of both,
without any limitation of time: And therefore we and our posterity are obliged
before God unto the observation thereof, as long as the Sun and Moon shall
endure. The sense of these things ought to be so deeply engraven upon the
hearts of all that are in trust, That as they should from their souls abhor
every thought of a breach with England; So should they carefully and wisely
study to avoid every thing that may prove a snare and tentation unto the same.
Amongst other things, If His shall have thoughts of coming to this Kingdom at
this time, he not having as yet subscribed the League and Covenant, nor
satisfied the lawful desires of his loyal Subjects in both Nations, We have
just cause to fear that the consequences of it may be very dangerous, both to
his Majesty and these Kingdoms; Which therefore we desire may be timely
prevented.

For so long as his Majesty does not approve in his heart, and seal with his
hand the League and Covenant, we cannot but apprehend, that according to his
former Principles, he will walk in opposition to the same, and study to draw us
unto the violation thereof, and the dissolution of the union so happily begun
between us and our Brethren, To weaken the Confidence and trust, and to
entertain Jealousies, and make divisions amongst our selves; Neither is it
possible, But that our receiving Him in this present posture of affairs, will
confirm the suspicions of the English Nation, of our underhand dealing with
him before his coming to our Army; And make them, not without cause, to think,
That We purpose to dispose of him without their consent, and to their
prejudice, Which is contrary to the Profession of these that were in trust at
His Majesty's first coming to the Scots Quarters, and overthrows all the
Arguments that have been used by the Commissioners of our Parliament in their
Papers concerning The disposing of His Majesty's Person by the joint advice and
common consent of both Kingdoms given in to both Houses of Parliament in
England; Nor do we see how we can vindicate such a practice from a direct
breach of our engagements to them by Covenant and Treaty, Which where not only
to expose us into the hazard of a Bloody War, but to involve us in the guilt
of Perjury. And what greater disservice could be done to His Majesty and his
Posterity, then to give way to a course that might prove prejudicial to their
interest in the Crown and Kingdom of England.

Our carriage now for many years past, in the midst of many tentations, has
put us beyond all suspicion in the point of our Loyalty, nor have we the least
thoughts of deserting the Kings Majesty in a just and good cause; Being bound
by our Covenant in our several vocations to endeavor with our estates and
Lives, to preserve and defend His Person and Authority, in the defense and
preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms; And so far
as His Majesty shall be for these, We really are, and we trust the rest of his
Kingdom will be for him: Yet we cannot deny, but openly avouch it, That if His
Majesty (which the Lord forbid) shall not satisfy the just desires of His
People, Both Nations stands mutually obliged by that inviolable Covenant to
pursue the ends therein expressed (which cannot be divided) against all letts
and impediments whatsoever. It is therefore our most earnest and longing
desire, That as these who are in trust with the public affairs of this Kingdom
have heretofore with all earnestness and care in all their addresses dealt
with His Majesty, with much strength of reason and vehemence of affection, so
they would still deal with him, to grant his Royal consent to the desires of
both Kingdoms, for settling Religion according to the Covenant, and for securing
a perfect and durable Peace (which we look upon as the only hopeful means of
preserving himself, His Crown and Posterity) That His Majesty may return to
His Houses of Parliament in England as a reconciled Prince, to satisfied
Subjects; And that acclamations of joy may be heard in all His Majesty's
Dominions, and no sound of War heard therein any more, except against the
bloody Irish Rebels, under whose barbarous and cruel persecution, our
distressed Brethren, both in this Kingdom and in Ireland, are still groaning
and crying out to us and to our Brethren in England, Be at peace among your
selves, and come to help us.

A. Ker.

Some Quaeries propounded by the Parliament of Scotland, to the Ministers that
are Commissioners from the General Assembly.
If the King shall come into this Kingdom, and that the Kingdom of England
shall exclude him from the Government there, for his leaving them without
granting the Propositions; Whether or not is will be lawful to this Kingdom to
assist him for the recovery of the Government, he not granting the Propositions
concerning Religion and the Covenant, and not giving a satisfactory Answer in
the remnant Propositions?

The Ministers answer.
The Quarie presupposes the Kings coming into this Kingdom, which case (for
the Reasons expressed in our late Warning) we humbly conceive should not be put
in the Question, and therefore desires your Lordships to go about all means for
the present prevention of it, as a matter of most dangerous consequence to
Religion, the Kirk and Kingdom, and to the King himself and his Posterity:

But if the question be stated simply, without supposing such a Case. in these
terms, If the King be excluded from Government in England, for not granting the
Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, and for not giving
satisfactory answer to the remnant Propositions: whether in that case it be
Lawful to this Kingdom to assist him for the recovery of the Government, or
if it be not lawful? (being put to it) We cannot but answer, in regard of the
engagements of this Kingdom by Covenant and Treaty, Negative.

If there be any other Votes said to come from Scotland, the Reader may choose
to believe them.

FINIS.

