TO OUR REVEREND AND VVell-beloved Brethren THE Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, THE Ministers of LONDON, and all other well-affected Brethren of
the Ministry in ENGLAND.

Presented to the Ministers of London this 13th. of December 1647.

December. 13. 1647.
Imprimatur

Ja. Cranford.



LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith; 1647.

TO Our Reverend and welbeloved Brethren, The Assembly of Divines at
Westminster.
Right Reverend and dearly beloved Brethren:
AS the General Assembly of this Church, and their Commissioners have upon
many former occasions, expressed their great respects and special affection to
our Brethren of England, and how much they valued and minded the Lords work
there: Of which also their actions have been real Testimonies. So we have
thought good in this present juncture, or rather dis-juncture of affairs to
add this new Testimony and symbol of brotherly love: And so much the more,
lest either the Commissioners of this Church, their return from London to
their particular flocks, after four years absence; or any informations spread
by disaffected persons might make some of our Brethren in that Kingdom, grow
somewhat less confident of the constancy of our affection to them, and to that
common cause, which both they and we did undertake, and are obliged to
prosecute with our best endeavors all the days of our lives. Wherefore we
do at once both (...) and trust that our Brethren will be as confident as ever
Brethren were of Brethren, that by the grace and assistance of Jesus Christ
come what may come, no alteration of affairs whatsoever shall ever remove us
from those principles and intentions, which have been professed before God and
all the world, in our solemn Covenant, and in our public Declarations from
time to time. We should think it a greater sin in us then in others, and should
certainly expect a dreadful curse and exemplary judgment from the righteous
God, if ever there shall be cause to say that the Church of Scotland remembered
not the brotherly Covenant. We owe indeed all loyal subjection, and lawful
obedenice to the King. Neither shall our prayers and best endeavors be
wanting for the preservation and defense of his Royal person and authority in
the preservation and defense of the true Religion and liberties of the
Kingdoms: but God forbid that we should ever separate or connive at any who
would separate what the Covenant linketh together, the glory of God and good of
Religion, being always the principal, and Gods interest more then Caesar's,
although not exclusive of Caesar's.

And now dear Brethren, although we are confident of you through the Lord,
that you neither are, nor will be otherwise minded then to stand fast in the
truth of Christ, and to be faithful to the death in the Covenant you have
taken: yet give us leave to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. That
whereto you and we have already attained, there may be a walking by the same
rule, and minding of the same thing.

The Directory of worship being about two years ago agreed upon by the
Assemblies, and Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

The Doctrinall part of Church Government agreed upon by the reverend and
learned Assembly of Divines was at the same time with the Directory of worship
approved by the general Assembly and ratified by the Parliament of this
Kingdom, the Confession of Faith is also approved by the last general
Assembly as sound and orthodoxe for the matter, and agreed unto on their part,
that it be a part of the uniformity and a Confession of Faith for the Churches
of Christ in the three Kingdoms.

The other things communicated from thence unto this Church, namely a Directory
of Church Government Cateisme, and new paraphrase of the Psalms in meter are
printed and published here, to be considred and examined against the next
general Assembly to be held in July 1648, we wish and hope that you all may
stand fast and firm together in the same principles and rules, and that these
results of so long and learned Syndiocall debates may generally find acceptance
through tho Kingdom; It cannot be expected that such a Reformation as is
according to the mind of Christ, and tends to the casting out of Satan's
Kingdom, to the censuring of prophannesse, and suppressing of errors and
heresy, can be carried on without a mighty and strong opposition: But how
strong soever the opposition be, it is but the strength of Satan and wicked
men; the weapons of your war far (if well handled) are more strong and
mighty through God to the casting down of every thing that exalts it self
against the Kingdom of Christ: The eyes of God, Angels, and Man, are now in a
more special manner upon you, observing how to acquit your selves in this time
of trial.

Blessed shall they be whosoever shall not be offended at the covenant and
cause of Christ, but shall be ready to speak, do or suffer for it,
whatsoever God calls them unto; and shall neither be ashamed of it when it is
set aside and abandoned by many, nor afraid to own it, and to give a good and
honest Testimony for it, even when it is opposed and persecuted.

We know your temptations are many and great, yet such as God has in his word
forewarned you of, promising withal that with your temptation; he will make a
way to escape that ye may be able to bear it: Faithful is he who has called
you, who also will do it. When you are pressed out of measure and above
strength, it is that you should not trust to your selves but to God; So that
when you are weak then are you strong, and when the adversaries of truth are
strong, then are they weak. Be it therefore far from you, to be overcome with
the tentations either on the right hand by compliance, and doing evil that
good may come of it, or on the left, by a despendency of spirit, and casting
away of your confidence, which as we trust you will not; so if any among you
should, there will be cause to say to him as once it was said to Job, Behold
thou have instructed many, and strengthened the weak hands. Thy words have
upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees: But
now it is come upon thee and thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. It is indeed the amazement of the Christian world, that after such a
Solemn Covenant for extirpation of heresy and schism, these pernicious
plants have been suffered to spread more then ever before.

It Is also a stupendous judgment of God that a little horn should grow forth,
and wax great, and have an host given it against the daily sacrifice by reason
of transgression, yea, to cast down the truth to the ground, practiseing and
prospering, and even by peace destroying many. Such things God has permitted
long ago, yet but for a time, having pre-limited a certain period thereunto.
Truth was at last victorious and so shall be. Mean while the greater and more
horrid the present evils be, it is the more necessary for you, and you have the
clearer call from God to give testimony against them and the greater were the
sin and danger if you should not: But we are the more confident that you
shall not fall under this sin and danger, because you have already by your
Sermons and Writings so much witnessed for the truth, and against the errors
of these times. This we must further say from our own experience, that
faithful endeavors of these who were both few and weak, in the greatest
extremities, and in the difficulties appeared most in-superable, have not
wanted a blessing and comfortable success. God can as easily drive all the
monsterous Errors and Heresies out of England, as once he took away all the
locusts out of Egypt by a mighty strong west wind, so that there remained not
one locust in all the coasts of Egypt. God can make the earth to open, her
mouth and swallow up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth: it is
not in vain in the worst of times to be witnesses for Christ and for his
truth, to do duty and trust God with events. As many as walk according to this
rule, and will yet sincerely constantly and really endeavor that by their
Covenant they are bound to do, shall find that their labor is not in vain in
the Lord, the very glory of Jesus Christ is highly concerned, and his name
interest, and engaged to repudiat, disclaim and overthrow those ways of
Error, Schis-me, Heresy, self interest, and carnal policy, falsely fathered
by many upon Christ, under the names of tender Consciences, Saints, and the
like,

And for our part you are in our hearts to dye and live with you, and we cease
not to make mention of you in our prayers daily: believing also that God has
thoughts of peace toward you and not of evil, to give you an expected end;
and that when he has humbled his people under his mighty hand, and brought
them to an acknowledgment of those offenses which are the true causes of his
controversy, he will awake for their help, and appear for their joy; And
then they who are by a temporary success hardened in ways of error or
malignancy, shall see it and be ashamed, and shall wonder and perish, but peace
shall be upon Israel.

Edinburgh 26 of Nove. 1647. Subscribed in name of the Commission of the
general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland by M. Robert Douglas Moderator.

FINIS.

