Causes of a solemn FAST, appointed by the Commissioners of the General
Assembly, to be kept in all the Congregations of this Kirk, upon the last
Thursday of April, 1646.
I. BEsides the diverse causes of our former solemn Humiliations, both for the
evil of Sin and of Punishment, lying still in a great measure upon the whole
Land, we should lay to heart the late shameful backsliding and compliance of
many with the Enemies, in the hour of temptation.

II. It is to be lamented, though the Lord our God has taken pains to purge us
by his Judgments of Sword and Pestilence, yet there is no reformation of our
lives, our scumme remains in us, many returning with the dog to their former
profaneness, neglect of Gods worship in Families, uncleanness, drunkenness,
and other great provocations, as if they had been delivered to do all these
abominations: Have we not just cause to mourn and be afraid that the Lord
kindle the fire again, heap on more wood, and cause his fury to rest upon us?

III. It is high time when the whole Land is threatened with a new breach from
the North, to acknowledge our great and senseless ingratitude, who have no
ways rendered to the Lord according to the benefits received, though the Lord
has begun to draw back his hand in a sensible and unexpected delivery from the
raging Pestilence, and has given us a little breathing from the cruel
insulting Enemy, yet all our promises and vows uttered in the day of our
trouble, have proven to be as the early dew and morning cloud; neither have we
brought forth the fruits of righteousness, and amendment of our ways, while
the Lord looked for them, after so gracious a Delivery: so that it is just with
our God to disappoint us of our expectation, when we look for healing to send
new troubles, and to raise up in his wrath some, who have banded themselves
together in the North, contrary to our solemn Covenants.

IV. Seeing our God hears Prayer, it is our duty to run to him in this day of
trouble, and to wrestle with tears and su^plications, that our God in he might
of his power would crush this Cockatrice Egg, that it break not forth into a
fiery flying Serpent; that the insolent pride of the contrivers of this
divisive and seditious Bond, may be rebuked by the Lord; that the simple who
have been misled, may be convinced and drawn out of the snare, that these who
stand, may be stablished by grace in their stedfastnes, and strengthened with
the spirit of Unity and Courage to oppose that divisive motion: Lastly, that
the Work of Uniformity in Church Government may be finished, our Armies blessed
and compassed with Gods favor, and a firm and well-grounded Peace settled
betwixt the Kings Majesty and Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

A. Ker.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.


