REVEREND BRETHREN.
THE Kings MAJESTY who lately reigned, being contrary to the Dissent and
Protestation of this Kingdom, now removed by a violent death, The Estates of
Parliament have declared and proclaimed the Prince of Scotland, and of Wales to
be King, as you will perceive by the enclosed Proclamation; and have resolved
to make addresses to him with all possible speed about these things that
concern the security of Religion, and the Peace of these Kingdoms. And because
of the great importance of his MAJESTY'S disposition and of these Affairs, we
hope that you will be careful to deal earnestly with God both in private and
public, in behalf of His MAJESTY who now is; And we have thought fit that a
solemn public Humiliation be kept on Thursday the 22. of this instant, as for
all the sins and provocations of the land, so to pray the Lord in a special
manner for these things following. 1. That he would deliver the King from the
snare of evil Counsel in which he is now involed, and teach him in his youth
in the knwledge of his way, that he may fear his name: and employ his power for
establishing and advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the work of
Reformation. 2. That the Lord would be pleased to bless those addresses that
are now to be made to his MAJESTY for the security of Religion, the union
betwixt the Kingdoms, and the peace and safety of this Kingdom. 3. That he
would strenthen and deliver our afflicted Brethren in England, who suffer by
the violence and strange practices of the Sectaries. 4. That he would in his
mercy prevent all those calamities and confusions that the present great
revolution of Affairs does threaten these Kingdoms with. So hoping that you
will be careful to stir up your selves and others to wrestle with God in
such an exigent, and to intimate the Fast timously, and to keep the same in
your several congregations the foresaid day.

We shall only add that if there be any in your congregations who refuse to
renew the Covenant, and are not excluded by the Act; Our judgment is, that
after you have conveened them before you, and found them obstinate, that you
make public intimation of their names from your Pulpits, as of persons that
are dissaffected, and enemies to the cause of God; and that you refer them to
the next General Assembly; till which time you are to suspend them from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and from all Ecclesiastic charge, that so they
may be in the same case with those who are excluded because of their malignancy
and accession to the engagement. We commend you to his Grace and rests,

Edinburgh, Febr. 6. 1649. Your affectionate Brethren, the COMMISSIONERS of the
General Assembly. M. TO. DUGLASSE Moderator.
Postscript.
IF these come not timously to your hands, you will be careful to keep the
next Thursday after the receipt hereof.



Printed by Evan Tyler Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY; 1649.


