A CANDLE For the blind CITIZENS OF LONDON, To see by:

By a Freeman of the same City, though of neither rank or quality, yet real
in heart, fearing God, honoring his King, and a Lover of Truth, Peace, and the
Brotherhood.

With Englands farewell from its ancient prosperity, to its new change of
misery.

Printed in the year of blindness, the month of stupidnes, the day of dulnes,
and the hour of unnaturalnes. 1648.

A Candle lighted for the blind Citizens of London, etc.
I Know well enough that the Citizens eyes are not yet opened; for they have
not suffered yet sufficiently, nor feelingly; neither do they know that
England is almost destroyed, or that their King is secured, or their states
wasted, or their fellow Citizens abused, and which is worst of all, their
Religion lost, and their God blasphemed; and have they not then need of a
candle lighted to see all this by? They might have foreseen this before if
they would, they then were but purblinde, but now they are quite stark staring
blind; it is so hid from their eyes, that they can see nothing at all: Tell me
ye Citizens, did ye ever hear of any Nation in the world so abused as this
is, and brought into such slavery by their fellows as we are, worse then the
Egyptian bondage? was ever any Nation under Heaven so robbed of their Religion
(their chiefest interrest) of their prviledges, of their freedoms, of their
liberties, of their rights, and of their estates purchased with their own
penny; and yet will sit still, and neither say or do any thing? Surely they
have need of a candle lighted to see by: Why where are your hearts become,
what is it you fear, are you afraid to speak, then you will never speed? Are
you afraid to act any thing? Have you put your hand to the plow, and do you
draw back? This is a base cowardice; no, fear not their faces nor their
threats; faint hearts never kissed fair Ladies, you know; are you content to
open your doors to let thieves in to cut your throats, or take your goods from
you, and never make any resistance? Are your hands so fast tied that they
cannot be undone? Do ye fear the Parliament, that they are so mighty, and have
the command of Sea and L^nd? If they be, you may thank your selves for it, who
made them so? Did not you send your men and horses, money and plate to them?
Wherefore believed you their Orders, Ordinances, Votes? Wherefore pay you
Excise and seasments? Wherefore let you them plunder your fellow Subjects, and
make slaves of them? For behold how they insult over you, and yet you cannot,
neither will you see, and therefore you have need of a candle lighted for to
see by: Divisions swarm more and more, without the least control; envy is
seen in the faces of men, and Rebellion is fine sport; blood is spilt as water
upon the ground, and unnatural and inhumane dealing with one another, is a
pastime for such fools: surely if you were not stark blind, you might easily
see, or you will not see because you have a finger in the pie; you have wetted
your hand in the Excise Office, and that has got you 2 or 3 hundred a year,
when as before your credit was so far lost, that your best friends would not
trust you for a Noble: or you have got a Committees place, and that has set
you a cock horse, that you can buy Bishops Lands, and write your self Bishop
of such a place; when as indeed you were but a broken Usurper; or were it that
you were but a poor Clarke of a Committee risen out of a stoake hole, this
has made you a Gentleman, that a good substantial Citizen is feign to stand
cap in hand to your Worshippes brich; or have you been a Traitor, and has
this made you hold up your head, because you could speak treason in defiance
of who dares? Indeed if you have your hands in any of these, or the like, I
blame you not for being so blind that you cannot see; but I fear your
conscience is not smitten with any such forrow for such offenses, it is seared
with a hot iron, it is hardened in rebellions, and which way to come off with
credit you cannot tell, and so you run on upon the score, and make the breach
bigger, till at last you run headlong to hell to the Devil, whose counsel you
have lollowed.

Wherefore ye blind Lord Mayer and Aldermen; O ye dull and stupid
Common-Counsell men, and O ye besotted and benumbed Citizens, look up and see
if you can see this candle burn; has the two great Lights of the Kingdom
shone so bright, that the looking upon them has dazzled your eyes, and smote
you with blindness that you can see no more, that you are as blind as
beetles? What means all these delays and excuses? What means this spinning
out of time, it is only a fine web to katch you in? What means this word so
often repeated, we give you thanks? (of which my cat dyed) after the
presenting of your humble Petitions, as you call them: Truly it is only to feed
you with delays, and to keep you in hand till they have brought about their
own ends; know you not, that whilst you humbly petition for peace (they
enviously prepare for war) and have thanks given you for your care, and you
can go away as content and as cheerfully, and so well fed and refresht, as if
you had been at the best banquet in the world, or got such a purchase not to be
valued at? Truly with such toys fools are soon pleased, and thanks is good
enough to stop your mouths withal, and so be sent away with a flea in your
ear, even as wise as you went: I would make a boy of 7 years old do as good
an errant, or I would know a reason wherefore; which makes me think that this
candle will give you no light to see by because it is but a candle to the Sun?
Yet it may give a little light that you may perceive your condition.

The whole world looks upon such blind stupidnesse, the Nations about us
admire at your simplicity, that such a reputed City, with wise and valiant
Citizens, of such discretion, judgment, wit, policy, and government, should
now at last be fooled out, this is not to be borne withal; you are more ready
to help and send relief, men, arms, and ammunition, to a company of Rebels,
then to relieve a poor Colchester distressed City, from whence many thousands
have their wealth; you had rather lose your Merchandise, and trading, and
shipping, then to send a little money to his Highness to relieve his wants; you
had rather see men and horse listed to fight against you, then to list for your
own safety, which if you should do, and be questioned for it, you will cry
peccavi, you will do so no more, and so you will let it fall to the ground, that
so an insolent and proud domineering Soldier may undo us all.

Are you so blind still that you cannot see? take this candle and hold it to
your noses; see if you can see; unto what a vast expense have you brought us
to, by going daily to Westminster to guard them, that neither fear God or
regard man: how is the wealth of this flourishing City decayed? how many
thousand of Subjects blood has been spilt? how many times have you been
deluded by bare votes? how many assessments have been made to fetch our money?
how many men's estates have been sequestered? how many Bishops Lands have been
sold? how much pole money, meale-money, and contributions have been given? how
much composition money has been received? how many plundered goods have been
so^d? How much plate and money has been brought into Guild Hall, of which we
shall never see use nor principal? how many thousand pounds out of His
Majesty's Revenues, and out of the customehouse? and how much has been paid
at the excize Office, and many others which my memory fails to speak of? as
money gived to the Scots, to the relief of Ireland, the buying of Irish Land,
for coals, for collections, and I know not what, and of what one of these can
there be a true accoumpt given? and yet the Citizens cannot see, and therefore
have need of a candle lighted, and if it be but to see how many thousands of
souls have been sent to their untimely ends, and for all this our Citizens
still run post have to fulfill every command of theirs and be ready to perform
it in as dutiful and respective manner as can be done; which makes me think
that the older the Citizens be, the more childish they grow, and that great men
are not always wise; for who would have thought that the Fathers of the mother
City of three Kingdoms should have proved such d^nces, so blockish, and so
wedded to their own foolishness, that blindness is their father that begat
them, and fearfullnesse their mother that brings them up? so that now we may
bid a farewell to all our former enjoyments, and take up this, lamentation,
(and all long of such Asses I had almost said) farewell to the King and Prince;
for we have got Thomas and Oliver; farewell Bishops, for we have got Elders;
farewell council table, for we have got Goldsmiths Hall; farewell High
commission Court, for we have got close Committees; farewell Pattentees, for
we have got Excize and sessments; farewell head for we have members; farewell
justice, for we have got just Asses; farewell Government, for here is Liberty
of conscience; farewell good neighborhood, for here is base envy; farewell
money and Plate, for we have got the public faith; farewell Religion, for we
have got superstition; farewell Roundhead and Cavaleer, for we have got Shimies
and Rabshakehs; farewell conscience, for we have got a Parliament; farewell
Lords and Ladies, for we have got Soldiers and their Laffes; farewell
Nobility, for we will have all common; farewell Common prayer, for we have a
Directory; farewell a preaching Ministry, for we have got prating Cobblers;
farewell Pulpits, for we have got Tubs; farewell Saints, for we have got
Devils; farewell Loyalty, for here is Rebellion; farewell honesty, for we
have got hypocrisy; fare well Churches and Chapels, for we have got barnes
and stables; farewell freedom, for we have got slavery; and farewell citizens,
for we are made Asses: Thus we may bid a farewell to all that ever we have
enjoyed; for by such means a well governed Kingdom is brought to destruction,
and who may we thank for this but the foreheaded Saints that have brought us
into such a purgatory, which was wont to be at Rome, but now abides in England?
O here is a sweet resurrection, a resurrection to destruction; if we were not
blind to see it, for such confusion comes by shaking off loyalty, and joining
hands with rebellion; this City has been the nurse that has brought it up
and dandled it on her knees and give it suck, that it is grown to such a
height of impudency that it dares call into question the unspotted life of the
Lords anointed.

I will not prophecy against thee thou great City, but I will be so bold to
tell thee, that through thy means and in thee is all manner of wickedness
maintained, and thou must speedily-suffer except thou take this candle lighted
to see by, for thou have plotted thy own destruction, and others also; for it
is nigh at hand, and thou art sinking; it is not the golden chains about my
Lords neck, or the Aldermens, or the great places of preferment that will
secure them from vengeance; no but let them rather take ropes about their necks
and go to the King of England, for he is a merciful King; and peradventure
they may find acceptance; for it is high time to leave off dissembling: You have
protested, vowed, and covenanted, with hands lifted up to the most high; but
neither Protestation, vow, or Covenant will you keep: Take this candle in your
own hands and see if you be not a company of perfidious wretches, and blind
Citizens: You have troubled your Common Councel-men day after day, and almost
whole nights have been consumed in canvasing the affairs of the City, and what
has been produced? ye were as very fools when you made an end as when you
began, notwithstanding you had candles lighted to see by: The sweet proffits
that have come into some of your purses from the Common people has blinded
your eyes that you cannot see, when many a poor creature is turned out of all,
and ready to starve, and you stand insulting over them, that men are become
wolves to one another: you have had fourscore fasting days since these
troubles, besides other days of humiliation to enlighten your eyes, and yet
you are blind, and there has been 21 thanksgiving days at least, when you
have rejoysed and feasted your selves at diverse Hals in triumph, for joy of the
(killing) victories of the Kings good subjects, as if it were a sport to you to
destroy them: and for shame wipe your eyes, that you may see your folly, and
leave off your assisting of Rebels, lest you purchase a Rebels reward both to
your selves and your posterity.

My candle is out.

FINIS.

