A DECLARATION FROM THE General Assembly Of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND IN
Answer to a DECLARATION sent by the Parliament of England, concerning the KING
and KIGDOME.

Whereing they declare, in the Name of the Kingdom of Scotland, their sense
and resolution touching the Kings Majesty, and the Kingdom of England, in
relation to His Majesty's Honor, and the Kingdoms Happiness.

With a brief Abstract of His Majesty's Letter to the General Assembly at
Edinburgh, containing the full Resolution of the Kings Majesty.

Agreed upon by the General Assembly, conveened at Edinburgh, and extracted
forth of the Original, by me Sir Archibald Johnston of Warnston Knight
Witnessing my sign and subscription mannuall.

A. JOHNSTON, Cler.

London, Printed for R. W. 1648.

A Declaration from the General Assembly of the Kingdom of Scotland, in
answer to the Declaration sent by the Parliament of England.
THe General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland having received a Declaration
sent unto them from the Parliament of England, and having taken the same into
serious consideration, as the importance of soweighty matters did require, have
with universal consent resolved upon this following Answer.

1. That from the receint sense of the goodness of God in their own late
deliverance, and from their earnest desire of all happiness to our native King
and that Kingdom, they blesse^e Lord in preserving them in the midst of so many
unhappy divisions and troubles. They also give God thanks, for their former and
present desires of a Reformation, especialy of Religion, which is the glory and
strength of a Kingdom.

2. That the hearts of all the Members of this Assembly, and of all the
well-affected within this Kingdom, are exccedingly grieved, and made heavy,
that in so long^n time against the professions both of King and Parliament, and
contrary to the joint desires of the godly in both Kingdoms, to whom it is more
dear and precious, then what is dearest to them in the world, the Reformation
of Religion has moved so slowly, and suffered so great interruption. The Kirk
and Nation when the Lord gave them the calling, considered not their own
deadnes, nor staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but gave glory to
God: And who knows (we speak it in humility and love, and from no other
mind, then from a desire of the blessing of God upon our King and that Kingdom)
but the Lord has now some controversy with England, which will not be removed,
til first and before all the worship of his Name and the Government of his
House be settled according to his own will. When this desire shall come, it shall be
to England, after so long deserred hopes, a Tree of life, which shall not only
yield temporal blessings unto themselves, but also shall spread the branches so
far, that both this Nation, and other Reformed Kirkes, shall find the fruits
thereof, to their great satisfaction.

3. The Commissioners of this Kingdom, in the late treaty, considering that
Religion i^ not only the mean of the service of God, and saving of souls, but
it is also the base and foundation of Kingdoms and States, and the strongest
band of the subjects to their Prince in true loyalty, and to knit the hearts of
one to another in true unity and love, they did with preface of all due respect
add reverence, represent in name of this Kingdom, the serious thoughts and
earnest desires for Unity of Religion, that in all his Majesty's Dominions
there might be one Confession of Faith, and one form of Kirk-Government; this
they conceived to be acceptable to God Almighty, who delights to see his
people walking in truth and unity: to be a special means for conserving peace
betwixt the Kingdoms, of easing the Kings Majesty, and the public government
of much trouble, which arises from differences of Religion, very grievous to
Kings and Estates of great content to the King himself, to his Nobles, his
Cour' and all his People, when occasioned to be abroad, without scruple to
themselves, or scandal to others, all may resort to the same public worship,
as if they were at their own dwellings; of suppressing the names of Heresies,
and Sects, Puritans, Conformists, Separatists, Anabaptists, etc. which do rent
asunder the bowels both of Church and Kingdom. His Majesty's late practice
while he was here in person in resorting frequently to the exercises of
public Worship, his Royal actions in establishing the Worship and Government
of this Kirk in Parliamen, and in giving order for a competent maintenance to
the Ministry and Seminaries of the Kirk, and his Majesty's gracious Letter to
the Assembly which contains his Religious expression.

The chief Heads of His Majesty's Letter.
Where any thing is amiss, we will endeavor a Reformation in a fair and
orderly way; and when Reformation is settled, we resolved with that Authority
wherewith God has vested us, to defend and maintain it in peace and Liberty
against all trouble that can come from without, and against all Heresies,
Sects, and Schisms, which may arise from within.

Upon these encouragements, and having so patent a door of hope, the Assembly
does confidently expect, that England will not bestir themselves in the best way
for a Reformation of Religion, wherein Christ is so much concerned in his glory
the KING in his honor, the Kirk and Kingdom of England in their happiness,
and this Kirk and Kingdom in the purity and peace of the Gospel.

4. What hope can the Kingdom and Kirk of Scotland have of a firm and durable
peace, till the Opposers thereof be plucked up root and branch, as a Plant
which God has not planted, and from which no better fruits can be expected,
then such sour Crapes, as this day set on edge the Kingdom of England.

5. The Usurping Hierarchy being put out of the way, the work will be easy
without forcing of any conscience, to settle in England the Government of the
Reformed Kirkes by Assemblies. For although the Reformed Kirkes do hold
without doubting their Kirk Officers, and Kirk Government by Assemblies higher
and lower, in their strong and beautiful subordination, to be Jure Divino, and
perpetual, yet as it differs from the Office of a Pastor is almost universaly
acknowledged by the Prelates themselves and their Adherents, to be but an
humane Ordinance, introduced by humane reason, and settled by humane Law and
Custom for supposed conveiencies, which therefore by humane authority, without
wronging any man's conscience, may be altered and abolished upon so great a
necessity, as is a hearty conjunction with all the reformed Kirks, a firm and
well grounded peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, formerly divided in themselves,
and betwixt themselves by this partition wall.

6. What may be required of the Kirk of Scotland for surthering the work of
Uniformity of government, or for agreeing upon a common Confession of Faith,
Catechism, and Directory for Worship, shall according to the Order given by
this Assembly, be most wilingly performed by us, who long extremely for the day
when King and Parliament shall join for bringing to pass, so great and so good
a work.

Extracted forth of the Book of the General Assembly, by me Sir Archibald
Johnston Knight, Clericus.

Witnessing my sign and subscription mannual. A. Johnston. Cler.



The Copy of a Letter sent from the Assembly at Edinburgh, to the Ministers of
the Church of England:
Right Reverend and beloved in the Lord Jesus,
YOu may perceive, that your last Letter which came so seasonably into our
hands, was not only acceptable unto us, but has also encouraged us to renew,
both to the Kings Majesty, and his great Council, the desires of the
Commissioners of this Kingdom, for unity in Religion in the four particulars
remembered by you. We cannot be ignorant, but the opposition from Satan, and
worldly men in Kirk, will still be vehement, as it has been already.

But we are confident, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that the prayers and
endeavors of the godly in both Kingdoms will bring the work to a wished and
blessed issue.

This whole National Kirk is so much concerned in that Reformation and Unity of
Religion in both Kingdoms, that without it, we cannot hope for any long time to
enjoy our purity and peace, which has cost us so deer, and is now our chiefest
comfort and greatest treasure; which one cause, beside the honor of God, and
the happiness of the people of God in that Kingdom) more desired of us then
our lives, is more then sufficient to move us to contribute all that is in our
power for bringing it to pass.

And since we have with so great liberty made our desires and hopes known both
to King and Parliament, it is a duty incumbent both to you and Us, who make
mention of he Lord, and are Watchmen upon the Walls of Jerusalem: never more to
keep silence, nor to hold your peace day nor night, till the righteousness of
Zion go forth as brightness and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns

And if it shall please the Lord to move the hearts of King and Parliament to
hearken unto the motion (for which end we have resolved to keep a Solemn Fast
and Humiliation in all the Kirkes of this Kingdom, the mean by which we have
prevailed in times past) we wish that the Work may be begun with speed, and
prosecuted with great diligence, by the joint labors of Divines in both
Kingdoms, who may prepare the same for the view and examination of a more
frequent and Ecclesiasticke meeting of the best affected to Reformation there,
and of the Commissioners of the General Assembly here, that in the end it may
have the approbation of the General Assembly here, and of all the Kirks there,
in the best way that may be, we wish and hope at last in a National Assembly.

Our Commissioners at Edinburgh shall in our name receive and return answers for
promoting so great a Work, which we with our heart and soul recommend to the
blessing of God, and continue,

Your loving Brethren, and Fellow Laborers The Commissioners of the General
Assembly; subscribing by our Moderator, and Clerk. Robert Douglasse, Moderator.
Vera Copia, A. Johnston, Cler.


FINIS.
Imprimatur,

G. M.


