A DECLARATION Of the Kirk of SCOTLAND PRESENTED To the Parliament of that
Kingdom on Monday the 5 of March, 1647. And of a Rising there.

ALSO The Marchings of some Regiaments of the Scots Army against the Malignants
that go out of ENGLAND thither. The Names of several Lords made in Scotland.
AND Diverse Votes, and Orders of that Parliament. CERTIFIED In a Letter from Mr.
ROSSE, Dated at Edinburgh, March 7. 1647.

March 15. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1646.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM Mr. WILLIAM ROSSE, Concerning The Affairs of
SCOTLAND: Dated at Edinburgh, March 7. 1647.
Right Honorable,
THe Convention of the Estates of Scotland were very busy on Tuesday the 29 of
Feb. 1647. in preparing of their transactions to be in a readiness to present
to the Parliament, at their sitting down on Thursday following: There came then
an Alarm into Scotland, (supported on the pillars of Malignants, especially
English) that the English Army was marching to invade Scotland, which put the
Inhabitants of this kingdom into a great fear. The Commissioners of the Kirk
were then very serious for dispatch of their Declaration to be in readiness to
be presented to the Parliament.

Wednesday, the 1 of March instant, great preparations was making for the
Parliaments siting down the next day. The City very full, Malignants not so
much countenanced as they hoped, so that many are gone from Edinburgh.

Thursday March the 2 The Parliament sat down at their usual place of
Assembling, where, after their passing over of the usual ceremonies for such a
meeting: There were many set Speeches made by diverse of the Lords and others,
concerning their president, which is a place as the Speaker is in England,
diverse were nominated, but it was chiefly disputed about four Lords (viz) The
Lord Chancellor Loudoune, the Earl Castles, the Lord Balmerino, and the Lord
Burley, and many stood for each of them, but being put to the question, it was
resolved by the major part, That the Lord Chancellor Loudoune should be Lord
President

Many new Lords are made here in Scotland, without musing of the business, and
they do sit in Parliament, Sir William Cokerham is made a Lord, and so is Sir
John Sanderson, and Sir John Hamilton of Burlington and others, who are
received as Peers by the Parliament. And the Lord Lowre is created Earl of
Athe, And it is said that some others are shortly to be made.

Friday the 3 of March, The members of the Parliament being called according to
the rule for the Counties and Burroughes, and the several Commissioners
debated, it appeared that (by reason of the great divisions in the several
Shires) there has been great stirs in choosing of the Members, Insomuch that
(in many places) they had chosen double the number of Commissioners for the
Parliament, one party by the Malignants, and another by the well-affected
party, the debates about which business took up much time.

Saturday March 4 Also was spent about the debates and resolutions concerning
the Counties and Burrows many of which are to choose again, by reason of false
elections, in which not only marquess Hambleton on the one side, but others
on the other side, have bin very active, so that the people have much
prejudiced from making free Elections. The Earl of Nottingham and the other
Commissioners, presented papers to the Lord President to be communicated to the
Parliament, to take their former papers into consideration.

Mr. Marshall this last Lords day, March 5. preached at Mr. Galaspies Church,
and had a very great audience, his Sermon was very seasonable, and we all hope
it will do good, the good Ministers here do daily press the maintenance of
the conjunction between the two kingdoms, as the interest of all honest men
binds them to do, and indeed they speak plainly, and as men that are sensible
of their present condition. The English Commissioners daily and hourly wait,
to see what conclusion they shall receive from the Scots Parliament, that they
may not frustrate the expectation of the English Parliament, nor betray the
trust committed to them. And I know they will do their utmost, that they may
be able to beget a right understanding here, of things. One thing is to be
lamented, that some honest men seem not willing to be right informed, as yet.

On that day the Provost of Edinburgh, received information that some English
in companies came in, and entered the borders of Scotland, about Carlisle side:
And that they were come up as far as Hagewick, and Seterick, which is within
25 or 26 miles of this place.

Yesterday being Monday the 6 of March, the Parliament being sat, were
advertised of a great number of English Cavaliers, (and malignants of Scotland,
joining with them underhand) were come into the frontier Counties of Scotland.
In which Captain Hall, Captain Wogan, and others, are said to be chief; They
are increased to between two and three hundred horse, with some foot, and
report that thousands more are coming, whereupon the Scots are making ready
for their defense, and some Regiaments are to march toward the borders, to
prevent the dangers of Malignants, whose designs the Parliament here, I hope,
will be sensible of.

Here is some talk here, as if some of judgment should think that this
Parliament will not sit here many weeks. But they sit at present very close,
and rise not till it was very late last night.

On the Lords day night last, there came above 70 Horsemen with a small number
of Foot, to Carlisle and with ladders scaled the walls, entered the Castle, broke
open the Goal, and released the Moss Troopers, and other prisoners, wounded
the Jailer and all marched together into Scotland.

It is feared that there will be an Army raised to come in, for the malignants
gives it out already, that if the Parliament will not give way for raising of
an Army, they will raise one of their own cost. The Church has finished the
Declaration, concerning which they have moved the Parliament for peace, yet the
Malignants are powerful with the Cavaliers party, and there is many English
men ly ng in and about the borders. Those that passed by Carlisle, gave out
themselves for Sir Thomas Fairfaxes men, until they were past, and then they
declared that they were for the King.

Here is much veying by some for a war with England, but I hope will not
prevail. The Parliament of Englands last Declaration did do much good here,
amongst some honest-minded men, though some others are not yet convinced: and
it was thought all this week, all would do well.

This last night came in a packet with Declarations, which will be delivered to
morrow to the Parliament, This night we hear will come in the Earl of
Stamford. Mr. Stapleton is not yet come. I hope by the next, to send you better
news, which is all at present, but that I am

Your Lordships humble servant, WILL. ROSSE.
Edinburgh the 7. March 1647.
FINIS,

