A FORM OF PRAYER.

To be used on Wednesday the 28th of May; BEING The Fast Day Appointed by
Proclamation of the Lord Lieutenant and Council.

To seek Reconciliation with Almighty God, and to implore him, that he would
Infatuate, and Defeat the Counsels of the Papists our Enemies; Continue his
Mercies and the Light of his Gospel to us, and our posterity; and bestow his
abundant Blessings upon His Sacred Majesty, and this present Parliament.

By His Majesty's Command

DUBLIN. Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crok at his Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-Row. 1679.

The Service shall be the same in all things with the Office appointed to be
used upon Friday in every Week, if it be Holiday; Except, where it is after
herein otherwise directed.

He that Ministers, shall begin with these Sentences, Joel II. 13. Dan. IX. 9,
10. Jer. X. 24.

Morning PRAYER.
In stead of Venite, Exultemus, shall this Psalm following be used; one verse
by the Minister, and another by the Clerk and People.
Psalm. LV.I.
HEar my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my petition.

2
Take heed unto me and hear me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

3
The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are minded to
do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me.

Psalm. LIX. 2
O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the Bloodthirsty men.

Psalm. LXIV. 2.
Hide me from the gathering together of the froward: and from the insurrection
of wicked doers.

Psalm. LIX. 3
For lo, they lie waiting for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against me
without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

Psalm. LXIV. 3
They encourage themselves in mischief: and commune among themselves, how they
may lay snares, and say, that no man shall see them.

Psalm. LXVIII 1.
Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him,
flee before him.

2
Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away: and like as wax
melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God.

Psalm. LXX. 2
Let them be ashamed and confounded, that seek after my soul: let them be turned
backward and put to confusion, that wish me evil.

Psa LIX. 13
Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they may perish: and know that
it is God that rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world

Psa. LXXIX, 9
Help us, O God of our salvation, for the Glory of thy Name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy Names sake.

Psalm. Lxxxvi, 5
For thou, Lord, art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that
call upon thee.

Psalm. LIVE, 4.
Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

Psa. Lxxxiv, 17
Show some token upon me for good, that they who hate me may see it and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, have helped me and comforted me.

Pals. LXI 6.
Thou shall grant the King a long life: that his years may endure throughout all
generations.

7.
He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and
faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

Psalm. Lxxix, 14
So we that are thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for
ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to generation,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Proper Psalms. LI.XXXII.LXXXIII.XX.

The first Lesson. Isaiah I.

The Second Lesson. Luc. XIII. or Acts XXIII.

Instead of the Collect for the Day, shall be used this, which follows, both
in Morning, and Evening Prayer, and in the Communion-Service.
ALmighty God, who of thy Great Mercy toward us have discovered the Designs,
and disappointed the Attempts of those Popish Conspirators, who under the
pretense of Religion, and thy most Holy Name, had contrived our Destruction,
and labored by the most unjustifiable Methods of Treason, and Murder, and the
Assassination of His Majesty's Sacred Person, to introduce the Tyranny of a
foreign power, and the Abomination of Superstitious Worship, and thereby to
enslave both the bodies and souls of thy servants, and to extinguish the
blessed light of thy holy Gospel amongst us: We yield thee praise, and thanks
for this thine infinite goodness to us; imploring thy Grace and Favor in the
farther Discovery of these depths of Satan, this mystery of iniquity. Send
forth thy Light, and thy Truth, and let them preserve us. Protect, and defend
our Sovereign Lord the King Bind up his soul in the bundle of life, and let no
Weapon formed against him prosper. Cloth all his enemies with shame; but upon
Himself, and His Posterity let the Crown ever flourish. To this end Bless the
present Parliament now Assembled, and knit together the Hearts of this whole
Nation, as the heart of one man, in the defense of our King, our Laws, and our
Religion. Teach us to know, at least in this our Day, the things which belong
to our peace, and let them not be hid from our Eyes. Remove from among us the
Accursed Thing; those personal and those public Guilts, the cry whereof is
gone up to Heaven, and calls aloud for Vengeance. And grant, that being by true
repentance reconciled to thee our God, we may also be united by Christian Love,
and Charity to one another: So that we walking in the paths of thy holy Law,
thou may continue the Blessing thereof to us and our posterity, and we All
may continue to give thee Thanks for ever, and show forth thy praise from
Generation to Generation; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the end of the Litany, after the Collect [We humbly beseech thee, O Father,
etc.] shall be read in this Order, The Collect for Ash Wednesday, The Three
Collects in the Commination, the Collect for XXI. Sunday after Trinity, The
Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, and this which follows. For
Deliverance from the Papists our Enemies; Taken out of the Office for the Fifth
of November.
ALmighty God, who have in all ages showed thy Power and Mercy in the
miraculous and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the Protection of
righteous and religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal
Truth, from the wicked Conspiracies, and malicious practices of all the enemies
thereof; Be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter our enemies that
delight in Blood: infatuate and defeat their Councels, abate their Pride,
assuage their Malice, and confound their Devices: Strengthen the hands of our
gracious King CHARLES and all that are put in Authority under him, with
Judgment and Justice, to cut off all such workers of Iniquity, as turn Religion
into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction; that they may never prevail against us,
or triumph in the ruin of thy Church among us: But that our gracious Sovereign
and his Realms being preserved in thy true Religion, and by thy merciful
goodness protected in the same, we may all duly serve thee, and give thee
thanks in thy holy Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then the Prayer of S. Chrysostom.

At the Communion-Service. The Epistle 1 Cor. X. 1. to v. 16. Or for the
Epistle, Joel II. 11: The day of the Lord, etc. to v. 19. The Gospel, Matthew.
XXI. 33. There was, etc. to v. 42. Or Matthew. VI. 16. to v. 22. Immediately after
the Prayer For the whole state of Christ's Church, shall this be used.
GLorious, and gracious God; who is Judgments against obstinate Offenders are
most severe, and terrible; but thy Mercies infinite to All, that with hearty
Repentance, and true Faith turn unto thee: We sinful people of this Land do
acknowledge before thee, to thy Glory, and our own shame, that never any Nation
had more Experience of thy Goodness; nor yet did ever any more unthankfully
abuse it. When thou gave us great, and long prosperity, we fed our selves to
the full, waxed fat, and kicked against thee. When thou threwest us into horrid
Confusions, from which we saw then little hope of arising; even in the time of
that distress did we trespass yet more against thee. When by Miracles of Mercy
thou had turned our Captivities; we soon returned to Folly, to our vomit, and
to our wallowing in our former, or greater Filthiness. Even while thou have of
late appeared for us by discovering the Plots and Contrivances of our
implacable Enemies of the Romish Faction, we have been in the mean time by our
sins fighting against Heaven, and against thee. And now we are no more worthy
to be called either thy sons, or thy servants; whom neither thy Fear has
driven, nor thy Goodness led to Repentance. In Mercy awaken our drowsy
Consciences. Soften, and subdue our hard hearts into deep contrition. Pardon
the many great offenses of us thy servants, and the crying sins of the whole
Nation Remove the Evils we now lie under. Avert the Judgments, which we justly
fear, because we most justly deserve. Discover more and more the snares of
Death and Popish Treachery: and let us never fall into the hands of those men,
who is mercies are cruel. Unite all our hearts in the profession of the true
Religion, which thine own right hand has planted among us, and in a holy
Conversation answerable thereunto. Pour out thy abundant Blessings upon our
Gracious King, and his great Council, the present Parliament: Keep him as the
Apple of thine Eye; hide him under the shadow of thy wings. Inform his Princes
after thy will, and teach his Senators Wisdom: And grant that all their
Counsels, Resolutions, and Endeavors may tend to, and end in the Glory of thy
great Name, the preservation of thy Church, and true Religion among us, and the
security, peace; and prosperity of these Kingdoms: All which we humbly beg in
the Name, and through the Mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son, our Savior. Amen.

Evening PRAYER.
Proper Psalms, XXI, XLVI.LVII, CXLIII. The First Lesson, Isaiah LVIII. The
Second Lesson, Romans XIII.
Immediate^y after the Collect [Lighten our darkness] shall be read, in this
Order, The Collect for Ash Wednesday, The three Collects in the Commination,
and the Collect for the XXI. Sunday after Trinity.

And after the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, shall be added that for
Deliverance from the Papists our Enemies, and the Prayer [ Glorious and
gracious God, etc.] as they are set down before in the Morning-Service.

FINIS.

