EIGHT PROPOSITIONS OF The desires of the Commissioners of the General Assembly
of Scotland, to the Parliament. 1 That the grounds and cause of undertaking a
war may be cleared. 2 To consider what are the breaches of peace, which are
taken to be the ground of the war. 3 That no ground or quarrel of war be, that
may break the union of the Kingdoms. 4. If the Popish, Prelaticall, or
Malignant party rise in arms, that all means be used for suppressing them. 5
That the Parliament will declare His Majesty's Concessions and offers of
Religion unsatisfactory. 6 Security to be bad from His Majesty, that he and his
Successors shall agree to Acts of Parliament injoyning the League and Covenant,
the Presbytery, and Directory. 7 That none have power, but such as have given
proof of their honest dealing. 8 And that there be no engagement without a
civil Oath.


AND The answer of the Lords to the said Propositions

ALSO A Petition entered in the Parliament of Scotland by eighteen Lords, and
near forty of the Commons, of Shires and Buroughs of the Parliament of
Scotland.

Published according to Order.

Printed at London by ROBERT IBBITSON. 1648.

1648. A PROTESTATION Entered IN THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, By eighteen Lords,
and near forty of the Commons of Shires, and Buroughs, of the Parliament of
SCOTLAND.
WHereas we have earnestly desired and pressed that no power be granted to any
Committee, to do, act, or Order any thing which may engage this Kingdom in a
new War, before the Parliament resolve on a War, and states the Causes and
Ends thereof, it being in our judgment neither agreeable to the Oath of
Parliament, and Tenor of Commons from Shires and Burroughes, nor the Act of
Parliameut 1640. And against the Articles, it being also a dangerous
preparative, and much derogatory to the Liberty of the Kingdom, and
Privileges of Parliament; And most of all it being of dangerous consequence to
the cause of God, and to the ends of the solemn League and Covenant. We do
therefore dissent from granting any such power, and do protest that we may not
be included in any such Vote or Resolution, but may be free before God and Man
of all the guiltiness, prejudices or evil that may follow thereupon,, to the
Cause, Covenant and Religion, to the Kings person and authority, to this Kirk
and Kingdom, or the union between the two Kingdoms.

Edinburgh 22 March, 1647.
TO the Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament present conveened: The
humble desires of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, Whereas we were
desired to appoint a conference of some of your Lordships, which did go on
toward an agreement, till it was obstructed by a Vote of Parliament of the 16.
of this instant, and having already shown by our papers of the 18. and 20. the
reasons of not proceeding in that conference, and that the cause was not in us;
we do now as the servants of Jesus Christ, for your exhortation, for
preventing of mistakes, and for a clear understanding betwixt yours and us
represent these our humble desires, which we commend to your Lordships serious
thoughts.

I.
That the ground and cause of undertaking was may be clear to be so just, as
that all who are well affected may be satisfied in the lawfulness and
necessity of engagement, and that nothing be enacted in reference to a war
before the lawfulness of the war, and the state of the question be agreed
upon.

II.
That as the breaches of the Covenant by the Parliament partly by Sectaries in
England are evident, so we desire and hope, that according to the treaties it
may be considered upon and declared by the Parliament what are those breaches
of peace which they take to be a ground of the war, and that whereabout
thereof may be sought.

III.
That there may be no such quarrel or ground of the war as may break the
union between the Kingdoms, or may discourage or disable the presbyterian party
in England, who continue from in adhering to the League and Covenant.

IV.
That if the popish prevail, or malignant party shall again rise in Arms,
this war and their Armies may be so far from joining, or associating with
them, that on the contrary they may oppose them, and endeavor to suppress
them, as enemies to the Cause and Covenant, upon the one hand, as well as
Sectaries on the other.

V.
Seeing your Lordships undertakings should be in the first part for Religion,
we desire that His Majesty's late consessions and offers concerning Religion as
they have been by the Church, so may be by the Parliament declared
unsatisfectory, whereby your Lordships may give a further evidence of the
reality of your intentions for the good and safety of Religion.

VI.
That your Lordships may be pleased not to fix or settle upon any such state of
a question, as does not contain security and assurance to be had from His
Majesty by his solemn oath under his hand and seal, That he shall for
himself and his successors consent and agree to acts of Parliament, injoyning
the League and Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterian Government,
Directory of worship, and confession of faith, in all His Majesty's Dominions,
and that His Majesty shall never make any opposition to any of these, or
endeavor any change thereof, and that this security be had from His Majesty
before his restitution to the exercise of His Regal power, which desire we
propound for no other end, but because we cannot see how Religion which has
been, and we trust shall be the principle end of the undertakings of this
nation can be otherwise secured, but that without this security it shall be
left in very great hazard.

VII.
That for the same end of securing Religion (which is professed to be the
principal end of engagement) and for all the other ends of this Covenant, such
persons only may be entrusted by your Lordships to be of your Committees or
Army as has given constant proof of their integrity and faithfulness in
this Cause, and against whom there is no just cause of exception or jealousy,
that so we may the more confidently encourage our Flocks and Congregations to
follow the Cause of God, in their hands, and not to doubt of the fidelity of
those who shall be entrusted by your Lordships.

VIII.
That there be no engagement without a Solemn Oath wherein the Kirk may have
the same interest which they have had in the Solemn League and Covenant, the
Cause being the same.

All which desires being duly pondered by your Lordships in an equal balance,
will we trust be found just and necessary: And we do not doubt but
satisfaction from your Lordships therein may be the happy effectual means for
facilitating the state of the question, and for uniting the Nations in one
unanimous undertaking of such duties as are requisite for the Reformation and
defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the Kiig, and the good, peace
and safety of the Kingdoms.

Eight Noblemen, eight Barrons, eight Burgesesses from the Parliament, with
seven Ministers, and eight Ruling-Elders were appointed to keep a Committee
and consider of the Articles aforesaid.

After which, that Committee called a Committee from the Parliament and gave
this report, viz.

March 25. 1648.
Anent the first of the Articles agrees to it, but so, that nothing be acted in
the mean time, in reference to war.

To the second Article, that some be appointed to represent the breaches of the
Covenant and Peace. And to report their representation both of the time and
manner.

Thirdly, any engagement to England, if it be for strengthening the Union of
the Presbyterian Party, and the well-affected in England.

The fourth agreed to, in matter and substance.

Fifthly, Upon the agreement and the whole matter, and state of the question,
their Lordships will be pleased to declare His Majesty's consessions to be
unsatisfactory, they agree.

Sixthly, Declare that the present question to be stated shall be an assurance
to be had from His Majesty and His Successors, that Acts of Parliament shall be
agreed unto, injoyning the League and Covenant, and as to the second part of
the Article, That His Majesty shall do this before His restoration: Its
remitted to those who shall be appointed for drawing up the state of the
Question.

The seventh agreed to verbatim.

To the eight, to consider the framing of Oaths, otherwise, that they shall
have their due interest past, that some be appointed for drawing up of the
question, and grounds of engagements for uniting the Kingdomse, and further an
uuanimous nnderstanding.

FINIS,

