DIRECTIONS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY Concerning Secret and Private WORSHIP, and
mutual edification, for cherishing Piety, for maintaining Unity, and avoiding
Schism and Division.

WITH An Act for observing these Directions, and for censuring such as use to
neglect FAMILY WORSHIP.

AND An Act against such as withdraw themselves from the Public Worship in
their own CONGREGATIONS.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1647. And Reprinted for Robert Bostock at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard, 1647.

Edinb. 24. Aug. 1647. Sess. 19. Act for observing the following Directions,
and for censuring such as use to neglect Family Worship.
THe General Assembly, after mature deliberation, does approve the following
Rules and Directions, for cherishing Piety and preventing Division and Schism,
and does appoint Ministers and Ruling Elders in each Congregation to take
special care that these Directions be observed and followed; As likewise that
Presbyteries and Provincial Synods enquire and make trial whether the said
Directions be duly observed in their bounds, and to reprove or censure
(according to the quality of the offense) such as shall be found to be
reproveable or censurable therein. And to the end that these Directions may not
be rendered ineffectual and unprofitable among some through the usual neglect of
the very substance of the duty of Family Worship, The Assemby does further
require and appoint Ministers and Ruling Elders, to make diligent search and
enquiry in the Congregations committed to their charge respectively, whether
there be among them any Family or Families which use to neglect this necessary
duty; And if any such Family be found, the head of that Family is to be first
admonished privately to amend this fault; And in case of his continuing
therein, he is to be gravely and sadly reproved by the Session. After which
reproof, if he be found still to neglect Family Worship, Let him before his
obstinacy, insuch an offense,e suspended and debarred from the Lords Supper as
being justly esteemed unworthy to communicate therein till he amend.

A. Ker,

DIRECTIONS OF THE General Assembly, concerning Secret and Private Worship and
mutual edification, for cherishing Piety, for maitaining Unity, and avoiding
Schism and Division.
BEsides the public Worship in Congregations, mercifully established in this
Land, in great purity; It is expedient and necessary, that Secret Worship of
each person alone, and Private Worship of Families be pressed and set up, That
with National Reformation, the profession and power of Godliness both Personal
and Domestic be advanced.

I. And first fot Secret Worship; It is most necessary, that every one apart
and by themselves be given to Prayer and Meditation; The unspeakable benefit
whereof is best known to them who are most exercised therein; This being the
mean whereby in a special way communion with God is entertained, and right
preparation for all other duties obtained; And therefore it becomes not only
Pastors, within their several Charges, to press Persons of all sorts to
perform this duty Morning and Evening, and at other occasions, but also it is
incumbent to the head of every Family, to have a care that both themselves and
all within their charge be daily diligent herein.

II. The ordinary duties comprehended under the exercise of Piety, which should
be in Families when they are conveened to that effect, are these: First, Prayer
and Praises performed, with a special reference as well to the public condition
of the Kirk of God and this Kingdom, as to the present case of the Family, and
every member thereof. Next, Reading of Scriptures with Catechizing in a plain
way, that the understandings of the simple may be the better enabled to profit
under the public Ordinances, and they made more capable to understand the
Scriptures when they are read; Together with godly conferences tending to the
edification of all the members in the most holy faith: As also, admonition and
rebuke upon just reasons from those who have Authority in the Family.

III. As the Charge and Office of interpreting the holy Scriptures, is a part
of the Ministerial calling, which none (howsoever otherwise qualified) should
take upon him in any place, but he that is duly called thereunto by God and his
Kirk: So in every Family where there is any that can read, The holy Scriptures
should be read ordinarily to the Family; And it is commendable that thereafter
they confer, and by way of conference make some good use of what has been read
and heard: As for example, if any sin be reproved in the Word read, use may be
made thereof, to make all the Family circumspect and watchful against the same;
Or, if any judgment be threatened or mentioned to have been inflicted in that
portion of Scripture which is read, use may be made to make all the Family
fear, lest the same or a worse judgment befall them, unless they beware of the
sin that procured it: And finally, if any duty be required, or comfort held
forth in a promise, use may be made to stir up themselves to employ Christ for
strength to enable them for doing the commanded duty, and to apply the offered
comfort; In all which the Master of the Family is to have the chief hand, And
any member of the Family may propone one question or doubt for resolution.

IIII. The head of the Family is to take care that none of the Family withdraw
himself from any part of Family worship; And seeing the ordinary performance of
all the parts of Family Worship belongs properly to the head of the Family,
The Minister is to ^^r up such as are lasie, and train up such as are weak to a
fitness for these exercises. It being always free to persons of quality to
entertain one approved by the Presbytery for performing Family exercise; And in
other families where the head of the Family is unfit that another constantly
residing in the Family approved by the Minister and Session, may be employed in
that service; Wherein the Minister and Session are to be countable to the
Presbytery. And if a Minister by divine providence be brought to any Family, It
is requisite, that at no time he conveen a part of the Family for Worship
secluding the rest; Except in singular cases; specially concerning these
parties, which (in Christian prudence) need not, or ought not to be imparted to
others.

V. Let no Idler who has no particular calling, or vagrant person under
pretense of a calling, be suffered to perform Worship in Families, to or for
the same; Seeing persons tainted with errors or aiming at division, may be
ready (after that manner) to creep into houses and lead captive silly and
unstable souls.

VI. At Family Worship a special care is to be had, that each Family keep by
themselves; Neither requiring, inviting, nor admitting persons from diverse
Families; Unless it be those who are lodged with them or at meal, or otherwise
with them upon some lawful occasion.

VII. Whatsoever has been the effects and fruits of meetings of persons of
diverse Families in the times of corruption or trouble (in which cases many
things are commendable, which otherwise are not tolerable) Yet when God has
blessed us with Peace and the Purity of the Gospel, such meetings of persons of
diverse families (except in the cases mentioned in these directions) are to be
disapproved, as tending to the hinderance of the Religious exercise of each
Family by it self, to the prejudice of the Public Ministry, to the renting of
the Families of particular Congregations, and (in progress of time) of the
whole Kirk; besides many offenses which may come thereby, to the hardening of
the hearts of carnal men, and grief of the godly.

VIII. On the Lords day, after every one of the Family apart, and the whole
Family together have sought the Lord (in whose hands the preparation of men's
hearts are) to fit them for the Public Worship, and to bless to them the
Public Ordinances; The Master of the Family ought to take care that all within
his charge repair to the public Worship, that he and they may join with the
rest of the Congregation; And, the public Worship being finished, after
prayer, he should take an account what they have heard, And thereafter to spend
the rest of the time which they may spare, in Catechizing and in Spiritual
Conferences upon the Word of God; Or else (going apart) they ought to apply
themselves to reading, meditation, and secret prayer, that they may confirm and
increase their Communion with God; That so the profit which they found in the
public Ordinances may be cherished and promoved, and they more edified unto
eternal life.

IX. So many as can conceive Prayer, ought to make use of that gift of God:
Albeit these who are rude and weaker may begin at a set Form of Prayer; But so,
as they be not sluggish in stirring up in themselves (according to their daily
necessities) the spirit of Prayer, which is given to all the children of God in
some measure. To which effect, they ought to be the more fervent and frequent
in secret Prayer to God, for enabling of their hearts to conceive, and their
tongues to express convenient desires to God for their Family. And in the mean
time, for their greater encouragement, let these materials of Prayer be
meditated upon, and made use of, as follows.

Let them confess to God how unworthy they are to come in his presence, and
how unfit to worship his Majesty; And therefore earnestly ask of God the
spirit of Prayer.

They are to confess their sins, and the sins of the Family, accusing,
judging, and condemning themselves for them, till they bring their souls to
some measure of true humiliation.

They are to pour out their souls to God, in the Name of Christ, by the Spirit,
for forgiveness of sins, for Grace to repent, to believe, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly; and that they may serve God with joy and delight,
walking before him.

They are to give thanks to God for his many mercies to his People, and to
themselves, and especially for his love in Christ, and for the light of the
Gospel.

They are to pray for such particular benefits, Spiritual and Temporal, as they
stand in need of for the time, (whether it be Morning or Evening) as health or
sickness, prosperity or adversity.

They ought to pray for the Kirk of Christ in general, for all the Reformed
Kirks, and for this Kirk in particular, and for all that suffer for the Name of
Christ, for all our Superiors, The Kings Majesty, the Queen, and their
Children; for the Magistrates, Ministers, and whole body of the Congregation
whereof they are members, as well for their Neighbors absent in their lawful
affairs, as for those that are at home.

The Prayer may be closed with an earnest desire that God may be glorified in
the coming of the Kingdom of his Son, and in the doing of his will; And with
assurance that themselves are accepted, and what they have asked according to
his will shall be done.

X. These Exercises ought to be performed in great sincerity without delay,
laying aside all Exercises of worldly business or hindrances, Notwithstanding
the mockings of Atheists and profane men; In respect of the great mercies of
God to this Land, and of his severe Corrections wherewith lately he has
exercised us. And to this effect, persons of eminency (and all Elders of the
Kirk) not only ought to stir up themselves and their Families to diligence
herein; But also to concur effectually, that in all other Families where they
have Power and Charge, the said exercises be conscionably performed.

XI. Besides the ordinary duties in Families which are abovementioned,
extraordinary duties both of humiliation and thanksgiving are to be carefully
performed in Families, when the Lord by extraordinary occasions (private or
public) calls for them.

XII. Seeing the Word of God requires, That we should consider one another
provoke unto love and good works; Therefore at all times, and especially in
this time wherein profanity abounds, and mockers walking after their own lusts
think it strange that others run not with them to the same excess of riot,
Every member of this Kirk ought to stir up themselves and one another to the
duties of mutual Edification, by instruction, admonition, rebuke, exhorting
one another to manifest the Grace of God, in denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and in living godly, soberly and righteously in this present world, by
comforting the feeble-minded, and praying with, or for one another: Which
duties respectively are to be performed upon special occasions offered by
divine providence; As namely, when under any calamity, cross, or great
difficulty, counsel or comfort is sought: Or when an offender is to be
reclaimed by private admonition; and if that be not effectual, by joining one
or two more in the admonition, according to the rule of Christ; That in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

XIII. And because it is not given to every one to speak a word in season to a
wearied or distressed conscience, It is expedient, that a person (in that case)
finding no ease after the use of all ordinary means private and public, have
their address to their own Pastor, or some experienced Christan: But if the
person troubled in conscience be of that condition, or of that sex, that
discretion, modesty, or fear of scandal requires a godly, grave, and secret
friend to be present with them in their said address, It is expedient that
such a friend be present.

XIV. When persons of diverse Families are brought together by divine
providence, being abroad upon their particular Vocations, or any necessary
occasions, As they would have the Lord their GOD with them whithersoever they
go, they ought to walk with GOD, and not neglect the duties of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, but take care that the same be performed by such as the company
shall judge fittest: And that they likewise take heed that no corrupt
communication proceed out of their mouth, but that which is good, to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.

The drift and scope of all these Directions is no other, but that upon the one
part the power and practice of godliness among all the Ministers and Members
of this Kirk, according to their several places and vocations, may be
cherished and advanced, and all impiety and mocking of Religious Exercises
suppressed; And upon the other part, that under the name and pretext of
Religious Exercises, no such meetings or practices be allowed as are apt to
breed error, scandal, schism, contempt or misregard of the public
Ordinances and Ministers, or neglect of the duties of particular Callings, or
such other evils as are the works not of the Spirit, but of the Flesh, and are
contrary to Truth and Peace.

A. Ker.

Act against such as withdraw themselves from the public worship in their own
Congregation.
SInce it has pleased God of his infinite goodness to bless his Kirk within
this Nation with the riches of the Gospel, in giving to us his Ordinances in
great purity, liberty, and withal, a comely and well-established order: The
Assembly, in the zeal of God, for preserving Order, Unity and Peace in the
Kirk, for maintaining that respect which is due to the Ordinances and Ministers
of Jesus Christ, for preventing Schism, noisome Errors, and all unlawful
practices which may follow on the peoples withdrawing themselves from their
own Congregations, Does charge every Minister to be diligent in fulfilling his
Ministry, to be holy and grave in his conversation, to be faithful in
preaching, declaring the whole counsel of God, and as he has occasion from
the Text of Scripture, to reprove the sins and errors, and press the duties
of the time; and in all those, to observe the rules prescribed by the Acts of
Assembly; wherein if he be negligent, he is to be censured by his own
Presbytery. As also ordains every Member in every congregation, to keep their
own Paroch Kirk, to communicate there in the Word and Sacraments: And if any
person or persons shall hereafter usually absent themselves from their own
Congregations, except in urgent cases made known to, and approven by the
Presbytery, The Ministers of these Congations whereto they resort, shall both
in public by preaching, and in private by admonition, show their dislike of
their withdrawing from their own Minister; That in so doing, they may witness
to all that hear them, their due care to strengthen the hands of their
fellow laborers in the work of the Lord, and their detestation of any thing
that may tend to separation, or any of the abovementioned evils; Hereby their
own Flock will be confirmed in their steadfastness, and the unstable spirits of
others will be rectified. Like as the Minister of that Congregation from which
they do withdraw, shall labor first by private admonition to reclaim them; And
if any after private admonition given by their own Pastor do not amend, in
that case the Pastor shall delate the foresaid persons to the Session, who
shall cite and censure them as contemners of the comely Order of the Kirk; And
if the matter be not taken order with there, It is to be brought to the
Presbytery: For the better observing whereof, the Presbyteries at the
Visitation of their several Kirks, and Provincial Assemblies, in their censure
of the several Presbyteries, shall inquire hereanent; Which Inquiry and Report
shall be registrate in the Provincial Books, that their diligence may be seen
in the General Assembly.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

