THE CONFESSION OF THE CHVRCH OF SCOTLAND, Concerning the Original of
Political Authority compendiously paraphrazed.

Also a Letter from an Intelligent Person, Communicating the present affairs
of Scotland, March, 14. 1647.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Confession of the Church of SCOTLAND.
WE confess and acknowledge, Empires, kin^domes, Dominions, and Cities to be
distincted and ordained by God; the Powers and Authorities in the same, be it
of Emperors in their Empires, Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in
their Dominions, and of other Magistrates in their Cities, to be Gods holy
ordinance ordained for manifestation of his own Glory, and for the singular
profit and commodity of mankind; so that whosoever goes about to take away or
confound the whole state of Civil policies now long established, we affirm
the same men, not only to be Enemies to mankind, but also wickedly fight
against Gods expressed will.

Of the Original of Political Authority.
GOD is the universal Monarch of the whole world, and in the several
Kingdoms, and dominions thereof, he constituteth Kings, and princes next under
him, and in his stead to rule and govern the people: hence God is called the
King of Kings, and they are called Gods Lievtenants and Viceroys.

As the King of England is the Monarch or governor of the Kingdom of England,
and constitutes other subordinate Governors under him throughout all the whole
Kingdom; sometimes by name as in the government of the Counties, and sometimes
by the election of the people, as in Cities, and Corporations; where the
Inhabitants choose the chief Magistrate by his Majesty's Indulgence, and
Charter, or rather the King himself constituteth the Magistrate there by the
people, authorized by his Grant to make such election; and hence the
Magistrate so elected is called, Minister Regis, the Kings Minister, and the
Kings Lieutenant, representing his Person, and governing there in his stead,
and by his Authority and Power.

And that God gives power to Kings and Princes is plain, from Dan. 2.37. The
God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory: And
that God also constituteth Kings, and Princes is proved from Dan. 2.21. He
removes Kings, and sets up Kings; and from Dan. 4.17.25.32. He rules in
the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will: Likewise St. Paul
tells us, that the Higher Powers are ordained by God, Romans 13. And whosoever
resists the power resists the O^dinance of God, v. 2. And that the people
cannot (of them selves) empower, or constitute: the supreme Magistrate is
proved thus: the Magistrate is over men's persons and estates, and extends unto
fines, imprisonment, and death it self, and hence is it called the power of
the sword. Romans 13.4. now the people are under the commandments, Thou shall
not kill. Thou shall not steal; and they cannot give order to any to take away
another life and estate without guilt of murder and theft: only God who is
above the Law, the Lord possessor of Heaven and Earth, and the Lord of life and
death can give this authority and power; and he gives it to the Magistrate for
the administration of justice only; for he has said, vengeance is mine and I
will repay, Deuteronomy. 32.35. And he makes the Magistrate his Minister, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4. Wherefore we must needs
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. v. 5.

A Letter from Scotland, etc.
Sir:
YOurs of the seventh instant, I received, whereby any man may easily perceive
your great and sad perplexities in regard of the present distractions, which
trouble you the more, because you seem to be destitute of advice which way to
turn, should a new war (as is justly feared) break forth. Sir, though
otherwise conscious of my own wants, I cannot dictate to you any certain
Rules of direction; yet my present thoughts of the state of things here shall
not be wanting to you: For mine own and others satisfaction, my stay in these
parts has been somewhat curiously employed to search out mysteries, and all
that can be discovered yet, is, that it is evident the Grandees who sit at
stern, have fixed their resolution to engage your Independent Party in a new
war; in prosecution whereof their whole endeavor now is, to purge out, or
quell at least the same side in both Houses here: which once effected, the
next design seems to be some attempt upon the Army with you, to try whether
by jealousies and discontents they can make a Division, and so bring it to a
confusion, or else by free quarter, impositions, or other oppressing means, to
provoke the long enslaved people to cast off their yoke, and once more stand up
for liberty: For this purpose upon specious pretenses they seem to comply with
Malignants, till they can get strength enough to settle their Presbyteriall
government, in its full careere and tyranny; but what ever the color is, be
assured there is nothing less intended, then to take in the Kings party, for
fear lest once engaged, they should be able to curb the Presbytery: Nor are
encouragements wanting for bringing about their ends, as long as that Party
does still prevail at Westminster, or there be hearts or money ready in the
City to invite them in. To which you may add the design of those that have
obtained leave (as we hear) to retire into their several Counties, especially
the Northern, where they sleep not supinely; but upon every occasion animate the
people in all possible arguments, now if ever to regaine their freedom by
lending assistance to their dear, and deeply engaged B ethren: to which no
small advantage the Northern Presbyters afford them, especially about York,
where at this day upon all sorts of people (as the report goes) the Covenant is
engaged, and all manner of motives used for a brotherly assistance, if they
hope to be freed from an Independent sl^very; and which is worse, an
inundation of all manner of Sects and Heresies. We are told likewise, the two
Houses of late have been very solicitous to disband those York: shire
Regiments, which were any whit inclined to Presbytery, whereby the discon^ented
Souldery (whose Religion is their money) being unsatisfied for arreares, are
ready upon the least opportunity to engage against the Parliament, and in all
likelihood are very active to draw in their Fellow Soldiers to their Party,
that so both in due time may be fully revenged upon those ungrateful M^sters.
In my opinion it had been more wisdom in our Grandees, by sending down some
well gifted Emissaries, who in all popular Auditories, might have possessed the
Pulpits, and refuted those rigid Presbyte^ian Tenants; so to have reclaimed the
Northern people from this dangerous recidivation, rather then so
inconsiderately to have casheered part of their Army, and so put them into a
condition to do themselves a mischief when time serves. Most certain it is,
some Parliament men of those parts, who daily vote at Westminster against the
Presbyterian Party, have notwithstanding their Agents here at Edenborough
transacting their designs with the Scots, and to my knowledge, H. D. H. C. and
R. D. have given assurance to desert the Houses so soon as they receive
certain intelligence of the Scots advance upon English ground; by these
particulars you may easily conjecture wherein our Sampsons strength lies.

That the Scots will not engage the Kings Party in this their design, is more
then probable, not only because they have refused the Marquess of Montrosse
his employment in their Army; but also because they are still pressing that
Party to take the National Covenant, or forthwith to depart the Kingdom. I
can assure you, in Spain under the Inquisition, or at Constantinople under the
great Turk, you may enjoy liberty of conscience, sooner then now in Scotland
under the Presbytery; for from all sorts of men an absolute, necessary and
unlimited obedience is required, the conformity of the outward man being not
sat isfactory, without the approbation of Will and Judgment; you must be
constrained to take all sorts of Oaths that are imposed without disputing the
lawfullnesse of them: Therefore in my opinion, you had better forbear coming
hither as yet, if you desire freedom, and the enjoyment of a good conscience,
which you have hitherto so carefully preserved; for in that respect it is much
more safe to live at Rome, or Constantinople, for exercise of the Reformed
Religion, then it is in Scotland, under the tyranny of the Scots Presbytery,
which in England is yet but an Embrio, or at most but an Infant of few days
old, in comparison of the full strength it has attained to here, ruling in a
most rigid and imperious way, judging all, being judged of none; and since from
the Assembly no appeal lies either to King or Parliament, you cannot believe
how insolent every Minister is grown, presuming to Lord it over us; so that if
not of their opinion, though otherwise never so unblameable in life, presently
you shall be defamed openly in the Pulpit by name, and debarred from the
comfortable communion of Christ's body and blood: Read but their last
D^claration of March the first, and you may soon judge of what spirit those
men are. For other affairs I can give you no satisfactory account; the
Parliament as yet having done little or nothing in the maine business, save
only the pu^ging of their House, and setting the due elections of their
Members, as also appoynting a Committee to draw up a Declaration for justifying
their Commissioners carriage in England, and to prepare an answer to the late
Declaration of the Parliament at Westminster, and touching the proceedings of
the Army. Thus Sir, having given you a true representation of the state of
things here, I shall leave you to the Conduct of your own prudence, and God
Almighties providence, for the future steering of your course; and remain ever,

Edenborough 14. March 1647. Sir, Your most affectionate and faithful Servant.

FINIS.

