The Kirk of Scotlands CONCLUSION In defense of the Presbyteriall Government,
and Discipline: WITH Their intentions toward the King, the Queen, and the
royal Progeny: As also against Heresies and Schisms.

Printed at Edinburgh, and reprinted at London for ^.A. 1645.

The Kirk of Scotlands Conclusion in Defense of the Presbyterian Government.
IN the Authority of the Assemblies Parochial, Presbyteriall, Provincial and
National, and in the subordination of the lesser unto the greater, or of more
particular Elderships to the larger and general Eldership, does consist the
external order, strength and steadfastness of the Church of Scotland, which is
lovely and comfortable to all fearing God, whether Pastor or Professors; and
has been very awful and terrible, as an Army with banners, to all Papists, to
all Heretics, Schismatics, Hirelings, and all ungodly persons. As upon the
one part they break not the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but do
cherish, and labor to bring to ripeness and use the grain of Mustardseed in
sincere beginners, and the smallest talent in Preachers, having the zeal of
God. So upon the other part, no scandal of proud sinners escapes censure; no
herefie or error is sooner hatched, but is presently spied out and crushed by
some of the inferior Assemblies; or, if it be kept on foot and gather
strength, it is quite suppressed and extinguished in the general Assembly,
which meets once in the year, and never suffers such bastard-births to
grow to be one year old, which is a true and maine cause why no Sects or
Errors have appeared in the reformed Church of France, and in the Churches of
Scotland, and of the Low-Countreyes, so long as they enjoyed the liberty and
happiness of Assemblies; which they did no sooner by the mercy of God recover,
but immediately, at their brightness, the mists and mildews gathered before
were scattered and vanished. And as by the order and power of these Assemblies,
Foxes are taken that they spoil not the Vines, and Gangrenes are prevented,
that they spread not against truth and unity, all sorts of lewd and wicked men
are discouraged and put to shame: so is there excited among the godly Ministers
an holy emulation by acquaintance, conference, and by perceiving the gifts one
of another, which makes them return from the Assemblies with a mean and
humble conceit of themselves, and with new and strong resolutions for greater
diligence in their studies, and faithfulness in every Pastoral du y, to the
common benefit and edification of all the Churches; all the Ministers are made
more wise in matters of Government; and all the Congregations are made more
wise in matters of Government; and all the Congregations are affected with
reverence to what is required of them by their particular Elderships, as having
the consent and approbation of the whole Church. Many such fruits are reaped of
these Affemblies, which without them no particular person or Congregation can
have any ground to hope for or expect.

They have no Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops, Suffraganes, no Chapters, no
Curats dumb nor idle Ministers, no hirelings, non-Residents, nor Pluralists, no
Deanes nor Archdeacons, no Chanters, Sub-Chanters, nor Treasurers, no
Chancellours, Officials, nor Apparators, no Canons, Peti-Canons, Prebends,
Singing-men, nor boys: And yet without these and the like, they have practice
and use of all the Ordinances of Christ; all matters Ecclesiastical determined
remitting questions of tithes, marriages, divorcements, etc. to the civil
Judge to whom they properly do belong, and all petitions, complaints, and
Church-grievances, heard and redressed, both to their consciences and estates,
to be free of such bundles and burdens of trash and superfluities. They
conceive, that to erect Presbyteries, Synods, and National assemblies, and
still to keep the members of that Hierarchy is, in the matter of
Church Government, not unlike the Popish adding of Traditions to Scripture in
the rule of faith, or works unto faith, in the point of justification etc.
additions to Christ's institution, being not only in respect of their author
humane inventions, and for any use they can have idlements vanities and
follies; but that they do also corrupt the purity, and eat out the life of the
Ordinances of Christ.

Here there is a superiority without tyranny, for no Minister has a Papal or
Monarchical Jurisdiction over his own flock, far less over Pastors, and over
all the Congregations or a large Diocese. Here there is a party without
confusion or disorder, for the Pastors are in order before the Elders, and the
Elders before the Deacons; the Church is subordinate to the Presbytery, the
Presbytery to the Synod, and the Synod to the National Assembly. One Pastor
also has priority before another, for age, for zeal, for gifts, for his good
deservings of the Church, each one honoring him whom God has honored, and as
he bears the Image of God, which was to be seen amongst the Apostles
themselves. But none has power or Jurisdiction above others; even as in
nature, one eye has not power over another, only the head has power over
all, even as Christ over his Church. The same may be seen in the Commonwealth,
and in some of the Offices of the Roman Church it self. And lastly, here there
is a subjection without slavery, for the people are subject to the Pastors and
Assemblies, yet there is no Assembly wherein every particular Church has not
interest and power; nor is there any thing done but they are, if not actually,
yet vertually called to consent unto it.

As they have done, and suffered much for vindicating and maintaining the
liberty of their Religion, that what belongs unto God may be rendered unto
God; So do they desire, that according to the rule of righteousness, each man
have his own, and above all men. That the things which are Caesar's be rendered
unto him, and to give him that which is Gods were a wronging both of God and
Caesar. They have ever been willing to taxes and to pay subsidies above that
which they were able. They join with the inward reverence of their hearts,
external honor and obedience in all things lawful. They power forth their
prayers to God in private and public, for all blessings spiritual upon his
Royal Person and Government, and upon his Progeny; and for the same blessings
upon the Queens Majesty, especially that God by his Spirit would give unto her
the knowledge and love of the truth. They long for her conversion as an
happiness to her self and a mean of great happiness to the King, to their
Children, and to all their Subjects. And that the Lord may answer their
prayers, they think it incumbent to the Church of England, nor can any bond
whatsoever oblige them to the contrary, to use the best and most powerful
means, and would most willingly in all humility, love and respect, join their
endeavors for that blessed end. And as they thus present their best desires
and prayers, so are they ready to sacrifice their lives to God for his
Majesty's good, and in their hearts are grieved, that their loyalty, which they
account their no small glony, should have been called in question.

Neither is this all, but moreover they do acknowledge that his Majesty, as
supreme Magistrate, has not only charge over the Commonwealth, but does
watch and has inspection over the Church and Church Matters, but in a civil
way, Vos Episcopi in Ecclesia (says Constantine) Ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus
a Deo constitutus sum. And therefore that he is by his high calling and place
Custos utriusque tabulae, to command the precepts of the first table as well as
of the second table to be obeyed: That he is Vindex Religionis by his sword, as
the Spirit of God in Scripture is Index, and the Church is Index: That he has
power to turn the constitutions of the Church into Laws: and to confirm them
by the civil sanction in Parliament: That he may constrain all his Subjects
to do duty in matters of Religion, and may punish he transgressors: That when
debates arise about Religion, he has power to call the Assemblies of the
Church to be present, and civilly preside in them, and to examine their
constitutions that he may discern of them both as a Christian caring for his
own soul, and as supreme Magistrate watching over his people: and that he may
do all things which can prove him to be a kind careful nursing father. They
account all that is vomited out to the contrary, [as that they liked Anarchie
better then Monarchy, and that they would turn a Kingdom into a democratie,]
to be b^t the fictions and calumnies of the malicious enemies of God and his
truth; not unlike the lies which were devised against the Christians of old,
their consciences, their words, writings, and actions, even then when the world
did put the worst constructions upon them, were witnesses of the integrity of
their hearts. They do still hold that there can be no antipathy betwixt one
Ordinance and another. By him Princes do reign, and has also appointed the
Office s and the Government of his own house. They do defire nothing more,
then that the Son of God may reign, and that with and under the Son of God,
the King may command, and they, as good subjects to Christ and the King, may
obey.

FINIS.

