A SOLEMN AND SEASONABLE WARNING To the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burrows,
Ministers, and Commons of Scotland: As also to the Scottish Armies without and
within that Kingdom.

From the General Assembly, 12 Feb. 1645.

And the humble Remonstrance of the aforesaid Assembly to the King, 13. Feb.
1645.

Shall the Watchmen of Sion be silent, when Israel is in trouble?

LONDON, Printed by J. Raworth, in the year 1645. According to the Copy printed
at Edinburgh.

12 Feb. 1645. Postmeridiem. Sess. XVIII.
THe General Assembly, after mature deliberation, having found it most
necessary that this whole Nation be timely Warned, and duly Informed of their
present Dangers, and the Remedies to be used, and Duties to be done for
preventing and removing thereof; Does ordain this Warning to be fortwith
Printed and Published, and sent to all the Presbyteries in this Kingdom, as
also to the Presbyteries that are with our Armies. And that each Presbytery,
immediately after the receipt hereof, take speedy course for the Reading of it
in every Congregation within their bounds, upon the Lords day after the
forenoons Sermon, and before the Blessing: And that they give account of their
diligence herein to the Commissioners of the General Assembly; Who have hereby
Power and Warrant to try and censure such as shall contemn or slight the said
Warning, or shall refuse or neglect to obey this Ordinance.

A Solemn and Seasonable Warning to the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burrows,
Ministers, and Commons of Scotland: As also to our Armies without and within
this Kingdom. From the General Assembly, 12 Feb. 1645.
THe Cause of God in this Kingdom, both in the beginnings and progress of it,
has been carried, through much craft and mighty opposition of Enemies, and
through other perplexities and dangers; God so disposing, for the greater glory
of his manifold and mavelous Wisdom, and his invincible Power, and for our
greater trial.

These dangers both from without and from within, together with the remedies
thereof, have been from time to time represented and held forth, in the many
public Supplications of this Kirk and Kingdom to the King, and in their many
Declarations, Remonstrances, Letters, Acts, and other public Intimations:
Particularly by a necessary Warning, published by the Commissioners of the
General Assembly in January 1643. And by the Remonstrance of the same
Commissioners to the Convention of Estates in July thereafter, concerning the
Dangers of Religion, and the Remedies of these Dangers. Which Warning and
Remonstrance at that time had, by the blessing of God, very good and
comfortable effects. And now the General Assembly it self, being by a special
Providence, and upon extraordinary occasions called together, while God is
writing bitter things against this Land in great Letters, which he that runs
may read: and knowing that we cannot be answerable to God, nor our own
consciences, nor the expectation of others, if from this chief Watchtower we
should give no Seasonable Warning to the City of God: While we think of these
things; For Sions sake we will not hold our peace, and for Jerusalems sake we
will not rest: trusting that God will give, though not to all, yet to many, a
seeing Eye, a hearing Ear, and an understanding Heart: For who is wise and he
shall understand these things, prudent and he shall know them; For the Ways of
the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the transgressors
shall fall therein, and the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked
shall understand.

That which we principally intend, is to hold forth (so far as the Lord gives
us light) how this Nation ought to be affected with their present Mercies and
Judgments; What use is to be made of the Lords dealings: And, what is required
of a people so dealt with.

Had we been timely awaked, and taken warning, either from the exemplary
judgments of other Nations; or from Gods threatenings by the mouths of his
servants amongst our selves; or from our own former visitations, and namely,
The Sword, threatened and drawn against us, both at home and from abroad, but at
that time through the forbearance of God, put up in the Sheath again, we might
have prevented the miseries under which now we groan. But the Cup of
trembling, before taken out of our hands, is again come about to us, that we
may drink deeper of it: And although when these bloody Monsters, the Irish
Rebels, together with some degenerate, unnatural, and perfidious Contrymen
of our own, did first lift up their heads, and enter this Kingdom in a hostile
way, it was looked upon as a light matter, and the great judgment which has
since appeared in it, not apprehended: yet now we are made more sensible, that
they are The rod of Gods wrath, and the staff in their hand, which has
stricken us these three times, is his indignation. He has showed his people
hard things, and made us to drink the wine of astonishment. Take we therefore
notice of the hand that smites us, for affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground. There is no evil in the
City nor Country which the Lord has not done. He it is that forms the
light, and creates darkness; Who makes peace, and creates evil: He it is
that has given a charge to the Sword, so that it cannot be still: He it is
that has his other Arrows ready upon the string to shoot at us, the Pestilence
and Famine.

In the next place, let us apply our hearts to know, and to search, and to seek
out wisdom, and the reason of things, and to understand the language of this
present judgment, and Gods meaning in it: For though the Almighty gives not
an account of any of his matters, and has his way in the Sea, and his path in
the deep waters which cannot be traced; Yet he is pleased by the light of his
Word and Spirit; by the voice of our own consciences, and by that which is
written and engraven upon our judgment, as with the point of a Diamond and a
Pen of iron, to make known in some measure his meaning unto his servants. God
has spoken once, yea twice, yet man perceives not; Therefore now has he made
this rod to speak aloud the third time, that we may hear the voice of the rod,
and who has appointed it. That which the rod points at, is not any guilt of
Rebellion or disloyalty in us, as the Sons of Belial do slander and belie the
Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, which we are so far from
repenting of, that we cannot remember or mention it without great joy and
thankfulness to God, as that which has drawn many blessings after it, and
unto which God has given manifold and evident testimonies; for no sooner was
the Covenant begun to be taken in England, but sensibly the condition of
affairs there was changed to the better; and though a little before, the Enemy
was coming in like a Flood, yet as soon as the Spirit of the Lord did lift up
the Standard against him, from that day forward the Waters of their Deluge did
decrease.

And for our part, our Forces sent into that Kingdom, in pursuance of that
Covenant, have been so mercifully and manifestly assisted, and blessed from
Heaven (though in the mids of many dangers and distresses, and much want and
hardship) and have been so far isntrumental to the foyling and scattering of
two principal Armies; First, the Marquess of Newcastle his Army, And
afterward, Prince Ruperts and his together; And to the reducing of two strong
Cities, York and Newcastle, that we have what to answer the Enemy that
reproacheth us concerning that Business, and that which may make iniquity it
self to stop her mouth. But, which is more unto us than all Victories, or
whatsomever temporal Blessing, The Reformation of Religion in England, and
Uniformity therein between both Kingdoms (a principal end of that Covenant) is
so far advanced, that the English Service Book, with the Holy Days, and many
other Ceremonies contained in it, together with the Prelacy, the fountain of
all these, are abolished and taken away by Ordinance of Parliament; and a
Directory for the Worship of God in all the three Kingdoms agreed upon in the
Assemblies, and in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, without a contrary voice
in either; the Government of the Kirk by Congregationall Elderships, Classical
Presbyteries, Provincial and National Assemblies, is agreed upon by the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, which is also voted and concluded in both
Houses of the Parliament of England: And what is yet remaining of the intended
Uniformitie, is in a good way; So that let our Lot fall in other things as it
may, the Will of the Lord be done; In this we rejoice, and will rejoice, that
our Lord Jesus Christ is no loser, but a Conqueror, that his Ordinances take
place, that his Cause prevails, and the work of purging and building his
Temple goes forward, and not backward. Neither yet are we so to understand the
voice of the rod which lies heavy upon us, as if the Lords meaning were to
pluck up what he has planted, and to pull down what he has builded in this
Kingdom, to have no more pleasure in us, to remove our Candlestick, and to take
his Kingdom from us: nay, before that our God cast us off, and the glory depart
from Israel. let him rather consume us by the Sword, and the Famine, and the
Pestilence, so that he will but keep his own great Name from reproach and
blasphemy, and own us as his people in Convenant with him. But now there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing, we will believe that we shall yet see the
goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living: We will not cast a way our
confidence of a blessed Peace, and of the removing of the scourge and casting
it in the Fire, when the Lord has by it performed his whole Work upon mount
Sion and Jerusalem, much more will we be confident of the continuance of the
blessings of the Gospel, that glory may dwell in our Land. This is the day of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it: And the time is coming, when a
new Song shall be put in our mouths, and we shall say, This is our God, we have
waited for him, and he has saved us. Though the Lord smite us, it is the hand
of a Father, not of an Enemy, he is not consuming us, but refining us, that we
may come forth as Gold out of the Fire. We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. We know assuredly there is more mercy
in emptying us from Vessel to Vessel, than in suffering us to settle on our
Lees, whereby our taste should remain in us, and our sent not be changed.

These things premised, we come to the true langauge of this heavy judgment,
and to the real procuring causes thereof. For the transgression of Jacob is
all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. God is hereby showing to
great and small in this Land their work and their transgression, that they have
exceeded. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they
return from iniquity. We leave every Congregation in the Land, every Family in
every Congregation, and every Person in every Family, to examine their own
hearts and ways, and to mourn for Congregationall, Domestical, and Personal
sins: Cursed shall they be who have added fuel to the fire, and now bring no
water to extinguish it; who had a great hand in the provocation, and bear no
part in the humiliation.

Let every one commune with his own conscience, and repent of his, even his
wickedness, and say, What have I done? We shall here touch only the National
sins, or at least more public ones, than those of a Family or Congregation,
which we also intend for chief causes of a public Fast and Humiliation. If
among our Nobles, Gentry, and Barons, there have been some studying their own
private interests more than the public, and, Seeking their own things more
than the things of Christ, or oppressing and defranding the poorer sort and the
needy, because it was in the power of their hand: and if among our Ministry
there have been diverse Time-servers, Who have not renounced the hidden things
of dishonesty, whose hearts have not been right before God, nor steadfast in his
Covenant, who have been secretly haters of the Power of Godliness, and of
Mortification; shall not God search all this out? who will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Councels of the hearts.
In these also leaving all men to a judging and searching of themselves, there
are many other provocations which are apparent in all or many of this Nation,
from which, though they wash with nitre, and take much soap, yet they cannot
make themselves clean: Because of these the Land mourns, and at these the
Sword strikes.

As first, the contempt, neglect, and dis-esteem of the glorious Gospel; our
unbelief, unfruitfulnesse, lukewarmnesse, formality, and hardness of heart,
under all the means of Grace; our not receiving of Christ in our hearts, nor
seeking to know him, and glorify him in all his Offices. The power of
Godliness is hated and mocked by many to this day, and by the better sort too
much neglected, and many Christian duties are not minded: as, The not speaking
of our own words, nor finding of our own pleasure upon the Lords day: Holy and
edifying conference both on that day, and at other occasions: The instructing,
admonishing, comforting, and rebuking one another, as Divine Providence
ministers occasion. In many Families almost no knowledge nor worship of God to
be found: yea, there are among the Ministers who have strengthened the hearts
and hands of the profane more than of the godly, and have not taken heed to the
Ministry which they have received of the Lord to fulfill it.

Next, God has sent the Sword to avenge the quarrel of his broken Covenant:
For besides the defection of many of this Nation under the Prelates from our
first National Covenant, a sin not forgotten by God, if not repented by men as
well as forsaken, our latter Vows and Covenants have been also foully violated,
by not contributing our uttermost assistance to this Cause, with our Estates
and Lives; by not endeavoring with all faithfulness, the discovery, trial,
and condign punishment of Malignants, and evil Instruments; yea, by complying
too much with those, who have not only born Arms, and given their personal
presence and assistance, but also drawn and led on others after them in the
shedding of our Brethrens blood: Therefore is our sin made our punishment, and
We are filled with the fruit of our own ways. These horns now push the sides
of Judah and Jerusalem, because Carpenters, when they ought and might, did not
them off: And yet to this day the course of Justice is obstructed: The Lord
himself will execute justice, if men will not. But above all, let it be deeply
and seriously thought of, that our Covenant is broken by the neglect of a real
Reformation of our selves and others under our power: let every one ask his own
heart what lust is mortified in him, or what change wrought in his life since,
more than before the Covenant? Swearing, Cursing, Profanation of the Lords day,
Fornication and other uncleanness, Drunkenness, Injustice, Lying, Oppression,
Murmuring, Repining, and other sorts of Profaneness still abound too much
both in the Country and in our Armies: yea, there is no Reformation of some
Members of public Judicatories, which is a great dishonor to God, and a foul
scandal to the whole Nation.

Thirdly, we have not glorified God according to the great things which he has
done for us, nor made the right use of former mercies: since he loved us (a
Nation not worthy to be beloved) he has made us precious and honorable, but
we have not walked worthy of his love: We waxed, fat and kicked, forsaking God
who made us, and lightly esteeming the Rock of our salvation. And this great
unthankfulnes filled up our Cup.

Fourthly, Notwithstanding of so much guiltiness, we did sent forth our
Armies, and undertake great services presumptuously, without repentance, and
making our peace with God, like the Children of Israel, who trusting the
goodness of their cause, minded no more, but Which of us shall go up first?

It is now high time, under the feeling of so great a burden both of sin and
wrath, to humble our uncircumcised hearts, to put our mouths in the dust, if so
be there may be hope, to wallow our selves in ashes, to clothe our selves with
our shame as with a garment, to justify Gods righteous judgments, to
acknowledge our iniquity, to make our supplication to our Judge, and to seek
his face, that he may pardon our sin, and heal our Land. The Lord roareth, and
shall not his children tremble? The God of glory thundereth, and the Highest
utters his voice, hailstones and coals of fire, who will not fall down and
fear before him? The fire waxes hot, and burns round about us, and shall any
sit still and be secure? The storm blows hard, and shall any sluggard be
still asleep? This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, who
will not take up a lamentation? Let the Watchmen rouse up themselves and
others, and strive to get their own, and their peoples hearts deeply affected,
and even melted before the Lord: Let every one turn from his evil way, and cry
mightily to God, and give him no rest till he repent of the evil, and smell a
favor of rest, and say, It is enough. He has not said to the seed of Jacob,
Seek ye me in vain. We do not mourn as they that have no hope, but we will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him, until he
plead our cause, and execute judgment for us. And what though our Candles be
put out? so that our Sun shine: What though our honor be laid in the dust? so
that God work out his own honor, yea, our happiness out of our shame. In vain
have we trusted to the arm of Flesh: in the Lord our God is the salvation of
Israel. No flesh must glory before him, but he that glories, must glory in the
Lord.

These duties of Humiliation, Repentance, Faith, Amendment of life, and Fervent
Prayer, though the principal, yet are not all which are required at the hands
of this Nation, but men of all sorts and degrees, must timely apply themselves
to such other Resolutions and Actions as are most suitable and necessary at
this time: Which that all may the better understand, and be excited and
encouraged to act accordingly, let it be well observed, that the present state
of the Controversy and Cause is no other but what has been formerly professed
before God and the World, that is, The Reformation and Preservation of
Religion, The Defense of the Honor and Happiness of the King, and of the
authority of the Parliament, together with The maintenance of our Laws,
Liberties, Lives, and Estates. We are not changed from our former principles
and intentions, but these who did fall off from us to the contrary party, have
now made it manifest, that these were not their ends when they seemed to join
with us: Therefore are they gone out from us, because they were not of us. And
as our Cause is the same, so the danger thereof is not less, but greater than
before, and that from two sorts of Enemies: First, from open Enemies, we mean
those of the Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant Faction, who have displayed a
Banner against the Lord, and against his Christ, in all the three Kingdoms,
being set on fire of Hell, and by the special inspiration of Satan, who is
full of fury, because he knows he has but a short time to reign. The
Cockatrice before hatched, is now broken forth into a Viper. The danger was
before feared, now it is felt; before imminent, now incumbent; before our
division, now our destruction is endeavored; before the Sword was fourbished
and made ready, now the Sword is made fat with Flesh, and drunk with Blood, and
yet it hungreth and thirsts for more. The Queen is most active abroad, using
all means for strengthening the Popish, and suppressing the Protestant party;
insomuch that Malignants have insolently expressed their confidence, that her
journey to France shall prove a successful Council, and that this Mand, and
particularly this Kingdom, shall have a greater power to grapple with, before
the next Summer, than any which yet we have encountered with. The Irish Rebels
have offered to the King to send over a greater number into both the Kingdoms:
The hostile intentions of the King of Denmark, if God be not pleased still to
divert and disable him, do plainly enough appear from his own Letters, sent not
long since to the Estates of this Kingdom. In the mean time, the hellish crew
under the conduct of the excommunicate and aforefaulted Earl of Montrose, and
of Alaster Mac-Donald, a Papist and an Outlaw, does exercise such barbarous,
unnatural, horrid, and unheard of cruelty, as is above expression: And (if not
repressed) what better usage can others not yet touched expect from them, being
now hardened and animated by the success which God has for our humiliation
and correction, permitted unto them? and if they shall now get leave to secure
the High-Lands for themselves, they will not only from thence infest the rest
of this Country, but endeavor a diversion of our Forces in England, from the
prosecution of the ends expressed in the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, toward
which ends, as their service has been already advantageous, so their
continuance is most necessary.

The second sort of Enemies, from which our present dangers arise, are secret
Malignants and Dis-covenanters, who may be known by these and the like
Characters: Their slighting or censulting of the public Resolutions of this
Kirk and State: Their consulting and laboring to raise Jealousies and
Divisions, to retard or hinder the execution of what is ordered by the public
Judicatories. Their standering of the Covenant of the three Kingdoms and
Expedition into England, as not necessary for the good of Religion, or safety
of this Kingdom, or as tending to the diminution of the Kings just power and
greatness: Their confounding of the Kings Honor and Authority, with the abuse
and pretense thereof, and with Commissions, Warrants, and Letters, procured
from the King, by the Enemies of this Cause and Covenant, as if we could not
oppose the latter, without encroacing upon the former: Their whetting of their
tongues, to censure and slander those whom God has honored as his chief
Instruments in this Work: Their commending, justifying, or excusing the
proceedings of James Grahame, sometime Earl of Mon^rose, and his Accomplices:
Their conversing or intercommuning by word or writ, with him, or other
excommunicate Lords, contrary to the nature of that Ordinance of Christ, and to
the old Acts of General Assemblies: Their making merry, and their inselent
carriage, and the News of any prosperous success of the Popish and Malignant
Armies in any of these Kingdoms: Their drawing of Parties and Factions, to the
weakening of the common Union: Their spreading of Informations, That Uniformity
in Religion, and the Presbyteriall Government, is not intended by the
Parliament of England: Their Endeavors, Informations, and Solicitations,
tending to weaken the hearts and hands of others, and to make them withhold
their assistance from this Work.

Let this sort of bosom Enemies, and disaffected Persons, be well marked,
timely discovered, and carefully avoided, lest they infuse the poison of their
seducing Councels into the minds of others: Wherein let Ministers be faithful,
and Presbyteries vigilant and unpartiall, as they will answer the contrary to
God, and to the General Assembly, or their Commissioners.

The cause and the dangers thereof being thus evidenced, unless men will blot
out of their hearts the love of Religion, and the Cause of God, and cast off
all care of their Country, Laws, Liberties, and Estates, yea, all natural
affection to the preservation of themselves, their Wives, Children, and
Friends, and whatsoever is dearest to them under the Sun (all these being in
the visible danger of a present ruin and destruction) they must now or never
appear actively, each one stretching himself to, yea beyond his power. It is no
time to dally, nor go about the business by halfes, nor by almost, but
altogether zealous: Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, or
deals falsely in the Covenant of God. If we have been so forward to assist our
Neighbor Kingdoms, shall we neglect to defend our own? Or shall the Enemies of
God be more active against his Cause, than his People for it? God forbid. If
the Work, being so far carried on, shall now miscarry, and fail in our hands,
our own consciences shall condemn us, and posterity shall curse us: But if we
stand stoutly and steadfastly to it, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
our hands, and all Generations shall call us blessed.

Let Ministers stir up others by free and faithful preaching, and by
admonishing every one of his duty, as there shall be occasion: And if it shall
be the lot of any of them to fall under the power of the Enemy, let them
through the strength of Christ, persevere in their integrity, choosing
affliction rather than sin, glorifying God, and not fearing what Flesh can do
unto them.

Let our Armies beware of ungodliness, and worldly lusts, living godly,
soberly, and righteously, avoiding all scandalous carriage, which may give
occasion to others to think the worse of their Cause and Covenant, and
remembering that the eyes of God, Angels, and Men are upon them: Finally,
renouncing all confidence in their own strength, skill, valor, and number, and
trusting only to the God of the Armies of Israel, who has fought, and will
fight for them.

Lat all sorts both of high and low degree in this Kingdom, call to mind their
Solemn Covenants, and pay their vows to the most High; and namely, that
Article of our first Covenant, which obliges us not to stay nor hinder any
such Resolution, as by common consent shall be found to conduce for the ends of
the Covenant, but by all lawful means to further and promove the same; Which
lies as a bond upon peoples consciences, readily to obey such orders, and
willingly to undergo such burdens, as by the public and common resolution of
the Estates of Parliament, are found necessary for the prosecution of the War;
considering that the Enemy cannot be suppressed without a competent number of
Forces, and Forces cannot be kept together without maintenance, and maintenance
cannot be had without such public Burdens; which however for the present, not
joyous, but grievous, yet it shall be no grief of heart afterward, even unto
the common sort, that they have given some part of their necessary livelihood,
for assisting so good a Work. It is far from our thoughts, that the pinching of
some, should make others superfluously to abound: It is rather to be expected
of the richer sort, that they will spare and defalk, not only the pride and
superfluity, both of apparel and diet, but also a part of their lawful
allowance in these things, to contribute the same as a free-will-offering,
beside what they are obliged to, by Law or upblike Order, after the example of
godly Nehemiah, who for the space of twelve years, while the walls of Jerusalem
were a building, did not eat the bread of the Governor, that he might ease by
so much the Peoples Burdens and Bondage.

In our last Covenant, there is another Article which (without the oblivion or
neglect of any of the rest) we wish may be well remembered at this time; namely,
That we shall assist and defend all that enter into this League and Covenant,
in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves,
directly or indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion, or Terror, to be
divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make
defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality in this Cause: According to which Article, men's
reality and integrity in the Covenant, will be manifest and demonstrable, as
well by their omissions, as by their commissions; as well by their not doing
good, as by their doing of evil; He that is not with us, is against us; and he
that gathers not with us, scatters. Whoever he be that will not according
to public order and appointment, adventure his Person, or send out these that
are under his power, or pay the Contributions imposed for the maintenance of
the Forces, must be taken for an Enemy, Malignant, and Covenant-breaker, and so
involved both into the displeasure of God, and Censures of the Kirk, and no
doubt into civil punishments also to be inflicted by the State.

And if any shall prove so outward and perfidious, their iniquity shall be upon
themselves, and they shall bear their punishment: Deliverance and good success
shall follow those who with purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord, and whose
hearts are upright toward his glory. When we look back upon the great things
which God has done for us, and our former deliverances out of several dangers
and difficulties which appeared to us insuperable, experience breeds hope: And
when we consider how in the midst of all our sorrows and pressures, the Lord
our God has given us a nail in his holy place, and has lightened our eyes
with the desirable and beautiful sight of his own glory in his Temple, we take
it for an argument that he has yet thoughts of peace, and a purpose of mercy
toward us; Though for a small moment he has forsaken us, yet with great
mercies he will gather us: He has lifted up our Enemies, that their fall may
be the greater, and that he may cast them down into desolation for ever. Arise,
and let us be doing; The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
Refuge.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. The humble Remonstrance of the General
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, met at Edinburgh the 13 day of February, 1645.
AS our Record is on high, and our consciences within us bear us witness; so
the many former Supplications and Remonstrances to your Majesty, from this Kirk
and Kingdom, our solemn Covenants, and the whole course of our proceedings
from time to time in the prosecution of this Cause, Do make known to the World,
and we trust also to your own conscience, our loyalty and faithful subjection,
and how far our intentions are from the diminution of your Majesty's just Power
and Greatness; And although the success of many of our humble addresses to
your Majesty, has been such as did frustrate our desires and hopes, yet this
has not blotted out of our hearts our loyalty, so often professed before God
and the World; but it is still our Souls desire, and our Prayer to God for you,
that your Self and your Posterity may prosperously reign over this your ancient
and native Kingdom, and over your other Dominions. And now as we have published
a solemn and free Warning to the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burrows,
Ministers, and Commons of this Kingdom, concerning the present affliction of
this Nation, and their sins procuring the same; So when we call to mind, that
God accepts not the persons of men, and that the greatest are not to be
winked at in their sins; We assure our selves, that the best and most real
testimony which we can give at this present, of the tenderness and
uprightness of our affection to your Majesty's true Happiness, is this our
humble and faithful Representation of your Majesty's great and growing
dangers, and the causes thereof; Of which, if we should be silent, our
consciences would condemn us, and the stones themselves would immediately cry
out.

The troubles of our hearts are enlarged, and our fears increased in your
Majesty's behalf, perceiving that your Peoples patience is above measure
tempted, and is like Cart pressed down with sheaves, and ready to break, while as
beside many former designs and endeavors to bring desolation and destruction
upon us, (which were (and we trust all of that kind shall be) by the
mavelous and merciful providence of God discovered and disappointed) Our
Country is now infested, the blood of diverse of our Brethren spilt, and other
acts of most barbarous and horrid cruelty exercised, by the cursed crew of the
Irish Rebels and their Accomplices in this Kingdom, under the conduct of such as
have Commission and Warrant from your Majesty. And unless we prove unfaithful
both to God and to your Majesty, we cannot conceal another danger which is
infinitely greater than that of your Peoples displeasure: Therefore we the
Servants of the most high God, and your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, in the
humility and grief of our hearts, fall down before your Throne, and in the Name
of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who shall judge the world in
righteousness, both great and small, and in the Name of this whole National
Kirk, which we represent, We make bold to warn your Majesty freely, that the
guilt which cleaves fast to your Majesty and to your Throne, is such, as
(whatsoever flattering preachers, or unfaithful counselors may say to the
contrary) if not timely repented, cannot but involve your Self and your
Posterity under the wrath of the ever-living God, For your being guilty of the
shedding of the blood of many thousands of your Majesty's best Subjects; For
your permitting the Mass, and other Idolatry, both in your own Family, and in
your own Dominions; For your authorizing, by the Book of Sports, the
profanation of the Lords Day; For your not punishing of public scandals, and
much profaneness, in, and about your Court; For the shutting of your ears
from the humble and just desires of your faithful Subjects; For your complying
too much with the Popish party many ways, and namely, by concluding the
Cessation of Arms in Ireland; and your embracing the councels of those who have
not set God nor good before their eyes; For your resisting and opposing this
Cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, your own honor and
happiness, and the peace and safety of your Kingdoms; and for what other
causes your Majesty is most conscious, and may best judge and search your own
conscience (nor would we have mentioned any particulars, if they had not been
public and known.) For all which it is high time for your Majesty to fall down
at the footstool of the King of Glory, to acknowledge your offense, to repent
timely, to make your peace with God through Jesus Christ, (whose blood is able
to wash away your great sin) and to be no longer as willing that the Son of God
reign over you and your Kingdoms in his pure Ordinances of Church Government
and Worship. These things if your Majesty do, it shall be no grief of heart
unto you afterward, a blessing is reserved for you, and you shall find favor
with God, and with your People, and with all the Churches of Christ; But if
your Majesty refuse to hearken to this wholesome council (which the Lord
forbid) we have discharged our own consciences, we take God and Men to
witness, That we are blameless of the sad Consequences which may follow, and
we shall wait upon the Lord, who, when he makes inquisition for blood, will
not forget the cry of the humble. In the mean while, beseeching your Majesty to
take notice That we are not staggering or fainting through diffidence of the
success of this Cause and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, unto which, as God
has already given manifold Testimonies of his favor and blessing; so it is
our steadfast and unshaken confidence, that this is the Work and Cause of God,
which shall gloriously prevail against all opposition, and from which; with
the assistance of the grace of God, we shall never suffer our selves to be
divided or withdrawn, but shall zealously and constantly in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, the pursuing and promoving
thereof.

That which we have concluded concerning Uniformity in Religion between both
Kingdoms, is to be humbly offered to your Majesty from the Commissioners of
this Kingdom, for your Royal Consent and Ratification. Although your Majesty
was not pleased to vouchsafe us the presence of your Commissioner, according to
the supplications of the Commissioners of the preceding General Assembly, yet
we have proceeded with as much respect to your Majesty's honor, and as much
remembrance of our duty, as if your Royal Person had been present in the mids
of us: And we shall still continue our Prayers for you, that God would
graciously incline your heart to the Councels of Truth and Peace, and grant
unto your Majesty a long and happy Reign, that we may live under you a
peaceable and quiet life, in all Godliness and Honesty.

FINIS.

