A DECLARATION FROM THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE General Assembly OF THE KINGDOM
OF SCOTLAND, CONCERNING The Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and His due Rights
and Privileges. With their sense and resolution touching the lawfulness of
Sovereignty, and the proceedings of a disloyal and perfidious Party, who
formerly pretended to light for the KING.

THis Declaration from the Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Kirk
of Scotland, was ordained to be forthwith Printed and Published, and to be read
in all Churches and Chapels throughout the said Kingdom.

Signed, A. KER.



Imprinted at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. And Reprinted at London, MDCXLVIII.

A DECLARATION FROM The Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Kingdom
of Scotland.
WHereas it has been our constant custom and continual care, from the sense
of the trust committed unto us, to give warning unto this Kirk and Kingdom of
their condition and duty; so it cannot be but very seasonable and necessary at
this time, to declare and make known our judgment of the carriage of the People
of the Land, in the day of darkness, and hour of temptation that they who
have stood may find matter of encouragement and praise, and such as have fallen
may recover themselves and repent.

We were void of understanding, if we should not observe, and more then
ungrate, if we should not acknowledge the loving kindness of the Lord toward
us, in the midst of our confusions and fears: Temptations were many and fierce,
because of the power and pride of an insolent enemy [both to God and out dread
Sovereign the King] whose proceedings is matter of abomination unto us, and
shall be a wonder unto the following Generation; yet did the body of the
Kingdom keep their integrity, entertaining all thoughts of backsliding and
complying with the Kings enemies, with indignation and detest, patiently
suffering the blood that has been spilt, and firmly standing to the Cause of
God in the midst of difficulties and straits, neither fearing the threats, nor
regarding the promises of such as oppose the same.

These, as they be for a name of praise and joy unto the most high, the
excellency of whose power is perfected in weakness; so for a witness unto the
truth, and to the work of Reformation, and for a shame and reproach unto the
haters of Sion, whose subtilty and violence is more then conquered by the faith
and patience of the Saints.

Yet is it the matter of much sorrow and astonishment unto us, that in the Land
of uprightness so many should have done foolishly; and notwithstanding of all
that work and power which their eyes have seen, and of their own vows and
Protestations, fallen from their excellency, and turned aside unto corrupt and
crooked ways with the workers of iniquity. The bond of the Covenant is such,
as every religious heart cannot but remember the violation thereof with horror
and trembling; yet has the Oath of God been forgotten and despised by many.

It is the admirable way of the working of the wisdom of God, to over rule all
the purposes and actions of the sons of men unto his own ends. He whose ways
toward us have all been mercy and truth, meant a discovery of those whose
indifferency or treachery would ere long have procured a sure and sensible
ruin unto us, and now has he brought his purpose to pass. This is a mercy
which bring rightly managed, may countervaile all our sufferings and p^^os, and
prove very wholesome unto the Land, and advantageous unto the Cause of God.

It is not any strength of reason on the side of our adversaries that could
have shaken so many; their pretexts of the Kings service, our Rebellion, and
such like as th^^^ are poor and void of truth in themselves, so do they easily
vanish before every discerning and rational man.

The service of Kings is not to cut down thousands of their faithful and
loyal Subjects whose multitude is their glory and strength; but to do those
things which the Laws of the Kingdom prescribe, and that are consonant unto the
will of God and unto the wealth of the people, whose safety is the Supreme Law,
and maine study of every King ruling in righteousness and judgment. Our souls
are not privy unto, and our actions plead us innocent from the guilt of
disloyalty; our witness is in heaven, and our record is on high, that it was
never our purpose or intention to subvert lawful Sovereignty, nor to encroach
upon the due rights and privileges of the same; and we trust, that whilst we
live, nothing shall escape us to the contrary.

We are able to justify our union with England, as an undeniable testimony of
our duty unto our Brethren in the times of their straits by the Prelaticall
Party, and of the preservation of Religion in its purity ane power in this, and
of its Reformation in the neighbor Lands, and surest Bulwark of a stable and
continuing peace betwixt the Kingdoms.

The League and Covenant with England, as it was studied and set on foot in the
days of our Fathers at Barwick in the year 1586. so was it from the beginning of
this glorious Work of Reformation endeavored by our selves, as stands upon
record in the Articles of the large Treaty, unto which some of those who have
now fallen to oppose it, were then neither strangers nor adversaries. Both
Covenants, in regard of the principals whence they issue, the heads which they
contain, and the ends which they pursue, are one and the same: And that the
extent of the last unto our dear Brethren in England should procure enmity, to
the intentions and substance of the first, seems to us to be a riddle, which
none can resolve but perfidious persons, who have made shipwreck of a good
conscience.

Who can but be amazed to hear the treacherous designs and bloody practices
of perjured men, palliat under pretense of the prosecution of the ends of our
National Covenant, as appears by diverse who have lifted up their hands to
Heaven, swearing unto the high God in the public Assembly of his people, to
build those things which they now destroy, and to destroy those things which
they have lately set up; [meaning the dissenting party of Scotland] though the
Kings Majesty, of whose Authority they pretended to be zealous of had not then
given his royal consent and approbation of our affairs.

It is our hearts desire and hope, that all this course of providence thus
abused by men void of understanding, may be improved by our selves, as a means
of sound and serious humiliation, that we may search and try our ways, and
turn again unto the Lord, who will do good unto us, because of the disloyal
actions of his Majesty's enemies; Notwithstanding of all calumnies and
reproaches, the righteousness of our cause shall be accounted of us our glory,
and in regard of it, We will not remove our integrity from us, our
righteousness we will still hold fast, and not let it go and our heart shall
not remove us so long as we live.

The true and real causes of our backsliding are to be sought amongst our
selves. If all the Watchmen of the house of Israel had been faithful and
zealous in discharge of their trust, then had the Lords people better known the
excellency of the Gospel, and stuck closer to the profession of the same,
because of the negligence and perverseness of some of those, many have halted
for want of instruction, and lack of knowledge; but from the corruption which
men have harbored in their own breasts, has mainly issued all the degrees of
their Declnation.

There be amongst us many rotten and hollow hearts, who though though the
joined wit us through subtility, or fear did still abide in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and wished nothing more then the subversion
of our cause: What wonder though such took advantage of a prevailing party, to
disclose their envy, wherewith they were now grown big, almost unto bursting:
And there is a generation whose ignorance and sloth has detained them, that
they have not sufficiently examined, nor rightly considered Zions controversy
with those that plead against her, because of her love to the truth: They
conceive the debate to be about things Civil, at least, not to go so high, as
the hazard of any thing important in Religion.

And such is the negligence of those, that they despise the means of
instruction, largly offered and holden forth in many Warnings and Declarations,
etc.

What though it be lawful in some cases to capitulate, yea with Turks and
Pagans, shall it therefore be lawful to do that which may argue subjection,
and imply submission unto a perfidious enemy, who are going about to drive the
People of the Land from their former duty, etc. In this case, all and every one
are called unto the asserting of the Confession of their Faith, and of their
own innocence and righteousness touching the Realm of England. Neither can we
judge any better of protections from such an enemy, because they do employ the
authority of one who is forfeit by the State, and excommunicate by the Kirk,
and do either expressly of taci^ely engage the Receivers, if not to join, yet
to resist: they lay a stumbling block before all the Inhabitants of the Land,
to make them forbear action, or decline suffering, by following such a course:
If all had done so, it may soon be foreseen what should have been the end:
though happily they who were the doers, were not so apprehensive, as to reach
the depth of the evil, yet the end of the work in it self, and in the
intention of enemies, was to make them Masters of all the lives and estates
within the Land.

Capitulations and protections, howsoever accounted of by those who walk after
the wisdom of the flesh, are destructive to our Covenant, almost in all the
heads and Articles thereof: They tend unto the corrupting of Religion in this
Land, and obstructing the Work of Reformation in England unto the countenancing
and strengthening of the Popish and Prelaticall party, unto the subversion of
the due rights and privileges of the Parliaments, and diminishing of his
Majesty's just greatness and authority unto the withdrawing of Incendiaries
and Malignants from condign punnishment unto the overthrow of the Union
betwixt the Kingdoms, unto the deserting of our brethren, following of divisive
motions, and denying to hazard or suffer the loss either of lives or estates
in the defense of the cause, and them that adhere thereunto. We see not not any
strength of reason in that seeming necessity, unto which many pretend
themselves to be redacted: If men could not have retired from the fury and
violence of the Enemy, or had not some probable way of resistance and defense
against the same, they should have taken it as an evidence of the will of God
calling them to suffer and give a testimony unto this Truth. Our Covenant does
no less oblige us to suffering, then to doing; and it is the ignorance or
ineffectual consideration of our duty that makes us thus to wipe our mouths as
if we had done nothing worthy of rebuke: Neither yet does it excuse, that some
were not active to ob ain protections the receiving of them was to prostitute
the chastity of that affection which we owe unto the cause of God, and could
be no better then a bribe that blinds the eyes of the wise, and hinders from
doing judgment unto to afflicted.

The deep apprehension of their souls danger, moves us seriously and in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to entreat all Temporizers and Back-sliders to remember
whence they are fallen and to repent: Let it not be a light thing unto such
that they have despised the Oath of God, undervalued the precious Truth of the
Gospel, and drawn upon themselves the guilt of their Brethrens-bloud by
forsaking them in their just de^ence. If the due sense of their sin shall bring
them to lament after the Lord, they may hope to find him gracious and
merciful, to forgive their iniquity and heal their backslidings: But if they
shall harden themselves, and continue in their provocation, they have cause of
fear, that the Lord of Hosts shall avenge the quarrel of his Covenant upon
them who have sworn falsely by his Name.

THe Estates of Parliament conveened in the first Session of the triennall
Parliament of Scotland, having heard the Declaration presented unto them by the
Commissioners of the General Assembly read in their audience, received the
same cheerfully, and Ordered the same to be forthwith printed and published.

SIGNED, Alex. Gibsone Cler. Registri.

FINIS.

