THE CHURCH-VVARDENS REPENTANCE. OR Mr CONNIWOOLS RECANTATION.

Wherein is expressed his penitent sorrow, for Oppression on the Poores Box.

Likewise, His Admonition to all covetous Doctors, careless Curates,
Charitable Churchwardens, Hypocritical Overseers, bribe-taking Constables,
conniving Headboroughs, dissembling Sextons, and Begger-whipping Beadles.

Written by Thomas Tell-troth, by request of the said Mr Conniwooll, who
desires that his friendly Admonitions may be accepted, of all those that would
be esteemed free from his offenses.

Printed in the Year 1641.

THE CHVRCH-WARDENS REPENTANCE.
Trueman and Coniwooll. MAster Trueman, welcome, I made bold to send for you
about some special affairs, which I hope will both content you, and benefit my
almost condemned soul.


Trueman. Believe me M. Coniwoll, this news is very pleasing to me, and what I
can perform, to gain content unto your dying same, shall be employed at large.


Coniwoll. It Is in your power, because to you of late I made recital of those
heinous crimes which then I thought were meritorious, therefore I thought it
fittest that you should be a witness of my penitence.


Trueman. I joy in the performance pray proceed


Coniwooll I shall sir, and as condemned men being brought to execution I
confess, I have deserved to have been hanged some eighteen times if I had had
my due, for I have been the veriest Jew that ever lived on earth. Some thirty
times I robbed the poor man's box, and all the money I have spent in Sack, since
I was five and twenty years of age, have I obtained by cosening and cheating.


Trueman. Indeed it is true you have been a cheating Raschal, but do you now
repent?


Coniwoll. With all my heart, and I do mean henceforward, if ever I come to be
Churchwarden, to make the poor amends.


Trueman. With such another.


Coniwooll. O by no means, hence forth they shall have Coals at fourteen
pence, I Will bate them the odd two pence. If any honest Gentleman or Knight be
pleased to make me his Executor, I Will pay them all their Legacies in groats, and
get but one poor 12. pence in a pound.


Trueman. But will you be so honest?


Coniwooll. Truly I, if any man would have my Coniwooll, I Will bate them six
pence now in every pound, for I resolve to be an honest man, and play the knave
no more.


Trueman. It Is true indeed, you have used that trade too long.


Coniwooll. Besides I do forgive that honest man, surnamed Tom Teltroth, who a
book did write, and made my faults aparant to the world, and wrought me to
conversion.


Trueman. Indeed he was a very honest man, and you had need reward him.


Coniwooll. The money likewise I hereafter gather upon Communion days, shall
be bestowed upon poor people, it shall never be shared amongst the poor
Churchwardens: Nor will I have any mental reservation when I cry, Pray
remember the poor, meaning my self and my brethren of the Vestry, and not the
poor of the Parish.


Trueman. It Is well resolved, believe me neighbor Coniwooll, this your
repentance makes me wondrous glad, and to the world I will so plain express
it, that those poor people, that before did flout you, shall now adore you,
you shall no more be like a wandering star, but now be sixth, and make your
seven stars eight, which then shall shine, although now clouded, brightly and
divine.


Coniwooll. One thing more because I desire to give to the world a large
testimony of my repentance, I have framed by the help of Mr. Thomas Teltroth
(whose friendship I esteem above my life) a friendly admonition to all my
brethren, alias Vestry men, from the greatest to the least, whersoever dispersed
through out the 3. kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.


Trueman. Pray let me hear it.


Coniwooll. You shall sir. First I do admonish every covetous careless Doctor,
which esteems his profit, above his pulpit, those that will preach but once a
month, and that too by reason that he will have his share of the poores money
which is gathered on Communion days, let me be your pattern, resolve to be
honest hereafter, preach once in a fortnight, although you make a repetition
Sermon, rack not the bodies of your Parishioners, but feed their souls.


Trueman. A Christian like admonition, Heaven grant they may have the grace to
follow it.


Coniwooll. Next I admonish every Curate, to be officious in the performing
the duty belonging to his place and calling, and to be an upright man, not to
take money of rich Heirs to make large praises of those that are dead, which
living were not praiseworthy, a crime neighbor to frequent amongst some of
our Curates and Lecturers.

Thirdly, I admonish every Sexton or Clark, never to connive or join with their
covetous Doctor in the giving way to have private burials out of rich men's
houses, of the sickness and other infectious diseases, only to hide it from
the world, for which they receive a great sum of money, share it amongst
themselves, which being done, the cl^rk he cries, Amen.


Trueman. True indeed Master Conniwooll, too many of them cry Amen, when they
have more need to cry Amend; but should they do so, they would not be so rich,
nor would they strive so much for the place, and I believe it is more for love
to the profit that insues by it, than any love they have to the religious
office, merely of the service of God: But pray you proceed.


Coniwooll. Fourthly, I admonish you and all my brethren Churchwardens and
Overseers of the poor, I beseech you be overseers for the poor, deal
uprightly, make no more five pound Suppers with the poores money, drink no
more pottles of Sack at the Parish charge, buy your wives no more Taffata
petty-coates, nor ten pound Gorgets with your weekly shares out of the poores
box. Likewise, I beseech you to be careful Stewards at offerings, let a plain
pair of gloves given you by the bridegroom content you; take up no more
Crowns to buy you fringe Gloves richly perfumed. Surely Brethren, I have found
it to be true, that the richest perfume most strangely does consume, and vanish
away in a short winters day, and instantly does perish.


Trueman. Truly Brother, a man may believe this to be true, because you have
had the trial of all these things.


Coniwooll. To my great grief I have: but to the next. Likewise all
Constables, Headboroughs, and Beadles, let me admonish you to watch warily,
least you verify the old Proverb, Harm watch, harm catch; trust not to the
eyes of your associates, sleep not for fear you be taken napping, if a
Gentleman and his Taffata-Lasse in her Copper lace russell by you, have a care
she put not our one of your eyes with a spangle, let them not go scot-free,
for if it be known, you will have no color for it. Likewise, you Beadles that
tyrannise over a beggar, and shake hands with a pick pocket, take heed, for
though you have carried many a beggar to Bridewell, such Rogues will carry you
to Tiburne, and then you will find it better to have said Stand thief, than
go Beggar. So having finished my Admonitions, I rest, hoping that my example
will induce all my brethren Officers that know themselves guilty, to repent
like me, for fear that Thomas Telleroth find Employment to anatomize their
names, as he has done mine. Thus leaving the honest Officers to their
continuance in virtue, and the knavish Officers to amend, I rest with this
Proverb, Let none but the gald Horse kick, let none take my Admonition amiss,
but him that would proclaim himself guilty of my offenses.

Let all amend, let every man abhor
So great a crime, as to deceive the poor;
Be not ambitious, Office to obtain;
For justly by Church-Office none can gain:
Be faithful Wardens, and your souls regard,
An upright Steward cannot want reward;
For the poores prayers, will daily mount the skies.
And offer for your souls a Sacrifice,
Acceptable to God, and you shall rest
(Happy on earth) in Heaven for ever blessed.

FINIS.

