THE DECLARATION Of the Commission of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, To this whole Kirk
and Kingdom of SCOTLAND Of the fifth of May: Concerning the present public
proceedings toward an engagement in War, so far as Religion is therein
concerned.

TOGETHER With their Desires and Petitions to the Honorable Court of
Parliament, The Parliaments Answers.

Their humble Returns and Representations, and other Papers that may give full
and clear information in the matter.

London, Printed for T.R. and E. M. 1648.

A DECLARATION Of the COMMISSION of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, to this whole Kirk
and Kingdom, concerning the present public proceedings toward an engagement
in War, so far as Religion is therein concerned.
GOD only wise, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, whose
thoughts are not like men's thoughts, nor his ways like men's ways; Who
sometimes by weak and unlikely means, and often by contrary means, uses to
work out the greatest works of his glory, and the greatest salvation to his
people: After he had broken the Egyptian Antichristian yoke, first in this,
then in the neighbour-Kingdome, with a mighty hand and a stretched out arm; and
had also brought us through a red Sea of a bloody opposition and War; yea,
after we were near the wished for Reformation and Peace, He has again reduced
us to such extreme difficulties and dangers, as makes many in their haste apt
to wish they had not come out of Egypt, or that they were returned thither
again. How great and how many soever our dangers be, The Lord is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his Works, and he has punished us less then
our iniquities deserve. Among many other provocations, that of Sinful
compliance is one, which the present judgments of God in both Kingdoms do more
especially and more distinctly proclaim and speak out (Eccho-wise) unto us.
Sectaries in the one hand, and Malignants in both, were so much connived at and
complied with, that God has most justly made them on both sides to be thorns
and scourges to these that cherished them when they should have suppressed
them. But as we will bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned
against him: So we encourage our selves in our God and trust, that when he hat
humbled and proved his people, he will do them good in their latter end.
Blessed are they that wait for him, and live by faith, and keep their garments
clean, for they shall see the good of Jerusalem, and peace upon Israel. yea,
God shall work so much good out of all the greatest evils which now afflict
them, that they shall say in end, We had perished, unless we had perished; and
the work of God had not been done, if it had not been undone.

It is one door of hope to us, that God has raised up the spirits of many of
his servants in diverse places and Provinces of England, to join together in
witnessing a good confession, and giving a fair public testimony for the truth
of Christ, for the Covenant, for the Presbyterial Government, and against that
abominable Toleration of most dangerous Errors. Heresies and Schisms. These
Testimonies we have seen to our great joy and comfort, and have been much
refreshed thereby; trusting, that so many public Testimonies as have been
given in both Kingdoms for the Covenant, and against the Toleration of Heresy
or Schism, shall not be in vain, but that God shall lay open those that
resist the truth, so as they shall proceed no further, but their folly shall be
made manifest unto all men. And we not doubt, but that such shoutings shall be
heard among the Churches of Christ: Shame, shame upon the way of the Sectaries!
Grace, grace upon that Covenant and Reformation which the Sectaries opposed!

Our present-work is at home, To give an Antidote against these Malignant
designs now brought to so much maturity: and withal to clear our own late
Proceedings, which some are content to misunderstand, except they also
misrepresent them to as many others as they can; yea some are so skilful in
coining, others so bold in outing, and a third sort so weak and simple in
believing lies and calumnies, that every conscientious man has cause to pray
at this time, Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips and from a deceitful
tongue.

That we may therefore lay more open the truth of matters, we shall not now so
far run the back-trade as to insist upon the rise and progress of these
present evils, nor upon the grounds of our former fears and apprehensions of
dangerous and malignant designs heretofore on foot: It shall be sufficient at
this time to make known the late passages, since we received His Majesty's
Letter dated at Carisbrook Castle, December 27. 1647. together with a Narrative
in writing of his Majesty's concessions and offers concerning Religion, and
what his Majesty is content to do for this Kingdom (upon a good agreement)
under which expression we know not how much may be comprehended. That Letter
and Narrative, together with the reports which then this Kingdom was full of,
that his Majesty had given satisfaction to the public desires concerning the
Covenant and Religion (thereby to make the people secure, and the better to
animate them unto an engagement in his Majesty's quarrel) did minister occasion
to our late Declaration, which although extremely opposed and maligned by such
as found their projects thereby crossed, yet has found such general and good
acceptance in this Kirk of Scotland, that we have already received not only
from diverse Presbyteries, but from the most part of the Provincial Synods,
most affectionate Letters of thanks for the same; as namely from the
Provincial of Lothian and Tweddale, Eyffe, Mense, and Tiviotdail, Perth and
Stirlin, Angus and Mernes, Glasgow and Air, Dumfreis, Galloway, and Aberdeen:
And we doubt not but that the few other Provincials would have done the like,
but that being in more remote places, they had not the opportunity to be so
soon acquainted with the condition of public affairs.

Not long after the emitting of that Declaration, we were desired, upon the 15
of March, by the Committee of Parliament to appoint some of our number to
confer with their Lordships, which we did: But upon the 17. of that month,
understanding that a Vote had past in Parliament upon the 16. concerning
Berwick and Carlisle, (which Vote as it was dissented from and protested against
by diverse Members of Parliament who have been most zealous and constant since
the beginning, so we conceived to be a predetermining of the subject of the
Conference, and to be of exceeding dangerous consequence to the cause of God
and ends of the Covenant) We were thereupon discouraged from entertaining that
Conference, and so resolved to delay it till we should give further Order to
those of our Number appointed on the Conference.

After this, upon the 22. of March, we did, for our own exoneration, and for a
clear understanding between the Honorable Court of Parliament and us,
represent to their Lordships, eight humble desires, whereupon the same day we
were invited to a new conference with some of their Lordships which did not
produce the wished effect and satisfaction which we were waiting for. Upon the
28. of March we received the Parliaments answers to our eight Desires, which
leaving us still unsatisfied, did occasion our humble Representation of March
29. whereunto we received no other answer, but a desire of Parliament sent us
the next day, for a conference upon our said Desires, and the parliaments
answer thereunto, and also upon the state of the Question and whole matter. But
as we were willing to confer upon our 8 desires, and the unsatisfactorinesse
of the parliaments answers thereunto, so till we should receive a clear and
real satisfaction to these our desires, we Declined a Conference upon the
state of a Question for War, for the Grounds and reasons expressed in our
paper of the 30 of March, and did accordingly give order to those of our number
appointed to confer. But the power given to the Committee of Parliament,
containing nothing of further satisfaction to be give to our desires, that
their Conference (after some time spent in debates) proved no less
ineffectuall then the former two.

Upon the 11 April. It was Ordered by the Parliament, that the demand
concerning Religion, thought fit by their Lordships to be sent to the
Parliament of England, should be communicated unto us: whereunto we returned an
answer by our Paper of the 13. of that month. And that we might leave no
means unessayed for satisfaction in those particulars, (wherein most part of
the Provincial Synods has joined with us in supplications to the Parliament)
without which, many others, as well as our selves, could not be satisfied in
conscience to concur in the Engagement) We did by our Petition of the 18.
further insist with their Lordships in all humility and earnestness for
satisfaction to our desires, and to be cleared upon the whole matter. Unto all
which we have received no other answers for the satisfaction of our
consciences, but the Paper delivered in to us from the Parliament upon the 20.
of April, together with their Lordships Declaration, unto which we were
remitted for satisfaction in most things we had desired, But how great reason
we have to be still unsatisfied, will appear by our Answer to their Lordships
paper of the 20. of April, and by our humble Representation upon the
Declaration it self, expressing more fully our sense of the whole matter: and
although we might have justly desired some weeks for deliberation about an
Answer to so large and so premeditate a Declaration concerning things of so
high a nature, yet we made much haste, that our Representation thereupon was
fully agreed and concluded among us upon the eight day after we received the
Declaration it self.

If the Honorable Estates of Parliament had been pleased to delay the sending
away of their demands to England, and the publishing their Declaration to this
Kingdom, till they had received and considered our Humble Representation
thereupon, We know not but it might have, by the blessing of God, conduced much
to the preventing of great and sad inconveniences. But now their Lordships
Declaration being emitted as it is, we have too much cause to fear, that the
Malignant party shall make use of it to the ensnaring of many, unless timous
warning and information be given them. For our part, it has been our endeavor
(which we are confident is desired with us by all the well-affected both in
Church and State) that there may be no rupture in this Nation, but a firm
union and conjunction upon the first principles and grounds of engaging in this
cause. And as we have not been tenacious of words, but of things, nor of any
other things but such as highly concern the glory of God, solemn Covenants,
and the good, safety, and security of Religion: so we shall be blameless
before God, Angels and men, of all the evils, distractions and confusions,
which may follow upon or be occasioned by the not satisfying of so just and
necessary desires.

And now for the result of the whole business: As we were before, and still are
ready to consent and agree to the engaging and acting in war, if we were
satisfied in our consciences concerning the grounds of undertaking, and the
means and ways of prosecuting the same, and concerning the other particulars
contained in our Papers presented to the Parliament: So not being satisfied in
those, and looking upon the war as it is now stated, matters standing as they
do, and the whole complex business taken together, We cannot but (with all
dutiful respect and honor both to his Majesty and to the Estates of Parlia.)
plainly dissent and differ from the same, being so far from a clear
satisfaction in our consciences concerning the lawfulness and necessity of a
War, upon the grounds and in the manner expressed in the Declaration of
Parliament, that contrariwise we are clearly persuaded in our consciences, it
is an engagement of most dangerous consequence to the true reformed Religion,
both in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government, prejudicial to the due
interest and liberty of the Kirk; favorable and advantageous to the Popish,
Prelaticall, and Malignant party: inconsistent with the union of the Kingdom,
and the satisfaction of the Presbyterian party in England; and therefore
contrary to the Word of God, to the Solemn Covenants, first Principles and
public Professions of this Kirk and Kingdom, and a remedy worse then the
disease, and a course whereupon we cannot expect a blessing from God. For which
reasons (expressed more fully and particularly in our Representation upon the
late Declaration of Parliament) we cannot in our consciences allow either
Ministers in their places and callings, or any others whatsoever, to concur
and cooperate in the Engagement: but trust, that all that have in them true
tenderness of conscience, and tremble at the Word of God, will by his grace
and assistance keep themselves unspotted and free in this business, and will
choose affliction rather then iniquity, and take their hazard of suffering
rather then of sin, believing that the wrath of man shall turn to the praise
of God, and the remainder of wrath He will restrain.

We know there is much zeal pretended for the ends of the Covenant, uniformity
of Religion, suppression of Sectaries, and the like: But the more pretense be
made of Religious ends, the Malignant designs varnished and painted therewith
are unto God and good men so much the more hateful. Does the same fountain
send forth both sweet water and bitter? Or how can true zeal against
Sectaries, lodge in one breast with zeal for Malignants? Besides, if Religion
and the Glory of God be now chiefly aimed at, what means the refusing of that
satisfaction and security which has been desired for Religion? And if there be
such zeal against Sectaries in the Engagement, what meant it, that not long
ago, when the dangers of the true Reformed Religion in this Kirk, from the
prevalent party of Sectaries in England were remonstrat by us to the honorable
Committee of Estates; it was pleaded by some, who now are most active and
forward for an Engagement that this Kirk and Kingdom was in no such danger from
the Sectaries in England and the Army there, as might be any cause of not
disbanding the Army in this Kingdom. And is this candid or fair dealing, to
extenuat or elevat dangers from Sectaries, so as may best serve men's present
businesses? Or if the design at that time was to disband that Army, as to make
up another of their own modelling, why was this so much disclaimed when
mentioned among our fears and apprehensions in our Romonstrance, October. 13?
However it seems the thing then suspected is now begun to be acted, and it is
too aparent that our former fears were not without some real ground.

As to any calumnies or aspersions cast upon our proceedings by Malignant and
disaffected persons: As our consciences before God, so the very course of our
proceedings before men does clearly wipe them off. And because we have here
only summarily pointed at things, we shall for the cleerer understanding of
all, refer to the several Papers themselves herewithall published and made
known to all the people of God in this Land, that they may prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good. We do not doubt but upon a serious search
into the particulars, all that do ingeniously seek after satisfaction shall find
it: And as it will appear by the particular Papers, that we have not meddled
with Civil businesses, but only with such things as merely concern the safety
and security of Religion; So we leave it to the consciences of all the
well-affected in the Land, whether they will give more credit and belief to the
professions and informations of such as were strangers and enemies to the work
and cause of God in the beginning, or of those who have given constant and real
proof of their integrity in this cause from the beginning? We trust, God will
discover more and more the mystery of Malignancy now so strongly working;
manifest the innocence and sincerity of his servants; deliver his people out of
the present snares and guide them in a right and safe way: which afterward
shall be no grief of heart, but matter of peace and comfort unto them.

A. KER.

The Parliaments Answer to the Declaration of the Commission of the General
Assembly of the first of March.
9. Martii. 1648. The Declaration of the Commission of the General Assembly
produced by Mr. Robert Douglas accompanied with diverse of the Ministry and
Ruling Elders, read in audience of the Parliament.
THE Estates of Parliament acknowledge, and takes well the continuance of their
correspondence in communicating this counsel or advise to the Parliament; and
remits the same to be considered in their several bodies: but the Parliament
desires in the mean time, till the return of their answer (which they will do
with all possible speed) that the Commissioners of the Church would take no
course for publishing or divulging the same. And declares that as they
conceive, this offer of Council from the Church to the Parliament, does not
derogate from Parliamentary power and liberty: So by this delay or answer they
do not mean any ways to entrench upon the privilege due to the Church or
Commission thereof: Their intention being merely for preservation of unity and
good correspondence betwixt them. Extractum.

Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

Answer of the Commission of the General Assembly to the Parliaments Paper of
the 9. of March.
Edinburgh 10. Martii, 1648.
THE Commission of the General Assembly, having this day received under the
hand of the Clerk Register, the desire of the Honorable Court of Parliament,
concerning their Declaration presented to their Honors yesterday.

Do humbly return this Answer.

AS we acknowledge it to be a great favor, that the Honorable Estates of
Parliament do take well the continuance of our correspondence, in communicating
our counsel and advice to their Honors; and that they profess their
intention for preservation of Unity, and good correspondence betwixt their
Lordships and us, without intrenching any ways upon he Privilege and
liberties of the Kirk. So we are necessitate humbly to represent to their
Honors, that their desire to us, (to take no course for publishing or
divulging the said Declaration till the return of their Answer) is such that
this Kirk has not been formerly acquainted with the like: Neither can we be
answerable to the trust put upon us by God and the General Assembly, if we
neglect or delay to emit and publish this Declaration, unless we had assurance
(which we have not) that there should be no danger to the cause by the delay:
Otherwise we come under great guiltiness, if we neglect to give timous and due
warning not only to their Honors, but also to the whole Kingdom, as God
requires of Watchmen in time of evident danger: Which made us, as before in
like cases we have done, to resolve upon the Printing of the said Declaration
before we knew any thing of their Honors desires for not publishing it.

Thus having exonered our own consciences, We humbly desire their Honors to
rest confident, that as we are careful to keep the liberty of the Kirk, so we
shall be most unwilling to give to their Honors any cause of offense.

A. KER.

The Dissent and Protestation of some Members of Parliament, upon the Vote of
Parliament of the 16. March, concerning Berwick and Carlisle.
WHereas we have earnestly desired and pressed that no power he granted to any
Committee to do, act, or order any thing which may engage this Kingdom in a
War, before the Parliament resolve on a War, and state the cause and the
ends thereof: It being in our judgment, neither agreeable to the Oath of
Parliament, and tenor of Commissions from Shires and Burghs nor to the act of
Parliament, 1640. against the Lords of the Articles, it being also of dangerous
preparative, and much derogatory to the Liberties of the Kingdoms and
Privileges of Parliament: And most of all it being of exceeding dangerous
consequence to the cause of God, and the Ends of our Solemn League and
Covenant; We do therefore dissent from the granting of any such power, and do
protest, that we may not be included in any such Vote or Resolution, but may be
free before God and man of all the guiltiness, prejudices and evils that may
follow thereupon to the Cause, Covenant and Religion, to the Kings person and
Authority, to this Kirk and Kingdom, or to the Union betwext the Kingdoms.

Edinburgh 22. Martii, 1648.
To the Right Honorable the Estates of PARLIAMENT, The humble Desires of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly.
WHereas we were desired to appoint a conference with some of your Lordships
which did go on toward an agreement, till it was obstructed by a Vote of
Parliament of the 16. of this instant; And having already shown by our Papers
of the 17. and 20. the reasons of our not proceeding in that conference, and
that the cause was not in us: We do now as the servants of Jesus Christ, for
our own exoneration, for preventing of mistakes, and for a clear understanding
between your Lordships and us, represent these our humble desires which we
recommend to your Lordships serious thoughts.

I. That the grounds and causes of undertaking a War may be cleared to be so
just, as that all who are well affected may be satisfied in the lawfulness and
necessity of the engagement, and that nothing be acted in reference to a War,
before the lawfulness of the War and state of the Question be agreed upon.

II. That as the breaches of the Covenant by the prevalent party of Sectaries
are evident, so we desire and hope, that according to the Treaty it may be
condiscended upon and declared by the parliment, what are those breaches of
Peace which they take to be a ground of War, and that reparation thereof may be
sought.

III. That there may be no such quarrel or ground of the War as may break the
Union between the Kingdoms, or may discourage or disoblige the Presbyterian
party in England who continue firm in adhering to the League and Covenant.

IV. That if the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party shall again rise in
Arms, this Nation and their Armies may be so far from joining or associating
with them, that one the contrary they may oppose them and endeavor to
suppress them, as enemies to this Cause and Covenant on the one hand, as well
as Sectaries on the other.

V. Seeing your Lordships undertaking should be in the first place for
Religion; We desire that his Majesty's late Concessions, and offers concerning
Religion as they have been by the Church, so may be by the Parliament deelared
unsatisfactory, whereby your Lordships may give further evidence of the reality
of your intentions for the good and safty of Religion.

VI. That your Lordships may be pleased not to fix or settle upon any such
state of a Question, as does not contain security to be had from his Majesty
by his solemn Oath under his hand and seal, That he shall for Himself and his
Successors, consent and agree to Acts of Parliament enjoining the League and
Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterian Government, Directory of Worship
and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's Dominions, and that his Majesty
shall never make opposition to any of these, or endeavor any change thereof:
And that this security be had from his Majesty before his Restitution to the
exercise of his Royal power; Which desire we propone for no other end but
because we cannot see how Religion, which has been, and we trust shall be, the
principal end of all the undertakings of this Nation, can be otherwise secured,
but that without this security, it shall be left in very great hazard.

VII. That for the same end of securing Religion (which is professed to be the
principal cause of engagement) and for securing all other ends of the
Covenant, such persons only may be entrusted by your Lordships to be of your
Committees and Armies, as have given constant proof of their integrity and
faithfulness in this Cause, and against whom there is no just cause of
exception or jealousy; That so we may the more confidently encourage our
Flocks, and Congregations to follow the Cause of God in their hands, and not to
doubt of the fidelity of those who shall be entrusted by your Lordships.

VIII. That there may be no engagement without a Solemn Oath, wherein the
Church may have the same interest which they had in the Solemn League and
Covenant, the Cause being the same.

All which desires being duly pondered by your Lordships in an equal balance,
will we trust be found just and necessary, and do not doubt but satisfaction
from your Lordships therein may be a happy and effectual means, for
facilitating the state of the Question, and for uniting this Nation in an
unanimous undertaking of such duties, as are requisite for the Reformation and
defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King, the Peace and safty
of the Kingdoms.

A. KER.

Edinb. 27. March, 1648.
Answers of Parliament to the Desires of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly represented by them to the Parliament.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened in this first Session of the second
Trienniall Parliament, having considered the desires of the Commissioners of
the General Assembly, represented to them. They after full debate and
consideration concerning the same for answer to the first desire.

1. Declares that the grounds and causes of undertaking of war, shall be
cleared to be so just, as that all who are well affected may be satisfied in
the lawfulness and necessity of the engagement. And declares that they will be
very careful, that nothing be acted in reference to a war during the
conference, and until the same be reported to the Parliament.

2. Item, For answer to the second desire. The Estates of Parliament thinks
fit, that the breaches of the Covenant and Treaties be represented. And the
seeking of Reparation, and the best time and manner thereof considered, and
appoints the Committee of twenty four, or such of their number as they shall
appoint to do the same.

3. Item, For answer to the third desire. The said Estates of Parliament
declares, that this Kingdom will be so far from making war against the
Kingdom of England, That any engagement they shall enter into, shall be for
strengthening the union betwixt the Kingdoms, And for encouraging the
Presbyterians and well-affected in England.

4. Item, For answer to the fourth desire, The Estates of Parliament agrees to
the substance and matter of this fourth desire. And remits to these who are to
be upon the conference for stating the question, to explain the same.

5. Item, To the fist desire. The Estates of Parliament for answer to this
desire, declares, That upon the agreement on the haill matter and state of the
question, they will declare his Majesty's concessions, concerning Religion not
to be satisfactory.

6. Item, to the sixth desire. The Estates of Parliament for answer to this,
declares. That since Religion has been, and they trust ever shall be the
principal end of all the undertakings of this Kingdom. So they will be
careful that the present question to be stated, shall contain security and
assurance to be had from his Majesty, be his solemn oath under his hand and
seal. That he shall for himself and his Successors, give his Royal consent
to pass acts of Parliament, enjoining the League and Covenant, establishing
Presbyterian Government, the Directory of worship, and Confession of Faith in
all his Majesty's Dominions, and that his Majesty shall never make any
opposition to any of these, nor endeavor any change thereof. And as to that
clause, viz. That this security be had from his Majesty before his restiution
to the exercise of his Royal power. The Estates of Parliament remits this to
these on the conference, And who shall be appointed for drawing up the state of
the question, To find out some more smooth expression in place thereof, with
the like security to Religion.

7. Item, to the seventh desire. The said Estates of Parliament declares that
they will be careful that none shall be employed in the command of their
Armies, nor in their Committees, But such as are of known integrity and
affection to the cause, and against whom there is no just case of exception.

Item, To the eighth Article or Desire, The Estates of Parliament declares,
That to the grounds of their engagement and undertaking an Oath shall be
subjoyned wherein both in the framing of it and otherwise the Church shall
have their due interest, And the Estates of Parliament desires the Commission
of the Church, To appoint some of their number to meet with such of that
Committee of Parliament of 24. As shall be appointed by the same Committee for
the conference and stating of the question, for agreeing upon the grounds of an
engagement, and drawing up such a state of a question as may unite this Nation
in an unanimous undertaking of such duties as are requisite for the Reformation
and defense of Religion, the safety, honor and happiness of the King and his
posterity and the good of this Kingdom. Extract forth out of the Books of
Parliament, By me Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie Knight, Clerk of his Majesty's
Registers Council and Rolls under my sign and subscription Manuel.

Alex. Gibson, Cler, Regist.

Edinburgh. 29. Martii. 1648.
A humble Representation of the sense of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly, To the Honorable Estates of Parli. upon their L. Answer to the eight
Desires lately presented to their Lordships.
HAving received yesterday the Answer of the Honorable Estates of Parliament
to our late Desires presented to their Lordships upon the 22. of this instant;
We did immediately take to our consideration the particular answers given
thereunto; And now without any longer delay do humbly represent to their
Honors our sense of the Particulars.

1. As to the Answer of the first Desire, we conceive that notwithstanding any
thing expressed in your Lordships Answer there may be an acting in reference to
a war before the lawfulness of the War and the state of the question be
agreed upon, which is the very thing we did desire to be avoided.

2. In the Answer to our second Desire, we neither find any breaches of peace
between the Kingdoms which may be a ground of war, condescended upon, nor any
positive resolution of the Parliament to seek reparation thereof according to
the Treaties, yet both these were desired by us.

3. In the answer to the third desire, instead of that clause of the desire,
The Presbyterian party in England, who continue firm in adhering to the League
and Covenant, we find this change of expression in the Answers, The
Presbyterians and well-affected in England; which as the words stand may
intimate and suppose, that there are some well-affected in England, which are
not of the Presbyterian party, nor do adhere to the League and Covenant.

4. Our fourth desire for not joining or associating what the Popish,
Prelaticall or malignant party, if they shall again rise in Arms, and that it
may be endeavored to suppress them as enemies to the cause and Covenant on
the one hand, as well as Sectaries upon the other; being so just in it self,
so consonant to the former principles and professions of this Kirk and
Kingdom, since their first engagement in this cause; and being also as clear
both in the matter and expression, as the Covenant, Treaties, and Declarations
of both Kingdoms, we cannot conceive wherein it needs explanation, or what
doubt or scruple can be made concerning it as it stands, unless there be now
some more favorable and friendly intentions toward the malignant party then
formerly, which we pray the Lord to avert: And although it is too manifest
that some plead for Malignants, as if they were to be joined with as friends,
rather then avoided as enemies to the cause (whereof we have spoken more fully
in our late Declaration) yet we trust that any such des^gne is and shall be far
from the thoughts and intentions of the Honorable Court of Parliament.

5. Touching the 5 Desire, as your Lordships answers ems to supp se his
Maje^late concessions concerning Religion, not to be satisfactory, so these
concessions being so prejudicial to the cause and Covenant; We wish your
Lordships had been pleased to declare against them both positively without any
condition, and presently without any delay.

6. In the answer to the sixth desire, as thereis much said in the first part
for security of Religion to be had from his Majesty, so that clause, viz. That
this security be had from his Majesty before his restitution to the exercise of
his royal tower not being agreed to by your Lordships, but rather laid aside
until some smoother expressions be found out; We are left unsatisfied in that
which is the maine of that desire, and cannot be assured of any security
expressed in the first part of your Lordships answer If your Lordships had been
pleased to condescend upon another expression containing as good and as real
security for Religion, we should have acquiessed therein without sticking upon
words, but there being no other expression yet condescended upon, and that
clause of ours (without which the whole desire is lest uncertain) laid aside
for the present; We cannot find our selves therein satisfied as yet.

7. The answer to the seventh Desire, concerning such as are to be trusted in
Armies, and Committees, does omit some of the qualifications expressed in our
Desire, viz. Such as have given constant proof of their integrity and
faithfulness in this cause, and against whom there is no just cause of
jealousy, that so we may the more confidently encourage our flocks to follow
the cause of God in their hands, and not to doubt of their fidelity; Which
qualifications being contained in our Desire, and omitted in your Lordships
Answers; We are not without fears that this omission may be made use of by
some, as if your Lordships had not meant to agree fully to that desire, and so
take occasion to deal for employing and entrusting such in the Committees and
Armies, as may be justly excluded by the qualifications contained in our said
Desire.

In the answer to the last Desire, in stead of that clear expression used by
us, namely, That the Kirk may have the same interest in any oath for a new
engagement which they had in the solemn League and Covenant; We find this
doubtful and uncertain expression, The Kirk shall have their due interests.
Which difference of your Lordships expression from ours, may also be
interpreted by some, as if the Kirk had assumed more interest in the League and
Covenant, than was due unto them.

Unto these, and the like considerations, We humbly conceive that our Desires,
unto which we still adhere as just and necessary, are not satisfied by your
Lordships Answer: And without clear satisfaction in these desires, We find it
not safe to appoint a conference for agreeing upon the state of a question for
War: yet if your Lordships had desired, or do desire further conference with
some of our number for satisfaction of our above mentioned Desires, We should
have yielded, and yet shall willingly yield thereunto. And as the present want
of satisfaction in these Desires does retard and hinder our proceedings toward
an agreement upon the state of a question; so we are still confident that a
real and clear satisfaction to the said desires, may be a happy and
effectual means for facilitating the state of the question, and for uniting
this Nation in an unanimous undertaking of such duties, as are requisite for
the reformation and defense of Religion, the safety, honor, and happiness of
the King and his posterity, and the good, peace, and safety of the Kingdoms.

A. KER.

A Paper from the Parliament of the 29 March, 1648.
At Edinburgh the 29 day of March, the year of God 1648 years;
WHereas the Commissioners of the Church have this day exhibited to the
Parliament one paper entitled an humble representation of the sense of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly; To the honorable Estates of Parliament
upon their Lordships answer to the eight Desires lately presented to their
Lordships: And the same being read in audience of the Estates of Parliament,
They ordain the former Committee of 24 to confer with the Commissioners of the
Church, or any whom they shall appoint upon the papers exhibited by the Church,
and answers given thereto by the Parliament, and appointed them to debate
thereupon, and for removing all differences, and also upon the state of the
question and whole matter: And ordaines this to be communicated to the
Commissioners of the Church in answer to the paper exhibited by them to the
Parliament this day. And desires that the Commissioners of the Kirk, or those
whom they shall appoint may come authorized with the like power to confer.
Extract.

ALEX. GIBSON, Cler. Registri.

The Answer of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, Edin. penult. Mar.
1648.
THE Commissioners of the General Assembly, having this day received a power
from the Honorable Estates of Parliament, desiring a conference upon our late
Desires, and the Parliaments answer given thereunto, and also upon the state of
the question, and whole matter, do humbly return this Answer:

That as we have been, so we are still willing to appoint a conference upon the
eight Desires lately presented to your Lordships, and upon the
unsatisfactorinesse of your Lordships answer thereunto: And if your Lordships
shall yet be pleased to give real and clear satisfaction to our said desires,
We shall immediately thereupon appoint some of our number to confer with a
Committee of Parliament upon the state of the question. This insisting upon
satisfaction to our desires, before we appoint a conference upon the state of
the question, does not proceed from any peremptorinesse about words, or things
of small moment, nor from any partiality, or self interest, nor from any
inclination to stretch our selves beyond our line, nor from intention to
obstruct any lawful endeavors, either for Monarchical government in the
Kings Majesty and his posterity, or for preferring opposing and suppressing of
Sectaries: Our record is in heaven, we abhor and detest all such ways: But our
real purpose is to keep our selves so free, that in an implicit way we consent
not to, nor concur in stating of a question of War, before we see the safety
and security of Religion sufficiently provided for, being tender of the great
trust committed to us, as the servants of Jesus Christ, and officers of his
Kingdom, for preserving the precious Jewel of Religion, which ought to be as
well to your Lordships as to us, above all worldly interests.

A. KER.

The Article of the Demands which is to be communicated to the Commissioners of
the Church, viz.
THAT an effectual course be taken by the Houses for enjoining the Covenant to
be taken by all the Subjects of the Crown of England conform to the first
Article-of the Treaty, and conform to the Declaration of both Kingdoms in anno
1643. By which all who would not take the Covenant, were declared to be
public enemies to Religion and the Country: And that they are to be
censured and punished as professed Adversaries and Malignants: And that
reformation of, and uniformity in Religion, be settled according to the
Covenant; That as the Houses of Parliament have agreed to the Directory of
worship, so they would take a real course for the practicing thereof by all
the Subjects of England and Ireland. That the Confession of Faith transmitted
from the Assembly of Divines at Westminster to the Houses be approved: And that
Presbyteriall government with a subordination of the lower Assemblies to the
higher, be settled, and fully established in England and Ireland: And that
effectual course be taken for suppressing and extirpating all Heresies and
Schisms, particularly Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Arrianisme, Anabaptisme,
Antinomianisme, Errastianisme, Familisme, Brownisme, and Independency; and for
perfecting what is yet further to be done, for extirpating Popery and Prelacy,
and suppressing the practice of the Service Book, commonly called the Book of
English Common Prayer.

2 Aprilis 1648.

This Article read and agreed to, by the Estates of Parliament, is thought
fitting to be demanded of the Parliament of England: And the Estates appoints
the seventh Article to be communicate to the Commissioners of the Kirk, that
they may return their thoughts thereupon, either for addition or alteration,
which the Parliament will take to their consideration. And the Estates appoints
the Lord Balmerinoth, Lord Huniby, and Archbald Sydserse, to acquaint the
Commissioners of the Church therewith. Extracted forth of the Records of
Parliament, and Articles of breaches of the Covenant and Treaties, and demands
for reparation thereof, respective by me, Sir Alex. Gibson of Dure, etc.

Alex. Gibson Cler. Regist.

Edinb. 13 Aprilis, 1648.
The humble return of the Commissioners of the General Assembly unto that
Article of the Demands concerning Religion, and the Covenant, etc. communicated
unto them by the Honorable Estates of Parliament.
AS there is nothing which the Kirk of Scotland now for a long time has more
earnestly wished, and seriously studied, then the settling of Religion, and
carrying on of the work of uniformity in all the three Kingdoms; so it is
still our desire that your Lordships should sincerely and really endeavor the
same in all fair and lawful ways both with the King and Parliament of England
according to the League and Covenant. As to the Article communicated unto us,
we shall not search after the cause why your Lordships have changed the way
formerly used of sending Propositions to his Majesty, without whose confidence
your Lordships will easily acknowledge, that the Parliament of England cannot
render the particulars contained in the demand effectual for securing of
Religion. Neither shall we insist upon the prejudice, that preparative of the
taking of resolutions in that which concerns Religion without the advice and
consent of the Kirk, may bring to the interest and liberty thereof. But
conceiving that we have just reason to look upon the demand as intended to be
a ground of war, in case the Seamen shall be refused by the Parliament of
England, we cannot return our thoughts thereupon, until your Lordships shall
be pleased to give us a satisfactory answer to our eight desires, formerly
propounded to your Lordships, and until you shall be pleased also to acquaint
us with the Articles of the breaches of the Covenant and Treaties, and other
demands, for reparation thereof, mentioned in the paper sent to us: that so we
may not only know that no other of the demands do cross this, or tend to the
hinderance of the work of Reformation, but also that we may be satisfied in our
consciences upon the whole matter, and be assured that all things are so
ordered, and resolved, as may indeed contribute for establishing the Covenant,
and settling of Reformation of, and Uniformitie in Religion, and attaining all
things expressed in your Lordships demands communicated to us. In the mean
while seeing your Lordships do profess that the Cause is the same, and the
chief ground of the undertaking is for Religion; We desire your Lordships
seriously in your consciences to ponder, how ye can make the refusal of this
demand a cause of war against the Parliament of England, with whom this
nation was lately engaged in a war in defense of the League and Covenant, and
ends thereof, when the King was in arms against both, and yet engage in a
war for the King, while he still refuses to settle Religion and enjoin the
Covenant, and will come no further at the uttermost, then to leave the Seamen
Arbitrary, as is evident from his late concessions; Or how your Lordships can
propound any such demand unto others whilst your selves have not declared the
Kings concessions so much as unsatisfactory, seeing these concessions are
distructive to most of the particulars contained in your Lordships demands.

A. Ker.

Edinb. 18 April, 1648.
To the Right honorable, and High Court of Parliament, The humble Petition, of
the Commissioner of the General Assembly.
REligion being of all things the most excellent, as it has been the
principal end of all the in deavours and undertakings of this Nation, so it is
the main subject of our thoughts and cares, and we trust is most in the hearts
of all the faithful Ministers and godly people throughout the Land, as
several of their supplications unto your Lordships do make evident. It was
from the tender regard we had of this so precious a jewel, that we did emit a
Declaration concerning present dangers, and duties; And it was also from our
respect thereunto, perceiving your Lordsh. inclined to an engagement, from
which we neither were then, nor now are averse (being first satisfied in the
grounds of the undertaking, and in the way of the managing of the same) that we
did afterward propound some humble desires unto your Lordships, containing
things necessary for a right undertaking for, and securing of Religion, and
preserving the Union between the Kingdoms: But after long attendance, and most
earnest expectation, having received no satisfaction from your Lordships in
these our desires; and conceiving that your Lordships resolutions are toward
an engagement in a war, We do from no other principle and intention, then
the love of the truth, and the discharge of the trust committed unto us, as the
servants of the living God, and his son Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead; entreat and obtest your Lordships, that as you do
profess that any undertakings which ye now are, or shall be necessitated
unto, shall only be for settling Religion, Truth and peace under His Majesty's
Government, So for convinceing our consciences and all the faithful Ministers
and people of God in both Kingdoms, of the integrity of your intentions, that
your Lordships will be pleased to give us satisfaction, in all these our former
just and necessary desires, and that for the said end, your Lordships will make
it appear that you mean to be far from interessing your selves in any thing,
that may put in His Majesty's hands such power as may not only bring the
by-gon proceedings of both Kingdoms in the League and Covenant in question,
but also for the time to come make void all the authority of Parliaments,
though proceeding never so rightly in reference to Religion, and Liberties of
the Kingdoms; And that your Lordships will be pleased to make it manifest, that
you will be so far from associating with, or giving trust and countenance to
any within the three Kingdoms, who do not swear and subscribe the Solemn
League and Covenant, That on the contrary your Lordships will hold them all for
professed Adversaries, and Malignants, and endeavor to suppress them if they
rise in Arms; Which we think we may with the greater reason and confidence
expect from your Lordships, because ye have resolved to demand of the
Parliament of England, that an effectual course be taken by the Houses for
injoyning the Covenant to be taken by all the Subjects of the Crown of
England, Conform to the first Article of the Treaty, and the Declaration of
both Kingdoms in anno 1643, By which all who would not take the Covenant, were
Declared to be public enemies to Religion and the Country, and that they are
to be censured and punished as professed Adversaries and Malignants; And we
trust, that whilst your Lordships require of them the performance of duties
contained in the Treaties and Declaration, you will make it appear that you
intend to do nothing your selves contrary thereunto, The obligation therein
being equal in regard of both, and the performance alike conducing for
Religion and the Covenant. And we do humbly entreat that your honors will be
pleased to make known unto us your resolutionsupon the whole matter, that we
may see there is nothing therein that may cross your Lordships demands
concerning Religion, and be inconsistent with the security thereof and our
desire for the same: And that what shall be thought fitting to be demanded of
the Parliament of England, concerning Religion, for rendering the same the more
effectual, your Lordships will at the same time solicit His Majesty for His
Royal assent thereunto, that His Majesty and all others may know, that what
you intend on His behalf, is with a subordination to those ends, And so his
Majesty may be induced to remove al obstructions on his part, that hinder the
settling of Religion, and his Majesty's Government. And being desirous that all
means be first assaid which may prevent the effusion of more Christian blood,
so far as is possible, Therefore as the messengers of peace, we do
supplicate that your Lordships will take such course for seeking reparation
from the Parliament of England, as may be most probable in reason to obtain
the same in a peaceable way. And finally we expect that your Lordships will do
nothing that may strengthen the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party, who
are waiting for their day, or that may discourage or weaken the Presbyterian
party in England, or render your ways suspicions unto them: but that your
Lordships will employ all the power which God has put in your hand for
advanceing his honor, and the Kingdom of his Son. Many of your Lordships
have been isntrumental in as glorious a work of reformation as any age has
seen, and all of your have been witnesses thereto, and if any thing shall
proceed from you for weakening or defeating thereof, as it will be matter of
high provocation against the Lord, so doubtless it will be trouble to your
souls in your latter end, and meet you in the day of your accounts. And if
your Lordships shall refuse to hearken to this our humble supplication; we take
God to record that we have exonoured our selves as in his sight, and that we,
and the Kirk of Scotland whose trust we discharge in the public affairs
thereof, are free of all that guilt that shall follow upon any undertakings or
resolutions, tending to the prejudice of Religion, the honor and happiness of
the King, and the union and peace of the Kingdoms. But we desire to persuade
our selves better things of your Lorships, and that you will give us such
satisfaction as may encourage us to bear real testimony of your Lordships,
that ye intend the settling of Religion, and the carrying on of all things in
such a way, as may contribute for the securing of the same,

A. Ker.

The dissent and protestation of some Members of Parliament against their
Lordships proceeding to a determination in the Declaration concerning the
breaches, and demands, etc.
WHereas the draught of a Declaratian has now been read concerning the
breaches of the Covenant, in matters of Religion and the demands to be made
for remedy and reparation thereof, the dangers to Religion, and the duties
whereunto we are obliged by Covenant for Reformation and Uniformity in
Religion, and the security to be had for establishing the same, upon which
grounds a war is principally founded: And whereas we have earnestly desired
and insisted. That there may be no proceeding to any determination concerning
the said Declaration before the Commissioners of the General Assembly be first
consulted therein, We do hereby enter our dissent, from proceeding to the
determination of matters so highly concerning Religion, without the advice and
concurrence of the Kirk, as a preparative of most dangerous consequence to
Religion, and destructive to the liberties of the Church, as contrary to the
National and Solemn League and Covenant, and to the known laws and constant
practices of this Kingdom; And we do protest that we may not be included in
any such vote or resolution, but may be free of all the guiltines, confusions
distractions and evil whatsoever that may follow thereupon to Religion, the
King, this Kirk and Kingdom, And the union betwixt the Kingdoms.

The Reasons of the aforesaid Protestation.
THat the Parliament ought to take into consideration the papers already
presented by the Kirk, and advise with them concerning the draught of the
Declaration, before they approve the same, for the Reasons following: 1. The
chief subject of the Declaration, is concerning the breaches of the Covenant
in matters of Religion, and the demands to be made for remedy and reparation
thereof, the dangers of Religion, with the duties whereunto we are obliged by
Covenant, for Reformation and uniformity in Religion, and the security to be
had for the establishment of the same: And so much the more the Kirk is to be
consulted therein, that upon these grounds chiefly, a war is founded,
concerning the lawfulness whereof, the advice of the Kirk ought to be taken,
the grounds being taken principally from the interest of Covenant and Religion.
2. It is acknowledged and declared, by the Laws of the Kingdom in several
Acts of Parliament, that the Assemblies of this Kirk, are the competent and
proper Judges, against all matters Ecclesiastical: And when there were
greatest controversies in matters of Religion betwixt his Majesty and this
Kingdom; that which was earnestly sought for, as the proper and only mean to
put an end to all differences touching matters of Religion, and assented to by
his Majesty in a solemn agreement, was, that all questions about Religion, and
matters Ecclesiastical, be determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, as
matters Civil by the Parliament: which express words are set down in the 4
and 38 Acts of Parliament, 1640 and by many Acts of Parliament, it is
particularly acknowledged, that in matters of Religion, the antecedent
judgment is the Kirk, and the consequent judgment or Civil sanction, is the
States, as in the Kings oath of Coronation, and the first act 1592. anent the
liberties of the Kirk, inserted in our National Covenant, and repeated in the
act rescissory 1640. which evinceth that the Parliament should communicate the
Declaration to the Kirk, before they resolve upon it among themselves. 3. All
our Supplications, Remonstrances, Declarations Protestations, Acts of Assembly
and Parliament, and our defensive Arms, in anno 1639, and 1640, were not only
against the Innovations then urged, in the book of Canons, Service book etc.
for the evil matter therein contained; but also against the dangerous manner
of introducing the same, without the advice and consent of the Assemblies of
the Kirk, and Laws of the Kingdom. 4. Our National Covenant, and our
Solemn League and Covenant were first drawn by the Kirk: And their interest
interpretation thereof, especially so far as concerns Religion, was never
hitherto denied: but by the constant practice of this Kingdom, the Assemblies
of the Kirk were always consulted, anent the dangers thereunto, and the
duties grounded thereupon, and touching the demands and security for Religion,
before any expedition or Declaration for War, offensive or defensive. 5. The
Parliaments assuming to themselves the sole judging of the breaches of
Covenants, demands for reparation, the dangers to, duties for, and security of
Religion, is a most dangerous preparative and destructive to the liberties of
the Kirk; for subsequent Parliaments may according to this president, without
the advice and consent of the Assemblies of the Kirk, impose upon them new
Confessions of Faith, forms of worship and Church government, and so change
the very substance and fundamentals of our Religion; likewise this preparative
in a Parliament of Scotland, will confirm such in their opinions and
practices, in the Parliament of England, who maintain the Errastian tenets:
wherefore if extirpation of Errastianisme be intended in England, as is
professed, it should not be practiced at home. 6. Even the Parliament of
England would not engage in the League and Covenant, until they had first
advised it with the Assembly of Divines in point of conscience, albeit that
Assembly has no jurisdiction; how much more should we be cautions of engaging
in such a business, where there is a constituted settled Church, without their
advice. 7. It were a manifest breach both of our National Covenant, and of the
Solemn League and Covenant to determine or approve of a business so highly
concerning Religion, without the advice and concurrence of the General
Assembly, or their Commissioners, seeing by both Covenants we are plainly
obliged, to preserve and maintain the doctrine, discipline, and government of
the Kirk, which yet cannot be preserved, but overthrown by such a
Parliamentary determination and Declaration, concerning the Covenant and
Religion, without the advice and consent of the Kirk. Neither can we expect
the blessing of God upon our undertakings, if in this cause, wherein the honor
and glory of God, and the good of Religion is so highly concerned, we should
engage without the advice and concurrence of the faithful Ministers of this
Kirk, whom God has used as maine instruments in the beginning and progress
of the work of Reformation.


Edinb. 20. April 1648.
Answers of the Parliament to the desires given in to them by the Commissioners
of the General Assembly, and to the papers given in by them upon the 13 and 18
days of this month.
THe Estates of Parliament having again taken to their consideration the
desires given in to them by the Commissioners of the General Assembly: And
having also considered the papers given in by the said Commissioners upon the
13 and 18 days of this month, do conceive that the Declaration of Parliament
is a full and satisfactory answer to the first eight Desires. As also to the
other two papers in so far as the same are concident with these desires: And as
to the other particulars of their two last papers, concerning the way and time
of sending Propositions to the King.

1. It is answered, That the Parliament conceives the same way is now taken
that has been formerly: And in regard the Parliament of England, have laid
aside these Propositions concerning Religion, and the joint interest of the
Kingdom of Scotland, We are necessitated to make our first applications to
them who must first agree and condescend thereunto before his Majesty's assent
can be demanded: And that it evidently appears by the Declaration, that we
really intend to insist for satisfaction from his Majesty in that that
concerns Religion before all worldly things: And that so soon as his Majesty
shall be in such a condition of freedom, honor, and safety, as his
concessions may be effectual. And as to that prejudice alleged in the
preparative of taking resolutions in that which concerns Religion, without
advice and consent of the Kirk.

2. It is answered, That as we have never hitherto taken any resolutions in
that which concerns Religion without advice of the Kirk: And since, what is
now declared by the Parliament in order to Religion, is not upon any new
grounds, but in pursuance of the same grounds contained in the Covenant, in the
Acts of the General Assembly and Acts of Parliament: And that in our demands
concerning Religion, as the advice of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly has been desired; so we shall never do any thing that may prejudice
the just interest and liberty of the Kirk of Scotland.

And for their desire to be satisfied in the whole matter, It is answered, That
it is clear by the Declaration which contains the grounds and resolutions of
the Parliament on the whole matter, That there is nothing therein which does
cross the demands concerning Religion, or is inconsistent with the security
thereof.

And farther, It is ordained that the Parliament having agreed unto the
Declaration, it be communicated to the Commissioners of the General Assembly
before it be published; and in matters that concerns Religion, that the
Parliament will be ready to hear and consider the advice of the Commissioners
of the Kirk. Extract. out of the books of Parliament, by Sir Alex Gibson of
Dury Knight, Clerk of his Majesty's Registers, Council and Rolls, etc.

Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

Edinb. 25. April 1648.
The humble return of the Commissioners of the General Assembly to the answer
of the Honorable and high Court of Parliament to our 8 Desires, and to our
papers of the 13 and 18 of this Month.
WHereas your Lordships did communicate unto us your large Declaration,
containing principally your Lordships resolutions concerning dangers and duties
relating to Religion, we wish your Lordships had been so tender of the liberty
and due interest of the Genesis Assembly and their Commissioners, as to have
communicated to us a business so highly concerning Religion before, not after
your Lordships resolutions taken therein; And that your Lordships had not given
just cause to so many and so considerable Members of Parliament, who have given
most real and constant testimony of their integrity in this cause, to dissent
from, and protest against your Lordships proceeding to determine a business of
this nature, without consultation with us, and our consent had therein. For our
part, the trust committed to us is so precious, that we may not hold our peace
in such a case, but must freely profess and declare to your Lordships, That
this Act being really a taking from us to your selves, the antecedent judgment
and determination of danger, sand duties, so highly concerning Religion in this
present juncture of affairs; the liberties of the Kirk are so far prejudiced
as could not have entered into our hearts to expect, after so solemn
obligations to preserve and maintain the Doctrine, Discipline, and Government
of the Kirk of Scotland; We therefore protest for the preservation of the
Liberties of this Kirk according to the word of God, Solemn Covenants, former
laws and laudable customs of this Kirk and Kingdom, and that this act of
your Lordships be no preparative for the future Finally that it shall be yet
free unto us, according to the duties of our place, and as there shall be
cause, to give our judgments in an Ecclesiastical way, of the materials of
the said Declaration, so far as Religion is therein concerned, as freely as if
your Lordships had taken no resolution thereupon.

These things being premised, And desiring your Lordships to remember what we
did formerly profess in our late petition, that we never were, nor now are
averse from any Engagement, being first satisfied in the grounds of
undertaking, and in the way of managing the same, We proceed to make our
humble return to your Lordships answer of the 20th of this month to our eight
desires, and our papers of the 13th and 18th of the same month.

Whereas your Lordships conceive that your Declaration communicated unto us, is
a full and satisfactory answer to our eight desires, we must clearly profess
to your Lordships, that we can find no such thing in that Declaration as a
satisfaction to our eight desires, But that we find diverse things in it, which
we humbly conceive to be very prejudicial to these our desires, and of very
dangerous consequence to the Cause of God and the Solemn League and Covenant.
And for the particulars we shall express our sense thereof in a distinct
paper as soon as we can put our thoughts in order, which we hope shall be very
shortly.

As to our other two papers, give us leave to put your Lordships in mind of
some particulars contained therein, which we observe not to be touched, much
less satisfied by your Lordships, either in your answer of the 20th. Or in the
Declaration, as namely.

1. In our paper of the 13th we desired your Lordships seriously to ponder how
you can make the refusal of that demand concerning Religion, a cause of war
against the Parliament of England? with whom this Nation was lately engaged in
a war for defense of the League and Covenant, and the end thereof, when the
King was in Arms against both: And yet engage in a war for the King whilst
he refuses to give satisfaction in that which concerns Religion and the
Covenant, and will come no further at the utmost, then to leave the same
arbitrary: Shall the refusal of one and the same desire, in the Parliament of
England be a cause of war, and yet in the King not so much as an impediment,
to assistance, even whilst we have just cause to fear that he will employ his
power against the Cause and Covenant?

2. Neither do we find any answer to that part of our petition of the 18th
which concerns his Majesty's negative voice, there expressed under the name
of such power as may not only bring the bygon proceedings of both Kingdoms in
the League and Covenant in question, but also for the time to come, make void
all the authority of Parliaments though proceeding never so rightly in
reference to Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms which made us desire your
Lord hips might be far from intere^^ing your selves in any thing that may put
such a power in his Majesty's hands.

3. We have received no answer to that part of the same petition, wherein it
was desired that if any within the three Kingdoms who do not swear and
subscribe the Solemn League and Covenant, rise in Arms, your Lordships will
hold them all for professed Adversaries and Malignants, and endeavor to
suppress them.

4. Nor find we nay thing in your Lordships answer or Declaration, in reference
to that clause of our petition that your Lordships may let His majesty and al
others know that what you intend on his behalf, is with a subordmation to
Religion, and the security thereof.

Some particulars in these two papers your Lordships are pleased to make answer
unto. And first to that which we desired concerning applications to be made to
the Kings Majesty, as well as to the Parliament of England, for satisfaction in
point of Religion, your Lordships answer, That the Parliament conceives the
same way is now taken that has been formerly, which we do not understand to
be so, not having known heretofore such a way of sending demands of this
nature to the Parliament of England, but that the Parliament of England were
always desired to concur with this Kingdom, in the sending of Propositions to
his Majesty, And whatsoever the Houses of Parliament have done in laying aside
diverse of the Propositions concerning Religion, formerly agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, yet we conceive it is still the duty of this Kingdom, to insist
with His Majesty upon their just and laudable desires, for settling the
Reformation and uniformity of Religion according to the Covenant, for the
reasons and ends expressed in our petition And so much the rather because after
so many unsatisfactory answers and messages from his Majesty, we do not expect
a right understanding between His Majesty and his people, till somewhat
proceeds from him toward a clear satisfaction of the just desires of his
people, and especially in point of Religion. And although his Majesty be not
presently in that condition, as that he may make a perfect settlement of
Religion, yet we know not why even in the condition he now is in, there may
not be applications made to him, for obtaining from him security, and assurance
for the settling of Religion according to the Covenant. And whereas your
Lordships by that which follows in your answer, let us know that you suspend
your insisting for satisfaction from his Majesty in Religion, till he shall
be in such a condition of freedom, honor, and safety, as his concessions may
be effectual; To pass the ambiguitie which may be concealed in these last
words, and what concessions are meant, whither His Majesty's future concessions
or those already granted, we do not think this delay safe, neither can we
know how long it may be. Withal this clause gives some light to that part of
your Lordships Declaration, For His Majesty's coming with honor, freedom and
safety, to some of his houses in or near London; This honor, freedom and
safety being conceived by your Lordships to be such as may enable His Majesty
to effectuate his concessions concerning Religion, appears to us to be no
less, then a restoring of His Majesty to the exercise of his royal power,
without security first had from him for settling Religion.

The second part of your Lordships answer, we humbly conceive does rather
confirm then satisfy our just complaint concerning resolutions taken by your
Lordships in matters of Religion, without the advice and consent of the Kirk.
For when your Lordships say that what is now Declared by the Parliament in
order to Religion, is not upon any new grounds, but in pursuance of the same
grounds contained in the Covenant and in the acts of the General Assembly yea,
that in your Lordshps demand concerning Religion, our advise was desired; All
this adds to our just grievance, intimating to us, that your Lordships
interpret the Covenant and acts of the General Assembly, otherwise then we do;
forwe cannot conceive how your Lo: Declarat agrees with the grounds of the
Covenant, and acts of the General Assembly but that it goes upon new grounds,
not contained in them. It is true, our advise was desired in that demand
concerning Religion, but it was also true that the demand was resolved upon by
your Lordships before our advise was desired, and that the answer and advise
returned from us has not found good acceptance, neither have your Lordships
proceeded according to the same. And whereas your Lordships say, that as you
have never hitherto taken any resolutions in that which concerns Religion,
without advice from the Kirk (and here give instance in those particulars
complained of by us) so you shall never do any thing that may prejudice this
just interest and liberty of the Kirk of Scotland: As we shall not call to
mind all that is past, so that which is here expressed by your Lordships, does
yet further add unto our grievance, for to parallel and proportion the measure
which we may expect for the future, with that which we have in these late
passages received from your Lordships, cannot but leave us under just fears
and sad apprehensions.

The third part of your Lordships answer is in reference to our desire of being
satisfied upon the whole matter; where your Lordships again refer us to the
Declaration, as containing the grounds and resolutions of the Parliament on the
whole matter. This we are not able to reconcile with that passage in the
Declaration where your Lordships profess, That you are resolved not to engage
in any War before the necessity and lawfulness thereof be cleared, so as all
who are well affected may be satisfied therewith, and that reparation to such
breaches or injuries as are or shall be condescended on, shall be demanded in
such a just and fit way as shall be found most lawful and expedient. The one
passage holds forth to us satisfaction on the whole matter, the other holds
us still in suspense till the necessity and lawfulness of the War be
cleared, and the way of demanding reparation resolved upon; for that your
Lordships are pleased to say in the end, that it is clear by the Declaration,
that there is nothing therein which does cross the demands concerning
Religion, or is inconsistent with the security thereof; what reason we have to
be of another judgment shall appear to your Lordships in our paper, which we
are to present to your Lordships concerning the Declaration, unto which we
refer our selves concerning our sense of other particulars in this business
not here expressed.

A. Ker

The humble Representation of the Commission of the General Assembly: To the
Honorable Estates of Parliament, upon their Declaration lately communicated to
us. Edinburgh 28. April 1648.
Seeing your Lordships have been pleased in your Answer to us of the twenty of
this Month to remit us to your Declaration to the Kingdom, for satisfaction
to our eight desires formerly presented to your Lordships, as likewise to our
other desire concerning applications to be made to the King, as well as to the
Parliament of England; And seeing your Lordships in the same Paper answering
our desire to be satisfied in the whole matter, were pleased again to remit us
to the Declaration, as containing the grounds and resolutions of the Parliament
on the whole matter. We have therefore taken to our serious consideration your
Lordships Declaration, to look after satisfactory answers to these our desires,
and to be satisfied in the whole matter: But in stead thereof, our fears and
dis-satisfactions are not a little increased by your Lordships Declaration. We
shall not search into some particulars in matter of fact, mentioned in the
narrative part, neither shall we be curious after the reason, why in so large a
Declaration concerning public dangers, duties, and remedies. There is no
expression for preservation of Monarchical Government in his Majesty's
Posterity, as well as in his own person.

To the Preface we shall only say thus much, that we could have wished your
Lordships had been pleased to express your selves more plainly, who are those
obstructers and traducers of your Lordships proceedings: those deceivers and
abusers of the people, which your Lordships (we suppose) point at in reference
to this Kingdom, the Declaration being intended for the Subjects of this
Kingdom, whom your Lordships call the abused people; If your Lordships meaning
be, that the People are abused by the lies and calumnies of Malignants, how
comes it that so much favor and forbearance is granted to such men? If any
other then the Malignant party in the Kingdom be meant, we should be glad they
were made known.

In the first part of the narrative, concerning the necessity, occasion, and
consequence of the conjunction of both Kingdoms, We cannot but take notice of
that which your Lordships say of those common enemies, by whose counsels and
practices the composing of differences in the beginning was hindered, and what
evils this Kingdom might have expected, if these counsels and advices which
gave first life and motion to these dissentions, should have been still
prevalent, We desire it may not be forgotten who were these common enemies, and
whose counsel it was that did prevail about his Majesty in the beginning of
these troubles, and whether there ought not to be a jealous and watchful eye
over any such, if even after their joining in the Covenant they be found in a
way of compliance with known Malignants and in a way of opposition to such as
have been most active and zealous in the Cause from the beginning.

Your Lordships add, that in pursuance of the Covenant, this Kingdom joined
in Arms with their Brethren of England, and did prosecute these ends, till
their common enemies were subdued, and most of them brought to such condign
punishment, as the respective Parliaments thought fit. We shall here pass your
Lordships omitting of the Treaty between the Kingdoms, which may be thought
to have had a near and immediate influence in reference to the conjunction of
these Kingdoms in Arms, although the Covenant was the chief foundation
thereof: But whereas your Lordships seem to intimate that the cloud of
Malignancy was then sufficiently dissipated, or at least, that the Covenant was
sufficiently performed in bringing Delinquents to such condign punishment as
the respective parliaments thought fit; We are sorry that we have cause to
remember what forbearance, yea, favor and friendship has been granted to many
such: and we are so far from thinking the danger from these former common
enemies past and gone, that we still see Malignancy upon the one hand, as
Sectarisme upon the other springing up like roots of bitterness to trouble,
yea, to defile many in these Kingdoms, these are the horns which yet push
Judah and Jerusalem on both sides, the Lord prepare such Carpenters as may cut
off both the one and the other.

As for the breaches of Covenant which your Lordships insist upon in the
following part of your narrative, we wish your Lordships to remember a passage
in the Declaration of the General Assembly, and how cautiously they speak of
the breach of Covenant in England; the words are these, We would not be
understood as if we meant either to justify this Nation, or to charge such a
sin upon all in that Nation; We know the Covenant has been in diverse
particulars broken by many in both Kingdoms; (The Lord pardon it, and accept a
sacrifice) and we do not doubt but there are many seven thousands in England,
who have not only kept themselves unspotted, and retained their integrity in
that business, etc. That the Covenant has been foully and shameful broken by
as many of the prevalent party of Sectaries and their adherents, as ever took
the Covenant, is clear and undeniable, and by their means has come the
resisting and hindering of Reformation, connivance at Heresy and Schism, and
other things contrary to the Covenant. But it can as little be doubted of, that
there are dangerous breaches of Covenant by Malignants, both at home and
abroad; And your Lordships know, true zeal, against breach of Covenant should
strike equally on both hands, beginning to reform at home. Your Lordships say
well, that the not takers of the Covenant are by the joint Declaration of both
Kingdoms declared to be public enemies to Religion and Country, and are to
be punished as professed Adversaries and Malignants: but we wish your Lordships
may not forget to apply that passage of the said Declaration to those who have
not to this day taken the Covenant in England, and that therefore, they may be
looked upon by your Lordships as common enemies, which ought to be suppressed
and punished.

The laying aside of the Covenant out of the new Propositions sent to his
Majesty to the Isle of Wight we utterly disapprove, and are heartily sorry for
it; but we wish there had not been some guiltiness of this same kind at
home, when it was carried in the Committee of Estates, that there should be no
mention of the Covenant in the public desires sent up in August last to his
Majesty. And whereas your Lordships do enumerate amongst these breaches of
Covenant, That they who ought to be brought to trial and condign punishment
for hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People,
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or party among the
People, contrary to the League and Covenant, have been protected and assisted;
We shall here only desire your Lordships to remember, that all this is true of
Malignants, as well as of Sectaries: and for our part, (whatsoever liberty
there be in the manner or circumstances) we do not doubt, but the thing it
self is necessary, both by the Word of God, and Solemn Covenant, viz. That
justice be done, and condign punishments inflicted on all hinderers of
Reformation and Peace, and all who make factions, contrary to the Covenant,
whether they be Sectaries or Malignants: But if it was sufficient that the most
part of the Malignants were brought to such condign punishment, as the
respective Parliaments thought fit, which your Lordships gave us a touch of in
the precedent part of your narrative, we leave it to your Lordships
consideration, whether you do not hereby furnish such a retortion to those
that favor the Sectaries in England, as that they may plead from that
principle in your Lordships declaration, that the punishment of Sectaries is to
be referred simply to the Parliament of England, as they think fit, and that
your Lordships must allow them the same latitude of favor toward the
Sectaries, as before you have allowed both to your selves and them, toward the
Malignants. Your Lordships add as another breach of Covenant, that in stead of
a firm Union and Peace between the Kingdoms, a breach has been endeavored,
which cannot be denied to be a breach of Covenant, and therefore a rock to be
the more carefully avoided; It is our grief that there is also cause to
complain of the Malignant party at home, as no less guilty of endeavoring a
breach between the Kingdoms.

The attempts, injuries, and violences of that party of Sectaries against his
Majesty's Royal Person, and the hard condition he is reduced unto by their
means, we are very sensible of: And, as we have often before professed, our
prayers and endeavors according to our place and calling, have not been,
neither shall be wanting for the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
authority, in the preservation of the true Religion, and liberties of the
Kingdoms: And we leave it to be pondered by your Lordships, whether they that
obstruct and hinder the requiring of satisfaction and security from his
Majesty, in point of Religion, before his restitution to the exercise of his
Royal Power, do not upon the matter, and by consequence obstruct and hinder
his Majesty's deliverance and restitution, whereof such security and assurance
had from his Majesty, might be a powerful and effectual means.

As we know not whom your Lordships mean when you speak of such, as had
warrant from the Parliament of this Kingdom, for access to his Majesty, and
yet were debarred, and as no violence nor injury offered to a public Minister
of another Kingdom can be excused; so we are informed, that the Soldiers Act
in removing once the Earl of Lauderdale from Wooburne, was not only
disclaimed, but his Lordship often thereafter permitted free access to his
Majesty.

Your Lordships insist upon three instances of the breach of Treaties, one of
the large Treaty, and two other breaches of the Treaty, 1643. As to the first,
(which for orders sake we begin at) We cannot say that it hold forth any
convincing clearness to us; Yea so far as we understand, the thing whereunto
the Kingdom of England was bound by the Treaty, was not insisted upon by the
Commissioners of this Kingdom at London, but an alternative, for assistance
against the Rebels by Forces or Moneys: After which the Parliament of this
Kingdom made a desire of assistance by moneys, which the Parliament of England
promised to take into their consideration; And seeing your Lordships in this
same Declaration wave breaches of Treaty, in Money-matters, even where the
Money was due by Treaty, We hope your Lordships will find it the more
inexpedient to insist upon the not obtaining of that assistance by moneys
against the rebels, being a way not provided by the Treaty.

Concerning the other two breaches which pitch upon the Treaty 1643. First,
your Lordships say, that according to the first article of that Treaty, the
Covenant should have been taken by both Kingdoms, but that now by the
prevalent party of Sectaries and their adherents, it is not only laid aside in
the new Propositions, and no execution of public orders for taking it
throughout the Country, but many in places of trust have never taken it,
neither are urged to take it. Certainly such slieghting of the Covenant is a
great sin against God, and a high contempt of the Covenant; And it is very fit
that this Kingdom should desire the Parliament of England to press it, not
only upon persons of trust, but universally on all the Subjects of that
Kingdom; yet we are not convinced of any just ground of War against that
Kingdom, in that which has been instanced by your Lordships, especially
considering that the Covenant was taken by the Representatives, and other
chief corporations in, England, whereupon both the General Assembly, and the
Parliament of this Kingdom have frequently mentioned in their Acts, Letters,
and Declarations, the Union and conjunction of both Kingdoms by Solemn
Covenant: neither are we without hopes, if things be carried on in a fair and
right way, that the Kingdom of England may be brought a further length in the
performance of this duty; Whereof we are the more confident, because of the
famous and frequent testimonies given to the Covenant, and against the errors
of the time, by the Ministry in diverse Provinces in England. As for the last
breach, which your Lordships conceive to be against the eighth Article of the
same Treaty, 1643. We heartily wish, that the joint way of applications to the
King by both Kingdoms once begun, had been continued, and do conceive very
much prejudice to the Cause by the divided way: only, we offer it to your
Lordships further consideration whether this breach be not at least disputable,
there being no mention at all in that Article of Proposalls, Propositions, or
Bills, but only of Cessation, Pacification, and agreement for Peace; so that it
may justly be doubted whether the sending of those Proposalls and Bills to the
King without the consent of this Kingdom, has in it that certainty and
clearness of a breach of Treaty between the Kingdoms, as may be a ground of
War: And if it be a breach of the Treaty for either Kingdom singly and
dividedly to send Propositions to his Majesty, We shall crave leave that we may
desire to to in formed, how this consists with that latitude which your
lordships leave afterward in this same Declaration in the manner of presenting
Bills or Acts of Parliament to the King, for your Lordships desire assurance of
his Majesty to agree to such Acts or Bills as shall be presented unto him by
his Parliaments of both or either Kingdoms, respecitive. We might also insist
upon some Papers and Propositions presented to his Maj. from this Kingdom at
Newcastle, and much more upon the Pacification concluded there, with his
Majesty, in reference to the disbanding and removing of the Rebels in this
Kingdom, and that in a single way (as we conceive) without the knowledge, and
concurrence of the Parliament of England.

But we shall come to that which your Lordships make the result upon all these
breaches of Covenant and Treaties, viz. That they call upon your Lordships to a
duty to GOD, your King and Country, and to your oppressed Brethren in England,
which your Lordships speak more plainly in the next Clause, giving us to
understand, that those differences or breaches are such, as if not repaired by
amicable endeavors, may otherwise necessitate this Kingdom to engage in a
war, but that first your Lordships intend to send the three desires (next
mentioned in the Declaration) to the Parliament of England: And this is all the
satisfaction we find to our second desire, which was, That according to the
Treaties it may be condescended upon, and Declared by the Parliament, what are
those breaches of Peace, which they take to be a ground of War, and that
reparation thereof may be sought. But as we see no breach of Peace instanced
in the Declaration, and as the three breaches of Treaties insisted upon by your
Lordships, seem to be at least debatable; So we hear nothing of any
resolution of parliament, that such breaches as are, or shall be condescended
upon by your Lordships, shall be made known and sent to the Parliament of
England, as we expected, and they have desired, by their Commissioners here;
Only we hear of three desires to be sent to the Parliament of England for
Religion, His Majesty, and the Good and Peace of these Kingdoms: We conceive
its the best and most justificable way of proceeding, that public, as well as
private injuries be declared and made known to those whom it concerns to
give satisfaction therein. Besides all this, we fear your Lordships will hardly
avoid a National quarrel against the Parliament of England, if the three
instances before mentioned be insisted upon as breaches of Treaty to infer a
War; because when the Houses were most free, and when there was no such
overawing influence of the Sectaries party, even then they did not suppress
the Irishes in this Kingdom, they did not enforce the Covenant on all their
Officers, much less on all English Subjects, neither would they then admit
that they were obliged by Treaty, not to send Propositions of Bills to the
King, without the concurrence of this Kingdom.

In all this that we have said, it is far from our meaning to assume any
judgment of the Treaties between the Kingdoms; Only because your Lordships
have remitted us to the Declaration, for satisfaction to our consciences, as in
other particulars, so in this of the breaches, We have humbly represented to
your Lordships, wherein we are not clear and satisfied in our consciences, to
consent and concur for our part upon such grounds. And withal, seeing it is
not only our desire as Messengers of peace, but your Lordships professed
resolution in this Declaration, that you will assay all Brotherly and amicable
ways for repairing differences and making up breaches, We recommend it to your
Lordships serious thoughts, whether it will not be most agreeable to that
Brotherly way of proceeding between two Kingdoms in Covenant together, to
desire a Treaty with the Parliament of England, concerning the breaches and
demands mentioned in this your Declaration, Especially seeing the way of Treaty
was the way thought fit to be used in the years 1639. and 1640. before the
Kingdoms were joined in Covenant; How much more now, being so conjoined, are
all possible and lawful ways to be tried, for preventing the effusion of
more blood.

In your Lordships first demand which concerns Religion, there are some
things wherewith we cannot in our consciences be satisfied, as namely, 1.
Because the first two particulars, therein contained, viz. concerning the
taking of the Covenant, and practicing of the Directory of Worship, are pressed
only upon Subjects, which may be interpreted as tending to exempt the Kings
Majesty, not only from taking the Covenant, (which yet was laudably desired in
the Propositions of both Kingd.) but from having the Directory of worship
practiced in his family, which was a liberty that his Majesty reserved to
himself in his late Concessions sent to us, and in diverse messages before
sent to the Houses of Parliament at Westminster. 2. We find nothing in this demand of
any application to be made at, or about the same time to the King for obtaining
assurance from his Majesty for his Royal consent; But of this we have
expressed our selves more fully in answer to your Lordships Paper of the
twentieth of this month. 3. Although this is the second time your Lordships
cite in this Declaration a passage of the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms,
by which all that would not take the Covenant were declared to be public
enemies to their Religion and Country, and that they are to be censured and
punished as professed Adversaries and Malignants; yet we find no such thing
declared or resolved by your Lordships in this Declaration, in reference to
those who have not to this day taken the Covenant, as that you will hold them
all for professed Adversaries and Malignants. We hope your Lordships will not
think it just nor equal to press such a rule upon the Parliament of England,
except your Lordships be pleased to walk according to that rule your selves. 4.
Your Lordships do simply and absolutely desire, that the Confession of Faith
transmitted from the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, to the Houses, be
approven; whereas the Act of the last General Assembly, approving that
Confession of Faith has in it some necessary cautions, provisoes, and
explanations; which as the General Assembly judged necessary to be added in
their Act, so we do not think that part of your Lordships demand as it stands
without any such caution to be safe enough: which among other things shows the
danger and inconvenience of your Lordships taking resolutions in things
concerning Religion without our advice and consent. 5. As we desire that
Reformation of, and Uniformity in Religion, may be endeavored by your
Lordships in all fair, lawful, and brotherly ways according to the Covenant,
and heartily approve any such desire as your Lordships shall send to the
Parliament of England, by the advice and consent of this Kirk, for in joining
the Covenant, and for bringing the Churches of CHRIST in the three Kingdoms to
the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in one Confession of Faith; Directory of
Worship, and Presbyteriall Government; So we would be very cautious, and tender
when such desires are turned into causes of War, if not obtained, which is the
present case, as we understand by your Lordships expression in the precedent
Paragraph.

Your Lordships second demand is, That the Kings Majesty may come to some of
his Houses in or near London, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, that
applications may he made to him by Parliaments of both Kingdoms for attaining
his Royal assent to such desires as shall be by them presented to him for
establishing Religion as is above expressed, and settling a well-grounded Peace.

This demand we conceive to be of dangerous consequence to Religion and the
Covenant for the reasons and considerations following, which we humbly offer to
be considered by your Lordships, 1. All applications and desires to his Majesty
for Religion are suspended till he come with Honor, Fredome and safty to some
of his Houses, in, or near London; We know not what length of time this may
draw to, or how much danger there may be in the delay 2. The establishing of
Religion here mentioned, as that which your Lordships intend to desire of his
Majesty, is according to that which is above expressed, where we doubt not
your Lordships refer to your first demand which went before; Whereas the
establishing of Religion in such a manner as is there expressed, we do not
think safe, for the reasons before given. 3. We conceive that this second
demand amounts to no less then the restitution of his Majesty to the exercise
of his Royal Power before Applications made, and desires presented to him,
much more before assurance and security had from him, for the settling of
Religion in the right manner, and according to the Covenant. For besides what
we have expressed in our last Paper presented to your Lordships that this
honor, freedom, and safety is conceived by your Lordships to be such, as may
enable his Majesty to effectuat his Concessions concerning Religion; And what
is that less then the exercise of his Royal power restored? This we further
add, that we humbly conceive, his Majesty's Honor may comprehend, or may be
made use of as comprehending, not only the possession of his Revenews, but also
the exercise of his Royal Government; Next, being in freedom, he may repare
to any part of his Dominions in Scotland, England or Ireland; And lastly, being
restored to be in a condition of safety, he may provide Forces for guarding
Himself against all apprehended dangers, for if Guards should be set about
him, by his Parliament, it will be said to be contrary to the condition of
freedom; So that bring restored to some of his Houses, in, or near London,
with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, We do not conceive what he shall want of the
exercise of his Royal Power Considering withal, that neither himself, nor
any others will conceive the Honor, Freedom and Safety to be Kingly, and such
as becomes his Royal Person, if he shall want the exercise of his Royal
Power: Yet this restitution of his Majesty to the exercise of his Royal Power,
before security had from him for settling Religion, Your Lordships know by our
eight Desires, and other ways, is conceived by us to be inconsistent with the
safety and security of Religion. 4. If his Majesty were once come with Honor,
Freedom and Safety to some of his Houses, in, or near London, We know not what
influences he may have upon the Houses of Parliament to obstruct and hinder
their presenting of Bills to Him, for enjoining the Covenant, abolishing
Prelacy, and the Book of Common Prayer, Establishing the Confession of Faith,
Directory of Worship, and Presbyteriall Government; Or what strength his
Majesty so restored may again attain by the assistance of the Popish,
Prelaticall, and Malignant party, for a new and bloody War, to the
devastation of these Kingdoms, and the ruin of our Religion and Liberties.
Which things we have the more cause to fear and apprehend, his Majesty having
declared and professed, that he is obliged in conscience to improve all the
power which God shall put in his hands, for the establishment of Episcopacy. 5.
To insist upon the bringing of his Majesty to some of his Houses, in, or near
London, before satisfaction and security had from him in point of Religion, and
in such other things as are necessary for the safety of the Kingdoms, could not
as we conceive but be an exceeding great discouragement and offense to the
Presbyterians in England, who will conceive (if such a thing be pressed upon
them) that the remedy propounded in your demand is worse then the disease. And
we have also heard, that the Parl. of England, when they were as free as ever
they were, would never agree to his Majesty's coming to London, with honor,
freedom, and safety, without security first had from him in such things as are
necessary for Religion, and the safety of the Kingdom. 6. Seeing your
Lordships are obliged by the third Article of the Covenant, to defend his
Majesty's Person and Authority, in the perservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; We conceive your Lordships should not
demand from, nor press upon the Kingdom of England, His Majesty's restitution
with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, except with that qualification in the
Covenant, and with a subordination to Religion and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, And how can this subordination according to the Covenant be said to
be observed in your Lordsh. demand as it stands; for, if His Majesty be brought
to some of His Houses, inor near London, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety,
before so much as applications be made to Him for establishing Religion and
Peace, we then leave it to your Lordships consciences, whether His Majesty
shall not be restored to His Honor, before Jesus Christ be restored to his
Honor, and set upon his Throne of Government in His Church: whether His
Majesty shall not be in a condition of Liberty before the Ordinances of Christ
have a free course, and whether His Majesty's safety shall not be provided for
and secured; before either Church, or Kingdom can say they are in a condition
of safety. And is this to endeavor the settling of Religion before all worldly
interests, or rather to make it come after the Kings interest? 7. We fear that
if after so many instructions from the Parliament. Convention, and Committee of
Estates to their Commissioners at London, from time to time, for endeavoring
in the first place the settlement of Religion, and then to endeavor the
removing of the Civil differences, and the restitution of the King, upon his
first giving satisfaction in Religion and the grounds of a solid Peace; And if
after it was declared by this Kingdom, (during His Majesty's being at
Newcastle,) that they could not admit of his Majesty's coming to Scotland in
freedom, unless his Majesty granted the Proposition concerning the Covenant
and Religion, and gave a satisfactory Answer to the rest of the Propositions;
Likewise, if after such a Declaration of the Parliament of this Kingdom,
January 16, 1647, for his Majesty's being in some of his Houses, with such
attendance as the two Houses should think fit, until He give satisfaction in
the Propositions; If after all this it be now insisted upon, that his Majesty
may be restored with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, before such satisfaction had
from Him, we fear it shall lie as a great scandal upon this Kingdom, and as
too sensible and apparent a change of their former principles and professions
in a point so much concerning the security of Religion. 8. We are very
apprehensive, that your Lordships urging the disposal of the Kings Person in
England, in such a way as that he may come to London with Honor, Freedom, and
Safety, without his Majesty's giving or your Lordships desiring his Majesty to
give satisfaction and security in Religion, and in such things as belong to the
safety of the Kingdom (without which there can be no lasting security expected
to Religion.) At it is a far different point from the urging of a joint
interest in the disposing of the Kings Person by both Kingdoms for the good of
both, so it will be fudged by most of all parties in England, that ever
concurred in this Cause, to be so prejudicial to their National Rights and
Liberties, and such an enchroachment thereupon (though your Lordships declare
you have no such intention) as that it will unite them all in opposition to
this Kingdom, and consequently alienate them from the intended Uniformity in
Religion, according to the Covenant. As these reasons make us conceive your
Lordships second demand to import no small danger to Religion, So we would not
be understood as if we had any thoughts to decline the restoring of his Majesty
to the same condition he was in, by the agreement of both Kingdoms. when he
was taken away by a party of the Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
that both Kingdoms may freely make their applications to him.

Concerning your Lordships third demand, That the present Army of Sectaries may
be disbanded, for the ends expressed in the demand, As we think no persons what
soever fit to be employed or entrusted in the Armies of either Kingdom, who
have not taken the Covenant, and that all Sectaries in England that are in Arms
should be disbanded and disarmed, So we conceive there is also reason for your
Lordships to foresee and provide against the danger of the rising again of the
Popish Prelatical and Malignant party in arms, and therther, because of the
late commotions begun by some of them both in England and Ireland; There being
also some both in Wales and Ireland actually in arms, who have discovered and
declared their principles and ends to be very Malignant; wherein we are
informed they are the more animated and encouraged upon confidence of some
agreement between his Majesty and this Kingdom. It is further to be
considered, that this Demand being joined with the second, the present Army in
England disbanded, and his Majesty brought to London with Honor, Freedom and
Safety, how easily may all the Malignant, Popish and Prelaticall party in his
Majesty's Dominions flock unto him? Which how prejudicial it may be, his
Majesty keeping still his principles, is easy to be judged.

As for the exceptions added in your Lordships demand, to pass the ambiguity
thereof, your Lordships except from the laid disbanding the Garrisons necessary
to be kept in England, and desire that these Garrisons may be commanded by such
as have or shall take the Covenant, and are well-affected to Religion and
Government, but do not desire any such thing concerning the Garrisons
themselves; which may be understood as a tacit confession on your part, that
all the Garrisons to be kept in England may be of such as have not taken nor
shall take the Covenant, nor are well affected to Religion and Government,
provided that those Garrisons be commanded by such as your Lordships describe.

We have but one point more to add, concerning this third and last demand: For
we cannot conceal our fears and apprehensions, that your present resolutions
and proceedings, and the entertainment of English Soldiers, whereof many are
Papists and Malignants, and some eminent in Malignancie, is not the way to
further, but to retard and hinder the disbanding of the present Army in
England, and to frustrate the ends your Lordships propose in your Declaration
for the disbanding of that Army.

And whereas your Lordships declare, that it is not your intention at all, to
make a National engagement against the Parliament and Kingdom of England, but
for them; as we shall not presume to speak of the National Rights and
Privileges of another Kingdom, So we cannot see how the principles of your
Lordships Declaration can consist with the first part of our third Desire,
which was, That there may be no such quarrel or ground of the Wa^re as may
break the Union between the Kingdoms; for we conceive there are diverse such
quarrels in the Declaration as fall directly and necessarly upon the votes and
proceedings of the Houses of Parliament, even when they were most free.

Concerning that which your Lordships add in reference to the latter part of
our third desire, and to out whole fourth desire, We humbly conceive, it is
very far short of that which is no less your Lordships duty then our desire;
for, 1. Your Lordships only declare Association and Conjunction of Forces with
those who shall refuse to swear and subscribe the Covenant, which does not
exclude Association of Forces with such as neither have taken, nor shall take
the Covenant, so that they be not urged thereto, and so not nerckoned among
refusers. This we have the more reason to take notice of, because your
Lordships have before in this same Declaration complained that there is no
urging of the Covenant in England, nor no execution of public Orders for
taking of the same. Which being so; how shall your Lordships find the
Malignants in England to be refusers of the Covenant, except your Lordships
enforce it upon them, which we suppose your Lordships intend not to do? 2. Your
Lordships do not declare, that if any who have not taken, and shall not take
the Covenant, nay not so much as they that shall refuse the Covenant, if they
rise in Arms, your Lordships will oppose them, and endeavor to suppress
them, only your Lordships say, you will not associate nor join forces with
them. 3. Whereas your Lordships say, That you will be so far from joining or
associating with the Popish Prelaticall, or Malignant party, if they shall
again rise in Arms, either to oppose or obstruct all or any one of the ends of
the Covenant, that you will oppose and endeavor to suppress them as enemies
to the Cause and Covenant; We beseech your Lordships to consider, whether this
part of your Declaration does not reserve a latitude, that if the Popish,
Prelaticall, or Malignant party shall rise in Arms for the Kings restitution,
and can but have so much cunning (with is more nor probable) as to conceal
their intentions of obstructing or opposing all, or any one of the ends of the
Covenant, in such a case it may be free to your Lordships instead of opposing
or endeavoring to suppress them, that you shall both protect their persons
and estates, and also join or associate Forces with them. In all which we have
the more cause to be full of fears and apprehensions, because of so many
English Malignants, even now protected and entertained in this Kingdom, in
hopes of military employments, yea diverse of them (as we are informed) such as
have served against this Cause and Covent.

As to that which sollowes relating to our seventh desire, concerning such as
are to be entrusted in Armies and Committees, we shall need to say no more then
was expressed in our humble representation, March 29. Namely, that your
Lordships omit in your Answer some of the qualifications expressed in our
desire, viz. such as have given constant proof of their integrity and
faithfulness in the Cause, and against whom there is no just cause of
jealousy, that so we may the more confidently encourage our Flocks to follow
the Cause of God in their hands, and not to doubt of their fidelity; Which
qualification being contained in our desire, and omitted in your Lordships
Answer, we are not without fears, that this omission may be made use of by
some, as if your Lordships had not meant to agree sully to that desire, and so
take occasion to deal for employing and entrusting such in the Committees and
Armies, as may be justly excluded by the qualifications contained in our said
desire.

These things having been before presented to your Lordships, and there being
nothing in your Lordships Declaration to satisfy or take off these our fears,
but such expressions insisted upon as keep aloof from the qualifications
desired by us, all that are unbyased, may easily judge whether we have not
herein some real ground to be unsatisfied.

That which follows in the said Declaration concerning the rescuing of his
Majesty's Person, that He may come with Honor Freedom, and safety to, or near
London where both Kingdoms may make their applications to him, for settling
Religion and Peace, we have before spoken fully to it. And whereas your
Lordships add a kind of Salvo in satisfaction to our fifth and sixth desires,
it will plainly appear that these desires are not satisfied by any thing here
expressed in your Lordships Declaration. Your Lordships say, You resolve not to
put in His Majesty's Hands or in any others whatsoever, any such power whereby
any of the ends of the Covenant may be obstructed or opposed: But may it please
your Lordships to give us leave to put your in mind, 1. That your Lordships
words may be understood, either in this sense, that you are not resolved to put
any such power in His Majesty's Hands, And if so, your Lordships know; what you
resolve not now, you may resolve afterward; Or in this sense, that your
Lordships are resolved that your shall put no such power in His Majesty's
Hands, and if so, then there remains some doubt how far that power extends,
which your Lordships conceive shall not be able to obstruct or oppose any of
the ends of the Covenant, or endanger Religion and Presbyteriall Government; Or
whether it be meant to be extended to his Majesty's negative voice. 2. When
your Lordships say, that you are not resolved to put any such power in His
Majesty's Hands, this needs not hinder your Lordships yielding and
acquiescing if others put such power in His Majesty's Hands; For resolutions,
not to do a thing, may stand with resolutions nor to hinder it. 3. When your
Lordships have resolved to oppose the putting of any such power in his Majestis
Hands, as may be destructive to Religion; Yet upon supposition, that His Ma
jestie is come to London with Honor, Freedom and Safety, we doubt, whether it
may not prove impossible to your Lordships to hinder the putting often such a
power in His Majesty's Hands.

Your Lordships add what assurance you intend to crave from His Majesty for
satisfaction in point of Religion; But withal, we observe three limitations or
qualifications joined therewith, which (so far as we are able to judge) leave
this great point in a very dangerous uncertainty. 1. Your Lordships resolve,
that his Majesty give this assurance for Religion, before any agreement or
condition to be made with His Majesty, which is the expression chosen by your
Lordships instead of that clause in our sixth desire, Before his restitution to
the exercise of his Royal Power. If your Lordships expression were only a more
smooth one, with the like security to Religion, (such as your Lordships Answer
March 27. did put us in hopes of) we should have chearefully acquiesced: but we
are so far from perceiving the like securite to Religion that we rather fear
your Lordships qualification may make void and firustrate the security that we
desired. For first, It clearly supposes, that his Majesty shall come with
Honor Freedom, and safety to London, before any agreement or condition to be
made with Him; For such agreement or condition to be made with his Majesty
being posterior to the assurance to be had from Him for Religion, must be much
more posterior to his Majesty's coming to, or near London with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety according to the method of proceedings proposed in the
Declaration; Now being once at London, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, and
that without any agreement or condition made with Him, it is not probable to
us, that his Majesty will then desire any agreement or condition, unless it be
for some Concessions on his Parliaments part, and among other Concessions
probably somewhat for Episcopacy too, for establishing whereof, He conceives
Himself obliged in conscience to make use of His Power as was before observed.
The result of this point that we humbly conceive is, that notwithstanding of
that clause, before any agreement or condition to be made with his Majesty, or
any thing else in the Declaration, His Majesty may be restored to the exercise
of His Royal Power before security had from Him for Religion as we desired.

The next qualification added by your Lordships, immediately is in these words,
having found His late Concessions and offers concerning Religion not
satisfactory; where first, the words having found, may be variously understood,
either, when His Majesty shall have found, or, when your Lordships shall have
found, or, because His Majesty has found, or because your Lordships have found.

Next, the words, not satisfactory, are as doubtful, and may be interpreted in
several sense, either that His Majesty's late Concessions and Offers
concerning Religion, are not satisfactory in themselves, or, that they are
neither satisfactory to your Lordships nor to us, or the meaning may be only,
that they are not satisfactory to us. Which doubtfulnesse in the sense of the
words we have more cause to observe, because your Lordships have not hitherto
returned us any clear or positive answer to our fifth desire; That his
Majesty's late Concessions and Offers concerning Religion, as they have been by
the Church so may be by the Parliament declared unsatisfactory; Only your
Lordships, are pleased here to make a light transition over that which we
conceived to be unto us a grave Subject of a Solemn Declaration.

The third qualification in the assurance to be required from his Majesty, is,
that he shall agree to such act or acts of Parliament, and Bills, as shall be
presented unto Him by His Parliaments of both or either Kingdoms respectively
for enjoining the Covenant, and establishing the Presbyteriall Government,
Directory of Worship and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's Dominions.
But we humbly conceive, it were more for the Glory of God, good of Religion and
his Majesty's own happiness, that his Majesty should after the example of the
Godly reforming Kings of Judah, and of the best Christian Emperors of old in
the Christian Church, Declare his own zeal and forwardness for the Reformation
and settling Religion, and that your Lordships should do well to solicit and
incite his Majesty hereunto, rather then to seem to yield so far as that his
Majesty shall be free for his part, till his Parliaments of both or either
Kingdoms respectively agree what acts or Bills to present to him; The
preparing and presenting whereof, how much it may be retarded and obstructed by
the prevalency both of Malignants and Sectaries, we know not: seeing therefore
His Majesty owes a duty does to God and to his people for the Reformation and
settlement of Religion, your Lordships may do better to solicit his Majesty,
and to desire that he will positively declare himself willing and ready for his
part and for that duty which is incumbent to his Majesty, and that he give
assurance for the same in the particulars. Your Lordships further declare in
reference to our eighth and last desire, that you are willing to subjoyn to the
grounds of your undertaking an Oath, wherein both in the framing thereof and
otherwise your Lordships are willing the Church shall have their due interest
as formerly in the like cases. Where, as we know not how far your Lordships
meaning does reach in the word other ways, and in the word due; so we know not
why your Lordships did not think fit to agree to our desire as it was
conceived, and the words stood, viz, that there may be no engagement without a
solemn Oath, wherein the Kirk may have the same interest which they had in the
Solemn League and Covenant; which desire is so far unsatisfied, that for our
interest in the matter of the Oath, and in the grounds of the undertaking, we
do not see it allowed or preserxed to us, but rather that the Declaration
holds forth the grounds of the undertaking already resolved upon by your
Lordships; only leaving us an interest in the form of an Oath to be subjoyned,
and that not without some uncertain and dubious qualifications, as has been
touched. Mean while we see only a Declaration without an Oath; and as
Declarations are alterable by Parliaments, and their proceedings sometimes not
agreeable to their Declarations (which he experience of these times has taught
us) so if there were an Oath subjoined to the grounds of undertaking expressed
in this Declaration, we could not account it a lawful Oath, but that it would
make the business worse.

Your Lordships add somewhat further, relating to the matter of our first and
second desires, namely, that your Lordships are resolved not to engage in any
War before the necessity and lawfulness thereof be cleared, so as all who are
well affected may be satisfied therewith, and that reparation to such bpeaches
and injurics as are or shall be condescended upon, shall be demanded in such a
just ane fit way, as shall be found most lawful and expedient. This clause, as
likewise that which follows, that many of the dangers with the grounds and
resolutions, are by this Declaration of your Lordships made known to this
Kingdom, seems to hold us in suspense, till all the dangers, grounds and
resolutions be made known, and till the lawfulness and necessity of the War be
cleared, and the way of seeking reparation resolved upon; yet eour Lordships
may be pleased to remember, that in that part of your Answer to us of the
twentieth, which is a return to our desire of knowing fully your Lordships
resolutions, and being satisfied on the whole matter, we were remitted to the
Declaretion, as containing the grounds and resolutions of the Parliament on the
whole matter.

As to that which follows, concerning a present putting of the Country in a
posture of defense as in Anno 1643. we should be glad it were made to appear
really that the grounds principles and end were the same now, they were in the
year 1643. Otherwise the like Act upon different grounds, and for different
ends make it not the same cause. Your Lordships do indeed speak of the
principles expressed in the Declaration, as the same with the first principles
contained in our National Covenant, and in the Solemn League and Covenant. But
what reason we have to conceive they are new and different principles, may
appear by the several particulars before mentioned. We cannot here pass a new
interpretation which the Declaration puts upon the Solemn League and Covenant,
viz. That we did solemnly swear and promise before God and his Angeli to
endeavor Reformation of, and Uniformity in Religion and Church Government in
all his Majesty's Dominions according to the Word of GOD, and the example of
the best Reformed Churches. Where we pass your Lordships limiting and
restricting of Uniformity more then the Covenant does: which may infer that
Uniformity in Church Government between the Churches of CHRIST in these three
Covenanted Kingdoms, is not to be urged in any other manner or measure then we
have a precedent of in other reformed Kirks; but that which here we chiefly aim
at, is the following clause of the Declaration, viz. And not only to the utmost
of our power, with our m^an, and lives to stand to the defense of our dread
Sovereign, his person and Authority, in the prese vation of the true Religion
and Liberties of the Kingdoms, but also in every cause which may concern His
Majesty's Honor, to concur according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and duty of
good subjects. Yet your Lordships know that no such interpretation bath been
made by the Assemblies of the Kirk of the Solemn League and Covenant, as your
Lordships are pleased here to make of it: If it be said, that your Lordships
meaning was only of our National Covenant, yet it may be observed withal that
the plain and grammatical construction of the words will carry that
interpretation either upon the Solemn League and Covenant only, or both upon it
and upon our National Covenant However, although our National Covenant only
were here fixed upon, concerning which there is such an expression in the
supplication of the General Assembly, Anno 1639. to his Majesty's commissioner
and the Lords of Secret Council, yet there are some weighty considerations
which we humbly offer against the application of that Supplication of the
Assembly, to the present dusinesse; for, 1. His Majesty was at that time giving
satisfaction to the public desires of this Kirk concerning Religion; We
heartily wish we might say the like now. 2. We do not see the Cause stated in
the Declaration to be for his Majesty's honor, and so to fall within that duty
expressed in the Declaration of the General Assembly. And as one of the ends
of the Covenant was his Majesty's honor and happiness, and your Lordships
also have acknowledged in your Oath of Parliament, that the honor, happiness,
and greatness of the Kings Majesty, does depend on the purity of Religion as
it is now established in this Kingdom, So whatsoever crosses or prejudiceth
the grounds of the Covenant, or any of the ends thereof, cannot with us find
any such commendation as to be a cause which concerns his Majesty's honor.
3. Whatsoever we owe to the King in civil matters distinct from the Cause of
Religion, sure all these other duties are with a subordination to the glory of
God, and good of Religion; and we are very confident it was and will be far
from the thoughts of the General Assembly, under color of his Majesty's
Honor to concur with him, or any in his Name, in a cause which is hurtful and
prejudicial to the good of Religion, and to the other ends of the Solemn
League and Covenant; yet the cause stated in the Declaration, we humbly
conceive to be such. 4. It may be remembered that the Crosse-petition having
cited the same clause of the said Petition of the General Assembly, and making
use thereof in order to an engagement in War in his Majesty's quarrel against
the Parliament of England, was declared against by the Commission of the
General Assembly, Anno 1643. And among other particulars it was then declared,
that the limitations expressly mentioned in the words cited out of the
Assemblies Supplication, viz. according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and duty
of good Subjects, were interpreted by some that spoke at the time in the
general Assembly, to be all one as if it had been said, within this Kingdom,
we not knowing of any Laws of this Kingdom of further extent. It was also
then observed any may now be applied and remembered, that the National Covenant
having been subscribed in the Years 1581. and 1590. before King James was King
of England, and being qualified in the particular Heads and Articles by
express limitations and restrictions to this Kirk and Kingdom, to the
Religion, Laws and Liberties of Scotland, can no more be extended to municipall
debates, and to the Laws and Liberties of England, unto which we are strangers,
then the Kingdom of England can judge of our Laws, and determine our
differences, the two Kingdoms being still independent each on other, and not
subordinate one to another, as the first Article of the large Treaty fully
declares.

As to that we find in the close of the Declaration, that this Kingdom of
Scotland will now make it evident, as they have often declared, that their
quietness, stability, and happiness does depend upon the safety of the Kings
Majesty's Person and maintenance of his greatness and Royal authority, who is
Gods Vicegerent set over us for maintenance of Religion and ministration of
Justice; we shall only put your Sordships in mind, that your National Covenant
joineth with his Majesty's Safety, his good behavior in his Office, and says,
That the quietness and stability of our Religion and Kick does depend upon the
saety, and good behavior of his Majesty, as upon a comfortable Instrument of
Gods mercy granted to this Country for the maintenance of his Kirk, and
ministration of Justice. Otherwise, if a King do not his duty for the
Maintenance of the true Religion, and Ministration of Justice, it is ot his
safety alone, that make his Peaple to be in quietness and happiness; Withal,
as our quietness and happiness depends on his Majesty, and his doing of his
duty as an Instrument and Minister of God for good, So the Honor, Greatness,
and Happiness of the Kings Royal Majesty, and the welfare of the Subjects,
depend upon the purity of Religion, as is well expressed in your Lordships Oath
gf Parliament.

And now we shall with your Lordships favor and permission make this
conclusion upon the whole matter, That as we neither were nor are against an
Engagement with this Kingdom in War, but have been and shall be willing to
consent thereto, if once satisfied in our consciences concerning the
clearness, lawfulness, and necessity of the Cause and quarrel, and
concerning our calling, manner of proceeding, Instruments to be entrusted,
security to be had for Religion, and other particulars contained in our former
Papers not yet satisfied by your Lordships. So we are necessitate to profess
and declare to your Lordships, that we cannot, we dare not in our consciences
agree to an Engagement upon such grounds, and in such a way as is stated in
your Lordships Declaration; And therefore for our exoneration do dissent from
the whole complex business in the said Declaration, as not containing clear
and convincing grounds of undertaking of a War, nor providing for the
security of Religion, nor clearly disclaiming his Majesty's late Concession and
offers as unsatisfactory, nor tending to the suppression of the Malignant
party, but rather to compliance with them, as we humbly conceive, nor
preserving the Liberties and known interest of the Kirk, nor proposing the way
of Treaties, and all other ways of Peace to be sought and assayed before a
War. For which reasons, and others before mentioned, upon the particular
heads of the Declaration, we plainly declare our dissent from the complex
circumstantiat state of the present business contained in the said
Declaration, and take to witness, God, Angels, and men, that your Lordships
have not wanted warning from the Watchmen, And that we shall be free of all the
distractions, confusions, miseries and blood, which may follow upon your
Lordships proceeding to an engagement in War, upon the grounds of the
Declaration. We further call to record, the searcher of all hearts, and the
righteous Judge of all the world, that our not concurring proceeds not from
want of zeal against Sectaries, nor from any remissness in that which may
concern his Majesty's true Honor and Happiness, and the preservation of
Monarchical Government in him and his Posterity, nor from any want of
tenderness of the Privileges of Parliament, nor from any want of sympathy
with our afflicted and oppressed Brethren in England, In reference to all which
our proceedings have been and shall be (we trust) real testimonies of our
affection and sincerity; But our not concurring proceeds merely from
tenderness in the point of security of Religion, and union between the
Kingdoms, and from the unsatisfactorinesse of the grounds of your Lordships
Declaration, as has been expressed in the particulars. Wherefore we humbly
beseech your Lordships to interpret favorably and charitably any liberty which
we have used (the matter being such as lies sad and weighty upon our
Consciences) and that your Lordships would also be pleased to be mindful of
making good that passage of your Declaration, where you say that you are
resolved not to engage in any War, before the necessity and lawfulness thereof
be cleared, so as all who are well-affected may be satisfied therewith; Which
if your Lordships shall be pleased to do, there is a door of Hope yet open, and
we shall not cease to pray unto the Lord (as he shall assist us) that a Spirit
of counsel and understanding and of the fear of the Lord may be upon you, and
tha God would graciously rid both your Lordships and us out of all hid and
lurking shares, and so guide your Lordships, as that there may be yet a sweet
and harmonious joining of hearts and hands upon right Principles, Grounds and
motives, in a right way, and for the right ends.

A. Ker.

Edinb. 6. Iunii, 1648.
The humble Vindication of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, and
their late Proceedings: In Answer to the LETTER of the High and Honorable
Court of PARLIAMENT, Dated May 11. to the several Presbyteries in the Kingdom.
ALthough we doubt not but the particular Presbyteries will sufficiently return
answer to the Parliaments Letter so far as concerns them, (wherein diverse
Presbyteries have already given example to the rest) yet the chief purposes of
that Letter reflecting all along upon our late proceedings, and the Letter
being also printed and published for common view and use; The great trust put
upon us will not allow us to be silent in such a case. And the greater cause we
have to vindicate our proceedings in this manner, because whilst we had just
reason to expect from the Parliament a clear and real satisfaction to our
desires, seconded by so many Provincial Synods, in stead of such satisfaction,
that Letter came abroad with many reflections upon our proceedings, neither was
any thing hereof communicate or made known from their Lordships to us, that we
might have been heard for clearing our own actions before the divulging and
spreading abroad of the Letter.

To the Preface of the Letter we answer, that as it is too manifest how many
and great scandals are thrown upon us and our proceedings by the favorers of
Malignants and haters of Reformation and Presbyteriall Government; So we know
not either among our selves, or in any Assemblies of the Church of Scotland and
favorers of Sectaries, or haters of the Person of the King and of Monarchical
Government, who throw scendals upon the Parliaments actions; And if any shall
by sufficient proof discover any such in this Kingdom, it will quickly appear
how far the Assemblies of this Church (and we for our part) shall be from
conniving at, or beating with them; yea the General Assembly and Commissioners
have already declared so much, and so often both for the preservation of the
Monarchical Government in his Majesty and his posterity, and against
Sectaries. And there has been also so long and real proof both of the
loyalty of this Reformed Church of Scotland to his Majesty's Father, and to
himself, and of zeal in executing Church Discipline against Sectaries
(wherever any were found) that the world may bear witness with our Consciences
of our integrity both in the one and in the other, although we should
altogether hold our peace. Error will sooner comply with error then truth can,
and favorers of Malignants have been and may again turn to be favorers of
Sectaries, to serve their turn and save their interest for the time. For our
part as we did before so we do still, clearly and ingeniously profess that we
look upon Sectaries and Malignants as enemies to be opposed, as rocks to be
avoided on the right and left hands.

We see no cause why the several Presbyteries need to be conjured as they will
answer to the great God not to suffer themselves to be possessed with unjust and
undeserved prejudices against the Parliament and their proceedings: The fear of
God, and conscience of their duty, will keep them upon the one hand from unjust
and undeserved prejudices against their Lordships and their proceedings, and
upon the other hand from obeying unjust Decrees, and complying with iniquity
although established by a Law.

What their Lordships profess concerning their preferring of no earthly thing
to their duties for Religion, and concerning their real endeavors to satisfy
the most tender consciences, by their Lordships great compliance with our many
desires: All this we leave to the searcher of the hearts, and tryer of the
reins, who can and will judge thereof: This we can say for our selves, that to
this day, we have not received a satisfactory Answer from their Lordships unto
any one of our desires presented to their Lordships for the safety and security
of Religion, but under color of yielding somewhat, our desires were more
dangerously refused, then if they had been flatly rejected.

If that which follows in the Letter hold good, viz. That it cannot be by any
with truth and justice alleged that their Lordships have in the least measure
wronged, or violated the true Privileges and Liberties of the Church, we are
greatly to be blamed and censured for complaining in one of our Papers to the
Parliament, that their Lordships have very much prejudiced the true privileges
and liberties of this Kirks, and for protesting (upon that occasion) against
such preparatives, and for preservation of the liberties of the Kirk in time
coming. But now how much truth and justice we had for the ground of our
grievance and protestation, all who will not shut their eyes against the clear
light may easily understand. For was it ever before heard or known, that any
Parliament of this Kingdom did without the knowledge and consent of those who
had for the time, the trust of the public affairs of the Kirk, determine,
judge, and declare, by an antecedent judgment, matters so highly concerning
Religion, as these contained in the Parliaments late Declaration. Wherein there
are not only dangerous expressions concerning the Confession of Faith,
Directory of Worship, and Presbyteriall Government(as we have particularly
instanced in our late Declaration) but likewise in the close a strange and new
sense put upon the Covenant and Acts of General Assemblies, without so much as
first consulting us concerning such a sense thereof, which might have been
prevented if they had consulted us therein: Notwithstanding of all which, the
Declaration being communicate to us from the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament, and we having promised a speedy return thereto, which accordingly
after eight days we performed, (the matter being copious) the Declaration was
ordered by the Parliament to be Printed, and the three demands contained
therein sent away to England, with out staying a little for cur Answer (which
we had let them know we were preparing) whereas a very short delay might have
by the blessing of God brought unto their Lordships more light, and matter of
second thoughts.

We can as easily acquit our selves of any encroachments upon the
unquestionable Rights of Parliament. We are obliged by Solemn Covenant to
endeavor the preservation of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; And to
encroach upon the same were indeed a heinous crime, wherewith if any shall
reproach us, let them take heed what the ninth Command will exact of them; yet
they who will remember how in all ages, the most faithful servants of God have
usually been traduced as troublers of, and encroachers upon the Rights of the
Civil Magistrate, will not much marvel that what has been, is now.

As to the three instances mentioned in the Letter, to prove that great
encroachments are made upon their Lordships unquestionable Rights. First, it is
said, What can be more civil then to determine what Civil duties we ought to
pay to our King, or what Civil powers he ought to be possessed of? We ask
again, whether in our late conferences with their Lordships concerning an
engagement in War, there was any thing more proper to be insisted upon by us,
then the securing of Religion before all worldly interests, and particularly,
that security may be had from his Majesty for the point of Religion before his
restitution to the exercise of his Royal power? Must not duties to God
(whereof the securing of Religion is a maine one) have the supreme and first
place, duties to the King a subordinate and second place? Next as we have not
determined what Civil duties the Parliament ought to pay to the King, or what
Civil powers he ought to be possessed of; and as it is competent to the
Parliament to judge of Civil duties between the King and his People, in their
own way; so can we not admit that it is proper and competent only to them to
judge of those duties; for the duties of the second Table as well as of the
first, as namely, the duties between King and Subject, Parents and children,
Husbands and Wives, Masters and servants, and the like, being contained in, and
to be taught and cleared from the Word of God, are in that respect, and so far
as concerns the point of conscience a subject of Ministerial Doctrine, and
in difficult cases a subject of cognizance, and judgment to the Assemblies of
the Kirk. And here it is not to be passed that the Kirk of Scotland in the
large Confession of Faith, ratified by Acts of Parliament, did long since
determine the duties of the King and Subjects: The like whereof may be seen in
the other Confessions of Faith of the Reformed Churches.

Secondly, whereas it is said, Is there any other Authority in this Kingdom but
that of the Parliament, and what flows from them, that can pretend
Authoritative power in the choice of the Instrument and Managers of their
publik Resolutions? We humbly ask, is there any Ecclesiastical Authority within
this Kingdom that has pretended or does pretend to such a power? for we know
no such thing. An Authoritative power and choice of the Instruments to be
entrusted in Committees of Parliament and Armies, does not belong unto us, but
unto the Parliament. Nevertheles it was very competent for us among other
things requisite for the safety and security of Religion and our Solemn
Covenant, to represent to the Parliament the Qualifications which we judged
from Gods word to be necessary in such as are entrusted with the managing of so
great Affairs, and so highly concerning our Religion and Consciences; Which we
have had the more reason to insist upon, for our own and others satisfaction,
we being desired to join and concur in the business. Suppose a Minister
preaching before the Election of Magistrates (which is usual) and showing from
the Word of God the Qualifications requisite in Magistrates, and that none
ought to be chosen but such as are so and so qualified; who will challenge such
a Minister of assuming the Authoritative power of choosing Magistrates? And if
the choosing of particular Magistrates in Cities and Boroughs contrary to the
Rules and Qualifications of the Word, be sinful and blameworthy, how much
more the committing of so great a public trust in Committees and Armies to
diverse not qualified with the necessary Qualifications.

To the third Instance, which asks, Is it a subject for the Dispute of Church
Judicatories, whether his Majesty has a negative voice in Parliament, or not?
We answer, so far as the Scriptures of the Old or New Testament hold forth any
light to us, what Power is due, and what is not due to Kings, it well agrees
with our places and callings, to communicate such light to others as we see
need. We know no Church Judicatory that has disputed whether his Majesty has
a negative voice in Parliament; but we had just reason to supplicate the
Parliament that they might not interest themselves in any quarrel for his
Majesty's Negative voice, because of the great dangers which may thereby come
to Religion, not only by future disappointments of the so much desired
settlement of Church affairs, but by quarrelling the Solemn League and
Covenant it self, and the begun Reformation and Uniformity in Religion which
has been purchased with so much pains, hazards, losses and sufferings.

And now we shall take all these three instances jointly, and make this further
answer to them all. First, although the points had been merely Civil, yet by
the Confession of Faith agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster
and approved by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland as sound and
Orthodox as the Act more particularly bears, we are allowed to apply our
selves to the Parliament by way of humble supplication even in Civil matters,
The Parliament also having in their Declaration expressed their desires and
resolutions, that the said Confession of Faith be confirmed and established,
have upon the matter allowed us to supplicate their Lordships concerning such
things. Next we say, that in all the three instances which are given, our
supplications and desires were to avert what we justly conceived to be
destructive to Religion: We hope no man will have the face to say that the
Assemblies of the Church may supplicate against dangers of Religion which fall
within the first Table, but not against dangers of Religion which fall within
the second Table, or that they may supplicate against dangers of Religion
arising from other men, but not against dangers of Religion in which his
Majesty is any way concerned, or which flow from a bad choice of the
Instruments and managers of public resolutions.

The Episcopal disease of meddling with Civil affairs we trust through Gods
mercy, neither has, nor shall have any place among the Ministry of this
Kingdom, who by their National Covenant abjured the Civil places and power
of Kirk-men. Only we shall desire it may be remembered that there were other
Episcopal diseases and distempers beside this, as namely, encroaching upon the
liberties and privileges of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, the forcing of the
consciences of Gods people, and persecuting such who could not in conscience
obey. Wherefore it is necessary that all the Episcopal evils and disorders be
carefully avoided. And as we do not doubt the ensuing General Assembly will
do what shall be fit for them to prevent the villifying and contemning the
authority of Parliament, if it be found in danger to be villified, so we humbly
conceive they will not be unmindfull to prevent the villifying and contemning
of the authority of their own Commissioners.

The following clause in the Letter puts over to the General Assembly any
of the Ministry, who shall offer to stir up the Subjects of this Kingdom to
disobey or deny to give Civil obedience to their Laws, it being expressly
provided by the second and third Acts of King James 6. his 8. Parliament in
Anno 1584. that none of his Majesty's Subjects under the pain of Treason
impugn the Authority of Parliament. Where first we shall desire that two
known distinctions, which in this passage of the Letter seem either to be
confounded or forgotten, may be remembered. Civil obedience to Acts of
Parliament is either in things unlawful and contrary to the Word of God, or in
things lawful and right. In the former case it is a sin to obey: in the latter
case, a sin not to obey. Again the Authority of Parliament is one thing, an
Act of Parliament another thing; We do still acknowledge their Authority when
we obey not this or that Act. And whatsoever be the Treason of impugning the
Authority of Parliament, it can be no Treason to obey God Father then man:
Neither did the General Assembly of Glasgow 1638. and such as were active for
the Covenant at that time commit any Treason when they impugned Episcopacy and
Perth Articles, although ratified and strengthened by Acts of Parliament and
standing Laws then unrepealed.

As to the two Acts cited in the Letter, if the Order of the Printed Acts be
followed, the third has nothing in it of what it is cited for, neither know we
for what use it can be cited and applied, except to the abridging of the
Liberties of Ecclesiastical Assemblies; for it discharges all Judicatories
and Judgments, Conventions and Assemblies Ecclesiastical, without his
Majesty's special license and Commandment, which how contrary it is to the
word of God, to the example of the primitive Church, to the Judgment of found
Divines, to the Liberties of this Kirk, and to our Solemn Covenants, is more
manifest then to need that we should insist upon it. But if the Order of the
unprinted Acts be followed, the second of these Acts does not mention the
Authority of Parliament, but of his Majesty and his Council: However we are
heartily sorry for the citation of the acts of that Parliament, a Parliament
which reintroduced Episcopacy, and so made defection from the National
Covenant sworn three years before: For Captain James Stewart then Earl of
Arran and Chancellor, and the few Prelates of that time contrived and procured
such Acts of Parliament as might serve their ends. The same Acts were alleged
and urged by his Majesty's Commissioner in Anno 1638. for Episcopacy, whereunto
this Answer was made at that time, The Acts of Parliament, 1584. are of
several natures but they were protested against by the Ministers of Edinburgh
in the name of the Kirk of Scotland at the Market Cross of Edinburgh when
they were proclaimed, and as they were made in that time which was called the
hour of darkness of this Kirk Tyranized over by the Earl of Arran, so are
they repealed, 1542. Cap. 114. It is not to be forgotten, That after the making
of those Acts of Parliament, they were so generally disliked by all good men,
that the chief Courtiers of that time thought it necessary to employ Master
Patrick Adamson, a chief deviser of these Acts to make a Declaration of the
meaning thereof in his Majesty's Name, which he accordingly performed.
Concerning which Declaration the said Master Patrick pretended Archbishop of
St. Andrews, did afterward in his renunciation make this Confession. As where
I am burdened to be the setter forth of a Book called the Kings Declaration
wherein the whole Order of the Kirk is condemned and traduced; I protest
before God, that so I was commanded to write the same by the Chancellor for
the time, but chiefly by the Secretary, another great Courtier who himself
penned the second Act of Parliament, concerning the Power and Authority of
Judicatory to be absolute in the Kings Power, and that it should not be lawful
for any Subject to reclaim from the same, under the penalty of the Act which I
suppose was Treason.

Beside that Declaration his Majesty himself having received a supplication
from diverse well-affected Ministers with their Animadversions upon the said
Acts of Parliament, did pen with his own hand another Declaration of the
meaning thereof: But by both those Declarations it may be easily understood,
that the said Acts were intended for innovating and changing the Government and
Discipline of this Kirk, for setting up Bishops, and for suppressing the best
Ministers, and accordingly they were made use of afterward for the ground of a
charge against the Ministers that were banished.

It shall not be amiss here to insert that part of the Ministers
Animadversions (given in to his Majesty at that time) which concerns the
second Act of that Parliament; the words are these, As concerning the second
Act, the Narration thereof, appears to be slanderous against some of the
Ministry, which we would wish to be reformed or otherwise conceived, except
the truth thereof were verified. And as to the substance of the Act it self,
it attributes to your Majesty a Sovereigne power of Judgment not only upon
the persons of your Subjects, but also in all matters wherein they or any of
them shall be apprehended, summoned, or charged, etc. Which appears to be
very strange, the like whereof we bear not to have been practiced in any
Christian Commonwealth, and cannot stand with the Word of God, for although the
persons of men are subject to your Majesty and Civil Judges when they offend
against your Laws, yet matters Ecclesiastical and concerning conscience, no
Christian Prince can justly claim, nor ever claimed to himself such power to
judge, Seeing the Prince in this behalf is a member of the Kirk, and Jesus
Christ only the head, who only has power to give Laws in matters of
Conscience; and so said the godly Ambrose, Imperator bonus intra Ecclesiam non
supra Ecclesiam est: And to confound the Jurisdiction, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, is that thing wherein men of all good Judgments have justly
found foult with, in the Pope of Rome, which claims to himself the power of
both the swords, which is as great a fault to a Civil Magistrate to claim and
usurp, and especially to judge upon Doctrine, Errors and Heresies, he not being
placed in Ecclesiastical function to interpret the Scriptures, the warrants
hereof out of the word of God we are likewise to bring forth.

Hereunto we shall add a passage out of the recantation of Mr. Patricke
Adamson subscribed with his hand before famous witnesses and exhibit to the
Synod of Fyffe. the passage is this. There are contained in that second Act of
Parliament diverse others false intentions for to defame the Ministry and to
bring the Kirk of God in hatred and envy with their Prince and Nobility,
burdening and accusing the Ministers falsely of Sedition, and other crimes,
whereof they were innocent (as likewise it is written in the same Act and
Declaration thereof that Sovereign and Supreme power pertains to the King in
matters Ecclesiastical, which is worthy to be condemned not to be contained
among Christian Acts, where the power of the word is to be extolled above all
the power of Princes, and to be brought under subjection to the same.

The words of the second Printed Act cited, or the third unprinted (so Far as
concerns the purpose of the Letter) we find to be thus: That none of his
Lieges nor Subjects presume or take upon band to impugn the dignity and the
Authority of the said three Estates, or to seek or procure the innovation or
diminution of the Power and Authority of the same three estates or any of them
in time coming under the pain of Treason, These words we humbly conceive as
they relate to the constitution of Parliament made of the three Estates and to
the Authority thereof, being in that manner constituted, not to the obedience
of their particular Acts, so if they be urged and pressed according to the
meaning and intention of the Act before declared, they will conclude under
Treason all who impugn the Power and Authority of Bishops, Abbots and Pryors
as the third Estate of Parliament.

To the conclusion of the Letter we shall need to say but little, having
already in other papers expressed our selves fully, concerning the
unsatisfactorines of their Lordships Declaration, and the unlawfulness of the
present engagement; Which although it be pretended to be the same cause for
which this Kingdom has don and suffered so much, yet if it be remembered that
the Kirks desires for the point of Religion are not granted, that the
well-affected who were most zealous in the cause from the beginning are
generally against this engagement, that it is carried on, by such as were for
the most part disaffected to the Cause in the beginning, and were against the
former expeditions; that the Public affairs are entrusted into many new
hands, such as we cannot be confident of; These and the like considerations
will quickly make it appear that the cause is not the same, but hugely
different from what it was, and that the same grounds and principles which made
us Active in furthering the former expeditions, hinder us from furthering this.

A. Ker.

Edinb. 10. Junii 1648.
The Humble Advice and Petition of the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
To the Honorable Estates of Parliament.
WHile we were about preparing of our thoughts concerning the
unsatisfactorinesse of a paper communicated unto us from your Lordships upon
Wednesday, being a draught of an Answer from the Parliament ot the several
Petitions of Presbyteries, Synods and Shires tendered to them: There was a
motion made unto us from your Lordships by the Lord Ley and the Lord of
Armstoun, to wave a particular return unto that Paper, seeing it was not to be
looked upon as the sense or mind of the Parliament, in respect that before the
Parliament had taken it into debate or consideration, they did think fit to
communicate it to this Commission; and withal to desire that the Commissioners
would be pleased to tender unto the Parliament their advise, concerning the
security of Religion in answer to the several Petitions presented to the
Parliament of late from Synods, Presbyteries and Shires: Unto which motion we
make this humble return.

For the first part of the motion; We are resolved to lay aside the
consideration of that Paper, and to make no Representation of our thoughts
thereupon, if your Lordships be pleased to make no further use thereof.

As for the other part of the motion, calling for our advise concerning an
Answer to the Petitions presented from several Shires, Presbyteries and Synods
unto the Parliament: Although we humbly conceive, your Honors may clearly
perceive what is our judgment by our Papers presented to your Lordships from
time to time; yet being required we shall again faithfully and freely tender
this our humble advise.

We call to record the searcher of all hearts, the Judge of the world, that
our not concurring with your Lordships proceedings hitherto, has not flowed
from want of zeal against Sectaries, for the suppression of whom, and for the
advancement of the work of Reformation, we are ready to hazard all in a
lawful way; Nor from any remissness in that which concerns his Majesty's
true Honor and happiness, and the preservation of Monarchical Government in
him and his posterity, nor from any want of tenderness of the privileges of
Parliament; nor from want of Simpathie with our afflicted and oppressed
Brethren in England; nor from partial or sinistrous respect to any party or
person whatsoever within the Kingdom; But from mien tenderness in point of
security of Religion, and the Union between the Kingdoms, and from the
unsatisfactorinesse of the grounds of your Lordships Declaration, as has been
expressed more at lengthen our Representation: Notwithstanding your Lordships,
to our very great grief, have proceeded to a Levy, whereby heavy burdens and
pressures have been laid upon many faithful Covenanters, most forward in all
former expeditions, and averse from this, only for want of satisfaction
concerning the necessity and lawfullnesse thereof, promised in your Lordships
late Declaration, but not as yet performed.

It is therefore our humble advice that the abovementioned Petitions being so
just in themselves, and flowing from the grounds aforesaid, as they ought in
equity to have been granted, so they ought yet to be granted by the securing of
Religion, staying the present Levy; and according to our former desires by
essaying Treaties with England, applications to His Majesty, and all other
fair and amicable ways for removing the differences between the Kingdoms,
before sending any forces to England or any other way of engagement in War. And
least the taking of Barwicke and Carlisle which is so scandalous to this
Nation) be looked upon by England as a breach of Union on your part; That your
Lordships would be pleased to make it appear, that neither the Parliament, or
any of your number have had any accession to the surprisall or supplying of
these Towns, nor shall we have any correspondence or compliance with those who
have been actors therein.

We do also conceive it necessary for satisfaction of the Petitioners, That
his Majesty's late Concessions and offers concerning Religion may by your
Lordships directly and positively be declared unsatisfactory to this present
Parliament.

That although we would not be understood, as if we have had, or have, any
thoughts of declining the restoring of his Majesty to the same condition He
was in, by the agreement of both Kingdoms when he was taken away by a party of
the Army under Sir T. Fairfax, that both Kingdoms, may freely make their
Applications to him; yet your Lordships would be pleased to Declare, That there
shall be no engagement for restoring his Majesty to one of his houses with
Honor freedom and safety (which does amount to no less then the restitution
of his Majesty to the exercise of his Royal power, for the reasons holden forth
in our late Representation never yet answered) before security and assurance be
had from his Majesty by his solemn Oath under his hand and seal, That he shall
for himself and his successors, consent and agree to Acts of Parliament,
injoyning the League and Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterian
Government, Directory of Worship, and confession of Faith in all his Majesty's
Dominions; and that his Majesty shall never make opposition to any of these, or
endeavor any change thereof.

That your Lordships will make it appear that you mean to be far from
interesting your selves in any quarrel for his Maj. that may put into his
Majesty's hands such power, as may not only bring the by-gon proceedings of
both Kingd. in the League and Covenant in question, but also for the time to
come make void all the authority of Parl. though proceeding never so rightly in
reference to Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms.

That a clear and direct course be laid down and declared not only not to
associate nor join in Councels or Forces with the Popish, Prelaticall or
Malignant party, but also to oppose and effectually endeavor to suppress all
such of them as have already risen or shall hereafter rise in Arms upon
whatsoever pretense, as enemies to the Cause and Covenant on the one hand; as
well as Sectaries on the other.

That nothing be don in carrying on the engagement, which may break the union
of the Kingdoms, or may discourage or dis-obliege the Presbyterian party in
England.

Because it is our grief, and the grief of all the well-affected, that those
who have been of constant and approved integrity in the Cause and have been
very isntrumental under God for our deliverance, should be forced for want of
satisfaction to their consciences to leave the service; and that others who
have not given constant proof of their integrity and faithfulness, and
against whom there is just cause of exception and jealousy, so that we cannot
exhort our flocks to be confident of their fidelity; yea, and diverse that have
been in real opposition to the Cause, are entrusted with the managing of your
Lordships publik resolutions: That therefore your Lordships will be pleased in
your wisdom to provide a timous remedy herein That there be no Engagement,
without a Solemn Oath, wherein the Kirk may have the same interest which they
had in the solemn League and Covenant the Cause being the same.

As we do humbly insist with your Lordships for satisfaction to our former
desires expressed in our former papers, so it is our humble petition to your
Lordships, That in such things as have been ordained by your Lordships, and
put in execution by your Order, contrary to some of these desires, some
effectual remedy may be found out by your Lordships wisdom and goodness for
the help thereof; That all who since the beginning of this Levy, through
tenderness of conscience, have suffered any ways, may be repaired, all
unusual and grievous courses impoverishing good people and utterly disabling
them to subsist, may be hereafter avoided: and the intolerable insolency,
profaneness, blasphemies, and manifold outrages that of late have appeared in
the Soldiers, may be severely punished and repressed; That no Ordinance nor
Order may issue from your Lord hips in prejudice of the liberties of the Kirk,
and of the free exercise of any part of the Ministerial calling, all which
they have from Jesus Christ the only Head and Lawgiver in his Kirk, and
which your Lordships are obliged by solemn oath in our Covenants to maintain:
And that as it is our grief, that whilst your Lordships have been seeking our
advice, you have been and are making grievous Acts, as we are informed so we
desire your Lordships in the fear of God to be wary of making or maintaining
such Acts and namely, That you put not the power of arbitrary Government in the
hands of any entrusted by your Lordships, nor ordain any Oaths to be imposed
or exacted, that may be snares to men's consciences.

All which we seriously recommend to your Lordships, as you desire not to
provoke against your selves and your posterity the wrath of the most High God,
and that the Lord should not avenge the quarrel of a broken Covenant upon the
Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland. But if your Lordship shall be pleased to
hearken to our humble advice, and to satisfy the consciences of the
well-affected in the Kingdom to the work of Reformation, by granting their
just desire; Your Honors shall be blessed of God, the Lord of the whole earth;
the people of God shall bless you in the name of the Lord, and bless the Lord
for you; You shall bind up the wounds of this distressed and distracted
Kingdom, endear the affections of the well-affected, disappoint the designs
of the disaffected, and your Names shall be a praise unto the present and
succeeding generations: And we shall power out supplications before him, who
sits and judges among Gods, to endue your Lordships with the Spirit of
counsel and of the fear of his Name; that your Resolutions may be rightly
ordered and tend to his glory, the security of Religion the honor and
happiness of the King and his posterity, and the peace and safety of the
Kingdoms.

A. KER.


