NEWS From Dublin IN IRELAND. RELATING How Colonel JONES Governor of the said
City, with his Forces, fell upon the Rebels, beat the whole Army, killed many,
some Prisoners taken, with much of their Provisions and fore'd them to a
flight. In a Letter to a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

News from Dublin in Ireland.
Honorable Sir:
IN my last of the third of this instant I certified you of Colonel Jones, the
Governor of Dublin's taking the field with that small party of 400. horse here
garrisoned; a small Party considering the power of the enemy (now found to have
been) 8000. foot, 2000. horse, and a multitude of others, Owen Roe O Neale (the
Rebels Ulster General) was advanced into the heart of these our Garrisons
(between us and Trim) and that within a few miles of this place, before the
Governor received any intelligence of his moving.

On the third of November, the Governor advanced hence with 400. horse, and
50. Dragoons, and upon advertisement given of a party of the enemies being
about Castle-knock (within three miles of Dublin) he made thither, and
commanded one Captain Otwey (of his own Regiment) with 60. commanded horse as
a forlorn hope.

The Governor himself made a halt short of Castle-knock, understanding that
the whole body of the enemies horse and foot lay two miles off at the church of
Mallehedard, whereupon he gave orders for returning back to Dublin those
Carriages that were following him, and that the foot in Dublin should forthwith
march toward him, therein preparing for the enemy should he advance toward
the City, or to attempt something on him if still quartering at Mallehedard.

At Castleknock aforesaid, there was a party of the enemies horse, and 60. foot
sent thither for destroying that part of our quarters; upon sight of our
forlorn hope then advancing the enemies horse fled, whom ours pursued up to
their maine body at Mallehedard, having in the chase slain and taken 11.
Whereupon, another party of horse and foot from the body of the enemy were
drawn out whom Captain Otwey, with those few of our forlorn hope, charged and
killed of them above 80. this in full view, and very nigh the whole Army of the
Rebels; after which he faced them about one hour, until it was found that
the enemies foot had the while marched away toward Fingall, purposing that
night to fire those quarters between Dublin and Dregheda; which the enemies
designs the Governor finding by some prisoners taken, he commanded back
Captain Otwey with the forlorn hope, who returning toward Castle-knock
aforesaid, met with those sixty foot of the enemies before mentioned, fleeing
from another party of our horse, most of whom Captain Otwey put to the sword.

The Governor forthwith sent to Sir Henry Titchburne, (at Trim) for drawing up
to him with the horse in the out-quarters, whose coming up to him he expected
before he would engage upon so great a body of the Rebels horse and foot.

That night the Governor sent back to Dublin the foot, and having commanded
100. horse toward Feltram for securing the quarters toward the Sea side, and
for observing the enemies motion, he himself with the rest of the horse
returned back to Dublin, no provision being found near him for his horse, the
enemy having destroyed all.

Owen O Neale having the City on the right hand, marched to a place called
Dubber, within three miles of Dublin, which he fired, having his head quarters
at Kilshaghan, six miles Northward from Dublin; he that night by parties sent
out, burnt all the corn about him, making very great spoil.

Thursday, November. 4. Owen O Neale marched to Brasyle (an house belonging to
the Lord chief Baron Bolton, within Fingall, which he burned, having first from
thence by parties sent out, burnt Carduffe (the Lord Chancellours house) and
Luske, with what other mischief he could suddenly do in that part of the
country, our Garrison at Swords made good the Bawne there against the Rebels,
whereby much Hay prepared for the Oxen of the Train was preserved.

This day the Governor again took the field, with his 400. horse (being his
whole strength of horse hereabouts) drawing toward the enemy for cutting off
straglers (of whom many were met withal) and for keeping in the Rebels (all
that might be) from destroying the quarters, until he should hear from Sir
Henry Titchburne, which he hourly expected, but all that day he heard nothing
of him; that night the Governor quartered at Donsinke, within three miles of
Dublin, and three miles from the enemy, who that night quartered at Weganstowne.

This day about 12 of the clock news was brought to the Governor of Sir Henry
Tichburnes coming up with Col. Pensonby, Col. Coots, and Sir Thomas Armestrongs
Regiments of Horse, which with the Governors party made up a body of 1400
horse: Whereupon the Governor forthwith about midnight sent orders to Dublin
for the Foot to draw out, and with all speed to advance toward him, appointing
the Rendezvouze the next morning at Pierces Town, eight miles from Dublin,
purposing by crossing the Country to stop Owen O Neile in his march back,
being informed that he had been then at Baldengan rowards the sea side,
purposing to bend toward Droghedah quarters for spoiling thereabouts as
elsewhere he had done.

But the Rebels having intelligence of the coming up of the Horse to the
Governor, and of the marching of the Foot, he suddenly changed his course,
marching back again by Crixtowne, Kilbrewe, and Ratoth, burning as he went.
This he did betimes on Friday morning the fifth of this instant. Our Foot not
being yet come up as was expected, the Governor with his Horse following, the
Enemy, coming up within a mile of him, and sending out parties to engage the
Enemy in some sort until the coming up of our Foot; but the Rebels marched off
as fast as they could, our men killing many of them, and from out their body
took away some Cattle.

This night the Rebels made show of quartering at a place called Clunmullin
near a bogge side, where the Governor had hope he might gain time of falling
in upon him if his Foot had come up.

This night our Foot from Dublin (about 3000) came up to Pierces Town, where
had they come sooner, it was hoped (by the blessing of God) the Rebels power in
Leinster had been quite broken.

The Governor had that night sent out several parties to allarm the Enemy,
thereby to engage them until he could with his Foot march up toward them; but
the Enemy having made show of quartering that night at Clunmullen, rises in
the night, marching away with all the speed he could possible.

Saturday the sixth, the Governor follows him with Horse and Foot, sending
our parties several ways to stop him in his course, but the Rebels had that
day not rested until they had gotten over the black Ford beyond Clon-Curry
into Briminghams Country, a place boggy and woody, and to them of great
advantage.

The Governor hereupon leaving the Foot at Balfegham, 13 miles from Dublin, he
the seventh followed the Enemy with the horse; but the Rebels marching all the
night before, had betimes this morning recovered their former retiring place at
Castle-Jordan. This night the Governor came back to the Foot at Bulfegham, and
the next day (having dismissed his additionall Forces) he with the rest march
back to Dublin.

The Enemy lost 500 of their men, and in their great haste cast off many of
their Knapsacks and baggage, which ours took up. It was not for the Governor
to engage his horse, they not having a grain of Oats, nor money, or Quarters,
for eight weeks before, neither any thing else but what they gained by daily
inroades upon the Enemies quarters, whereby the horse were so worn out, that
had not necessity enforced, they had not been fit to appear in service,
therefore was it not safe to engage them especially severed from the foot,
against so great a power of the Enemies horse and Foot, wherein had there been
any miscarriage, this city and Province had been undoubtedly lost, and the
whole Kingdom endangered. And here I must give you the Governors words to me
discoursing of this, That although he should have had the fortune with his
horse alone, to have defeated the power of the Enemies, yet he deserved to
suffer for hazarding so lighty so many and great interests; knowing the
weakness of his horse, but after the coming up of his foot, he doubted not
then to put all to a day, though the Rebels were many to one, and had done it,
had it been possible to overtake that cowardly and runaway Enemy. You have,
Sir, in this the perfectest and most distinct account I can give of these
particulars, wherein you have in short the whole state of the party here, not
to be kept together, wanting wherewithal so to keep them, and being dispersed
(as of necessity they must be for a subsistence) they or the Country lying open
to spoil, before an Enemy entering almost our very gates, can be disputed with.
Sir, it is there to put us into a condition whereby these evils may be
prevented, and for enabling yours here to serve you as they earnestly desire.
By Captain Pierce (one of ours being prisoner with the Rebels at Kilkenny)
returned hither on exchange. The Governor has been given to understand that
the common voice at Kilkenny was, That Sir Bryon O Neile (here resident) is one
serviceable to the Enemy in the way of intelligence, whereupon he is committed,
the Governor expecting (I believe) directions thence for disposing of him.
Pardon this great boldness of

Sir Your most assured to serve you, H. C.
Dublin 10. November. 1647. November. 22. Imprrmatur Gilb. Mabbot.



FINIS.

