A PETITION Delivered to the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND By the Commissioners of the
General Assembly of the Kirk, April 18. 1648. FOR A Right understanding
between the Kingdoms, for settling Religion and peace. AND For confirming the
Covenant and the Presbyterian Government. With their supplications concerning
the Kings Majesty. And their demands from the Parliament of ENGLAND.

April 26. 1648
Imprimatur

G. M.

LONDON, Printed (according to the Copy sent from Edinburgh) by ROBERT IBBITSON
in Smithfield, 1648.

Edinburgh, 18. April, 1648. To the Right Honorable and High Court of
Parliament, The humble Petition of the Commissioners of the General Assembly
of the Kirk of Scotland.
REligion being of all things the most excellent, as it has bin the principal
end of all the undertaking and endeavors of this Nation, so it is the maine
subject of our thoughts and cares: And we trust is most in the hearts of all
the faithful Ministers and godly people throughout the land. As several of
their supplications unto your Lordships can make evident, it was from the
tender regard we had of this so precious a Jewel, that we did emit a
Declaration concerning present dangers, and duties, it was also for our
respects thereunto pursuing your Lordships inclination to an engagement, from
which we neither were then, nor now are averse (being first satisfied in the
grounds of undertaking, and in the way of the managing of the same, That we did
afterward propound some humble desires unto your Lordships, containing things
necessary for a right understanding, and securing of Religion, and preserve the
union betwixt the kingdoms) But after long attendance, and most earnest
expectation, having received no satisfaction from your Lordships, in these our
desires. And perceiving that your Lordships resolutions are toward an
engagement in a War, we do (from no other principle, and intention, then the
love of the truth, and the discharge of the trust committed unto us, as the
servants of the living God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and dead) entreat and obtest your Lordships, that as you do profess that
any undertakings which ye now are, or shall be necessitated unto, shall only
be for settling of Religion, truth and peace, under his Majesty's Government.
So far concerning our consciences, and all the faithful Ministers and people
of God, in both Kingdoms, of the integrity of your intentions, that your
Lordships will be pleased to give us satisfaction in all these, or former,
just, and necessary desires, and that for the same end, your Lordships will
make it appear, that you mean to be so far from intrusting your selves in
any thing that may put in his Majesty's hands, such power as may not only
bring the bygone proceedings of both Kingdoms in the League and Covenant in
question, but also for the time to come, will void all the authorities of
Parliament, though they proceed never so rightly, in reference to Religion and
Liberties to the kingdom. And that your Lordships will be pleased to make it
manifest that you will be so far from associating with, or giving trust or
countenance to any within the three Kingdoms, who do not swear and subscribe
the Solemn League and Covenant; that on the contrary, your Lordships will hold
them all for professed Enemies, adversaries, and Malignants, and endeavor to
suppress them if they rise in Arms, which we think we may expect with the
greater reason and confidence from your Lordships, because ye have resolved to
demand of the Parliament of England, that an effectual course be taken by the
Houses for injoyning the Covenant to be taken by all the Subjects of the Crown
of England, conform to the first Article of the Treaty, and the Declaration of
both Kingdoms, in Anno 1643. by which all that would not take the Covenant,
was declared to be public enemies to Religion and the Country, and that they
are to be censured and punished as professed Adversaries and Malignants. And we
trust that while your Lordships desire of them the performance of duties,
contained in the Treaties and Declarations: you will make it appear that you
intend to do nothing contrary thereunto. The obligation therein being
originally in regard of both, and the performance alike, both conducing for
Religion and the Cause.

And we do humbly entreat that your honors will be pleased to make known to
us your resolutions upon the whole matter that we may see there is nothing
therein that may cross your Lordships demands concerning Religion, and be
in-consistant with the security thereof, and our desires for the same, And that
which shall be thought fiting to be demanded of the Parliament of England,
concerning Religion; for rendering the same the more effectual, your Lordships
will at this time solicit His Majesty for His Royal assent thereunto. That
His Majesty and all others may know that what you intend in his behalf is with
a subordination to those ends, and so His Majesty may be pleased to remove all
obstructions on His part, that hinder all the settling of Religion and his
Majesty's Government. And being desirous that all means, being first assayed
which may prevent the effusion of more Christian blood so far as is possible.
Therefore as the Messengers of peace, we do humbly supplicate that your
Lordships will take such course for seeking reparation from the Parliament of
England as may be most probable in reason to obtain the same in a peaceable
way. And finally, we expect that your Lordships will do nothing that may
strengthen the Popish Prelaticall, or Malignant Party who are waiting for their
day, or that may discourage the Presbyterian Party in England, or render your
ways suspicious to them, But your Lordships will employ all the power which
God has put into your hands, for advancing his Honor, and the Kingdom of his
Son. Many of your Lordships have been instruments in as glorious a work of
Reformation, as any age has seen, and all of you has been witnesses thereof:
And if any thing shall proceed from you for weakening or defacing thereof, as it
will be matter of high provocation against the Lord, so doubtless it will be
trouble to your souls, in your latter end, and meet you in the day of your
accounts. And if your Lordships shall refuse to hearken to this our
supplication, we call God to record, that we have exhonerated our selves as in
his sight, and that we and the Kirk of Scotland, whose trust we discharge in
the public affairs thereof, are free of all the guilt that shall follow upon
any undertakings or resolutions tending to the prejudices of Religion, the
Honor and Happiness of the King, and the Union and Peace of the Kingdoms.
But we desire to persuade our selves better things of your Lordships, and that
you will give such satisfaction as may encourage us to be a testimony to your
Lordships, that your eally intend the settling of Religion and the carrying on
of all things in such a way as may contribute for the securing of the same.

A: KER:

FINIS.

