A DECLARATION AND WARNING To all the Members of this KIRK, FROM THE COMMISSION
OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY. Together with A POSTSCRIPT, appointing a solemn Day of
Thanksgiving the twenty fifth of May 1649, for the utter routing of the
strength of the Rebels Army in the North of SCOTLAND.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY. 1649.

And Reprinted at LONDON for ROBERT BOSTOCK, May the 22. 1649.

EDINBURGH, May 11, 1649.
A Declaration and Warning to all the Members of this Kirk, from the Commission
of the General Assembly.
SEeing men of Malignant and perverse spirits do not cease to oppose the Work
of the Lord, and disquiet the peace of his People, but after many
disappointments, renew their wicked designs and practices against Religion and
the Covenant; It becomes us, whom the Lord has called to so public a Trust,
not to cease to renew our Warnings and Declarations concerning the evil of
their way, that they may be recovered out of the snare of Satan, if it be
possible, and that others may not fall therein, but avoid such tentations, and
do their duty straightly and without fear.

We did not long since bear Testimony against the proceedings of Sectaries in
our Neighbour-Land, in reference to Religion and Government; And it is unto us
matter of very much astonishment and sorrow, that whilst their practices are
not lessened, but heightened, there should be found in our Land some who have
taken up Arms, and made Insurrections in the North, laboring to strengthen
themselves against the Power and Authority of the Parliament, that they may set
up again the Malignant party, to overturn the work of God, and tread upon the
necks of his people: And albeit most of that Malignant party are plagued of God
with blindness of mind and hardness of heart, and stop their ears against
instruction; yet if there be any place left for exhortation, We shall desire
these men who are hatching such cockatrice eggs, and weaving such spiders webs,
and all others who favor their way and wish them to prosper, or have any
thoughts or inclination to join with them, or follow their steps, seriously to
ponder and consider these things which follow.

1. What an horrible and high provocation it is for any to be found fighting
against God, and persecuting his People and Truth. (...) not this it that has
brought down many Kings and Princes and great men, and overturned many
Kingdoms, Cities and Families, and brought many great and sore plagues upon
many particular persons of all ranks and conditions. 2. How abominable and
treacherous a thing it is for men who are under the oath of God, and the tie
both of the National Covenant and the solemn League and Covenant, some whereof
have been lately professing and offering repentance for their former
backslidings, to turn open enemies and adversaries thereto; Perjury is hateful
amongst the heathen, and how much more hateful and monstrous should it be
amongst Christians, especially in those things that concern God and Religion?
3. Has not the Lord now for ten years past shown himself strong and mighty,
dreadful and terrible in defeating all the designs, and breaking all the
power, and bringing down all the pride of the Malignant party? Have they not
many times dug deep to hide their counsels from the Lord, and has he not
found them out, and filled them with the devices of their own hearts? With what
art and industry have they many times promoted, and with what power and
strength have they often times backed and carried on their purposes and
projects? But he that sits in heaven has always blown upon them, and brought
them to nothing. No weapon formed against his people has prospered, but after
that the Lord had hardened the Instruments of our former troubles by success
for a little space, he did set a snare for them, and brought them down to
horrible destruction in a moment: The Lords dealing with the Rebels in this
Kingdom, and with the Authors and Abettors of the Engagement against the
Kingdom of England, whom he has made a terror round about, we hope, shall be
examples of his wrath against the Enemies of his Cause and of his People, not
only to this, but also to the following generations. 4. How great a wickedness
must it be in such a period of time, when so much danger threatens Religion and
Government, from that prevailing party in England, for men to arise in this
Land to discourage the hearts and weaken the hands of the Lords People, by
their Malignant and insolent attempts. 5. How little pity have they, nay
certainly their malice and cruelty must needs be very great, who will needs
after so many and long continued troubles and calamities again involve this
land in confusion and blood. It is the earnest and longing desire, and in some
measure the hope and expectation of the Lords People in this Kingdom, after so
many storms and tempests which have tossed them for so many days, that the Lord
may now bring them into the harbor of tranquillity and peace; And the man who
shall obstruct or retard this, as he shall be hated of good men, so certainly
he shall bring upon himself a great measure of wrath and indignation from the
Lord, and God shall make his memory stink unto the generations that are to
come. 6. What Treachery and cruelty it is against the Kings Majesty, and what
an obstruction in establishing of his Throne in such a nick of time, when both
State and Kirk have sent Commissioners and given in Desires to his Majesty in
those things that concern the securing of Religion, and the settling of his
Majesty's Government and the Peace of these Kingdoms, for any that will raise
new commotions and troubles, which cannot but foment jealousies between the
King and his Subjects, and beget and entertain differences amongst them unto
the estranging their affection one from another; And whosoever are the Authors
thereof, or accessory thereto shall justly be looked upon, as enemies to
Religion, to his Majesty's Person and Government, upon whom the guilt of all
those miseries that may come upon his Majesty or his Royal Family does lie in
a special way.

These and many other considerations do exceedingly heighten and increase the
guilt of that wicked Insurrection both before God and men: And therefore we do
earnestly Beseech and Exhort all who live in this Land, that as they tender
their solemn Obligation and Oath both by the National Covenant, and by the
solemn League and Covenant, and as they love the Honor of Jesus Christ and the
Gospel, and the work of Reformation, and as they respect the Kings Honor and
Happiness, and desire Religion to be secured, and peace to be settled; Nay, as
they wish to eschew the heavy Wrath and Indignation of the LORD, That they do
not give any countenance nor assistance, nor connivance to these wicked men in
their wicked way, much less to join with them in Counsel or in Arms: And
because it lies upon us to be faithful in our station, therefore as We have
already given warning unto those men that unless they do speedily des^st from
their evil way and repent, that We will proceed against them with the
dreadful sentence of Excommunication; so We do now declare that this being a
crime so Atrocious that if any shall hereafter join with them, We will be
necessitated impartially to proceed against them with the highest Censures of
the Kirk, that such dross may be purged out from amongst Us, and that others
may learn to fear. We know that these men labor to shadow their attempts
against Religion and the Cause of GOD under the pretext of self preservation
and their being debarred from public trust, and the respect which they owe to
his Majesty's greatness, the privileges of the Parliament and Liberties of
the Subjects; But We know no cause why they should have feared danger from
these to whom God has committed the power of the sword in the Land, sufficient
security being offered unto them for their lives and Estates, the obliging
themselves not to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom: That they are debarred
from trust, is that which their own misdemeanors and treachery by betraying of
their former trust has justly procured on their part and necessitated upon the
part both of State and Kirk, unless they would have resolved after so many sad
and dear bought experiences of backsliding and unfaithfulness of these men, to
be so blind and foolish as again to tempt God, to the overturning of his
Cause, and exposing the Kingdoms to ruin. Neither will any who has eyes to
discern, look upon them but as the Kings Enemies, and the Enemies of his
Throne; For as they by their perverse counsels and wicked combinations and
conspiracies did harden the King his Royal Father, unto the continuing of the
afflictions and troubles of these Kingdoms: So we cannot but think, that if
they and others of their way should cease to raise calumnies against those who
are truly Loyal to his Majesty, and to suggest evil Councels to the prejudice
of Religion, and the peace of his Kingdoms, and to entertain him with hopes of
Armies for carrying on their wicked designs, but that his Majesty should in a
very short time be settled upon his Throne in peace, with all the splendour and
greatness that is due to him: And who will believe that these men are for the
Privileges of Parliament, who these many years past have pleaded and fought
for an Arbitrary and illimited power, that ought not (if we will believe them)
though acting never so unjustly, be resisted by any; Or can it be thought that
they are for the Subjects liberty, who in the few months time that GOD
permitted them to prevail, and use so horrible oppressions over the Lords
people in their consciences, persons and estates. Most of those who have now
made Insurrections, and their adherents, are no other then those who opposed
the Cause of GOD, and the work of Reformation from the beginning; Neither are
their principles, ways and ends any other then have been owned and promoted by
the malignant party in these Kingdoms these many years past. Of this We desire
to give warning to all men in the land, that none may be deceived in partaking
with them in their sins, lest they be partakers of their plagues: We do exhort
all the LORDS people to be strong in the LORD, and in the power of his might;
and as to adhere unto the Covenant and work of Reformation, so to cleave to
those whom GOD has entrusted with the Government, and public affairs in the
Land, that their hands may be strengthened in the performance of all public
duties, which they mind with so much faithfulness and care. These are they
whom the LORD was pleased to honor to be the Instruments, to begin the great
Work of Reformation in this Kingdom, who have been faithful in the midst of
many difficulties and temptations in promoting of it in both Kingdoms, whose
endeavors have been attended with blessings and success from Heaven. Neither is
the cause which they now own and defend, any other then that which they have
owned and defended against the Popish, Prelaticall and Malignant party these
ten years past, and are ready to maintain and defend against all enemies
whatsoever, both on the right hand and on the left: And therefore we hope that
all that love Religion and Covenant, will be obedient unto all their lawful
commands, and cordially and actively further and promote the present Levy, and
cheerfully and patiently bear the lengthning of necessary burdens, without
which We can never preserve that which the Lord has wrought amongst Us, nor
our selves, and if any injustice or oppression has fallen out, or shall
hereafter fall out in executing of public orders for Levies or maintenance, as
We are confident that those whom it concerns will take speedy and effectual
course for reparation of the same, so shall We according to our vocation,
endevor to have the same redressed, and remedies provided for the time to come.
We know no cause why any man's hand should fail, or his heart faint, the LORDS
hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ears heavy that he cannot
hear; He has done great things for us, and will never fail us nor forsake us:
Our troubles shall help to refine us, but not to destroy us, they shall not
overturn the work of Reformation, but put more luster and beauty upon it, and
shall give unto us more pregnant evidences of the power and goodness of the
LORD, and set him high upon the Throne of his Glory.

A. Ker.

EDINBVRGH, 12. May 1649.
Postscript.
Containing the Causes of a solemn Thanksgiving, to be kept upon Friday the 25.
day of this instant.
WIthin a short time after that we had resolved and concluded thus to Declare
and give warning concerning the Insurrection in the North, We received
certain Intelligence by an Express sent of purpose from thence, that upon
Tuesday last, at Balvenie upon Spey side, by a party of an hundred and twenty
horse, commanded by Lieutenant General Leslie to attend these fields under the
conduct of Colonel Ker, Lieutenant Colonel Hacket, Lieutenant Colonel
Strachen, the Lord has defeated the most considerable part, if not all the
strength of the Rebels in the North, to the number of twelve hundred, of whom
betwixt sixty and eighty are killed, near eight hundred taken prisoners, and
amongst those, the now L. Rae with his most considerable officers, and many
considerable gentlemen and officers of the name of Mac-kenie: Which as it is a
great and most seasonable mercy that carries upon it a lively impression of the
power and goodness of the Lord, so does it engage his people to acknowledge
and bear Testimony to the same before the sons of men.

And therefore having now for along time past, had thoughts of a public
thanksgiving for the many mercies bestowed upon, and deliverances wrought for
the Land; We conceive this day of salvation to be a fitting opportunity,
wherein the Lords people should make mention of his loving kindness, and exalt
his Name by public thanksgiving and praise, for all the great things which he
has done for them, especially for these which follow.

1 That as the Lord since the beginning of the work of Reformation has
always gone before his people, and visited them with most seasonable
deliverances in the day of their difficulties and distresses; so also that of
late, when all the power of the Kingdom both in Judicatories and Armies was
come into the hands of Malignant and disaffected men, the Lord was pleased to
preserve in this Land (having been over them in a pillar of direction and
protection) a remnant in the Parliament to dissent from, and protest against
the proceedings of the greater part tending so much to the pr^^i^^^^^e of
Religion and the work of God, and that h^ directed and enabled his servants of
the ministry to beat ^o free and faithful Testimony in their Sermons, W^^^^^^
and Declarations* against that unlawful Eng^gement, and put it in the hearts
of many of his people to petition against it, and to refuse to concur therein
notwithstanding of their great suffering. 2 That whilst the Malignant and
disaffected party in the Land were in the height of their strength, and pride
of their power, God was pleased to break their horn, and to scatter them and
bring them down, and to put it in the hearts of his people to come forth for
their own defense against the remnant of their Forces, and so to dispose, that
after that Malignant party at Stirling had shed blood, yet things were
concluded in a peaceable way, and both their Armies and the Civil power,
gotten out of their hands, and put into the hands of those that have been
honest and faithful in the Cause from the beginning. 3. That the Lord was
pleased to give unto us in such a period of time, a Parliament consisting of so
many able and faithful men, who did walk so straightly in all things
concerning Religion, and his Majesty's Government, and made so many pious and
laudable Acts for the suppressing of prophanitie and iniquity, and advancing
Piety, and Righteousness in the Land. 4. That the Lord has disappointed and
defeated so many secret Plots and devises, tending to the undermining of his
Cause, especially that at the Isle of Wight so prejudicial to the Covenant and
the Union betwixt the Kingdoms. 5. That the Lord has been pleased at such a
time when all the Malignants of the Kingdom were hatching new devices, and
strengthening themselves at home, and expecting Forces from abroad, by so small
a number, and in so unexpected a way, to defeat so many of them, and give such
victory and salvation to his People, without so much as one being killed on our
side. 6. That the LORD was pleased to direct and assist both State and Kirk, in
giving so seasonable, full, and harmonious Testimony against the proceedings of
the Secturies in England.
A. Ker.

FINIS.

