ACTS FOR The utter abolishing of Bishops out of the Churches of ENGLAND and
SCOTLAND.

WITH A Motion to the House for the Order for Church Government by a better Way.

Jan: 31 1642 LONDON, Printed for Thomas Watson. 1643.

The Act of the general Assembly in Scotland for the abolishing of Bishops in
that Kingdom.
THe Kings Majesty having declared, that it is his Royal will and pleasure,
that all questions about Religion and and matters ecclesiastical, be
determined by the Church: having also by public Proclamation indicted this
free National Assembly, for settling the present distractions of this Church;
and for establishing a perfect peace, against such divisions and discords, as
have been sore displeasing to his Majesty, and grievous to all his Majesty's
good subjects, And now his Majesty's Commissioner John E. of Traquair,
instructed and authorized with s full Commission, being present and sitting in
this Assembly, now fully conveened and orderly constitute, in all the members
thereof, according to the order of this Church, having at large declared his
Majesty's xeal to the reformed Religion; and his Koyall care, and tender
affection to this Church; (where his Majesty had both his Birth and Baptism)
his great displeasure at the manifold distractions and divisions of this Church
and Kingdom, and his desire to have all our wounds perfectly cured, with a
fair and fatherly hand. And although in the way approved by this Church,
trial has bin taken in former Assemblies before from the Church Registers to
our full satisfaction. Yet the Commissioner making a particular inquiry, from
the Members of the Assembly now solemnly conveened concerning the real and
true causes, of so many and great evils at this time past, and so sore
troubling the peace of the Church and Kingdom. It was represented to his
Majesty's Commissioner by this Assembly, that besides many other, the main and
most material causes were.

Reasons from the Assembly for the change of Church Government.
1 THe pressing of this Church by Prelates with a Service Book, or Book of
Common Prayer, without direction or warrant ftom the Church, and containing
besides the popish frame thereof, diverse popish errors and Ceremonies; and the
seeds of manifold gross superstitions and Idolatry: with a Book of Canons,
without warrant or direction from the general assembly, establishing a
tyrannical power over the Church in the person of Bishop; and overthrowing the
whole discipline and government of the Church by assemblies: with a Book of
consecration and Ordination, without warrant of authority civil or
ecclesiastical, appointing offices in the house of God, which are not wa
ranted by the word of God, and repugnant to the Discipline and Acts of our
Church: with the Commissicn erected without the consent of the Church,
subverting the Jurisdiction and ordinary Judicatories of this Church; and
giving to persons merely Ecclesiastical the power of both Swords; and to
persons merely civil, the power of the Keys and Church Censures.

2. A second cause was the Articles of Perth. viz. Observation of Festival
days, kneeling at the Communion, Confirmation, Administration of the
Sacraments in private places, which were brought in by a civil Assembly; and
are contrary to the confession of faith 1590 as it was meant and subscribed in
Ann^. 1580. and diverse times since to the order and constitution of this Church.

3. A third cause was, the change of the Government of the Church, from the
Assemblies of the Church to the persons of Churchmen, usurping the priority
and power over their brethren by the way, and under the name of Episcopal
government against the confession, Anno. 1580. Against the order set down in
the book of policy, and against the intentions and Constitutions of this Church
from the beginning.

4. A fourth cause was the civil places and power of Church men, their sitting
in Session, Counsel, and Exchequer, their ridding, sitting and voting in
Parliament; and their sitting in the Bench as Justices of Peace, which
according to the constitutions of the Church are incompatible with their
spiritual function, do tend to the hindrance of the Minister.

A fifth cause was, the keeping and authorizing of corrupt Assemblies at
Linlithgow 1606. 1608. at Glasgow 1610. at Aberdene 1616. at S. Andrews 1617.
at Perth 1618. which are all null and unlawful, as being called and constitute
quite contrary to the order and constitutions of this Church received and
practiced ever since the reformation of Religion, and laboring to introduce
innovations in this Church, against the order and religion established.

A sixth cause was, the want of lawful and free general Assemblies, rightly
constitute of Pastors, Doctors and Elders yearly or oftener pro re nata,
according to the liberty of this Church, expressed in the Book of Policy, and
acknowledged in the Art of Parliament 1592. Which his Majesty's Commissioner
having heard patiently, and examined particularly; all objections to the
contrary being answered to the full. The whole Assembly with express consent
of his Majesty's Commissioner, in one heart and voice did declare, that these
and such other proceedings, from the neglect and breach of the National
Covenant of this Church and Kingdom made in An. 1580. have been indeed the true
and main cause of all our evils and distractions; and therefore ordains,
according to the constitutions of the general Assemblies of this Church, and
upon the grounds respective above-specified, that the foresaid Service-Booke,
Book of Canons and Ordination, and High Commission be rejected still* that the
Articles of Perth be no more practiced: that Episcopal government and the
civil places and power of Chuch-men be holden still as unlawful in this
Church: that the abovenamed pretended Assemblies at Linlithgow 1606, 1608. at
Glasgow 1610. an Aberden 1616. at S. Andrews 1617. at Perth 1618. be hereafter
accounted as null and of none effect; and that for preservation of Religion,
and preventing all such evils in time coming, General Assemblies rightly
constitute, as the perfect and compent Judge of all matters Ecclesiastical
hereafter be kept yearly, and oftener, as occasion and necessity shall require,
the necessity being first remonstrate to his Majesty by humble supplication; as
also of these occasional Assemblies, that Church-Sessions, Presbyteries, and
Synodall Assemblies, constitute and ordained according to the Book of Policies,
and constitutions of this Church, be also hereafter kept as occasion and
necessity shall require.

The Heads of the Bill in Parliament for abolishing of Bishops in ENGLAND.
WHereas the government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other their
Ecclesiastical Officers, has been found by long experience to be a great
impediment to the perfect reformation and growth of Religion, It is therefore
enacted from henceforth there shall be no Archbishops, Bishops, etc, or any
their Officers within this Church and Kingdom: and that if any person shall
take upon him to exercise any such Office, he shall incur a Praemunire
according to the Statute of 16. Ric. 2. And that all Manors, Lands, Rectories,
Impropriations, Houses, Rents, Services, and other Hereditaments whatsoever of
the said Archbishops. Bishops, Deans, Deacons and Chapters, Archdeacons,
Prebendaries, Canons, and Pettie-Canons, which they or any of them have in the
right of the said Churches and dignities, shall be disposed of and ordered in
such manner and form as the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Temporal
and Commons shall appoint. And it is therein further enacted, that all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction fit to be exercised in the Church and Kingdom of
England, shall be committed to such a number of persons, and in such manner as
by this present Parliament shall be appointed.

A Motion to the House concerning Church Government.
EVery several Shire of England and Wales, to be a several Circuit or
Diocese, for the Eclesiasticall Jurisdiction, excepting Yorkshire, which is
to be divided into three.

2. A constant Presbytery of twelve choice Divines to be selected in every
Shire or Diocese.

3. A constant President to be established over this Presbytery.

4. This President in each Diocese to ordain, suspend, deprive, degrade,
Excommunicate, by and with the consent and assistance of seven Divines of his
Presbytery then present and not otherwise.

5. The times of ordination throughout the land to be four times every year,
viz, the first of May, the first of August, the first of November, and the
first of February.

6. Every President constantly to reside within his Diocese, in some one prime
or chief City or Town with in his Diocese, as in particular.

7. Every President to have one special particular congregation, to be chosen
out of the most convenient for distance of place, from his chief residence,
and the richest in value that may be had, where he shall duly preach unless
he be lawfully hindered, and then he shall, take care that his cure be well
supplied by another.

8. No President shall remove or be translated from the Presbytery which he
shall first undertake.

9. Upon every death, or other avoidance of a president, the King to grant a
Conge d'elire to the whole Clergy of that Diocese, and they to present three
of the Presbyters aforesaid, and the King to choose and nominate whom he please
of them.

10. The first Presbyters of every Shire to be named by the Parliament, and
afterward upon the death of any Presbyter, the remaining Presbyter to choose
another out of the Parish Ministers of that Shire, and this to be done within
one-month after such death or avoidance.

11 No President or Clergie-man to exercise or have any Temporal Office, or
secular employmwnt, but only, for the present, to hold and keep the probate of
wills, until the Parliament shall otherwise resolve.

12. The President once a year (at Midsummer) to summon a Diocesan Synod, there
to hear and by general vote, to determine ail such matter of scandal in Life
and Doctrine among the Clergymen, as shall be presented unto them.

13. Every three years, a National Synod to be, which for persons shall
consist of all the Presidents in the Land and of two Presbiters to be chosen by
the rest out of each Presbitery, and of two Clerks to be chosen out of every
Dioces, by the Clergy thereof.

14. This National Synod to make and ordain Canons of the Government of the
Church, but they not to bind until tey be confirmed by Parliament.

15. Every President over and above the benefice aforesaid, a certain constant
rent allowed and allotted proportional to the Diocese wherein he is to
officiate, that is to say, every Presbyter to have a constant yearly profit
above his benefice.

16. As for the revenue of the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, etc. a strict
survey to be taken of all their rents and profits, and the same to be
represented at the beginning of our next convention, and in the mean time no
Lease to be renewed, nor timber to be felled.

FINIS.

