THE WISE TAKEN IN THEIR CRAFTINESS, AND Their Wisdom made manifest to be
Foolishness with God; and their actions discovered to be contrary to the pure
Law of Righteousne^s given forth by the pure Lawgiver, Christ Jesus the Light;
by which Light some one Judge, or Judges of this Nation are made manifest, how
he, or they have acted contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of this Nation;
and contrary to all the Kings, Rulers, and Judges, spoken of in Scripture; by
setting Fines upon men, and sending them to Prison till payment of the same,
for not putting off their Hats, and stand bare-headed before them in their
Court of Assizes, and Jail-delivery.

ALSO, Here is showed, that it is no sin for a man to stand with his Hat on his
head, before any Emperor, King, Ruler, Judge, Justice, or other Magistrate,
either alone, or in open Court; neither is the putting the hat off, and
standing, bare-headed before them, the honor that is due unto Magistrates,
which the Scripture speaks of.

And shall not Ged avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night ^a^s him,
though he bear long with them: I tell you that he will avenge them speedily; he
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: Luke 18.7.8. Heb. 10 37.

He leads the Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fool^: He
loses the bonds of Kings, and girdeth their loyn^ with a g^^e. He leads
Princes away spoiled, and overthrows them mighty. There is a sp ^^t in ^an,
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. Great me^ are
not always wise, neither do the aged unde^stand judgment, Job 12.17, 18, 19.
Job 31.8.9.

Written by, me who am known by the Name of Henry Clark.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's, 1656.

Here is the wise taken in their craftiness, and their wisdom made manifest to
be foolishness with God; and their actions discovered to be contrary to the
pure Law of Righteousness, given forth by the pure Lawgiver Christ Jesus, the
Light; by which light some one Judge, or Judges of this Nation are made
manifest, how he or they have acted contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of
this Nation; and contrary to all the Kings, Rulers, and Judges spoken of in
Scripture, by setting fines upon men, and sending them to prison till payment
of the same, for not putting off their hats, and stand bare-headed before them
in their Court of Assizes, and Jail-delivery, etc.

GOD in the beginning created man in his own image, Genesis 1.26, 27.
and after his own likeness, in holiness and righteousness, which is after the
image of God, created he man, holy and upright: For said Solomon, God created
man upright: Ecles. 7.29.
But they have sought out many inventions; man turning from the light, and
going out from the presence of God, who is light, runs into the transgression,
and then sought out the invention how to hide themselves from the presence of
the living God, who is Light, and makes manifest all darkness, and evil deeds
whatsoever that are reproved. Adam after his fall into the transgression, he
sought out in his invention, how to hide and cover himself, Eve being deceived
by the Serpent was in the transgression, she took of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, which God commanded the man, saying, Thou shall not
eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; and
she did eat, and she gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat also;
and their eyes being opened, they knew that they were naked; then they sought
our an invenion, Isa. 30. i.
and sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons, to cover themselves
therewith; but the woe was, and is unto them that be covered, but not with the
Spirit of the Lord. The fig leaves being too short a covering for them, (they
sought out another invention) they went and hid themselves in the Garden among
the trees, from the presence of the Lord; but the Lord God walking in the
Garden in the cool of the day, Read the second and third chapter of Genesis
called unto Adam, and said, Where art thou? and Adam said unto the Lord God, I
heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid because I was naked, and hid my
self. Here you may see how the wise was taken in his craftiness, and his
invention stood him in no stead, neither saved him from the presence of the
Almighty, nor hid him from the judgment of God: for God said unto Adam,
Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy Wife, and have eaten of the
Tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it: Cursed (said
the Lord) is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life; Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee; in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto thee ground, for
out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.

So likewise after the Flood, the whole earth being of one Language and of one
speech, the people as they journeyed from the East, they found a Plain in the
Land of Shinar, and they dwelt there, (and being there at ease, they sought out
an invention) they said one to another, Go to, let us make Brick, and burn them
thoroughly: and they had Brick for Stone, and they had Slime for Motter: and
said, Go to, and let us build us a City and a Tower, whose top may reach up
unto Heaven, and let us make us a Name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the
face of the whole earth. See here, how men in the pride of their hearts, and in
their inventions, how they sought for their honor: Let us make us a Name, said
they: and likewise for their safety, least (said they) we be scattered abroad
upon the face of the whole earth: Go to, let us build a City and a Tower; whose
top may reach up to Heaven: here was their pride. But the only wise God, whose
eye sees all things, he came and took the Wise in their own Craftiness, and he
scattered the proud in the imagination of their own hearts; all that they could
do by their inventions, could not save them from the Wrath of the Almighty, who
consounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings to naught the understanding of the
Prudent: Read Genesis 11 chapter
For God he came down to see the City and the Tower which the children of men
builded, and the LORD said, The People are one, and they have all one LANGUAGE,
and this they begin to do; and nothing will be restrained from them which
they have imagined to do; then the Lord did there confound their LANGUAGE, that
they could not understand one ano^hers Speech; and from thence did the Lord
scatter them abroad upon the face of the whole earth, and so they left off
building the City.

And as men sought out many inventions for their own safety and honor, and to
make themselves rich and great in the world, and to hide themselves from the
presence and wrath of God; so likewise the said wicked men sought out many
inventions how to destroy, and to affl^ct the righteous; therefore said David,
The wicked plotteth against the just, Psa. 36.4. and 37.12. Psa. 2.1, 2. Psa.
21.11.
and gnasheth upon him with his teeth; he devises mischief upon his b^d; he
sets himself in a way that is not good; for the Kings of the earth s^t
themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, and the people imagine a va^n
thing, against the Lord and against his anointed; For said Dav^d, they
intended evil against thee, O Lord, they imagine a mischievous device, Habbak.
1.4. P^o^o. 23. Read Psa. the 9^.
which they are not able to perform: And Habbakkuk said, the wicked does
compass about the righteous, the wicked are filled with mischief, they take
please ^e in unrighteousness: and said Solomon, it is a sport to a fool to do
mischi^ef: and David said, O Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph, and all
the workers of iniquity boast themselves? said he, they break in pieces thy
people, O Lord, they afflict thine heritage; they slay the widow and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless; they frame mischief by a Law, they gather
themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent
blood.

Cain who was the first born, (he sought a wicked invention) because his own
works was evil, and his brothers were righteous, Cain was wrath, and his
countenance fell, and he talked with his brother Abel the righteous, and when
they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel the righteous,
and slew him; this wickedness was plotted, and the murder acted without any
Law; but God, who hears the cry of the innocent, and pleads the cause
himself, of the just; repayed the wicked for his wickedness; God he said to
Cain, what have thou done? Read Genesis 4. chapter Isa. 3.11.
the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground: now see what
followed, woe unto the wicked, for it shall go ill with him; for the Lord said
unto Cain, Now art thou cursed from the earth; when thou titlest the ground it
shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength: a Fugitive and a Vagabond
shall thou be in the earth: And God set a Mark upon Cain, lest any finding him
should kill him; for said the Lord, Whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be
taken on him seven fold; and Cain said, My punishment is greater then I can
bear.

And so the Lords of the Philistines, they sought out an invention how to
afflict Sampson, and see here how they take counsel together, to accomplish
their invention; The Lords of the Philistines came to Delilah a woman in the
valley of Sorock, whom Sampson loved, and they said unto her, Entice him, and
see wherein his great strength lies, and by what means we may prevail against
him, that we may bind him to afflict him, and we will give thee every one of
us eleven pieces of Silver: Now Delilah she took their counsel, and accepted of
the mon y, and sought in her invention whore Sampsons strength lay, and she
enticed Sampson, and got out from him where his strength lay, and she made him
sleep upon her knees, and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off
the seven ^ocks off his head, where Sampson said his strength lay; then she
called for the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he has showed me all
his heart, and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him; and
then the Philistines took him and bound him with fetters of Brass, Read Judges,
16 chap.
and put out his eyes, and he did grind in the prisonhouse; then the Lords of
the Philistines gathered themselves together, to offer a great sacrifice unto
Dagon their God, and to rejoice, and when their hearts were merry, they called
for Sampson out of the prisonhouse to make them sport; but God who gave
Sampson strength at first, renewed his strenth again, and took the wise in
their own craftiness, and made their wisdom manifest to be but foolishness,
and rewarded the uncircumcised Philistines with judgment; and in their mirth
cut them off, when they thought not on it.

And so Haman, when he saw that Mordecai bowed not to him, nor did him
reverence, according to the Kings command, then was Haman full of wrath, and
Haman was so proud, and so envious against the people of God, that he thought
scorn to lay hands upon Mordecai alone, therefore Haman he sought how to
destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole Kingdom, there was Hamans
invention to destroy all the people, for then he had no Law to do it by, for if
he had had a Law, he (being set up above all the Princes, when he was so full
of wrath) would have put it in execution without going to the King; Therefore
Haman said to the King Abasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad,
and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their
Laws are diverse from all people; neither do they (said Haman) keep the Kings
Laws; therefore said Haman to the King, It is not for the Kings profit to
suffer them to live; if it please the King (said Haman) let it be written that
they may be destroyed, and said Haman, I will pay ten thousand talents of
silver to the hands of those that shall have the charge of the business, Read
the 3, 4, 5, 6. and 7: chap. of the book of Esther.
to bring it into the Kings treasuries: Here you may see how the Rulers and the
King set themselves against the people of God, and frame mischief by a Law; the
King took off his ring from off his hand, and gave it to Haman, and said, Do
with the people as it seems good unto thee; then was the Kings Scribes
called, and all was written according to Hamans command, and the decree was
made and sealed with the Kings seal, and according to the writing thereof it
was sent into every Province in the kings name by the Posts, to the Rulers of
every Province, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all the Jews both
young and old, little children, and women, in one day; but he that sits in the
Heavens laugh't Haman to scorn, and had him in derision daily; for Haman was
taken in his own craftiness, and his invention was discovered which he had
sought out, even the Gallows which he had prepared to hang Mordecai on, and
his intention to destroy all the Jews according to the decree, was made
manifest, and Haman taken and hanged upon the Gallows himself; the same measure
that he would have meeted to others, was meeted to himself, up heaped.

And so likewise Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon sought out an invention, and
made an image of Gold, threescore Cubits high, and six cubit, broad, and he set
it up in the plain of Dura, in the Province of Babylon; then the King sent, and
gathered together the Princes, the Governors, and the Captains, the Judges, the
Counselors, the Treasurers, the Sheriffs, and all the Rulers of the Provinces,
to the dedication of the Image, which the King had set up, and there they sat
and took counsel together, and made their invented decree, (to burn men in the
invented fiery furnace) and caused it to be proclaimed aloud by the Harold,
that whatsoever People, Nations, or Languages, did not fall down and worship
the Golden Image, when they heard the sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp,
Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcemer, and all kinds of Music, should be the same hour
cast into the midst of the fiery burning furnace; then certain of the Caldeans
accused the Jews, for not falling down according to the Kings decree, to
worship the Golden Image, which the King had set up; then the King in his rage
and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, M^shech, and Abedigo before him, and when
they were brought before him, they told the King, they were not careful to
answer him in that matter: For, (said they) Be it known unto thee, O King, that
we will not serve thy Gods, Read the 3d. chap. of Daniel.
nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up, behold our God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver us
out of thy hand, O King; then was the King full of fury, and the form of his
visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshech, and Obednigo, and he commanded
the fiery furnace to be heated seventimes hotter then it was wont to be heat,
and he commanded the most mighty men of his Army to bind Shadrach, Meshech and
Abednigo, and cast them into the fiery furnace; therefore because the Kings
commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, those men Shadrach, M
sh^ch, and Abednigo, were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats)
and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the Fery burning
Furnace. Here you may see how mischief was invented, and wickedness acted by a
Law of the King, the Princes, the Judges, the Counselors, and the Sheriffs,
and all the Rulers of the Provinces; yea, and put in execution in the Kings
rage and fury, when the form of his visage was changed; but the most high and
mighty God (who confounds the wisdom of the wise, and makes the Judges fools)
suffered not the fire to have power over the bodies of his servants, that
feared and trusted in his Name, for he sent his Angel and delivered them; sa^
the hair of their heads was not singed, neither was their coats changed, nor
the sm^ll ^f the fi^e pass^d on them.

M^^. 26 3, 4, 14, ^5, 1^ Ma^k. ^4.1.10, 11. Lu^. 22.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And again the ch^^^ Priests and the Scribes, with Judas, sought out ^n their
invert on how to kill Christ the Son of the living God, for they ^ea^^d the
people. Then Judas went out from Christ the Light, and Satan entered into him,
and he fell into the transgression: And Judas he went unto the ch^ef Priests,
and he communed with them and the Captains, how he might betray Christ unto
them, and they were glad, and covenanted with him for thirty p^eces of silver.
Here you may likewise see the chief Priests, the Scribes, the Captains, and
Judas, how they sat in c^unsel together, and plotted against the just; yea,
and invented mischief against the Lord, and against his anointed, Jesus Christ:
From that time Judas (in his invention) sought opportunity how to betray Christ
unto them conveniently in the absence of the multitude: Joh. 18.1, 2, 3, 12,
13. Mat. 26.5, 6.
Then Judas having received a band of men and officers from the chief Priests
and Pharisees, comes with Lanthornes, and Torches, and Weapons into the Garden
where Jesus and his Disciples were, which was over the Brook Ch^dron, and there
the Captain, the Officers, and the Band, took Christ Jesus the Son of God, and
bound him, and led him away to the High Priest, Mar. 14 53 Mar. 14.55, 56, 37.
Joh. 19.7.
and with him were assembled all the chief Priests, the Elders, and Scribes:
and the chief Priests and all the counsel (in their inventions) sought for
witnesses against Jesus, that they might put him to death; for said the Jews,
We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye; because, said they, he made
himself the Son of God, and they began to accuse him before Pilate, saying, we
have found this fellow perverting the Nation, Luke 23.1, 2. Mat. 26.59, 60, 61.
Mat. 27.22.25. Luke 23.18 23, 24.
and forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ, a
King: and many bore false witness against him, but their witness agreed not
together, and so found none: And at last came two false witnesses, and said,
This fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in
three days; and the Jews said unto Pilate, Away with this man, let him be
crucified, and let his blood be upon us, and upon our children; and Pilate gave
Sentence as they required, and they crucified him, and parted his Garments, and
cast lots for them. And thus you may see that they were the wise men, so
called, and the learned Rabbis, the high Priests, the chief Priests, the
Judges, Counselors, and Captains, that gathered themselves together, and sat
in counsel, and upon judgment, as they called it, against the Lords Christ his
anointed; 1 Cor. 3.19.
but their wisdom is made manifest to be foolishness with God to after
Generations: Judas hanged himself, and the Jews were scattered abroad in all
Nations.

And as it was then, so it was in after generations; that wicked men imagined
and invented mischief against the servants of God, how to afflict and destroy
them; some were slain with the Sword, some had their heads cut off; some sawn
asunder; some tortured and stretched upon Racks; some cast into Lions Dens, and
amongst other wild beasts to be devoured: Some put into boiling Caldrons; some
stoned; some whipped; and others hanged; and some burned with fire; and if you
will read the History of the ten Persecutions, in the first volume of the Book
of Martyrs, ye may read of more filthy, cruel, wicked inventions that they had,
and did destroy the people of God with, then I write of.

And now to come to King Henry the fourth's days, you may see by a Statute,
called the Statute Ex officio, what a Law (the learned and wise men, so called)
the Bishop, and the Clergy his brethren, the Suffragans and Assistants, had in
their inventions got the King and the House of Lords to make, to burn openly
all those people that would not in those days worship the cross, the crucifix,
with other images and pictures, which in their inventions and imaginations they
had set up to be worshipped; or that should declare by writing, preaching, or
other ways inform openly, or in secret, contrary to the Catholic Faith, and
determination of holy Church, as they called it, and the Pope, should be
counted Heretics, and openly be burned to the view of all people: and so eager
(says the History of those passages) were the Bishops, and the Clergy, the
Suffragans, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Archdeacons, Priests, Canons, Parsons,
Vicars, Chaplains, and Clerks, to have those called Heretics to be burned,
that after they had passed definitive Sentence upon Tho. Saultre, and delivered
him over to the secular powers, for them to burn him, according to their
invented Law, that for fear it should not be done speedily enough, they called
upon the King, who was ready enough to satisfy their blood-thirsty humors, who
made made a strict Decree, and sent it to the then Mayo^ and Sher ffs of
London, requiring them to take the said Tho. Saul^r^, whom they had in their
custody, and to put him in the fire, and burn him openly and really, to the
great horror of his offense; which was accordingly done; and many more after
him, as the History relates: And this cruel bloody invention lasted till Queen
Mary's days, and a little after; for see if there were not some of those
called Anabaptists burned in queen Elizabeth's days: And so you may see here,
how man whom God created upright, Eccles. 7.26.
sought out many wicked inventions, and plotted against the just, and set
themselves, and took counsel together against the Lord, and against his
anointed, and imagined mi^chief both by a Law, and without a Law, saying, Let
us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from off us; Psa. 2.3.
and as the heathen did rage then, so they do now; and as the people imagined
vain things then, so they do now in these days imagine vain things, and seek
out new inventions, whereby to afflict the servants of the living God.

So here follows a new Invention, sought out by man's imagination, and in man's
will is acted as he sits in Judgment, so called; for which he has neither Law
from God or man, to bear him out in passing his Sentence, as some of those who
are counted grave, wise Judges of this Land have done upon some of those people
called quakers, and setting a Fine of twenty Marks a piece upon them, and sent
them to prison to lie there till payment of the same; and for their so doing, I
say they have neither Law from God, nor no Law of this Nation to bear them out;
but what is done in this case, is done without any law upon the innocent, who
have transgressed no law by standing with their hats on their heads in open
Court before the Justices of Assizes, for the which they are fined twenty Marks
a piece, and sent to prison till payment of the same; for where there is no
law, there is no tran^gression; therefore the parties are innocent in this
thing, by keeping their hats on their heads, and not putting them off to stand
bare-headed before them in the Court: and where there is no law to transgress,
there ought no sentence to pass upon any man, for punishment to be inflicted,
either by death, or loss of limb, bani^hment, or imprisonment, nor no Fine set
to to the confiscation of Goods, unless there were a law given, with a penalty
thereunto, to be inflicted upon the transgressors thereof. And therefore I say,
Whatsoever Judge or Justice that passes Judgment upon any man, or men, for
which he has no law, acts in his own will, and by his own invention, contrary
to the rule of the law, which is holy, just, pure and good, given forth by the
pure law giver, Christ Jesus, and is written in their heart, according to the
Covenant of God, who says he has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what
the Lord does require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? who stands in the Congregation of the mighty, and
judges among the Judges, saying, How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept
the persons of the wicked? says the Lord; defend the poor and fatherless, do
justice to the afflicted and needy: Psa. 82.
You Judges, the Lord God says, You must deliver the POOR and NEEDY, and rid
them out of the hands of the wicked, and see that ye respect no man's person in
judgment: for with the Lord there is no respect of persons, nor taking of
gifts: Therefore you are not to judge for man, but for the Lord; and upon the
Transgressors of the Law are you to inflict punishment, and not upon the just,
as some of you have done here in England, upon some of those people called
quakers, for not putting off their hats, and not standing bareheaded before you
in your Court, and for no other thing, whom ye ought to have set at liberty,
and so have rid them out of the hands of the wicked; for I tell, that if they
had put off their hats, and stood bare-headed before you, respecting your
persons, then they had transgressed the law, as says the Scripture; for James,
a witness of Christ, James 2.9
and a Minister of the Word, said, but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit
sin, and are convinced of the Law as Transgressors; for whosoever shall offend
in one point, he is guilty of all; and he that respects men's persons, has
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; for Christ Jesus said, How can ye
believe that receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes
from God only? Christ Jesus leaving us an example, Joh. 5.44. 1 Pet. 2.21. Mat.
22.16 Mark 12.14. Luke 20.21. 1 John 3.4, 6, 8, 9, 10.
that we should follow his steps, who respected no man's person: And God says,
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty; he that respects men's
persons commits sin by transgressing the Law; for every sin is the
transgression of the Law: and he that commits sin is not of God, but of the
devil, as ^aith the Scripture; but every knee shall bow to the Name of Jesus,
and every tongue shall confess him to be Lord and King: and the Lord God alone
is to be worshipped; and the people of his Pasture, and the sheep of his hand,
they worship him in spirit and in truth, and come and bow, and kneel down
before the Lord their Maker, and not to man. Mordecai would not bow to Haman,
nor do him reverence according to the Kings command, which was contrary to Gods
command. Shadrach, M sh^ch, and Abednigo would not bow down to the golden Image
that the King had set up, nor worship his Gods, according to the Kings command,
which was contrary to Gods command.

ANd yet I say, that the great God of heaven and earth commands every soul to
be subject to the higher powers for conscience sake, which are ordained of God;
and likewise to submit to every O^d^nance of man for the Lords sake; and to
honor all men, and to honor the King; ^ow to honor all men is not to rise up
and bow down to them, as the fashion of this world is, and to stand bare-headed
before men, as it is the practice of the world so to do one to another, upon
every occasion that ^hey have to do with those that are greater in the worlds
estimation in riches, and have higher places and titles of honor in the world
then themselves, and so have their persons in admiration for their advantage
sake: Nay, this is not honoring all men, nor no man, but mere flattery; for
all this a man may do, and yet at the very same time hate the man in his heart,
and seek his Neighbors hurt; therefore said Solomon, Pro. 20.19. and 26.28.
and 29.5.
Meddle not with him that has flattering lips, for a man that flattereth his
Neighbor spreads a Net for his feet; and says he, A flattering mouth
works ruin: therefore said, Elihu, Let me not I pray you accept any man's
person, Job 22.21, Job 17.5.
neither let me give flattering titles unto man; for I know, said he, to give
flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would soon take me away: and Job said,
He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall
fail: and such flattery was used by Saul to David; and likewise by Saul's
servants to David; to be the Kings Son in-law, and to have his eldest Daughter
to his wife, to be a snate to him; as you may read 1 Samuel chap. 18. toward the
latter end: And so Judas came to Christ, and said, Hail Master, and kissed him;
and for money the same time betrayed him to the Jews. Mat. 26.47, 48, 49.
And so a Thief, a Robber, or Murderer, he will put off his hat and stand b^r^
headed before a Magistrate, Judge or Justice, who could find in his heart at
the same time, if he had but the Magistrate, Judge or Justice upon Black Heath,
or Salisbury-Plain, to rob and take all he has from him, and his life too.

And is this honor? nay: To honor all men consists in doing good to all men,
as we would be done unto our selves by others; and in loving all men, even our
neigbour as our selves; and in doing good to all men, and se^king every man's
good; for said Christ, if ye love them that love ^ou, Mat. 5.46.
what reward have you? do not even the publicanes the same? Did the Publicanes
honor all men? nay, but their friends only; and what reward had they? the
world loves its own; therefore they honor not all men; but they that honor
all men, love continually, pray for their enemies, ^o good ^o them that hate
them, and overcom evil with good; when they see their enemies hungry, they give
them meat; when they see them thirsty, they give them drink; and naked, they
clothe them: and they that honor all men, are no backbiters, nor slanderers,
nor false accusers, nor ^peak evil of any man; for love thinks no evil, but
seeks all men's good, and not their own; nor are they easily provoked, nor
b^have themselves unseemly, but are gentle, enduring all things, and rejoyc^ng
in the truth.

NEither does the honor which is to be given unto the Magistrate, ^hether it
be to a King, as supreme; or to a Lord Protector, as chief; or to any Ruler,
Governor, Judge, or Justice, or other Officer, either alone or before them in
open Court of Judicature, consist in standing up, and bowing down the body to
them, nor in putting the hat off, and standing bareheaded before them; but the
honor which is to be given to the Magistrate, consists in love, obedience and
fear: for he that does evil is to be afraid, seeing that the Ruler is set up of
God to be a terror to evil doers; therefore he that rules must be just, ruling
in the fear of God, and not to bear his sword in vain, but to lay it upon the
evildoers, who are to fear (the Ruler) because they have done the evil, and he
is set up of the Lord to be a terror to them: but he that does no evil, needs
not to fear: For doing that which is good, he is to have praise of the same;
for the Ruler is set up of God likewise for the praise of them that do well:
Therefore he that is in the well-doing, needs not fear the Rulers sword; for
Perfect love casts out fear, and The righteous is bold as a lion: So likewise
the honor which is to be given to the Magistrate, consists in love: he that is
in the well-doing, loves the Magistrate, because he is set up of God to be a
terror to the evil doers, and a protection to them that do well: and love to
the Magistrate consists in seeking his good always, and in giving to him his
due that God requires to give unto him: and those that give to the Magistrate
his due, speak not evil of the Ruler of the People, nor revile the Judges, no
nor curse the Magistrate or Ruler in their thoughts, which is contrary to Gods
Command: But for the Lords sake he loves the Magistrate, and dares not rise up
in his own will against him for conscience sake, and for that cause pays
tribute, and so likewise is subject to what is required by the Magistrate that
comes from God: and for conscience sake that which comes from God by the
Magistrate, is not gainsaid, but submitted to by them that honor the
Magistrate for the Lords sake: And herein the People of Israel showed their
willingness to obey that of God, that came from God to them by Moses their
Ruler: For, said they to Moses, Go thou near and hear all that the Lord our
Go^ shall say, D^ut. 5.27, 28.
and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we
will hear it, and do it: and the Lord said, This People have said well in all
that they have spoken. So likewise the chief of the Fathers, and the Princes of
the Tribes of Israel, and the Captains over thousands and hundreds; with the
Rulers over David the kings work joined with David, and offered willingly to
the Lord, and gave for the service of the house of God, gold, silver, iron, and
precious stones: 1 Chro. 29.
and with a perfect heart they offered willingly to the Lord, and rejoiced: and
David the king rejoiced also with great joy, because the thing was of the Lord:
which was so willingly done by them, according to the Command of the Lord God
who says, Hea^ O Israel, What does the Lord require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and to keep the
Commandments of the Lord and his Statutes, which says the Lord, I command thee
this day for thy good? Now whatsoever comes from any Ruler or Magistrate
contrary to the Lord God and his Commandments, the servants of the Lord obey
not, but rather choose to suffer afflictions by submitting to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, then to obey the Magistrates Command which is
contrary to Gods Command. For if the Magistrate make an Ordinance to take a man
that fears the Lord God, and to bring him before him, the man that fears the
Lord for the Lords sake who commands him, submits unto the Ordinance of man: he
patiently and willingly goes whither the Officer will have him: and if the
Magistrate make an Ordinance to send him to prison, he goes willingly, not
resisting against it, for the Lords sake, if it be to suffer stripes by virtue
of that Ordinance; they bear it patiently, not striving nor crying out; if it
be to suffer death by virtue of the Magistrates Ordinance. They that love the
Lord, are not only willing to suffer, but ready also to dye for the sake of
Jesus, and for obeying the Commandments of the Lord God. And herein did
Shadrach, Meshach and Ab^dnego refuse to obey the kings command, which was to
worship his gods, and to bow to the Image which he had set up, which to do was
contrary to Gods Command: so for the Lords sake they submitted patiently to the
kings Ordinance, which was to be cast into the fiery burning furnace for
disobeying the Kings Command: And so did Daniel refuse to obey the Kings
Command, which was that no man should ask any Petition of any god or man for
thirty days save only of the King, which was contrary to the Command of God
[Pray continually] for which Command of obeying God, and refusing to obey the
Kings, Daniel submitted to the Kings Ordinance, which was to be cast into the
lions den: And so Peter and John said that they could not forbear to speak the
things which they had seen and heard concerning Jesus, which was according to
Christ's Command, notwithstanding that the High Priest, the Rulers, the Elders
and the Scribes commanded them to preach no more in the name of Jesus: And if
the Magistrate make an Ordinance to take away the goods of those that fear God,
and obey his Commandments, they for the Lords sake submit to the Ordinance of
man, and suffer the spoiling of their goods willingly and patiently, rather
then to transgress the Law which is holy, pure and good, given forth by the
pure Lawgiver Christ Jesus; And they revile not again; being cursed they bless:
and although they suffer wrongfully, yet they threaten not, but commit
themselves and their cause to God which judges righteously: And herein do they
that fear the Lord follow Christ, who suffered for us, leaving us an Example,
that we should follow his steps, who commands to fear God, and to honor all
men, and to honor the King, and to submitt to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto other Governors as
unto those that are sent for the punishment of Evildoers, and for the praise
of them that do well. And herein is Submission and Subjection declared; which
is accordingly done by the Servants of the most high God, not for wrath, but
for conscience sake toward God.

And again I say it is no sin to stand with my hat on before the higher Powers,
because Where there is no Law, there is no transgression; For every day I go
about my Occasions at home and abroad, and stand or sit with my hat on my head
before the great God of I heaven and earth my Maker in his sight and presence,
out of which I cannot go, who is the highest of all Powers: and for so doing
my conscience does not accuse me for sin. For I know that if it were a sin,
that of God in my conscience would condemn me for so doing: and if my
conscience did condemn me, God is greater who would condemn me also: And seeing
it is no sin for me to walk, sit or stand with my hat on my head before the
great God of heaven and earth, who is the highest of Powers, by whom Kings
reign; then it is no sin for me to stand with my hat on my head before the
lesser Powers: And if it be no sin for me to stand with my hat on my head
before the great God of heaven and earth that lives for ever; then it is no sin
for me to stand with my hat on my head before them that are called Gods, who
shall dye like men. And again, if it be no sin for me to stand with my hat on
my head before the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords (which sits amongst them
and the Judges) and has power to pull down one, and set up another; then it is
no sin for me to stand with my hat on my head before a King, Lord, Judge,
Justice or any other Magistrate, who have no Law from him by whom they rule to
command me to take my hat off, and stand bare-headed before them in respect to
their persons.

And again, the putting off the hat, and the standing bare-headed before the
Ruler, Judge or Justice, or other Magistrate, singly and alone or before them
in the Courts of Judicature, as the multitude of the world does, is but
eye-service done to please the Magistrate, while his eye is on them, and they
in his sight; But those that fear the Lord, they deny all eye-service, For
whatsoever they do they do it in singleness of heart as unto the Lord, and not
unto man, or to please man in respect to their persons, contrary to the Command
of God. For I tell you both Judges and Justices, that those People that put
their hats off and stand bare-headed before you while they are in your sight,
in respect to your persons which you call honor, even they will and do, when
they are out of your sight transgress all laws (without any fear at all of you,
And what honor is this?) by swearing, lying, cursing, drunkenness, adultery,
fornication, robbing, stealing, fighting, quarrelling, murder and bloodshed,
plotting how to set the wh^le Nation together by the cars, that thereby they
might rule themselves over all, as daily Experience makes manifest, and ye your
selves be witnesses against them, who are brought before you for such
transgressions, whom ye ought to punish for their evil deeds, and mind to do
justice and judgment in the fear of the Lord, and take no notice of their hats
(but of their evil deeds) for their hats do no evil, nor transgress no law, but
do good by keeping of the head warm, and covering of it from the heat, cold and
wet; and for this end let them keep on their hats as they do their other
garments, and see that they honor God by leaving off their sins, and then there
will be honor to the Magistrate indeed given for conscience sake, and the Land
will be cleansed of evil doers: Now the raiment is for the body, and given of
God to Man to put on; For, (said Jacob) if the Lord will give me bread to eat,
and raiment to put on: And Moses said, The Lord loves the Stranger in giving
him raiment; now the hat is one part of the raiment, which God has given to
man to cover his nakedness, for which it is to be put and kept on the body,
which is for the Lord; so likewise the raiment is to keep the body from the
cold, and the wet, and also from the parching heat of the Sun: Now seeing that
God has given unto all mankind raiment for these causes to put on, to cover
the body with, then why should one man command another to take it off, and to
uncover himself, or any part of his body, for which his raiment is given to him
to be a covering thereof? Now all you who take men's hats from off their heads,
and make them to stand bare-headed at your pleasure, you act contrary to God
and his command, who says, Do violence to no man. God he clothes man, and will
you unclothe him, or any part of him? God he loves the Stranger in giving of
him raiment: and will you make a profession of God and Christ, and when a
Stranger comes before you, will you cause his hat which is pair of his raiment,
to be pulled off from his head, and to stand bare-headed to take cold, or to be
over-heat with the heat of the Sun, or to be wet with the rain or snow; and
will you have him to suffer these things, or any of them, by standing
bare-headed in respect to your persons? if ye will, leave off making a
profession of God, for God is not mocked; But some of you (it is like) will
say, that he may put on a cap, or two caps on his head, Is not that all one?
For, is not the cap, or caps, made to cover the head, and to keep it warm, as
well as the hats? And why are you more offended with a man that stands before
you with a hat on his head, then you are with another that stands before you
with a cap, or two caps upon his head, seeing that there is no law for one to
transgress more then the other? Do not you show your selves to be partial
herein? And again, every man it is like is not provided with a cap ready to put
on his head, and some are poor, and have not money to buy a cap or two with;
and why should the poor man be compelled to stand bare-headed to get cold more
then the rich? Or, again, Why should one that fears God, and cannot for
conscience toward God put off his hat, and stand bare-headed before you in
respect to your persons, be compelled to stand bare-headed when it is taken off
from him, as the Swearer, Drunkard, Thief, Robber, and Murderer can do, (who
transgress the Law) only to please you, and do it not out of any fear or
Obedience to God.

And again some have said, That to put off the hat, and to stand bare-headed
before the Magistrate is the custom of this Nation; and therefore it is to be
kept and observed before the Magistrate.

But, God he commands the contrary, as the Scripture with me does witness: For,
says the Lord, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall
thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment; neither shall
thou do after the works of the Canaanites, the Hivites, the Perizites, the
Hittites and the Iebusites. And Solomon said, The way of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord: And, If sinners entice thee, consent thou not to
them. Therefore those that are the Servants of the Lord God are not to to do
after the manner of the Heathen, nor to follow a multitude to do evil, nor to
fashion thmselves according to the World, and as they did in the time of their
ignorance according to their former Lusts, when they walked in a vain
conversation received by tradition from their Fathers: By following of which
Traditions, they transgressed the Commandments of God, Mat. 15.3.
but being called to holiness of conversation, in obedience to God they are to
observe no such Traditions.

But some have said that the Custom of the Nation is law; and likewise that
the Law maintains the Nations Customs.

If the putting off the hat, and standing bare-headed before the Magistrate,
either alone or in open Court, be a Custom, and that the Law of the Land
maintains it for a Custom, then let any of the Judges or Counselors of the
Land make known that Law, that maintain it for a Custom: or let them show one
President for it, or whose Case it was in law that was so fined, and sent to
prison till payment of the said Fine of twenty Marks; or whatever parties goods
were ever distrained of for not paying the said Fine; or whether ever any Fine
was brought into the Exchequer for such a thing; and in what King or Queens
Reigns it was in, since William the Conquerors time, that any man or men were
fined twenty Marks a piece, and sent to prison till payment of the same, by any
Judge of justice of the English Nation: or let them show me any Example from
any one Judge, Ruler or King, that judged, or ruled over Israel, or from any of
the Heathen Kings that the Scripture speaks of.

For Moses, he was a Ruler and a Judge over Israel, and the Scripture does not
anywhere testify that he set a Fine upon any man for not putting off his hat,
and standing bare-headed before him; nor sent any ^an to prison for any such
thing; neither did he give any charge or Command to the Judges that judged the
People at all seasons, so to do. For said Moses, I charged your Judges at that
time, saying, Exodus 18.25, 26.
Hear the Causes between your Brethrens and judge righteously between every man
and his brother, and the stranger that is with him: ye shall not r^spect
persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; you
shall not be afraid of the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
for the judgment is Gods. And the Cause that is too hard for you, bring it
before me, and I will hear it, and in this charge there is no mention made of
hats to be put off by the people, nor standing bare-headed before them, neither
do I find that Joshua who was a Ruler over Israel after Moses, that he fined
any man, and sent him to prison for not putting off his Hat, and not standing
bare headed before him; neither did he give any charge to the heads of the
people, the Rulers, Judges, and Officers so to do; for Joshua called them
together, and said to them, I am old and stricken in age, be ye therefore very
courageous to keep, and to do all that is written in the book of the Law of
Moses, Josh. 23.2.6, 11, ver.
that ye turn not aside therefrom, to the right hand, or to the left; take
good heed therefore unto your selves, that you love the Lord your God. Did
Gideon, Jeptha, Deborah, Sampson, Eli, Samuel, or any other of the Judges that
judged Israel, command the people to put off their hats, and to stand
bare-headed before them? or fine and send any to prison, to lie there till
payment of the said fine, for not putting their hats off, and standing not
bare-headed before them? Or did any of the Kings of Israel and Judah that
feared the Lord, as David, Solomon, Jehosaphat, Josiah, or Hezekiah, or others
that feared the Lord, command any man to put off his hat, and to stand
bare-headed before them? Or if they did not, did any one of them fine any man,
and send him to prison to lie there till payment of the said fine? (as some of
the Judges of this Nation have done to some of those people called quakers:)
Or, did any of those Kings give any charge to the Judges so to do to the people
that did not put off their hats, and stand bare-headed before them, yea or nay?
For I find that Jehosaphat set Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced
Cities of Judah, City by City, and he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do;
2 Chro. 19.5, 6, 7.
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment:
Wherefore, said he, now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do
it; for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts; and in this charge to all the Judges by Jehosaphat, here was
no mention made of hats, or did any of the idolatrous Kings ot Israel and
Judah, as Rehoboam, Jeroboam, Zimri, Ahab, Zedekiah, or others of those Kings,
command the people to put off their hats, and to stand bare-headed before them,
or did they set fines upon any of the people that did not put off their hats,
and stand bare headed before them, or send them to prison till payment of the
same, yea or nay? Or did any of the heathen Kings which the Scripture speaks
of, as Pharaoh King of Egypt, or Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, or Caesar,
Herod, or others, fine any man, and lend him to prison to lie there till
payment of the said fine, for not putting off their hats, and standing not
bare-headed before them, yea or nay?

You Judges of England, who have done thus, see if you have any precedent for
what you have done, or any example in all the Scriptures; and if you have not,
then to that of God in every one of your consciences that bears me witness,
that you have exceeded all the Kings, Rulers and Judges, that ever have gone
before you, in this invention that ye have sought out now of late; And what do
you make a profession of God, and of Christ, and seek out inventions? And are
not you ashamed that you are discovered by the light, to be in the inventions,
and to exceed therein beyond the very Heathen that have gone before you, which
are spoken of in the Scripture? I am sure you have no example from Oliver,
Protector, for this; for he never set any fine upon any man, no nor sent any
man to prison, for standing with his hat on his head before him, neither did I
ever hear that he was offended with any man, or men, for their so doing; and I
am sure that he and his Council have not made any Law for you to act so by; if
they had, it would have been published as well as others have been: And seeing
you have no example from Oliver Protector, nor any Law from him and his Council
for your so doing; then I appeal to all understanding men, whether you do not
disgrace his Government, and dishonor him the chief Ruler of the Commonwealth,
by doing such things in the Corners of the Land in his name, for which you have
neither Law, nor Example from him for your so doing, whom ye ought to honor, as
well as others. And now to you the Judges, who have set fines upon men, and
sent them to prison to lie there till payment of the same, for nothing but
because they could not for conscience sake toward God, and in respect to your
persons, put off their hats, and stand bare-headed before you; I say, Stand
still a little while, and commune with your own hearts, and see whether you
have kept the Law of God, and judged for the Lord in this thing: or, whether
you have not gone beyond the rule that God has showed you; that is, He has
showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what the Lord does requ^re of thee; but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God: Have you done
thus yea or nay? Or, Judges Oath, 18 Ed. 3. Stat. 3.
see if ye have done according to your own Law and Oath; that is, That ye shall
do even Law and execution of right to all Subjects rich and poor, without
having ^egard to any person, and in case any Letters come to you contrary to
the Law, that ye do nothing by such Letters, and go forth and do the Law; and
by the Law no man of what estate or condition that he be, Anno 28 Ed. 3. chapter 3.
shall be put from his Land or Tenement, or taken and imprisoned, or
dis-inherited, or put death, without being brought into answer by due process
of Law; now see if ye have gone according to your own rule, and kept within
your own bounds, and if ye have not kept within your own rule which is but
man's Law, neither have you any Law from God to act so by; then consider, How do
you think to execuse your selves, when the Lord God shall call you to an
account, and say, Who has required this at your hands? What answer will you
make him? What have you to show, whereby to justify your selves? How do you
think to stand before the Lord in judgment, that have done such things against
his servants, who says, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm;
and you that have touched them, have touched the apple of his eye, for they are
his Jewels, and Christ says, What ye have done unto them, he takes as done
unto himself: Therefore I tell you it were better for you, that you had never
been born, or that a millstone were hanged about your necks, and you cast into
the Sea, then to offend the least of these little ones, except you speedily
repent.

Be wise therefore now, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth;
serve the Lord with fear, serve him in love, and in singleness of heart; Kiss
the Sun, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way when his wrath is
kindled; while you have time prize it, and humble your selves before the Lord,
and submit your selves under the mighty power of God; For now is the day of
your visitation, and to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
but fear the Lord God, which is the beginning of wisdom, which will guide you
to do true judgment, and the fear of the Lord is to depart from iniquity.

This is written to be printed, that every Ruler, Judge, and Justice, or other
Officer in this Nation may each have one, and that those friends into whose
hands this book shall come, may send them to those Rulers, Judges, or Justices
that they know, that all they who have not yet acted such things as is herein
contained, may (if they fear the Lord, and rule, and judge for him) be
prevented, and that the other may be left without excuse, that are without his
fear, acting in their own wills, by their own inventions, against the Lord, and
against his anointed.

Henry Clark.

The End.

