To the Right Honorable The COMMONS of ENGLAND: And His Excellency, the LORD
FAIRFAX, Lord General of all the Forces raised in ENGLAND, by authority of
Parliament: And His General Council of War.
IT is well spoken by Philip King of Macedon, that the reproaches and injuries
of the Athenian Orators should cause him to order his words and deeds so; that
themselves might be proved liars. Your good beginning promises the same to the
whole Nation; and we have great hopes now, that such a further progres will be
made in the work of a full Reformation, as the righteous shall see it and
rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Psalm. 107.42.


For the mutinous tumult and noise which some men make in the City, by reason
of their loose tongues and pens, to obstruct your good proceedings, and to
raise a new war, and involve the people again in blood, it is but a flash, and
the Lord will suddenly blast it: Only it is worth your observing, how your
enemies in many particulars, are like the adversaries of Nehemiah, and the
honest party with him. When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arabian, and the rest
perceived that all their former Malignant designs took no effect, but the
building went prosperously forward, they drew over to them the Priests, by
bribery and flattery, and by these men's speeches they thought to affright the
Governor, and bring that to pass which they could not do by other means. Neh.
4.1.2,3.11.15. chap. 6.1,2,4,5,9,10,12,13,14 chapter 13.28 29.
This present conspiracy amongst the Prophets, is a bringing up of the rear,
the last piece of the whole work: As we see on a stage several actors, and
every one plays his part, yet all make but one Tragedy; so the rising in Kent,
Essex, Wales, the revolting of the Ships, the bringing in of the Scots; the
Personal Treaty, and these Pulpit Incendiaries, it is all one plot, howsoever
acted by several persons, and therefore I doubt not, but as the Lord has
discovered the treachery of the one, so he will the hypocrisy of the other,
and confound the whole building, both first, and last.

Moreover we cannot but take notise, in and through what further difficulties
and streights the Lord has held you up, and carried you on; we are very
senceable how some have left you in the work, of whom we thought better things,
and did think they would have been more faithful and real to their trust, the
truth and their own principles. Aelian reports of Dionysius that he married two
wives in one day, the one followed him in his wars, the other accompanied him
only at his return: Men are forward enough to come in when the fight is over,
to have a part and share in the spoil and fruit of the victory, but what they
deserve, is to be considered of, and this to be minded. Ignavum fucos pecus a
praesepibus arcent.

I have made the more have to publish this First Part, because I perceive not
only Royalists and Cavileers accuse you of high injustice against the Person of
the King, and that the action has been formerly carried forth merely by power,
without Law, reason or conscience: But also, the lawfulness of the thing, is
by some better minded, and persons more honest, doubted, and are not clearly
satisfied therein: And for these later, I say, specially for their sake, I have
taken in hand, not your cause so much, as the cause of the whole Nation, and
have not only given a satisfactory answer to whatsoever may be objected against
the act, but justified what has been don by your authority in point of Law and
conscience, to all rational and indifferent men.

I confess it yields to the soul but little peace, when our actions have no
other bottom or foundation, but opportunities, power, advantages, success. But
when we know it is Gods work, and we see it don in Gods way, then the present
opportunity, power, and succes, is a manifest and infallible witness, that as
the Lord own the work, so he will honor the workmen, and be their mighty
protector.

And this I prove to be your case, not that the action was just because you had
opportunity and power to do it, but being in it self just, and you lawfully
called thereto; the power and opportunity which God gave you, did manifest his
approving your zeal and justice. Now the God of peace, and the Lord of hosts,
be ever mightily present with you, to counsel, direct, protect, and prosper
your endeavors, that we may no longer talk of Subjects liberty, and right
things, but know them and enjoy them, we and our posterity; and this being
accomplished, he that desires the Public good, rests Yours to serve,

JOHN CAN.

THE GOLDEN RULE, Or, Justice Advanced.
ALCON of Creet, as a Dragon was embracing his son, shot an arrow into the
heart, and hurt not the child, but the Dragon died immediately. Our
State-Archers will now show their skill and art, if (by Gods blessing on their
labor) tyranny and oppression may be taken away, without prejudice or hurt to
the Nation: and for the better carrying on of so necessary and good a work, I
have undertaken to prove, that when Princes become Dragons (as the Scripture
usually styles great Tyrants) Isa 27.1. Ezekiel, 29.3.
it is lawful for the supreme and Sovereign power of the People to shoot at
them, and kill them likewise; and whatsoever to the contrary is objected,
either from Scripture, Law, Reason, or inconveniences, I have fully answered
and refuted.

1. Objec. First, The Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, is mentioned,
from which example some conclude, that all opposition and resistance is
unlawful of the people against their King: Ergo, this kind of proceeding much
more.

Answ. This objection being impertinent, I shall speak the less to it. 1.
Because a faithful officer in the due execution of his office, may not be
opposed, resisted, punished: will it follow, that the unfaithful and wicked
must be left alone? Moses was a lawful Magistrate, and Aaron a true Minister of
God, faithful and good men both, and therefore to be obeyed; but Kings
becoming perjured tyrants, are not so; neither is there any Allegiance or
obedience from the people due to them, as we shall hereafter show.

But 2. If this example be well considered, it will sufficiently serve to
justify so much as by me is here asserted, and thus I prove it: For any man or
men causlesly to mutiny against the Supreme Power of a Kingdom, and most
unnaturally and impiously invade men's Lives, Liberties, and Estates, oppose
Justice, and seek to bring a whole Nation to utter desolation, such lawfully
may be resisted, suppressed; yea, by the example of Korah, etc. put to death:
Now certain it is, howsoever Kings ruling according to Law are public
Ministers of State, nevertheless degenerating into Tyrants, and acting against
Law, they are in such a case, no more then private men: because whatsoever at
first was confirmed upon them in respect of Office, it did not in any sort make
a change upon their persons; neither set them at any distance touching
subjection to the Law, either active or passive, more then they were before;
their personal estate was the same still as before, neither are they exempted
from corporal punishment if they break the Law, more then any other men.

2. objec. It is further objected, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the gods,
nor curse the Ruler of thy people. Again, Ecc. 10.20. Curse not the King, no
not in thy thoughts, and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber. If Kings may
not be cursed, much less put to death by their Subjects.

Answ. 1. The first text is not properly meant of Kings, but pertains rather to
Judges and other sort of Rulers; and so the Jew Doctors understand the place.
2. Solomon well explains the place, Prove. 17.26. It is not good to strike
Princes for equity; that is, evil speaking of Magistrates for well doing, is a
wicked and vile thing. Hier. in hunc. ver. ^
3.The other text by some is applied unto Christ the King of his Church. But
take it literally, because Kings may not be cursed, which is prohibited under
pain of condemnation, will it therefore follow that Kings may be thieves,
murderers, traitors, tyrants, and commit any wickedness, and not be called to
an account by such who are above them, and have a lawful Power in their hands
to punish them? 4. The place comprehends Rich-men as well as Kings, and
therefore it may be as well concluded from it, that no man if rich, may be
punished for any crime or fault whatsoever. 5. Both these if rightly applied
are altogether for us: for whosoever (whether King or Prince) shall curse and
revile the Supreme and Sovereign State of the Land, and that for well doing, as
call them Rebels and Traitors, and violently seek to destroy them, he
absolutely violateth this Law, Thou shall not revile the gods. It is true,
there is here no punishment set down for him, that should thus rail: But seeing
(as one writes on the place) Willet Qu. 57.
he that railed on his father and mother was to die for it, Exodus 21.17. much
more worthy of death was he, which should curse the fathers of the Country.

3. objec. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of
the oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil
thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of a King is, there
is power, and who may say to him, What do thou? Ecc. 8.2,3,4. Hence the
Royallists argue, If the word of a King must stand, and his power not to be
resisted, how can his Subjects lawfully touch his Person?

Answ. 1. To keep the Kings commandment must be understood of things just and
lawful: otherwise (as the Apostle says) We must obey God rather than man. It
is well laid down by Philo, Philo de vita Mosis.
Regis officium est jubere quae oportet fieri, and vetare a quibus abstinere
debet: caeterum jussie faciendorum, and interdictio cavendoru m proprie ad
Legem pertinet. Atque ita consequitur, ut Rex animata sit, Lex vero sit Rex
justissimus. The office of a King is to command, those things which ought to be
don, and to forbid those things which ought to be avoided. But the command of
things to be don, and the forbidding of things not to be don, properly
belongs to the Law. And so it follows that a King is a living Law, and the
Law is a most just King.

2. The oath of God here, is the oath which is taken in the name of God, and
whereof God is made a witness: The meaning is, the King is so to be obeyed, as
that God is not to be disobeyed, and that the oath made to the King is so to be
kept, as that the oath made to God be not broken. Hence Tremellius reads it,
sed pro ratione juramenti Dei, but with regard to the oath of God: showing that
Subjects are by their Allegiance and Covenant no further obliged to observe the
Laws of earthly Princes, then are agreeable to Gods commandments.

3. Whereas it is said, He does whatsoever pleases him: this must be
understood only of a good King, and just commands, as if it were supplied with,
whatsoever pleases God, not licet si libet, as if all were lawful whatsoever
a King should do; but the genuine sense of the place is, stand not in an evil
matter, for the King has power to do whatsoever he pleases in way of justice
to punish thee, if thou continue obstinate in evil courses, to forgive thee, if
thou confess, submit and crave pardon of him for the same.

4. Who may say to him what do thou? that is reprove, or censure him for
doing justly as Job expounds it, Chap. 34 18. and so must the place be
understood: to wit, that no man may presume to question the Kings just actions,
warranted by the Law of God and men, but otherwise Kings may, and are to be
reprehended, as we have sundry examples for it, in Elias reproving Ahab;
Elisha, Jehoram; Nathan, David; John Baptist, Herod. 1 Samuel 13.13. 2 King.
3.14. Jer. 1^ 28. chap. 22.3. Ho. 5.1.2
Yea, not only so, but to be resisted, withstood, and opposed in their
unrighteous courses. Hence Augustine and Ambrose do affirm, Augu. in Psalm. 82.
Amb. in Offic.
when Herod and Pilate condemned Christ, and caused him to be put to death,
howsoever the people lamented it, were sorry for him, and sorely bewailed his
death; yet were they all punished: and why so? because when they were able and
might have taken him out of the hands of unjust and wicked Magistrates, and so
preserved his life, they did it not, in this regard they wrapped themselves in the
same guilt of blood and became murderers of him.

But lastly, This text intends, only private men? not a Parliament, the
supreamest Judicatory and Sovereign power in the Kingdom: for in this High
Court, the Kings Person is no other than another subject; I say it again to
this Court, He personally stands as a single man to be questioned, censured,
punished as the Crime and Cause shall be. And in truth, here lies the stone at
which many have stumbled, much like to that long controversy between us and
the Church of Rome, about Petros, and Petra; Peter, and the Rock. We
distinguish them, taking the person of Peter to be one thing, his faith, or
Christ another. Whereas the Papists will allow of no such distinction. So the
Title and Office of a King is one thing, the Person another: and howsoever the
former comes not into question, yet the latter may. But many by mixing and
confounding things together which should be severed and distinguished,
apprehend not how the Person of the King, and not the Title and Office of a
King can be questioned, censured, and punished. Hugo Grotius, putting down
seven cases in which the people may have most real action against the King, to
accuse, and punish him: Groti. de jure bell. and pac. l. 1* cap. 4.
The second is, He may (says he) be punished as a private man.

4. Objec. That place in Psalm. 105.14.15. is usually objected, Touch not mine
anointed. This by Royallists is applied to Kings, as a prohibition, that no man
touch them, so as to hurt their Persons.

Answ. 1. The words in the Prophet, do not at all concern Kings, but were
spoken directly and immediately of the Patriarks, their wives, and families,
walking as strangers from Nation to Nation; the which is evident by verse. 6. by
the whole serious of the Psalm, which is historical; some places of Genesis to
which the words relate, Genesis 12. 10. to 20. chapter 20. and 26. 1. to 29.
and the general confession of all Expositors on the place. The Cavalliers had
in one of their Colors (which was taken by the Scots at the battle of Marston,
July 2. Anno 1644.) the Crown and the Prelates mitre painted, with these words,
Nolite tangere Christos meos: so that it seems the antichristian mitre claims
here a share with the crown.

But 2. Admit this Scripture should be so meant, (which is not so) yet nothing
can be hence rightly gathered, that Kings should be exempted from Arrests,
Imprisonments, or Sentence of death it self. For 1. If we take it spiritually
for the internal oil of the Spirit, as this anointing is common to subjects as
well as Kings, so it must follow necessarily that in their persons they are no
more exempted from arraignment and capital censures than other men.

2. Admit it be meant of an actual external Anointing, yet that in it self
affords Kings no greater privilege, than the inward unction of which it is a
type, neither can it privilege them from the just corporal sentence of all
kinds: and this is manifest in Sihon, Og, Adonibezek, Eglon, Agag, Joram,
Ahaziah, Jehoaz and others, who by Princes and subjects of another nation, were
apprehended, and slain, and justly, as all grant without exception. Besides,
Kings who are subordinate homagers, and subjects to other Kings and Emperors,
though anointed, may for treasons and rebellions against them, be lawfully
judged to death, and executed; as appears by sundry presidents in our own and
foreign Histories. Yea, the Roman, Greek, and Germane Emperors, have been
Imprisoned, Deposed, and some of them judicially judged to death by their own
Senates, Parliaments, and States for their oppression and tyranny: So the
ancient Kings of France, Spain, Arragon, Britain, Hungary, Poland, Denmark,
Bohemia, India etc. and that justly notwithstanding any pretense of being
anointed Sovereigns: And it is by Grotius confessed, Grot. de Jur. bell. and
pac. l. 1 cap. 4
That the People may punish the King to death for matters capital, if so it be
agreed on betwixt king and the people, as in Lacedemonia.

3. If the Scope and Sense of this Text be duly weighed, it is so far from
affording Kings any corporal immunities, or exemption from punishment, as it
clearly speaks the contrary: For the words are not spoken of Kings, but by God
Himself spoken unto Kings, that they should not touch his Spiritual anointed
Saints, men consecrated unto him by the oil of the Spirit. But you will say,
What if they touch Gods anointed, even spoil and murder them for his sake? I
answer, The Law ( Genesis 9.6.) excepteth none: the dearest that nature knows
are not excepted. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
The Supreme Court of Justice is here highly concerned. Thus says the Lord,
Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter
destruction; therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people. 1 King. 20.42.


5. object. David's often sparing of Saul, though in his hand is often object.
And Dr. Gauden in his late Letter to his Excellency, says, You cannot be
ignorant of David's both conscientious and generous respect to Saul's safety, and
life, whom he leaves to Gods justice, by no usurpation of power, successes, or
opportunities of revenge. page 7.

Ans. 1. There is nothing from David's carriage toward Saul in this particular,
but to bring it into a short account is thus: Subjects ought not wilfully or
purposely to murder or offer violence to the person of the King, specially in
their cold blood when he does not actually assault them, nor have a lawful
power judiciously to proceed against him.

2. But more particularly I answer. The difference was but private and personal
between Saul and David, David being Saul's private subject, servant and
son-in-law; not public between Saul and his Parliament or Kingdom. Now many
things are unlawful in private quarrels, which are just and honorable in
public differences. Saul intended no Arbitrary government, nor to make Israel
a conquered people, nor yet to cut off all the godly, under the pretense of
heretics and sectaries; neither to destroy laws, liberties and Parliaments:
nor came Saul against these Princes, Elders, and People who made him King; only
David's head would have made Saul lay down his arms.

3. Howsoever some reasons may be given wherefore David spared Saul, as, 1.
Being his father-in-law, and lord too, and so it would have been thought
somewhat an unnatural act in him, and savoured too much of private revenge and
ambition, aspiring to the Crown before due time. 2. By his lenity to convince
Saul, and reclaim him from his bloody pursuit, and clear his innocence to the
world.

And lastly, Manifest his dependence upon God, and his special promise, that he
should enjoy the crown after Saul, by divine appointment: nevertheless, if
these and other Scriptures be well perused, Saul and David soldiers (if not
David himself) conceived that David might with safe conscience have punished
him, as well as pitied him. 1 Samuel 24.10.11 12.17.18 and 26.23.24.
Expedient I confess it was (for the considerations mentioned) to spare him,
but whether the thing in soro Dei and in it self altogether unlawful had he
slain him (specially after he had killed the Priests, and destroyed both men
and women, children and sucklings in Nob) 1 Samuel 22.18.19
I leave to the judicious Reader to think of.

6. Objec. That place 1 Samuel 8.9. and ver. 11. is much alleged to prove both
the absolute power of a King, and the unlawfulness of resistance. Grot. de
Jur. bell. and pac. lib. 1. c. 4. n. 3.
Hugo Grotius, Barcl. cont. mon l. 2. p. 64.
Barclay, Arnis. de fur. 6. May. c. 1. n. 3. p. 157, 158.
Arnisaeus, Dr. Fern 3. p. Sect. 2. p. 10.
Dr. Fern, and others argue thus; that by this place, The People oppressed with
the injuries of a tyrannous King, have nothing left them but prayers and tears
to God, and will have us distinguish inter officium Regis and potestatem,
between the Kings office and the Kings power; and it cannot be ver. 9.11. the
custom and manner of the King, but must be the law of absolute Majesty, etc.

It is said of Paracelsus that the diet he prescribed his patients, was to eat
what, and how often they thought fitting themselves. Royallists and
Court-flatterers do allow such an absolute prerogative to Kings, that if they
would make use of their plenitude and unlimitted power, there is no wickedness
but they may do. viz. violently ravish matrons, deflour virgins; unnaturally
abuse youth, cut all their Subjects throats, fire their houses, sack their
Cities, subvert their Liberties, and (as Bellarmin puts the case of the Popes
absolute irresistible authority) send millions of souls to hell; yet no man
under pain of damnation, may or ought demand of him, Domine, cur ita facis?
Sir, what do you? such a slavery those vermins have sought to bring all
Subjects into.

But to answer, 1. The scope and drift of the place is thus: Samuel being
displeased with the people because they would reject Gods government, who was
then their King, having in his own hand the regal rights, and did substitute
under him Judges, whom he extraordinarily called, qualified, and inspired them
with his spirit; shows them the manner of the King, ver. 9.11. not what they
should be, and ought to do in right, but what they use to be, and do in fact,
and how commonly they demean themselves in Government, contrary to Gods Law,
Deuteronomy. 17.15. and the Laws of the Kingdom; and that he speaks not here of the
Law or power of a lawful King, but of Readiness tyrannical usurpation: is
evident thus.

1. The Hebrew word is not (...) but (...), the which as our English renders,
is the manner, and so the word usually signifies 2 K ng. 17.26. Genesis 40 13.
Exodus, 21,19. 1 Samuel, 27,11.
a custom or manner; and as a custom, so a wicked 1 Samuel, 2,13, 1 Kings 18,28,
custom. Peter Martyr on the place says, He means here of an usurped Law.
The custom and manner of doing, say Junius and Tremellius. Clemens
Alexandrinus on the place says, non humanum pollicetur Dominum, sed insolentem
daturum minatur tyrannum, he promises not a humane Prince, but threatens to
give them an insolent tyrant. So says Beda. Lyra expounds it Tyranny: so
Cajetanus. And Serrarius, he speaks not here, quid Reges jure possint, sed
quid audeant; what they may do by right and Law, but what they will be bold to
do; and so speaks Thomas Aquinas, Osiander, Pelican, Borhaius, Willet and our
last large Annotations, take it, that Samuel sets not down the office of a
King; and what he ought to be, but what manner of Kings they should have, such
as would decline to tyranny, be tyrants, not Kings, rule by will, not by Law.

2. He speaks of such a power as is answerable to the acts here spoken of:
but the acts here spoken of, are acts of mere tyranny. As 1. to make slaves of
their sons, ver. 11. was an act of Tyranny. 2. To take their fields, and
vineyards, and oliveyards from them, ver. 14. was no better then Ahabs cruelty
toward Naboth. 3. To put the people of God to bondage. ver. 15, 16. was to
deal with them as the Tyrant Pharaoh did. 4. He speaks of such a Law, the
execution whereof should make them cry out to the Lord because of their King.
ver. 18. but the execution of the just Law of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. is a
blessing, not a cross or curse.

3. It is clear, that God by his Prophet disswades them from their purpose of
seeking a King, by fortelling the evil of punishment, that they should suffer
under a tyrant. for 1. Samuel is to protest against their unlawful course, v.
9. 2. He is to lay before them the tyranny and oppression of their King, which
cruelty Saul exercised in his time; as the history of his life shows. But he
speaks not one word of these necessary and comfortable acts of favor, that a
just King by his good Government was to do for his people, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. It is
set down, ver. 19. how in effectual Samuels exhortation was: now how could it
be said, they refused to hear the voice of Samuel, if he had not dehorted them
from a King.

2. Touching these words, and ye shall cry out in that day because of your
King. 1. Here is not one word of any lawful remedy, for this is not always
understood of praying to God by reason of oppression, as by many Is. 15.4. Ha.
2.11. Deuteronomy. 22.24.
Scriptures does appear. 2. Though it were the Prophets meaning, they cried
unto the Lord, yet it is not the crying of a people truly humbled, and in faith
speaking to God in their Zec. 7.12. Psalm. 18.41.
troubles, and therefore such prayer as God hears not. 3. It is a rule in
Logic and Divinity, Ex particulari non valet argumentum negative; from one
particular place a negative argument is not good. To apprehend, imprison, and
put a tyrant to death is not written in this particular place: therefore it is
not written at al in other places of Scripture. But 4. The text says not They
shall only cry out, as if no other course were to be used against a tyrant, but
crying out, which shows a mere fallacy and absurdity in what they speak.
Because a man must pray for Kings and Rulers; Ergo, there is no tribute or
obedience due to them. Again, Men must pray for their daily bread, and sick
persons seek to God for health. Ergo, they must only pray, and not labor for
it, they must take no physic but only pray.

3. If the Prophets words be rightly understood, he is so far from affirming
that the power of a King is absolute, and uncontrollable, as on the contrary he
closely admonishes the people, that they should look to him, as to restrain
and bridle his licentious liberty, and keep him within the due limits of law
and reason, and seeing he is apt to degenerate into a tyrant, and cruelly to
oppress the subjects, to be therefore prudent and careful seasonably to
prevent so great a mischief and danger.

Lastly, In the whole description here of a tyrant there is not one word
against our Conclusion. For 1. The peoples power (whose Representatives the
Ordines Regni, the States of the Kingdom are) is above the King. Polib. his. l.
6,
Such were the Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians, the Senate amongst the Romans:
The Forum Superbiense amongst the Arragonians: The Electors of the Emperors:
the Parliaments in England, Scotland, France, and Spain: The Fathers of
Families, and Princes of Tribes amongst the Jews. And for this Sovereign and
Supreme power of Estates, as above Kings, I appeal to Jurists, and to approved
Authors. Argu. L. aliud. 160. sect. 1. de Jur. Reg. l. 22. Mortuo de fidei. l.
11.14. ad Mum. l. 3.14. Cornelius Bertramo, c. 12. Junius Brutus, Vindic. cont.
Tyran. sect. 2. Sigonius de Rep. Judaeor. l. 6. c. 7. Author Libelli de Jur.
Magist. in Subd. q. 6. Althus. Pol. c. 18. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 20. Pareus
in Romans 13. Peter Mart. in lib. Judic. c. 3. Joan Marianus, de Rege, lib. 1. c.
7. Marius Salamonius Lib. 1. de Principatu Hottaman de jure. Antiq. Reg.
Gallica. l. 1. c. 22. Danaeus Polit. Christ. l. 3. c. 6. Buchanan de Jure Regni
apud Scotos.

2. The King is under Law, and punishable by Law, as we shall manifest more
fully hereafter. It is the Law* Imp, l. 4, dignavox C, de leg. and tit.
Quod quisque Juris in alium statuit, eodem et ipse utatur. What a man of right
enacteth for another, the same he himself should do. If otherwise, proving a
Tyrant, he may (says Bartol) In tractat, de Tyran, and in tract, de re, Ci.
Jun. Bru, vind, con, tyr. l, 3.
be justly deposed by his superior, or according to the Julian law, by force
of the whole Commonwealth most deservedly punished. I will end this point with
the words of Junius Brutus. A Tyrant (says he) is more outragiously wicked,
than any thief, high-way-robber, murderer, or sacrilegious person, and
therefore deserves a far greater, heavier, and severer punishment.

7 object, I find some to frame their objection thus. None of the Prophets in
the old Testament reprehending the Kings of Israel and Judah for their gross
Idolatry, cruelty, and oppression, did call upon the great Council of State, to
convent, censure, and put their Kings to death upon any of these grounds,
therefore to put them to death is unlawful.

Answ. 1. It is a great Non-consequence, Aristoteles aut Plato hoc non
dixerunt, hoc Ergo ita se non habet. Fra, Bur^ Instit, L^, l. 1. c. 18.
This duty is not practiced by any example out of the Prophets in Gods word.
Ergo, It is no duty. Practice in Scripture, is a narrow rule of faith: show a
practice when a husband stoned his wife because she enticed him to follow
strange gods. Yet it is commanded, Deuteronomy. 13.6. when a man lying with a beast
was put to death. Yet it is a law, Exodus 22.19. so many other laws, the
practice of which we find not in Scripture.

But 2. Seeing none of the Prophets did forbid the thing, or dehorted the
people from proceeding this way, therefore it was lawful, and the people freely
might have done it, if they had been zealous of the law, and had a heart to it.
And to make this clear, take notice what the Law says, Levit. 19.35,36, Deuteronomy.
25,13.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in
measure: just balances, just weights, etc. Thou shall not have in thy bag
diverse weights, a great and a small. These ordinances taught men justice. Ye
shall not respect persons in judgment, ye shall not be afraid of the face of
man: deu. 1.17.
so that whosoever was a murderer, an adulterer, a witch, a Sodomite etc. he
was to be put to death. And questionless, had the Lord intended, that some,
(namely Kings, howbeit murderers, adulterers, witches,) should be exempted from
the punishment of such laws, as being no power or Court on earth to reach them,
it would have been some where set down. And therefore whereas it is objected,
that the Prophets speak no where of putting their Idolaters and wicked Kings to
death, the truth is, it needed not, neither was there any reason for it, for it
was never questioned in the Prophets times, whether Kings might be put to death
if they did such things as by the law was death.

3. Not only is it evident by the History of the Kings and Chronicles in sundry
places, 2 Kin. 21.11.12. and 23.26. and 24.3. Jer. 15.1,2,3.4.
that God did punish the people for the wickedness of their Kings: but likewise
the Prophets have threatened so much: the which thing surely God in justice
would not have done, neither the Prophets so have spoken, had not the people
power to have removed them, and put them to death for their capital crimes,
according to the Law.

4. When the Prophets exhorted the People to repent, and to execute justice and
judgment, and to deliver him that was spoiled out of the hands of the
oppressor. Jer, 7.5. and 21.12. and 22,3.
Here they did call upon the great Council of State to punish their tyrannous,
murderous, and idolatrous Kings with death, according to the law: for
otherwise, how could the people truly repent, or have answered what the
Prophets exhorted them unto in point of justice.

5. That tyrannous Princes, not only by command of Gods Prophets, but of God
himself, and by his special approbation have been put to death by their
subjects, it is apparent in Scripture: thus Nadab by Baasha, Elah by Zimry, Jehu
by Gods own appointment puts to death Joram and Ahaziah Kings of Israel and
Judah: And say, that it was extraordinary to Jehu that he should kill Joram,
yet there was an express law for it, that he that stirs up others to
idolatry, should die the death. Deuteronomy. 13.6. And mark what Mr. Rutherfurd writes
in this very point, Preem Elect, qu 34. p. 364
THERE IS NO EXCEPTION OF KING or Father in the Law: For to except Father or
mother in Gods matters is expressly against the zeal of God. Deuteronomy. 33.9.

8 object. That passage in Psalm. 51.4. is much taken hold of, where King David
confessing his sin of adultery and murder to God, uses this expression,
against thee, thee only have I sinned, and don this evil in thy sight: Sac.
May. p. 148. de author prin. c. 4. number. 5. p. 73
Hence Maxwell, Arnisaeus, and others conclude, That the King is above all Law,
and all earthly Tribunals; accountable to none for his actions, but to God, and
that there was not any on earth, who might punish David.

I have somewhere read how Calisthenes Lucullus servant, gave his Master
poison, not of any evil intent, but supposing the poison had power to make his
Master love him the more; but it put him out of his wits, and killed him.
Fawning Sycophants, and Court-flatterers, have usually thus served Kings and
Princes, in hope of more love, and greater preferment from them, have powerd
into them the venomous doctrine of absolute Monarchs, Arbitrary power, to be
responsable to none but God only, for what they do; by which means they have
grown mad Tyrants, and afterward cut off by some visible and sensible stroke
of justice.

But to the objection, I answer, 1. It is most certain that David by his
adultery and murder (being sins against the second table) did sin not only
against God, but against Vriah, his wife, children, and kindred, and against
his own soul. And this must needs be so, for otherwise, 1. The King because a
King is free, not only from all punishing Laws of men: but from the duties of
the second Table simply, and so a King cannot be under the best and largest
half of the law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

2. He shall not need to say, forgive us our sins as we forgive them that sin
against us. For there is no reason from the nature of sin, and the nature of
Gods Law, why we can say more the subjects and sons sin against the King and
Father, then to say, the Father and King sin against the sons and subjects.
3. The King killing his Father Jesse should sin only against God, but not break
the fifth commandment, nor sin against his Father.

2. As all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, are subject to the Laws of God, of
nature, and Nations; so are they bound in conscience to give satisfaction and
recompense to their subjects against whom they sin in this nature; and David
himself determines so much in his own cause. And David's anger was greatly
kindled against the man (the man was himself, 1 Samuel 12.7. thou art the man)
and he said to Nathan, as the Lord lives the man that has don this shall
surely die.

3. For the reason of David's speech, in saying, against thee, thee only have I
sinned. Expositors are diversely minded, some say, he means none durst judge
or punish him, but God only. Lorinus the Jesuit observes eleven
interpretations of Ancient writers all to this sense. It is true, Beda,
Euthymius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basil, Theodoret, do acknowledge from the
place de facto, there was none above David to judge him: so Augustine, Basil,
Gregory, Arnobius, Dydimus, Hieronim. But the simple meaning is, Against thee
only. 1. As my eye witness and immediate beholder: for he concealed his sin
from men, but could not from God. 2 Samuel 12.12. 2. Because as the cause stood,
God only could remit the punishment of his sin. 3. By only he means
comparatively, as if he should say, principally and especially against thee:
Isa. 43 5 Psalm. 41.3
and the word ( 1 King 15.7. Josh 1.7.18, 1 Samuel 18.17.
only) is often so taken.

4. The Sanedrim did not punish David: Ergo, it was not lawful for them; nor is
it lawful for a State to punish a King for any act of injustice, is logic
which we may resist.

5. Had the adultery, and murder been publicly known, and complained of to the
Great Council of the Kingdom, I do affirm, and will stand to it, that they
might judicially have proceeded against him for it. And because some will be
ready to brand this under the scornful term of a new light, or think I am
singular herein, I shall here set down the judgment of a judicious and learned
professor of Divinity, Mr. Sam. Rutherfurd a Scotchman. Preem of Elect of King.
qu 26, p, 241
The Prelate (says he) draws me to speak of the case of the Kings unjust
murder confessed, Psalm. 51. To which I answer, He takes it for confessed, that
it had been treason in the Sanedrin and States of Israel, to have taken on them
to judge and punish David for his adultery and murder, but he gives no reason
for this nor any word of God: and truly, though I will not presume to go before
others in this, Gods law (Genesis 9.6. compared with Numb. 35.30,31.) seems to
say against them.

Nor can I think that Gods law, Deuteronomy, 1,17 2 Chr. 19 6,7,
or his deputy the Judges are to accept the persons of the great, because they
are great: and we say, we cannot distinguish where the Law distinguishes not.
The Lord speaks to under-Judges, Levit. 19.15. Thou shall not respect the
person of the poor, nor the honor of the person of the mighty, or of the
PRINCE, for we know what these names (...) and (...) means. I grant it is not
Gods meaning that the King should draw the sword against himself; but yet it
follows not, that if we speak of the demerit of blood, that the Law of God
accepts any Judge great or small, and if the STATE BE ABOVE THE KING, as I
conceive they are, though it be a humane politic constitution, that the King
is free from all coaction of law, because it conduces for the peace of the
Commonwealth, yet if we make a matter of conscience* FOR MY PART, I SEE NO
EXCEPTION THAT GOD MAKES OF IT; if men make, I crave leave to say, A facto ad
jus non sequitur. Thus that Reverend Author.

Lastly, This sin against Vrijah was personal, and a private injury into which
David fell by occasion, and out of humane frailty: it was the first and only
sin that he committed in this kind that ever we read of, he made no trade of
it, he repented for it, and never relapsed after into it. Whereas Charles
Steuart in a hostile and public way has murdered many thousands of his best
subjects, by giving Warrants and Commissions under his own hand to Atheists,
and Papists, personally appeared in many battles to destroy the people, caused
sundry villages, towns, and cities to be ruinated by fire, plunder, rapine,
authorized villainous Pirates of other nations, (not to mention his own Son, nor
Rupert that monster of mankind) to rob and kill his own subjects at sea: gave
Ormond commission, and the bloody Irish, to kill and massacre, not so few as
two hundred thousand, men women, and children, of the Protestant religion in
Ireland; not to speak of fifteen hundred widows which he made in one morning,
as Mr. Henderson told him; nor the loss of Rochel in France, by his lending
ships to the French King; and this was his trade and constant practice many
years together, and doubtless would have continued so to this day, had not the
Lord of Hosts by a powerful hand (using our Army as instrumental means)
suppressed him: and for all this his heart never smote him as it could be
perceived, but remained impenitent and incorrigeble in his sins.

9. object. It is likewise objected, Jer. 29,7.
That the children of Israel were commanded by God himself to pour out
supplications and prayers for the peace and prosperous estate of Nebuchadnezer
a most cruel tyrant, and that it was not lawful for the Jews to withdraw
themselves from the subjection which they did owe unto his Empire: Neither
would the Lord authorize the people to deliver themselves from under Pharaoh,
but made Moses a Prince to bring them out of Egypt with a stretched out arm:
Nor did the Lord deliver his People by the wisdom of Moses, or strength of the
People, or any act that way of theirs, but by his own immediate hand and Power.
Hence conclude, that subjects may not punish their Kings for any misdemeanour.

Answ. 1. The Jews were not only subjects and of a private condition, but
likewise most of them servants and bondmen under the power and Empire of the
Caldeans, and therefore for private men to rise up against the Magistrates, or
to resist them with force of arms had been unlawful.

2. And let it be observed, that the Jews came by the immediate appointment of
the Lord, under the power of the Caldeans, of which thing they were often
preadmonished and foretold by the Prophets: so that it was not only unlawful
for Zedekiah and the rest of the Jews in the time of their captivity to resist
the tyranny of the Caldeans, but likewise before the captivity, they could not
with a good conscience have resisted, or maintained the city against them when
they had besieged it; forasmuch as the Lord commanded them by Jeremy that they
should deliver up the city into the hands of the Caldeans, and without
resistance yield themselves to be their servants. Chap. 21.2,3,4, and
27,1,12,13,14, ch 36, ch, 37


3. Touching Pharaoh, 1. He had not his crown from Israel. 2. Pharaoh had not
sworn to defend Israel, nor became their King upon condition and oath to
maintain their Laws, Liberties, and Rights. 3. Israel had their land in Egypt
by the mere gift of the King. 4. The Israelites were not his native subjects,
but strangers and sojourners; who by the Laws of the King and Princes, by the
means of Joseph had gotten the land of Goshen for their dwelling, and liberty
to serve the God of Abraham, to whom they prayed in their bondage. Exodus
2,23,24.
The Kings of England (as Kings) have stood to England in a fourfold contrary
relation: they have had their crown by the voluntary and free choice of the
People, and no otherwise but conditionally; that is, covenanting and taking
their oath to do so and so, for the public good: The English are natives, not
beholding to their Kings for their possessions, nor ever held the same as
gratis from them: The Supreme and Sovereign Power of the Kingdom is in their
hand; the which Israel in Egypt never had, nor could lawfully challenge.

10. obje. Dr. Gouden speaking of putting the King to death, says, Never did
Christ or his Apostles by practice or precept give the lest intimation of the
will of his Father as agreeing to what you declare to be your purpose. Christ
(says Maxwel) Sac. San. May. c, 5. n. 6.
in the cradle taught by practice to flee from Herod, and all Christ's actions
are full of mysteries and our instructions: He might have had Legions of Angels
to defend him, but would rather work a miracle in curing of Malchu's ear, as
use the sword against Caesar. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, and to commend
patient suffering of ill, and condemn al resistance of superiors, would have
servants suffer buffets not only for ill doing of good masters, but also
undeservedly of these masters that are evil, and that from his own example, 1
Pet. 2.18.21.23. much more are we patiently to suffer of Kings without
resistance.

The monuments of Babels ruin, show far off to be high and great things, but
being near they are very low and little too: whatsoever is here, if we come up
close to it, it is impertinences, non-consequences and nothing else. And first
in general we answer, 1. Christ saying, His Kingdom is not of the world, and
refusing to take the Magistracy upon him signified thereby, that for civil
polity he left it to the people, to practice according to the humane Law and
reason, and as it might best serve for every nations safety, peace, and
welfare. 2. When the Dr. writes next, I would have him set down where Christ
and his Apostles, by precept or practice taught, that any man for murder,
treason, rebellion, etc. might lawfully be put to death by the higher powers:
if he find this thing no where directly or by consequence in the New Testament,
then under favor of his Doctorship, it is simply spoken: But if he can find
such a precept or practice, thus far I do engage, and challenge any man to
oppose, that I will as clearly prove from the same place, that the Commons of
England may lawfully put their King to death for the like crimes. 3. If Christ
came not to destroy the Law, as the Law of nature, Nations, then it is not
contrary to any precept or practice of his, for the Parliament of England, to
judge to death the King for treason and high misdemeanors against the law of
nature and Nations. But the first is true, therefore the latter.

2. For a more particular answer: 1. Christ flying into Egypt, what mystery
soever it had, sure I am, it contained no prohibition against the lawful
execution of justice and judgment upon any man.

2. That Christ might have defended himself with more then twelve legions of
Angels, but would not, it was not because, to cut off tyrants is unlawful,
(...) no shadow for that in the Text, but because it was Gods will, that he
should drink the cup his Father gave him.

3. That Christ blamed Peter for speaking of drawing his sword: Rivetus shows
the reasons, Rivet, in dec. in mand. 6. page, 234.
1. Because it had a kind of revenge in it: for so few could not repel such an
Army as came to take Christ. 2. He waited not on Christ's answer. 3. He could
have defended himself another way. 4. It was contrary to Gods will revealed to
Peter. Mat. 16,21,22,24


4. To the place in Peter I answer: 1. Patient bearing of wrong, and punishing
wrong doers are compatible in one and the same person. One act of grace is not
contrary to another: Not to respect persons in judgment, is as commendable a
virtue as patient suffering for a good cause. 2. The scope of the place, is not
to forbid all violent resisting, but only forbids revenging resisting, as
not to repair one wrong with another, from the example of Christ, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again: and therefore the Argument is a fallacy, Ab eo
quod dicitur (...) ad illud quod dicitur (...) If a master attempt to kill an
innocent servant, and invade him with a weapon of death, in that case the
servant is free from guiltiness, if (there being no other way to save his life)
he slay the master than be killed himself: because I am nearer by the law of
nature, and dearer to my self and mine own life, then to my brother. 3. No
Prince has a mastery or dominion over his subjects, but only a free, paternal,
and tutorly oversight for the good of the people. The masters in the Apostles
time, had a dominion over servants as over their proper goods. To. 13.4.


11. obje. But the special Objection of Royallists is, Romans 13.1,2. Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: and
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Hence
therefore they conclude, Grot. de Jur. bell. and pac. l. 1 cap. 4 Barc, con mon.
l. 3. c, 9 Maxwel S^c. San. May. c. 2 p. 29.
1. That the King is the supreamest or highest power here intended. There is no
Judge above a King on earth. 2. Howsoever, in those days there was a standing
and continual Senate, which not long before had the Supreme power in the Roman
State, yet now the Emperor was Supreme, and therefore no power of resistance
left to the people. 3. The prohibition, does not only concern Christians, but
all the people under these Emperors, and howbeit Religion was persecuted, the
peoples Liberty lost, and the Senate then enslaved by Edict and Laws enforced
on them by Nero and other Emperors, yet notwithstanding, the Apostle forbids to
resist.

That I may give a satisfactorie answer to this Objection, I desire the Reader
to consider the occasion of the Apostles words, which I take to be thus. The
Roman Magistrates being Infidels, people newly converted to Christian Religion,
might think themselves exempted from any subjection or obedience unto them, by
reason of Gospel-liberty and further, that it was not lawful for them to make
use of such Magistrates in any civil cause what wrong soever they suffered: To
refute which error, the Apostle informs them, that howbeit the Magistrates were
unbeleeving Gentiles, yet their authority and power was from God Himself, and
in that regard, their profession of Christianity did rather obleige them, then
exempt them from subjection; and they were Gods Ministers appointed by him, to
punish offenders, and to take vengeance on them. Now bring this into an
argument, because Religion exempts not subjects from due obedience to lawful
pagan Magistrates, and people oppressed may seek redress of their grievances,
therefore Tyrants may not be legally arraigned, censured, and put to death by
the highest and supremest Court of the Kingdom.

2. If the Apostles words be observed (even word for word) there is not any
thing in them against the arraignment of a tyrant. For 1. The Higher Powers
must be submitted to: and why? Because they are ordained of God, and are Gods
ordinances. verse. 1, 2. That is so far as they govern according to reason and
just laws, preserve their Peoples liberties, persons, and estates. But where is
it said, When they prove traitors to the Kingdom, and are the Devil's Agents,
they may not be severely punished for it. 2. Because those who resist lawful
authority, and just commands, receive to themselves condemnation, is not this,
a non sequitur, that the Parliament whose jurisdiction and power is above the
King, may not call him to an account for tyranny and mis-government.

3. Rulers must be obeyed, Because they are not a terror to good works, but to
evil. verse 3. is not this a good consequence, when they are professed enemies to
all good works, and do evil and continually evil with both hands, that same
power which has set them up, cannot take them down again.

4. Obey him says the Apostle, why? because he is the minister of God to thee
for good. v. 4. But can this be applied to a tyrant, who has destroyed the
people in body and goods; does it not rather plainly imply, that those who are
the devils ministers to us for evil, rather then Gods for good; by a lawful
power above them, should be thrust out of their place.

5. It is said, ver. 5. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he
bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God, a revenger, to
execute wrath on him that does evil: Can any Roialist find any thing here,
which is not spoken in reference only to faithful Magistrates, in the
execution of justice upon malefactors, wherein they must not be resisted, much
less punished for well doing. And by the rules of contraries, a Tyrant that
makes war upon his people, to ruin, spoil, and enslave them, protecteth all
wicked men, gives liberty to all manner of unrighteousness, bears the sword,
not only in vain, in reference to the public good, but draws it forth only
upon those that are good; for such cruelty, oppression and impiety, may
lawfully be cut off.

3. The text does include all higher powers, not to be restrained only to Kings
and Emperors, but comprehends all kind of civil Rulers: Augustine, Irenaeus,
Chrysostom, Hierom, expound it of Masters, Magistrates. So do Calvin, Beza,
Pareus, Piscator, Rollor, Marlorat, So do Popish writers, Aquinas, Lyra, Hugo
Cardinal, Carthus. Pierius, Toletus, Cornel. a Lapide, Salmeron, Estitius,
expound the place. Hence it must follow, that no resistance of the higher
powers is here prohibited, but only in the due and legal execution of their
offices. For no man will deny but inferior lawful officers illegally
endeavoring to subvert Liberties, Laws, and unrighteously governing the people,
may be imprisoned, arraigned and condemned for their misdemeanor. And this
granted (which cannot be denied) our conclusion is fully proved: and thus I
make it appear.

Whosoever is a murderer or a traitor to the State, may lawfully be put to
death by the civil power that is above him, and that by virtue of this text,
Romans 13.1,2,3. But the King of England is under a civil power and jurisdiction;
to wit, the Sovereign power of the Parliament. Ergo, If a murderer or traitor
to the State may lawfully be put to death. Though there be no Tribunal (says
Mr. Rutherfurd) formally, regal, and Kingly above the King, yet there is a
Tribunal vertual, eminently above him, in the case of tyranny; for the States
and Princes are above him.

4. That the Roman Emperor (when Paul wrote) was the Supreme and highest power
in the Roman State, is most untrue: Justinian indeed, speaks somewhat that
way, Dig. l, 2. Tit, 2. p, 146.
that the Emperor was absolute, but he is partial in this case. Bodin proves,
Bodin de Rep, l, 2 c. 5. page 221.
That the Roman Emperors were but princes of the Commonwealth, and that the
Sovereignty remained still in the Senate and people. Livius, Florus, Tacitus,
say the like; and to put it out of all doubt, the case of Nero that wicked
Emperor is proof sufficient, whom the Senate judicially condemned, and as a
public enemy to the State adjudged him to have his head fastened to a fork, and
so to be publicly whipped to death, and then to be precipitated from a rock;
upon which sentence he being sought for (and forsaken of al) to avoid the
execution thereof, murdered himself with a poinyard.

5. As for tyrants and wicked oppressing Magistrates, they are not within the
intendment of this text, neither is there any thing here spoken to prohibit the
people from censuring and punishing of them. for 1. That which is not the
Ordinance of God, but rather of the devil, and the mere sin and enormity of the
Governor himself, not of the Government, is not within the compass of this
text.

2. That which is no point of the Magistrates lawful power ordained of God,
but diametrally repugnant to it, as tyranny, oppression, violence, etc. is not
within the verge or compass of this text.

3. All Powers intended in the text are not only ordained of God but also
circumscribed and bounded with certain rules of Law, justice, and honesty,
within which they must contain themselves, and if they pass beyond those
limits, they are none of Gods Ordinance. Now the tyranny and oppression of
Kings and Rulers are mere exorbitances, arbitrary, illegal actions exceeding
the bound of justice and honesty, prescribed by the Law of God and men:
therefore not within the limits of this text, and therefore to be resisted, and
the Person punishable.

4. Howsoever the lawful power of Princes be of God, yet the tyranny it self,
and abuse of this power is of Satan, and therefore though the power it self
which is good and profitable, be to be honored and continued, yet the tyrant
justly may be condemned to death, as not within the compass of this text.

13. Obje* And thus much for the first sort of Objections: we come now to the
rest. Kings (some say) are in dignity and power above tho people, their persons
sacred, not criminal or obnoxious to any tribunal but that of God. King
Theodor. in Cassidore speaking of himself, Cassi. var. l. 6, var. 4.
hac sola ratione discreti, quod alteri subdi non possimus, qui Judices non
habemus. In this respect we are distinguished from others, that we cannot be
subject to another, who have no Judges over us. Impune quidvis facere, id est,
Regem esse.

I have read in Plutarch, that Alexander Magnus published he was the son of
Jupiter Hammon; yet when he saw the humor running down from his wounds, was
constrained to say, this is (...) not (...) the blood of man not of God: and
smelling the stench of his own flesh, asked his flatterers, if the gods yielded
such a stench. Princes (specially of late) have deemed themselves to be
Nonesuch, and altogether unlike other men, but when they shall see themselves
as prisoners stand at the bar, and justice don upon them, they will think
otherwise of their condition. I know what the common saying is: Quidquid
delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi.
What fault soever Kings commit,
The subject must be hanged for it.


A practice against Scripture, reason, and conscience: It is no Law grounded
upon any divine principle, That the King does no wrong, only his wicked
Councellers and bad instruments must be punished, but he not: the Lord says,
the soul that sins, it shall die; and in all ages has punished the author of
sin, and persons commanding such and such wickedness, more severely and
extremely, then the agent, who acted by the others warrant, commission, and
authority. We see daily the mother punished for her whordom, yet the bastard
spared; but that the bastard should suffer, and the mother escape, it is such a
thing as I think was never heard of.

Now touching the objection I answer, 1. Simply, absolutely the people are
above and more excellent then the King, and the King in dignity inferior to the
people and the whole Kingdom: and this I prove. 2 Samuel 19.9. Psa, 78.70.71. 1
Sa. 10,1 To. 13.4.
1. Because he is the mean, ordained for the people, as for the end, that he
may save them: a public shepherd to feed them, the captain and leader of the
Lords inheritance to defend them; the Minister of God for their good. 2. The
pilot is less then the whole passengers, the General less then the whole
Army, the physician less then all the living men, whose health he cares for;
the Master or Teacher, less then all the Scholars; because the part is less
then the whole. The King is but a part or member of the Kingdom.

3. Those who are given of God as gifts for the preservation of the people, to
be nursing-Fathers to them; those must be of less worth before God, then those
to whom they are given, for the gift, as a gift, is less then the party on
whom the gift is bestowed: But the King is a gift for the good and welfare of
the people, as is manifest, Esa. 1.26.

4. People though mortal in the individuals, yet in the species cannot dye,
Ecc. 1.4.
but the King as King may and does die, and therefore more excellent then that
which is accidental temporary, and mortal.

5. The people are before the King, and may be without the King, and therefore
must be of more worth then that which is posterior, and cannot be a King
without them.

2. The people in power are superior to the King, and that upon these reasons:
1. Because every efficient and constituent cause is more excellent then the
effect: every mean is inferior in power to the end. But the people are the
efficient cause, the King is the effect; Isa. 3.7.
the people are the end both intended of God to save the people, to be a healer
and physician to them.

2. Common reason, Law, and experience, manifests that the whole, or greatest
part in all politic or natural bodies is of greater power and jurisdiction,
then any one particular member. Thus in all corporations the Court of Aldermen
and Common Counsel is of greater power then the Major alone, though the chief
officer: so the whole Bench, then the Lord chief Justice, and the whole Council
then the President. And it is Aristotle's express determination, Pol, lib. 1
C. 2. and l. 3. c. 8.
Majorum rerum potest as jure populo tribuitur. The King (as we said just now)
is but a part or member (though I grant a very noble and eminent member) of the
Commonwealth.

3. The Sovereign Power to make Laws, and so a power eminent in their states
representative, to govern themselves, is in the people. Ergo,

4. Those who can limit power, and bind royal power in elected Kings, they in
power are superior to Kings. Peter speaking of Kings and their Supremacy, calls
them a creature or humane ordinance, because it took its original and rise
from men, and can be bound, limited, or restrained, as they see occasion. 1
Pe, 2.13


Coverrunias a great Lawyer says, Cover. Tom. 2. pra. quest, c. 1. n. 2. 3.
That all civil power is, penes remp. in the hands of the Commonwealth; and it
is a received principle, That Sovereign Power, eminently, fontaliter,
originally, and radically, is in the people.

But it is objected, The people have made over their right, and whole power to
the King, all is freely given up into his hands, and so may not retract or take
back what they have once given.

Answ. 1. It is a thing neither probable nor credible that any free people when
they voluntarily incorporated themselves into Kingdoms, and of their own accord
set up an elective King over them, that there was such a stupidity and madness
in them, as absolutely to make away their whole power to the King and his heirs
for ever, and to give him an entire, full, and incontroulable Supremacy over
them, and so to make the Creature superior to the Creator, the derivative
greater then the primative, the servant more potent than themselves, and so of
freemen to make themselves slaves, and for their more safety to be more
enslaved.

2. People cannot by the Law of nature resign up their sovereign and popular
power, authority and right, into the hand of a King: for neither God, nor
natures Law, has given them any such power.

3. He who constituteth himself a slave is supposed to be compelled to that
unnatural fact of alienation of that liberty which he received of God, from the
womb, by violence, constraint, or extreme necessity, and so is inferior to all
freemen: but the people do not make themselves slaves, when they constitute a
King over them.

4. If the people give all power away: 1. What power is then left them to make
a new King when this man dies? 2. If the King turn distracted, or like
Nebuchadnezer his reason be taken from him: what then? or if he turn Tyrant,
and destroy his subjects with the sword? In a word, If the King be absent and
taken captive, the people having given all their power away, there can be
nothing done in such and many the like cases, for their own safety.

5. He who swears to the people to be regulated by law and takes the Crown
Covenant-wise, and so as the people would refuse to make him their King, if
either he should refuse to swear, or if they knew certainly that he would break
his oath, he had never the whole power of the people resigned up unto him.

6. Though the people should give away their power, and swear, though the King
should kill them all, they would not resist, nor defend their own lives though
he should commit the vilest wickedness that was ever heard of, yet they would
not question him for it; this should not obliege the conscience, for it should
be intrinsecally sinful, and an oath directly against the law of God.

7. These are known rules in law, nature, and reason, Nemo plus iurus ad alium
transfer potest quam ipse haberet. No man can give to another of right more
than that which he has. Again, Non debet actori licere, quod reo non
permittitur: so Alterius circumventio alii non praebet actionem. So likewise,
Non debet alteri per alterum iniqua conditio inferri. If the father have
resigned his whole right of liberty in the hand of the King, yet could he not
take in his posterity with him, neither obliege them in point of equity and
conscience to confirm and observe what against the law of nature he had done,
but his children afterward might lawfully, yea and ought to stand fast in the
liberty which the law of God, nature, and nations had made them free, and not
be entangled in the slavish yoke and bondage of their father. Nullus videtur
dolo facere, qui suo jure utitur

I shall here conclude this point with a few observations. 1. Seeing the
servant is no better than his Lord: Kings may as lawfully be punished for their
crimes as other men: because in dignity and power they are inferior to the
people: they are the Ministers and Servants of the Commonwealth, not Masters
of the State, which title good Kings did never scorn, nay evil Princes have
affected that name, and for some ages none of the Roman Emperors (unless those
who were most manifest wicked, and notorious professed tyrants, as Caligula,
Nero, Domitian) would be called Lords.

2. If the King as King, be the peoples Creature, they his Creator, then by the
same power they may un-king him: For eodem modo quid constituitur dissolvitur,
in what manner a thing is constituted it may be dissolved. Again, Omnia quae
jure contrahuntur contrario jure pereunt.

3. Whosoever grants that the King in power is inferior to the people, he must
necessarily grant that by this power duly and rightly administered, a King for
treason and murder may lawfully be put to death, for it is absurd and
irrational to say, there may be a power, and the due executing of it unlawful.

4. If our forefathers in times past have given away all their power and right
to Kings, and have sworn not to punish them for tyranny and misgovernment, it
concerns us not, neither are we tied to such engagements, oaths, promises which
they have made, but in point of conscience, law and reason, are free to use our
own due power, as occasion shall be offered

13 object As the King is above the people in dignity and power, so say
Royallists, he is absolute, and has a prerogative above all law. Such a
plenitude and fullness of power (says Sanches) Th. San. Ma. Tom 1. l. 2. dis.
15. n. 3.
as subject to no necessity, Nulliusq. publici juris regulis limitatus and
bounded with rules of no public law. And so Baldus before him. Bald. l 2. n
40. c. de s. and aqua.
Vlpian says, Vlpian. l. de regib.
The Prince is loosed from laws. Bodin Bodin de Rep. l. 7. cap. 20.
Nemo imperat sibi, no man commands himself. Tholosanus says, Ipsius dare
non accepere: the Prince gives laws, but receives none. Donellus
distinguishes betwixt a law, and a Royal law proper to the King. Don. l. 1.
com. c. 17
Trentlerus says, Tren, vol 1. ^9. 8.
The Prince is freed from laws, and that he obeys laws, de honestate non de
necessitate, upon honesty, not of necessity: And with him Soto, Gregorius de
valentia and other Schoolmen, subject the king to the directive power of the
law, and liberate him of the coactive power of the law.

It is reported of one Licas and Thrasilius, being cured by Physicians of the
Frenzy and fantastical conceits, grew afterward very angry with their
friends because they left them not alone in their former foolish condition. I
know there is little thanks to be expected from the Kings of the earth, by
seeking to remove that State destroying principle which their Court-flatterers
have put into them, as, Absoluteness, a prerogative above law, not under power
of any jurisdiction etc. nevertheless, the work being useful and necessary for
the public good, it is fit it should be taken in hand.

That God has given no absolute and unlimitted power to a King above law, is
clearly proved thus:

1. He is appointed of God, even when he sits on the throne, to take heed to
read on a written copy of Gods Law, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God,
and keep all the words of this Law. Deuteronomy. 17,18,19.
Notwithstanding the greatness of the affairs of his Kingly office, he must
read the Law, the more carefully to observe and obey it in every particular,
for the ordering of his own life, and for the government of the people.

2. Whatsoever power a King has, he has it from the people, and all the power
they gave him, is a legal and lawful power, to guide themselves in peace and
godliness, and save themselves from unjust violence, by the benefit of Rulers;
and therefore to claim a power above Law, or to use a tyrannical power against
the people for their hurt and destruction, or to be exempted from punishment;
is not only against the peoples intention in their election, but such a power
as they never gave him, never had, never could give; for they cannot give what
they never had, and power to destroy themselves, they never had, nor to save
any man, who should commit such crimes, as by the Law of God and nature
deserves death. I say such a power the people never had, never gave him, and
so consequently a King has it not.

3. The Law says, Illud possimus quod jure poscimus. Again, it is no power
which is not a lawful power, and therefore if a King murder the innocent, and
do acts of sinful injustice, this tyrannical power is not from God, otherwise
then by way of permission, as a power to sin, in devils and men is; and
therefore such a power is restrainable and punishable by the subject, as being
a power, I say, not from God at all.

4. Note the conditions tacit or express, upon which the Prince receives the
crown: For soedus conditionatum, aut promissio conditionalis mutua, facit vis
alteri in alterum; a mutual conditional covenant gives Law and power over one
to another: I ask then, why a subject breaking his covenant with the King by
treason or rebellions should be punished for it justly; and the King breaking
his covenant and oath with the people in degenerating into a tyrant, and
murdering the innocent, should not be punished likewise? Specially seeing it is
acknowledged, That the States of the Kingdom who gave him the crown are above
him, and they may take away what they gave him, as the Law of Nature and God
says, Qui habet potestatem constituendi, etiam and jus adimendi. Rutl plea for
the people. quest. 26. page 234. l. nemo 37. l. 21. de reg, jur l. ille a quo
13. S.


5. If the King turn a paricide, a lion, a waster, and a destroyer of the
People, as a man he is Subject to the coactive Laws of the land; if any thing
should hinder that a Tyrant should not be punished by law, it must be, either
because he has not a superior, but God, or nemo potest a se ipso cogi: but
this ground is false and absurd, for a politic society, as by natures
instinct, they may appoint a head or heads to themselves, so also if their head
or heads become ravenous wolves, the God of nature has not left a perfect
society, and free people remediless, but they may arraign and punish the head
or heads to whom they gave all the power that they have for their good, not for
their destruction.

6. Where ever there is a covenant and oath betwixt two equals; yea, or
superiors and inferiors, the one has some coactive power over the other. If
the father give his bond to pay the son a thousand pounds, as his patrimony;
though before this engagement the father was not obliged, but only by the law
of nature to give a patrimony to his son: yet now by a politic obligation of
promise, covenant, and writ, he is so obliged to his son, to pay a thousand
pound, that by the Law of Nations, and the civil law, the son has now a
coactive power by law to compel his father, though his superior, to pay him so
much of his patrimony. Even so (though it should be granted (which I shall
never grant) that the King stands superior to his Kingdom and States, yet if
the King come under covenant with his Kingdom (as ours have don) he must by
that come under some coactive power to fulfill his covenant: for omne promissum
(says the Law) cadit in debitum, what any man does promise falls under debt.
If the Covenant be politic and civil, then the King must come under a civil
obligation, to perform the covenant, and though there be none on earth superior
to King and people to compel them both, to perform what they have promised; yet
de jure by the law of nations each may compel the other to mutual performance.
And this is clear, 1. By the law of Nations, if one nation break covenant with
another, though both be Independent, yet has the wronged Nation power, de
jure, to press performance, and to force the other to keep covenant, or punish
them for violation.

2. This is proved from the nature of a promise or covenant, described by
Solomon, Pro. 6.1,3
My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand with
a stranger: Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, and art taken with the
words of thy mouth. The meaning is, by a word of promise and covenant, the
creditor has coactive power, though he be an equal or an inferior to the man
who is surety, even by law to force him to pay, and the Judge is obliged to
give his coactive power to the debtor, that he may force the creditor to pay.
If then the King (giving, not granting he were superior to his whole Kingdom)
come under a covenant to them, to preserve their rights, lives, liberties: but
contrariwise destroys their persons, goods, cities, by sword, plunder, and
fire, by his commissions granted to inhumane malignants and bloody Irish, they
have power to compel him to give satisfaction.

3. The law shall warrant to loose the vassal from his lord, when his lord has
broken his covenant. Hippolitus in L. Si quis viduam, col. 5. and dixit de
quoest. l. Si quis major, 41. and 161. Boltol. n. 41. The Magdeburgens. in
libel. de Offic. Magist. Imperatores and Reges esse Primarios vassallos
imperii, and Regni, and proinde fi feloniam contra Imperium, aut Regnum
committant, feudo privari, proinde ut alias vasallos.

14 obie. I find this to be a main objection, That there is no law for subjects
to put their Kings to death, for any crime. It is (says Bodin) a great
difference to say that a King may be lawfully slain, by a strange Prince, or by
his Subjects

It is no commendation or grace given to the law, that it should be like the
spiders web, that catches the little flies, and lets the greater escape.

But to answer. 1. It is an error and a great mistake, to say, that the Commons
in the house of Parliament, or the representative Kingdom are subjects to the
King. This I utterly deny, to wit, as they are Judges, there, to be subjects to
the King, neither do they Judicially convent his Person before them, censure
and judge him to death, (quatenus) as subjects: but thus, He being a minister,
a steward, or servant of the people, and they representing the whole body of
the people, do call him to an account, not as Subjects to him, but indeed as
his lord and master, and so have a Sovereign power to judge him to death, if
his crimes deserve the same.

2 In point of law Bodin gives us the whole cause, Ibid.
for he confesses Where the Prince that bears rule is not an absolute
Sovereign, but the Sovereignty is either in the people or Nobility: in such a
case (says he) there is no doubt, but it is lawful to proceed against a
Tyrant in way of justice, and to put him to death: and gives for it the example
of Nero and Maximinius. That the Kings of England have not been absolute
Monarchs, but the Supreme Sovereignty resided in the people, is a thing
certainly known, and so abundantly proved by other hands, as there cannot be
any show of reason brought against it.

3. Seeing the King is under law, and the representative of the people above
the King to proceed in justice against him, hence it will necessarily follow,
that the King by law, may lawfully be put to death: for the law says, the
highest or supreamest Judge upon earth, cannot pardon and free the guilty of
the punishment due to him. A. de le. l. non ideo minns. Romans 3,4 Deu. 1.17


And the reason is, he is, but the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil. And if the judgment be the Lords, not man's, not the
Parliaments, as indeed it is not, he cannot then draw the sword against the
innocent, nor absolve the guilty, except the would take upon him, to be wiser
then God, respect persons in judgment, and dispose of that which is proper to
his master. Now sure it is, God only univocally and essentially as God, is
judge; and God only and essentially, and all men in relation to him, are
ministers, legates, deputies, servants, I say, in relation to him, equivocally
and improperly Judges, and mere created, and breathing shadows of the power of
the King of Kings. And look as the Scribe following his own devise and writing,
what sentence he pleases, is not an officer of the court in that point, nor
the pen and servant of the Judge: so the Supreme Council of State, and
Representative of the Kingdom arraigning the King for murder, Treason, and
other high misdemeanors, would be but forged intruders and bastard Judges, and
go contrary to Law, so far as they gieve not the very sentence of God, and are
not the very mouth of the Judge of Heaven and Earth, to pronounce such a
sentence as the Almighty himself would do, if he were sitting on the throne or
bench.

4. Howsoever there be some solemnities of the Law, from which the King may be
free, which indeed are not Laws (as Prickman proves) D. c. n. 78
but some circumstances belonging to the Laws: Nevertheles, if a king commit
murder, adultery, theft, and be a traitor, a waster, and destroyer of his
people, their goods, lives, Laws, Liberties, contrary to his oath and
Coronation-Covenant, in this case I confidently affirm, there is no law (that
has reason, equity, or justice for its bottom and ground) against the putting
of such a King to death by the great Council of State (as we have formerly
showed) above him. And the reason is clear, for the people have no power to
make a law, that the King shall not die by the hand of Justice what wickedness
soever he should commit.

5. I would gladly be informed by any Iurist, or Statist, If a Tyrant without a
title may be killed, yea by a private man; why a Tyrant that has lost his
right and title to the Crown, by the highest Judicature in the Kingdom, may not
lawfully be put to death. Ut L. and vim F de Justit. and jure ubi plene per
omnes.
For the first, the law gives it, and it is so generally held by Vasquez,
Barclay and others. Vasq. l. 1 c. 8. n. 33. Bar. cont. Monar. l. 4: cap. 10
page 286.
And for the latter, observe what Royalists themselves acknowledge, Winzetus
against Buchan, says of Nero, Wintzet. adv. Buc. p. 275.
that he seeking to destroy the Senate and People of Rome, and seeking to make
new laws for himself, excidit jure Regni, lost all right to the kingdom. And
Barclay says, a Tyrant such as Caligula, spoliare se jure Regni, spoileth
himself of the right to the Crown. So Grotius, Groti. de jure bell. and pac. l.
1 cap. 4.
Si Rex hostili animo in totius populi exitium feratur emittit regnum, If he
turn enemy to the kingdom for their destruction he loses his kingdom: because
(says he) Voluntas imperandi, and voluntas perdendi, simul consistere non
possunt. A will or mind to govern and to destroy, cannot consist together in one.

6 The cutting off of a contagious member, that by a Gangreen would corrupt the
whole body is well warranted by nature and reason: for the safety of the whole
is to be preferred before a part. But here perhaps, it will be objected, cut
off a man's head, and the life of the body is taken away; so the King being the
head, destroy him, and the whole body of the Commonwealth is dissolved. I
answer. God cutteth off the spirits of Tyrannous Kings, and yet the
Commonwealth is not dissolved: For 1. This or that tyrannous King being a
transient mortal thing, cannot be referred to the immortal Commonwealth, as it
is adequate correlate. 2. If all the Kings of the earth were removed, yet the
Commonwealth would not leave off to be a body, it would be only a casting off
of one form of Government for another, the worser for the better; but the
natural body without the head cannot live.

Lastly, Mr. Pryn citing some Law Books, where the King is said to be the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, has no Peer in his Kingdom, ought not to be
under man. Sovereign power of Parl, l. 1. p 104, 105.
Thus answers, 1. That the meaning of al these books is, the king is above
every one of his Subjects particularly and distributively as single men: but if
we take them collectively in Parliament, as they are one body, and represent
the whole kingdom, then they are above the King, and may, yea, ought to
restrain and question his actions, his male-Administrations, if there be just
cause. 2. Bracton explains himself how he is highest and without a Peer, to
wit, in distributing justice, that is, he is the highest Iusticiar in the
Kingdom, but as the Law as any in receiving justice. And for the Oath of
Supremacy, it relates to the Popes foreign Princes authority, formerly usurped
in this Realm, and not at all to be referred to Parliaments, or their
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority, not so much as
once thought of by the subscribers of this Oath, which had its creation and
authority from the Parliament.

15. Obje Some say, For people to adjudge their King to death, is without
example, either in Scripture or humane history.

Answ. 1. We argue this negatively, this is neither commanded, nor practiced,
nor warranted by promise: Ergo. It is not lawful, But this is not practiced in
Scripture: Ergo. It is not lawful, It follows not. I read not in all the
word of God, of a man put to death, for lying with a beast, for witchcraft, for
tempting the people to go a whoring and serving a false God; yet these things
are written, and are all divine precepts.

2. Physicians say, that that Physic which only stirs the humors, and does not
carry them away, leaves the body worse then it found it: so, it has been seen
by often and woeful experience, when the States of a kingdom have only stirred
their Princes by opposing and resisting their tyranny and misgovernment, and
not cut them off, they have brought upon themselves and the whole Realm the more
mischief and misery afterward.

3. Former examples are no binding rules to us, otherwise then we see men have
acted according to reason, religion, Law; for wherein soever they differed from
these things, therein ought we to differ from them. 4. If kings formerly have
not judicially been put to death for murder, treason, and other capital crimes,
it is the more needful and useful that such a thing should now be don, that
all other Nations far and near may hence know and learn, what their duty is,
and what they may lawfully do, in point of Law and conscience, and not stand
still as if they were beasts in a base and senseless slavery any longer.

But Fifthly. To speak more directly to the objection, There is no new thing
under the sun. We have many examples of Emperors and Kings which have
judicially been condemned and put to death by the Sovereign power of the
people. Matthew. Par. page 273, 274, 275.
Not to speak of Nero mentioned before: nor of our King John who was condemned
to death by a Parliament in France, for slaying his Nephew Arthur treacherously
with his own hands, and likewise to lose the Crown of England. It is said of
Amaziah king of Judah 2 King. 14.19. That they made a conspiracy against him
in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and
slew him there. Not privately, but openly, as acted by public authority for
his great impiety, and having broken his Oath and Covenant: whereupon we read
not of any complaint, inquisition, proceeding, or punishment inflicted on those
that slew him after his death either by the people, or his children, as there
was upon those that slew king Amon: but being slain, They (to wit, the persons
who had put him to death) brought him on horses, and he was buried in
Jerusalem: and all the people of Judah made Ahaziah King. Which plainly shows
that what was formerly done by the greater part of the State at Jerusalem, was
afterward confirmed by Common-consent, and executed by command of those which
might lawfully do it.

In like manner Andronieus, was apprehended, deposed, and put to death by the
people for his tyranny and oppression. Nic. Chr An nales fol. 52. Grimst. Emp.
hlst page 160. Reg. Sco Buchan. lib. 4. pa. 111.
So Iulianus, not only deprived of the Empire, but authoritatively commanded to
be slain in his palace. Heliogabulus (that monster of mankind) was by the
Praetorian Soldiers, put to death with the Senate and peoples approbation.
Dardan King of Scotland by the unanimous consent of the Nobles and people had
his head cut off (which they carried about for a laughing stock) and threw his
corpse into a jakes, after he had reigned 4. years, Lucktock the 22 King of
Scotland, for his vicious and base life was convented before an assembly of the
chief men and slain with the instruments of his wickedness. ib. p. 113.
Eugenius the 8. another of their Kings, was for his filthy lusts,
covetousness, and cruelty, slain in the assembly of his Lords, by their general
consent, and his companions in villainy and wickedness hanged: Et ipsi gratum
populo speculatum praebuere: page 165.
which was a greateful spectacle to the people.

So Agis and Pausanias two Lacedemonian Princes put to death by the people.
Mun. cos. l. 5. c. 37. p. 1248.
So the Thracian Kings for their offenses by public consent were punished with
death. The usual practice of the Saboeans was to stone their Kings, if they
highly transgressed and went beyond their bounds. If need were, it might be
showed out of Histories and approved Authors, that the Athenians, Ionians,
Melesians, Marchomanni, Quadi. Persians, Sicilians, Corinthians, Parthians,
Meroes, Gardii, Medes, Paphii, Cathians, Ethiopians, Sidonians, Germans,
Swedes, Danes; and anciently even all other Nations, not only prescribed laws,
and lim^ to their Kings, but called them usually to an account for their
misgovernment, and often times put them to death when they saw cause. Alex. ab ^
4. ^ fol. ^. ^uel. and Gibel. pli l. 4. Alex. l. 6. c. 4. Plut. in Arat. Val.


6 The putting to death of Tyrants in former times has been held so lawful and
honorable, as large rewards have been propounded to the undertakers and authors
thereof, and to the living they have given the goods of the Tyrant as to the
deliverer of their Country, and honored the dead with Epitaphs, and Statutes of
brass, as in Athens, Harmodius, and Aristogiton, together with Brutus, and
Cassius: Max. l. 2. c. ult. L. 3. and L. om^ ne delictu^, Sect. ut F. de re mil.
in Greece Aratus the Sycienian, and thus by public Decree of their States,
because they had freed their several countries from the tyranny of Pasistratus,
Coesar, Nicoebis, yea, those monuments of Tyrant-killers by antiquity were so
honored and highly esteemed of, as they placed them in their Temples on sacred
banqueting beds: And when Xerxes (having vanquished the Athenians) had carried
away with him the Statutes of Harmodius and Aristogiton into his own country:
Seleucus one of the successors of Alexander the great King of Syria, caused
them with all diligence to be carried back again, and to be set up in their own
places.

In Norway anciently they had this custom, That whosoever slew a Tyrant King,
was thereby made a King. Gul. Neu brig. l. 3. cap. 6.
And what the Poet wrote was the opinion then, and common saying of the people.
-- Victima haud ulla amplior
Potest, magisve opima mactari Iovi
Quam Rex iniquus.
To God no better offering can men bring,
Nor fatter, than a wicked Tyrant King.


For conclusion: This only I shall add, to say, There is not an example any
where of the like practice. If it be meant not so judicially and according to
the strict rule and form of law, I confess there may be much truth in it: For
commonly heretofore, amongst all Nations, Jews. Turks, Papists, Heathens, etc.
People observed not the manner as matter, they thought Tyrants so worthy of
death, as they did not much mind how and in what way to cut them off, so they
were destroyed; hence it came to pass, that few tyrannous princes in old time
ever died a natural death, but either by their subjects, or their means were
slain in war, or by some private hand made out of the way: which gave Iuvenal
occasion to say, Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges and sicca morte Tyranni.
Few Tyrants unto Plutoes Court do go
But that are thither sent by bloody blow.


And therefore this late proceeding against the King, seeing it was so legal,
it shall live and remain upon record to the perpetual honor of our English
State, who took no dark or doubtful way, no indirect ^by-course, but went in
the open and plain path of Justice, Reason, ^w, and Religion: and in this
regard they need not fear the reproaches and falsehood of malicious tongues and
pens; for as God does approve their work, and owns it, so he will defend them,
his, and their Cause in spite of all treacherous and wicked Designs, either of
Men or Devils.

The end of the First Part.

