Leaven, corrupting the Childrens Bread; OR Christ's Caveat to beware of
Sectaries and their dangerous Doctrines.

IN TWO SERMONS on Mark 8.15.

The former preached in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, at the Lecture, on
Wednesday, October 1. 1645.

The latter in another Auditorie.

By JOHN CLARKE, B. D. and Pastor of the Church of Fiskerton, near Lincoln.

2 Timothy 3.13, 14. But evil men, and seducers, shall wax worse, and worse,
deceiving and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou have
learned, and have been assured of etc.

2 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
doctrine; but after their own lusts, shall they heap to themselves teachers,
having itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and
shall be turned unto fables -- But watch thou in all things --

Aug. ad Hieronym. Resecandae sunt putridae carnes, and scabiosa ovis ab ovili
repellenda est, ne tota domus, Massa, and pecora ardeant, corrumpantur,
putrescant, ^^^tereant. Arrius in Alexandria, una scintilla fuit, sed quia non
statim oppressus est, totum orbem ejus flamma populata est.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian READER,
ALthough I be neither so obscure in the world, as not to know, or be known,
unto some great and good men too, some Theophilus unto whom I might, perhaps
with acceptance, dedicate and entitle the following sermons; nor so badly
beloved, befriended, that either my pains, or person, need fear slighting,
discountenance, or contempt; Yet I choose rather at this time (as one not
ashamed, or afraid, in this particular to be counted Independent) to let these
plain sermons pass abroad without ambitious affecting, wooing the patronage,
wearing the Liverie of any great name, but only thine (Christian) who art
truly great and honorable, yea of the blood royal, partaker of the Divine
nature; whose father, brother, hope, happiness, inheritance, crown, are all in
heaven. It is the truth of Jesus Christ which I preach; and will I doubt not be
entertained by such with due respect, who know and follow Christ's voice. Every
truth ought to be precious unto us. What is truth, if not this which issued out
of the mouth of truth it self?

The sad experience we all have of the present distempers of our Church, in
regard of a perverse spirit of error mingled among us, tells us our need of
being charged to take heed, beware of Leaven.

Abundans cautela non nocet. I and thou have lift up our hands unto the Lord,
the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth, Genesis 14.22. and by the
solemn national covenant, stand ^ou^^, without respect of persons to endeavor
the ext^ipat^on of popery, superstition, heresy, schism, profanesse, and
whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine and the power of
Godliness -- Who shall, can, disengage us of this Bond?

How ever in the preaching of these Sermons, I pleased not some, who with a
shie, discontented countenance, a malign disdainful eye since have looked on
me, over me, as the D^vil looked over Lincoln (according to our country (...);)
Yet by men judicious, godly, orthodox, what I preached (...) ^^en accepted,
accounted a word in season, profitable, (...); through whose importunity, now,
at last, it is th^^ (...) presented to thine eye.

If it may do any good to the common cause, and b^^ bucket to quench the
scare-fire; an Antidote against the infection of the times, I shall be glad.
It Is not my purpose to ex^^^^^t^, I wish rather to heal the, canker, sore: I
desire to be faithful to Christ, and his peoples souls; not to please men, or
for itch their itching ears; to move planctum, rather then pl^^sum; to speak
to their hearts, not to feed their humourous fancies. Plain dealing is a jewel,
yet they that use it, die beggars; I matter it no, for if I yet pleased men, I
should not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.10. The Lord stir up the spirit of
every found truly good Christian, to stand up as Gods witness, and greatly to
contend for the faith, which wa^ o^^e delivered to the Saints. So prays

Thy servant in his ministry John Clark.

Leaven corrupting the childrens Bread, OR Christ's caveat to beware of
Sectaries, and their dangerous Doctrines.
MARK 8.15. And He charged them, saying; Take heed, beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod.


UPON occasion of the late miraculous feeeding of four thousand people with
seven loaves, (as we find in ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. of this present Chapter) Our
blessed Savior (whose manner usually was Sican enim Joh. 6. Christus ex
miraculo quinque panum occasionem sumpsit docendi de pane caelesti, qui vitam
assert mundo: ita hic ex miraculo septem panum nuper edito, and eorum
fermentatione, occasionem sumit Apostolos instituendi de fermento Pharisaeorum
and Sadducaeorum, quo illi sinceram doctrinam verbi divini, quod est panis
vitae, corrumpunt. Chemn. Harm. Evan. c. 82.
to improve earthly, sensible, obvious objects to spiritual advantages:)
draws off the minds of his hearers, raises up the hearts of his Disciples,
to more high, and heavenly meditations; minding them of another kind of bread;
fore-warning them of another kind of leaven than was used and eaten ordinarily
in their houses, and set on their tables; viz. False Doctrine -- fermentum
Pharisaeorum in doctrina consistit falsa. Chemnit. Harm. cap. 61. -- fermentum
Pharisaeorum, and Sadducaeorum non corporalem panem, sed traditiones perversas,
and haeretica significat dogmata, R. Mont.
poisonous positions, soul-damning principles -- impia Pharisaeorum doctrina
fermento comparatur propter vim noxiam seducendi homines, and praecipitandi in
exitium. Paraeus in 1. ad Corinth. cap. 5. v. 6.
broached, broken among the people, dropped here and there, and crumbled into
the Bread of Life, the Word of God, by sundry pernicious Sectaries of those
times, Pharisees, Sadduces, (for I take in them too, as I am warranted from
Mat. 16.6.) and Herodians, who did shamefully vitiate, grossly corrupt, the
sincere -- est hic sermo metaphoricus. Chemn. harm. cap. 82. denotat id quo
nativa rei puritas inficitur, and opponitur puro ac simplici Dei verbo.
genuine truth of the Word of God, soul-bread; with their erroneous glosses and
traditions: for so, without all metaphor, the Disciples understood, That he
bode them, not beware of the Leaven of Bread, -- non ex panibus, sed ex
cordibus vult fermentum expurgari. Paraeus ibid.
but of the Doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces, Mat. 16.12.

2. Parts.
In the Words, observe two particulars.

1. A Duty charged on the Disciples. 2. Reasons pressing it.
1. Duty.
1. The Duty charged upon them, is this, viz. Carefully to heed whatsoever
Doctrines, they might occasionally hear; as a business of great consequence,
deeply concerning them -- hanc fuisse Christi mentem ut contra praesentes
corruptelas, quibus undique erant obsessi, eos muniret. Calvin.
, as appears by our Saviors ingeminated Caveat, And he charged them, saying,
1. Take heed: 2. Beware.


2. Reasons.
2. The Reasons pressing their due circumspection; and that from 1. The nature
of the Doctrine, it is Leaven. 2. The quality of the Persons, preaching,
professing, practicing the same; -- illae fectae tunc tyrannice regnaban: in
Ecclesia and vitiosis suis dogmatibus oppressam tenebant legis and Prophetarum
doctrinam, ut nihil fere sanum vel integrum maneret. Calv.
no small fools or mean men, you may be sure; but the Masters of Israel,
Doctors of the chair, the Rabbi's; seeming Saints, great zealots; holy,
honorable, and learned men; the reputed none-such's; the gracious, magnified,
omni-fied ones, who were cried up, in Court, City, Country; Pharisees,
Sadduces, and Herodians, who might easily beguile, and seduce unheeding
credulous souls.


I shall sum up the total of my following discourse, in 1. An Historical
Narration 2. Doctrinall Observation 3. Practical Application
of the particular truths contained in the Text.

The first, Historically to acquaint you, What 1. These 3 sorts of Sectaries
were Pharisees. Sadduces. Herodians.
2. They held, professed, their dogmaticall tenants, principles, doctrines. 3.
Their carriage and behavior was toward Christ. Gospel. Disciples.



The second, Doctrinally to inform and teach you, what Divine truths may hence
profitably be learned, and observed.

The third practically to apply, 1. Phrisees.
and make Use of such things from thence, as may concern our selves.

For the first.

The Pharisees were Separatists a (...) divisit. or (...) a separatione and
dissidio; quoniam a vulgari ordine segregati, religionis professione
fecernebantur. Tolet. in Joan. cap. 18. -- See two other Etymologies of
Pharisee in Mr Godwins Moses and Aaron, lib. 1. cap. 10. Quin etiam ex libris
Talmudicis, constat, Pharisaeos ipsos, in septem Sectas fuisse divisos. Jansen.
concord. Evangel. cap. 13. Mr Godwin his Moses and Aaron, lib, 1. cap. 10. --
So the German Anabaptists were crumbled into 14. several Sects. Mr Paget^
Heresiograph. page 31.
to an extraordinary pretended sanctity of life, above other men After the most
strait Sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisee, Act. 26.5.
of the same Nation, and Church of God, the Jews, at that time, the Lords own
peculiar above all Nations: these, though born of the same womb, sucking the
same breasts, enjoying the sacred Ordinances, lively Oracles, etc. Called the
holy seed, Ezra 9.2. The people of Gods holiness, Isai 63.18. Yet, if not
listed under them, members of their Congregation, they branded as profane,
thought them not worthy of their holy society. Whereupon our Savior brings in
the proud Pharisee, strutting and vapouring, God, I thank thee, that I am not
as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, etc. Luke 18.11.

Secondly, They would not eat or drink, or converse, neither make nor meddle
with them, nor so much as touch them, willingly or wittingly; as may appear
Luke 7.39. When the woman which was a sinner, washed Christ's feet with her
tears, The Pharisee spoke within himself, saying, This man if he were a
Prophet, would have known who, and what manner of woman this is that touches
him, for she is a sinner. (see also Isai. 65.5.) and thereupon the Pharisees
were ever and anon upon our Saviors jacket, snarling at him, and censoriously
taxing him, for eating, drinking, or having to do with Publicans and Sinners,
Mark 2.16. Luke 5.30.

Thirdly, They would not go in the common garb, wear such apparel, be in the
same fashion, or kind of habit, that other their Countrymen and neighbors
were; they affected singularity in their very clothes, and would say, Vestes
populi terrae conculcatio sunt Pharisaeorum.

Fourthly, They accounted al others who were not of their Sect, Order,
Fraternity, and Congregation, Cursed, ignorant sorry sots, miscreant, wretched
caytiffs, creatures Erant Pharisaei cum sua, tum aliorum sententia, Lux
Israelis, secta exactissima Judaeorum. Montacut. Appar. 7. Sect. 40.
John 7.48, 49. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?
But this people, who knows not the Law, are cursed.

For the second

2. What they held, their Dogmata Errores autemquos mordicus tenebant, graves
admodum fuerunt. Godwin. Synops. Antiquitatum Hebraicarum lib. 3. cap. 1.
Chemnit. Harm. Evangelist cap. 51.
positions, 2. their Leaven.
and Leaven of their Doctrine (besides what Saint Matthew sets down, Mat. 5.21,
27, 38, etc. Mat. 15.4. Mat. 23. per tot.) was made up of these four erroneous,
heretical, and blasphemous ingredients, which they stiffly maintained, and
stood to.

1. That there was but one person in the Godhead; and that Christ the Messiah,
was to be man -- hunc humanam tantum naturam habiturum putarunt, nec de alia
quam de corporalis regni restauratione somniarunt. Godwin Synops.
only, and his kingdom temporal. Opinio quae etiam Apostolis inhaerebat, qua
sibi finxerunt, regnum Messiae fore imperium mundanum, simile regno Davidis,
and Alexandri imperio. Chemnit. Harm. Evangel. cap. 61. see Mat. 20.21. Luke
17.20. Ioh. 18.36. See more of their tenants at large in Montac. Appar. 7.
Sect. 37.


2. That the souls of righteous men at their death, passed into other bodies of
good men: (a whelp much what of the same litter with the Pythagorean (...)) and
animated them. Hereupon it was that they which savoured of this Leaven, said,
That Christ was John Baptist, Elias, Jeremias, or one of the Prophets, Mat.
16.14.

3. That there was in man a freedom of Will, by Nature, unto good; and a
self-ability to fulfill the whole Law of God, and to attain heaven. Haec
fiducia propriae justitiae fuit instar fermenti, quo Judaei turgidi, inflati,
Chem. har. Evan. c. 51
And therefore they rejected the Free Grace of God justifying sinners; puffed
up with a conceited righteousness of their own, as not needing any mercy from
God, or merit of a Redeemer to save them; see Romans 10.3.

4. Not resting in the written Law, and Word of God, they maintained a
traditionall Law, thorah begnal pe (delivered by Word of mouth to Moses by God,
and by Moses to their fathers, and so to them) more complete, absolute, and
which did expound the Law written, Mat. 15.6, 9.

And thus they added needless, endless ceremonies, wilworship, fictions,
fables, assumenta, beggarly patches to Scripture broad-cloth: consisting in 1.
Washings, diverse, often, cubitaliter, up to the elbows: Theophylact in Mar. 7.3.
-- Not eat till they wash, Mat. 15.2. Luke 11.38. -- When they came from the
market, washing, cups, pots, tables, Mar. 7.4.
2. Fastings, twice in the week they fasted, on Monday. Thursday.
I fast twice in the week, Luke 18.12. Pharisaet jejunantes, jejunabant vere;
nihil enim plane comedebant usque ad noctem, aliquandiu post occasum solis,
Mont. Appar. 7. Sect. 23. Theophylact Drusius
in Luke 18.12.
3. Phylacteries, or small scrols of parchment -- Ipsi simbrias protrahebant,
and in oris earum spinas ligabant quarum assiduis punctionibus, pedes and
tibiae, sanguine aspersae monstrabantur; ea solum ratione, ut populis vitae
poenitudinem ostentarent. Tolet in Joan. cap. 18.
in which certain select sentences of the Law were written, by Gods own
appointment, Deuteronomy. 6, 8, 9. and bound to the head, hand, skirts: -- but the
Pharisees in an hypocritical vainglorious Non ut exactam legis observationem
praestarent, sed quia his hominum gloriam, and existimationem ambibant. idem.
Ambitionis animalia. Mont. Appar. 7. Sect. 4. and 31.
humor, enlarged these above ordinary, and are therefore censured by our
Savior, Mat. 23.5. 4. Praying often, much, in private Privatis orationibus
domi adeo incumbebant, ut se somni privarent beneficio. Epiphan. -- aeneam
sphaeram manu tenere consuescebat, pelvi subjecta, ut cum e manu sphaera in
pelvim excidisset, sono excitatus Pharisaeus somnum excuteret, and se
componeret denuo ad orationem, vid Montacut. Apparat. 7. Sect. 17.
and in public, Mat. 6.5, 7. But with much superstition and hypocrisy. 5.
Pains to make Proselytes, gather Churches, Mat. 23.15. (or scatter -- in
schismaticis vel haereticis congregationibus, vel potius segregationibus. Aug.
de Verb. Dom. Sermon. 11.
rather, Mat. 12.30.) Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye
compass sea and land, to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him
twofold more the child of hell, then your selves. Miseri homines and
infelices, qui per bona etiam opera gehennam licitarentur!



Secondly, 2. Sadduces
The Sadduces

So named from Sadoc Antigoni discipulo, qui cum defecisset ad templum montis
Gerizim, a Manasse, inter Samaritas constructum, Alexandro Magno regnante,
haeresin intulit Sadducaeorum. -- Godwin lib. 3. cap. 2. Antiq. hebraic.
(others say tsedeck, justitia, ironice) the founder of that Sect, (as
Brownists from Brown, and Arrians, Arminians, Donatists, Pelagians, Socinians,
etc. from their first heresiarch) were a sort of Samaritane, miscreant,
mungrell-Jews, who 1. Stuck stiffly to the bare letter of the Law, admitting
only the Pentateuch, Moses 5 Books for canonical Scripture; but rejected 1.
The Psalms, Prophets, and all other Scriptures. Hence our Savior confutes
them out of Moses, Exodus 3, 6. in the point of Resurrection, which they denied,
Mat. 22.32. 2. All traditions and Comments on the Text, and were thence called
Karaim, Biblers, Scripturists.
2. Denied the Holy Ghost, as also Angels, Spirits, Acts 23.8. The Sadduces
say, that there is no Resurrection, neither Angel, nor Spirit. 3. Maintained
the souls of men to be mortal, to dye as the beasts, and be annihilated: no
resurrection at all, or future retribution to good or bad, Luke 20.27. no
heaven, no hell; thus putting off at once, all sense of Religion; profane
Atheists, arrant Epicures, Dementiam potius Epicuream, quam legis divinae jura
sectabantur, inquit Philastrius.
opening a wide gap to all licentiousness Omnem religio ni^ ^ensum
excusserunt, -- carni ad effraenem peccandi licentiam viam aperuerunt. Chemnit.
Harm. cap. 82.
and abominable practices.


3. Herodians.
Thirdly, The Herodians

Were a Court-faction of seducing Parasites, by Nation Jews Drusius says,
Greeks.
but trained up at Court, or employed thence, as Herod's Agents: Secta Aulica
says Master Calvin in Mat. 22.16. Herodis domestici. Sir. Interp. Whose
Religion (like the Turkish Alcoran) was a hotch-potch medley, patcht up of
Paganism and Judaism. -- novam quandam religionem ex Paganismo and Judaismo
conssabant. Bez. in Mat. 22.16. -- nimirum, mixturam quandam religionis, ex
Pharisaismo pariter and Sadducaeismo conflatam; ex utraque enim secta
receperunt ea quae ad stabiliendam dominationem, commodissima videbantur, ut
sic populum in regis sui parts traherent. Chemnit. Harm. cap. 82.


They who were tutored in this Court-Religion, sowred with the leaven of Herod,

1. Cried up Herod among the common people, as their promised Messiah, Herodem
arbitrabantur esse illum Christum, in prophetis and in lege, omnibus promissum,
and ab omnibus expectatum. Epiphan. Hieronym. in Mat. 22. Montac. Ap. 7. Sect.
67.
the Scepter now departed from Judah, and no other King of the Jews visibly
appearing but he; the Herodian-Chaplains, Court-Parasites, are prime sticklers
to persuade the people, to receive him for the expected Messiah.

2. Honored Herod with superstitious solemnities, annually observing his
birthday: -- Herodis venere dies, -- Pers. Satyr. 5.

3. Humored Herod, turned Sadduces, Epicures, were of his Atheistical
opinions, followed his licentious living, and loose Bezain Notis Major. in Mat.
22.16. -- fermentum Herodis, quod est manifesta impletas, profanus Dei
contemptus, estraenis licentia -- Chemnit. Harmon. Evang. cap. 61.
practices; were molded into his lewd ungodly manners, wretched and profane
temporizers. Mark. 6.14.16.18.

4. Were rigid exacters of Caesar's tribute, which was an Herodian principle, of
Court Divinity -- aulicae etiam Theologiae subsidio fulcire regnum suum.
(rather State-policie) which this domineering usurper catechized his creatures
into; clean against the hair of the Jewish immunity from taxes, anciently
prescribed to by them; point blank crossing the popular maxim of a free State,
and liberty of the subject, John 8.33. and was the occasion of sundry
rebellions and broyls; as that of Theudas, Judas of Galilee, Act. 5.36.

This tribute did Herod squeeze out of their purses, to gratify Augustus, and
keep in at the Roman Court; lest the Crown which Caesar had set on his
usurping head, he should again pull off. This morsel of Herodian-Leaven lay
heavy on the Jews stomach, which though they were forced to swallow, yet they
could never well digest.

And thus having showed you the Devils bakers Diabolum in domo Domini pistorem
agere velle and habere suos quosdam incarnatos Pistorios, qui diabolicum
fermentum, spiritualem fastum and superbiam, fidelibus admiscere conantur, quo
eos and Deo insipidos, and hominibus molestos reddant. Chemnit. Harm. cap. 61.
who these Sectaries were, and given you a taste or essay of their dangerous
Leaven what they held.

The third particular of the Historical part of the Text, now follows, What
the carridge and demeanor of the Pharisees, Sadduces and Herodians, was
toward our Savior Christ, his Gospel, Disciples, etc.

All these three sorts of heretical Sectaries, though at deadly feud among
themselves -- capitales, alias, essent ^inimicitiae (...) inter se
discordabant. Chemnit. harm. Evan cap. 49. and cap. ^^. Montacut. Apparat. T.
S. 21.
and mortal enemies each to other in asserting their hellish principles; yet
they joined hand in hand, and were firmly combined against the Lord Jesus
Christ; were his sworn and bitter, and implacable enemies, and never left
dogging, and baiting, and persecuting of him, till they had his blood, and
brought him to his grave.

1. In Words, they call him the Carpenter, Mark 6.5. a man gluttonous and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Math. 11.19. They said he was a
Samaritane and had a Devil, John 8.48. they called the master of the house
Beelzebub, Math. 10.25. that Deceiver, Math. 27.63. mad, John 10.20. with a
deal of other foul language, and opprobrious calumnies.

2. In Deeds, sometime underhand, and by their emissaries, they seek to
undermine him, and blow up his reputation among the people. Sometimes they send
and suborn some that may feign themselves just men, to snittle and ensnare him,
in resolving a case of Conscience forsooth; they send to catch him in his
words, Mark 12.13. Sometimes again they oppose him with captious questions,
thinking to make him odious, as doing against the Law, against Caesar, against
the ancient received Customs.

2. Sometime with open violence they assault him, seek to lay hands on him: --
send officers and soldiers to take him: -- bearing the world in hand, that
such tender conscienced Saints, as they seemed, so religious and merciful men
made up all of goodness Chemn. Harmon. Evang. 49.
would not have persecuted Christ, unless he had been an evill-doer, or some
notorious wicked man. Mark 3.6.

2. How do they undervalue his preaching, seek to draw away his hearers, buzze
strange conceits of him into their heads?

3. Thus also they dealt with his Disciples Peter, John, James, Paul, etc. they
revile them, beat them, imprison them, kill them, -- and all this to stop the
way of

4. The Gospel, and the Preaching of the glad tidings of salvation among the
Gentiles; how did they stomach, and storm at, and gainsay, and persecute it?
how did they seek to leaven them, and obtrude upon them circumcision, keeping
the Law? etc. thus perverting and poisoning the souls of Christ's young converts
with their contagious doctrine So Paraeus observes, in Gal. cap. 1
.

So you see there was good reason to charge his Disciples, to take heed and
beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, Sadduces and Herodians.

And here in the close of the Historical of my Text, I might (perhaps not
unseasonably) show you how this Charg and Caveat of our Saviors; this Antidote
here prescribed by the great Physician of souls, to his Disciples; this
Ephemeris primarily calculated for Iudaea, and the Meridian of those
Primitive-Church times; yet may, does, without much observable difference,
serve generally for great Britain, and the Climate of our English Church and
State: as not in factu esse, being long since done; but in fieri; now in doing:
and hence from the circumferentialls of the Text might draw home the lines to
our own Center, and make the parallel: there being as much reason, as much
need, that even Our people should be charged, to take heed, beware of the
Leaven of seducing Sectaries, now scattered into the Childrens, the Churches
bread, as was for them. For have not we now the like dangerous Leaveners? Who
See M. Pagets Heresiographie. Master Edwards Gangraena pa. 19.29.


Deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God.

Affirm them to be unsufficient uncertain.

-- Written by the pen-mens own private Spirit?

Who say There is but one person in the Divine nature.

Jesus Christ is not very God: Christ's humane nature is defiled with original
sin -- men may be saved without Christ.

It Is no less then blasphemy for a child of God to ask pardon of sins.

The soul of man is mortal, as the soul of a beast, and dies with the body.

Many Christians in these days have more knowledge than the Apostles: and
should not tie themselves to their imperfections.

The Christian Magistrate has no power at all to meddle in matters of Religion.

Children are not bound to obey their parents, if they be wicked.

The Lords prayer is but an idol -- and that Our father, has sent more to
hell, than Pater noster ever did etc.

But I forbear to rake further into this kennell, and shall leave the sad
consideration hereof to your private thoughts; and come now to

2. Part.
The Doctrinall part of our Text; in which these 4. Divine truths, aphorisms, or
Documents, are observable: that 1. Corrupt Doctrine is like Leaven. 2. Gods
people must with all possible caution, and circumspection preserve themselves
from being corrupted, seduced, and poisoned with such Leaven. 3. The best of
Gods people, (Christ's own family -- Disciples themselves) need charging to take
heed and beware of false doctrine. 4. The greatness, or seeming goodness, of
any man's person, should not so captivate, or bewitch the people of God, that
they should suffer themselves to be seduced, catched, or empoysoned by them.


To begin with the First.

Erroneous, corrupt Doctine is like Leaven. Math. 16.12. M^n^me obscurum est
quin fermenti nomen Christus simplici puroque Dei verbo opponat -- utplurimum
Scriptura hoc nomine quidvis adventitium designat quo nativa rei cujusque
puritas inficitur. In hoc autem loco, haec inter se duo antitheta haud dubie
respondent, Simplex Dei veritas, and figmenta, quae ex proprio sensu
comminiscuntur homines. Neque est quod elabi tentet quispiam Sopista, negans de
qualibet doctrina hoc debere intelligi, quia non alia reperietur doctrina quae
purae and azymae doctrinae nomen sustineat, quam quae a Deo profecta est. Unde
sequitur fermentum vocari quicquid aliunde mixturae provenit: sicuti etiam
Paulus docet adulterari fidem, simulatque a Christi simplicitate abducimur 2
Cor. 11.2, 3, 4. Calvin in Math. 1^.12.
and that in sundry respects. 1. In regard of the Commonnesse; In Use common.
Leaven was usually mingled with every batch, every loaf of Jewish bread:
every family among them, did all the year-long, ordinarily, bake and eat
leavened bread; unleavened was only, or for the most part, used at the
Passover. Now the common houshold-bread, which they daily ate, was not more
leavened, than the doctrines those heretical Masters of Israel usually taught:
the bread of life they brake, was bread of death -- Mors in olla. Leaven in
every loaf, rats-bane and rank poison in every point. As you may observe when
our Savior picks out small, yet bane-full crumbs of their corrupt glosses,
from the pure Word of God, on every occasion -- see Math. 5. etc.

2. In regard of the Quantity, Little. Leaven is but little, 2. Little.
a small piece of old sour dough -- si misceatur farinae quae decuplo vel
trigecuplo and amplius quoad quantitatem fermentum superat; totam tamen massam
penetrat and infint. Chemnit. Harm. cap. 61.
which when it is crumbled among the meal, is hardly visible, when it is
incorporated with the paste, and kneaded up among the lump of dough, scarcely
perceivable, 1 Cor. 5, 6. So erroneous doctrine is but little at the first;
Heretics have tricks of cleanly conveyance, can by scraps, and piecemeal
steal in here and there a bit, now and then a crumb, among other orthodox and
unleavened truths. They are cunning enough, to mix, and blend it, not to let it
fall all together on a lump; lest it happily should be descryed -- which if it
be; Then, it is but a slip in judgment, in utterance and delivery; a private
opinion of no great moment: what great harm can it do in being vented? An vos
viros tam sapientes ignorare convenit illud vulgo tritum ex pistrino sumptum
proverbium, modico fermenti fermentari totam massam? Epitheton modicum, tacitam
includit (...), si forte dixerint, modicum hoc est. Imo, et modicum nocet. --
Paraeus in 1. ad Corinth. cap. 5. v. 6.

Fermentum enim videtur res non magni momenti, sed tamen intra conspersionem
admissa, totam massam acidam reddit. Sic leviculum, and nullius momenti videtur
esse, hoc vel illud doctrinae addere. Quodnam enim periculum ex additiuncula
aliqua enasceretur? sed corruptela etiam minima semel recepta, serpit ut
cancer. -- Chemnit. Harm. c. p. 82.


.

O ye beloved! it leaveneth people, draws Disciples, breeds a faction,
separates hearers into private conventicles, and makes rents and schisms in the
Church: One is for Paul, another for Apollos, (...) 1 Cor. 1.13. A little pin
may kill mortally. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles. Jam. 3.5.

3. Like.
3. In regard of the Quality, Like. Leaven is like the dough, is of the same
grain, of the same meal, leavings of the same lump, the scrapings up of the
kneading trough; very like, it differs but in age, sowrenesse etc.

So is the corrupt leaven of heretical doctrine, scraped up, raked together, 2
Pet. 3.6.
out of the Scriptures, (but perverted, wrested, sophisticated, adulterated,
sowred with rotten, corrupt mis-interpretations, and glosses): so seemingly
sound, true, probable, Heb. 5.14.
holy, good, that he had need of senses exercised that should discern the
hidden poison of the abominable opinions, of heretical leaveners. Seria
praem^nit one utitur, qua declarat Christus, non esse cuivis datum, discernere
falsam doctrinam, and ab illa sibi caver^. Bucer.


4. In regard of the Spreading property, 4. Spreads.
that is in Leaven, for it speedily, secretly, suddenly, unperceiveably
diffuseth it self through the whole lump of dough -- ferm^nci nomine
significatur, id quod late serpit e^ alia quoque ad se trahit. Chemn. Harm.
cap. 82.
till all be leavened; creeps into every corner of the kneading trough: so
does this mystical leaven of false doctrine, this scab of error, like an
universal leprosy Arrianorum venenum non portiunculam quandam sed pene orbem
totum contaminaverat. -- Vinc Lir. cap. 6.
overspread and disperse it self, over the whole Church and Kingdom, from
old to young, from Minister to people, from one Christian to another. One
scab'd sheep marreth the whole flock, one rotten apple tainteth those that lie
next unto it: -- uvaque contactu livorem ducit ab uva --
One pestilent fellow may breath death into a thousand. And therefore Saint
Paul warns Timothy to shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase
to more ungodlynesse. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is
Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred -- 2 Timothy 2.16, 17.
When men have once forsaken the right way, they wander in infinitum -- Thus we
see many fall from schism to heresy Master Hooker eccles. polit. in the
prefaci.
from being Separatists to Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, Socinians,
Libertines, Atheists, Seekers (and so they may be all their days and yet shall
never find that old, and right way, which for some toy they forsook formerly;
God penally giving them over to strong delusions, and leaving them to a spirit
of error) Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me, Joh. 7.34. Ye shall seek me,
and shall dye in your sins, Joh. 8.21. as Christ there tells the Pharisees.
Uno absurdo dato, mill sequuntur. God knows where such men shall stop;
themselves, nor we know not Master Edwards Antapolog p. 295. some of them had
gone far by this time of the day.
till they be over head and ears ingulfed, from the puddle of heresy, into the
bottomless pit, bank-less, bound-less.

5. In regard of the Effects, Leaven 1. sowreth 2. heateth 3. swells.


1 Sowreth
1. Leaven sowreth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. a crumb of leaven mingled with
the pure meal -- fermentum h^nc vim habet ut si farinae mixtum f^er^tquod
parvum videbatur, crescat in majus, and ad saporem suum universam conspersionem
trahat: ita doctrina haeretica si vel modicam scintillam in tuum pectus
jecerit, in brevi, ingens fl^mma succrescit, ut totam hominis possessionem ad
se trahat. Hieronym.
knod among the dough, molded up into the loaf, leaveneth, vitiateth,
alters, the first, simple, pure sweet nature of it, makes it smell sowrely,
taste saltly, savor rammish, unpleasingly.

So does this corrupt Leaven of erroneous doctrine -- humana commenta and
traditiones, Evangelio Christi admin^tas, id totum adulterare, subve^tere,
fidem and conscientias turbare. Sicut enim modicum veneni totum cotpus inficit;
sic vel modicum de humanis commentis Evangelio gratiae aspersum, totum
corrumpit. Paraeus in Galat. cap. 1. Lect. 8.
adulterate and sour the unleavened truth, and pure Word of God: and therefore
was odious and abominable unto God, (who cannot endure humane mixtures
Quemadmodum in moneta regia, qui aliquam partem de impressa imagine
amputaverit, totum numisma reddit addulterinum; ita quisquis vel minimam
particulam sanae fidei perverterit -- vid. Para. ibid. ex Chrysostom.
and sophistications, Amos 4.5.) expressly forbidden the Jewish Church in all
their sacrifices, Levit. 2.11.

2. Heateth
2 Leaven heateth, and thence (in the three learned Our English Leaven, is from
the leavings of the batch, usually made up and reserved, as the other Hebr.
word (...) comes of (...) reliquum esse, to leave.
languages) has its denomination. 1. fermentum a ferveo. 2. (...) quod
fervendo crescat. 3. (...) from (...) calefactus fuit, incaluit, he was hot:
every house-wife that lays Leaven Mulierum erat opus panes coquere sicut ex
historia Sarae patet Genesis 18.36: and Plinius testatur Romae per annos ab urbe
condita quingentos and octoginta, nullos pistores fuisse -- Chemit. Harm. cap.
61.
knows this heating quality to be in Leaven, and therefore they cover and
keep warm their dough, lest the bread should be sad. No leaven but heateth, it
is of an active, fiery nature.

So does the leaven of heresy heat, inflame, and enrage men's spirits, sets
Church, Kingdom, yea the whole Christian world in combustion; and (as Saint
James says of the tongue) sets on fire the course of nature, and it is set
on fire of hell, Iam. 3.6. -- profana Arrianorum novitas velut quaedam Bellona
aut Furia -- non destitit universa miscere atque vexare; privata ac publica,
sacra, profanaque omnia -- Vinc. Lir. cap. 6.
What heart-burnings does it breed, what jealousies, suspicions, bitter,
uncharitable censures does it foment against Master Hooker eccles. polit. in
the preface.
all those that do not side and hold with them in all things? they account them
heathens, publicans, dogs, devils. They lowre, brow-beat, disdainfully frown,
and look sowrly upon them (as Cain on Abel) with a discontented and fallen
countenance; like Richard Nevill the great Earl of Warwick who looked so
terribly when he was moved, that every wrinkle in his forehead was a grave for
a Prince to be buried in.

How bitter are their speeches, tongues like razors, with what vinegar and gall
do they write? it would be tedious to particularize. Who were more bitter
persecutours of Christ, then the Pharisees? Paul himself while he was so,
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Church. The Devil throws
in his gunpowder among their zeal; sets all in combustion betwixt men of the
same Church, Kingdom, Society, Congregation, Family, Flesh, that board and bed
together, so that even these lift up the heel, the hand against each other.
Psalm. 41.9. -- nec enim tantum affinitates, cognationes, amicitiae, domus,
verum etiam urbes, popull, provinc^ae nationes, universum postremo Romanorum
imperium funditus concussum and emotum est. Vinc. Lir. de Arrian. cap. 6. --
Acti in exillium sacerdotes, oppleta sanctis ergastula, carceres, metalla --
ibid.


David from experience of some harsh usage from such kind of furious fellows,
prays to be delivered (...) from the hand of the injurious and leavened man;
-- Prufracte, violenter agentis. ^uaterf. Ainsworth in Ps. 71.4
of such we say in the proverb totus est in fermento: such hot spurs, fiery
fierce spirited men, are most heretical zelots: witness the Anabaptists in
Germany, of whose outrageous violences, villainies, cruelties, Historians Joan.
Sleidan de stat. relig. and reipub. lib. 6. Mr Philpot that godly Martyr says,
the Anabaptists be an inordinate kind of men stirred up by the Devil, to the
destruction of the Gospel. Mr. Fox Acts Mon. vol. 3. page 607.
relate: and the Jesuite-leaveners, whom one witrily caleth in one word
Bombardo-gladio-fun-hasti-flammi-loquentes.

Alsted poetic. very incendiaries to all Churches and states: as the Gunpowder
Treason, and sundry other Machiavilian plots of the Popish leavened crew,
especially the yet freshly-bleeding, bloody rebellion in Ireland, (in which so
many thousand Protestant-English innocents have been mercilesly murdered)
testify.

3. Swells
3 Leaven swells, puffs up, heaveth, raises the dough and makes the bread
light: so does the leaven of heresy, and false doctrine puff up men with an
overweening conceit of their own parts, persons, graces, -- ut enim fermentum
^^^tam conspersam inflat, and efficit ut se in altum attollat: ita etiam falsa
doctrina hominem in altitudinem extollit non tantum adversus homines sed et^^m
gratiam Dei, inflat fiducia propriae justiciae -- Chemnit. Harm^n. cap. 61.
as the precious ones, Saints on earth, the excellent. The proud Pharisees
trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others, Luke 18.9.
They affect singularity in their opinions, practices, are not, will not be, do
not as other men Marry in the night; receive the Lords supper at night; anoint
the sick with oil; enter into a Church covenant; people make Ministers; baptize
in rivers; use the holy kiss; bring in widows; hymns; The Apostolici wash
one another feet; have all things common, preach on the house tops, etc.
. No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you. Job 12.2.

As the Chinoys highly conceited of themselves Helyn. hist. of China. p. 687.
that they use to say, they themselves have two eyes, the Europaeans one, and
the rest of the people not one: so are even the low-form Proselytes of leavened
sectaries, puffed up with their horn book learning; knowledge puffs up. 1. Cor.
8.7 (...). 1 Timothy 6.4. vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. Col. 2.18. Every
novice is wiser then his teachers, the spirit leads them into all truth, they
have abundance of revelations, new lights; see more, know more then ordinary
dull Christians, yea then Ministers of the Reformed Churches; hence they
arrogantly take the chair, -- In genere nullum animal magis est inflatum and
superbum quam sit haereticus. Chemn.
expounding, exercising in private, resolving doubts, wading into the deeps of
Scripture, prophesies, mysteries (alas, poor pigmies! thimbles full of dust!)
yea saucily invade our pulpits in public. What? (say they) must none preach
but black coats?

And why not black coats, I pray as well as gray coats and buffe coats, and
blue aprons? I see no cause to be ashamed of a black coat; the prophets and the
prophets sons of old were known and distinguished by their habits. -- allusit
Christus ad vestes, ex quibus olim dign^sch^^tur prophetae -- Beza Not. Major.
in Math. 7.15


Neither know I any reason why that men that have been from their childhood
trained up in the Schools and Universities, (with great expense of time and
means) and principled in tongues and Arts; besides many years study in the
Scriptures with daily humble prayer to God, for the right understanding of
them, and diligent searching out of ancient and modern expositors, what is the
meaning of the H. Ghost in them, I see no reason I say, (but what talk I of
reason to unreasonable men? 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.) why professed Scholars, Graduates,
Divines, Ministers, Black coats should not be fitter to expound, preach; abler
to dispense Sacred mysteries, then quilibet etrivio; every tailor, tapster,
cobbler, baker and other mechanics, (...) -- has not the God of o^der set
several orders of men in his Church? some Apostles, some Prophets? etc. 1 C^.
12.28. -- he gave some, Apostles, and s^^^ Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Sal^te. f^^ the work of
the ministry, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Their trades sure come not by revelation; their novices must serve out an
apprenti^^ship ere they be masters of their art, or fit to set up for
themselves; only Divinity is soon learned, easy to understand, in an instant
infused into every enthysiast; for so they apply that of Joel 2.28. I will
pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophecy -- (which when they can do, we will believe them, as Luther from that
text answered the Germane Anabaptists) which was only truly and fully
accomplished in, and applyable to the Apostles, and Primitive disciples, as
Saint Peter expounds it Acts 2.16.

And now I come to the Practical part of my discourse, to apply and make Use
of the point delivered, and that for Information. Exhortation.


And is corrupt doctrine like leaven?

1. Use of Information.
1 See then from hence a reason of the so speedy growth, and sudden spreading of
pernicious opinions, damnable heresies, and doctrines of Devils; It is no news
to see a little leaven sour, heat, heave, and disperse it self speedily
through the whole lump of dough -- ejusdemfarinae hominibus -- Chemn.
. The least dram, draught, drop of deadly poison spreades from stomach to
veins, arteries, seiseth the vitals, and soon dispatcheth a man. So does
heresy poison men's brains, spirits, and possesses them with a spiritual
frenzy, and madness, and this contagious too, infecting others, which is no
wonder in Divinity, though it be in Physic, madmen smit not others: If there
were no other reason to suspect the upstart Sectarie and his new Divinity, this
might be one, enough to stop his mouth; that his doctrine, conversation,
practice cannot be right, good, of God, because they but touch and take; every
one, ignorant, athiest, profane, old, young, boys, wenches, all from every
quarter, hang upon them, follow them as proselytes, and like tinder take fire
at every spark of new pretended light; walk in the light of your fire, by the
sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down
in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Questionless it is erroneous doctrine, hellish heresy,
that like ill weeds grows so fast: It is unsound Divinity, that is so soon
believed, received, that Mushrome-like or as Jonah's gourd springs up in a
night. True grace, saving knowledge, lie warm at the heart, sanctify the
spirit, soul, body: the grain of Paradise lies long under the clods, and
grows but slowly; what a while was our Savior in hammering sundry divine
truths into his disciples heads? how dull and slow of heart were they to
believe! Be sure then that must needs be naught, that is so soon learned,
embraced, believed.

It is strange now to see, (but it would not have been believed some few years
ago, as a thing possible in the Church of England) that there should, could be
such an overflowing jaundice of unsound opinions, brainsick whimzies, such an
overspreading leprosy and gangrene of schism, heresy, sects, -- ut sit
ibidem deinceps impiorum ac turpium errorum lupanar, ubi^erat ante castae
incorruptae sacrarium veritatis. Vincent. Lirin. c. 31
as now with sad hearts we every where see. That a small contemptible handful
of corupt leaven, one or two firebrand-factious sectaries in a country like
Moses handful of ashes from the furnace (which sprinkled became a boil
breaking forth with blains, upon man and beast. Exodus 9.8.10.) should spoil a
whole country, Church, Kingdom, and like an impetuous torrent carry all
before them -- cum stabulis armenta -- So that as holy Polycarpus of the buding
heresies in his time, each godly Christian might, ought, to look up to heaven,
and say (...); Good God unto what times have thou reserved me, that I should
live to see this!
The cloud is broken and wets to the skin, which was little in the rise, but
like a man's hand. 1 Kin. 18.44.45. So did Arrianism overspread the face of the
Primitive Church, the whole world became Arrian. So Pelagianism, Donatism,
after that. And at last Mahometism, like an overflowing deluge, soul-killing
pestilence has poisoned the Eastern, as Popish leaven has the Western Church.
Rev. 13.3. all the world wondered after the beast. 2. Pet. 2.2. Many shall
follow their pernicious ways -- but they are unstable souls that are gulled
and beguiled by mount bank teachers, Mr Edw. Antapol. p. 211. Errors readily
enertained; truth may stand out of doors long enough --
quacsalving sectaries, that vapor and brag of great things, and disparage the
grave, learned, experienced physician. Children are taken with every toy,
rattle, hobbyhorse, guegaw. Idle people in a fair flock after players, throng
about Ballad singers, and so do simple ungrounded, credulous Christians after
leavening seducers.

2. Use of exhortation
2 Is corrupt doctrine like to leaven? Let us then do with this mystical as the
Jews at the Passover did with material leaven, Physicum fermentum Par.
Natural.
(which being strictly and under severe penalty, by God himself forbidden them,
Exodus 12.18.19. as Pharisaicall and Doctrinall Leaven is Us in this Text with a
most deep Charge and ingeminated Caveat, by Christ himself) who had a religious
custom 1. General
Inquirendi Exterminandi Execrandi
fermenttum; to search out, cast out, curse out leaven from their houses and
habitations. Weemse Christian synagogue lib. 1. ca. 6. Scaliger Emendat. temp.
in Prolegom.


1 Inquisitio fermenti, there was a searching after leaven throughout all the
rooms of their houses, even to the very mouse-holes Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic.
cap. 12. p. 317. 320.
on the fourteenth day from Sunrising (they began betimes) till ten of the
clock, usque ad quartam horam post ortum solis.

2 Exterminatio, a purging out of leaven, casting it away, burning of it, not
so much as looking on it, or naming it, (nor (...) bread, lest they should
stir up in their children a desire to leavened bread) to which custom Saint
Paul is thought to allude Ephesians. 5.3. Let it not be once named among you: and
this ceremony lasted from ten till twelve of the clock.

3 Execratio fermenti, a formal and solemn cursing of leaven thus, Let all
that leaven, or whatsoever leavened thing is in my power, whether it were seen
of me, or not seen, whether cleansed by me, or not cleansed, let all that be
scattened, destroyed, and accounted as the dust of the earth. Buxt^rf. Synag.
Judaic. cap. 12. page 325.


These were the Jewish religious ceremonies about leaven constantly performed
by them at the Passover; now Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, and we
should therefore purge out the old leaven, not of wicked manners only, but of
corrupt doctrine also. 1 Cor. 5.7. from the first day we believe in Christ
throughout the whole course of our life, Mr Wilson s Christian Dictionary in
the word Leaven.
both every singular person should purge himself from evil doctrine and
corrupt manners (noted by old leaven) and every congregation should
excommunicate from among them men of scandalous behavior.

But alas! the pulse of our zeal beats not so high, so strongly; we may cry
shame to our selves, that in Gods and his Churches yea in ou rown souls cause
we are so negligent and remiss; did we ever make search after false teachers,
and heretical leaven? did we ever question those that teach otherwise then the
truth of Christ's Gospel, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ and to the doctrine which is according to godliness. 1 Timothy 6.3 Do we ferret out these vermin, these vipers, that eat out our mothers
bowels? Do we catch the foxes that destroy our grapes? Do not we wink at them,
nay nourish them, embrace and hug them in our bosoms? nay suffer them to
nestle among us? so far are we from casting them out, hunting them away,
discountenancing of them, that we invite them to breed and burrow, and kindle
and kittle in our houses, heads and hearts. I wish we keep not birds to pick
out our own and childrens eyes. O let us be wise at last, take heed of a snake
in the bosom. Toleration ^n Religion is not to be tolerated, this overthrew
Solomon, Valentinian etc. The Church of Thyatira is blamed for suffering the
woman Jezabel to teach and to seduce Gods servants, Rev. 2.20. 'twas the fault
of Theodostus to suffer the Arrians to have their meetings in chief cities --
'Twil be a foundation to the Devils Kingdom to al generations; like gunpowder,
blows up both Church and State at one blast. Saint Paul opposed it, Gal. 1.8,
9. The primitive bishops would not suffer Arrians, Donatists -- Jerome,
Ambrose, Chrysostom. reproved even kings for conniving at them. So Luther, Calvin
-- and the reformed Churches -- so Bishop Jewel, Bilson, Bahington -- Mr
Perkins etc. would not endure a Toleration of Popery -- And should we tolerate
more damnable heresies? Papists are no enemies to Devotion, to Scripture, to
Order, to Learning; they have some form of Religion, many truths preached,
believed among them. The Word of God, Christ Jesus a Savior,; a heaven, a hell;
but we have those that bring in confusion, subvert fundamentals, overthrow
Religion, Learning, Order, al; yea that bless God, they never trusted in a
crucified Christ, nor did believe him to be the son of God; -- nay, for
themselves to say they were equal to Christ was no robbery -- See Mr Edwards
Gangraena from whence these and other passages -- also Antapolog. p. 280. 292.
Give a timely antidote against this killing poison: A spark neglected may burn
down to the cold ground both our own and our neighbors houses. -- in any wise
keep your selves from the accursed thing, lest ye make your selves accursed
when ye take of the accursed thing and make the camp of Israel a curse, and
trouble it. John 6.18. There be, will be Achans among the Israel of God to
trouble the Churches peace, but let them be Anathema, account them execrable.

2 Special Exhort. to Magistrates Ministers People


And 1 the Magistrate ought to let the leavening sectaries know, that he
bears not the sword in vain; he may, yea must (...) Tit. 1.11. dit up their
mouths -- corrigi cos cup^mus, non necari -- sic ergo little peccata compesce,
ut sint quos penireat peccavis^. This was Saint Augustine favorable opinion --
ad Donat. Procons. Africae Ep. 127. but experience afterward altered him. See
Master Edwards Ant. 291.
by his coercive and restraining power: and cause the false prophets and
unclean spirit to pass out of the land Zech. 13.2. In the Old Testament false
prophets were to be punished even with death, and that by Gods own command
Deuteronomy. 13. 5. because they sought to thrust Gods people out of the way, etc. see
the place. And none of them pleaded to the religious and reforming Magistrate,
Sir, it is our conscience, you ought not to trouble us for it.

I confess a tender regard should be had of tender consciences; and God
forbid, God forbid, we should exasperate authority against such as are indeed
tender conscienced. But the crafty Devil, when he is hunted, and cast out
elsewhere will take sanctuary even in conscience it self 'twas conscience the
Papists pleaded -- in K. Edw. and Q Elizabeth's time -- Antapolog. 286.
and, as Rachel when she had stolen her fathers idols, Genesis 31.35. plead for
liberty, you must not disease or molest him. But shall he therefore play Rex?
must he be suffered to hold possession? doubtless he will then bring seven other
devils, worse then himself and the latter end of those men into whose
consciences he is crept, will be worse then the beginning. He will fill them full
of all iniquity, and under pretense of being suffered, he will infect, pervert,
poison and destroy the whole Church. S. Paul therefore Gal. 5.12. wishes that
seducing sectaries that troubled that Church, were even cut off; Do you think
heretics were not conscionable in the Old Testament as now? If any man had a
conscience to turn men from God, he would have men of as much conscience to cut
them off. Mr Cotton on Vial. 3. and 4. p. 17. 21. Paulus non tam furoris in
adversarios quam ardoris in Dei gloriam et sanctam ecclesiam, verba loquutus
est; videbat quippe totan^ provinciam quam ipse -- Marlorat. exp. eccles. --
haec maledictio profecta est a Spiritu Sancto, non e^ privato affectu.
and yet Saint Paul was no persecuter of tender consciences; no man more
tendered them, persuaded and wrote more in their behalf; Romans 14. the whole
chapter is upon that point; yet how severe is he in his reprehensions,
animadversions against leavening and seducing teachers? he calls them Dogs,
evil workers. Phil. 3, 2. he likens them to witches Gal. 3.1. How does he rate
and rattle up Elymas who sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith? O full
of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? And
struck him blind. Act. 13.8.10.11.

2 Ministers must preach, pray down heresy, and whatsoever -- commonefaciens
tam superiores quam inferiores sui officij, Superiores quidem, nefermentum
errorum in doctrina, aut vitiorum in moribus, licet modicum videatur, in
republica, ecclesia, scholis, oeconomia vel quavis societate invalescere
sinant, sed legitimis rationibus mature praecaveant, vel expurgandum cu^ent,
antequam plures inficiantur. Inferiores vero ut fermentum Pharisaeorum,
Papistarum, haereticorum, and pravorum hominum h. e. falsa dogmata, hominum
commenta, and consortia vitiorum tanquam pestem fugiant -- Paraeus in 1. ad
Corint. c. 5. v. 6.
is contrary to sound doctrine; exhort, persuade, rebuke, Tit. 1.13. (...) what
have we our tongues for, our places for, what are we lieger ambassadors for,
here in the Church, but for intelligence to let our Lord and Master know, what
affairs of Church and State are transacted: what molitions, machinations are
against his crown and dignity, how men conspire against him; break his bonds in
sunder and cast away his cords from them; will not be regulated under his
discipline? What are we watchmen set Excubias agere, adversus supos and fures
ut si ad gregem accedere voluerint, eos magnis clamoribus and altis
vociferationibus quam longissime summoveant. Calvin. praefat: adv. fanatic.
sect. Libertin --
upon the walls of Jerusalem and will not blow the trumpet, when the sly
enemy under false colors, a feigned word, which he can give, shall pretend he
comes as a friend, and so cut our throats? Alas! alas! poor England, thou have
many malignant watchmen, that pretend to descrie and discover danger, that are
themselves most dangerous: that have, and do undo thee, by daubing and cursed
silence, in such a time as this Est. 8.6. that are of thy enemies counsel, are
at a fee with him, his pensioners: If it were not so, they would not betray the
truth of God to vile sectaries as they now do. O these carriages would make
dumb stones speak. It is irremissibile peccatum a sin against the Holy Ghost
(says Luther In Epist. ad Spalatin.
to be mealy-mouthed, when such pernicious leaveners poison the bread of the
household of faith.

3 Every private Christian look to one, look well about you; Believe not every
spirit, but try their doctrines, whether they be of God or not. 1 John 4.1. If
any come that bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, bid him not
God speed 2 John 10. -- say thou of their clandestine meetings, and adjure thy
self as Jacob of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.6. O my soul come not thou into their
secret; unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united. Pray God by his
power to keep thee to salvation. Lead not thy self into temptation: Julian the
Emperor became an Apostate by going to hear Libanius the sophister declame
against the Christians. Come not near the door of their house; know thou
not that the dead ar there, and that their guests are in the depths of hell,
Prove. 9.18?

If corrupt doctrine be so dangerous, take thou heed to thy self in leavening
times and places, and companies, heedfully mind every sermon, opinion, tenet:
every book and discourse, thou hear, see, read: carefully look unto
every bit of bread, the least morsel thou put into thy mouth, lest some
unsuspected crumb of unsound leaven be mingled therewith. And this is the
second point, which we are fallen upon, and now follows in order to be
handled, viz. that,

Take heed, beware. Tribus verbis utitur, quo Apostoli and reliqui omnes
intelligant, rem illam, a qua ipsos tam sancte et serio dehortatur, esse modis
omnibus detestandam. Deus enim etiam levissimas purioris suae doctrinae
corruptelas, nullo modo far potest. -- vult ut sui discipuli, and Christiani,
non instar caetorum, mox cuivis spiritui applaudant, sed spiritus probent --
Chemnit. Harm. cap. 82.


Deuteronomy. 13.3. Thou shall not hearken to the words of that prophet -- vid.
Vincent. Lirin. cap. 15. upon that place of Deuteronomy chap. 13. who
excellently paraphraseth thereon --
for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God,
with all your heart --

-8- thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him -- read the place
from verse. 1. to the 14.

Jer. 23.16. Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophecy unto
you, they make you vain, they speak a vision of their own heart.

Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets -- -- also on Math. 7.15. read Vinc.
Lir. cap. 36.


Mar. 4.24. Take heed what you hear --

Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to the flock --

-29- shall grievous wolves enter in among you,

-30- also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them.

31 Therefore watch and remember that --

Phil. 3.2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil-workers, beware of --

Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through- And good reason have we to be
thus careful, in regard of 1 our Own souls 2 Sectaries, and leavening Teachers
3 Doctrines delivered by them.


Reasons 1. In regard of our selves.
1 In regard of our selves,

Because it is a matter which much concerns us, a business of great
consequence; our immortal souls (which are more worth then all the world) are
in danger, lie at stake, may come to be perverted, poisoned, destroyed, damned,
through our base neglect. Matthew. 23.15. -- they make him (viz. The Pharisaicall
leaveners make their proselytes) two fold more the child of hell then
themselves.

2 Pet. 2.1. who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them -- ver. 2. and many shall follow their pernicious ways
-- ver. 3. with feigned words make merchandise of you.

The Apostles words are emphaticall and weighty- 1. will not a wise Christian
take heed of that which will bring upon him an irrecoverable loss, that may
undo him for ever, and break his back? heresies are damnable. 2. would a man
walk in a way which would bring him to some ill end? these are pernicious
ways. 3 would a wise and freeborn man be bought and sold Like a slave or
beast? Bez. not Major in 2 Pet. 2. tanquam pecoribus ad nundinationem.
these with feigned words make merchandise of you.

As therefore in fairs we look to our purses, and take heed of cheaters; as in
times of warwe gird on our swords, and will not be unprovided for an enemies
encounter; as in times of infection we provide Antidotes, comfort and preserve
our spirits, fence and corroborate the vitals: so should we take as great care
of our souls and bless our selves out of the company of smitting and
contagious leaveners, seducers. Touch not that pitch, which will not easily be
got off. S. John (that beloved disciple) accidentally being in the Bath where
Cerinthus was Cerinthus maintained that the world was made by Angels; that
circumcision and other legal rites were to be observed; that Jesus Christ was a
mere man: not risen again, but should rise: that Christ should reign a thousand
years on earth, and men should enjoy al sensual pleasures. vid. Augustine. de
Haeres. 8.
he leaped out of the Bath, unbathed; because he feared the Bath should have
fallen, seeing that enemy to the truth was within. Such fear and zeal had the
Apostles (says Irenaeus) that they would not communicate a word with them that
adulterated the truth -- as Master Fox relates it. Acts Mon-vol. 1. P. 48.

Secondly because of the number nature,
of corrupting seducing Leaveners. 2 In regard of false teachers.


1 For number; many false prophets are gone out into the world. 1. John 4.1.-,
not as many which corrupt the word of God. 2. Cor. 2.17 --. many walk --
enemies of the cross of Christ. Phil. 3.18.

Therefore as a man that has a charge of money, 1. Many.
in a way where many robbers haunt; in a fair where many cheaters and
cut-purses come; had need look well about him, be very wary and circumspect: or
as in times and places of the Pestilence, where many be infected, shut up, and
die of the plague, had need be very careful of him self: so had every sober
humble, discreet Christian that carries in him a precious, immortal,
invaluable soul, carefully avoid all contagious and smitting heretics, who
truly are what Tertullus falsely said Saint Paul was. (...) pestilent fellows.
Acts 24.5.

2 For Nature, quality, and condition they are very cunning, persuasive,
modest, methodicall.


1. Cunn^ng.
1. Seducing sectaries are Cunning, cubs of that old fox, the subtle seed of
the old serpent that can (like their father the Devil who hides his horns and
cloven foot) put on the sheepskin-profession -- ut fa^lacius inc^utis ovibus
obrepant, manente luporum ferocia, deponunt lupinam speciem, ut sese divinae
legis sententiis, velut quibusdam velleribus obvolvunt; ut cum quisque lanarum
mollitiem persenserit, nequaquam aculeos dentium pertimescat. Vinc. Lir. cap.
36. -- Antapolog. p. 203. -- doubling, shuffling, troubling the waters etc. p.
215.
over a wolvish purpose, Mat. 7.15. Beware of false prophets which come to you
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly (if you uncase them) they are ravening wolves.
White devils, -- will not own their own names -- Antap. 206.
that appear not in their native hue and own hellish affrighting color -- non
vult diabolus deformis and ater esse in suis ministris, sed mundus and
candidus, and ut talis appareat, proponit and ornat omnia verba, and opera sua,
praetextu veritatis, and nominis Dei. Luther loc. com.
, but assume a form of godliness, personate the Saints. Deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. 2 Cor. 11.13. And no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it
is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of
light.

They know the way, have the art of taking people, can give (like Naphtali)
goodly words, honey and butter are under their tongue; but trust them not: false
merchants set fair glosses on bad wares: suspect them in every thing, yielding,
flying, preaching, praying; the Pharisees devoured widows houses under pretense
of long prayers.

2 Attractive, persuasive, 2 persuasive
of insinuating and winning carriage, some smell of ointment is on them Sciunt
enim faetores suos nulli fere cito esse placituros, si nudi, et simplices
exhale ntur; atque idcirco eos coelestis eloquij velut quodam a^omate
aspergunt, ut ille qui humanum facile despiceret errorem divina non facile
contemnat oracula. Vinc. Lirin. cap. 35.
which draws eyes and ears toward them; precious Mr Edwards Antapolog. p. 188.
men of heavenly parts, Thus like Absalom they steal away men's hearts, and draw
disciples after them. Those who came to catch our Savior, pretended holiness,
they feigned themselves to be just men. Luke 20.20. but he that knew their
hearts to be hollow, naught, trusted them not. What dangerous sectaries that
ever were, had not some eminently good parts, -- Itaque faciunt quod hi solent,
qui parvulis austera quaedam temperaturi pocula, prius or a melle circum
linunt; ut incauta aetas cum dulcedinem praesenserit, amaritudinem non
reformidet. Quod etiam iis curae est, qui mala gramina, and noxios succos
medicaminum vocabulis praecolorant; ut nemo fere ubi supra scriptum legerit
remedium suspic^tur venenum. idem. ibid.
seeming graces, as if very zealous, humble, religious, conscientious men, yet
all their seeming beauty came out of the Devils box. The Pharisees could make
long prayers, did give much alms, did many specious works, builded the
sepulchers of the martyred prophets. All the damned heretics that formerly
poisoned the church, were of strict and exemplary life. Arrius, Eutyches,
Donatus, Pelagius, Arminius, etc.

The Devil is a cunning fowler, knows how to call and catch silly doves by the
smell of cumin, salt-cats -- and to lure them to his coat. He can set some
live-bird for a stay; to fligger, hop up and down, and draw unheeding fowls
into his lime twigges: some active spirited men, of vigorous parts and graces
-- nihil enim aliud efficacius movet, allicit, impellit, it sui amorem,
desiderium, admirationem, quam religio -- Mont. appar. 7. s. 13.
which dazzle simple, plain hearted peoples eyes, Mr Edw. Antapol. p. 50. 198.
and win their approbation and applause; and thus cheates the world with
spiritual delusions: when the lions skin cannot prevail, he puts on the foxes.

3 Modest 3 modest.
at the first, and very maiden-like they will not force upon their proselytes a
full carouse of their Circean cups, but by degrees (as our common drunkards,
when they get in a temperat man upon their ale bench, 'tice him, tempt him, and
till him on, first to taste, then to pledge them, then when he is well whitled
and come on, cup after cup, this and that health, till he be fully fudled, and
intoxicated;) they wind in themselves by little and little, and privily bring
in damnable heresies. 2. Pet. 2.1. creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women (a sex carried more by affection then judgment) 2. Tim. 3.6. begin at
the apron strings Master ^^ook r ^ccles. polu. in the Preface; and Mr Edw.
Antap. 296.
let fall an apple, to see if Atalanta will stoop for it; steal in here and
there a crumb, a morsel of their sour leaven, and see how it will be rellished
and digested; now and then slily foist in some erroneous opinion, poisonous
principle, scatter some sparks of wild fire to see whether they will heat,
inflame.

4 Methodicall, 4 Methodical
they have their ways ((...) Ephesians. 6.11.) and rules to go by; they grammar and
ground their deluded proselytes at their first admission in general and
fundamental principles of their black art, but let them not see at what they
drive, acquaint not at the first dash, with the mystery of iniquity, the
depths of Satan Rev. 2.24. Thus the Anabaptists teach their novices See Mr
Hookers eccles. pol. in the Preface -- Mr Pagets herestogr. p. 2, 3 -- ad 11.
that our church, and ministry, and persons and place, and time and tithes,
and all is Antichristian, and then, hear them not, live not among them, down
with their churches, observe not their days -- etc. and at last down with
ministers, learning, Magistrates, corporations, and all government -- In chaos
antiquum -- etc.

Thus has the world been deceived by sectaries and fetched over by their
policy; sleights and tricks of cheating, Ephesians 4 14.
from time to time, who under pretense to reform deform the Church; to cast out
idol shepherds eat their flocks, swallow their maintenance: to pull down the
tyranny of popish discipline, to utter anarchy, and no discipline at all. --
quia haec fere Diaboli est astutia, ut homines calcariam fugientes, in
carbonariam inducat, hoc est efficiat ut in alterutrum veritati oppositorum,
extrernum, sive in Scyllam, sive in Charybdim incidentes, fidei naufragium
patiantur -- Chemnit. Harm. cap. 82.


3 In regard of the Doctrine it self, 3 Their Doctrine is plausible.
which false teachers broach and deliver, it stands us in hand to be very
careful; for it is

Probable, plausible, pleasing to corrupt nature, and the itching humors of
ungrounded unsanctified men. -- potest quidem Satanas suum fermentum mellea
dulcedine inficere. Quid enim falsa doctrina suavius, and amabilius? Chemnit.
Harm. ^^61
Thus was the leaven of Pharisaicall, Sadducean, and Herodian sectaries: it
took much with the common people. Such is the leaven of our days, it savoureth
well to the common palate to have liberty of conscience; none to control them;
no covenant to bind, no law to command or condemn -- etc. Nothing but Christ,
Gospel, Spirit, revelations, new light, no tying of men to Duties of piety,
familie-prayer, etc. (such they opprobriously nickname Duty-mongers, formalists
--) There needs no fixed time, place persons, for any public ordinances of God
-- for they are all taught of God; able to preach, pray, minister a word in
season -- need not, must not be servants of men, pay tribute to Caesar, tithes
or maintenance to an Antichristian ministry (let them labor with their hands
as Saint Paul did) that all things must be common Sleidan lib. 3.
that all men, all creatures shall be saved at the last -- etc. Is not this
gallant Divinity? must not such Doctrine as this needs take? -- And have not we
need to take heed, and beware of such leaven?

The point thus proved by Scripture and Reason, affords unto us a twofold Use
of Exhortation, Reproof.


1. Use of Exhortation.
1 For Exhortation. And are these things so? Why then Let all Christians take
out this lesson which our Savior taught his disciples here: and suffer not a
company of cunning giddy self seeking sectaries to undo them; believe not any
seducing spirit. Be not turned aside after another Gospel Gal. 1.7. Take not on
trust what the leavening Pharisee delivers out of Moses chair; receive nor
any venomous tenet under the pleasing notion of Gospel, and new light; but
prove all things 1 These. 5.21. Search the Scriptures, as those noble Beraeans
Acts 17.11. Blind men swallow many a fly. Look well about you therefore, have
your eyes in your head, lest in any kind or degree you admit such.

How wary are you in taking money? how advisedly, exactly do you weigh gold,
refusing it not only when the metal is base, brass, and drossie, but also
when it wants the least grain of due weight? It Is a rule you have, tell money
after your father, to turn every suspected penny you take; especially when much
bad money, and copper coin is stirring abroad. Believe me (brethren) there is
not now so much bad silver in the world as there is bad doctrine. Look to your
selves that ye lose not those things which ye have gained 2. John 8. (so some
copies read the place) that precious depositum of sound truth and wholesome
words: Let not the Devil, or his heretical imps cheat you with their new
counters, though glistering and glorious: you know the proverb, All is not gold
that glistereth. Be henceforth no more children, tossed to and fro and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4.14. All seducers say
they are of Christ, come from him, preach in his name. The Devil never comes
to deceive in his own likeness. All fanaticall phrensies that ever have been
broached in Gods Church to this day, do pretend to some degree of new light
Audias etenim quosdam ipsorum dicere, venite, o insipientes and miseri qui
vulgo Catholici vocitamini, and discite fidem veram, quam praeter nos nullus
intelligit, quae multis ante saeculis latuit, nuper vero revelata, and ostensa
est; sed discite furtim, atque secretim, delectabit enim vos. Et item, cum
didiceritis, latenter docete, ne mundus audiat, nec ecclesia sciat; paucis
namque concessum est tanti mysterij capere secretum. Vinc. Livin. cap. 26.
though it be indeed mere darkness -- ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know
these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked fall from your own steadfastness. 2 Pet. 3.17.

2 This Doctrine (of cautelous circumspection lest Christians be leavened,
perverted) falls foul upon, 2. Use of Reprehension to people.
sharply chides and reproves.

1 Foole-hardy adventurous people, that love to be nibling at every leavened
loaf, that will be sipling of every sugared cup, though full of deadly poison,
as K. John of the Monk of Swinshed his Wassail, though it should cost them, as
it did him, their life. They will run a madding after mountebank teachers;
their mouth waters after bread of deceit, because it is sweet, though afterward
the gravel stick in their teeth. Pro. 20.17. Unsettled professors -- cum quaeque
novitas ebullit, statim cernitur frumentorum gravitas et levitas palearum; tunc
sine magno molimine excutitur ab area, quod nullo pondere intra aream
tenebatur. Vincent. Lir. cap. 25.
of the tribe of Gad (as one wittily calls them) like rambling beasts, though
they have never so green and good pasture, will over hedge and ditch into fresh
grounds: and like silly sheep love to feed on fresh, lushious, though rotting
grass. Very weather-cocks, every wind of Doctrine turns them; unballasted
ships, every wave shakes them Heu miseranda conditio quantis illi curarum
aestibus quantis turbinibus exagitantur? Nunc etenim qua ventus impulerit,
incitato errore rapiuntur, nunc in semetipsos reversi tanquam contrarij fluctus
reliduntur -- Vincent. Lirin. Ibid.
They have a penny to bestow with every pedlar; As Soon as they hear of a new
merchant they will take up his wares on trust. Alas poor souls! are you such
children, such fools, heedlesly and greedily to swallow any leavened morsel?
know you not that these scorpions have stings in their tail? Rev. 9.10. and yet
will you play on the hole of the aspe? It Is Solomon's advise for the avoiding of
drunkenness, Prove. 23.31. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it
gives his color in the cup, when it moves it self aright. At the last it
biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder. Take heed of leavening
seducers, they have an intoxicating cup to pervert, make giddy, and poison your
souls. Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of aspes.
Deuteronomy. 32.33. Wine here signifies the corrupt doctrine and heresies wherewith
the Jews poisoned themselves and their disciples; poison of dragons, that is,
their doctrines and actions, are venomous and deadly to soul and body, as being
doctrines of devils, and the poison of the old dragon -- Ainsw. in loc.


2. Magistr.
This also blames the negligent and unregarding Magistrate, who by his place
ought to defend the faith, look to religion and be custos utriusque tabulae.
There be good laws against vagrant rogues, and fiddlers, players, Gipseys and
fortune tellers, that they be not suffered to wander, abuse or deceive the
Kings liege people.

It Is pity men's souls are not as carefully provided for, -- tum ecclesiastici
tum polititi ordinis Antistites toti in eo esse debent ut Diaboli fermentum
expurgetur, and populus fidei suae commissus ab eo arceatur, nisi aliquando
loco panum propositionis Deo offerendorum, Satanicas placentas, olim in
infernalibus prunis excoquendas, reponere velint. Chem. Harm. Evangelic. cap.
61.
as dearly valued and as much tendered, that there be no Searchers appointed
for seducing Sectaries. In times of a common plague, the infected are shut up,
removed to the pesthouses, not suffered to go abroad and infect others: Should
not the like care be had that schismatical leaveners be not suffered to meet in
corners and private conventicles to the perverting and poisoning of men's souls?
ought not as watchful an eye to be upon that pestilence (of error) that
walks in darkness, the destruction that wastes at noonday Psalm. 91.6.
Dominus te totamque familiam ab omni malo, ac praesertim a Daemoniis meridianis
istic obambulantibus custodiat. Beza Epist. 1. Andr. Duditio. viz. from the
Errors of Anabaptisme, Brownism, Antinomianism, Toleration of sects and
schisms, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience. Mr Edwards in Epist. to his
An^apolog.
(For like Absalom, they spread their tent on the top of the house in the sight
of all Israel, they are not ashamed nor blush, to preach on the house tops,
their places and times of meeting are known, proclaimed, come who come will) Is
this to root out heresy, schism,, or to keep the covenant of our God?

If the enemy should storm or steal into this garrison, what a bustling would
there be? how would every man take the alarm, and stand to his arms? how
would they be censured, and fined as malignants that should not so do? no enemy
so dangerous as Heresy, no garrison of that consequence as the soul, which we
are not to suffer to be fraudulently surprised by false teachers, nor violently
taken from us by the powers of hell.

There is no proportion or comparison, between malignant cavaliers, and
seducing impostors, that more dangerously set up the kingdom of darkness, and
tyranny of the Devil.

Why should there be any Gallio that cares not for any of these things? Acts
18.17. Jeremie sadly complains of some great ones that were not valiant for
the truth Jer. 9.3. Godly Magistrates have forced Antidotes on a distempered,
corrupted people; compelled them to repair to public ordinances, 2 Chr.
15.13.33.16.34, 32.
brought them into the Bond of a national covenant.

What wonder is it, if every wherry swim so swiftly into the bottomless abyss
when they have so fair a wind, so full a tide? when they are preferred,
advanced, countenanced, put into places of great trust, command and profit, and
engrosse every gainful office? Mammon of unrighteousnes will not only work
with a Blaam, but will biasse a better spirit then his was, to seduce others,
and be seduced himself. Every man would be of the winning hand, would be of a
thriving and gainful trade; no tradesman so custom'd, or has the like return
as Sectaries that trade in merchandise of Souls. But shall the Godly Magistrate
freely suffer them to retail their deceitful wares? In free corporations they
will not endure forreiners to set up by them and steal away their customers.

Market towns have a standard, an assize for bread and beer -- etc. Bread that
will not hold out weight, is to be given away; it would do well to see the
bread of life to have his true weight. And to set a fine on their heads that
make and sell that which is light, naught, unwholesom, leavened.

The Publicans, among the Jews, sat at the receipt of custom Luke 5.27. Luke
19.2.
to see and compel the poor bleeding country to pay tribute unto Caesar,
taxes and assessements imposed and exacted for the use of the Roman state; and
our Savior so far condescended to the necessities of those times, that himself
paid tribute-money, such as was levied and assessed upon him. Matthew. 17.24.27.
But he denounces a dreadful woe to the Scribes, not because they paid tithe
of mint and annise, and cummin (due by Gods law) but that they omitted the
weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith; these (says he)
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Mat. 23.23.
Magistrates and men in place, should see God have his due, as well as
themselves have their due; they should see that religion be not corrupted, Gods
word perverted, the souls of people destroyed. What serve mothers or nurses
for, but to look to their little ones, and not let them eat dirt, chalk, coals,
in stead of bread; spiders poison in stead of sugar, milk, or wholesome
nourishment? I should think such an undutifull, ungracious child not fit nor
worthy to be suffered to live in a family, that Ishmael like should mock the
Isaacks. Genesis 21.9. neither are such worthy to live in a Christian -- illi
certe nullo modo sinendi sunt vivere, cum illorum temporalis vita aliis sit
aeterna mors. Za^ch. de Magistr.

-- Mr Cotton on Rev. 16. pouring out the seven Vials 3. page 16, 17, 21. 4.
page 17.


-- if any have a conscience to turn men from God, he would have men have as
much conscience to cut them off.


church (especially not to be cockered, countenanced) that spit in their aged
mothers face (the church of England) and call her Whore.

And thus much may suffice for the two first observations, out of the Text. The
end of the first SERMON


The third follows viz.

Even the Apostles themselves, bred up and fed up in Christ's own family, are in
danger of being leavened.

How does Saint Paul fear, lest the Corinthian Saints should by Satan's
subtilty, be beguiled, and their minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ? 2 Cor. 11.3.

How does he in sundry places, charge, and adjure Timothy? This charge I commit
unto thee -- to hold faith, and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwreck, of whom is Hymeneus, etc. 1 Timothy
1.18.19.20. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
angels -- 1. Tim. 5.21. I give thee charge in the sight of God -- and before
Christ -- that thou keep this commandment 1 Timothy 6.13. O O, exclamatio iffa and
praescientioe est pariter and charitatis; praevidebat enim futuros, quos etiam
praedolebat Errores. Quis est hodie Timotheus? nisi vel generaliter universa
ecclesia; vel specialiter totum corpus praepositorum, qui integram divini
cultus scientiam, vel habere ipsi debent, vel aliis infundere. Vinc. Lirin.
cap. 27. where he excellently paraphraseth the whole text -- as also cap. 33,
34.
Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain
bablings and oppositions of science falsely so called: which some professing
have erred concerning the faith. 1 Timothy 6.20.21:

2 Timothy 2.14, 16, 17.
-- Charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.

-- Shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness: And their word will eat as does a canker-

And the Reasons are three.

charge withal; so Isaac to his son Jacob, not to take a wife of the
Canaanites Genesis 28.6. S. Paul charge the Thessalonians lest they should throw
by his letter at their heeels 1 These. 5.27. So here in our Text, is an
ingeminated caveat, and charge withal, lying on the Disciples, to take heed
and beware of soul-leavening Doctrine -- Et post haec invenientur aliqui, tanta
inveteratae frontis duritia, tanta impudentiae incude, tam adamantinae
pertinaciae qui tantis cloquiorum coelestium molibus non succumbant? tantis
ponderibus non fatiscant? tantis malleis non conquassentur? tantis postremo
fulminibus non conterantur? Vinc. Lirin. -- cap. 26.
whereby (as with a threefold cord) our blessed Savior would bind them to a
constant, conscionable vigilancie over their ears, hearts, minds, affections,
whenever they should light in company of, fall into discourse with
Pharisaicall teachers, or hear them expounding, opening, and applying
Scripture; that so their ears being discreet porters to their soul, might not
suffer soul murdering doctrine to enter in, but hold it out; as Elisha advises
in another case. 2 Kin. 6.32. O they are very cunning that hunt souls; and we
had need set a strong guard over our souls, that we may not be taken napping,
surprised unawares by any Sirenly incantations of enchanting seducers -- devita
-- quasi viperam, quasi scorpionem, quasi basiliscum, ne te non solum tactu,
sed etiam visu, afflatuque percutiant. Vinc. Lit. cap. 33.
factious sectaries, though they charm never so wisely: It Is our wisdom to
forestall error, have our veins filled, spirits strengthened against poison; to
have our mouth in taste, our palate seasoned with heavenly Manna, that we need
not long for Egyptian garlic, onions, trash, nor care at all to look on, taste,
much less swallow or digest sour leaven; but stomach-boak, spirit rise at the
sight of error as unpleasing, heart burning, heavy bread.

2 Because of the proclivity of men's, the best men's nature, as to al kind of
evil, so to the evil of error; -- natura hominis corrupti tam facile admittit
errores quam fomes igniarius concipit ignem Ames. in 2 Pet. 2. -- apt to be
seduced and ready to take any impressions, and to be cast into any mould that
has but the appearance of a strict way.
our bodies are not proner to dangerous diseases, then our souls to be seduced
by every unsound doctrine. Wondrous apt we are to rove, and turn aside unto
crooked ways; to embrace and be taken with the worst, the foulest heresies; our
hearts are like tow, falls doctrine is like a spark, if we do not keep them
asunder, al will instantly be in combustion. The best meal is soon leavened,
sweet dough soon sowred, the purest linen soonest sullied, the most fresh
complexion soonest seized on by the plague. It Is observed in times of
infection, that children are soonest smitten, tainted with pox, meazles, or any
contagious disease, and most and oftenest die; and the reason is because their
spirits are weaker, and nature less able to resist or expel infection; There Is
a sympathy in our corrupt nature to corrupt doctrine, it savoureth well, etiam
ipse sapor ex acido et falso mixtus concoctionem irritat et acuit. Chemnit.
Harm. cap 61.
is like, and likeness is one cause of love; whereas the wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against God, and truths of God. It Is an easy matter to trundle a
boul down the hill- facilis descensus Averni-. There is a propensity and
disposition in the heart of men, the best men to swerve and deviate from the
truth, a root of bitterness, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God, a principle of Apostasy; and therefore had need to have a
back-byas to withdraw, counter-poyze, preserve and keep the soul upright in the
ways of God, and truths of God. All advises, counsels, exhortations,
persuasions, charges, caveats are little enough to keep us from being seduced,
perverted; All bars, gates, are doors, and drawbridges, and works, and
courts of Guard too little to keep our treacherous spirits of Error within,
from having correspondence, or intelligence, with that spirit of error that
is, and will be tampering with us, from without.

3 Because Satan himself the great grandsire of all heretics, is a subtle
restless spirit, of a reaching pate, and can make use of always, men, means,
to further his ends, advance, and set up his kingdom; he can make religion it
self to overthrow religion, conscience it self to destroy conscience;
reformation of a church to deform a church; builders to be destroyers; and
Ministers of the Gospel, of being converters to become perverters, subverters
of their hearers. And we may be sure, at such a time as this he will improve
his utmost skill, policy, tricks, stratagems, and set his wits on the tenters,
to inveigh and seduce teachers, guides, Apostles, messengers of the church,
angels -- if he can but taint the rams of the flock with his scab of error,
all is his own: silly sheep follow the leaders. His aim is at the white
pigeons in the flight; fight neither against small nor great, but the king of
Israel. miles feri faciem. He assayeth to draw down the stars of heaven with
his tail. Rev. 12.4. To poison the fountains, leaven the teachers, is (he well
knows) a speeding way. Isa. 3.12. O my people they which lead thee cause thee
to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. Hereupon he tutors his agents,
factors, familiars, to propine and propound their pernicious doctrines,
devilish designs, with all efficacy of error, 2 These. 2.29, 10.
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, that it is ten to one but they shall and will take; and seduce if it
were possible even the elect, Mar. 13.22.

For Use of this point, viz. Instruction, in 3 particulars Exhortation.


1. 1. Use Instruct.
Take notice from hence of the miserable corruption of man's nature; that even
the best of men stand in such need of charging, warning, taking heed of being
leavened with unwholesome doctrines. O how hardly are saving truths beaten into
our heads and hearts ( precept must be upon precept, line upon line, here a
little and there a little Isa. 28.10.) but how easily, even headlong, do we
tumble down-ward unto damnable heresies, into the pit of destruction!

We need then go no further then our present text, and the charge and caveat
given by Christ himself to his own Disciples, if we should be required to give
a reason why such and so many, so hopeful, so well affected and religious
people, that did indeed set their faces toward Zion, looked earnestly toward
heaven, desired sincerely to fear God, and did (as then was charitably
conceived) and still is by me, for God is able to graft them in again, though
peevishly they have cut themselves off from our assemblies -- qui se collegarum
sensui aut incorporare neglexit aut excorporare praesumpsit -- Vinc. Lir. de
Juliano Pelagiano cap. 40.
and pass uncharitable censurers upon us) walk with God, and shine as lights
in their sphere, are now become falling stars, plucked out of their orb, the
church, by the dragons tail of dangerous heresy. How many do we see groping
for the light at noon day, seekers of the right way, of a Gospel, a Church, a
Christ, a Savior (as Mary Magdalen thought the gardener had carried Christ's
dead body away; which she then sought, when his living body, and soul, and
Godhead too John 20.15. were standing before her) and heaven; whose eyes are so
holden and dazzled that they do not know Christ, see Christ among us, their
spirits so seduced, minds so bewitched that they will not again be reduced, and
brought back into the ways of truth and peace.

The meteors, Ignis fatuus, new lights of these seducing times, might easily
deceive, and lead blindfold Christians of more then ordinary parts and graces,
when the Disciples that had Christ himself in person with them were in such
danger to be leavened. Therefore never be offended, scandalized or wonder,
though we see many drawn off from Christ, walk no more with him, separate from
him, his ordinances, and assemblies, though we see many tainted, infected with
damnable opinions; it is bred in our bone, we have it by kind, the spirit that
is in us, is an apostatizing, backsliding spirit; the Devil is cunning,
powerful; it is a wonder, any escape his winnowing: so that which Solomon
says of the strange woman, may be truly also said of strange doctrines, Pro
7.26.
leaveners, heresy, schism, -- she has cast down many wounded, yea many
strong men have been slain by her, her house is the way to hell, going down to
the chambers of death.

2. Instr.
2. Commendable is the zeal and care of those men of God, those watchmen on the
walls of Jerusalem, that blow the trumpet, cry aloud, cease not to warn and
charge their people of taking heed to their souls; of circumspect hearing,
reading, discoursing, companying with the leavening teachers of the times,
those spirits of Devils that are gone out into the world.

They are good shepherds, and have here the example of the great shepherd
backing them, whose practice and precedent herein, is beyond all just exception.

It is a good ministers duty to look to the ways of his people, to diet his
sheep in fear of a rot, to mind where they feed, and lie down, what layer, what
pasture they delight in; that if it be not safe, or wholesome for them; he may
drive them, diswont them thence. Thus was Saint Paul jealous over the
Corinthians with godly jealousy, and feared lest by any means as the serpent
beguiled Eve, through his subtilty, so their minds should be corrupted -- 2.
Cor. 11.3.

What Christians heart can choose but bleed within him to see hopeful flocks,
all grown over with the scab? to see grievous wolves enter, that destroy, and
tear in pieces, both flesh and fleece? our Savior was moved with compassion,
when he saw the multitude scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Matthew.
9.36. -- A sad condition for people to be without a shepherd. Mr Edw. Antapol.
page 92.
And we have many flocks now without a feeder, leader; few shepherds in a
country to take the care or cure of souls; some that had, break their staff of
beauty and bands, and will feed them no more; will take no pastoral charge,
nor own them as their flock; their first calling to them was (they think
perhaps) Antichristian Master Edwards in his Antap. p. 49.
; and resolve therefore (as he in Zecharie 11.9.) I will not feed you; that
that dies, let it die, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and
let the rest eat every one the flesh of another.

It is our honor, and crown of rejoicing, when we can (as Saint Paul 2. Cor.
11.2.) preserve and present our people as a chaste virgin to their husband
Christ, to whom all our wooing is to win and espouse them to Christ.

What an honor is it to blessed Calvin, that holy Saint and worthy servant of
Jesus Christ, that he -- mos iste semper in ecclesia viguit, ut quo quisque
foret religiosior, eo promptius novellis adinve^tionibus contra iret Vinc. Lir.
cap. 9.
not only preserved his own Geneva-flock, but the most reformed, or then
reforming churches of Christendom, (I am sure our English church was much also
beholding to his care and pains, as might be easy to demonstrate in sundry
particulars) from the dangerous infection of leavening seducers, and pestilent
heretics: whom (as so many beasts at Ephesus) he hand to hand encountered,
fought with, foiled, and for ever routed, without all possibility of recruit;
few or none standing by, or seconding of him; insomuch as one worthily calls
him a Christian Hercules, that vanquished and quelled the monsters of heresies
in his time -- hoc potius admiratione dignum est unicum hominem, tanquam
Herculem quendam Christianum tot domandis monstris sufficere potuisse; nempe
fortissima illa clava, id est Dei verbo utentem. Beza in vita Calvini sub finem.


3. Instr.
3 People should not take it ill at our hands, if sometimes they be urged, and
charged, and even adjured by us to take heed and beware of Leaven; especially
if now, we be so instant and importunate with them, and even with a holy
violence, pluck leavened bread out of their mouth; their souls out of the paws
and jaws of heresy. O these are dangerous Dog-dayes wherein we live (as Master
Philpot In his letter about Infants baptism -- Mr Fox Acts Mon. vol. 3. p.
607. -- now alas most miserably is torn in pieces by many dangerous sects and
damnable opinions -- that any giddy head in these Dog Days -- page 610.
calls them, and yet these cockatrices were then but in the shell) in which
Satan and hell is broke loose, and the ghosts of all former damned heretics
are come out of their graves and walk abroad daily among us, seeking again to
poison more souls, and to draw another world of men into hell after them.

Gal 4.16.
The Galatians had no reason to be angry with Saint Paul because he told them
the truth, because he sought by all possible means to unwitch their seduced
judgments, and to conjure down by ghostly charms, and Gospel arguments, the
malignant spirit of Error risen up among them. If thieves were in the way,
ready to rob and strip the honest traveller, could he take it ill to be told
and forewarned of them? If witches should conspire the death of people Calvin
advers. Libertin. page 603
were it not fit they should be indicted and brought to trial? Certainly no
theft is so wicked, no witchcraft so pernicious, as heretical doctrine, it
poisons and sends the soul packing to hell.

What? are any people now privileged from being leavened more then the -- ut
sicut haec morum mandata, ita etiam illa quae de fide cauta sunt, omnes pari
modo comprehendant Vinc. c. 13.
Apostles? Are they shot-free of Satan's poisonous darts? Are their graces and
parts more unshakeable then Peter's, or Christ's other Disciples whom Satan
sought to winnow as wheat? Why then do they censure Us (that freely and boldly
speak in the cause of Christ, in their own souls cause that now lie a bleeding
under cutthroat heretics) as wounders of tender consciences, as persecuters of
the Saints? Is the physician a persecuter that administers pills and potions to
the diseased patient? Is the surgeon a persecuter that searches and lanceth
impostumated and festered sores? Surely no. Therefore let our people rectify
their judgments concerning us; we desire not to rub galled backs, to
exulcerate men's spirits: we had rather pour in oil, apply Lenitives.

But give us leave to deal faithfully with your souls, not to sow pillows under
any man's elbows: the devil is not become more orthodox now, then formerly.
Satan is no less Satanicall then he was. The father of lies is no more
converted to speak truth then heretofore; nor has a supersedeas from poisoning
souls. The envious man will sow tares, and is as busy now as ever, because he
knows he has but a short time and therefore sends out his emissaries,
seducing spirits, giddy Enthusiasts, leavening impostors, to turn the world
upside down, to broach subverting principles to undo Church and State: he does
strike while the iron is hot; loves to fish in troubled waters. This is his
harvest. It ever has been the Devils manner when the Church is at the point of
her deliverance of a man child, to be ready with open mouth to devour it. In
times of desired reformation, to bring in a cursed deformation both of Church
and State. So the Arrians in Constantines time, and the Anabaptists in Luthers:
and I would I might truly say, It is not so now but it is no false alarm that I
give you Hannibal ad portas -- We see everywhere sad symptoms of a distempered,
diseased, infected Church and State.

Secondly for Exhortation.

2. Use of Exhort.
Do the best of Gods people need charging to take heed of leaven? is there such
danger of having our souls seduced, infected? Why then let us send up strong
prayers and cries to heaven, that God by his spirit would guide us into all
truth, and kep us by his own power to salvation -- of our selves we are of
Reubens constitution, Genesis 49, 4
Unstable as water; soon turned out of the right way.

Pray for the spirit of discerning, that the eyes of our understanding being
opened, we may see, embrace, love, and cleave to the truth, and hate every
false way, that we may have our eyes anointed with eye salve from heaven to see
clearly into the mysteries of the Gospel; and that he would give unto us the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him -- that we may discern
things that differ, and be able to distinguish opium from apium, hemlock from
wholesome herbs, sour leaven from soul-nourishing bread.

Quest. But how may we try the Doctrines we hear, discern and sift out their
leaven, and discover seducing sectaries, their persons, and leavening practices?

Answ. 1 For their Doctrines, bring them to the touchstone of Holy Scripture;
-- quo omnes omnium haerese o a sceleratae novitates velut quodam spirituali
glad^o, saepe truncatae, semperque truncandae sunt. Vinc. Lir.
weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary. To the law and to the testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Isa. 8.20. Search the Scriptures -- John 5.39. Do ye not therefore err,
because ye know not the Scriptures? Mar. 12.24.

Object. But heretics bring Scripture for their opinions. Novit Diabolus
nullam esse ad fallendum faciliorem viam quam ut ubi nefarii erroris
subinducitur fraudulentia, ibi divinorum verborum praetendatur auctoritas.
Vincent. Lirin. cap. 37.
Every sectarie can allege the word of God, as well as the orthodox Christian;
So did the Devil himself to our blessed Savior Matthew. 4.6. It is written.
Satanam imitati, qui verbo ipso Domini in contrariam sententiam distorto, ad
stabilienda falsissima dogmata, abutuntur -- Beza Annot. Major. in Act. 20.28.


Solut. 1. They corrupt, wrest, Haeretici divinae scripturae testimoniis
utuntur, nam videas eos volare per singula quaeque sanctae legis volumina: --
nihil unquam pene de suo proferunt, quod non etiam scripturae verbis adumbrare
conentur. Lege Pauli Samosetani opuscula, Priscilliani, Eunomij, Joviniani,
reliquarumque pestium: cernas infinitam exemplorum congeriem, prope nullam
omitti paginam, quae non novi, aut veteris testamenti sententiis fucata and
colorata sit. Sed tanto magis cavendi, and pertimescendi sunt, quanto occultius
sub divinae legis umbraculis latitant. -- Vinc. Lirin. cap. 35, and 37.
writh, and falsify the texts which they quote, sometimes by adding, sometimes
by clipping and paring away, and stamp the private image and superscription of
man upon Gods own coin, and rack and torture the Scriptures to confess that
which was never in them.

2. They make false constructions and inferences from them; spiders suck poison
even from wholesome and sweet flowers. 2 Pet. 3.16.

3. We must therefore compare Scripture with Scripture; this is a notable means
of finding out the true sense of them. Thus our Savior brings Scripture
against that Scripture which the Devil mis-quoted Mat. 4.7. -- ad defensionem
sui, quaedam sacrae legis verba furari atque fallaciter and fraudulenter
exponere -- idem c. 39.


2 We may discover the persons of seducing sectaries, as our Savior teaches
his Disciples to discern those wicked leaveners, Pharisees, Sadduces and
Herodians.

Matthew. 7.16, 20, by their fruits ye shall know them. They be chiefly three.
All heretics, if we look wistly at them, and thoroughly sift them, we shall
find they are 1 Self seekers. 2 Proud. 3 Persecuters.


1 Self-seekers Phil. 2.21, they all seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ's. Their own 1. Profit, gainful places, offices -- an heart they
have exercised with covetous practices 2 Pet. 2.14. -- teaching things which
they Avaritia est plerumque haeresium comes, fomes, matter, nutrix. -- Ames. in
2 Pet. 2, 3.
ought not for filthy lucres sake Tit. 1.11. supposing that gain is godliness 1 Timothy 6.5. 5. The Pharisees devoured widows houses and their so zealous pains in
making proselytes, was but to get the fat morsells on their own trencher.
Quaerebant discipulos quos pecuniis emungere possent, non quod salutem animarum
procurare curabant -- Montac. Apparat. 7. sect. 28.
2 Credit, honor and esteem among men -- love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be
called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, Matthew 23.6.7. they love to be looked at as the
only religious ones, to be followed, admired; all other are No bodies, to
them. True grace is truly honorable, where it is in truth; The Lord makes his
people glorious within, and not to seek honor from without by vain
ostentation. 3 Pleasure, and ease; their belly, back- Mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned For they
that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans 16.17.18.
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things Phil. 3.18,
19.


2 Proud 1 Timothy 6.4. He is proud 2 Pet. 2, 18. they speak great swelling words
of vanity. They set up their own righteousness, worth, works, as if they and
none but they were Gods Saints, holy ones, his anointed. Their congregations
the only church on earth; all other reformed churches are (in their esteem)
the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird, as Saint John Rev. 18.2. says of Babylon.

They brag of the Spirit, new light -- Moncer reproached Luther, that he wanted
the spirit of revelation, and preached only a carnal Gospel.

They brag of their parts, abilities, graces, precious men, beyond the
Apostles. That Christ himself could See Mr Edwards Gangrene -- page 44
preach no better then some of them. One of their tribe is affirmed to be the
ablest man in England for prayer, preaching, expounding the Scripture -- They
appropriate Audent etenim polliceri et docere, quod in ecclesia sua, id est in
communionis suae conventiculo, magna, and specialis, ac plane personalis
quaedam sit Dei gratia, adeo ut sine ullo labor, sine ullo studio, sine ulla
industria, etiamsi nec quaerant, nec pulsent, quicunque illi ad numerum suum
pertinent, tamen ita divinitus dispensentur ut angelicis -- etc. Vinc. Lirin.
cap. 37.
to themselves the name of the godly, well affected party, all others are
malignants, cavaliers.

And all heretics generally that it may be known from whence their doctrines
are, have a spirit of Luciferian pride in them, and are hence distinguishable
from the humble, lowly, -- that five such young men and no deeplier studied
should thus proudly and tanquam ex tripode, so magisterially conclude against
all the reformed Churches -- Antapolog. page 194, 195.
meek, mortified servants of Christ; as the Britains asking counsel of a
certain holy Anchorite concerning the receiving of Augustine the monk, and his
doctrine and government, in the British Church, were told that they might
discern whether he were a man of God, by his meek and humble mindedness; but
if he be stout and proud, he was not of God, they might be bold- Godwins
Histor. of Bishops page 44.
.

3 Persecuters of the right ways of God -- 2 Pet. 2.2. Were ever any more
bitter enemies to the truth then sectaries? How implacable was the rage of Mr
Hooker eccles. polit. in the Preface

So the Arminians in the Netherlands. Antapol. p. 279.


the leavening Pharisees, Sadduces, against our Savior, and his Apostles? How
cruel, even as a bear robbed of her whelps, were the Germane Sleidan. lib. 5.
Anabaptists? And such persecuting spirits have our Leaveners now; as appears
by their tongues, pens, practices, -- witness the many scurrilous bitter,
base, biting papers, pamphlets, books of theirs -- Arraignment of Pers. etc.
They will have never a priest in England ere they have done. Hanging is too
good for us. It Is pity we are not pulled out of the pulpit. They call us
Baalites, Antichristian -- If any godly Paul's spirit be stirred in him at their
strange and erroneous courses, and Doctrines, he is presently discountenanced,
etc. Some have not failed to tell us, that if we ever look to get livings, and
places to maintain us, We must turn to them, and hang the black coat on a
willow tree. But they persecute our church and nation: God they say is not
among us; we are Moabites, Ammonites, Samaritanes, without Christ, Aliens from
the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of promise. --

They persecute and blaspheme our baptism, -- they dressed a cat like a child
to be baptized, invited many See M. Edwards Gangr. p. 67.
men and women, and then had one to preach against baptizing of Infants: and it
is generally observable in them, that they will neither administer Baptism to
Infants, or the Lords supper to grown Christians. An uncharitable course, and
harsh dealing it is, thus to make their own mother an harlot; their brethren
bastards; the breasts they have sucked, and Church in which they have been
bred, upon whose knees they have been dandled, an Antichristian stews: none of
us, they show any Christian, or common respect unto more then a Turk or a Jew,
or an Indian; but shun us, separate from us -- if they condescend sometimes to
speak a word, it is like court holy water. That their heart is not with us,
their poor, cold, blew, remote discourses testify. This went to David's heart
Psalm. 55.12.13.14.. that not an enemy reproached him, but it was thou, a man,
mine equal, my guide and mine acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together and
walked unto the house of God in company. That such, because we now are not just
of their cue, should quite unchurch us, See Mr Edwards his Antap. pa. 45, 46.
un-saint us, un-hope us, un-God us, and un-heaven us too, is very harsh! But
thus did the Pharisaicall sectaries, they persecuted Christ, and all those that
believed in him. Joh. 9.29.34. or defended him -- they cast him out. viz. the
blind man, whom Christ had restored to sight.

The fourth and last point yet remains, of which in order.

The greatness, or seeming goodness of any man's person should not so
captivate or bewitch the people of God that they should suffer themselves to be
seduced, catched, or poisoned by them.

-- even Sadduces Pharisees and Herodians must be taken heed of.

Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy brother, son, daughter, wife, friend, which is as thine own
soul -- entice thee

-9- thou shall surely kill him,

10- because he sought to thrust thee away from following the Lord.

Gal. 1.8.9. -though We, or an angel from heaven -- etiamsi Petrus, etiamsi
Andreas, -- etiamsi omnis Apostolorum chorus Evangelizet vobis -- aut angelus
de caelo; h. e. si fiat quod non potest fieri; quisquis ille traditam semel
fidem mutare tentaverit, anathema fit. Vinc. Lir. cap. 12. vid. cap. 13. --
Paulus meras flammas loquitur, tamque vehementer ardet ut -- Muscul.
preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed.

And the Reasons are

the Jews; yet odious and vile sectaries, very hypocrites, and incarnate
Devils: none of the Rulers, except Nicodemus, believed savingly on Jesus
Christ. John 7.48. Unsanctified great ones like great trees in an orchard,
overdrop the small, and young, and more fruitful plants, that they do not,
cannot thrive, or prosper under them. Like rank weeds, they choke the
profitable grain, the great men are great hinderers, and blocks in the way of
piety. Poison is often tempered in golden cups, and then does most harm to such
as hoped for a wholesome refection, not mortal infection, from such precious
and refined metal.

Venerabilis quondam memoriae Agrippinus Carthaginensis Episcopus primus omnium
mortalium, contra divinum canonem -- rebaptizandum esse censebat. Quae
praesumptio tantum mali invexit, ut non solum haereticis omnibus formam
sacrilegij -- vid. Vinc. Lir. cap, 9.
and observable imperfections. They know 1. Cor. 13.9. but in part, are good
but in part. There is a posse errare, falli, decipi; a possibility of error,
of deceiving, and being deceived, in the very best -- Quicquid vero, quamvis
ille sanctus and doctus, quamvis episcopus, quamvis confessor, et martyr
praeter omnes aut etiam contra omnes senserit, id inter proprias, et occultas,
and privatas opiniunculas, a communis, publicae, ac generalis sententiae
auctoritate secretum sit; ne cum summo aeternae salutis periculo juxta
sacrilegam haereticorum et schismaticorum consuetudinem, universalis dogmatis
antiqua veritate dimissa, unius hominis novitium sectemur errorem. Vincent.
Lirin. cap. 39.
; Peter himself was not in all things, imitable, nor walked uprightly according
to the truth of the Gospel Gal. 2.14. so that Saint Paul withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed. ver. 11. -- get thee behind me Satan- for
thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men, Mat.
16.23.

Never look for a moon without spots; the best fruits have kernells, cores,
stones, parings; the purest wheat has chafe, bran, -- Never yet was there
among ministers, or private Christians, any so eminent in parts, sound in
graces, orthodox in opinions, regular in practices, that durst challenge
imitation or belief in all things; and therefore Saint Paul modestly says, 1
Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ. Saint Augustine the
soundest among the fathers, could not, did not justify himself in all things,
even after his solemn rerractations, and serious review of his own works; some
want, failing, error did perhaps stick still by him.

tang of error, and imperfection in them that are the ablest gifted, best
graced saints; the Devil can turn their wine into water; make the gold dim:
Eccles. 10.1.
can corrupt a whole box of precious ointment, with one dead and stinking fly,
that it shall become unwholesome, loathsome. Thus he has used, or rather
abused, the great learned Rabbis among the Jews, to be perverters and
poysoners of their nation, till this day: Some great men of place, and parts in
the Primitive Church, were thus made use of by Satan, -- So was blessed Cyprian
-- by the cursed Donatists. Vincent. Lir. c. 11. -- ut etsi in errore
concipiendo Origenis non fuit sensus; ad errorem tamen persuadendum Origenis
auctorita valere videatur. Vinc. Lir. de Orig. cap. 23.
to be leaders of a faction, fathers of sects, and heresies. Luther that worthy
instrument of God, and heroic oppugner, expugner of Papists, Anabaptists, and
other erroneous sectaries; yet is made (in Consubstantiation, and some other
points) by Satan's policy author and founder of the Lutherans. Mr Fox Acts,
Mon. vol. 2. p. 87.


see and learn from hence, the unsafenesse of too much affecting any man,
Instruct.
or addicting our selves to the opinions, doctrines, principles, practices of
the best teachers. Take we heed how we have men's persons, or parts, or
performances, in too great admiration. There will be something, sometimes, that
may be said or done amiss -- Saint Paul himself would not glory but in his
infirmities, lest any man should think of him, above that which he saw him to
be -- 2 Cor. 12.5, 6. It Is a great folly for us to look for more in men, to
promise our selves more from creatures, then we shall ever find in them. It Is
not safe to pin our faith on any man's sleeve -- Et profecto magna tentatio est,
cum ille, quem tu prophetam, quem prophetarum discipulum, quem doctorem, and
adsertorem veritatis putes, quem summa veneratione, and amore com^lexus sis, is
subito, latenter noxios subinducat errores; quos nec cito deprehendere valeas
dum antiqui magisterij duceris praejudicio; nec facile damnare fas ducis, dum
magistri veteris impediris affectu. Vinc. Lirin. cap. 15.
though they sit in Peter's chair, (as the seducing Pharisees did in Moses's)
and arrogantly pretend to a more then Papal infallibility. Leaven may be in
their dough. -- infaelix ille Nestorius subito ex ove conversus in lupum,
gregem Christi lacerare coepisset; cum eum hi ipsi qui rodebantur, ex magna
adhuc part ovem crederent, ideoque morsibus ejus magis paterent -- See, and
read, the whole cap. 16.


Photinus erat et ingenij viribus valens, and doctrinae opibus excellens, and
eloquio praepotens -- sed been, quodcommissae ipsi, oves Christi, cautae,
vigilantes -- quem antea quasi arietem gregis sequebantur, eundem deinceps
voluti lupum fugere coeperunt.

3. Apollinaris, ipse auditoribus suis magnos aestus, and magnas generavit
angustias; quippe cum eos huc ecclesiae traheret auctoritas, huc magistri
retraheret consuetudo -- nam quid illo praestantius acumine, exercitatione,
doctrina? quam multas ille haereses multis voluminibus opprefferit, quot
inimicos fidei confutaverit errores -- summis aedificatoribus ecclesiae par
esse potuisset; nisi prophana illa haereticae curiositatis libidine, novum
nescio quid invenisset, quo and cunctos labores suos velut cujusdam leprae
admixtione faedaret -- ut doctrina ejus non tam aedificatio, quam tentatio
potius ecclesiastica diceretur. Vinc. Lirin. cap. 16.

4. Origenes in quo plura adeo praeclara, adeo singularia, adeo mira
extiterunt, ut inter initia habendam cunctis adsertionibus ejus fidem quivis
facile judicaret. Nam si vita -- si genus, vel eruditio, quid eo nobilius qui
primum in ea domo natus est, quae est illustrata martyrio? Deinde pro Christo
non solum patr^, sed omni quoque facultate privatus, tantum inter sanctae
paupertatis profecit angustias, ut pro nomine Dominicae confessionis, saepius
ut ferunt, adfligeretur. -- tanta etiam vis ingenii tam profundi, tam acris,
tam elegantis -- eloquentiam vero quid memorem? cujus fuit tam amoena, tam
lactea, tam dulcis oration, ut mihi ex ore ipsius non tam verba quam mella
quaedam fluxisse videantur. -- Quanta apud omnes illius admiratio! quanta
gloria! quanta gratia fuerit, quis exequi valeat? Quis non ad eum, paulo
religiosior ex ultimis mundi partibus advolavit? Quis Christianorum, non pene
ut prophetam; quis philosophorum non ut magistrum veneratus est? -- se cum
Origene errare malle, quam cum aliis vera sentire? -- tantae personae, tanti
doctoris, tanti prophetae periculosa tentatio plurimos a fidei integritate
deduceret. Vinc. Lir. cap. 23.

5. Tertullianus -- ingenio, acumine, gravi, vehementi -- cujus quot pene verba
tot sententiae sunt, quot sensus tot victoriae -- and tamen hic idem hic
Tortullianus -- exurgentes in ecclesia novellas Montani Furias, and insana illa
insanarum mulierum novitii dogmatis somnia -- etc. Vinc. Lir. cap. 24. -- read
the chapt.


they will (leaving their own minister whom God has set over them, perhaps one
far more able, sound, truly zealous) run after such, because he can speak well,
seems an Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures; a man that can at least pretend
holiness, heavenlinesse of life: now this man, though a sectarie, seducer, a
corrupt leavener, a mere mountebank and impostor, shall be cried up, followed,
admired idolized, and all his doctrines though full of corrupt leaven, shall be
heedlesly, and yet greedily swallowed.

Is this discreetly and Christianly done to take truths on trust? (but they are
indeed falsehood) or to think that every good man has a monopoly of all sound
unerring ministerial graces, and accomplishments, or so to magnify, yea
Goddifie them, that they receive and entertain them (as the Galatians did Paul)
as an angel from heaven, even as Jesus Christ himself? Gal. 4.14.

Beloved, be these you so fancy, so follow, never so great, leaned, holy,
sanctified, profitable teachers (as you conceive) yet still there may be a
little crumb of some unespyed leaven, of pride, hypocrisy, heresy, some thing
that is not very sound, or wholesome. Let them be what they are, what they will
be, what they can be, they are but men, they may err, and deceive, and be
deceived; It Is God alone that cannot lie, deceive any man, or be deceived
himself.

Last of all. Let our blessed Saviors charge, and warning here given to his
Disciples (men every way as good, as wise, as discerning, as able, as holy, as
the best of you can be) let it, I say, sink into your ears, pierce and settle
into your hearts, Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees- Beware of
strange, and new, and unsound opinions, doctrines, positions, of the most
plausible heart-moving preachers. -- quia jam grassatur passim -- nocentissimum
fermentum imo plusquam lethale virus, ad hanc omnium maxim necessariam
cautionem, totos suos sensus conferant. Marlorat. expos. eccles.
Beware of fantastical novelties, though delivered, defended by never so wise,
learned, great, grave, honored, holy, Seraphicall persons -- ut omnes fere
Catholici noverint fecum ecclesiae doctores recipere, non cum Doctoribus
ecclesiae fidem deserere debere. Vinc. Lir. c. 23.
Remember that Satan can transform himself into an angel of light, and is then
most a Devil, when he seems a Saint. Let not respect of persons sway with you
-- vult devitari and rejici falsa dogmata, quae a veritate abducunt, absque
omni personarum respectu, sive sint Pharisaei, hoc est doctissimi; sive
Sadducaei qui tam fere pontificatum administrabant; sive Herodiani qui regali
dignitate superbiebant. Fides enim nostra non ex hominibus sed ex Deo ipsiusque
verbo dependere debet. Chemnit. Harm. c. 82.
. Say and resolve with your selves, (as once the great Philosopher Aristotle
said of Pl^to and Socrates in some case of dissent and difference in opinion,
Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica Veritas) that nothing but truth
shall have force with you; not such a teacher, nor such a preacher, nor such a
powerful persuasive heavenly man shall ever move or remove you. Though they
may be your good, very good friends, yet the truth is your best friend;
incomparably the best Adnunciare ergo aliquid Christianis Catholicis praeter id
quod acceperunt, nunquam licuit, nunquam licet, nunquam licebit, et anathemare
eos qui adnuncient aliquid praeterquam quod semel acceptum est nunquam non
oportuit, nusquam non oportet, nusquam non oportebit. -- Clamet and repetendo
clamet, and omnibus, and semper, and ubique per literas suas clamet ille, ille
vas electionis, ille magister gentium, ille Apostolorum rub^, ille terrarum
praeco, ille coelorum conscius, ursi quis novum dogma adnunciaverit,
anathematizetur. Et contra reclament ranae quaedam, and cyniph^s, and muscae
moriturae, quales sunt Pelagiani, and hoc Catholicis; Nobis inquiunt autoribus,
nobis principibus, nobis expositoribus damnate quae tenehatis, tenete quae
damnabatis, rejicite antiquam fidem, pattern instituta, majorum deposita -- et
recipite, etc. -- Vinc. Lir. cap. 14. in verb. Apost. Gal. 1.8, 9.
.

The Devil is doubtless of great, deep, profound, vast parts; he has
learning, knowledge, even sacred (though not saving) above any, yea all men: he
can likewise make show of holiness, can personate an angel; act to the life, a
seeming saint -- The Devil a monk would be -- so can his ministers, and all
deceitful workers; so could and did the Scribes and Pharisees, appear
glorious, yet whited tombs; so did those false teachers that seduced the
Galatians, they seemed to be somewhat, desired to make a fair show in the
flesh, were of chief note in the Church: and yet rotten, unsound in their
doctrines, preached another Gospel, perverted the Gospel of Christ. Such, many
such creep in among us, who under pretense of preaching Christ, preach down
Christianity -- Christianismum sub Christi nomine evertunt. Paraeus in Galat.
speaking of the Socinians.
.

Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also,
2 Pet. 3.17
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness.

But grow in grace, 18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory,
both now and for ever. Amen.

FINJS.

