EMANUEL, OR, GOD WITH US. Wherein is set forth Englands late great Victory
over the Scots Army, in a Battle at Dunbar, September. 3. 1650.

And by many Particulars of Gods Acting and Appearing then for us, it is
certain (and so much is cle^rly proved) that our Armies marching into
Scotland, and the Wars undertaken and prosecuted against that Nation, to be
upon Grounds of Justice and Necessity, as the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND has
declared.

Also here is showed, how grossly the Covenant is abused, and what an Idol it
is now made. With the fraud and falsehood of the Scots, and their Kings
hypocrisy and dissimulation.

Moreover such Objections are answered, as seem to have any thing in them,
against the point here Asserted.

By JOHN CAN.

The First Part, published by Authority.

Psalm. 41.11. By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine Enemy does
not triumph over me.

Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see.

London, printed by Matthew Simmons next door to the Goden Lion in Aldersgate
street, 1650.

To the Right Honorable, the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament
of ENGLAND.
SIRS,
MANY men have written well, and effectually in the defenc of your Cause, and
have sufficiently proved it, to be a righteous and glorious Cause. Nevertheles,
as the Philistims stopped the Wels which Abraham had dig'd, and filled them with
earth: so it has been the constant endeavor of some men, by fraud and
falsehood, to darken the clear and evident truth which has been opened, to the
end, people might not have the benefit of such wholesome and sweet water: But
the Lord of Hosts (whose Cause yours is) has (like Isaac) dug again the
wels of water; and what was stopped by others, he has opened: He (I say) now is
a Writer for you: so that were there no Books extent, pleading your Cause,
Gods own hand were enough; the late book written (as it were) with pen and
ink of divine providence were sufficient. As the unbeleeving Jews could not
keep Christ in the grave, though they rol'd a great stone before the door of
the Sepulcre, but he gloriously ascended: so this righteous Cause (which God
has put into your hands) shall rise, and shine as the Sun, far and near
amongst the Nations of the earth: In spite of enemies, let them use all the
the wiles, wit, and ways they can to keep it under.

Aristotle says, omne inconsuetum est obscurum. I confess the way which I
here take, to justify your Cause against all Adversaries (of what name or
title soever) may at first seem obscure, being hitherto by few walked in.
Scire per causam, is the common rode; but when it shall be considered what
light I have ^^nd whose hand (as a Guide) I here follow. I question not, but it
will be acknowledged, that a more certain way cannot be chosen, to give a clear
and full satisfaction to all men desirous to know, on whose side the Truth and
Right is, between you and your Enemies.

I do observe, that there are two sorts of men unfruitful, Beholders of Gods
mavelous and great works.

1. The brutish man (as David calls him) he never considers of them, nor sees
any thing of providence therein: As Nicomacus in Plutarch fitly answered an
Ide^t, that could see no beauty in the famous Helena, painted by Zeuxis; take
my eyes (quoth he) and you shall think her to be a Goddess. Even so, had these
men other men's eyes, any spiritual discerning: they would see in Gods
dispensations so much of his power, goodness, justice, etc. as they would say,
Jehovah, there is none like unto thee; who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy name.

Another sort there are, who will speak of divine providence, and confess that
all things are gov^rned by Gods counsel, and nothing comes to pass but
according to his will and pleasure: notwithstanding, they will not see his hand
when it is lifted up, nor make any profitable and good use thereof. As the
Papist, though in words they acknowledge the Scriptures, yet by their corrupt
interpretation, in a manner deny them: So these men; though they confess a
providence, yet by their unsound application thereof, do in effect deny it,
destroying with one hand what they build with the other. And with this later
sort I specially here deal.

I shall not trouble your Honors with a large Epistle: Only thus, as God by
his Acting for you has made it evident (and you many times in your
Declarations humbly confess it) that he is on your side, takes your part,
justifies and ownes your Cause; so let it appear ^o the world, by your
Actings, that you are (not for your Selves and your own Interests, but) for
God, as owning his Cause, which is Truth and Righteousness.

Now the Lord, who alone has power to make you able to Act and Appear for him
and his Cause (as he has Acted and Appeared for you and your Cause) give you
both hearts and hands so to do. And thus shall he ever pray, who is

Yours most humble and faithful Servant, JOHN CAN.

EMANVEL, OR, GOD WITH US. Wherein is set forth, Englands late great Victory
over the SCOTS Army in a Battle at Dunbarre, the third of September, 1650.
AS The Sun would shine in it is own brightness, and glory, though all the
world were blind, or did wilfully shut their eyes against it: So will the Lord,
gloriously appear in his mighty and wondrous works, howsoever man shuts his
eyes, and Isa. 26.10, 11.
will not behold the majesty of the Lord, nor see w^^n his hand is lifted up.
I make no question, had the Scots ob^ained the Victory (though not clothed
with half so many remarkable circumstances of Gods presence) they would have
said, (and their friends here likewise) in the words of the Prophet; Psalm. 9.4.
Thou have maintained my right and my cause: Thou satest in the throne judging
right. And as Protogenes said of the Painters line, Non enim cadere in alium
tam absolutum opus. Plin. na. hist l. 35. cap. 9.
none but Apelles could draw it. So would they peremptorily have concluded, had
our Army been overthrown, a special hand of God, remonstrating a justifying of
them, their Cause, their King and Kirk.

I hope without offense, what they would have done, (had our Cause been theirs)
we may take the like liberty, and with reverence to the place say, Psalm. 41.11.
By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph
over me: Yea, and make it appear in the eyes of all impartial, and
dis-ingaged men, that the Lord was so with us, and for us in this great
Victory, as does strongly prove, and make good our Armies marching into
Scotland, and the Wars undertaken, and prosecuted against that Nation: to be
(as the Decl. of the Parl. of England upon the marching of the Army into
Scotland.
Parliament has declared) upon Grounds of Justice and Necessity.

1. It is a sign that the Lord maintains the Cause of a people when he
seasonably delivers them from an insole^t and proud Enemy; from Psalm. 75.4.
vainglorious fools, Holelim, Mad-boasting fools, vainly promising themselves
Victory, and brea^hing out threatenings. Thus the Egyptians triumph Exodus 15.9.
. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will over come, I will divide the spoil: my
lust shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, mine hand shall
destr^y them. Behold, how they flattered them selves in their own eyes, Hab.
3.14.
rejoicing to devour the poor in secret: But whilst they were imagining a
victory, and dividing the prey, Judge. 5.30.
the Lord stirred up himself, and awaked to Isreal's judgment, even unto his
Cause: and therein not only got himself a great name, but it is recorded as one
Neh. 9.10.
of his signs and wonders showed upon Pharaoh, a special deliverance, and that
which carries the stamp and character of a divine providence and mercy toward
his Church and People. No less insulted Benhadad, he will not be satisfied
with 1 King. 20.5.
Ahabs silver and his gold, and his wives, and his children: Verse. 6.
But he will send his servants, and they shall search his house, and the houses
of his servants, and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in his eyes, they
shall take it away. Besides, he takes his gods to witness, Verse. 10.
If the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls, for all the people that
follow him. Here I may say with the Prophet, Psalm. 52.1.
Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O thou mighty man? How God destroyed
the Army of that blood-boasting Tyrant, and clothed him with shame, the
History shows, and with all, in that the Lord did so, it did evid^^^ly appear,
that Israel had the better Cause.

Other instances of the like kind might be produced, but we come now to the
application. Touching the insolency of the Scots, how proud and puffed up they
were, with an imaginary victory, it is almost incredible: They reproached us
with that condition the Parliaments Army was in, when it made its hard
conditions with the King in Cornwall: this, jestingly, they cal^d Essex his
Pound, demanded of our men to yield up our Train, Carriages, and Firearms:
They had disposed of us, and of their business, in sufficient wrath and
revenge toward our persons, and had swallowed^p the poor Interest of England,
believing that our Army lay at their mercy, and that they would suddenly with
their new King at the head of their Army march up to London, without any
opposition or interruption. David Lesley then General in the field, boasted he
would have our whole Army dead or alive by seve^ a clock the next morning.

Neither were the Ministers less insolent and presumptuous then the rest; for
as Pharaoh said of the children of Israel, they are entangled in the land, the
wilderness has shut them in: so these conceiving us to be in a trap, Tantaene
aenimis caelestibus irae. Virg. Eneid. l. 1.
persuaded their Commanders to draw up their Army between us and home, that
none might escape, or drive us into the Sea, and so drown us.

It seems the Scots would have been like the Fig Tree to which Christ went for
fruit, and found none: no Quarter, no Mercy, no Deliverance to be expected from
them. It was the honor of the N^mon^ines, that they would make peace with
Mancius a Roman Captain, when they might have had the killing of the whole Army
to a man. But the Scots, although not Conquerours, but in conceit, will swallow
up our whole Army, not spare a man, neither is there any one to deliver them
out of their hands: But Exo. 18.11.
in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, the Lord was above them. So that, what
David prayed for, when his ememies insulted, was a mercy here bestowed upon our
Army: Psalm. 35.26.
Let them be ashamed, and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at my
hurt, let them be clothed with shame and dishonor that magnify themselves
against me. And in this the Lord has not left himself without witness, in
reference to the Justice of our Cause, by giving us so wonderful a victory and
deliverance.

I shall conclude with this admonition to the Scots and their Adherents. Psalm
75. l, 5.
I said to the vainglorious fools, be not vain-gloriously foolish, and to the
wicked, lift not up the horn: Lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a
stiff neck.

2. It argues Gods owning a people and their Cause, when he Psalm. 136.23.
remembers them in a low estate; app^ars for them, when humane helps and hopes
in a manner fail, and gives them victory over an Enemy, strong, Judge. 3.29.
lasty, and men of valor. In the Book of Judges, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles,
the people of God sometimes have been so low, as they have not 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
known what to do, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
their power gone, their General 2 Samuel 21.15.
fainted, 1 Samuel 30.10.
half of their Army so feeble and sore broken, as not able to march. In a word,
they have been reduced to such streights, as if they had the sentence of death
in themselves.

Now Gods appearing for them at such a time, and giving them the victory in
such a case, not only showed that it was the work of his own hands; but as if
upon the Actings and Appearances of the Lord, it had been written in broad and
vi^ble Characters, THIS IS GODS CAUSE.

How weak and low the condition of our Army was, thus it is related: We being
thus humbled by the hand of God, and the menaces of merciless men: Our Forces
lessened, our bodies enfeebled with fluxes, our strength wasted with watchings,
want of drink, wet and cold being our continual companions, much impaired our
strength and courage, and made above 2000. men altogether useless, which were
sent away at several times to Berwick: His Excellency and his Officers finding
their unfitness for further delay, and being in and under such streights, and
distresses, resolved, by day break, to break through this Israelitish
condition.

Man's extremity is Gods opportunity: when we are Psalm. 107.28, 29.
at our wits end, then makes he the storm a calm, and brings us to our
desired haven. And it is an usual thing with God, thus to manifest his power in
our weakness, and by unworthy and unlikely instruments, contemptible in the
eyes of men, to bring great things to pass, and to confound the things which
are great and mighty, that it may appear: Eccl. 9.11.
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, and therefore Jer.
9.23.
the mighty man should not glory in his might, but his glorying should be in
the holy one of Israel.

Again, the Lord very often, puts off the time of our deliverance, till we are
at a lost, and in the lowest and weakest condition, that so the power and
goodness of God may the more shine forth, and the mercy it self when it comes
taste the sweeter. As the greater a man's hunger is, the sweeter is the meat, and
the more relish he has in it.

That this victory may appear to be of God, and not of man, and what a signal
Testimony the Lord has given in this particular, that the Battle and Cause was
his: I desire the Reader to observe; that Heb. 11.34.
out of weakness our Army was made strong. Isa. 40.29.
God gave power to the faint, and to them that had no might he increased
strength. He that was Zec. 12.8.
feeble among them at that day, was as David, and David as the Angel of the
Lord before them. Ezekiel. 21.26.
The Lord exalted him that was low, and abased him that was high: Job 12.21.
Powered contempt upon Princes, and weakened the strength of the mighty. No
sooner had our men powered out their complaint before God, and showed before him
their trouble, saying, Psalm. 142.6.
Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low; deliver me from my Did not the
Lord put his hook in their nose, and his bridle in their lips, there would not
be greater persecutors in the world the^ the Scots, especially their Kirk-men.
persecutors, for they are stronger then I. But suddenly the Lord arose like a
Giant refreshed with wine, wounded the hairy scalp of his ^nemies, smote them
upon the cheek-bone, and put them to a perpetual reproach. Psalm. 97.8.
Sion heard and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy
judgments O Lord.

3. That the Lord has given Testimony to the Justice of our Cause, does
further appear by the great number of the enemies overthrown by a few.

Some report the Scots Army was thirty thousand; but six thousand horse, and
sixteen thousand foot at least. Ours (to sound men) were not above seven
thousand and five hundred foot, and three thousand and five hundred horse;
these with the courage which the Lord was pleased to give them, in less than an
hours dispute, put the Enemies whole Army into confusion, and it became a
total Rout, our men having the chase and execution of them near Magna ea
victoria, neque cruenta nobis suit: Quinta ab hora diej ad noctem caesi hosts
december milia passuum cadaveribus atque armis opplevere. Tac. Anal. l. 2.
8. miles: their foot in a manner all taken and slain, to the number of 15000.
whereof a third part were computed to be killed: 200. Colors and more of Horse
and Foot were taken, 10. Colonels, 12. Lieutenant-Colonels, 9. Majors, 47.
Captains, 72. Lieutenants, 80. Ensigns, besides Cornets and Quarter Masters:
All their Train of Artillery, consisting of 22. field-guns, beside smaller
pieces: They left behind them all their Arms, no less than 15000. their Tents,
Bag, and Baggage. Thus the Lord Psalm. 68.30.
rebuked the company of spear-men, the multitude of the bulls, with the Calves
of the people; and so let thine enemies perish O God.

And that it may appear 2 Chronicles. 14.13.
they were destroyed before the Lord; and the same God which to them was
terrible, a consuming fire, making his arrows drunk with the blood of the
slain, and of the Captives, to our Army was their rock, their fortress and
deliverer, the horn of their salvation, who covered their head in the day of
battle, and girded them with strength.

Our slain and hurt were not many; I do not believe (says his Excellency) we
have lost 20. men, not one Commissioned Officer slain that I can hear of, save
one Cornet, and Major Rooksby, since dead of his wounds, and not many mortally
wounded. Was not that promise here made good, even in the letter? Ps. 91.7, 8.
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but at
shall not come nigh thee: Only with thine eyes thou shall behold, and see the
reward of the wicked: He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wings shall thou be safe.

I have read of a Antigonus.
General, who finding his Soldiers dismayed by the smalnesse of their
company, and the multitude of their enemies, asked them, how many (quoth he) do
ye reckon me at, who am your Commander and I eader: If David were 1 Samuel 18.3.
as ten thousand of the people, what is David's Lord? Our Soldiers never
thought as Caecina did, Tacit. An. l. 1.
unam in armis salutem; that their safety only consisted in their weapons; they
are better principled, and therefore knew, that Salvation belongs to the
Lord: and making him their Refuge, even the most High their habitation, he was
with them in trouble, he delivered them, and honored them, his right hand, and
his holy arm got them the victory.

Heretofore, when the Lord had acted, and appeared for a people in this manner,
it was always observed by the godly wise, as a sure evidence and sign of his
approving their Cause: as on the contrary, a righteous hand of divine
punishment upon the destroyed party, for taking up Arms in defense of some
thing unjust and sinful, either Person or Thing. And indeed, the promise runs
so; Lev, 26.2.
If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them: Verse.
7.8.
Ye shall chase your Enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword: and
five of you shall chase a hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand
to flight: This promise is enlarged in Chapter 23.10.
Joshuah, One of you shall chase a thousand: Nos quoque, si legem observemus,
victorias consequemur.
So we also, (as Lavaret on the place) shall obtain victories if we keep the
law. This thing afterward was notably performed in 1 Chr. 11.
David's Worthies, of whom some one 2 Samuel 23.18.
lifted up his s^ear against eight hundred, and slew three hundred at one time.
1 Chronicles. 11.18.
Three men brake through the host of the Philistims; As Major-Generall
Whalley's Regiment, charged through the Enemies whole Army, and back again,
with little or no loss.

I know there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or few, nothing is
unpossible with him: Notwithstanding, when by weakness he overcomes strength
and power, by a few, many and multitudes: as Ps. 11.7.
the righteous Lord loves righteousness, so this shows, that he has pleaded
and maintained the righteous man's Cause; That God delivered diverse Kings and
all their host into the hand of Israel; Ios. 11.4.8.
much people, even as the sand that is upon the shore in multitude, with horses
and charets, and by a few totally routed; the Judge. 6.5. and 7.12.
Midianites and the Amalekites, and all the children of the East, which lay a
long encam^ped in the valleys like grasshoppers: Saved Israel by a very small
party, when the Philistims gathered themselves against them, 1 Samuel 13.5.
thirty thousand Charets, and six thousand Horsemen, and people as the sand
which is on the Seashore for multitude. Overthrew Zerah the Ethiopian, when
he came against As 2 Chronicles. 14.9.
with a^ host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred Chario^s, and by a
small number in comparison of his. What is to be learnt hence; what observation
to be raised? what use to be made of such glorious Vctories, such great Actings
and high Appearances of God? Only that he is Psa. 24.8.
mighty in battle, Exo. 15.3.
a man of war, Ps. 77.14.
a God that does wonders, Great things and unsearchable, mavelous things,
without number? What, nothing else? Yes surely, something more; Job 5.9.
namely, that he owned their cause, and acknowledged them to be his Soldiers,
and 2 Chronicles. 14.12.
his host, whom he delivered, and made Conquerours, with a stretched-out Arm,
and with great judgments; the others he took for his enemies, and that their
Cause was naught and wicked. They might see, by destroying them in such a
wonderful and strange manner. Ps. 92.5.
A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this.

I have read of one Atabalipa, King of Cusco, who being persuaded by one
Vincent a Friar to become a Christian, and upon this reason, that he should
serve the God that made Heaven and Earth: The Indian asked the Friar how he
knew it, he having a Bible in his hand, told him, he had learnt it there: The
King takes the Book in his hand, opens it, smells to it, and lays it to his
ear, and hearkens if it spoke any thing; but perceiving he could have no
satisfaction by his feeling, neither did the Book speak to him, he threw it
away, and laughing at the Friar, told him, that his Book and he were both fools.

Now such there are at this day, and not a few; for all the world, like that
Heathen King, because God speaks not to their dull and blind hearts, in their
gross and foolish way, they profit not by the works of his hands, neither are
his present Appearances, and Givings in to his people, (though the same with
his former dispensations, all along held forth in holy Scripture) observed, at
least not acknowledged of them, and God glorified, as they ought and should
do. But what of all this, yet Ps. 10.16.
the Lord is known by the judgments which he executes.

4. I suppose it cannot be paralleled (as his In the 4 letters between him and
the Ministers.
Excellency has well observed) of the like solemn Appeals unto God, in
reference to the Justice of a Cause, Deuteronomy. 17.8.
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of Controversy, as was done by Solemn Appeals made by both
parties to Almighty God. The Answer of the Parliament to the Scots Kings
Declaration, page 36.
both parties before the War began. The Scots not only took God to witness,
that they had clean hands, and pure hearts, were men (like Nathanael) in whom
there is no guile, but See page 23. in that Answ.
referred the Cause between Them and Us, to the unerring sentence of the
highest Judge, as he should appear in his providence and mighty Actings either
for us or them. It is true, they are a people presumptuous and lavish this way,
as in all their Remonstrances, Declarations, Petitions, Answers, etc. may be
seen; evermore Appealing to the great and eternal God, the searcher of all
hearts, and taking the Lord to record upon their souls, touching their
integrity and clearness in walking. But howsoever, seeing now Psalm. 102.19.
God has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, and has Neh. 9.28.
heard from heaven, and 2 Samuel 22.14.
from heaven uttered his voice, and Ps. 76.8.
caused his judgment to be heard. Methinks they should fear, and be still,
Josh. 7.19.
give glory to the God of heaven, and make confession to him: and the rather,
because they know, as he is a Tit. 1.2.
God that cannot lie; a God that Ps. 33.5.
loves righteousness and judgment, and Ps. 45.7.
hates wickedness: so it is Ps. 85.11.
righteousness that has now looked down from heaven, and 1 K. 8.32.
in heaven God has heard and done, and judged his servants, condemning the
wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give
him according to his righteousness.

This Appealing unto God, is like the water which was given in trial of
Jealousy: Numb. 5.27.
If the woman had done trespass against her Husband, the water would become
bitter in her bowels, her belly swel, and her thigh rot: But if Verse. 28.
clean, and not defiled, she should conceive seed, and be fruitful. So it is,
when men call upon God to judge their Cause, and will have a witness in Heaven,
and in his definitive sentence pretend to stand. If they are Liers,
Dissemblers, Hypocrites, fals-hearted, double-hearted, etc. no marvail if the
Curse enter into them, and that God by some visible, sensible, remarkable hand,
punish them for their great presumption, and for such impudent boldness, and
because they did not Deuteronomy. 28.58.
fear this glorious and fearful name, JEHOVAH THY GOD.

Again, on the other hand, if men appeal unto God, as David did in the Cause
between him and Saul, 1 Samuel 24.12.
the Lord judge between me and thee: and are upright before him, walk in their
integrity, setting the Lord always before them: The Lord will open to them his
good treasure, he will make them the head, and not the tail; they shall be
above only, and not beneath, and wheresoever they go they shall prosper.

Neither did the Scots rest in a bare appealing unto God, as to plead the Cause
between us and them: but so confident they were, or rather foole-presumptuous,
of Gods being on their side; as if they had tied him (as the Alex. Gent. Dic.
l. 6. c. 4.
Tyryans did their god Hercules) with a golden chain to secure themselves of
his residence among them. And here some of their Ministers played their pranks,
telling the people, yea and God too, he could not be just and righteous, and
like himself, unless he assisted them to destroy the Sectarian Army, as they
called us: to such an height of blindness and madness were they lifted up,
making true the proverb, Prove. 26.28.
a flattering mouth works ruin.

Henry the 2. hearing Menz his City to be taken, used this blasphemous speech;
I shall never (quoth he) love God any more, that suffered a City so dear to
me, to be taken from me. I am so far from wishing, that any of them should be
given up to such gall of bitterness, and power of darkness, as to blaspheme
the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores, as I unfeignedly
desire (and my prayer to God for them so is) that they may see, how the Lord,
to whom they have again and again appealed, is against them and their Cause, as
being come to them to judgment, Mal. 3.5.
a swift witness against the sorcerers against the adulterers, and against
false swearers. And therefore they shall do well, to Deuteronomy. 17.13.
hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

The Prophet David says, Ps. 77.19.
Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters. In a Sea-voyage,
there are no lanes, no foot-paths, no print of wheels, no high Mercuries to
direct the Mariners, all their direction must be fetched from the Pole and
Stars, compared with the card and compass, and touched needle. It were to be
wished, that some men (for their own sake, and the sake of others) would look
less upon the rotten post of the Covenant, the humane Kirk, and the Lordly
discipline, and see more of Gods footsteps and goings in his sanctuary: how he
bows the Heavens and comes down, and darkness is under his feet, when he
arises: how his Enemies are scattered, and the wicked perish at the presence of
God. Are the unreasonable creatures called upon, Ps. 96.11, 12, 13.
heaven and earth, the sea, the field, and all trees of the wood, to rejoice
and be glad, because the Lord judges the world with righteousness, and the
people with his truth? should not man more abundantly utter the memory of his
great goodness, sing of his righteousness, and talk of his power. Now,
wherein is this great goodness, righteousness, and power of God more seen,
then when God has his way in the Sea, speaks from Heaven; that is, being
appealed unto as the supreme Judge, and called upon to give sentence in a
Cause depending between two Nations; he speaks out, and gives sentence, yea so
Job 37.4.
thundreth with the voice of his Excellency, as our Enemies themselves, being
Judges, they must confess, it is a Divine voice, a God speaking, the righteous
judgment of the most high. Ps. 107.4^
Who so is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

5. There is not a surer evidence of the Lords presence with a people, and
pleading their Cause, then when in the way of his providence he makes the
unreasonable creatures seasonably serve for their comfortable deliverance and
safety. When he Dan. 6.22.
stopped the Lions mouths, Dan. 3.27.
restraind the violence of the fire, Ps. 114.3.
Caused the sea to fly, and Jordan to run back. What was showed here? That the
Lord Ps. 109.31.
stands at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn his
soul. Again, when Nah. 1.3.
the Lord has his way in the storm: When Judge. 5.20.
the stars in their courses shall fight against Sisera, and Josh. 10.11.
great stones from heaven shall be cast down upon the heads of the Canaanites:
when the Lord visits Isa. 29.6.
with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise; with storm and tempest,
and the flame of devouring fire: What is here signified? That he is angry with
those against whom he thus fights, takes them for his Enemies, and that they
have a sinful and unrighteous cause.

What a clear Character and sign the Lord gave our Army, of owning them and
us, and the Cause for which they fought, Our posterity after us shall have
cause to remember, and to bless God for it: Thus it was.

Upon Saturday, August 30. we marched from Muscleburgh to Heddington, where by
that time we had got the Van brigade of our Horse, and our Foot and Train into
their Quarters, the Enemy was marched with that exceeding expedition, that
they fell upon the Reed-forlorn of our Horse, and put it in some disorder: And
indeed, had like to have engaged our Reer-brigade of Horse, with the whole
Army, had not the Lord by his providence put a cloud over the Luna clariore
paene coelo visa languescere. Tac. Aon^^. l. 1.
Moon, thereby giving us opportunity to draw off those Horse to the rest of
the Army; So his Excellency. From ano^^er In a ^^^tive (...) friend Col.
Overton Governor of Hull.
hand, thus; The Enemy (unknown to us) attended upon (...) right wing, and in
the Evening drew up a strong party upon our ^^cer guard, and might, probably,
have spoiled them, if not provi^^^tially prevented by the over-shadowing
clouds, which so eclipsed the Moon, as thereby a period was put to the Enemies
motion, until the Sky was cleared, etc.

A little before day, the darkness is greatest: When our streights and
troubles are at the highest, then is our deliverance nearest at hand. In sick
persons we see it comes to pass, that they think there is no hope of life;
when the Physicians and standers by see certain and undoubted signs of
health. When 1 Samuel 23.24.
Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them: here
was little hope of life: what way now could a man imagine of safety to David?
What probability, or possibility in man's understanding, that he should escape?
yet the Lord found out a way for him, and delivered him.

When the King of Syria sent Horses and Chariots, and a great host to apprehend
Elisha, and they had 2 K. 6.14.
compassed the Gitie about, in which he was: What hope of life here? what way
was there, in human Reason, for the Prophet to escape? Yet the Lord (who knows
how to d^liver the godly out of temptations) had a door open for him whereby
to escape.

When the Scots Army suddenly and unexpectedly fell upon us, had many
advantages; Our whole Army was like to be engaged, (not then in a capacity or
posture to fight, but rather as sheep to be led to the slaughter:) what hope of
life here? who can see any way of coming out? As a man upon a Rock in the Sea,
sees only waters round about him, no land: so is our present case, we see
nothing, but either fight or fly: Coacta stabile ad praelium, we must fight,
and are forced to it, even in this sad and hard condition. But the Lord, who
has his preventing blessings of goodness, commanded the Moon not to give her
light, over-shadowed her with his thick clouds, so that the Scots are here
left, like the Sodomites, in darkness, groping for our men, as they did for
Lot's house, whilst the Angels of the Lord put forth their hands, and pulled us
in, under the shadow of the Almighty.

Thus God was seen in the Mount, an act of special providence, and sufficient
to convince any Adversary, that the Lord was with us and with our Cause,
unless he be like unto him who said, I will not be convinced, though I am
convinced.

Indeed, some men are like Squint-eyes; if you set a book direct before them,
they cannot read a word, nor see a letter, though it be a large and fair
print; but hold the book side-way, then they can read very well, and see even
the least and smallest point. Such mercies and deliverances as are before their
eyes, and wherein the power, goodness, justice and faithfulness of God most
shine forth, and which look most fully and directly at his glory, those, their
squint-eyes cannot see. Quid non mortalia pectoracoges? Auri sacra fam^s. Virg.
Eneid. 3.
But for others which come in side-way, that is, advance their Interest, help
to hold up their unsanctified places, and standings; their pomp, pride,
Lordlinesse, bring them in Corn and Wine, etc. These side-way blessings,
whether Victories, or what else, they can see, and will read them, and in their
Churches too, and keep days of public Thanksgiving in remembrance of them,
If the State command it, Isa. 26.11.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see: but they shall see, and be
ashamed, for their envy toward thy people, yea the fire of thine enemies shall
devour them.

6. Not only has the Lord given us this great Victory, but with it has
happily brought to light many remarkable things, whereby is discovered the
gross hypocrisy, falsehood, and dissimulation of the Scots, especially some
of their Church men, and that great Proselyte, their King, which is another
weighty Argument to prove Gods taking our part and Cause against them.

1. Since the Victory, some of their Officers and Soldiers have declared, that
the hand of God was certainly against them, because their King was constrained
to take the Covenant, and to own their Declaration altogether against his
conscience: For, howsoever they well knew, that whatsoever he did in this
particular, would be contrary to his mind: Nevertheless, willing or not
willing, do it he As puppets are moved wholly at his direction and bent that
exte^ds or slacks the strings whereon they dance: And the blind Bayard rusheth
into the Battle, which way he should go he sees not, save only his rider
spurreth him: so is this man's case.
must, and shall; howsoever (as was said) they knew, that therein he would
dissemble, and play the hypocrite and themselves also.

It may seem strange to all sincere and conscientious people, that men
speaking so much of religion, of the great Cause of God, of advancing the
glorious name of Jesus, etc. should act so corruptly before God and men.
Touching the hypocrisy and deep dissimulation both of King and people, the The
Answer of the Parliament of England, to a paper entitled a Declaration of the
Kings Majesty, etc. page 17.19.
same in the Parliaments Answer excellently is observed.

In the space almost of 24. hours to grow up in the full persuasion of the
Justice and Equity of all the Heads and Articles contained in the Covenant, and
to be able to declare that he has not sworn, nor subscribed them upon any
sinister intention and crooked design, for attaining his own ends; and fixed a
resolution to persist therein really, constantly and sincerely all the days of
his life.

Again, He that can on the 15. of August, hug all his Malignants and Popish
party in his bosom, and lodge them in the secret Reserves of his favor and
love as his best friends, can now on the 16. (the day following) from the
fullness of persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all the Heads and Articles
of the Covenant, renounce and discard them in the sight of God and the world,
and vow never to have any more to do with them. There needs nothing to be
added, for the matter it self is like a filthy carcass, which will rot and
consume away, though it be never touched.

Among the Myconians it was no unseemely thing to be bald, because the people
were naturally so; if their young King among other nations had thus dissembled,
it would have been judged a thing unseemly, and most unchristian: but it seems
among Scots, falsehood and hypocrisy is no deformity, no blemish or fault in
nature, they being naturally so; I speak not of all, but of the most part,
liars, and a seed of falsehood.

Physicians in some unseemly convulsions, wish their Patients should look on
themselves in a glass, which will cause them to strive the more when they
shall see their own deformity. If the Scots would but look here upon
themselves, and behold this deformity, I should think they would strive the
more against it; howsoever God sees their halting and double-dealing, and has
already showed his great indignation against them for it. Some of them say In a
letter to his Excellency.
God has hid his face for a while from the sons of Jacob; but by your leave,
Jacob's sons are Isa. 63.8.
children that will not lie, they will not Isa. 28.15.
make lies their refuge, and under falsehood hide themselves: they will not 1 Timothy 4.2.
speak lies in hypocrisy, but Zech. 8.16.
every man the truth to his neighbor: Zech. 8.3.
and Jerusalem shall be called the City of truth. If men trust in vanity, and
speak lies, conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity: if there be
transgression and lying against the Lord, and a departing away from our God,
speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of
falsehood. If judgment be turned away backward, and justice stands afar of:
If truth be fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter, God indeed will then
Isa. 59.2.
hide his face from such a people, as the Prophet has it, yea though they
boast of a Covenant, and a Temple, title themselves the Sons of Jacob, and
say Isa. 65.5.
stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am more holy than thou.

2. Their dissimulation each with other does further appear, and Gods judgment
upon them likewise for it. No sooner did the Scots King hear of the loss of
their Army, bu he protested he was glad of it; and This was affirmed
conside^tly to the Lord Genesis by Major Genesis Straughams Trumpet.
falling down on his knees, gave great thanks in the presence of all about
him, that they were so destroyed.

Stat. Hist. l. 8. c. 25.
Plyny writes of a people called Tentarites, when they have taken a Crocodile,
they will so fright him with their words, and threats, as he is forct to cast
up, and vomit out the prey which before he had swallowed down. If it should be
granted, the Scots by their thundering threats of rejection, deposition, Sale,
Excommunication, etc. had so terrified the young Crocodile (I speak It is
usual in Scripture to resemble Tyrants to Serpents, Dragons. Leviathan, Psalm.
74.13, 14. Ezekiel. 29.3. Isa, 27.3.
in Scripture language) having gotten him amongst them, as he was forced to
vomit up his own sins, and his Fathers, and Mothers sins; all the idolatries,
adulteries, witchcrafts, sodomies, murders, etc. of his Ancestors, to William
the Bastard, as they make him say in his Declaration. Yet he knew how to lick
up all again, and to turn when occasion should be, to his former vomit, and
wallowing in the mire.

Germanicus (howbeit a Heathen) was so affected to see his men cast away, as
that he said Se tanti exitij reum clamitaret, vix cohibuere amici, quo minus
eodem mari opeteret, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
he only was guilty of their death, and could hardly be stayed by his Friends
from casting himself into the Sea. But their Kings happy Conversion, amounted
not to so much humanity, ingenuity, pity, fellow-feeling, etc. It seems by
this, he was at most but a Pharisaicall Proselite, of whom Christ says Mat.
23.15.
Ye So did the Scots to make this man their Proselite.
compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite, and when he is made, ye make him
two fold more the Child of Hell then your selves. Some give the sense of the
place thus: the Proselite is two fold worse, because whatsoever he saw evil in
the Pharisees, that he would learn and practice; but wherein they did well,
and what was good, therein he followed them not. Such a Proselite their King
seems to be; he sees them dissemble, and seek to cozen the World, under
glorious words of a holy Covenant, pure worship, a zeal of God against
superstition, Heresy, Profaneness, etc. This he learnes by heart, and speaks
it by rote, and lies, and dissembles as fast as they: but for other things
which he sees amongst them, as are venerable, lovely, and of good report, we
do not understand he is this way inclined to follow their example.

3. Remarkable it is (and another proof of Gods witnessing against their
Cause) how the Scots Prophets Lam. 2.14.
have seen vain, and foolish things, false Burdens and causes of banishment.
These men, as our General has well observed, have hindered the passage of
good things to the hearts of the People: And when much love has been offered
them in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, by good words, and fair Speeches, they
have deceived the minds of the simple, whereby they have brought the just guilt
of much blood upon their own heads. And not only like Jer. 28.1, 2, 3, 4.
Hananiah, have some of them sought out false Visions, Prophesying the
destruction of an Army, promising safety, and Victory to theirs; but leaving
the subject to which they were called, and taking to them the Instruments of
foolish Shepherds, they would give Orders to the Soldiery where to March,
when to Fight, Counselling them contrary to the advice of their chief
Officers, by which their rash and heady presumptions, many were overthrown,
and destroyed.

It is somewhere reported of the Indians, that if they snuff up into their
Nostrills the powder of the Herb Cohabba, they will streightwayes run mad, and
are ready to do any bad thing. We can show it by experience, when Ministers
leave off to Preach Christ, and meddle in State Affairs, and Worldly polities,
will determine of civil powers, asperse the Government under which they live,
and not be subject to the higher Powers (for all their swelling words of being
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, ready to speak in their Masters service, and
will refuse no suffering, so they may fulfill their Ministrey with joy.) Such
as do receive their Carnal Doctrines, are driven into a kind of fury, and
madness, acting strange things prejudicial and destructive to the People
amongst whom they live. Philosophers do hold, if the inferior spheres were
not ruled, and in a manner corrected by the highest, the swiftnes of their
motion would quickly fire the World. There are no men so swift of motion, as
some of our Coat, and did not the higher spheres wisely rule them, and many
times correct them too, they would soon set on fire both Church, and State.
Scotland at present can say so by woeful experience, England would say no less
if her higher spheres were as low and dull as theirs.

4. This is to be added as a further manifestation of God just hand against
their unrighteous Cause: To wit, wha^ this Army was (I mean in their own eyes)
which the Lord by weakness overthrew: All Covenanters, no As Gideons Army was
glorieous when it was separate from all the Cowardly, and faint-hearted: So the
Scots having outed, and routed all disaffected to the Cause of the Kirk, and
Covenant, it must needs be honourable^.
Malignants, Sectaries, Papists, an Army in point of Covenant, Reformation
(like the Spanish Armado in 88. INVINCIBLE:) An Army like Alberts, Duke of
Saxony, called the Dye Groate Gaerde, the great Rod or Whip; so this shall be
the Hammer of Heretics, the Scourge of Schismatics, and Sectaries. That is,
being interpreted, the Arm of Flesh, and isntrumental means to hinder the
passage of the Gospel, suppress the ways of Christ, and power of godliness,
and to advance humane institutions, formallity, Tyranny, etc.

Indeed, such glorying there was in this reformed Army, having none in it but
Subscribers to the Covenant, and the Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron
being likewise amongst them: their enemies vain men, and Children of Belial,
with whom were the golden Calves which the Parliament had made, and whose
leader was the great Antichrist. As the foolish and ignorant people did fully
believe there would be little need for them to Fight, but standing still they
should see their Enemies fall before them. Being dealt withal here not much
unlike one Tammoran a Jacobine Friar, who persuaded Joanillie, Anastros Boy, to
kill the Prince of Orange, and for his encouragement gave him certain
Characters in paper, assuring him that he should go invisibly, having the same
about him: The Crew of the condition of this Army (having also the Kirks
blessing with it) so tickled the ears of the people, as it was no other, then
as a Chrame to bewitch them, causing them Jer. 29.31.
to trust in a lie, and for sake their own mercies.

Among the Scythians, when their Priests foretold an untruth, they were carried
along upon hurdles, full of heath, and dry wood, drawn by Oxen, and manicled
Hand and Foot, and burnt to death. My worst wishes toward these men, is
Repentance from dead works, and that God will make them see how extremely they
have deluded and abused the People. It was piously and Christianly spoken of
our General in his Letter to them, The Lord pity you, says he: Truly I pity
them with my heart, and my Bowels yearn for them; nevertheless, being to
speak of their hypocrisies and delusions, in so grossly dissembling with God
and his People (as the same Hand writes) I conceive it is my duty, having the
Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, for an example, to discover things in
such a way as is best, and profitablest to undeceive the people Isa. 29.16.
Surely their turning of things upsidowne shall be esteemed as the Potters
Clay. Their filling of men's ears with the nauseous noise of the Covenant, the
cause of God, Reformation, the extirpation of Heresy, Schism, Superstition,
is no otherwise (as they apply it) but hatching Cockatrice Eggs, and weaving
the Spiders web: It is the very same which the Prophet calls Ezekiel. 13.15.
Dawbing with untempered Mortar. When a man dwells in a ruynous house, the
Mason comes and Plasters it over, and makes him believe that all is well, then
the house falls, and smothers him: So by their lies they make sad the hearts of
the righteous whom the Lord makes not sad; that is, Isa. 59.15.
he that departs from evil, they brand him with the contemptible name of
Sectary, Schismatic, Regicide, Rebel, and strengthen the hand of the wicked
that he should not return from his wicked way Hos. 7.3.
They make their King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their
lies. Hence the wrath of God rises against them, cuts off Isa. 9.15.
head and tail, Root and Branch, and there is no remedy, 2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give ye understanding in all things.

7. Neither was it without a special providence of God that our WORD should be
the LORD OF HOSTS, theirs, THE COVENANT: Here now lay the great Cause betwixt
us and them, They for the Covenant, we for The Lord of Hosts, and as the Cause
thus stood betwixt us, so the Lord by a mighty hand, gave a remarkable Witness
from Heaven, on whose side the truth and right was. For as As the hand of God
upon that Idol was sufficient to convince the Philistims of the vanity of it,
an their madness: yet the were rather hardened in their Idolatry by it then
reclaimed: So I fear will be the condition here of some.
Dagon fell when the Ark came near it, so fell the Covenant (as another D^gon)
at the presence of the Lord of Hosts.

Since this great Victory, some of the Presbyterian Ministers here, have openly
declared, that there was an Achan in the Scots Army, it is true, there was so
indeed, but what was that Achan? Seeing they t^l^ us not, I shall do it for
them; the Cherem, or Cursed thing (I ^ake it) was the Covenant; this should
have been destroy^d, and therefore seeing their Cause was the Covenant, and the
Covenant Anathema, no marvel they fell in the day of Battle. Now that the
Reader may be of the same Opinion with me, I shall lay down many Reasons for
it. But before I speak of them, I desire that these things may be taken notice
of.

1. I have In a Book entitled, The snare is broken.
elsewhere clearly proved that the Covenant is sick of Jehorams Disease, the
Bowels of it are fallen out. It is a Covenant like Musgrum, or Toad-stoole,
though it grow, it has no root; not a word or warrant in holy Scripture, for
its justification, either in reference to the matter of it, or the manner, as
it was given, and taken. It is an Oath indeed, but contrary to the definition
of a religious and lawful Oath, a Covenant it is, but against the properties,
use, and end of a sacred, or holy Covenant; these things we have fully
manifested by the word of God, and reasons, and have answered to whatsoever
probably may be said in the defense thereof.

2. Howsoever they have set up Altars to THAT SHAMEFUL THING, and bow their
knee before it; yet have not any of them to this day (and I desire I hope such
as fear God, and have by others been seduced and deluded about this Covenant,
will now have their eyes open. It gives just cause to the buyer to suspect his
wares are naught, who is not willing to bring them forth to light for trial.
all men in all places to observe it well) fairly appeared in the behalf of
it, as taking it part by part, and proving every part. I say it again, (as
yet) they never came so nigh the Covenant as ^o prove, either the Groundwork,
matter, or form of it justifiable. That which they do, is thus, they tell us,
The General Assembly has approved it: So the Reverend Synod of Divines in
England, the Kirk allows it, Learned men of the reformed Churches beyond Sea
consent to it. But the Church of England (as some call it) Resolves that all
Counsels, and Synods, whither Provincial, National, or Oecumenicall Jer.
11.13.
they may err, and have erred in things appertaining to God, and the same is
professed by all Protestant Churches.

King Henry the 8. put out the name of the Pope, but allowed still his Laws. I
know some are well content that Popes and Prelates should go down, howsoever
they will walk in their steps, as to be Lords over Gods Heritage, and have
dominion over the faith and Consciences of men. Beza says De har. civil. mag.
puniendis.
that God never gave power to man for imposing Laws upon the Conscience, nor
can endure that any besides himself, should bear sway, or dominion over the
minds of men. Nevertheless, when these men speak great, and swelling words,
the KIRR, the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, the REVEREND SYNOD OF DIVINES; they look now
that men should Cajetan the Cardinal was wont to say, had it not bin for
Luther, the Pope would have made the Germans eat grass like Beasts: Now were
it not but that God raises up, some instruments to discover these men's
legerdemains, guiles, and devises, they would in time make people such I dolls,
and so brutish, as to believe whatsoever they should say, right or wrong.
fall down and worship them, yield subjection and obedience in points of
faith, to whatsoever is imposed upon them, under these big names, and titles,
howsoever they bring nothing (neither can they) from the word of God, for the
clear justification thereof.

But really, the Priests of Rome (in this particular) deal more plainly and
truly, and are truer to their own principles, then these men are. They say
right out that the Pope, in things belonging to faith Nullo casu errare potest.
Be jarm. de. just. l. 1. c. 7.
he can by no possible means err. when he sets forth a Decree Divinitus illi
praecu^sa est omnis via. Th: Bozius. l. 12. ^esig. etc. c. 16.
God stops every way unto him which might bring him into error, so that he
never was, he never shall be able to do ought against faith. Now grant this,
then whatsoever he devises, and imposes upon men, although there be not any
Scripture brought to confirm it, yet there is no need to question the same.
The Ministers of the Church of England, and Scotland, say, a General Assembly,
and Synod of Divines may err, and have erred in things appertaining to God.
Nevertheless, Magisterially, and Authoritatively, they will have their Acts
and decrees received (as this Covenant ^o be the Covenant of God) though
nothing do appear, wherefore it should be received, but ipse dixit, their
will, and bare word, and the great sound of a General Assembly.

Thus Reader, I have thought good to mind thee of, to wit, howsoever the
Presbyterian Ministers, both here, and elsewhere, cry up the Covenant, and in
their Pulpits make it half their work to speak against Covenant-breakers,
notwithstanding they have not by the word of God ever showed the same to be
lawful. I say more (and will abide to it) there is not one of them single,
Nunqu^m va^^ it aut valebit facere contra fidem. Boz. ^. 16. c. 8.
nor the whole College of them together, that can prove it to be the Covenant
of God. Pro. 14 15.
The simple beleiv^th every word, but the prudent man looks well to his
going. And now I come to the reasons, the Covenant being the Scots Cause, could
not but incense the Lord of Hosts, to jealousy and wrath against them,
considering the foul, and gross abuse thereof, and to what bad, and base uses
it is put: As,

1. This Covenant (as it wanders like Cain in the earth) is now made a common
Strumpet, as the Prophet says Eze. 16.15.
opens her feet to every one that passes by. It Is a cover for every pot, A
Scotch Army is raised to invade England, and by the Covenant lawful: and by
the same Covenant is unlawful, when the Kirk cannot prevail to have what
General they please.
a Fiddler for all Companies, a Cloak to any design; it is like a Dutch-mans
house, you may turn it up, or down, wear it which way or how you will. As it
will fit a Presbyterian, so it will serve a Cavaleer, or a Malignant likewise,
and as well: their King and his party, by it, can as fairly carry on their
interest of Tyranny, and Idolatry, as the other their way (which they falsely
call) the cause of God. And why not? For may not the former, abounding in their
own sense, and taking the liberty which the later do, say, the Church of Rome
is best reformed, according to the word of God, and by the Covenant: they are
bound in their places to seek the extirpation of the Presbyterian-Church,
Ministry, worship, and Government, as Heretical, Factious, Schismatical.
Cosmus Medicis, Duke of Tetruria, gave two Anchors for his impression, with
this word, Duabus, meaning it was good to have two holds. This Covenant carries
the like device, or Coat-Arms, two holds, yea ten, and they may be used any
way, put * forward, or backward, as men please, and Politicians know how to
turn and wind them so.

2. That the Lord of Hosts was against the Covenant, the Scots Cause, no
marvel, for if we will take the Presbyterian sense of it, the Covenant
enjoynes men to destroy the Churches and people of God, and to suppress the
gifts of God, and the Spirit of Christ in his Saints, and Servants. Yet so
(Caute si non cast) as Nero cladded the Christians in Bears skins, when he
perceived the Mastives otherwise would not devour them: so this great
wickedness (in the This is the Covenant Tongue. By this Covenant-Oath all
Independents ought to be expelled from the house of Parliament: yea not to sit
in any Court of Judicatory, to hear votes, and to determine the weighty causes
of Religion, and Church Reformation, but as offensive Rubs, and Remoras to he
removed, and only sound Presbyters, Lords and Commons to Rule. The implety of
Impunity page 12. It seems the Covenat in a Presbyterian sense destroys a man
in things outward, and temporal, as well as things spiritual, and inward.
Covenant Tongue) must be called, the extirpation of Heresy and Schism, and
under that color men may act the highest persecution, and the Covenant will
allow it. It is said, that the coming up of the Preaching Friars, was
purposely to suppress the Truth; and Tiberius made Caligulus his Successor,
that he might destroy these People. I will not say that it was in any man's
heart when this Covenant was first devised, that it should be a Snare, and a
pit, whereby to destroy true Religion, and the faithfulst Professors thereof;
but this I will say, as it is now interpreted (and some would have it executed)
one maine thing to be found in it is, the blood of the Prophets, and of the
Saints, and of the souls of the poor innocents, being like the Idols of the
Samoeds, whose mouths and eyes are all bloody: Or Hercules Image, which had a
string in his Tongue, and a Club in his hand, inficiet, or interficiet,
persuade, or kill. I have seldom heard of the like Covenant, unless that of
Charles the 5. who Vowed to make the Decrees of Trent, to be received by the
Sword. When he makes Inquisition for blood Psalm. 9.12.
he remembers them, he forgets not the cry of the humble.

3. This Covenant must needs be one of the things which God hates, and is an
abomination to him, because it is Prove. 6.19.
a false witness, that speaks lies, and sows discord among brethren. The
use and end of a lawful oath (as Pareus says) Vt lites and controversiae
fimanter Comment. ad heb. c. 6.16.
is that debates and controversies may cease. So the Apostle, Heb. 6.16.
An oath is the end of all strife. On the 3. Com: p. 75.
The taking of an Oath (says Mr. Elton) serves to further brotherly love, and
to confirm lawful peace and society between party and party, Country and
Country, Kingdom and Kingdom: And a little after, that Controversies which
hinder love, and Christian charity, may be ended. So Blakewel, word for word:
What a Makebate this Covenant is between man and man, Family and Family,
Church and Church, Nation and Nation, I may speak the less, considering our
present sad experience shows it abundantly. It is no Isa. 54 10
Covenant of peace, but an Ishmaelite, whose hand is against every man. As
flies sticking to a sore hinder the healing; so this Covenant (as a noisome
fly) keeps open the differences and breaches between brethren and neighbors,
obstructing the recovery and cure thereof. Gideon's Altar and Ensigns did carry
this motto: Judge. 6.23. New Transla. marg.
JEHOVAH SHALOM, that is, the Lord send peace: but on the Ensigns and Colors
of the Covenant, is engraven the mark of the beast, WAR AGAINST THE SAINTS,
covered over with a spetious pretense, See the Motto upon the Scots Colors
hanging at Westminster
For God and the King, for Religion, the Church, etc. As the Turks say, it is
for Mahomet that they make war upon the Christians? and the Popes plead it, in
ordine ad deum, that they supresse the truth, and persecute the professors of
it: so they make the Covenant to speak lies in hypocrisy. Woe unto them that
call evil good, that put darkness for light, and bitter for sweet.

4. That the Scots Covenant, and so their Cause was evil, and therefore the
Lord of Hosts fought against it; appears further thus: As it is a Canem
rabidum. Hier: Catalog. Script. Eccle.
mad dog (as Julian was called) biting where it should not; so it is a dumb dog
in the Presbyterian sense, not barking or biting where it should do, and where
there is just cause and reason for it. The Scripture says Genesis 9.6.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Number. 35.31.
Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer which is guilty of
death, but he shall surely be put to death. Deuteronomy. 19.13.
Thine eye shall not pity him, etc. Pro. 28.17.
Let no man stay him from the Pit. Now, howsoever it be acknowledged by the
Presbyterians, that the late King was a man of blood, and did most unnaturally
murder, and kill many thousands of his best Subjects, yet they say by the
Covenant Oath, men were bound, (although clearly against the Law of God) to
preserve his person, and not to put him to death, notwithstanding all the
innocent blood which he had shed, and other high crimes committed. As his
Excellency says, away with the Covenant if this be so; a Heathen could say,
Nihil honestum esse porest quod justicia vacet. Cicero. offic. lib. 3.
Nothing can be honest which wants justice. And it is a Maxim in Law Contractus
vel pacta contra legem prohibitam, n^^unt jure nulla. L. non dubinm. C. de 11.
l. ^bemujs nulli.
Prohibited contracts, or Covenants against Law, are by right nothing.

Again, Conditio turpis vel impossibilis vitiat actum. de Verb. Obligat.
A condition evil, or impossible, makes the Action void. Our Divines also
affirm the like Si factum. sit juramentum de rebus quae non sunt nostrae
pocetatis ill^t^^: Alsted: Ca^^: c. 15. p. 288.
An Oath is unlawful, being taken concerning things which are not in our
power. Nihil honestum esse porest quod justicia vacet. Cicero. offic. lib. 3.
It is Tyranny (says another) to oblige others unto impossible things. So
Rivel, Tyrannicum est ad res non possibiles ali^s ad stringere. Pareus Com. in
Genesis 24. v. 8
No man ought to be constrained by Oath to act any thing that is unjust. His
Reason is, Because obedience to Gods Commandments (which never disagree among
themselves) is to be preferred before all things. That it is not in man's power
to preserve the life of a Murderer (whither King or Subject) the word of God
clearly holds it forth (and so much I have in another place proved,) and
therefore it is Tyranny in the Covenant to force men to do that which is not in
their power, neither can they do it possibly: Or if they should, Nemo juramento
cogi debet ad aliquid inique perpetra^dum: Quia obedientia erga divina mandata
(quae inter se nunquam pugnant) Omnibus est praeferenda. Explicat. de Catalog.
3. prae. p. 90.
it were then a sinful and most unjust thing. Non tantum non obligat: sed si
observetur, auget reatum. Ames. cont. l. 4. c. 22.
Amesius goes further; If a man (says he) should swear that he would not do
his duty and office, he is so far in such a case from keeping his oath, that
keeping it, he increases his sin. So then, by this it appears, if men by the
Covenant did bind themselves not to do what God required of them, and what
their duty and office was to do, (namely not to put a Murderer and Tyrant to
death) yet they ought not to keep such an unlawful Oath or Covenant; but
rather repenting of it, fulfill the Commandment and will of God: Pro. 13.14.
The law of the wise is a fountain of life to depart from the snares of death.

5. Howsoever the Scots and some here cry up the Covenant, as they did the
Image which fell down from Jupiter; Great is Diana of the Ephesians:
Nevertheless (and let it be well minded) what the Covenant is, it is not yet
known; not the Negative or Affirmative parts of it: neither can the Takers of
it agree among themselves about the particulars contained therein. Some think it
was in taking, like the Jewish Manna in eating, of which a report goes, that it
tasted as every one would have it: so it is supposed, that the Covenant might
be applied every way, and to any thing, as men did desire to please their
pallat. But here was not that way which David desired the Lord to lead him in,
Psalm. 27.11. Margent.
A way of plainness; here would be no Jer. 4.2. Juramentum licitum est, de
rebus veriscerto cognitis Pola^. Syntag. l. 9. c. 23. p. 628.
swearing in judgment, that is, consideratly, knowingly, and understanding what
they did. But here rather, the doctrine of blind obedience, and the Colliars
faith was countenanced: and what Hos: Confut. Petti. c. 14. p. 18.
Hosius says, ignorance in most things is best of all: to know nothing is to
know all things. And Cusan; Obedientia irrationalis, est consummata and
perfectissima, scilicet, quando obeditur, sine inquisitione rationis: sicut
jumentum obedit domino suo. Cusan. Exercit. l. 6.
Irrational obedience is the fullest and perfectest; that is, when obedience
is showed, without enquiry or asking any reason as a beast obeys his Master.

This blind obedience in taking the Covenant I much pity, and howsoever the
time of this ignorance God winked at; nevertheless let men take heed of
presumptuous sins, as not to plead for Baal against knowledge and conscience:
the Lord of Host has begun to cast dung in the face of it, and he will every
Romans 1.18.
day more and more Romans 1.18.
declare his wrath from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.

6. That the Covenant, the Scots Cause, was the Achan, who will not think so,
if he duly consider, how after a Scots trick, it serves to make men hypocrites
and liars: Of their King, made to Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit imperare.
dissemble before God and the world, and that by the Covenant. I shall speak no
more, only it is worthy of note, as one says of Traitors, Proditores, etiam
ijs quos anteponunt, invisi sunt. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.
they are odius to those, even whose instruments they are: So many men,
although they make use of the Covenant (as a Traitor to further their design)
yet is the same detested, and hated by them: The Covenant usually has been
taken, as men do physic, in extremity, and for necessity sake; not but the
purge is bitter and loathsome to them: so in extremity to prevent sequestration
and the Kinks curse, they have swallowed it, but sore against their wills.
Neither would they have done so, if necessity had not been: As a monster
occasioneth grief to those that bred it; even so, my mind gives me, the
Covenant is now matter of shame and sorrow to some, who had a chief hand in
the first promoting of it.

7. Neither in the last place may it be forgotten, as another cause, wherefore
the Covenant could not stand before the Lord of Hosts: Namely, because (as it
is used) it serves to heighten and strengthen formality, profaneness, and
looseness of life: What an enemy it is unto Gospel Truths, and the power of
godliness, I have showed before: this only here may be added, how it leads men
unto humane Forms, and builds them in a careless, spiritlesse, and fruitless
worship. The Spaniards say of Aquinas, he that knows not him, knows not any
thing; and he that knows him, knows all things. The Covenant is the Scots
Aquinas; he that takes it is no Malignant, no Sectary or Schismatic, but Vox
pietatis, excusatio iniquitatis. Aug. in Psalm. 38.
a geud Christian: whosoever refuses it, is an enemy to the Kirk, the work of
Reformation, and the great cause of God: so that the Covenant is lifted up
above faith, and the grace of God in Christ; as if it were that man of sin,
opposing and exalting it self above all that is called God. The Turk keeps a
lock on the crown of his head, thinking he shall be drawn up into heaven by it:
such is the vanity and madness of some, as they think God loves them, and that
they shall be saved, and upon this account, because they are Covenanters, not
having besides, any appearance of piety, or fear of God before their eyes. Jer.
50.38.
It is a land of graven Images, and they are mad upon their idols. Josh. 7.12.
I will not be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.

Having thus showed, that the Lord of Hosts was above the Covenant, and why
against it: I shall now in the Close, humbly propound something to the
consideration of our State. The Numb. 21.8.
brazen S^rpent, howsoever set up by Gods appointment, yet afterward was 2
King. 18.4.
broken in pieces, being abused to Idolatry. If this Covenant had been of God
(which never was but So the Temple, howsoever built by Gods commandment; yet
being abused, and made an idol (as this Covenant is) the Lord would have it to
be destroyed.
Nehushtan, bras at first) it being now made an Idol, and like Judge. 8.27.
Gideons ephod, a snare to Israel, England I mean; whether it be not fit
(following the good example of that great Reformer Hezekiah) that it should be
put down by public Authority: Methinks there should not any relick or
monument of it remain in the Land, but what hangs up in Westminster Hall: and
the rather, seeing the Lord of Hosts has gone before us, and cast the first
stone at the Hulalah.

The manna which the Lord gave Israel, when it Exo. 16.20.
stanke and bred worms (they having kept it against the word of the Lord) they
threw it away. Flowers, though they pleased us well when they were fresh; yet
when the sweetnesss of them is lost, when they stink, and are offensive, we
cast them off: Had this Covenant (like Manna) been good at first, a lovely and
sweet flower, (which never was:) Nevertheless, seeing it is now a worm in our
bowels, and most offensive, something should be done in a public way, to show
our disowning and rejection of it. I know that maxim in Logic, Arist. 2 Pol.
tollatur abusus, maneat usus seu substantia: but that rule cannot be applied
here, because this Covenant was sinful and unlawful in the very matter and
substance of it. Isa. 57.14.
Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of
the way of my people.

8. Concerning this Victory, it is further related, thus: They staid only two
shocks, and soon left their Train; their Foot threw down their Arms, and
both Horse and Foot ran several ways.

I have read of a certain mercenary Soldier, who would with many disgraceful
speeches exclaim against great Alexander: Memmon the General of Darius Army
lent him a blow with his lance, saying, that he had hired him to fight against
Alexander, and not to rail at him. It is not credible, how the Scots Soldiers
aspersed his Excellency with their bold and base reproaches: but in Battle were
like the Satyr, that winded his horn, and ran away from the sound of it;
fulfilling that saying in the Prophet, Isa. 33.14.
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. And here was another clear
demonstration, that the Lord took our part; and by his acting and appearing in
this manner against them, manifested himself an Enemy to them and their Cause.

It is usually Gods manner, when he comes to visit Isa. 10.6.
an hypocritical Nation, and purposes to tread them down like the mire of
the street, for maintaining an unjust Cause, to send Levit. 26.36.
a faintness into their hearts, and Jer. 49.5.
bring a fear upon them, Verse. 29.
a fear on every side, and Eze. 7.18.
horror shall cover them: then Job 12.5.
he will take away the heart of the chiefest of them, Jer. 51.30.
their might shall fail, Psa. 76.5.
their stout-hearted be spoiled, and none of the men of might shall find their
hands: their men (at such a time) shall be as women, and Isa. 30.7.
their strength to sit still. Isa. 13.7, 8
All hands shall be faint, and every man's heart shall melt, and they shall be
afraid: Pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as
a woman that travelleth; they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall
be as flames.

How this Job 5.21.
dreadful sound comes in their ear, and Ps. 48.5, 6.
through fear they have away: It is

1. Because Job 37.22.
with God is terrible Majesty. Now 2 Chr. 14.14.
the fear of him comes upon them, and Ex. 15.16.
by the greatness of his arm they are still, and Mic. 7.17.
afraid: When they hear, Judge. 7.20, 21.
the sword of the Lord and of Gideon, all the host runs, flies, cries 1 Samuel
woe unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hand of this mighty God? Rev.
6.16.
or hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb? Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not, because
the Lord did drive them, Jer. 46.15.

2. Trembling and anguish seizes on them, because their enemies are Gods
friends. And howsoever at other times they scoff the people of God, and set
light by them; yet in Battle, their appearance and presence is terrible and
dreadful to them. Ezekiel. 32.
I will make many people amazed at thee, and their Kings shall be horribly
afraid of thee. Deu. 2.25. and 11.25.
I will put the dread of thee, and the fear of thee upon Nations, who shall
hear report of thee, and shall tremble. Jos. 2.9.
Your terror is fallen upon us, that all the Inhabitants of the land faint
because of you. Jos. 5.1.
Their hearts melted, neither was their spirit in them any more because of the
children of Israel. Thus Job 17.8
the innocent shall stir himself up against the hypocrite: and howsoever
behind their backs they shall be called a Sectarian Army, and Antichrists
soldiers: yet when they come face to face, they are a dread and a terror, and
a great fear unto them: and no marvail, mark the reason Ps. 14.5.
for God is in the congregation of the righteous, and breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, and the Chariot he burns with fire.

No marvail they throw away their Arms, and fly, Horse and Foot, when God
strikes their hearts with inward stinging terrors: this was signified by the
Exo. 23.20. Deuteronomy. 7.20. Josh. 24.12.
hornets. Deuteronomy. 32.25.
The sword without, and terror within shall destroy. As a Theif flies before
the pursuer, and dares not ^ight or look back, knowing what he has done, and
how his condition is: so men being conscious to the falsehood and injustice of
their Cause, have no courage in Battle; but through the horror and dread of a
guilty Conscience, with sorrow and shame fly before their enemies.

4. Fear and faintness is upon them, because now they begin to consider the
great things which the Lord has done for their enemies: What remarkable
deliverances and victories they have formerly had, how he has evermore blessed
the labors of their hands, and made them successful and prosperous
wheresoever they come: This coming to their mind (with thoughts of Gods
revenging hand formerly upon them forth i^deceit and hypocrisy, in acting the
same thing which now they do) it convinces them that the others have a
rightful cause: they, (...), haters of God, and fighters against God and
Christ. Jer. 33.9.
When the nations of the earth shall hear all the good that I do unto thee,
they shall fear and tremble, for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity
that I procure unto thee. Saul seeing the Lord was with David, 1 Samuel 18.28, 29.
he was the more afraid of him: howsoever some men make no profitable and good
use, in beholding Gods mighty Actings for his people; nevertheless, afraid
they are of such with whom they see Gods presence, and appearance thus to be:
As the Lord said of Noah and his sons, Genesis 9.2.
the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth:
so there falls and lies a dread and fear upon these men, although (as Saul did
David) they hate them, and are enemies to them continually.

5. And in a word, they are afraid Psalm. 65.8.
at Gods tokens, what desolations he has made in the earth. Who knows the
power of thine anger; whilst they consider what others have suffered, for
hyporisie, falsehood, cruelty, and other misdemeanors, they cannot but quake and
tremble to think how the like wrath is pouring out now upon them; yea greater,
deeper, heavier, being for hypocrisy and profaneness of life, far worse and
viler than many Nations whom the Lord has scattered and destroyed for such
sins. Psalm. 66.5.
Come and see the works of God, he is terrible in his doing toward the children
of men. Isa. 42.18.
Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind that ye may see.

Again, on the other hand, if they are the people, and it be the cause which
the Lord loves and likes, and will defend, he will in Battle put courage and
strength into them, Lev. 26.6.
None shall make them afraid, Psalm. 112.8.
their heart is established, and they shall not be afraid until they see
their desire upon their enemies: And no marvel, for Isa. 12.2.
the Lord JEHOVAH is their strength, Deuteronomy. 7.21.
a mighty and terrible God among them, Psalm. 74.12.
working salvation in the mids of the earth. As one set on a high rock, or
standing upon a sure and invincible Tower may look and laugh at all his
enemies below, not caring what they can do possibly against him, how fiercely
and furiously soever they assault him: so they, who have God for their rock and
tower, though they Psalm. 23.4.
walk in the valley of the shadow of death; though their enemies are two to
one, yea ten to one, and have all the conveniences, accommodations, and
advantages that their hearts can wish: yet they need fear no evil; for he
Psalm. 118.7.
that takes their part with them that helps them, will let them see their desire
upon them that hate them. Isa. 28.29.
This also comes from THE LORD OF HOST which is wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in working.

9. If by the return of prayer we may learn any thing of the mind of God: in
this likewise we have a full and clear testimony given us, that the Lord loved
us, and approved our Cause.

This thing his Excellency has well observed: In his letter to the Ministers
in Edinburgh Castle.
Did not you (says he) solemnly appeal and pray? did not we so? and shall we
after all these our prayers, fastings, tears, expectations and solemn Appeals,
call these bare Events? The Lord pity you.

Some men are like little children, who cannot read unless it be in their own
Book: what gracious Answers and special returns of prayer the Lord vouchsafes
unto others; here they can see nothing of God, nothing of his power, goodness,
justice, and faithfulness; nothing of his justifying and owning a righteous
Cause, and his just displeasure against lying and falsehood: It is only a bare
Event which they behold, and nothing else; to such gross darkness of heart
are they given up, and delivered over.

It was a law among the Assyrians, that if any did fall sick, he should ask
counsel of those, that had been visited with the like sickness, by what
means and way they were recovered. If you ask of Exo. 17.11.
Moses, Psalm. 56.9.
David, 2 Chronicles. 14.
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 20.
Jehosaphat, 2 King. 19.
Hezekiah, when they fought against their Enemies (who were more in number, and
mightier then they) how out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in
fight, subdued Kingdoms, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens: They
would say, The Lord 1 Chr. 5.20.
helped them, and delivered the enemies into their hands, because they made
their supplications and prayers unto him.

When God purposes to bestow any special favor upon his People, he moves
their hearts before hand to pray for it: How the Lord prepared the heart, even
filled the souls of many thousand precious people with the Spirit of
Supplication, it is well known, and our Army found the strength, and fruit
thereof, in the day of Battle. When we see Clouds over our heads, laden, and
full with rain, we think it will not be long before the Earth receive the bles
sing of it from God. He that had seen what fulness of God, what enlargment of
the Spirit there was in Prayer for our Army, might through faith, have foreseen
the Victory, and said, God will send Ezekiel. 34.26.
SHOWERS OF BLESSING, Psalm. 68.9.
a PLENTIFUL RAIN, Rain of Liberallities (as the Hebrew is) in giving
Salvation to England. Men at Sea labor to bring themselves upon such Points,
or Ports, as they may receive good Wind to bring them home. We know Psalm.
33.16, 17.
there is no King saved by the multitude of an Host, a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength, an Horse is a vain thing for safety. The Battle
is not man's, but Gods; his right hand, and holy Arm, is the wind which brings
us home, gets the Victory for us. And knowing this, our labor was, to bring
our Army by Prayer, upon that Port, or Point, where we might see Jehovah riding
upon the Wings of the Wind, girding our Army with strength in the day of
Battle, and the Enemies as Chafe which the WIND drives away.

Fulmen adversus hosts, imbrem ad refocillandum exercitum. Euse. Hist Ec., d.
3. c. 9.
Eusebius reports, that the Christians by prayer obtained lightning against
their Enemies, and rain to refresh the Army. What less by Prayer obtained we,
but on our part Victory, and great deliverance? Against the Enemy he sent out
his Arrows, and scattered them; he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them.
Psalm. 56.9.
When I cry unto thee, then shall mine Enemies turn back, this I know, for God
is for me Psalm. 66.20.
Blessed be God, which has not turned away my Prayer, nor his mercy from me.

It is a rule in Art, and daily experience shows it, contraries placed together
do mutually illustrate each other. That there was Prayer made for the
success, and welfare of the Scots Army, Ezekiel. 3.21.
Weeping and Supplications, upon the high places. Mal. 2.13
A covering the Altar with Tears, with weeping, and with crying. I say, for
their prosperity, and our overthrow, who knows it not. Ezekiel. 8.14.
Women weeping for Tammuz, the Covenant I should have said. Now seeing the
Lord, when they did cry, and shout, did shut out their Prayer, covered himself
with a cloud, that their Prayer should not pass through: What should this
signify? I shall forbear to give them mine own Opinion I desire they would
lay their hands on their hearts, and speak truly, whither hence they have not
just cause to think: that Ps. 10.97.
their Prayer became sin, or Pro. 289.
an abomination; or that the Lord Ps. 8.4.
was angry against it, or, he heard them not, because Isa. 1.15.
their hands were full of blood, and 1 Timothy 2.8.
wrath, or Ps. 66.18.
regarded iniquity in their hearts, or, as it is said of the Job. 27.9.
Hypocrite, Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? It is true,
of some God speaks, Jer. 11.
Though they cry to him ( Ezekiel. 7.18.
cry in his ears with a loud voice) he will not hearken to them. Though they
Pro. 1.28
seek him early, with much fasting, and Jer. 14.1^
spread forth their hands, he will Isa. 1.15.
hide his face from them. But who are these? not a national Church standing
for the Holy Covenant, for the great cause of God, and Reformation, not men
zealouslie earnest for the purity of divine worship, and Enemies to Idolatry,
superstition, heresy, Schism, profaneness: No, the Prophets tell us
otherwise: these were Isa. 1.4.
A sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, Mic. 3.4.
a seed of evil doers, Rulers of Sodom, Ver. 23.
rebellious Princes, and Companions of thieves Mic. 2.3.
who hated the good, and loved the evil. Whose Jer. 14.14.
Prophets Prophesied lies, the Lord sent them not, neither spoke unto them:
They Prophesied to the people a false Vision and divination, a thing of naught,
and the deceit of their own heart.

These people whose prayers God would not hear, and from whom he had hid his
face, were an HYPOCRITICAL Nation, Isa. 10.
dissemblers in their heart. Jer. 4.2.
AN ASSEMBLY OF TREACHEROUS MEN, Jer. 15.17.
OF MOCKERS, such as would deceive every man his Neighbor, and would not speak
the truth, but teach their Tongues to speak lies, and wearied themselves to
commit iniquity. Sons, not of Jacob, but Jer. 42.20.
of the Sorceresse, Children of Transgression, a seed of falsehood, of the
Adulterer, and of the Whore.

It is true, such a Nation the Lord would not hear, neither would his eye
pity them; but did appoint them for Famine, Pestilence, Captivity, and the
fearful Sword of War: But what then? Can it be showed in holy Scripture, that
a pure Kirk, holding fast the Covenant of God, and having under hand the great
work of Reformation, seeking God by fasting and Prayer, in a righteous and just
cause, were not only denied of his presence and pretection, but left to the
Sword of Heretics, and cruel persecutors to be devoured?

I remember I have read somwhere, that whilst Pompey prospered, and Rome
flourished, Cato stoutly held and defended a divine providence; but when he saw
Pompey overthrown by Caesar, his body cast upon the shore, without honor of
Burial, and himself exposed to danger of Caesar's Army, he changed his
Opinion, denying that there was any Divine providence, but all things set out
by chance. The time was, when the Presbyterians, Scots, and English, spoke much
of Divine providence. In Victories and deliverances they could see much of God,
I mean, when the Prelates were going down, and they thought to have had as
great power to persecute; when like proud Haman, they thought that the seducing
the men whom the Parliament would honor, and Mordecai and his people should be
all destroyed, then indeed every victory and deliverance against the Kings
party (in Books and Sermons) must have a divine mark, and Character of Gods
presence; then it was the War of God, the Cause of God, yea, and confirmed to
be so, by Gods Actings, and appearances for us. But se^ng now their way (like
Baal) is like to plead for it self, sits upon a wooden horse, and must stand
of it self, (as it will) if it be of God, with Cato they have Some report that
Manna at first was in eating very sweet, and did relish well, but afterward,
through the murmuring, and unthankfullnesse of the people, it had no savor, or
good taste. That these men see not so much of God in his Dispensations, have
lost that relish and sweet taste of them which formerly they had, they may
thank themse^lves, this is of their ingratitude, and murmuring against God,
and Moses.
changed their Opinion, nothing now but bare events, success proves nothing,
all things come alike, etc. Howsoever the Victories, and deliverances which
they so cried up, as to have on them the visible stamp, and Character of Gods
owning the Cause, were not by many degrees in several particulars, so eminent,
and remarkable, as these are of whom we speak.

Now who can but pity the people thus deluded, and abused by these men? And
what has been the Hos. 15.1.
Snare on Mizpah, and the Net spread upon Tabor, the Zech. 13.4.
rough Garment whereby they have deceived the simple; but chiefly their long
Prayers, frequent Fastings for the prosperity of the Scots Army, bitter
exclamations, and invectives against the present Government. Those who hawk for
Birds, make a stale of the Owl, and so the silly Birds, whilst they are
staring about her, are taken. For what serves some men's sour faces, bowing
down the head as a Bulrush, covering the Altar with tears, with weeping, and
with cryings, throwing all the curses of the Law at Magistrates: but as a bait
to catch silly Birds, simple people; for whilst they stand gazing, on these
men, as at some strange Creature (a wonder to see so much rebellion, malice,
hypocrisy, covered under the cloak of a holy Covenant, the cause of God,
extirpation of Heresy, Schism, profaneness) they fall into the Net of
destroying, and undoing themselves. Isa. 58.34.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Why have we afflicted
our souls, and thou take no notice? Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness. Isa. 59.1, 2.
Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear
heavy that it cannot hear, but your iniquities have separated between you, and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear.

10. How exceedingly the Lord at this time appeared for us, and gave witness
to the Justice of our Cause, will be the more perspicuous and clear, if former
Victories, and deliverances be duly considered: that is, what God has done
for us in England, and Ireland, and how he has all along gone forth with this
Army, since it was first raised, still upholding the same cause which, by the
Scots (to their shame, and loss) is now opposed.

It is true, the cause of God (this public righteous Cause which is now held
forth by the Parliament of England) has found Enemies of several kinds, of
all sorts, and sice: As the Trent Fathers, howsoever among themselves they
could not agree, yet to oppose, and persecute Luther, therein, unanimously
accorded together: So the Enemies of this Commonwealth, although there be among
them some difference, (and that not a little, as being some Papisticall, others
prelaticall, some Presbyteriall) yet here they all center: and are one in
malice, and revenge, in their design, and plot all one; as seeking every one
of them, the overthrow of this present Government.

A Painter being Commanded by the Turk to paint every Nation in his habit,
Painted the Germain naked; and being asked the Cause, Answered, he could not
prescribe him a particular kind of habit, he was so delighted with Novelties.
If it were my task to set out here, to the life, what the design, and plot is,
of the Enemy (I mean) wherein they agree altogether against us: I could not do
better (to have it truly understood) then to compare it to the naked Germain;
for one while it has upon it, Scarlet, or Royal Rev. 12.3
Red, other while an Irish Pro. 7.9.
black; sometimes a Scotch Ezekiel. 23.56.
Blew; thus there is a changing, and shifting of Colors (from Red to Black,
from Black to Blew) as they see occasion of advantage; yet so, as but one body,
the plot, and design still the same.

In this combination (says the Parliament) the Popish, An Act of Thanksgiving
for setting a part Tuesday, October. 8. 1650.
Prelaticall, Profane, and Malignant Parties, stand behind the Curtain, and
seemed for a season to be quite laid aside; that the cause of God, the
Covenant, and work of Reformation, might bear the name.

It is true, they did so, here now was laid aside (in Appearance) Red, and
Black, and the naked Germain comes forth all in Blew: having on his forehead,
RELIGION: and under the name of Religion, the extirpation of our Religion,
Laws, and Liberty, is intended. But the Lord of Host, who had before delivered
our Army (and us with it) out of the Paw of the Lion, and the Bear (Royalists
and Irish) the same God, by weak means delivered us from that insulting
Enemy, who had defied the Army of the living God. If we hear one Cock Crow,
and no more, there is some hope, and probability the day is breaking; but if
all, it is taken for certain, and out of doubt. In many Victories which the
Lord has given us, so much has appeared (being looked on, single, and a part)
as we might hopefully say, Englands great day of deliverance from the Tyranny
of Kings, and Priests is at hand. But when we consider successes, and
victories, every where (in England, in Ireland, in Scotland,) so seasonable,
and wonderful, as no other Nation almost has ever heard, or been made
partaker of: we should not glorify God in those great things which he does for
us, unless (beleiving his works) we did say, The Lord is creating England a
rejoicing, and her people a joy.

Judge. 13.23.
If the Lord meant to ^ill us, he would not have showed us all these things.
That Deuteronomy. 23.14.
Jehovah walks in the midst of our C^mp, to deliver them, and to give up the
Enemies before them, makes one Army a blessing in the Earth; no Weapon that is
formed against it does prosper: And for the Machavilion Counsels, traitorous
devises, and all endeavors of the Enemy, here and every where (whither Popish,
prelaticall, Irish, Scottish) we see still, like Arrows they fall on their own
heads; are not these things sufficient evidences, and demonstrations that the
Lord takes our part? is, Emanuel, God with us, and with our cause? Surely let
the Enemy, (like another Pharaoh) harden himself, and in the time of his
distress, trespass yet more against the Lord, as Ahaz did: Yet we for our
parts, shall not be unbeleiving, but believe, yea, and further be assured, from
these present actings and appearances of God for us: that he will mainetaine
this Cause of ours, against all Enemies, in spite of all their falsehoods,
lies, Hypocrisies, never so artificially, and deceitfully cloaked, and covered
over, with the cause of God, the Covenant, Reformation, Praying, Fasting.

When Balak, and Balaam (King and Prophet) had done what they could, turned
every stone, and tried every way (from place to place) what they could do
against Israel, by their Sorceries and Enchantments; and perceiving all to be
in vain, it is said, Numb. 24.25.
Balaam rose up, and went, and returned to his place, and Balak also went his
way; doubtless as convinced that the Lord was so with Israel, as they should
not prosper in that way and course which they had taken up against him. Will
the Enemies of this Commonwealth be worse and more blind then they? What
blinder then Balak, and Balaam? It seems they are, for howsoever they have gone
as far in essays, and trialls, and found no better success, yet have they not
the understanding the others had, that is, to give over, and cease, as they
did, and go every one to his own home.

Balak brought Balaam up to the high places of Baal; so has the Enemies
design been Namely by the late King and his wife, who made it their
Masterpiece, and groundwork, to have in the first place the Priests of Rome,
and England, for their asistants. Of her it may be said, as Livia, gravis in
Remp. matter. Tac. An. l. 1.
brought unto the House of Baal. The Priests of Room have built Altars,
offered Sacrifices, In the Popish Synagogues beyond Sea, the late King was
every where prayed for, that he might prevail against the Parliament.
and called upon their Gods, their He Saints, and She Saints, for aid and
assistance; and the Parliament of England by them has been cursed with Bell,
Book, and Candle. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. The Lord who
Psalm. 20.2.
sends his people help (not from the high places of Baal) but from his
Sanctuary, and supporteth them out of Sion, turned that curse, into a blessing,
unto us. Besides, whatsoever the Baalimites could otherwise do (as the Pope,
Cardinals, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, with the English Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Cannons, and the rest of that Viperous brood:) either by their
counsels, Policies, There have bin many great Collections among the Papists
(as voluntary gifts) in all Popish Countries, for to furnish the late King with
moneys in his war against the Parliament, besides the great sums he had from
them other ways.
Purses, or what way else they have contributed, from time to time, all the
furtherance, and help they could. But as a wet Sack wherewith a naked man is
covered, is so far from arming him against the cold, that it does increase his
shivering: So this Enemies Design hereby, was so far from being helped, or
effected, as this proved a means (the Lords good hand so ordering it) of its
greater fall and ruin. Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills,
and from the multitude of Mountains; truly in the Lord our God, is the
Salvation of Israel, Isa. 3.23.

2. As Balak brought Balaam Number. 32.14.
into the Field of Zophim, that is, of the So is the word by the Learned
Interpreted.
Spies, or Scowt-watches: So the Enemies great cause, or design has been here
likewise witness; the Popish, prelatical, and Malignant party, who have watched
all opportunities to raise Hurliburleys, and Commotion, both in England, and
Ireland, and where ever they have spied any advantage, or imagined the least
help of success, multitudes have made themselves ready to engage against the
Parliament. What Isa. 29.20.
watching there has been for iniquity, Psalm. 37.32.
to slay the righteous; pretended to be for the Protestant Religion,
Privileges of Parliament, and the liberty of the Subjects, now for the
Covenant, and reformation, it is well known by what the blood-thirsty Irish,
and desperate English Cavaleers, have often attempted; but he that sits in
Heaven laughed them to scorn, so as their taking Counsels together their
Associations, conspiracies, and insurrections, in City, and Country, was to
them no otherwise then a Quagmire, or Irish-bog, the more they stirred, the
deeper they sanke, and faster they were. Isa. 47.11.
Mischief did fall upon them, and they were not able to put it off, and
sudden desolation which they did not know. Our Army Psalm. 18.42.
Beating them small as the dust before the wind, casting them out as the dirt
in the street.

3. As Balak when he saw he could not attain his end by carrying Balaam unto
the two former places, he brings him then Number. 23.28.
unto the top of Peor, to Deuteronomy. 3.2^
Beth-Peor, the House, or Temple of his God, the Kirk in which his Idol was,
the enemies design, their great cause (after they have Ezekiel. 9.5
wearied themselves to commit iniquity, and with their lies) at length is
brought to the holy place where (under color of Religion, and reformation) it
may be the more strengthened, and better carried forth. But as Solomon says
Ezekiel. 24.1^.
The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, how much more when he brings
it with a wicked mind. As the Lord here saw Si mulata aequitasnon est aequitas
sed ini qua duplex; quia iniquitas est simulatio, Aug. Super. Ps. 63.
more dissimulation, Hypocrisy, falsehood, then on the high places of Baal, or
Field of Zaphim, so does the power of his anger the more appear; here the Lord
will show himself that he has not pleasure in wickedness, is of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity. And howsoever (perhaps) they might flatter themselves,
and think, He would hide his face, and never see it, or say, How does he know?
Can he judge through the dark Clouds? Nevertheless he did see their falsehood,
and juggling (how cunningly soever covered) and has left them (as Lots Wife) to
be a Pillar of Salt, a memorable example unto posterity, not to provoke the
Almighty, and terrible God in such sort; for as Eliphaz says in Job, The
Congregations of Hypocrites shall be desolate. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, Job. 15.43.
and Pro. 21.27
I am afraid of thy Judgments.

Two things I find more acted at Beth-Peor.

First, Balaams wicked Doctrine, who Counnselled Balak to lay a Stumbling Block
before the Children of Israel, whereby they might be occasioned to rebel
against the Lord, and so destroyed.

2 Balaks putting off his Prophet without any reward; when he saw he had
received no profit by him, and that all his juggling, and Hocus-Pocus, helped
him not. O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom thou have made them all.
What was that Declaration which the Scots lately counseled their King to set
forth, but It carries the look and face of their Kirk.
Balaams Doctrine, a stumbling block, a snare, a pit? For what was the maine
drift, and scope thereof: but rebellion against God, and man; namely to have
the English rise up in Arms against the Magistrate, that so they might be cut
off. I say themselves, their Families, Wives, and Children utterly undone: and
then the Scots to come in for our Gued, or Goods.

As for the other particular, their King perceiving now that he cannot carry on
his design by their Wiles, wherewith they thought to have beguiled England.
(No more then Balaam helped Balak by his Enchantments, and Sorceries,) he is so
far from having any thoughts to reward them; as that he is upon the point to
cast them off, and to cloth the naked German again with Red, and Black: as
making use no more of the Blew: for he sees the Covenant so ominous, and
unhappy, as no design or plot ever prospers that goes forth under the name of
it. As if God had spoken of it. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed
shall thou be in the Field; cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and
cursed shall thou be when thou go out. And thus much of Balak and Balaam, or
the pararell between them, and the Enemies of this Commonwealth, Isa. 44.11.
in acting their Designs, or cause alike. Let them all be gathered together,
let them stand up, yet they shall fear, and be ashamed together.

I should now speak something in Answer to such objections as might be made
against the thing here stood for: something I shall write, although a larger
discourse the Reader shall have in the Second part.

Object. 1. Solomon says, Eccl. 9.1, 2 Judicium carnis de administratione dei
erga personas ipsas. Junius in Loc. Est autem hic. descrip^io elegantissima
totius judicj carnalis. ibid. Sententia carnis de administratione dej in mundo.
Gartw. in Loc.
No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before him: All things
come alike to all, there is one event to the wicked, and to the righteous.
Hence it follows, that nothing can be concluded from Successes, Victories, or
outward deliverances, as if thereby it might be proved, that God should own
and justify one man's cause, more then another.

Answ. 1. It is a great Question whither these are the words of Solomon, some
say not, but the Atheist, or carnal reason, is here brought in, denying Gods
providence, and framing an Objection thus. If things here below were ordered
and administered by a just, and wise God, some distinction then, would be seen
between men, and men, in order to their condition, and events of things; but
wicked men, and such whose cause is sinful, and unjust prosper, and have as
great success as the righteous, and those whose cause is right and good. Ergo.
An Argument like Catos, after Pompey was beaten by Caesar: and the same in
effect which the Scots, and English Presbyters, now maintain, to darken the
glory of God, shining forth in his works. But,

2. Admit another interpretation, nevertheless, by these words, All things
come alike to all, etc. It cannot be meant, as if nothing could be gathered
from Gods dispensations in the World, or that Events, and successes prove
nothing: for such a sense is a plain contradiction unto other Scriptures.
Psalm. 34.15.16.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, his face is against them that do
evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the Earth. When he saved Noah,
and his Family from drowning, and left the rest to perish in the great waters:
delivered Lot out of Sodom, and gave up the Sodomites to be burnt with fire,
and brimstone: brought Israel safe through the red Sea, and left the Egyptians
there to be overwhelmed, and destroyed. Here all things are not alike, neither
is there one event to the wicked and to the righteous. Besides, by the
deliverance, and good success, which the Lord gave Noah, Lot, and the
Israelites, it did appear (and had there been nothing else, that same thing
was enough to prove) their way and cause to be better then the others. It is
therefore most true, as one says Jermin upon Eccles. 9.3. p. 312.
As God beholds men who are not alike, so he beholds them in a manner not
alike. And much to the same purpose are Salvians words, Intelligis generalem
quidem esse in omnes domini vis^onem, sed meritorum fieri disparilitate di^^
versum, boni quippe aspi^iun tur ut conserventur, mali ut disperdantur. Salvian
de Gub: dej. l. 2.
Thou understandest the sight of God to be general upon all, but to be made
different by diversity of their deserts, for the good are beheld that they may
be preserved, the wicked, that they may be destroyed: so he,

3. Should the place be understood that nothing can be proved by Events, and
Successes, there would then little use many times be made of Gods pow er,
justice, goodness: or any cause to ascribe glory and praise unto him, for his
great and marvelous works: for suppose he have saved a people by a special,
and mighty hand, and destroyed their enemies in an unwonted and extraordinary
sort; and all this, after both have solemnly, and often appealed unto Heaven,
that the Lord would judge the cause betwixt them; yet must not any man
(beholding these things) say, that God in all this, either gave any sign or
token to the Conquerors of approving their Action, or that they subdued, had
not a just and righteous cause.

Now what place is there here (if such Events, and successes speak nothing) to
sing the Song of Moses: Great and mavelous are thy works O Lord God Almighty,
just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. As for the grounds of the War
between them, it is possible many may be ignorant thereof, and therefore if
they may neither say, nor think of the cause by the events, be they whatsoever:
here then they must either hold their peace, or offer the Sacrifice of fools.
It is a rule in Aristotle, Ex vero semper sequitur verum: but this Doctrine
that Events prove nothing, cannot be Sound, because such an absurdity, and
untruth follows thereupon.

4. Had these men been living (who teach that nothing can be concluded from
success, or event) when the There is a^ much now in a solemn appealing unto
God, as there was in casting a Lot; so that if men (being at difference) do
appeal, and that before the World, unto God, that he should judge the cause
between them. No question but the Lord now upon this appealing to him, will
do, as formerly he did in the Lot: give a most righteous sentence by his
ordering hand of providence. And therefore it seems to me, that had a Scot, and
others of his mind, bin found out by a Lot, as Achan was, they would not have
allowed it, or stood to it; but have said, One event to all.
Lot fell to Achan, Jonathan Jonas, and others: they could easily have evaded
it, had it been their case; as for example, they would have pleaded, all things
come alike to all, there is one event to the wicked, and to the righteous: And
therefore whatsoever the success or event be of the lot, nothing thence can be
inferred, as to prove a man guilty, or that any distinction or difference
should be put between person and person, Cause and Cause. But what cannot men
do ((...)) by wit and art, as to make the works of God and his Administrations
(sought out of all that have pleasure therein) to be of no effect, and to teach
men so to do, when, and as they please. I have read of Antonius, when he
angled, some dived under water, and put fishes upon his hook, the which he cast
up at his pleasure one after another: he that would learn to wrest the
Scripture, needs not seek any further Counsel then here; for if he cast in his
hook where these Diverse are, he may be sure they will fit him with fish to
the purpose, a subtle device and trick whereby to mock God, and destroy his
own soul.

5. Sometime the event or success of a thing, is so far from being Null, or
standing as as a Cipher: as the equity and truth of the Cause is thereby
confirmed, and no other way. Put a staff in the water, and it will seem
crooked, not that it is so, but we cannot see it right for the water. Even so a
Cause, howsoever right and just; yet through the cunning of men, by the water
of their calumniation and slander, it may seem otherwise, and by many otherwise
believed. As on the contrary, a filthy dunghill may be covered with snow, a
viper hid under a rose; an 2 Samuel 15.8.11.
an unrighteous Cause so colored and cloak'd, with such titles of Truth,
piety, Religion, Gods worship, etc. as some (deceived thereby) may think the
same to be just and good.

When Jannes and Jambres, (two Egyptian Sorcerers) withstood Moses: and five
hundred false Prophets of Baal contended with Elias: Here was Cause against
Cause, Plea against Plea (as it is now between us and the Scots:) But how was
the truth here discovered, and made to appear? and those satisfied or
convinced which were concerned therein? Truly by the Event or Suc^^sse; that
is, he Lord making them Conquerours, and giving them the victory who had the
just and rightful Cause. That ^aul by his calumniations, lies, flatteries, and
other deceitful practices, had so clouded David's Cause, as many thought that
his carriage and dealing toward his Father in law was not good, and that Saul
had some reason and ground for what he did: so much is very clear, by many
passages and expressions of David in the Psalms. But the Success and Event
cleared David, and justified his Cause: as how? to wit, by the many wonderful
and seasonable deliverances which David had by the Lords mighty appearing, and
working salvation for him with an high hand: On the contrary (is not
destruction to the wicked, Job 31.3.
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?) that Divine Justice that
followed Saul all along in life and death, was such an Event, as did prove with
a witness, what for a man he was, and how un^^ righteously he had dealt with
David.

It is true, (and I know it to be so) that the Parliament of Englands Cause, in
reference to the public Enemies of this Commonwealth (by what name or title
soever) has been proved sufficiently to be a Just Cause, even the Cause of
GOD, both by the law of God, of Nature, and Nations: As for instance, See a
book Entitled, the golden Rule, or Justice advanced.
The putting to death the late KING, the laying aside the House of LORDS, the
Constitution of England a COMMONWEALTH, the present Parliament a true
REPRESENTATIVE, and Supreme Authority of the Nation. The marching of our Army
into Scotland upon grounds of Justice and Necessity. All these things have been
proved over and over: nevertheless, some envying the good we have, because it
came not to us by them: Others perceiving that their private profits and
interests must go down, and lie in the dust, if public Good be set up, and
prosper; hereupon, they consult together, and are Confederates: and what can be
done by fraud, or falsehood, or any way, they seek to attempt. Yea, such are
the depths of Satan, and mystery of iniquity, now working to deceive every
where, and every one; as that the just and righteous Cause of the Parliament,
is questioned by some, denied by others, and all this through the deceit and
craft of such men, who either are discontented, because others under God did
the good work, and not they; or who find themselves now shut out from the Act
10.25. (...) know th^^ by this (...) we have (...) wealth. A (...) reason
^^^^e^ore (...) should (...) ^ccupation.
g^infull trade formerly they had, and unwarranble ways to deceive and (...)
the people in soul, purse, and person.

But the Lord, whose ways and judgments are all ^^^^teous; he I say, who
justifies the righteous, and condemns (...) wicked, seeing them to cast such a
cloud over his Cause, and to make it contemptible before men, by aspe^^ng (...)
with Treason, Usurpation, Oppression, Fraud, etc. comes forth in behalf of it:
and as he did for Moses against the Magicians, for Elias against Baals
Prophets, and for David against Saul: so does he for us, (or rather for his
great name) gives such such glorious Successes, and most remarkable Events to
this Cause every where, that unless men did wilfully shut their eyes, or made
themselves blind through malice, pride, covetousness, etc. they might see Quid
faciun video, nec me ignorantia very de^ipiet, sed amor.
as clearly as they do the sun shining at noone day, to be a RIGHTEOUS AND
GOOD CAUSE, the which the Lord has, does, and will still defend.

Object. 2. The Israelites in two Battles were overcome by the Benjamites, but
they had a good Cause, the which the others had not: Therefore Successes or
Events in War prove nothing in respect of the Cause, whether it be just or
unjust.

Answ. 1. Some men's tongues are like a mill that is loose hung, keeps a mighty
crackling, but grinds no corn. This example of the Benjamites I hear is much
talked of; and as David said of Goliah's sword, there is none like that: So
some say, there is none to this, it cannot be answered. But how far this is
from that rule, simpliciter ad simpliciter, inconsistent to the matter they
bring it for; and to what they apply it, will appear, by putting it into
form; for thus it must be, if it be any thing. If GOD sometimes (for reasons
known to himself) suffer wicked men to prosper in a bad Cause, as to have a
Victory once or twice, being fewer in number then their Enemies: It will
necessarily follow, that what soever assistance he gives a people in Battle,
what Victory and Deliverance soever they have: in what manner or way soever he
appears for them, and against their Enemies: Nothing by the Success or Event
can be gathered, concerning the justice of the Cause, on whose side it is.

A simple Reader, without help of Schoole-learning, may easily see the vanity
and absurdity of such reasoning. Suppose I would argue thus; there is not any
light that shows a distinction or difference between day and night; and to
prove this assertion: I instance, that neither the Moonlight, Starlight, or
Candlelight does it, or can do it: But thou will say, by the shining light of
the Sun, the day is known from the night. Can thou find out the depth and
subtlety of this argument? look over then upon the other, it is the very same
in Mood and Figure: because that Light or Appearance of God which is like
Moonlight, proves not the day or Cause; therefore the greater light will not
do it: not the sun, not the highest and most glorious shinings of God.

2. That the Benjamites had an ill Cause, and yet in Battle overthrew the
Israelites two several times, we grant: which might be to humble the one, and
harden the other; but here the main and essential part, to make the comparison
hold between this Example, and the thing whereto they apply it, is altogether
wanting. We do not say that Victories and Successes (barely considered) prove a
good Cause; but this we say, such may be the Actings and Appearances of God for
a People, so wonderful may be their Victories and Deliverances, as thereby it
does infallibly appear, the LORD his owning and justifying their Cause.

For the Victories which the Benjamites had, there is nothing appears in them,
of any special divine presence; no remarkable footsteps of Gods walking in
their Camp: not one thing in the History, witnessing a singular and
transcendent love of God toward them. Whereas our Victories all along, in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, have had most apparent evidences of Gods
especial presence with us: we have seen his Goings in our Army before us, and
our salvation has been wrought for us, by an extraordinary powerful hand: and
therefore unless they show us, that the LORD was with the Benjamites, in the
same manner he was with us, where do they read that Israel and Benjamin
before they sought, did both parties solemnly appeal to God: and after they had
referred the Cause betwee^ them to Gods tribunal seat, Israel lost the Battle.
and gave them the like victory, in the circumstances and several particulars,
which we had over the Scots. In mentioning this example, as they show their
great perverseness against the works of God, and implacable malice to us; so it
only serves (and we cannot imagine for what other use and end they bring it)
then to darken the glory of God, and deceive simple people.

Object. 3. Many have been great Conquerours (as the Caldeans, Assyrians,
Romans) howbeit wicked men, and their Cause sinful and unjust: Ergo,
Victories and Successes in War prove nothing.

Answ. That this Objection may be capable of answer, there are 3. things to be
cleared.

1. Whether men, howsoever wicked, may not have just cause to fight, and
therein the Lord to take their part.

2. How it does appear, that when their Cause was unjust, that the Lord then
gave them good success.

3. But if so, then where is it recorded that wicked men in sinful and
unrighteous Causes have had the assistance and help of GOD, in as full and
large manner, and way, as we have had.

I have now done for this time; and as I am upon closing, I remember how the
Clown served Aristides; who giving his voice to the banishing of Aristides, and
being asked of him unknown, Plutarch in Apo.
whether he knew him against whom he had given his voice, answered that he knew
him not, but it was trouble to him to hear him termed a just man.

It may well be, that some (who know me not) will give their voice against me,
for what I have now done, but they must be such then, as are troubled to hear
of justice, of an honorable and righteous Cause. This just Cause I have indeed
here pleaded, and in the Second Part (by the good hand of God assisting me)
will plead it more: to the satisfaction of all such as love the present
Government, and desire the prosperity and peace of this Commonwealth.

FINIS.

