THE CITIES X COMMANDMENTS, commanded to be read in all Churches, by my L.
Warner and the Common Council.
Estote Proditores.

Sine Rex
Sine Lex.

I. THou shall not worship any god save Oliver, Harry Martin, and Mr. Warner, a
trinity in unity, and unity in trinity.

II. Thou shall not make any resistance against them, or either of them, or
yield obedience to any power, not derived from them; neither shall thou grave
any Image except of Mr. Warner, mounted on his Palfray, with a branch of Holly
on his head, and a tod of yvie at his tail; thou shall not when thou beholdest
thy King, either bow down to him, or worship him; for we of the City are
zealous Animals, and will cause our masters at Westminster, to visit such unto
the third and fourth Generation, of them that hate us for our base cowardice,
and will not obey our masters Ordinances.

III. Thou shall not take the name of my Lord Mayjor in vain, by calling him
Pigwidgin Sectarie, or Coxscomb, for we of the Common Counsel will not hold
him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

IIII. Remember, that thou keep holy all our thanksgiving days, on which we
feast the greedy Cormorants of Westminister, especially let that day, be
celebrated, on which K. Tom, had a Dinner given him by us, to the expense of
500. l. on that day thou shall do no manner of work, thou nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, for we have entered that day into the Calendar, and command it to
be kept holy.

V. Thou shall honor no father, save the penniefathers at Westminister, nor no
mother save the new Church, which we the Sectaries of the Common Counsel have
set up, so will we entreat our masters for thee, that thy days may be long in
these sequestered Lands which they legally and justly have ceazed on.

VI. Thou shall aid and assist us of the Common Counsel, to imprison and
murder all, that will not yield obedience, to the Decrees of our masters, at
Westminster.

VII. Thou shall follow the example of thy Lord Major, and us of the Common
Counsel, and not refrain to commit adultery, with any well shapt woman.

VIII. Thou shall steal, or purloine anything, from those that are not Saints
of our new moddell, but that under a pretense of justice, provided thou be
invested with the Power of a Parliament man, a Common Counsel man, or
Committee man.

IX. Thou shall bear false witness against thy neighbor, upon all occasions,
that we of the Common Counsel, call him before us, provided he be rich and
worthy the screwing, thou shall follow our example, to squeeze all men,
imprison some men, and spare no man.

X. Thou shall and art hereby authorized, if any warrant come to thee from us,
bearing date from Westminster, to take from thy neighbor, his wife his house,
his Ox, or his Ass, or anything that belongs unto him, all which our masters,
are first to view and we to share the reversion.

All these our Commandments we require all the inhabitants of great Britain
strictly to observe, and put in practice, and we of the Common Counsel, will
not be wanting, at all times to put you in mind of keeping the same.

The City Lords Prayer.
Our Fathers which are at Westminster hallowed be your names, for that you have
brought us into perfect bondage, and Fgyptian slaverie, your kingdom come,
which can never be, so long as King CHARLES is possessed with life, or any of
the Royal Progeny, your wills are done on Earth, though you break his will
that is in Heaven, give us this day our daily bread; for you have brought us to
that pass, that without you, we can have nothing, and forgive us our
trespasses, though we cannot forgive you, that have trespassed against us, and
lead as not any more into such temptations, as for these seven years past you
have done; now at length become honest and deliver us from those evils, that
now hang over our heads, for yours is the Kingdom, and the power, though you
merit no glory, but we hope it will not last for ever and ever, Amen.

The Cities Creed.
I Believe in Warner, the father of all Fopperie, maker of trouble, and
Tumults, and in Col. Barkstead, his son by adoption, who was conceived of a
Dairie maid in long Sutton, borne at Winchester, brought up at Salsbury,
suffered under the heavy Cross of doing pennace, he descended into Olivers
favor, and rose the third day into Fairfax favor, and now sits at the
right hand of the Sophies at Westminster, from wgence each day, he comes to
hunt out the Royal party, to judgment; I believe he will come to an jill
end; as also all the communion of our new Saints, for that it is impossible for
them, to gain the forgiveness of their sins, at the Resurection of the
dead, or to enjoy life everlasting, Amen.

Finis.

