THE CITIES Warning-Peece, IN The MALIGNANTS description and Conversion: OR,
The ROUNDHEAD turned POET.

Where a Feast of Prose and Verse invites Curiosity to be nibling.

Written long since, but Printed in the Year
That every knave and fool turned Cavaleere.
The Cities Warning-peece: IN The MALIGNANTS Description and Conversion.
Cic. GOod morrow Sir.


Gloc. Good morrow.


Cic. Do not you know me?


Glo. No, What art thou?


Ci. A Rascal, any thing that may deserve the name of fool or knave, or
thief, or murderer; I Am justly liable to all the scornthat truth can cast upon
ignorance and malice, I am a slave, abeggar.


Gl. Hold I pray thee, whither will thou run?


Cic. Why, I Will run my country, and glad I may escape so, for I have neither
friends, nor means, nor honesty, nor any thing that is good left, neither
within or without me, I am indeed a Malignant, an enemy to God, my King, my
Country, nay to my self, my wife, my children, every body.


Gl. And why art thou so?


Cic. Faith it is a curse that God has laid upon me for my sins, that is all I
can see in it. Sir I perceive you know not what it is to be a malignant,


Gl. No.


Ci. Why it is to be a devil in the shape of a man, one that despises all
manner of goodness, cries down all that speak well, and hates all that do
well, he cannot abide Parliamens, lest a reformation should force him to
amendment of life, and so fave his soul, he loves not the Laws because he
loves to do that for which the Laws would hang him: He lives every where and
takes all shapes upon him. I have heard it credibly reported that there is not
a parish in the City clear of him, and he has so dispersed his poison in the
Suburbs, that but few have escaped the infection. He is sometimes a Gallant,
sometimes a Merchant, sometimes a Mecanich, but always a Rascal.


Gl. It seems you hate your own condition and repent.


Ci. Yes, I do repent now it is too late.


Gl. Too late, that cannot be.


Ci. Yes yes, all is gone, I am robbed, undone, plundered, pillaged, the
Cavalliers, the Thieves, the Rogues, the Rebbels have taken all away, and left
me nothing but too late repentance.


Gl. Pray open a little the story of your miseries, that I may know how to
pity you.


Ci. Sir your pity I neither deserve nor desire, but if you please I Will tell
you that shall make you hate me, I was of late a Cycesterian where I had good
means, and lived in the best fashion, but my honest neighbors could never
persuade me to the truth, I loved pleasure and folly, feared nothing more then
to be godly, delighted most in the basest company, for none could ever give me
such content, as those that have now undone me, he that would swear loudly, and
drink stoutly I called my associate, and he that talked of piety or Prayer my
enemy: Thus when I might have lived well I neglected it, and now I must live
ill because I cannot help it.


Gl. Then you were in the Town when 'twas lost.


Ci. Yes I was one of them.


Gl. And how came you off?


Ci. Why by running away, the truth is, I built so much upon mineown malignant
merit, that having help the Rogues to rob many of my neighbors, at length I
was forced to do the like by my self; I stood off a while and pleaded
malignancie, gave as good words as I could, that my bad actions might prosper,
I told them that I was as bad as they, and swore it, railed upon the
Parliament, cursed all Roundheads and Puritans, rapt out 5. or 6. oaths with as
much grace as was possible for such agracelesse villain, all would not do, they
answered that they were acustomed to that kind of cousenage and made me work
on, so when I had labored to load all my goods for Oxford, I watched my
opportunity, and never any man parted so joyfully from that he loved so dearly.


Gl. It seems then you were faulty in this business.


Ci. yes, and deserve to be hanged for it. Sir shall I tell you, had there been
in our Town of Cice-ster, half so many Roundheads as there were Malignants
the Town had never been taken, for they used all possible means they could to
defend it, and we that were the major part (out of mere malice to them) did
what we could to betray it: How we were betwitcht I know not, but for my part I
find my self so changed, that I am confident I was either enchanted then, or
am inspired now.


Gl. How mean you by that?


Ci. I see with other eyes me thinks, my affections and thoughts are changed,
I hate that I loved, and I love that I hated, Justice and truth appear fair
and amiable, and vice and villainy odious. In brief I like so well the name of
a Christian, that (for all my lost wealth) I would not be again an Egyptian.


Gl. A good change, and now you begin to know your self, I shall begin to know
you, be resolute in this, and your gain exceeds your loss.

Seek heavenly treasure, and you need no more,
He that God hates for sin is only poor.

Ci. How long have you been a poet?


Gl. As long as you have been a convert, you see this age is full of changes,
but indeed this whimsie took me at the first discovery of the black clouds
that have bred all these Tempests, when I saw distraction in the face of the
Kingdom, I could no longer contain my self, but grew mad too, and fell to
making verses.


Ci. Sir shall I be beholding to you?


Gl. For what?


Ci. If your leisure will serve you, I pray repeat some of them.


Gl. That I dare do to you, because I fear not your censure, besides, though
they were made two or three years since, yet because they have some affinity
with the times, you shall hear them.

NOw is the net laid, and the tempting bait
disperct with Jesuiticall deceit:
The Pope (orejoy'd) of victory does vaunt,
and the cry goes, Down with the Protestant:
It Is a brave world, the Soldier domineeres,
Neighbors and friends, together by the ears
Are set, to rape and murder is the way
Laid open, goodness does become a prey
As well as goods to policy, that dives
Both into good men's pockets and their lives:
Ignorance plays the Ass, bears all, and ties
His tongue to silence, Reformation dies
By innovations council in his youth,
for fear he should yet strength and maintain truth.
Why what an age is this? who shall we trust?
When we to oneanother prove unjust?
Why should we dam the Spaniard and the Turk,
When homebred malice strives to take the work
Out of their hands? nay to exceed them far,
For private plots are worse then open War.

Ci. Now in my mind these are admirable good lines, and as fit for the times,
as if they had been made but yesterday, another of these good Sir.


Gl. I confess I have another or two, but they are somewhat further off, yet
since they are not altogether impertinent, and that I perceive such toys are
effectual to revive your malancholy and drooping spirits, you shall have them.


The Spanish Fleet in the Downs.
BRave Dons or DonZelles, welcome, now we find
That ye are far beyond our merits kind:
Else had ye not thus spent five months and more
At Sea, in hope to hugg us on the Shore
At last, and find an entertainment meet
For the Commanders of so brave a Fleet.
You know our hearts, we yours, no odds appears,
Since there does only run a pair of sheares
Twixt our Religions, Rome, and Spain, and we
Put all together, make but one of three:
And shall you fear us, or shall we fear you?
Tush, Spain is England, England is Spain now:
Our harbors are your own, and the next Spring
A fresh supply will make us any thing.
Paul's for your sakes is almost newly built,
And it is not long since Cheapside-crosse was gilt.
Old Charing shall be now reedified
That lost his glory when old Chaucer died:
And the brave western buildings, that for sight
Put down their neighbor City London quite,
Are at your service, Fate ordaind they should
'Tincrease the reverend Roman neighborhood,
For for Saint Peter's sake w'ave almost all
Forsook our dwellings, near decai'd Saint Paul,
And our Religions too, as you would wish,
And like your selves keep days of flesh and fish,
Though we are neither; Witness the Book of sports and Sunday no Sabbath.
we are in the way
Of giving over quite our Sabbath day:
Not knowing (till of late) that 'twas more fit
To sanctify an Holy day then it;
And lest we should be still incredulous
Of Purgatory, they have tricks with us
To make us feel it living: but no doubt
Your presence and your prayers will help us out.
Gl. So what do you think of this, are you satisfied now?


Ci. Sir I am pleased but not satisfied, of that I like best, I always desire
most, but Sir by your favor me thinks it is strange that there is nothing in
these lines touching the confusion of this Spanish Fleet.


Gl. If that will give you such content you shall have it by and by, for the
truth is, these were made (such as they are), at the Fleets first coming into
the Downs.

O how I long to hear of the confusion of those that plot and endeavor the
destruction of this poor Kingdom!

Here Is no dissimulation, not a jot:
We shall be Protestants still, shall we not?
Yes, yes, be confident the Bishops doom
Will shift Religion but from room to Rome.
The Protestant and Papist shall not vary,
But love together, go to Church and marry
At the high Altar, unto which they bow
With equal show of Superstition now.
The vulgar voice derived from vulgar fears,
Ready to set together by the ears
Those that have any left, affright the sage
With rumor of an Innovating Age.
Old 88. (for sooth) is not for got,
Nor yet (alas) the failing powder plot:
And now to mend the matter, they defcrie
Twixt Spain and England other knavery
Made manifest (as they conceive) of late,
By agreat Fleet that met a grievous Fate.
The Scots rebel, the English murmur, why?
It seems they see and hate Idolatry
Now crept into the Church. The Papists cry
With voice exalted, Rome and Victory.
Civil dissension with the noise she makes,
Startles the valiant, Britain now partakes
The fears of Germany, and just Heaven knows,
It merits to participate her woes.
This MaZerunnes rumor, these fantasma's fright
Those that profess the Gospel, and delight
To be styled Heretics, but they are vain
And idle fancies, we are friends with Spain,
And Spain with us, there is no confederacy,
Nor private contract (more then ought to be)
Betwixt the great ones: or suppose there should,
Dare we not trust God if our cause be good?
This huge Fleet came to sport upon the Maine,
And for no other purpose sent from Spain,
But to become a Royal Offering,
At Neptunes Altar, the great Ocean's King.
Their business is dispatched with all content,
(Though per adventure better then they meant)
From what they seem to us, things differ far,
God makes the end show truly what they are.
What think you of this?


Ci. Good, excellent good.


Gl. So I have that I looked for.

Poets must needs grow rich with their vast gains,
When they can purchase praise for all their pains.

But now I have done this at your entreaty, I Will make bold to entreat you to
hear a little further: I have yet a few other lines that were written in
almost as mad a fit as you were when I met you, here they are.

Why how now Muse, confounded by the times,
Whose manners mar the manner of thy rimes?
Is all in a combustion, that thy vain
Discovers the distemper of a brain,
So suitable? why what have we to do.
With Commonwealths, not yet invited to
The meanest office, fie let eminence
Regard the good, that hopes the recompense.
What if the Pope prevail, the State decline?
Mines not the fault, make not the mischife mine.
How should the soldier thrive if sweet content
Were to be purchased by a Parliament?
How should long Roabes still flourish as they do,
If bad Church Government were looked into?
How should the Lawyer purchase, if a bribe
Were held infectious in the thrifty tribe?
Come, Come, great men have privilege to draw
From their own wills decrees above the law.
The poor must suffer, and not dare to grudge
At the false sentence of a wicked Judge.
Religion, Justice, Truth, all out of use,
May now go whistle, there is no such abuse
Among so great, so many, as to know
From whence these miser able mischeifes grow,
Still lives the cause, and still the grief survives,
Malice more potent grows, though knowledge thrives;
Endeavors prosper not, the hate to sin
Is not of force sufficient to bring in
Neglected piety, vice in the head
Keeps virtue under foot, as good as dead:
Ignorance only has the fate to be
From grief and fear, but not from danger free.
I am sorry I have nothing but thanks to give you for so large an expression of
love to me, but if my service may in any thing be acceptable I shall for this
free favor be ever willing to be commanded by you.

Be your own frind hereafter, understand
The Truth, and fight fort, this is my command.
FINIS.

