PLAIN TRUTH OR, A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE Of the DUTIES of PEOPLE To their
PASTORS In an Essay upon Heb: 13:17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, etc.

The first Book of Discipline, Heed. 4. p. 30. The People would be exhorted to
Reverence and Honor their Ministers, chosen as the Servants and Ambassadors
of the LORD JESUS, Obeying the Commandment which they pronounce from GODS
Mouth and Book, even as they would Obey GOD Himself.

Pooles Annotations on 1 Kings 6:7. It is the Duty of the Builders and Members
of the Church, as far as in them lies, to take care, that all things be
transacted there, with perfect Peace and Quietness; and that no noise of
contention, or division, or violence be heard in that Sacred Building.

Jo: Davenantius Sarisbur Episc: de pace Eccles: p: 89: 90 Omnes necesse habent
confiteri, veram and genuinam Charitatem esse omnibus Ecclesiis and
Christianarum Ecclesiarum Membris non minus ad salutem necessariam, quam fidei
Orthodo^^^ and salutiferae veram and Integram Professionem.

By a Well Wisher of all good Christians.

EDINBURGH, Printed by J: Reid, in the Year, 1693. To be Sold by James Wardlaw,
at his Shop, opposite to the middle of the Lucken-Booths.

A SIGH AND A VOTE.
OH! were my Head as full of Tears
As is my Heart of Fears,
With watered Cheeks I would Lament,
Because the Church is Rent!
All say, we should in Love Unite,
As is both Just and Meet;
Yet none will quite a hair or I mean ^^ of Truth.
hoove,
For the Churches behoof:
GOD knows this shows not Wit nor Grace,
Base Self takes too much place:
LORD send me Joy in stead of Tears,
And Hope in stead of Fears.
The Churches Peace LORD let me see,
Matched with Verity;
And let me see Uniting Love
Working like Thine above,
That Saints each others faults may hide,
For all are apt to slide;
LORD make Thy Grace 'bove self ascend,
So be it, to the end.
Some Necessary ADVERTISEMENTS to the READER.
CHRISTIAN Reader,
I Have been in many Debates and perplexities of mind anent the publication of
the ensuing Discourse, having suffered a smart conflict, through the
interchangeable blows of these contending Parties in my bosom, viz Scripture,
Reason, Conscience, Self, Hope and Fear; But while I was languishing under the
wounds of this warfare, I received some recruite of Spirits and strength from
the same Divine Oracle, that the worthy and pious Mr. Buroughs tells us, did
quiet his mind in a like case; I will give you his own words, He that meddles
with the division of the times, may expect to be divided himself, to have his
name, his repute to be cut assunder, and thrown this way and that way. -- But
seeing Providence has brought it so fully into my way, I shall now venture
upon it, with my heart cast and fixed upon that promise, Prove. 11.3. The
uprightness of the upright shall guide him Irenic: c: 3: 11.

I was also induced to offer this Essay from the consideration of the
seasonableness and usefulness of this subject, and several other motives, all
which I will not here mention, but seeing a better hand has penned some of
them, I will give them in his words, Mr. James Fergusson Expos: on 1 Thessalonians:
5:12: p: 234. So great an enemy is Satan to the Ordinance of a public
Ministry, so necessary is it that People do countenance that Ordinance, and
encourage those who are entrusted with it; so ignorant, unmindfull, and
neglective are they of those duties which they ought to perform, that the
Servants of CHRIST should with much seriousness and affectionate Insinuation
press upon the LORDS People, all such duties of Respect, Reverence, Love,
Obedience, Submission, Heb: 13.17. And gratitude, Gal: 6:6: as they owe unto
their Ministers, so far should they be from a total neglect of pressing any
such duties under a pretense of self-denial, or from preposterous modesty.
Thus far that wise and pious man. I am not without some dumpish apprehension (I
wish they be not Ominous) that I may be evil spoken of and misconstrued for my
pains in what I offer in the ensuing Lucubration (for there is a prodigious
Plague-spirit of detraction and evil speaking raging at this time, as also of
too credulous entertaining Jealouzies and Reproaches) but I hope the sincerity
of my Intention, and the kindness of the great Patron of Truth will support me,
being resolved to expose my self to a fair Venture, seeing I am persuaded it is
Truth and seasonable Truth that I have delivered; but though I may sustain the
damage of evil speaking, yet if I understood that but any one got solid good,
I would rejoice more in that, then I will he sorry for what rash Censures,
some Scores may pass upon me; for very commonly the less Judicious and
intelligent are most ready to carpe and censure. Hos: 4.4.6. Prove: 26:12:16.
Which therefore should not be thoughtfully heeded.

Bue if any good Souls (whom the LORD knows I intend not to offend or griive,
shall either inadvertently mistake, or uncharitably misjudge me, (as I hope GOD
will not) by imposing Sinister Senses on any thing I say, I pray GOD may
forgive them (as I do) and that the Judge of all Flesh may he more merciful to
them then they are Just to me.

And more specially I caution here, (that seeing the Tendency of some Passages
in the following Essay, is for recomending Union and Charity) I may not be
mistaken, for I am far from Heterogeneous mixtures, or such pieces of Alloy, as
may corrupt or damnifie Religion; for its my hearts wish there may he a holy
Ministry, and a holy People; And O that there were a Gospel Spirit poured
forth kindly disposing all parties and People to say by prejudices and
Animosities, and seriously consider what may most probabl^ contribute for the
credit and safety of the Protestant Christian Religion, and for my own part I
have small hopes of the further propagation thereof, or that its primitive
purity and luster will be recovered, till all parties see the Ingredient hand
they have had in obstructing and destroying the Common Interests thereof, and
thereupon repent and turn unto GOD whom we have provoked to divide us in his
anger: And if we take Godly and Christian Methods for this effect, there is yet
hope in Israel concerning this thing, for our GOD who is the same Yesterday and
to Day and for ever, has cured as desperate Maladies as ours are.

I thought fit to tell thee, that I have industriously and of design cited some
passages from the Writing 's of Masters James Durham, G: Gillespie: Samuel
Rutherfoord, Jet: Buroughs, Richard Baxter, Richard Vines, Will: Green-hill,
and Rich: Alleine, all of them unquestionably pious and able Ministers of the
Gospel, to homologate what I say; that if thou will quarrel and censure, all
the burden may not ly upon my weak shoulders alone, but I may have stronger
then my self to help me with a lift.

In the last place, I desire thou may not satisfy thy self with an overly
glance of one passage or two, (which may occasion thy mistaking) but read over
the entire discourse, and seriously ponder the Scripture grounds of it, seeking
GODS blessing on what thou reads. I add no more but wishes that all professing
Christians may be endued with a Spirit of a sound mind, and of true Charity and
Holiness.

FAREWELL.
A Discourse of the Duties of PEOPLE to their PASTORS. In an Essay upon HEBREWS
13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over You, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy
and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for You.
THe Scope of this Text is to point at the mutual Duties of Pastors and People;
Wherein we have

I. The Pastors Duty employed. First, To Rule, or Guide. Secondly, To Watch.
II. The Peoples Duty expressed. First, To Obey. Secondly, To Submit.
III. Reasons of Peoples Duty to their Pastors. 1. R. Because of the
Obligation that lies upon them, arising from the Relation they stand in to
their Pastors. Pastors are Rulers; People are the Ruled. Pastors are Shepherds;
People the Flock to be watched over. 2. R. Because of the weighty charge and
care of Peoples Souls, that lies upon Pastors, they watch over, and must give
account of their Souls; and Pastors being so concerned in Peoples Good: It Is
most just they should be concerned in Pastors Good and Comfort, and they cannot
better manifest this, then in performing expected Duties. 3. R. That People may
be an occasion of Joy and Encouragement to their Pastors, and not creat or
augment their grievances, which can no ways be profitable to them.

I shall not spend time in Criticizing or Glossing upon the terms of our Text,
but humbly offers what follows, as the plain and genuine Sense thereof,
according to our uptaking, as if we did hear the Apostle saying,

O! ye Hebrews understand your Station, know your Duty, GOD has set Rulers
over you, whom he has vested with Authority, and Clothed with a Commission to
Guide and Govern you: And it is not your secular Interest they are to consult,
but it is your Precious Immortal Souls they are watchfully concerned in.
Therefore yield due Obedience and Submission to their ^^st Commands and
Counsels, not that I mean ye should do so implicitly for I have told you
before, ( verse 7.) and now again I put you in remembrance, that ye ought to
obey them, while they speak to you the Word of GOD, or agreeable thereunto;
And it is very fit ye should do so, that they may Rejoice on your behalf, and
not be discouraged in the Work of the LORD; wherein surely ye can reap no
Profit.

Doctr: There are several mutual Duties, that Pastors and People are obliged to
perform to one another.

In prosecution of this head of Doctrine, I shall not meddle with the Duties of
Pastors, knowing that such do understand their Station, and the Offices of it
better than I can tell them; but will with GODS Assistance, chiefly toutch what
concerns the Duties of People to their Pastors.

In discharge of which Undertaking, I will 1. Lay down some general
Propositions, that I expect all intelligent Christians will receive, as
unquestionable Truths. 2. I will inform People of some of their Duties to their
Pastors. 3. I will reach a Reproof to some who may justly deserve it. 4. I will
close with a few Cautions.


1. As to the Propositions, they are These.
1. Prop: GOD out of his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, has appointed a Gospel
Ministry and Ordinances, to be continued in His Church to the end of the
World, for making Disciples, for the perfecting of the Saints, for edifying of
the Body of CHRIST, and for ruling and taking care of the Church, Matthew: 28.19,
20. Ephesians: 4.11, 12.

2. Prop: It is not the pregnant Parts, the excelling Gifts, nor the
flourishing Graces of any Ministers that conferrs a Virtue to GODS Ordinances
to make them effectual, it is only the inward Workings and Power of the Spirit
of GOD, accompanying outward Administrations, in fulfillment of GODS Gracious
Promise, Isa: 55.11. 1 Cor: 3.5, 6, 7. Who then is Paul? etc.

3. Prop: It is presumable and to be rationally supposed, that knowing Godly
and Judicious Ministers understand the Contraversies and Concerns of Religion
better then the People, specially those who are illiterate, and not capable to
use these Helps and Means of Understanding, which painful Ministers are daily
improving, Mal: 2.7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his mouth. Matthew: 13.52. 1 Timothy: 4.13, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.15. Pray
let me not be mistaken here, as if I did hence infer, that learned Men hoc
ipso, or on the account that they are learned, and have gifts or parts
paramount to what the Vulgar can claim, therefore are to be esteemed the best
men, or the most Orthodox, and faithful to the Interests of Religion; for the
contrare has been to palpable in all the ages of the Church, that many has
abused their Literature and Wits, to the damage and prejudice of Religion: And
it has been also known, that some common People, who could not set off their
plain meanings in the learned terms of Art, yet have expressed their
Conceptions as to the main things of Religion, with more savor and spiritual
Sagacity, then many learned Clerks; but my meaning here is, that ceteris
paribus, or being evens otherwise, that is, where Ministers are Pious and
Conscientious, as well as Intelligent and Judicious, surely with this odd of
Advantage, (it may be safely said) that they understand the Concerns of
Religion, better than the unlearned People.

4. Prop: All Pastors and People are not of alike reach and seize, in
light, strength, Solidity of Judgment, and other Christian Perfections, there
are strong Men, and there are Babes in Christ, there are Tollerably well
Learned, and there are who are ever Learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth; there is no doubt but various tempers, and capacities,
various Gifts and Graces, various Interests and Projects, and Innumerable other
various Circumstances, may Occasion several Persons thus stated to vary and
differ in their Conceptions and Sentiments about somethings in Religion, (where
yet on all sides there may be honesty in the main) the which differences in
Judgment, should not make alienation of affection, nor Interrupt Christian
communion where there is agreement and Unanimity in the Grand Articles of
Faith. Rom: 14.2.5.19. 1 Cor: 8.1.27.13.12.13. Phil: 3.15. Hence says Mr.
Gillespie Miscel: qu: p: 142. I dare not appropriat the Name of the Godly party
to these who are free from any of the errors of the times, those that are
truly Godly may in diverse things differ in their Opinion, every error is not
Inconsistent with Holiness. And Mr. Durham in his Book of Scandal p: 284.
Speaking of differences among good People, says he, There is no question many
might go to Heaven, with such differences on both sides, for we will find them
continue zealous in such (Differences) even to Death; neither ought this to be
thought strange, for the best but know in part, and are subject to mistakes,
etc. And Mr. Rutherfoord is also particular to the same purpose, Dispute
against Liberty of Conscience Epist: to the Reader, says he, We cannot think
but all Saints in this side of Glory carry to Heaven with them errors,
mistakes, and Prophesying in part, and the Fairest Stars and lights in this
Lower Firmament of the Church are Clouded, etc. One Suitable passage more I
think worth Inserting here, which I find in a Printed Letter of the
Presbyterian Ministers in London, presented to the Westminster Assembly,
January 1. 1645. By reason of different Lights and differing sights among
Brethren, there may be dissenting in opinions, yet why should there be any
separating from Church Communion? The Churches Coat may be of diverse Colors,
yet why should there be any Rent in it?

5. Prop. Neither Pastors nor People are able so singly, so Prudently, nor so
diligently as they ought to Discharge all their respective duties: Who is
sufficient for those things; 2 Cor. 2.16* Romans 7.18, 19. So that neither should
Pastors nor People rashly and uncharitably suspect, Challenge or censure one
another, for if both will Impartialy and seriously search themselves, it will
soon be found that on all hands, there is too much guilt of negligence and
being defective in doing duties. Let us often remember our LORDS saying: Mat.
7.5.

6. Prop: The disrespect and misbehaviours of People toward GODS Ministers,
whom he has sent and Sealed, their Master and Patron will resent as done
against himself, for they are his Ambassadors, his Messengers, clothed with
his authority, so that GOD Himself is toutched and dishonored with the
affronts done to his Servants; Luke 10.16. He that despises you despises me,
etc. I say not this as if I imagined, the quality and Character of a Minister
should shelter or excuse him if he malverse or misbehave either against the
Holy Laws of GOD, or just Laws of Men, for of all men on GODS Earth, a
scandalous and profane Minister is the basest and most Contemptible, hateful
to GOD and all good men; but my meaning is that when any Persons do
contemptuously abuse, injure or discourage the Ministers of CHRIST for their
works sake, or when in the due discret management of it: Surely GOD will notice
and punish such. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17.

7. Prop: It is an unspeakably great blessing (to be prized above all other
mercies) to enjoy the opportunity of Gospel ordinances in plenty and purity;
Compare your condition with theirs who never heard of a Savior, never heard a
Gosple Preaching, never saw the Bible, but worship Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea
Devils for their Deities: And compare also with those places of Machumitan
darkness, that were sometimes light in the LORD, and had the Candle of the
Gospel Shining brightly among them. Psalm: 147.19.20 Luk 1.68.78.79. O I say be
humble and thankful ye that have the Gospel in peace and plenty: for as Mr.
Borough lays, heretofore ye would have been glad of that which now you slight
and reject, this is not from more light and strength, that ye have now which ye
had not then, but from more vanity, pride, and wantonness; Irenicum. p: 182.

8. Prop: Both Ministers and People must answer to GOD, how they have minded
and managed their respective duties. Matt: 7.22. Luke 13.23. 2 Timothy 4 14. Heb.
13.17.

The second point is to Inform you of the Duties of People to their Pastors.
1. They should consult him in all their scruples doubts, and hard dark Cases,
so that when they are truly troubled and unclear about their Soul and
Conscience concerns, They should betake themselves to their Minister, with an
earnest desire to be taught, and a single resolution humbly to comply with his
Godly Counsels and directions, but see they be weighty Cales, and also that
that they be your own and such as may tend to edifying, rather then to nourish
curiosity; Mal: 2.7. Phil 1.7. 1 Samuel: 9.9. Before time in Israel, when a man
came to inquire of GOD, thus he spoke, come and let us go to the Seer, for he
that is now called a Prophet, was beforetime called a Seer. And Ministers may
be called Seers, in regard they may see and have further insight into cases of
Conscience, then some others, especialy they whom GOD has trained up in
variety of exercise themselves.

2. People should honor and reverence their Ministers; Pastors are spiritual
Parents, and Ecclesiastic Rulers, and ye know that honor is due to superiors;
I say ye should put all due notes of respect upon your Pastor, not only on the
account of his eminency of Gifts and Graces (which in their own Room deserve
esteem) but for the dignity of his Calling, and the preferment that the GOD of
Heaven has put upon him, he is called GODS Ambassador, a Steward of the
mystries of the Kingdom, the messenger of the LORD of Hosts, an Angel of the
Churches, and surely to despise or disparage such is a manifest Contempt, both
of the Divine precept and pattern. 2 Cor: 5 20 1 Cor. 4.1. Mal. 2.7. Rev: 1.20.

3. People should love their Pastors, and on all occasions give suitable
expressions of the true and tender affection they owe unto them: If affection
cool, edifications gone, and all likeliehood of profiting under that Ministers
labors, let him preach never so Powerfuly or pertinently, I say if once love
to his person be withdrawn none of his performances will relish or affect; pray
consider the Tie betwixt Minister and People, it has in several respects a
near resemblance to a marriage union and oblidgement, and as they in so closs a
relation should love one another, so proportionably should the other discharge
the alike duty, arising from an Ecclesiastic marriage and union, 1 Thessalonians.
5.12.13.

4. People should obey their Pastors and receive their charges and commands
with a due Deference and Observance, not as being the Word of a Man but as it
is in truth the Word of GOD. 1 Thessalonians: 2:13. Our Text tells us Ministers are
Rulers, and also they who are ruled should obey; Ministers should not be looked
on as Men only Vested with human Qualities, being liable to Errors, Mistakes,
Infirmities and Eruptions of their peevish Passions, even as others (the
covering of Love and Charity should be cast over these) But what of GOD they
represent, both on the account of their Commission, and their faithful
discharge of the same, conform to their sacred Instructions, that I say is
mainly to be respected in them, and so they being the speaking Trumpets of the
GOD of Heaven, what of the Voice and Will of GOD they are Instruments to
express, should for GOD 'S sake, their Masters sake, be readily received and
obsequiously observed.

5. People should humbly submit to their Ministers in the Dispensation and
seasonable application of all the Ordinances of the Lord: I mean not they
should implicity subject their Judgment to all their Dictats and Sentiments
without Examination, for we know none that possess an infallible Chair, and
certainly all the People of the LORD have a Judgment of Discretion allowed
them, which they should exercise in trying the Spirits whether they be of GOD,
yet People are not hereupon licentiously and vainly to carp at every thing
Ministers say, but except there be very great and clear Reasons in the contrar,
they should give a due deference to their Ministers Opinion and Judgment in
what he teaches or says; and as they should submit to him in the doctrinall
part of his Ministry, so also in the disciplinary part, meekly taking with just
and reasonable admonitions or Rebukes, whether more public or private;
Considering that he is vested with authority and charge upon his peril to
rebuke as well as exhort; 1 Timothy 5.20, 21. 2 iTm. 4:2, 3.

6. People should vindicat their Ministers from injurious calumnies, and unjust
Reproaches; the Pastors credit should be the Peoples care; and his integrity
and innocence, their glory and joy: not only should ye be concerned this way
because he is your Minister, or of your acquaintance, etc. but for the Gospels
sake; for there is no greater or more effectual Ingine of Satan (the accuser of
the Brethren) for obstructing the progress of the Gospel, then to bring the
Ministers thereof into discredit, and who ever are Satan's Tools in promoving
this his plot, GOD knows it had better for them, that the first day they were
heard speak, the burial bell had been heard tolling for them; therefore it is
the Concern of all good Christians to ward of what Tongue-Lashes may be reached
against the Reputation of Ministers. Acts 23.5. 1 Timothy 5.19: Jam: 4.11.

7. People should cheerfully render to Ministers all their just Rights and dues
provided for their honest and comfortable maintenance, and be every way
steedable to them for their help and encouragement: Though as we said, they are
the Angels of the Churches, yet we would have you consider it is of the Church
Militant in this World, and they cannot live like the triumphant Angles of
Glory without meat and drink, no more then civil Rulers, though they be called
gods; And seeing they are sequestrate from Worldly Employments, whereby they
might advance their Secular Interests and Wealth, as well as other men, and are
set apart to attend and serve at the Altar, it is most just they should live of
the things of the Altar; But we will not insist further on this point, lest it
be thought we are pointing at our own Profits, but as we should give unto
Caesar, that which is Caesar's, so should we give unto GOD that which is GODS,
of which dues Ministers dues are a part, as is clear, Number: 18.20.21.24. 1 Cor:
9:13:14* Gal: 6:6.

8 People should help Ministers with their prayers, for the LORDS Sake remember
your Pastors before the LORD: Pray that GOD will give them the Spirit of their
Calling, pray that he will bestow on them gifts and graces, pray that he will give
them strength and courage, pray that he will give them spiritual Wisdom, and
godly Zeal, for they have varieties of humors, and difficult cases to meddle
with, pray that he will bless and prosper their labors, even pray that GOD will
be with them in their Closets, in their Pulpits, in their Converses, and in all
their Performances: O Sirs! I say pray, pray for poor Ministers, there is none
has more need of help then they, none has more need of a lift, for heavy, heavy
is the Charge that lies upon them, so that if the everlasting Arms be not
underneath them (which ye are to implore) they will sink down under the
Pressure of it, pray, pray for Ministers, for they have Needs, Wants,
Weaknesses, Passions, and a carnal deceitful heart to wrestle with like other
men, pray for them for their Stock is not in their own hand, seek then to him
who has the seven Spirits of GOD, that he will dispense to them, what may be
needful to be dispensed to you, and if there were no more but your own
Interest, methinks this should have some weight with you, for the more he
receives from the LORD the more of the LORDS has he to give unto you,
therefore I say pray, pray for Ministers, 2 These: 3.2. Heb: 13.18.

The third Point, is to reach a Reproof to some who are Blame worthy.
1. They are reproveable who incroach upon, or evacuate the Right and Authority
of Ministers, which the Mediator has doted and endued them with, and which of
his own good pleasure he so shared among them, that by his Authentic Grant and
Commission, they stand in a Just parity of power and Jurisdiction, so that the
encroachments of civil Magistrates by an Erastian Supremacy come into be taxed
here. As also, the Hierarchical Prelacy, whereby Bishops pretend a claim of
superiority of order and Jurisdiction above the Ministers of CHRIST, from which
GOD be thanked we are now freed; There comes also to be challenged here a kind
of popular supremacy, that some unskilful and unduetiful People have a humor
to aspire after, taking too much upon them, in meddling with matters too high
for them, we will not point at specialities, but I w^sh that People did
understand their own Station, of being the Ruled and Watched over, and that
they may keep within their own sphere of Activity, least they give the Ark of GOD a wrong touch.

2. They are reprovable who take up groundless petts and prejudices at
Ministers; the truth is, the weakness and mistakes of many well meaning People
is to be pitied and lamented: But place, when such persons arrive at offensive
practices, that have a- manifest tendency to destroy all order and peace in the
Church, it becomes mighty straitning what course to take with them, so as
neither to suffer them to run to greater Errors, or not to provoke them to
despise all Ordinances; And consequently the Authority of the Ministry; for if
once cloudy prejudices overcast their minds, it is neither the Reason or
Rhetoric of the best of Divines will dispel their darkened thoughts, for that
which is to be taxed in them (among other things) as their sin (in being picked
or prejudged) is their plague too, that will not let them see their sin, or
understand their errors, GOD pity and help them whose sad case this is, Gal:
4.16.

3. They are reproveable who misconstrue Ministers, either in their Sermons or
Practices, and this ordinarily follows upon the former, for where once prejudice
takes place, the perverse influence and tincture of this black humor too
commonly prevails to make them affix the blackest sense and gloss upon the
Ministers sayings and doings, if not sometimes the quite contrar to what he
ever either meaned or minded. Hense says Mr. Borrough, we are bound to give
the best Interpretation upon our Brethers Actions we can, if they be not
apparently ill, we must rather wrong our selves by thinking too well of them,
then wrong them by thinking too ill of them. Irenicum p: 96. And says Mr.
Durham, we come now to consider what occasional means may have influence upon
this division among Godly men, and such may be, First some tale-bearers, and
secreet whisperers, who may have much influence to alienate good men's
affections, by misrepresenting the words and actions of others, etc. Of
scandale p: 277. I glanced before in the fourth Proposition, that neither
Ministers nor People, are all of alike standard and stature in their light and
judgment; some have a freedom to say and to do that which others mightily
scruple, some are ready to judge that duty, which others reckon to be sin, as
one says, All minds are not alike, nor of one frame,
What some approve, others condemn the same.
But so long as the ground of different Opinions is things indifferent, or that
less concerns the essentials of Religion, I beseech you for GODS sake, do not
misjudge or misconstrue one another, but forbear one another in Love,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians: 4:23:
To which purpose says Mr. Allan, Hold communion in the things wherein you
agree, and charity wherein you differ: Vind: piet: 2: piet: p: 142. see also
Green-hil on Ezekiel. 11.19 p: 411.

4. They are reproveable who cast at Ministers on slender and frivolous
accounts; O it is great and weighty Reasons, that should make people withdraw
from the Ministry of their Pastors, to whom they have given their hand, and
should give their Heart, the mischief of such rash adventurs is not
conceiveable; O that GOD would discover the greatness of this too common and
grievous, yet slighted sin. But ah! when people faird this sin with the fancy
of duty, it is hard, hard, and only for GODS Handling to cure such a distemper;
however, if it may happily prove an ingredient in the cure (through GODS
Blessing) to tell you what are insufficient grounds of withdrawing from a
Gospel Ministry, behold in the following Considerations, I Will in part inform
you.

1. Ministers should not be cast at for their Faithfulness and Freedom in the
seasonable Reprehension, of the Vices, Errors, and Faults, either of great or
small, Godly or wicked, or of any fort of People or party, Ministers should
neither cowardly neglect to tell the greatest persons their abominations, nor
partially decline to tell the greatest Professors, their extreems and
extravagancies (providing all be done with prudence and to edification) I doubt
not but there is a culpable failzure among Ministers, in not declaring the
whole Council of GOD upon the one hand, as well as upon the other: An
Ambassador of Christ should speak boldly as he ought to speak, Isa. 58:1.2:
Ephesians: 6.20. Hence says Mr. Baxter, A sinful humouring of rash Profossours, is as
great a temptation to Godly Ministers, as a sinful compliance with the great
ones of the World. Cure of Church, Divis: p: 394:

2. Ministers should not be cast at for the weakness of their gifts, for as we
have demonstrated before 2. Prop: The desirable success of Ordinances depends
not on the Qualification of the Administrators, but on the Blissing of that
GOD, who by all His own Means, accomplishes all His own Ends, and sometimes by
the weakest and least promising Instruments GOD Atchieves the greatest Gospel
fates, that the excellency of the power may be seen to be of GOD and not of
Men, and I will not say but upon the contrar to, the ablest of Ministers may be
cast at by some, for the Vulgar are not very discreet, or competent Judges of.
Ministers, abilities, being many times pickets and choisers of Ministers, more
one the account of homologating their Sentiments in some contraversal
Oppinions, then either for their Gifts and Graces, or their integrity and
prudence, and are often more affected with such kind of Subjects, then more
useful seasonable and momentuous-Doctrines, so that affection swayes them more
then Judgment, as one says;

Most more partial zeal, affection blind, are rapt and ruled, then a Judicious
mind

3. Ministers should not be cast at for every personal fault, or esape in their
conversation, there is no perfection here away, He is lifeless that is
faultless, pray who of the Patriarchs, who of the prophets, or who of the holy
Apostles of Christ without their blots and blamishes, and some of them had
very foul ones too? Yet GOD himself (who is Glorious in holiness) both
employed them, and willed others to receave his will and ordinances from them,
as from himself; Have a care ye be not righteous overmuch, or in seperating
either in affection or fellowship from any of the Ministers or people of GOD,
to whom a Holy GOD gives his presence. To which purpose says Mr. Allan,
excommunicate not them from you, excommunicat not your selves from them, with
whom CHRIST holds Communion; Judge not that CHRIST withdraws from all those who
are not in every thing of your mind and way: destroy not all Communion, by
seeking after a purer, than in this our imperfect state, we shall ever attain,
etc. Vind: Pietat: 2 Pt: p: 142. And says Mr. Rutherfoord. The faults of the
Guides are not your faults who are private Members, you are to keep public
Communion in the public ordinances of CHRIST, etc. peaceable Plea: p: 98. And
let me suggest here, That whatever may be the faults of Ministers either real
or supposed, yet people are not to set up a Chancery court in their own
Bosoms, to canvass, censure and sentence Ministers and there faults, GOD is a
GOD of order, and has wisely appointed, Courts, Laws, Rulers or Officers, that
in an orderly authoritative way, and according to the due Divine steps of
procedure, they that give Just offense to the Church of GOD (whether they be
Ministers or people) may be taken notice of and censured, suitable to the
nature and degrees, of their known guilt, for if every body shall rashly and
rudely usurp this part of the Ministerial Function, we should soon see Anarchie
and confusion in the Church and that either there shall be no Ministers, or
else every body turn Ministers at pleasure, and not only small faults severely
and greatly censured, but faults made where there are none; yea and some for
doing duty lashed as criminals; Eccles: 7.20: John 16:20: Jam: 5:17: Mat:
17:15, 16.

4. Ministers should not be cast at, because rejected of men, Christ and his
Apostles were cast at by the Rulers of their time, and sometimes even they of
whom better things might be expected, may cast at very eminent Ministers and
that most unrighteously and unreasonably.

5. Ministers should not be cast at for their Youth-hood, I am not to state a
Comparison betwixt old Ministers and young, all are duly to be respected,
honored, and loved for their Works sake, when they behave soberly and
conscienciously; tho I think venerable old Age deserves a grain of Allowance,
because it is to be supposed that (ceteribus Paribus) they have most experience
and understanding, but as Youth-hood is no Vice, so neither is old Age a
Virtue. 1 Timothy: 4.12: Tit. 2 15.

In the last plac: I come to some Cautions. 1. Have a care of dividing
principles and practices, or packing parties in Israel, ye know the
Matchiavellian Maxim divide et impera, first divide then rign Rrenting makes
way for running, and it is a sad Truth, that sometimes even the Saints of GOD,
this way, are the Devils servants, for when once Satan gets the Church crumbled
into parties, under specious and plausible pretenses of respect to the
Interests of Truth, he ordinarily employes those divided Factions to spend their
Zeal and Wits against one another, upon which their unavoidably follows a
renting of the Church with wages of Heroun Timber, And O! but it be sad to
think upon, that as Mr. Vines, speaks of some Light and Inconstant People as he
calls them who are still upon the Wing to practice separation, says he There
are many make but a Humor of it, being ignorant of the greatness of the sin of
renting assunder the Union and Unity of the body of Christ, Vines of the Lords
Supper. C. 20, P. 261 And so grievous a sin this is, and has so many mischivous
Consequences that it would take a Volumn to tell them in Number and Order, but
that ye may have a brief passing View, it cannot be more compendiously
performed, then in a few lines out of Mr. Allein; The Reproach of the Gospel,
the hardening of the perverse, the stumbling of the weak, the hindering of
Edification, the promoting of Confusion, and every evil work, Pride and
Haughtiness. Vanity and wantonness, envy and uncharitableness, etc: Are the sad
effects of our divisions, Vind piet: 2. pt: p: 138. I will say no more of those
whose genius leads them to renting and dividing, but only usurp a prayer that
one makes.

GOD save His Church from such unhallowed sprits,
And quickly quench our woeful fellow heats.
Here I take occasion to require thee, seriously to peruse Durham on Scandal,
especially the 4th. part.

2. Have a care ye do not too credulously entertain ill reports of Ministers,
sometimes the profane are ready to do so, to excuse and extenuate their own
Impieties, sometimes unwarry Professors are ready to do so, especially if the
misrepresented Ministers be not of their way in every punctilio, Psalm. 15.3.

3. Have a care of Zeal without Knowledge, or being too Zealous for ye know not
what, with not a few their wrath goes before their wits, and fumes of passion
pass for flames of Zeal, and see your Zeal be not too great for small things, as
Mr. Allan says, In matters Circumstantial, be not over hasty in stamping a jus
divinum, on things disputable and doubtful; put no more weight nor a greater
necessity on any thing than GOD has evidently put on it, and spend no more of
your Zeal about it than is proportionable to its weight and evidence: Vind:
piet: 2: pt: 140. I am not for disproving Godly Zeal, for surely there is none
of the graces of more stead sometimes than purely spiritual Zeal, tempered with
sound knowledge and just Moderation, Rom: 10.2.3. Gal. 4.18

4. Carefully guard against spiritual pride and self conceit, be not proud of
your gifts, graces, or any Christian seize, for thus you make a bad use
of the best things, and are foolish to the boot, in boasting of that which is
not your own, 1 Cor. 4.7. And neither be proud of your sufferings for a
profession of Religion, some have suffered for Religion, who have made Religion
to suffer; some has suffered for Religion in times, who will suffer for their
Irreligion to Eternity; The LORD grant Humility, Wisdom, Love, and Charity may
be the Ornaments of Christians, and that there may be many thus Qualified
Christians, to be the Orna^^^^ (...)

FINIS

