GREAT BABYLON The Mother of Harlots and abominations of That filthy and Bloody
City. Rev. 17.
Engraving of enclosed city.

THE CITY of GOD, OR Kingdom of Christ, IN The thousand years Reign before his
Personal coming and appearing, further asserted and cleared.

From the 21th. Chapter of the Revelations.

Wherein you have the Mystery of the two Worlds, Christ's and Antichrists,
further explained. Wherein you have the Mystery of the two Kingdoms, Christ's
and Antichrists, further explained. Wherein you have the Mystery of the two
Cities, Jerusalem and Babylon, further explained. Wherein you have the Mystery
of the two Women, Bride and Whore, further explained. Wherein you have the
Mystery of the two Creatures, Lamb and Beast. further explained.
Ps. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God.

Ps. 122.6. They shall prosper that love thee.

Ps. 48.12, 13. Walk about Zion, and go round about her, tell the Towers
thereof, mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye may tell it
to the Generations following.

(...) 137.8. Oh Daughters of Babylon, that art to be destroyed, happy shall he
be that rewards thee, as thou have served us.

^^ch. 8.8. So they read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly and gave the
sense, and caused them to understand the reading.

London, Printed in the Year of our Lord. 1672.

THEOPOLIS, OR THE CITY of GOD New JERUSALEM, IN Opposition to the City of the
Nations Great BABYLON; Comprehending The blessing and benefit of Christ's
Kingdom, in the thousand years Reign before his personal coming and appearing,
after the total ruin of the Beast, and his Kingdom.

In a Coment upon the 20th. and 21st. Chapters of the Revelations.

With An Additional Answer to these two material Questions: 1. Whether the
thousand years Reign is not already past, as Brightman, and others affirm. 2.
Whether the natural Jew is not most concerned in the latter day Promises and
Prophecies, especially in the pulling down Babylon, and Building of Zion, as
Maton, and others assert.


Ezekiel. 4.1. Son of Man take thee a Tyle, and Pourtray upon it the City
Jerusalem.

Hos. 12.10. I have multiplied Visions, and used similitudes.

Dan. 12.4. And many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall increase.

Ps. 145.11. They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy
Power.

Isa. 57.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people.

London, Printed by T. Ratcliff, and Not. Thompson, for Nathanie Ponder, at the
Peacock in Chancery Lane. 1672.

THE INDEX Of the principal Heads treated of in the 20th. Chapter.
THe Introduction. Page. 1 The Analasys, or part of the Chapter. Page. 4 Rules
to be observed in the exposition. Page. 9 Who the Dragon. Page. 13 Of the
taking of the Dragon. Page. 24 Of the Angel that laid hold on the Dragon. Page.
28 What by Heaven. Page. 34 Of the Dragons binding. Page. 36 Of the bottomless
Pit. Page. 40 Of the thousand years. Page. 43 Of the living of the Martyrs.
Page. 47 Of the rest of the dead that lived not. Page. 60 Of the Reigning with
Christ. Page. 63 Of being Priests of God. Page. 104 Of the the Second Death.
Page. 107 Of the Dragons Release. Page. 109 Of Gog and Magog. Page. 110 Of the
Camp of the Saints and beloved City. Page. 112 Of Fire from Heaven. Page. 113
Of the general Judgment. Page. 113 The Paraphrase. Page. 115
THE INDEX OF THE XXI. CHAPTER in the second Part.
THe Text of the 21th. of the Revelations, and part of the 22th. Page. 121 The
Introduction. Page. 125 The Analysis or parts of the Chapter. Page. 130 Of the
Angel that discovers the Vision. Page. 139 Of the Bride the Lambs Wife. Page.
139 Of the Mountain on which the City stands. Page. 143 Of Jerusalem that great
and Holy City. Page. 145 Of the City's descent from Heaven. Page. 149 Of the
glory of God upon her. Page. 151 Of the Wall. Page. 154 Of the City's four
square Cubical figure. Page. 160 Of the precious Materials. Page. 162 Of the
Tree and Water of Life. Page. 170 Of there being no Temple in it. Page. 172 Of
the Kings of the Earth that bring their glory to it. Page. 176 Of the Throne of
God and of the Lamb. Page. 179 The Paraphrastical Exposition. Page. 202 The
first Question, necessary to be spoken to, for the better clearing what has
been before asserted, relating to the thousand years Reign, is. Page. 211 The
second Question. Page. 235 Gospel Principles to be observed concerning the Jew.
Page. 237
XX. CHAP. Of the Revelations.
ANd I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless
Pit, and a great Chain in his hand.

2. And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

3. And cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up and set a Seal upon
him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand years should
be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.

4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto
them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his
Image, neither had received their marks upon their foreheads or in their hands,
and they lived and Reigned with Christ a thousand years.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand years were
finished. This is the first Resurrection.

6. Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such
the second death has no power but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ,
and shall Reign with him a thousand years.

7. And when the thousand years are expired Saton s^all be ^^^^d (...) of his
prison,

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the quarters of the
Earth Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, the number of whom is
as the Land of the Sea.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the
Saints about, and the beloved City, and fire came down from God out of Heaven,
and devoured them.

10. And the Devil that deceived them was cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and false Prophet are, and they shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.

11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it from whose face the
Earth and Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

12. And I saw the dead small and great stand before God, and the Books were
opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead
were judged out of those things, which were written in the Books according to
their works.

13. And the Sea gave up their dead which were in it, and Hell delivered up the
dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to their
works.

14. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire; this is the second
death.

15 And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, were cast into the
Lake of Fire.


Christ's Kingdom in the thousand years Reign, before his Personal appearing,
asserted from the 20th of the Revelations, etc.
THis Chapter contains the last Historical, prophecy of the Dragons disaster.
The twelfth foretells his being subdued by Michael, and cast unto the Earth:
This, of his being taken by the Angel, and cast bound into the bottomless pit,
etc. being the Epilogue and last act of the whole warfare of the Church, as it
is subject to dangers and distress s, he being the last of her three capital
Enemies, that here goes off the Stage.

In the 16th Chapter John has discovered to him the consederacy and
conjunction of Dragon, Beast, and False-prophet in their call to and
combination with the Kings of the Earth, and whole world to oppose Christ, and
his Saints in the great battle: In the 19th is the issue of this great
undertaking declared, viz. a total overthrow and destruction of that great
Army, the Kings, Captains and Mighty men, the taking of the Beast and
False-prophet, and casting them alive into the lake of fire burning with
Brimstone: And in this 20th you have the account of the Dragons Fate in this
great Catastrophe, viz. of his taking and how as a wretched Captive he was
bound, and made close prisoner (for a season,) then after a short Release, how
brought to judgment, and sentenced to the lake of fire with his Companions,
together with the blessing and advantage, that accrues hereby to the Church of
Christ.

A Portion of Scripture worthy our most serious search and enquiry, containing
most seasonable and necessary truths, and of such import, that a late learned
Author says thus of it. That it contains the Catastrophe, Result, and Design
of all, that God has spoken before in the Old Testament, and no less than a
Golden Key to unlock the Bible, especially the Old Testament. Though expressed
in such mistical Allegories and Types, such Figurative and Tropical Terms, as
makes it very abstruse, and difficult, and to that degree, so that Brightman
says, that a man may see by the commentary of Interpreters, how greatly they
are puzzled and toyled in the interpritation of this Chapter, being like an
intricate Maze and Labyrinth, where there is no winding of a man's self out. And
Mr. Mead calls it the most abstruse of all the Prophetical Scriptures and most
to be admired, and so misterious, that he dares not enlarge himself into that
curious search of the Reasons of several Circumstances, lest that of Solomon be
laid to his charge (Prove. 10.19) In the multitude of words there wants not
sin. And another thus; The particulars contained herein are most abstruse and
misterious, and that to be too positive and definitive about them, and the
mysteries intended in them, would argue too much boldness and temerity.

The consideration whereof calls therefore for the greater circumspection,
watiness, and sobriety.

The Method propounded in search after the mysteries contained in this Chapter
shall be.

First, To lay down the Analisis and parts of the Chapter: then treat of each
material thing contained in the parts, and that by certain known rules as helps
and way-marks to steer herein, with some remarks upon the same, and a brief
Paraphrase upon it.

The Parts of the Chapter.
THis Chapter contains the doom and judgment of the Dragon, as discovered to
John in three parts or periods.

First, In his binding and consequents thereof.

Secondly, In his loosing with the effects of it.

Thirdly, In his final and utter judgment, and what follows thereon.

First, Of his binding, wherein is considerable.

1 The Agent by whom, an Angel; And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven,
having the Key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

2. The actions of the Angel. 1. In apprehending of him; And he laid hold on
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan. 2. In binding of
him, and how long; And bound him a thousand years. 3. In Imprisoning of him set
forth, partly by the place (and cast him into the bottomless pit) partly by his
secure way of proceeding, And shut him up and set a seal upon him.


3. The end of his judicial process with the Dragon, viz. That he should
deceive the Nations no more till the thousand years were fulfilled, amplified
by the Dragons release for a little moment; (After that he must be released a
little season.)

Then the consequents of the Dragons binding, and as one main reason thereof,
viz. the Churches happy and glorious condition, wherein is considerable.

First, The Resurrection and Reviving state, under the denomination of Martyrs;
And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither had received
his mark upon their foreheads, or in their right hands.

Secondly, Their Enthroning or Reigning; And I saw Thrones and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given to them, And they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years.

Then their said state and condition is amplified three ways, 1. By the
opposite condition of their Enemies; But the rest of the Dead lived not again,
till the thousand years were finished. 2, By the denomination given to this
condition of the Revived Martyrs; This is the first Resurrection. 3. By their
happiness and holiness, partly in respect to the evil, they are exempted from:
partly the good they are called to enjoy; Blessed and holy is he that has part
in the first Resurrection: on such the second Death has no power* But they
shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years.


Secondly, Of the loosing of the Dragon out of Prison, wherein is considerable.

1. The time when; But when the thousand years are expired Satan shall be
loosed out of Prison.

2. The subtle practices of the Dragon declared in the seducing, and stirring
up new Enemies against the Church; And he shall go out to deceive the Nations:
described by the extent of of the places whence to be gathered; From all the
Quarters of the Earth. 2ly By their denomination (Gog and Magog.) 3ly By their
number (As the sand of the Sea.) 4ly The intent of the gathering; For Battle
against the Saints.

3. The hostile acts of these seduced Enemies, partly going up every way
against them, partly surrounding them on every side: And they went up on the
breadth of the Earth, and encompassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City.

Then nextly, The effects of this great gathering, and what became of this
Dragonical design and mighty Host: And fire came down from God out of Heaven
and devoured them.

Thirdly, His final and utter judgment, which is described.

1. By the Cause; And the Devil that deceived them.

3. By the place; Was cast into the lake of fire.

2. By his Companions in Torment; Beast and False-prophet.

4. By the extremity and endlesness of it; And shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever.

Then what follows the damning of the Dragon, viz. The general judgment,
wherein is to be considered.

1. The Majestical Enthronement of the Judge upon his Tribunal or Judgment
seat, partly by the glory thereof; partly by the power of his presence: And I
saw a great white Throne and him that sat upon it, from whose face the Earth
and Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

2. The order and manner of his judicial proceeding.

1. By his conventing all before his Tribunal, that were to be judged; And I
saw the Dead both small and great stand before God, the Sea giving up the dead
which were in it, and the Graves delivering up the dead which were in them.

2, By his final dooming or sentencing of them, wherein note,

1. The matrer of fact.

2. The evidence produced for coviction; And the Books were opened, and another
Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the dead were judged out of
those things, which were written in the Books according to their works.

3. The Exccution of the judicial sentence, both upon Things and Persons, 1.
Things: And Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire:

This is the second Death. 2. Persons, And whosoever was not found written in
the Book of Life, was cast into the lake of fire.

Having thus laid down the parts, the next thing to be considered and enquired
into, is the meaning of the Spirit, and what is held forth to us by this
Parabolical, and misterious Prophecy. For this Book of the Revelations (as Mr.
Mead well observes) is not usually to be taken accoridng to the Letter only, as
of a certain bare History of things done, but as a Prophecy involved with
Mysteries, Allegories, and Types. Therefore must we labor to get a right
discerning of the meaning of those Parables, and Prophetical Mysteries which
for the most part are Figurative and Tropical, and in part borrowed from the
Condition of affairs under the Old Testament, And that it is alike injurious to
truth to take a misterious Allegory in the Letter, as to make an Allegory of
the plain Scripture; to Litterize the Allegory, as to Allegorize the Letter.

Bernard, p. 130. As it is composed of similitudes, so the words are
Figurative, the whole Prophecy full of Metaphors, and almost altogether
Allegorical: so as we must take heed that we look further than into the Letter
and naked Relation of things, as they are set down: Otherways the book should
be full of absurdities, impossibilities, falsities, and flat contradictions
unto other truths of Scripture, which are far from the words of Gods holy
Spirit, which are ever holy and true* For who can believe a Lamb to have seven
eyes, a mountain burning to be cast into the Sea, and this thereby to become in
a third part blood, a star to fall from Heaven, Locusts to be of so monstrous a
shape as is set down in Chapter 9 h, and Horses with Lions heads; fire, smoke
and brimstone coming out of their mouths; Dragon and Beast with seven heads and
ten horns, etc. Therefore we must not stick in the Letter, but search out the
Historical sense, which is the truth intended. Also we must note this
carefully, that all this whole prophecy is framed after the state and
condition of the ancient people of God, the Jews; and after the words and
visions of the ancient Prophets as we may see by comparing the words and
visions of this Book with Moses and the Prophets, First to their sufferings
under their three Enemies, as Pharaoh in Egypt called a Dragon. 2. By Babel
and the Beasts noted in Daniel. 3. By Gog and Magog. 2. To their whole state,
viz. By the twelve Tribes, the Wilderness, Thunder, Lightning, Earthquake, to
the Tabernale, the Ark of his Testament, the Priests, to white Raiment, a
Golden girdle about the paps, the Altar, Incense, Odours, Lamps, Candlesticks.
Golden Censer, Temple, Singing, Instruments of Music, smoke filling the
Temple, to the Trumpets, To Jerusalem, Kings, Thrones, Crowns, Elders, etc.

Therefore for our better guide herein, these known necessary and approved
Rules are laid down to be observed in the Exposition of the difficult things in
this Chapter, viz. That taking it for granted as previous to all, there is an
absolute necessity of James 1.17. 1 John 1.20, 27
Prayer, Rev. 1.3. Acts 8.28, 29.30.
Reading, Psalm. 1.12.
Meditation, Dan. 12.4, 8, 13.
Conference, Rev. 1.3. Psalm. 119.98, 99. John 7.17. Dan. 12.3.
Practice, we must diligently observe.

Rule 1. First, to compare any obscure passage, or phrase with other Scriptrues
and Prophesies alleged, or alluded to, whereby much light will be gained to
many dark places in this book, and so Scripture shall expound Scripture, which
is the best Interpreter, as for instance, Rev. 11.4, 5, 6. Wherein the two
witnesses are compared to Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. to Elijah and ^lisha, ^
Kings 1. to Zerubbabel and Joshua. Zach. 73.11, 12, 14. The Song of Moses, Rev.
^^.3. with Exodus 15.1. Psalm. 145.17. mistical Babylon, Rev. 17.24. with
litteral Babylon, Jer. 51.7. To separate from her, Rev. 18.4. with Jer. 51.6.
her destruction, Rev. 18.7, 8. with Isa. 47.7, 8, 9. To rejoice at it, Rev.
18.20. with Jer. 51.48. Saints coming forth in vengeance, Rev. 19.13. Isa. 63.2
Rev. 19.15. with Psalm. 29. Isa. 63.3. New Heavens and Earth, Rev. 21.1. with
Isa. 65.7. 2 Pet. 3.13, etc.

Rule 2. Secondly, To consider, what vision or obscure passage the Holy Ghost
has interpreted in the Revelation it self. For of all such the Exposition is
undoubted and infallible, and so will the Revelation be the best Expounder of
the Revelation, and from those Expositions proportionably borrow light, for the
discovering of other obscure passages depending thereupon, relating thereto, or
contemporaneous therewith: As for instance, Rev. 1.20. The mystery of the seven
Stars in his right hand, and of the seven Golden Candlesticks interpreted by
Christ, viz. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches: and the
seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches. So Rev. 17.7. The mystery of the
Woman and of the Beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and ten
horns, and of the waters she sat on, explained and expounded by the Holy
Spirit: The Woman is interpreted to be the great City, that then reigned over
the Kings of the Earth: And the waters where the Whore siteth to be People,
Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues: The Beasts seven heads to be seven Mountains,
and seven Kings; Ten horns to be ten Kingdoms, concerning which interpretation
Mr. Mead has this Remark, viz. This is singular in this place, nor to be
passed over, with a slight observation: That this vision concerning the great
Whore and the Beast bearing her, is opened to John and to us by the Angel
(contrary to his wonted manner) with a most plain interpretation without boubt
to this end, that by the benefit of the interpretation thereof, as being the
chiefest vision of all the rest, the other Mysteries contained in the
Revelations, hitherto indeed shut up, but depending upon it with a wonderful
Artifice, might be revealed. Here therefore give all attention: and least the
Angel should take this pain in vain, as far forth as it concerns thee:
Remember this right well, right well, I say.

And another thus; This prophecy thus lively disclosed, may deservedly be
styled the Divine Key of the Revelation, whereby many mysteries of this book
may be unlocked, and the Top-Tower, or Turret of the Revelations, whence the
secrets of this Book may be peculiarly and certainly discovered on every side.

Rule 3. Thirdly, Most diligently to observe the scope, order, and harmony of
the Prophecies.

In the next place we come to consider the Phrases and Terms, that call for
explanation and unfolding in this Prophecy, which we shall take in order as
they lie in the several parts of the Chapter, viz.

First, Who the Dragon? 2ly What by his apprehending? 3ly Who the Angel that
thus lays hold upon him, that comes from Heaven? and what by Heaven? 4ly What
by the Dragons binding, imprisoning, and sealing in the pit? 5ly What by the
bottomless pit? 6ly What the thousand years, and how to be taken whether
definitely and indefinitely? 7ly What this living of the Martyrs, or first
Resurrection: 8ly What this Reigning with Christ? 9ly What this second Death?
10ly What by the rest of the Dead, that lived not again? 11ly What to be
Priests of God and of Christ? 12ly What by the Dragons loosing, or release and
deceiving the Nations? 13ly Who Gog and Magog? 14ly What the beloved City: 15ly
What the fire that comes down from Heaven to destroy the Enemies? 16ly What by
the general judgment? And of these we shall endeavor to speak distinctly with
enlargement suitable to the point before us.

Of the Dragon.
THe first thing to be enquired into, is the great subject of this discourse,
the Dragon; Who and what he is. The right understanding whereof will let us
much into the Mystery of this Prophecy, which therefore obliges to the more
diligent search, and greater exactness, keeping close to the rules propounded.

Dragon, or old Serpent in Scripture is taken in a twofold sense; sometimes in
a litteral, viz. that Creature, who as said ( Genesis 3.1.) Was more subtle than
any beast of the field, which the Lord God had made, held forth to be
destructive, cruel and devouring, Jer. 51.34. Eccles. 10.11. poisonous and
murderous, Deuteronomy. 52.33. Psalm. 58.4. Envious and malicious, Genesis 3.1, 2, 4. And
sometimes in a figurative or mistical sense, viz. Great Tyrants, who acting in
the Dragons cruel, subtle, envious and destructive nature, are properly so
called. Therefore Pharaoh that old cruel Enemy of Gods people is called Dragon,
Isa. 51.9. Ezck. 29.3. So also Nebuchadnezzar that other cruel bloody Enemy,
Isa. 27.1. Jer. 51.34. Also the Roman Empire whilst Heathen, so murderously
bloody to the Saints in distinction from the Beast called Dragon, great Red
Dragon, Rev. 12.30. So the Whale or Leviathan that devouring tyrannous
Sea Monster called Dragon Psalm. 74.13, 14. Hence the Heathenish and Pagan
Empire, that bears rule in all the World, as Turk, Tartar, etc. Is called here
in this place Dragon in distinction from the Beast, that bore sway only in
Euroep, and now vanquished and put down, as in the former Chapter, so that as
the Pagan Empire we are to notion Dragon here, viz. a State or Empire (as the
Beast interpreted before) not any particular person.

Object. But it is said, what need you go so far for an interpretation, when
you have one so near at hand? Is it not here said that he is the Devil and
Satan the old Serpent? So also Rev. 12.9. the seven headed, ten horned, red
Dragon is called the old Serpent the Devil and Satan, and therefore by Dragon
here is not to be understood a state or constitution of Government, as you
suppose; but the Devil himself.

Answ. It is true the Dragon in the 12th and here also is said to be the old
Serpent. Devil and Satan; not that he was personally so, but figuratively and
representatively; as it is said the Serpent beguiled Eve. 2 Cor 11.3. which was
not the Serpent barely considered, but the Devil acting the Serpent: As the
Devil in Samuels shape or mantle; or when a man is possessed by the Devil, the
man is said to speak and act, when it is the Devil that speaks and acts him:
And so is the Heathen Empire called the Devil and Satan, Rev. 2.10. Where it is
said the Devil shall cast some of you into prison: Not that the Devil in person
was to do it; But the Devil in his Imps, Agents, Officers, Instruments,
Vicegerents; And so Rev. 2.13. It is said, Satan dwelt and had his seat there;
not that the Devil actually and visibly in person dwelt there: But the Devil in
his Spirit and old enmity acting in his substitutes, the Rulers and Magistrates
of that place. And well might the Heathen Emperors of old be called the Devil,
and Satan that old Serpent.

First, Because he as God and Prince of this World, and of the Air the Abaddon,
and Apollyon, King of the bottomless pit, having by Gods permission the dispose
of the worldly Governments, ( Luke 4.6. compared Rev. 13.7.) is the Head and
Sovereign of the Rulers of darkness in this world. And therefore are the
Beastly and dragonical powers springing from him, acting under him, and being
influenced by his Spirit as their Lord and Head, are called Devils by his name;
Whereas Gods Rulers, deriving from above, influenced by his Spirit, acting in
his name, by his Laws and in his Authority, are called Gods.

Secondly, Because they acting in that Dragonical, subtle, tyrannous, bloody
spirit, even the spirit of the Devil, are therefore called the Red Dragon,
Devil, and Satan.

Thirdly. Because they set up and impose Idolatry, the Devils worship, not only
thereby worshipping themselves, but enforcing others to do the same, yea to
require divine worship to be done to themselves, as Nebuchadnezzar, and the
Heathen Emperors of old, false worship being called the worship of Devils, 1
Cor. 10.20, 21. 2 Chronicles 11.15. Deuteronomy. 32.17. And that by Dragon is to be
understood the Heathen Empire or Government, further appears from the
interpretation given by Christ himself in this Book, Rev. 17.8, 9, 10. Where
the seven headed and ten horned Beast, that had the Crowns upon the horns (the
Image as well as substitute of the Dragon, who had seven heads and ten horns
also, the difference only betwixt them, was, that the Dragon had his Crowns
upon his heads; which when he resigned in that part of his Dominion to the
Beast, the Crowns were put upon the horns) is interpreted by the spirit to be
civil Empire and power The ten horns are ten Kingdoms, and seven heads are
seven Kings, five of which were fallen before John's time, and one of the six of
those heads was in John's time, and the seventh afterward to come; and they
also signified seven hills interpreted to be that City, that then ruled over
the Kings of the Earth, which was no other than Rome, the seat and Metropolis
of the Empire, as it was then standing upon seven Mountains.

So that the seven headed red Dragon and seven headed scarlet colored Beast,
his Image and Successor, in that part of the World, Europe, was no other by
this interpretation than the Sovereign Empire and Rule, that first was
exercised in Rome Heathen (that drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, or
powers or potentates of this world) during the Dragonical state, and in Rome
Antichristian, during the Beastly state.

And further it appears that by Dragon we are to understand here the heathen
Empire from the extent of his power and jurisdiction. For it is said Rev.
16.13, 14. that the emissaries of the Dragon, Beast and False-Prophet go forth
unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world to gather them to the
Battle of that great day of God Almighty. The Beast and False-Prophets power
extend no further than the ten Kingdoms. But it is the Dragon that commands the
rest of the world, deceiving the nations and whole world, Rev. 12.9 Therefore
it is said of him, after he is loosed again, 20.8. that he goes out again to
deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters of the Earth, Gog and
Magog, which great army (the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea) is said
to come up upon the breadth of the Earth, and to compass the Camp of the
Saints: so that it appears plainly to be that power that influences and
commands, the greater part of the world. And again it appears to be the Heathen
Empire or State of Government; because it is judged to the same ruin and
destruction that the Beast and False-prophet were (they who were interpreted,
Rev. 7. the ministerial and magisterial part of Antichrist) and said to be
taken and cast alive into the lake of Fire und Brimstone, viz. that frame of
Rule and Government, as utterly to be cancelled, reverst, and vacated, and
never any more to appear in this world; so is the Dragonical, Satanical state,
being adjudged to the same lake of Fire and Brimstone with the Beast and
False-prophet, utterly also damned and destroyed, never any more to appear in
the world.

And again it appears to be no less, if you examine thr scope of the place and
order of the Prophesies.

The scope of the Book is to show as the rise and rage, so especially the ruin
of the Enemies of Christ, and his Church in order to their triumph and Glory,
which is excellently held forth by Mr. Thomas Goodwin in his Interest of States
and Nations in that brief Epitome he gives of the Revelations: Which Book
(says he) is a Tragi-comedy beginning with a Kingdom, given to be won by
conquest, Rev. 6.8. and ending with a Corronation of a King and the Marriage of
his Bride; and all between is but the removing of all such lets and impediments
as stand in the way. Now the principal Enemies that Christ and his Church has
to deal with, are held forth under the types and terms of a Dragon, Beast and
False-prophet. The Dragon acts two parts one before the rise of the Beast, and
another presently upon and after the Beasts fall. The twelfth Chapter gives an
account of the victory that Michael obtained over him, when he was cast out of
Heaven into the Earth, upon which he resigned up his power, seat and authority
unto the Beast, viz. in those territories for 42. Months, or 1260. days or
years.

At the latter end of the Beasts or Antichrists Dominion, viz. under the sixth
Vial, there is a confederacy and combination of Dragon, Beast and False-prophet
to gather the Kings of the Earth and whole world to the Battle of the great Day
of God Almighty: Accordingly they are assembled and engage Battle with Christ
and his followers; (not that we are to suppose that all the world, viz. Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America, are to be gathered into one place: But holding out
the Universal enmity and opposition, that with mutual consent shall be made in
the powers of the Earth against Christ, his people and Government) but with
what success this Hostile league and confederacy is struck, you have already
heard: Their powers are broken; their Authority is dissolved. The Beast and
False-prophet, viz. the ministerial and Magisterial part of Antichrist is
taken and cast alive into the lake of Fire and Brimstone. They are wholly gone
off the Stage with a stink, who have so long Lorded it in those ten Kingdoms of
Europe. And then also is the Dragon taken, and bound, and imprisoned in order
to the taking place of Christ's Kingdom, not only in Europe, but over the whole
world, throughout the whole Earth, which was the Dragons or Devils dominions,
or that Heathenish Empire and Rule, that extends all the world, through both
Asia, Africa, and America in distinction from the Beastly state, that has been
visible in the Europian Territories. Now during the time of the Dragons
binding, the Church has peace, rest and rule over the whole world; but after
he is released, and that Empire permitted to perk up again, fresh disturbance
will be given to the Church, called the Camp of the Saints or the beloved City,
all the world through, till the Dragons total doom and judgment, which then
immediately follows.

In further confirmarion hereof take these following instances.

The Assemblees Annotations upon Rev. 12.3. A great red Dragon, viz the Heathen
Roman Emperors succeeding one another, who did the Devil service, as in other
things, so chiefly in persecuting the Church, Psalm. 74.13, 14. Isa 27.17,
18.51.9. Ezekiel. 29.3. He is great because of his large Empire; Red, that is
bedewed with the blood of the Saints, as if dyed with it; seven heads sitting
on seven hills, Chap. 17.9. Ten horns ten Provinces, the strength of it as
horns are of Beasts, Dan. 8.3, 4, 5.6. Seven Crowns seven kinds of Governments,
one after another on her seven hills (Rev. 17.10) on his heads, not his horns;
for the Supreme Authority was in Rome on the seven hills, not in the Provinces
as after: His tail drew the third part of Heaven, he subjected the third part
of the Provinces of the world: Did cast them to the Earth, viz. Put down these
Princes, whom he subdued from the Royal Authorities. And upon Rev. 20.2.
Dragon, the Pope being destroyed, the Devil would bring in the Turk, who
seems yet to stand, or some other Enemy, like the Heathen Emperor called the
Dragon, before Rev. 12.3. to persecute, and war against the Christians, but God
will not permit it till the thousand years of the Churches prosperity be done,
and upon the 10th verse, The Devil, viz. the Turk the Devils new Agent, another
Dragon, like the Heathen Emperor or some other Enemy, no Christian by
Profession shall be sent to Hell to keep the Pope and Popish Emperor company
Here it may be noted, that the foes of the Church that profess not the name of
Christ, as the Heathen and Turkish Emperor, are in this Book compared to
Dragons and Serpents, and to the Devil himself, so the Popes and Popish
Emperors who profess Christianity, are eompared to wild Beasts.

And Mr. Mead in his Comment upon the Rev. Chap. 12.3, 4. A wonder or
representation of Rome Heathen, whose marks are every where seven heads and ten
horns: seven heads indeed, as well for the seven hills, upon which the City was
built, as also for the seven sorts of Governors, who were successively to
Govern that City The ten horns for the ten Kingdoms, which were to arise in the
time of the last head, to which they were to grow: Which interpretation is not
mine, but the Angels Chap. 17. In the mean time another Character of the Roman
Emperor is added to these. Whereas it is said, He drew the third part of the
Stars of Heaven with his Tail, and did cast them to the Earth; that is, he
subjected the third part of the Princes and Rulers of the World to his Empire.
For even so much, viz the third part of the known world in John's age, the
dominion of Rome did comprehend within its Limits.

Add here Bernard upon Rev. 12.3. p. 208. This is expounded to be the old
Serpent, the Devil and Satan verse. 9. by an allusion to Genesis 3. but yet so
understanding him as* hereby be understood also the special ministry of his
fury, viz. the Heathen persecuting Emperors of Rome. For this prophecy ^ of
things to be done here on Earth by men: Also the Woman notes out a company
here in this world, and so must the Dragon note out in like sort such here as
be her Adversaries. Again the description of this Dragon cannot agree properly
to the Devil himself, but is indeed the Arms of Rome, when it was Heathen and
had Heathen Emperors ruling there, who worshipped the Devil, 1 Cor. 10.20* and
were led by him, as all the wicked be, Ephesians. 2.2. He persecuting Christians for
the very name of Christ, so as the battle was against Christ Jesus himself. No
marvel then that they be called the Dragon, that is the Devil, who is put for
his Instruments, Chap. 2.10 As here his Instruments for him.

Of the Dragons taking or apprehending.
ANd he laid hold, or took; A Metaphor borrowed from the seizing of a Prisoner
at war and so improved here, It is said in the former Chapter he was fought
with and vanquished; and in this Chapter laid hold off, or taken, implying a
complete conquest; for when a chief General after Battle is taken, the business
is over.

Which holds out no less than the absolute victory, that Christ and his
followers have obtained in pleading his kingly right to the Governments of this
world over the Beastly and Dragonical powers of this world, who have usurpt and
a long time possessed the same, and having not only subdued, but absolutely
dismissed, cashiered, and damned the Antichristian state in both parts of it,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical, even to that degree, that they shall never
appear to do mischief any more, no more than two wicked wretches, that are cast
alive into Hell fire, can ever expect to come forth to act villainy any more in
this world; so now also is the Heathen Pagan state so vanquished and brought
down, and as much out of a capacity to do any more mischief for the season
intended, then a Baffled, Conquered enemy that is apprehended and taken
prisoner.

And that such a season shall be, wherein Christ Jesus, (who has right to the
worlds Government, not only by gift, purchase, covenant and inheritance) must
yet plead and obtain the same by war and conquest also, appears in part from
these following Seriptures.

Numb. 24.8. He shall eat up the Nations his Enemies: He shall break their
bones and pierce them through with his arrows. 9. He couched, he lay down as a
Lion: Who shall raise him up?

Isa. 41.2. Who raised up the righteous man from the East, called him to his
foot, gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings? He gave them
as the dust to his Sword, and driven Stubble to his Bow: Speaking of Abraham
(Genesis 14.) in his subduing the four Kings, Types of the four Monarchies. Who
has wrought and done it, calling the Generations from the beginning? I the
Lord, the first ( viz. he that was with Abraham in the Type in the beginning at
the first,) and with the last I am he* (will also in the conclusion be with the
seed of Abraham in the same work in subduing and taking their Antitypes, the
four Monarchs eyes themselves) Isa. 42.13. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty
man: He shall stir up jealousy like a man of War: He shall cry, yea roar: He
shall prevail against his Enemies. 14. I have a long time holden my peace, I
have been still and refrained my self: Now will I cry like a Traveling Woman;
I will destroy, and devour at once. 15. I will make wast Mountains and Hills,
and dry up all their Herbs: and I will make the Rivers Islands, and I will dry
up the Pools, etc.

Haggai 2.22. And I will overthrow the Throne of Kingdoms, and will destroy the
strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathon: and I will overthrow the Chariots, and
those that ride in them: and their Horses and their Riders shall come down,
every one by the Sword of his Brother.

Rev. 17.14. These shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and they that are with him
are called chosen and faithful.

Rev. 19.13, etc. And he was clothed in a Vesture dipped in blood, and his name
is called the Word of God: And the Armies, which are in Heaven, followed him
upon white Horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean: And out of his
Mouth goes a Sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the Nations: And he
shall rule them with a rod of Iron: And he treads the Wine Press of the
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God: And he has on his Vesture and on his
thigh written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

So also, Psalms 2.8, 9, etc. Dan. 2.44, 45. Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5. Psalm. 66.3, etc,
Psalm. 72. 9, 10. Isa. 24.19, 20, 21, 22. Ezekiel. 21.26, 27. Rev. 14.19, 20. Isa.
63.1, 2, 3, 4, 6. Which dispensation is no other than the pouring out the
Vials, Chap. 16. The Earthquake, Desolation and Slaughter that attends the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. Typed out by Abrams Conquest of the
four Kings, as before; the overturning of Pharaoh and his Host; the subduing
the thirty one Kings in Canaan by Joshuah, in order to give rest to the people
in the promised land; the destruction of all Enemies by David in order to
Solomon's quiet, and peaceable Reign. And this work (as in the Types) is to be
performed gradually. First the Antichristian powers and Interest; afterward
the Heathenish and pagan Governments, in order to the subduing, and bringing
the whole world under the Dominion, and Sovereignty of Jesus Christ, who must
have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession, and must rule from Sea to Sea, from the River to the end of the
Earth.

Of the Angel, that lays hold on, or apprehends the Dragon. And I saw an Angel
come down from Heaven having the Key of the Bottomless pit and a great chain in
his hand, and he laid hold, etc.
THe word Angel both in Greek and Hebrew signifies a Messenger, taken therefore
sometimes for Heavenly Spirit Heb. 1.7. Psalm. 103.20. Sometimes a Minister of
the Gospel or Elder, 2 Cor. 5.20. Rev. 2.1. Sometimes for Christ Jesus himself
the Archangel. So sometimes by an Angel, though expressed in the singular Number,
is meant the whole Eldership or Ministry, as Rev. 2 1. So the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, is to be understood more than one, because they had Elders
more than one, Acts 20.17. So the Angel is said to pour out the Vials, Chap.
16. By it is to be understood those Ministers of Gods wrath, that are to
execute his judgments upon Babylon. And by the Angel in the 14th Chapter, that
is to Preach the Everlasting Gospel, we are to understand the whole Ministry,
that is then called thereto. Which I take to be the import of Angel here, viz.
the virtue, power and authority of Christ the Archangel, put forth in and by
his Church, and people clothed with authority to perform this great service,
having the Key and Chain, Emblems of power and authority put into their hands.
Christ being their head and representative, and the rather so, because it is a
power and authority in opposition to the Dragon, who is a mistical
representative of all the Enemies of Christ; it being no new thing to represent
a whole party by the head and chief, that influences them: As to say such a
King vanquished such a King, when neither of the Kings are personally present,
but vertually so by their commissions, impowring their Generals and Armies. So
Michael and his Angels are said to fight, Rev. 12. on the one side, and the
Dragon and his Angels on the other; when neither Christ, nor the Devil are
personally present, but their Agents and Instruments, Constantine and his Host
in the behalf of the Woman and Man child on the one side, and Maxentius and his
crew seeking to devour the one and the other, on the other side.

So are the Bloody, Tyrannous, Antichristian powers, that for 1260. years are
to oppose the Church, represented by a Beast. And the filthy Idolatrous Church
by a lewd filthy Strumpet, a whorish Woman: and the true Church of Christ by a
Woman,

Object. But is it not said that the Angel comes down from Heaven? Therefore it
must either be Christ himself in person, or some mighty Angel that descends
from him out of Heaven to perform his great Service.

In answer whereto I shall first show you, that by this Angel we cannot
understand the person of Christ here descending, and coming from Heaven: and
secondly, show you what we are understand by Heaven.

First, By this Angel we cannot understand the person of Christ.

First, Because this is not the time of his personal coming and appearing,
which will not be till a thousand years after; for this action is but at the
beginning of the thousand years: His personal coming is not to be till the
Judgment day: It being said, that he mu^^ judge the quick and dead at his
appearing and Kingdom, which is not to be till after the thousand years, and
after the Battle of Gog and Magog.

Secondly, Because when he comes in person, it i^ not to such work as this; not
to fight and subdue Enemies with material Swords, nor to put his people as the
Lambs Army and followers upon any such service at that time, being then all to
be in the Resurrection and glorified state made like himself in glory, and as
the Angels of God. Neither will any of his Enemies be in a capacity to make
resistance, or opposition, who in their own persons shall be destroyed by fire,
and the very earth they inhabit, and all its works burnt up and consumed, at
whose presence the Earth and Heaven fly away.

Thirdly, Because such an apprehension would make three personal comings of
Christ. whereas we read but of two ( Heb. 9.28.) who will appear the second
time without sin to Salvation. Because it is expressly said, He sits at the
right hand of God, till his Enemies be made his footstool.

Fourthly, This conquering, fighting work is not by Christ in person at this
time of his glorious and terrible appearing; because the Execution then upon
the Enemies will be sudden and speedy like travail upon a Woman with Child; as
a Thief in the night; like Lightning; as it was in the days of Lot and Noah
with sudden destruction: and as a snare will he come upon all the Inhabitants
of the Earth Whereas this work (as you have heard) is a work of time, gradually
to be performed. The stone smites not the Image all at once, but gradually, and
after smiting beats him to powder, and blows it away: Then by degrees does that
little stone increase to be a great mountain, and to fill the whole Earth:
first the ten Kingdoms in Europe, where the Beast has ruled, must be overcome
in order to Whores judging, for which there is Hallelujah aad Praise by all the
Saints: After that is the Dragon to be dealt with, viz. The Heathen power and
rule all the world through; for all the Kingdoms of this world are to become
the Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ; this therefore asks time, the other is
done at an instant, suddenly, at the sounding of a Trump, in the twinkling of
an eye.

Fifthly, Neither can Christ's personal appearing, be at this time, because then
it must be supposed, that Christ being in the Camp of the Saints and beloved
City shall suffer himself, and all the Glorious Angels and glorified Saints to
be besieged and straightened by the Gog-Magog Army.

Therefore must this be done by his virtual presence power and spirit (though
spoken, as if he did it in person) and these great Conquests effected, as in
the foregoing Chapter is expressed by the Sword coming out of his mouth, viz.
by his word, commission, in his name, and by his authority.

But by what ways will the Lord effect this work upon the Enemy?

Various will be the ways and means, that this great work of removing this
opposition and subduing these Enemies be brought to pass, as the Scripture
plentifully makes mention, viz.

First, Sometimes by appearing against them in some extraordinary way of his
providence, either after the manner of Egypt, by engaging the Host of Heaven
and Stars in their courses against them by Hailstones and Coals of fire, as at
Mount Perizim, or as in the Valley of Gibeon.

Or Secondly, sometimes in an ordinary way, by confounding, dispiriting,
dividing them, engaging them one against the othet, as Isa. 19.2.14. Jer. 51.46.

More especially by raising, spiriting and engaging his own people in the
service to the fulfilling of diverse promises and prophesies, as Genesis 22.17.
Psalm. 110.2. Psalm. 76. Jer. 51.19. to the 25. Obad. 21. Zach. 13.14.12.3. Mal.
4.4. Rev. 17.14.18.4.19.14.

And the fore is the spirit promised to be poured out in the latter day to this
(as one) end. Isa. 28.6.10.27. Zach. 12.6. Isa. 32.15, 16.

And as Satan inspires and influences his Instruments in an invisible,
spiritual manner; so the Lord Jesus directs, guides, governs and spirits his
Saints and followers.

And his special presence (as of old) to accompany his in such great service,
Joshuah 5.13, 14, 15. Numb. 10.35, 36.14.42. Exodus 33.15. Psalm. 68.1. Isa.
51.9, 10, 11. Mica 2.12, 13.7.15. Zeph. 3.8.

And why should it be thought more strange to have the work of God in the hands
of his Saints in binding and keeping under their Enemies; to be represented by
an Angel dealing with a Dragon, then to have the work in the hand of
Constantine against the Pagan Roman power (in the behalf of the Man-child the
type hereof) to be represented by a contest betwixt Michael and the Dragon? It
being said that Michael and his Angels fought, and the Dragon and his Angels,
when Constantine and his followers in the behalf of Christ, fought with and
overcame Maxentius and his Heathen crew, though both of them influenced no
doubt by both the heads and principals, as it may be also concluded in this
place.

This contemporizeth with the witnesses, rising and Earthquake, Vials out of
the Temple, the Lambs war, and the retaliating of Babylon.

Of Heaven.
BY Heaven properly is to be understood either the out-spread Firmament, which
God called Heaven, Genesis 1.8. wherein are the Birds of Heaven, Mat. 13.32. the
Winds of Heaven, Dan. 4.12. the Clouds, Rain and Dew of Heaven. Or the starry
Heaven, Genesis 1.17. Or that Heaven of heavens, the third Heaven, the place of
Gods principal Seat, Mat. 16.9 2 Cor. 12.2.

Figuratively, sometimes for the heights and places above us, sometimes God
himself, Luke 20.21. I have sinned against Heaven Sometimes the Church is called
the Kingdom of Heaven, and often so represented in this Book.

Sometimes for Rule, Dignity and Sovereignty in the world the place of the
Rulers or the Gods, Rev. 12.11. States and Kingdoms in the World political are
(as Mr. Mead observes upon the place) much answerable to the condition of the
world natural and accordingly represented in Scripture; for as the world
natural consists of Heaven and Earth, and in the Heaven Sun, Moon Stars; so in
each State and Kingdom by Nobility and Laity and Diversity of Orders and
degrees in Rule and Government, there is the semblance of them; which
interpretation Dr. Twist highly applauds, convincing (says he) the Reader of
the sense and meaning of the Text, which is delivered by him even to
admiration, wherein he excels greatly in his Preface upon the Key of the
Revelations. And therefore it is familiarly expressed in Scripture, when great
desolations happen to a State or Kingdom in subversion of their Rule and
Government, that the Sun is darkened, Moon eclipsed, Stars fall from Heaven. As
Isa. 13.10. Upon Babilons threatened destruction. Ezekiel 32.7. Upon Aegypts
desolation. And so the Catastrophe that befalls the Kings and great men of the
Earth under tho sixth seal, Rev. 6.12, 13, 14. set forth by like Metaphors, by
Sun being darkened, Moon becoming blood, Stars of Heaven falling to the Earth,
Heaven departing as a Scroll, and Mountains removing out of their places.

Which I take to be the true meaning of Heaven here, viz. the seat of
authority, that the Church was now ascended to after the Victory obtained
against her Enemies, who now by her Rulers, that come forth in Christ's name, by
the righteous Laws, which are the cords and Chains of Christ's Kingdom and by
the visible power, and authority in their hand, bind and chain up their
Enemies, new Heavens, Isa. 65. importing the same.

Of the Dragons Binding, Imprisoning, shutting up, sealing. And bound him and
cast him into the botiomless pit, and Shut him up and set a Seal upon him, that
he should deceive the Nations no more.
THis Binding, Casting into Prison, shuting up and sealing are all terms of
securing, as Dan. 6.16, 17. Mat. 27.64, 65, 66. And are Metaphorical
expressions, taken from the Nature of restraining and safe keeping some
notorious desperate Villane, from doing of mischief. As when some cruel,
murderous desperate wretch is taken, they use to fetter him with heavy Chains,
cast him into the Dungeon, lock the door fast upon him, not only to preserve
the peace and quiet, but to see him forthcoming to the Law day.

Which here holds out not only an absolute Conquest, and subduing of Enemies
(as before) but as much quiet and peace to the Church of God by this their
close imprisonment and restraint, as the neighborhood may expect safety and
quiet, when the murderous Thiefs and Robbers are in Irons in the Dungeon, or as
the Lamb may enjoy freedom and ease, while the Foxes, Wolves and Dogs are in
Chains; As the good Duchess said to the bloody Gardener, looking out of his
prison in Edward the sixth his days, that it was well for the Lambs when the
Foxes were in Chains. For such a righteous Rule by the Laws and Government of
Christ shall take place, that shall be as Chains, Bonds and Cords to all the
wicked tyrants and oppressors, that they shall have no more liberty and power
to domineer and exercise their wonted cruelty over the Saints, then as so many
men in Fetters and Chains.

And that such a state of ease, peace, quiet and rest is to be the portion of
the Church after all their trouble, disturbance and vexation, they have met
with from the bloody tyrants and beastly oppressors by this eminent restraint,
that is to be put upon them, appears from the following Scriptures,

Isa. 10, 9, 10. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for
the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Seas. 10. And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for
an Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his REST shall be
glorious.

Isa. 32.17. And the work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever. 18. And my people shall dwell
in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings and in quiet resting places.

Isa. 60.17, 18. I will also make thy Officers peace, and thy Exactors
righteousness: Violence shall be no more heard in thy Land, wasting and
destruction within thy Borders; but thou shall call thy Walls Salvation, and
thy Gates praise. 21. Thy people shall be all righteous.

Isa. 2.3, 4. Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. 2. And he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears
into Pruninghooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation; neither shall
they learn War any mere.

Isa. 33.20. Look upon Zion the City of our Solemnities. Thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not
one of the Stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the Cords
thereof be broken

Psalm. 7^.3. The Mountains shall bring peace and the little hills by
righteousness. 4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the
children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppresscur. 7. In his days
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the M^on
endures. So Ezekiel. 34.12. to 16.27, 28. Jerem. 50 6.

Heb. 4.9. There remains therefore a Rest (or keeping of a Sabbath) to the
people of God.

This is to be the state of the new Heavens, and the new Earth, wherein
righteousness shall dwell, when Jerusalem shall be a rejoicing and her people a
joy, in whom shall no more be heard the voice of weeping, nor crying, when the
Elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands, etc. This is the new Jerusalems
state, Isa. 65.17, 18.66.22. Rev. 21.3. The beloved City now takes place in the
ruin of the great City Babylon, Rev. 20.9. Now comes the Bride, the Lambs
wife, after the destruction of the Mother of Harlots and Abominations. And the
Palm bearing multitu^e now appears, Rev. 21.9, 10, 11.79.10, etc. Typed out by
Canaan the Land of rest and promise, by Solomon's reign, a time of peace, all
the Enemies being subdued and brought under.

Of the Bottomless pit, that the Angel casts the Dragon into upon his binding.
ANd cast him into the bottomless pit. The word here rendered bottomless pit, is
from the Latin Abissus, taken from the Greek (...) from a and (...) to Cover;
for the deep is covered with waters: sometimes therefore translated the deep, 2
Cor. 11.25. a night and a day in the deep. So the Hebrew (...) is used for
depth of the Sea, Isa. 51.10. Psalm. 42.7. Or for Chaos, Genesis 1.2. and so taken
herein this Book. For the Beast, that is said to come out of the Abyss or
bottomless pit ( Rev. 11.7.17.8.) is said to rise up out of the Sea (^3.1.)
compared with Dan, 7.1, 2 Sea is so called from the gathering together of
Waters ( Genesis 1.10.) and Waters in this book are interpreted to be multitudes
of People, Nations and Tongues, Rev. 17.15. Metapharicolly also put for Hell,
Luke 8.31. Rev. 9.2.

So that as the Dragon, Chap. 12. was cast by Michael from Heaven, viz. from
the Rule, Dignity and Sovereignty that he enjoyed in the Empire, into the Earth
(as Mead well interprets Heaven here; for in no other sense could the Dragon be
in Heaven, or cast out of Heaven, being neither capable of the material Heaven,
nor the Spiritual Heaven the Church: therefore no other but the figurative or
metaphorical Heaven, in which he resided, and out of which upon Michaels
cornbate and overthrow he is thus cast out) so is he here not only deposed and
dethroned, but so kept down during the thousand years reign, as if he was shut
up a close prisoner in a Dungeon or pit.

And in this sense, Earth, Sea, Deep, bottemless pit are much of the same
signification, the Earth being founded upon the Sea. In the 12 Chapt. upon the
Dragons casting upon the Earth, there is a Woe to the inhabitants of the Earth,
and of the Sea. The first Beast Chapt. 13 rises from the Sea, and the second
two horned Beast comes from the Earth, and they are the Earth dwellers, that
succor and support him, wander after and worship him.

He was in the 12 Chapt. cast into the Earth though no restraint upon him; for
he makes reaks there, deceives the nations still, and by his Vicegerent the
Beast, to whom he gives power seat and authority, casts floods against the
Church still, and ingages afresh to their disturbance, as Revel. 16. But here
being cast into the Abyss, he is bound; an absolute restraint is upon him for
this thousand years.

For during the said term, all Empire and Rule is taken from him, and he is not
only cast into the Lump and Mass of the people, the Earth dwellers, from whom
he came out, but such a restraint laid upon him, during Christ's Kingdom, that
the Nations shall know no other Rule, or Sovereignty either in Civil, Military
or Ecclesiastical; but Christ's only; and to which the whole world must be
subject, will they, nill they.

The mystical Dragon is cast into the Sea, Abyss, great Waters, or into the
Earth, or among the Earth-dwellers, that through the Devils influence he should
not deceive the Nations to Idolatry, and murderous slaughter and persecution by
his tyrannous Rule and Government. The Spiritual Dragon influencing, in the
mean time put into his restraint all that time as if chained in Hell.

Of the thousand years.
COncerning the thousand years so often expressed in this Chapter we shall make
this threefold enquiry. First, How we are to take it, whether definitely or
indefinitely. Secondly, If definitely, whether only one space of time is
intended, where a thousand years is so expres'd six several times. And Thirdly,
If so, when those thousand years are said to begin and end.

First, whether to take that number of years indefinitely for a great space of
time, as Psalm. 91.7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy
right hand. So Psalm. 90.4. A thousand years are in thy sight, but as yestarday,
when it is past as a watch in the night for a great while, 1 Samuel 18.7. Saul
has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands; that is, David many more
than Saul, not just so many.

Or definitely, for the certain express time as here mentioned? I conclude the
latter for these Reasons.

First, Because, that when there is no necessity to take a Scripture in a
figurative sense, we are to receive it in the Letter, but neither the scope of
the place, Analogy of Faith, or other Scriptures lay any such necessity upon
us, therefore so to take it.

Secondly, Because this same space is so often repeated by the spirit, to which
we should take the more earnest heed, as matter of instruction and information;
for thrice it is said, Satan was bound a thousand years and afterward loosed,
2. 3. 7. Twice it is said the Saints shall reign a thousand years, verse 4.6.
Once that the rest of the dead lived not again till the thousand years
finished, verse 5. There being a thousand years of Satan's Captivity and the
Rest of dead; and a thousand years of the Saints Reigning with Christ.

If so, then Secondly, Whether these intend one and the same space of time or
no;

That one and the same space of time is hereby intended is manifest, as Pareus
well observes: Because in verse 2. and 6. the thousand years are without an
Article, (...): But four times afterward with an Article (...), these thousand
years emphatically. As if he should say, Satan's imprisonment shall continue a
thousand years, and during these thousand years, the Martyrs shall live and
reign with Christ, and afterward he shall be loosed. The parts to which this
number is applied, are so cemented together as Cause and Effect, distinction
and opposition that they very much strengthen and prove that just account of a
thousand years, viz. Satan is bound a thousand years, that he should not
deceive the Nations, till the same thousand years be fulfilled: Then the Saints
lived and reigned a thousand years with Christ, that same thousand years: But
the rest of the dead lived not again, until these thousand years were
finished; whilst the holy ones as their happiness made Priests of God and of
Christ, Reign with Christ a thousand years.

And as to the third, when these thousand years begin and end, we have this
general account.

That it is the space of time, that is bounded with two Wars, that of the great
Battle of God Almighty before it begins: And that of the Battle of Gog and
Magog, after it is ended, being a time of ease, peace and rest as before.

A space of time, that has the Beasts destruction and judgment, the Dragons
overthrow, binding and imprisonment going before, and the dragons release and
final doom and judgment going after.

A space of time containing the sounding of the seventh ( Rev. 11.15.) Trumpet,
the new Jerusalem the Bride of the Lamb; (21, ^^.) the new Heavens and the new
Earth, the Palme-bearing multitude out of all Nations, Tribes, People and
Tongues, Rev. 7.9. till the War and judgment of Gog, personal coming of Christ,
dissolution of Heaven and Earth, general Resurrection and judgment.

A space of time bounded with two Resurrections, viz. the mistical or
figurative Resurrection of the Church out of her death and slaughter called the
first Resurrection; and the Corporeal Resurrection at the lest day. And with
two deaths, viz. that mistical death of the Rest of the Dead, viz. the wicked
that live not all the thousand years, and the Eternal death which will be their
doom after the thousand years; with two Life's, the mistical of the Church in
the thousand years, and the Eternal Life and Glory to be their portion at
Christ's personal coming after the thousand years. And with two judgments, that
of the Beast and False-prophet with their followers before; and that of the
Dragon and his followers with all the wicked after.

But when particularly as to precise time these thousand years shall begin, is
yet a secret the Lamb has not discovered, contained in the sealed Book; all
being as yet at a loss, as to the certain Epoch of the Apocalyptick numbers,
either as to the forty two Months or 1260, days or years of the Beasts Reign,
or the Churches entering the Wilderness which God in his due time will discover.

Of the living of the Martyrs or first Resurrection. And I saw the Souls of
them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and the Word of God: and
which had not worshipped the beast, neither his Image, neither had received his
Mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands. And they lived, etc.
IN the interpretation of this mistry of the living of the Martyrs, Writers and
Commentators much differ; some judging this to be a Corporeal Resurrection:
others (and they not a few) conceive it to be a spiritual Resurrection, a
renewing and reviving of Soul, the effect of Christ's Spirit upon the heart of
Believers and faithful Witnesses; and a leaving others to a state of sin and
death.

But it is humbly conceived, the mind of the Spirit here it is a mistical
Resurrection, or civil life; they are said to live, as most consonant to Truth,
sound Reason, and the scope of the place. They lived.

Living and dying in Scripture is variously taken sometimes literally for the
natural spirit or Eternal life and death, sometimes figuratively for a civil or
mistical life and death, consisting either in a freedom from misery and
di^^ress in this life; the lying under which is called death, Isa. 52.2. Isa.
26.19. Luke 2.34. 2. Chron. 19.10. And freedom therefrom into a prosperous
state, Resurrection and Life. Resurrection, Isa. 52.2. 1 Samuel 2.7, 8. Isa.
26.14.19, Romans 11.19. Life, Job 21.7. Psalm. 38.19. Hosea 6.2. The not freedom
therefrom, an unraised state, Psalm. 140.10. Isa. 2^.14 43.17. Amos 8.14.

This therefore holds out under these terms of living or first
Resurrection-state, the beginning of the Churches glorious, happy, and
peaceable condition (whereof all the Prophets speak) after her long sorrow and
suffering, her Enemios being now conquered and brought under, alluding to the
Corporeal Resurrection; for as the Saints cannot enter into Glory, and triumph,
till the bodies be raised out of the Dust, and revived, and Resurrection power
passes upon them: No more shall the Church enter into its promised Rest,
foretold to be enjoyed by her in this life, till this mistical Resurrection or
reviving passes upon her, before which under the Beasts Dominion they are but
as so many slain, and dead men, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9, 10.6.9. They are so in a
natural sense, because they worship not the Beast, Rev. 13.15. Dan. 3.6. Being
killed all the day long, Romans 8.36. viz. in purpose and decree and by sentence
of the Antichristian Laws, multitudes also feel^ng actually the force of them
under the bloody Beast and Scarlet colored Whore; muchmore in a civil sense,
thrust down from the exercise of all power, dignity and Sovereignty in the
behalf of Christ, either in Civils or Ecclesiastics, So was it with Israel in
Babylon in these respects. as persons put into their Graves, Ezekiel. 37.12 as so
many dead men.

But now is the time come (their Mortal deadly Enemies being brought down by an
high hand) that they shall not only have all the bloody Laws and Decrees
reverst, and cancelled, and so be freed from all danger or damage, that may
come to their persons: But be revived to a civil life, and put now into a
capacity to come into the exercise of power, dignity and Sovereignty, both in
Church and State; for as is the Death, so the Resurrection. Therefore is it
said, that when Israel were to come out of Babylon, and restored to former
privileges in their own Land, the Lord opened their Graves, caused Bone to
come to its Bone, Sinew to its Sinew, put a Spirit of Life into them, set them
upon their feet, to their becoming an exceeding great Army, whereby they came
again to the exercise of their former Jurisdictions in Rule and Government
among themselves.

And so a parrallel place to this Rev. 11.11. The Church having passed the
State of Death, Slain, Slaughtered Witnesses during the Beasts reign and rage,
comes now to have a Spirit of Life from God enter into them, enabling them to
stand upon their feet. And then a voice from Heaven, or the Orb of Government
and Rule (for so Heaven here, and in the Rev. 12.7. is to be taken) calls them
up thereto, alluding hereby to Christ's dead body that was killed, raised, and
ascended into Heaven, And so the Prophet, Isa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise: Awake and Sing, ye that dwell in
the Dust; for thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the
Dead.

And parallel to this, Hosea 6.2. After two days he will revive us; in the
third day he will raise us, and we shall live in his sight. His mistical body
the Church being in a mistical way to conform and suit in a figure to the
Death, Resurrection and Ascension of his real Body.

The Prophet Hosea also in the 13, 14. ver. foretelling this promised
restoration to the Church in this mistical manner, does it in terms alluding
to the Corporeal Resurrection, to which also the Apostle refers, 1 Cor. 15.55.
when he asserts that Doctrine of the Resurrection. I will ransom them from the
power of the Grave, I will redeem them from Death: O Death, I will be thy
Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction: Repentance shall be hid from my
Eyes. And again by the Prophet Isa. 25.8. Speaking of this very time. He will
swallow up Death in Victory, and the Lord will wipe away tears from all faces,
and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the Earth; for the
Lord has spoken it. Which very words of the Prophet are repeated by John, and
applied to this very time, Rev. 21.4. Rev. 7.17. Now as is the Death, so must
the Resurrection be: to the Spiritual Death there is a Spiritual Resurrection,
to the mistical Death a mistical Resurrection, to the Corporeal Death a
Corporeal Resurrection.

To this the Assemblies Annotations upon this place seem to concur also, Rev.
20.5, 6. After Antichrists destruction there will be such a new face of the
Church, as if the Saints were all raised up again. This Resurrection is not of
particular persons, but of whole Churches and Nations, as Romans 11.15. alluded
to in the raising of dead Bones, Ezekiel 37. in which they are said to have part.

And that the Corporeal Resurrection of the Saints cannot be understood in this
place, further appears.

First, Because the Text in the Letter of it speaks not of their Bodies, but
Souls, and of the Souls only of them that were beheaded, as Rev. 6.9. And I saw
under the Altar the Souls of them, that were slain for the Word of God, etc.
Now it is no where said, that Souls in a proper sense revive and are raised;
because they never dye being Immortal, and so not capable of Resurrection;
necessitating therefore another sense.

Secondly, Because if we are here to understand a bodily Resurrection of the
Saints (Martyrs only being here mentioned and beheaded Martyrs too, taking in
no other Saints and only such too, that suffered under Antichrist) then will
Christ have but a small Kingdom: And then only such Martyrs partaking of that
first Resurrection are to share of happiness and freedom from second Death;
excluding all but such both from happiness and exemption from such a curse,
contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and whole current of Scriptures; for what by
such Doctrine will become of all the Saints from Abel to this time, that were
not Martyrs under Antichrist.

Thirdly, Because this will hold out an absurdity of a twofold Resurrection (a
thousand years distant each from other) of bodies, contrary to John 5.28. The
hour is coming, in which all that are in the Graves, shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth, they that have done Good to the Resurrection of Life; and
they that have done Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation. The state of the
Resurrection being there held forth by Christ to be general and universal,
relating to Good and Bad, and to be at one time, the hour. So in John 6. four
several times he refers the Saints Resurrection to the last day, verse 39.40,
44, 54. The professed Faith of the Saints in that day, John 11.24. And Martha
said unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last
day. So 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the
last Trump; for the Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed, Joh 19.25, 26. For I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. 26.
And though, after, my skin, Worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God. So Job 14.12. Man lies down and rises not till the Heavens be no
more, etc. By which two Scriptures in Job the last day and time of the last
Trump is explained, and limited to Christ's personal coming, and end of the
world, or dissolution of the Heavens and the Earth, as 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12.
Rev. 20.11.

Fourthly, Because this opinion holds out this to be the first bodily
Resurrection, contrary to what the Scripture speaks of, nine going before it.
As first, the Widow of Sarepta's Son, 1. Kin. 17.22. 2ly, The Son of the
Shunnamite, 1 Kings 4.35. 3ly The man that was raised by the touch of the
Prophets Coffin. 2 Kings 13.21. 4y The Widow of Naim's Son, Luke 7.15. 5ly The
Daughter of Jairus, Luke 8.55. 6y Lazarus, John 11.44. 7ly Those many that came
out of their Graves accompanying Christ at his Resurrection. 8ly Tabitha, Acts
9.41. 9ly Eutichus, Acts 20.16. By which several instances it must appear, thar
either this is not a Corporeal Resurrection spoken of, or these nine mentioned
were not so; for this cannot be said in truth to be the first Corporeal
Resurrection, when nine went before it, but the Tenth Resurrection rather.

Fifthly, The Bodily Resurrection cannot be here meant, because that is not to
be till a thousand years after this, as in this Chapter, when all the Elements
must give up their Dead, Rev. 20.12, 13.

Sixthly, This cannot be the Corporeal Resurection of the Saints; for that
cannot be till Christ's personal coming and appearing, and day of Judgment, 1
These. 4.14. Them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Cor. 15.23.
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, 2 Timothy
4.1. Who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom.
And (as before) Christ's personal coming is proved by many arguments not to be
till after the thousand years: And it is as clear that the Judgment day is not
till after the thousand years, and destruction of the Gog Magog Army.

Seventhly, This cannot be the Corporeal Resurrection of the Saints, because it
inverts Christ's order, which is to be at the sounding of the last trumpet. The
time of the living Saints change, the time that is expres'd to be the last day,
which is the time of his coming and appearing, which is the Judgment day. But
this a thousand years before all.

Eighthly, Because if Corporeal and to be understood of Martyrs only, then all
the dead at the last day shall be raised to the second death; contrary to John
5.24.6.39, 40.44 54. Dan. 12.2. And they only as Martyrs, Priests to God,
contrary to 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev. 1.^.

Ninthly, Because if this be understood to be the Resurrection of all the
Saints, who in that immortal and glorified state are to live and Reign the
thousand years in and over the world, it necessarily infers these strange
absurdities.

First; that glorified and unglorified, mortal and immortal bodies must
converse together; for it necessarily follows, if the Saints are raised, then
is Christ come in Glory, and their vile bodies are made like to his glorified
body; and that Christ and the Saints and Angels in this glorified state
converse with the men of the world, Ruling, Governing and Ordering them in the
respective policies by Zions Laws and Edicts, contrary to express Scripture, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see, viz. No mortal man, no
unglorified man; for if Moses that had only a glimps of Gods back parts, had
such a Glory upon him, that the Children of Israel could not converse with him
without a vail; And the Disciples were not able to stand before Christ in the
Transfiguration, nor Paul in the Vision; how unable will wicked men be to stand
before, and converse with Christ, who appears in transcendent Glory, both in
his own and the Fathers Glory, the Glory of all the Holy Angels, and Glory of
all Saints, as hereafter: And it is expressly said, that none can see God and
live, Exodus 33.20. It being impossible that any poor, mortal, finite Creature
can see and stand before the glorious, immortal and infinite Being, without
being consumed.

Secondly, It holds out that some glorified and unglorified Saints, shall at
this time converse together, viz. those that are raised from the dead, with
those that are then upon the Earth, when the Scripture tells us, 1 Cor. 15.51,
52. that at the same instant, that the dead Saints are raised, the living
Saints, are changed at a Moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye, which must needs
be so.

1. Because when Christ comes, he must have all the Saints come with him, who
are raised, changed and glorified, taken up in the Air to meet him, and in that
state are ever with him; not one Saint being to be left behind.

2. Because he then appears in flaming fire, againt them that know him not, nor
obey his Gospel, the day of Grace being then over, and none to be converted
after that: And therefore are all the exhortations of making ready, of getting
Oil in the Vessel and in the Lamp, before he comes, it being too late to do it
after he comes.

A third absurdity is, that whereas Christ says, The last Enemy is Death, here
the raised Saints after death are to meet with another Enemy, the Gog-Magog
Army.

Tenthly, This cannot be the Corporeal Resurrection because it is said
expreslly, that during this thousand years, the new Jerusalem, new Heaven and
new Earth-state, the Saints shall build, plant, Marry and give in Marriage,
enjoy the works of their hands, dispense Laws, manage Governments in the world,
and be liable to death and dessolution therein, which is utterly inconsistent
with the Resurrection-state, Luke 20.34. The Children of this world marry and
are given in marriage. 35. But they which shall be accounted worthy to'btain
that world, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry nor are given in
marriage, neither can they dye any more,; for they are equal to the Angels, and
are the childeren of God, being the Children of the Resurrection, the
dispensing of Laws, managing worldly policies and affairs, being as utterly
inconsistent with this state also.

Secondly, Neither can this living or rising again intend the Spiritual
Resurrection, viz. the rising from the death of sin to the life of Grace, the
converted, changed state, though that will abundantly be manifested herein,
both amongst Jews and Gentiles by the preaching of the Gospel.

1. Because it is supposed it speaks of the Church that were converted and
lived a spiritual life.

2. Neither was this a life their Enemies could take from them; for in this
sense they lived all the time of the Beasts and the Dragons rage and rule, and
in this respect might be said to live most, when most liable to outward death
and distresses,

Thirdly neither can this be the Eternal Life of Glory, Because this speaks of
a state, that precedes that a thousand years.

Therefore lastly it will follow, that if it be neither the Corporeal,
Spiritual nor Eternal Life, that is here meant, to which the Saints are raised,
then must it be the mistical or civil life, to which the Prophets give witness,
as before: And the rather so, because of that mistical and civil death, that
all Saints are liable to, and lie under, during Antichrists reign, because they
refuse to worship the Beast or his Image, or receive his Mark and Number, etc.
As also bcause the whole Church and all Saints do at this time partake of this
life; because it is said in the next verse, that the rest or others lived not,
viz. those that did worship the Beast, the Character of the Antichristian
Church, they lived not this thousand years, viz. this mistical life: But are
now to take their turns in the Valley of the shadow of death, liable now to the
Prison-state, and Gibbet. to give an account for all their cruelties and
murders, to be killed all the day long, to be filled in the Cup they have
filled, and as being thrust in the pit and bound, kept from all Rule, Dignity
and Authority,

Object. But why must the Church be included under these terms or characters of
Souls beheaded, and that would not worship the Beast?

Answ. Because it may more emphatically and significantly held forth the state,
they are raised from and raised to.

Various are the names and Characters, the Church is represented by in this
Book, and yet all suitable to their present posture and station, viz. In her
primitive purity and lusture, a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under
her feet, and upon her head a Crown of Twelve Stars: In her persecuted,
afflicted state under the Dragon or Rome Heathen, Souls under the Altar, Rev.
6.9, 10. Slain for the Word of God, and Testimony they held, and so here Souls
of the beheaded Rev. 20. In her contests with the Dragon, Rev. 12.2. A woman
with Child cried traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered. Under the
Beast tyranny, and persecution, Rev. 12. A Woman flying into the Wilderness,
Rev. 11. Witnesses in Sackcloth and slain Witnesses: In their cleaving to
Christ, whilst so many wonder and wander after the the Beast, the Lambs
followers, the Sealed and Marked ones, Keepers of the Commandments of God and
Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 14. In the^r courageous opposition to Tyranny and
Idolatry, called Victors over the Beasts Image, Mark, Number, Name. In their
Martial attempts against the Beast and Whore, the called, chosen and faithful,
the Lambs Army. In her quiet, peaceable state, Kings and Priests, Ascenders of
Heaven and the Throne of God, Reigners with Christ, the Bride, the Lambs Wife,
the new Jerusalem, the beloved City, the Palme-bearing multitude. The false
Church being represented also under various Marks, Names and Characters, as you
may find under another Head, and amongst the rest, they are called the Dead,
that shall not live this thousand years. As Antichrist and his followers dye
and go off the Stage; so Christ and his followers live and come on: The death
of the one is the life of the other,

Of the rest of the Dead that lived not. But the rest of the Dead lived not
again till the thousand years were finished.
IN the understanding of this death of the wicked, interpreters as much differ,
as they do about the living of the Saints. Some suppose a Corporeal death that
is here intended; intimating that whilst the Saints and Martyrs are raised, to
live and Reign with Christ, the bodies of the wicked shall not be raised, but
are to lie in their Graves, all the thousand years.

And others suppose it a spiritual death, a death in sin, an unconverted,
unregenerated state, that the wicked will be found in during all the thousand
years.

But it is humbly conceived there is the same good ground t'understand this as
the former living of the Saints, viz. in a metaphorical sense: As that living
of the Saints is to be taken to be a civil life; so this death of the wicked is
to be understood a civil death, being the direct Antithesis to the former, and
so indeed no other then a confirmation, and illustration of that happy state of
the Saints; for as when the Beast and Dragon and their worshipers lived, viz.
were found in the full exercise of power, Rule and Authority in the world, the
Saints then civilly dyed, being not only put out of all capacity of that kind,
but made liable to all manner of natural deaths and distress for opposing their
usurpations, and refusing their Idolatrous worship; so when the Saints come to
take their turns to live in power and authority, then shall all the Beasts and
Dragons worshipers and followers, take their turns in a state of death too, not
only thrust from all Rule and Authority, but rendered liable to give an account
with their lives and liberties for all their cruelties and murders, during
their tyrannous usurpations: When they must have retaliation, and be filled in
the Cup, they have filled to others, and be rewarded as they have rewarded the
Saints, during their reign and rage. For how much she has glorified her self
and lived deliciously, so much torment and soorrw she must have.

Object. But why called the rest of the Dead that lived not again?

This also is a proper Character of the false Church, holding out their present
posture and condition, sometimes termed Earth-dwellers, Beast-worshipers and
Wonderers, Babylon, Whore, a Glorious Queen, City of the Nations, and here
according to their dethroned, slaughtered, imprisoned, captivated state, The
Dead that lived not.

But why the Rest of the Dead, so read, as Pareus, after the manner of the
Greek, the Genetive for the Nomnative, the rest of the dead for the rest being
dead: so Rev. 9.20. rest of the men, that is, other men. The word (...) being
other, as Ephesians. 6.10. 1 Cor. 7:29. 1 Timothy 4.13, 20. The Saints that were dead,
that would not worship formerly in the Dragons and Beasts life and reign are
now alive: But the other men that worshipped Beast and Dragon, enter now a state
of Death and Judgment, who are judged to death all the thousand years, no more
to Rule or Reign either in Civils, Militaries, or Ecclesiastics (for, or under
the Beast) during that time, then they permited the Saints to exercise any such
Sovereignty for, and in the behalf of Christ, during their day; for as one goes
up, the other goes down. They are not to live again till the thousand years be
finished, implying that when the Dragon is loosed, there will then be a
Military power and jurisdiction at least, that they may live to, again in
opposition unto Christ and the Saints, in their encompassing the Camp of the
Saints, and beloved City, which their said raised state makes good, and
confirms the former interprepretation, that their death is mistically and
figuratively to be understood of a civil, and not literally of a Corporeal
death; for if the dead men must not live again till the thousand years be
expired, and then must be raised out of their Graves, and in that
Resurrection-state appear in that Military posture, is such an absurdity, that
I presume none will own: Wicked men being not raised to make opposition against
Christ and his Saints, but to appear to judgment, being the Resurrection (to
them) of Damnation, as to the raised Saints of Life and Salvation.

Of Reigning with Christ. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and
Judgment was given unto them, etc. And they lived and Reigned with Christ a
thousand years, etc. And they shall be Priests to God and Christ, etc.
AFter the Saints are revived and a Spirit of Life entered into them, they are
called up and ascend into Heaven, says Rev. 1.1. viz. to Rule and Government,
as Page 39. to Kingly power, to sit upon Thrones and have judgment committed to
them, says this Text, Ensigns of Sovereignty, Psalm. 122.5. Psalm. 7.21. 1. Dan.
7.22. Alluding to the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ after his Death, who
Ascending Heaven had all power, judgment, and authority given to him, Mat.
28.18. John 5.22, 27.

So shall it be in like manner with his mistical body in their mistical
Resurrection and Ascension: They are to Ascend the Throne of Christ, and to
receive Judgment, Rule and Authority from him, having suffered with him during
Antichrists Reign, and are now as Kings to Reign with him in his Kingdom.

Which Kingly state of the Saints is confirmed by diverse Scriptures, whereof
take some few.

Rev. 5, 10. And has made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall
Reign on the Earth. (Being part of the new song of the 24 Elders, that are said
to be about the Throne in Chap. 4.10. with white Raiment and Crowns of Gold,
casting them down before the Throne, interpreted here in the 9. verse of 5. to
be the Church of God, that were redeemed by his Blood, out of every Kindred,
Tongue, people and Nation.)

Compared with Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own Blood: And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to
him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever.

Daniel 7.17. These great Beasts which are four, are four Kings, which shall
arise out of the Earth (viz. the four Monarchies, as interpreted Chap. 2.18.)
But the Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom
for ever. 2^. And judgment was given to the Saints of the most high. 26. And
the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and
destroy it to the end. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion and the greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom: and all Dominions
shall serve and obey him.

Which is the very same spoken of Dan 2.44. and in the days of these Kings (viz
four Monarchs typed out by the Image) the God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other
people: but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever.

Psalm. 110 2. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy strength (viz. his Septer, or
Ensign of Rule and Dignity) out of Zion (the new Testament Church) Rule thou in
the midst of thine Enemies, Mica 4.8. And thou O Tower of the Flock, the strong
hold of the Daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first Dominion,
the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, Rev. 2.26, 27. And he that
overcomes and keeps my Works unto the end, to him will I give power over the
Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, as the Vessels of a Potter
shall they be broken to pieces, even as I have received of my Father, and I
will give him the Morning Star.

Which glorious reign is held forth to us in the particulars following, viz.

First, In the Great Extent. Secondly, in the Glorious Administration (which is
first in dispensing Laws, 2ly Administering judgment, both punishing the Evil,
and rewarding the Good) to the increase of 1. Peace, 2. Plenty, and 3.
Protection. Sixthly, the great conversions both of Jews and Gentiles.
Seventhly, the increase of holiness. Eighthly, Freedom from sorrow. Ninthly,
Restoration of the Creature.

First, The extent of this Kingdom is no less than the bounds of the Beasts and
Dragons Territories, even the whole Earth, Rev. 16.14. No less than the limits
of the four preceding Monarchies, as Dan. 7.27. And the Kingdom and Dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. So Dan. 2.34, 35. The Universality
whereof is confirmed also by these following Scriptures.

Isa. 60.11. Thy Gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day
nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that
their Kings may be brought. 12. For the Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve
thee shall perish: Yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted.

Isa. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the last deays that the Mountain, of
the Lords house shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow thereunto.

Agreeable to the first promise to Abram, Genesis 12.3. And I will bless them that
bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all the Families
of the Earth be blessed. Ratified also by an Oath, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. By my
self have I sworn (says the Lord) that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand
which is upon the Sea Shore. And thy seed shall possess the Gate of his
Enemies: And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.

Rev. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in
Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

So Psalm. 2.8. Psalm. 29.10. Isa. 19.23, 25.

The glorious Administration consists,

First in dispensing the Righteous Laws of the Lord in opposition to the Laws
of the Nations, the Statutes of Omri; the Lord alone being the Lawgiver.

Mica 4.2. And many Nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for the Law shall go forth of
Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Therefore it is said. Isa. 51.4.
Hearken unto me my people, and give ear unto me Oh my Nation; for a Law shall
proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.
5. My Righteousness is near, my Salvation is gone forth, and mine Arms shall
judge the people, the Isles shall wait upon me, and upon mine Arm shall they
trust. Therefore verse the 7th Hearken to me ye that know Right, the People in
whose heart is my Law. Fear not the reproach of men, etc.

Isa. 42.2. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in
the Land, and the Isles shall wait for his Law. Verse 21: The Lord is well
pleased for his Righteousness sake: He will magnify the Law, and make it
Honorable.

And further as a precept for the day, Mal. 4.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses
my Servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel with the
Statutes and Judgments, Ezekiel. 44.23, 24.

Secondly, In Administering Justice and Judgment and Righteousness to the
increase of Peace and plenty and protection, the blessings of good Government.

Isa. 1.26 And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and the Counselors,
as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness,
the faithful City

Ps. 72.7. In his days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of Peace, so
long as the Moon endures. Verse the 2. of that Psalm. He shall judge thy people
with Righteousness and thy poor with Judgment. Verse 11. All Kings stall fall
down before him, all Nations shall serve him. 12. For he shall deliver the
needy, when he cries, the poor also and him that has no helper. 13. He shall
spare the poor and needy, and save the Souls of the needy. 14. He shall redeem
their Soul from deceit and violence, etc.

Isa. 60.17, 18. I will also make thy Officers peace, and thine exacters
Righteousness. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting and
destruction within thy Borders: But thou shall call thy walls Salvation, and
thy Gates praise. 21. Thy people also shall be all Righteous, they shall
inherit thy Land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands that
I may be glorified.

Isa. 62.2. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy
Glory.

Isa. 11.4. With righteousness shall he Judge the Poor, and reprove with
Equity, for the meek of the Earth: and he shall smite the Earth with the Rod of
his Mouth, and with the breath of his Lips shall he slay the wicked. 5. And
righteousness shall be the Girdle of his Loins, and faithfulness the Girdle of
his Reins. 6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and etc. 9. They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain: for the Earth shall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea.

Isa. 2.4. And he shall Judge among the Nations and rebuke many people: and
they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning
hooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn
War any more.

Isa. 32.16, 17. Then Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and
righteousness remain in the fruitful Field; and the work of righteousness shall
be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever:
and my people shall dwell in a peaceable Habitation, and in sure dwellings, and
in quiet resting places.

Isa. 33.5. He has filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. 6. And wisdom
and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times.

Isa. 66.12. I will extend peace to her like a River, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream, etc.

Joel 3.18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Mountains shall
drop down new Wine, and the Hills shall flow with Milk: and all the Rivers of
Judah shall flow with Waters, and a Fountain shall come forth of the House of
the Lord, and shall water the Valley of Shittim. Then Egypt shall be a
desolation.

Amos 9.13. Behold the days come (says the Lord) that the Plowman shall
overtake the Reaper; and the treader of Grapes him that sows Seed, and the
Mountains shall drop sweet Wine, and all the Hills shall melt.

Ezekiel. 34.26. And I will make them and the places round about them my Hill, a
blessing: and I will cause the Shower to come down in his season: there shall
be Showers of blessing. 27. And the Tree of the Field shall yield her fruit,
and the Earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their Land,
etc. 28. And they shall no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the
Beasts of the Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall
make them afraid.

Isa. 51.3. He will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert like the
Garden of the Lord, So Ezekiel. 36, 35.

Isa. 49 10. They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor Sun
smite them: for he that has mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs
of Waters shall he guide them. 12. Behold these shall come from far: and lo
these from the North, and from the West, and from the Land of Sinim.

Isa. 65.21. And they shall build Houses and inhabit them; and they shall plant
Vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. 22. They shall not build and another
inhabit; they shall not plant and another eat; for as the days of a Tree, are
the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
23. They shall not labor in vain, and bring forth for trouble: For they are
the Seed of the blessed of the Lord and their Offspring with them. 25. The
Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat Straw like the
Bullock: And dust shall be the Serpents meat; They shall not hurt nor destroy
in all my Holy Mountain (says the Lord) spoken of the New Heaven and New Earth
State, as Verses 17, 18. Which golden Age is further described.

Psalm. 72.11.15. Isa. 60.17. For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron Silver,
and for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron.

To which peace and plenty is added the eminent protection that is vouchsafed
in this day.

Isa. 4, 5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion,
and upon her assemblies a Cloud and smoke by day, and shining of a flaming fire
by night; for upon all the Glory shall be a defense 6. And there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain.

Zach 2.5. For I (says the Lord) will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her.

The blessing also of which blessed reigning day, consists much in the great
Conversions, that shall be effected both among the Jews and Gentiles, by the
publication of the Gospel.

Gentiles Conversion, Psalm. 87.3, 4, 5. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O
City of God, Selah. 4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon, to them that
know me; behold Philistia and Tire with Ethiopia; This man was born there. 5.
And of Zion it shall be said this and that man was born in her, and the highest
himself shall establish her.

Isa. 1.27. Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her converts with
Righteousness.

Isa. 11.10. And in that day shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious. 12. And he shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble
the out casts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the
four corners of the Earth.

Isa. 60:5. Then thou shall see and flow together, and thy heart shall fear and
be enlarged; because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, 6. The multitude of Camels shall
cover thee: The Dromedaries of Median and Epha: all they from Sheba shall come,
they shall bring Gold and Incense, and they shall show forth the Praises of the
Lord. 7. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the Rams
of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: They shall come up with acceptance on
mine Altar, and I will glorify the house of my Glory. 8. Who are these that
fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows. 9. Surely the Isles shall
wait for me, etc. 10. And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls.

Isa. 35.1, 2. The Wilderness and solitary place shall be glad for them, and
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as a Rose. 2. It shall blossom abundantly
and rejoice even with joy and singing; the Glory of Lebanon shall be given unto
it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon: They shall see the Glory of the Lord
and the excellency of our God. 5. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,
and the ears of the deaf shall be unstoped. 6. Then shall the Lame man Leap as
an Heart, and tongue of the dumb sing; for in the Wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the Desert.

Amos 9.11. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David, that is fallen
and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will
build it as in the days of old. 12. That the may possess the Remnant of Edom,
and of all the Heathen, which are called by my name, says the Lord that does
this. which is interpreted, Acts 15.16. the Conversion of the Gentiles to
Christ Jesus.

Isa. 19.24. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with
Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the Land. 25. Whom the Lord of Hosts
shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyrya the work of mine
hands and Israel mine Inheritance.

Zechar. 8.23. Thus says the Lord of Hosts in those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you;
for we have heard that God is with you.

Rev. 21.24. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light
of it* and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it. 27.
And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing, that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are written in
the Lamb's Book of life.

Zech. 12.10, And I will pour upon the House of David and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications: and they shall look upon
him, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for
his first born.

Amos 9.10. And in that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is
fallen, etc.

Romans 11.15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the World,
what shall the receiving of them be but life from the Dead? So the 23. And they
also if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able
to graff them in again. 24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree, which
is wild by nature, and were graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive Tree;
how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed into their
own Olive Tree? 25. For I would not, Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of
this Mystery (least you should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in
part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. 25. And
so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Zion,
the Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob.

4. The abounding of Holiness, Isa. 35.8. And an Highway shall be there, and
away; and it shall be called the way of Holiness: The unclean shall not pass
over it; but it shall be for those.

Joel 3.17. Then shall Jerusalem be Holy, and there shall no stranger pass
through her any more.

Zech. 14.20. In that day shall there be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness
unto the Lord, and the Pots in the Lord's House shall be like the Bowls before
the Altar: 21. Yea, every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be Holiness unto
the Lord of Hosts: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the
House of the Lord of Hosts. Hos. 9. Ezekiel. 44.9. Rev. 21.1.

Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all righteous.

Zeph. 3.13. The Remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity nor speak lies:
neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths.

2 Pet. 2.13. New Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Rev. 21.1. And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth. 2. And I John saw the Holy
City, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, etc. 3. Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, etc. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into
it any thing that defiles, etc. but they that are written in the Lamb's Book.

Outward and visible acts of Worship, Rev. 88. Rev. 21.

Freedom from Sorrow, Pain and Sickness.
Isa. 25.8. The Lord will in that day wipe away all tears from all faces; and
the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the Earth: for the
Lord has spoken it.

Isa. 54.13, 14. Thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy Children: In righteousness shall thou be established; thou
shall be far from oppression (for thou shall not fear) and from terror, for it
shall not come near thee.

Isa. 60 15. Whereas thou have been forsaken, I will make thee an eternal
excellency: violence shall be no more heard in thy Land; the days of thy
mourning shall be ended.

Isa. 65.19. I will joy in my people, and the voice of weeping, or crying shall
no more be heard in her.

Rev. 7.16, 17. They shall hunger no more For the Lamb in the midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be
no more sorrowing, nor crying, nor pain, Ezekiel. 28.24. Jer. 30.10.

Superabounding pouring forth of the Spirit.
Joel 2.28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my
spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, your
old Men shall dream Dreams, your Youngmen shall see Visions: 29. And also upon
the Servants and upon the Handmaids in those days, will I pour out my Spirit.
Isa. 32.15.

Lastly, The restoration of the Creature.
Isa 65.17. For behold I create a new Heavens, and a new Earth; and the former
shall not be remembered, no come into mind. 25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together, etc.

Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory, which shall be revealed in us. 19. For
the earnest expectation of the Creature waits for the manifestation of the
Sons of God. 21. Because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, etc.

This glorious and happy state of the Church in this your Rule, Dignity, and
Soveraignity is called in Scripture the Kingdom of Christ, and is so spoken
off, as if he was personally present with them in all this work before
mentioned, both in the conquering, as well as peaceable part of the Kingdom.

First, As to the Conquering part, or (as by way of distinction called) the
Kingdoms of the Stone, it is called his Kingdom and spoke of, as if he were
personally present.

Dan. 2.44. And in the days of those Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the Kingdom shall not be left to
other people, etc. The interpretation of Verse 34. Thou saw till that a
Stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet, that were
of Iron and Clay, and brake them to pieces. (Interpreted to be the fourth or
last Monarchy Chapt. 7 and Verse 40. of this Chapter) 35. And the Stone that
smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth.

Rev. 17.14. These (viz. the ten Horns, ten Kingdoms, or ten Toes of this
Image) make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful. (Spoken as though personally present in the work) and parallel to
this.

Rev. 19.11. And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat
upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and
make War. 13. And he was clothed in a Vesture dipped in blood, (taken out of
Isa. 63.2. etc.) And his name is called the Word of God: 14. And the Armies
which are in Heaven followed him upon white Horses, clothed in fine Linen
white and clean. 15. And out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he
should smite the Nations: and he shall Rule them with a Rod of Iron: and he
treads the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. 16. And he
has on his Vesture and Thigh written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And
then there is an invitation to the Fouls of Heaven to feast themselves with the
flesh of Kings, Captains, and Mighty Men in the Supper of the great God.

And in the 45 Psa. a Prophecy of the Kingdom, Verse 3. Gird thy Sword upon thy
Thigh, O most Mighty, with thy Glory and thy Majesty. 4. And in thy Majesty
ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness, and righteousness: and thy
right hand shall teach thee terrible things. 5. Thine Arrows are sharp in the
heart of the Kings enemies; whereby the people fall under thee, (And then after
this Conquest, as though in it in person.) 6. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, etc. So Psa. 66.3.
Isa. 42.13, Haggai 2.22. As in Page 23. Isa. 35.4.

Secondly, The Peaceable part of the Kingdom, or the Kingdom of the Mountain,
so spoken of as if Christ was personally present.

Ps. 72.1. Give the King thy judgment, O God, and thy righteousness unto the
Kings Son. 2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment. 3. The Mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
Hills by righteousness. 7 In his days shall the righteous flourish, and
abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures. 8. He shall have dominion also
from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the Earth, etc. 11. Yea, all
Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him, etc.

Dan. 7.14. And there was given him ( viz. the Son of man Christ Jesus)
Dominion and Glory and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should
serve him: His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away,
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. 27. And the Kingdom and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve him.

Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
justice and judgment in the Earth. 6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name, whereby he shall called, the
Lord our righteousness.

Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, he shall be their shepherd.
24. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among them;
I the Lord have spoken it.

Jer. 39.9. They shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom I
will raise up unto them.

Luke 1.32. He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. 33. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be
no end. And so again upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet.

Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. And again,

Rev. 20.4. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. Rev. 22.3.

Object. But why then should not we so take it, as the Scripture represents it,
and so plainly lays it down? will you be wiser than what is written? why should
we not so receive and believe it?

Answ. First it must be taken for granted, that as the Beasts Kingdom is a
mystery, so is the Kingdom of Christ no less; and threfore is the mind of
wisdom called for, to reach into the one as the other. And as the Apostle (2
Pet. 3.16.) speaking of these things, in which (as he says) there are some
things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest
unto their own destruction; Which therefore calls for great sear, caution and
circumspection in our conversing about these great mysteries.

Secondly, It must be taken for granted, that in the speaking to these things
no sense ought to be given, that denies received fundimental principles; nor
thwarts the Analogy of Faith, nor crosses the current of Scripture.

Thirdly, That it is the genuine sense, true scope and intent of the Scripture,
comparing Scripture with Scripture, and spiritual things with spiritual; and
not only the litteral reading in some places; for otherwise the Racovian
Catechism, asserting Socinianisme shall go for good pay. Nay what Heresy upon
that account may not be asserted and proved? And therefore Maton well says,
whatsoever Text of Scripture is expounded any other ways than god meant by it,
it is according to its interpretation, the word of man and not of God, and
consequently in adhearing to such interpretations we believe not what God
says, but what man does make him say.

Lastly, That we cannot receive these Scriptures in the sense that many give of
them, that thus seem to assert Christ personally to be present, either in the
smiting or peaceable part of his Kingdom, during these thousand years.

Take these following Reasons, and weigh them in the fear of the Lord, in the
true balance of the Sanctuary, wherein we shall first show, why they cannot so
be received

Secondly, In what sense truly according to the mind of Christ, they may and
ought to be received.

First, That Christ Jesus cannot properly be said to be personally present in
the smiting part, besides the five Reasons to this thing, Page ^5, 26, 27.

Because it is expressly said, Psalm. 110.2. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou
at my right hand, until I make thine Enemy thy footstool. compared with,

Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever,
sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting, till his Enemies
be made his footstool. And therefore being as an overcomer, he sat down with
God upon his Throne, and the Earth his footstool: He is upon that Throne to
reign, till all his Enemies be brought down, as 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. For he must
Reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet, the last Enemy that shall be
destroyed, is death.

So that it is most manifest by this positive position, that Jesus Christ is to
sit upon the Throne of Heaven at Gods right hand, till all his Enemies be
subdued; yea till death it self as the last Enemy be conquered, which will not
be till the general Resurrection, when it shall be said, that death is
swallowed up in Victory, and Death and Hell shall be cast into the lake of fire
Therefore by this received principle, Christ shall not leave the Fathers right
hand personally to encounter Dragon, Beast and False-prophet, who are to be
fought with (as is already proved) and vanquished before the general
Resurrection; Nay before the thousand years, at the beginning whereof, many
suppose is this personal coming and Resurrection of the Saints: So that
according to their apprehensions that seeming coming of Christ to war with the
Saints against the Beast, Dragon, and False-prophet, must admit of another
sense, which is also expressed, Page 27, 28.

Secondly, Neither can be properly be said to be personally present in the
peaceable part, or mountain state, during the thousand years.

First, Because besides the constant concurrence of Scripture, the universal
consent of all parties is, that Christ comes not personally till the bodily
Resurrection, and that there is no bodily Resurrection either of Saints or
sinners in the beginning of the thousand years. Take these Eleven Arguments
from Page 40. to 44.

Secondly, It appears from the former Argument of his being at the Fathers
right hand, till the general resurrection, till Death the last Enemy be
destroyed; and if so then the thousand years is to be first over, and the
Battle of Gog, before the general Resurrection shall take place, and that this
is true Doctrine, appears also from all the considerable places that make
mention of his personal coming and appearing, viz.

First, From those Scriptures that assert, that when he comes all the Saints
shall come with him, which cannot be short of the great Resurrection.

1 These. 3.3.13. To the end be may establish your hearts, unblameable in
holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints.

Luke 13.28, 29. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall
see Abram and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and your selves thrust
out. And they shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North,
and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God.

1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again; even so them
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 16 For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. 17. Then we
which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed in a Moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trump
(for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and
we shall be changed.) 54. So when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written; Death is swallowed up in Victory.
55. O Death etc.

By which Scriptures it infallibly appears, that at the coming of Christ all
the Saints shall come with him: The living Saints are to be changed and
glorified; The dead Saints to be raised and glorified. But if this coming of
Christ, and Resurrection be to be understood at the beginning of the thousand
years, then cannot all the Saints come with him: For as page 37, multitudes
both of Jews and Gentiles are to be called and converted in the thousand years;
Therefore cannot it be short of the general Resurrection after the thousand
years.

Secondly, From those Scriptures, that inform his coming to be at the general
Resurrection, p. 40. John 5.28. John 6.39, 40.44.54. 1 Cor. 15.51.52. 1 Thessalonians.
4.16. Job 14 12. Job 19.25, 26.

Secondly, From those several Scriptures, that assign Christ's coming to be at
the General Judgment, to Judge the wicked and the righteous: which is also
long after this thousand years Reign, viz.

1. To Judge the Wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. etc. When the Lord shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels. 8. In flaming fire taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 9.
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his Power; 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, etc. 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the
dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom.

Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. 32. And before
him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another,
as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats. 33. And he shall set the
Sheep at his right hand, but the Goats on the left. 34. And then shall the King
say to them on his right hand, etc.

Jude 14, 15. Verses, And Enoch also the seventh from Adam Prophesyed of these,
saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are Ungodly amongst them, etc.
Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great stand before God, and the Books
were opened. And the dead were judged out of those things, which were written
in the Books according to their works.

2. To Judge the Righteous. Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on
his right hand, etc.

Rev. 20.12. And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, etc.

Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: 20.
And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was Preached unto you: 21. Whom
the Heaven must receive, until the times of Restitution of all things, which
God has spoken by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets, since the World began.

Hebr. 9.28. To them that look for him will he appear the second time without
sin (blotting out the sin) to Salvation.

1 Thessalonians. 2.9. For what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? are not
even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall we appear with
him in Glory.

1 John ^.2. Now are we Sons of God: but it does not yet appear what we shall
be: but when he shall appear, we shall be like him.

Phil. 3.20. For our consolation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for our
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like his glorious body.

1 Pet. 5.4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown of Glory, that fades not away.

By which Scriptures it fully appears, that Christ's personal coming and
appearing, is not till the general Resurrection and general Judgment, which
are after this thousand years Reign.

Fourthly, From those Scriptures, that assign the dissolution of the Heavens
and the Earth to be at his personal coming and appearing.

2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord shall come as a Thief in the Night, in which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat: The Earth also and the work therein shall be burnt up. 12.
Wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved.

Rev. 20.11. From whose face the Heavens and the Earth fled away, with Mark.
13.24.25.26.

By which it is further manifest, that the thousand years Reign must be before;
Otherwise where will be that Building, Planting, Rule, Government in this
World, when the Earth and all its works are burnt up. Therefore of necessity
must these things precede the personal coming and appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

In the next place, Christ's personal coming and appearing cannot be at this
time, from arguments taken from his high Priesthood, and work of Mediation.

We read Hebr. 9.7. That the High Priest alone once every year, not without
blood, did enter into the Holy place to offer for himself, and the errors of
the people, etc. But ( Verse 11) Christ being come, an High Priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands,
that is to say, not of this Building; 12. Neither by the blood of Goats and
Calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the Holy Place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us. 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator
of the New Testament, etc. 24. For Christ is not entered into the Holy places
made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into Heaven it self now
to appear in the presence of God for us, etc.

Hebr. 4.15. And there, as our High Priest is he touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, being in a l points he was tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. To encourage us to hold fast our profession, and to come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, to obtain mercy and find grace to help in the time of our
need; who can have compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way
Heb. 5.2. For if any sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins, etc. 1 John 2.1. Who was in
all things made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people; For in that he himself suffered being tempted, he is
also able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18. And an High Priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 5.6. Who ever lives to make
intercession for us, and to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by
him, Hebr. 7.25. And this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood; Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, etc. For such
an High Priest became us, etc. Heb. 7.24, 25, 26. So that whilst sinners are
to be converted, Saints are liable to sin, suffering, and temptation, and have
need to pray, and be found in the use of Ordinances. Yea, whilst they have any
thing to do with God, short of eternal Glory, they will stand in need of an
Advocate, Mediator, an Intercessour, a Days-man. But this is needful to the
end of the World, in and after the thousand years; Therefore there is a
necessity for the continuance of Christ's Mediation at the right hand of the
Father, whilst Sin, Satan, evil World, and Death remain, and till the Saints be
safely entered into Eternal Rest. Neither can he any more come off from that
work, till he has completed it; then the High Priest was to come off from
within the Vail, till he had perfected the work, for which he entered the Holy
Place. Therefore it will be very dangerous to hold out any Doctrine, that may
entrench upon this great office of the Mediator.

Again, neither can Christ personally appear with all the raised and glorified
Saints in the thousand years Reign, from the consideration of the special work,
that is to be transacted therein, altogether unsuitable for Glorified,
Angelical, Spiritual Bodies; viz. To fight and wage War with material Swords,
To dispense Laws, to manage humane policies in the administration of Judgment,
and Justice amongst men, as well in the execution of Justice upon
Transgressors, as to encourage the Well-doers to build, to plant, etc. To
share of worldly peace and plenty: To Preach the Gospel, dispense and partake
of Ordinances: or to partake of the great Spiritual blessing in the pouring out
of the Spirit; proper only for natural bodies and humane capacities; and how
incongruous it is for mortal and immortal, glorified and unglorified, Heavenly
and Earthly bodies, to converse and transact together; is already manifest.

Upon which considerations we cannot suppose, that Christ can personally be
present in either part of the Kingdom, necessitating therefore some other sense
to those former Scriptures, seeming to hold out the same, more agreeable to
Truth and current of Scripture.

Object. But you will say, in what sense can you suppose Christ to be said to
come, to be with his people to fight against enemies, to Reign and sit upon a
Throne, if not personally?

To the first, concerning Christ's coming, it is necessary that we should take
notice of a fourfold coming of Christ in the Scriptures, viz. A Personal, a
Spiritual, a Mystical, and a providential coming, each of which may also be
used in a double sense.

First, He is said to come in person, when he came in the flesh to take our
Nature upon him, 1 John 4.2. and Heb. 10. and also when he comes the second
time without sin to Salvation, Heb. 2.28. Acts 11 1. 1 Cor. 15.23. These. 1.8.

Secondly, His spiritual coming is, either when he comes by his spirit to
convince, call and convert a Soul, as Ephesians. 3.17. 1 These. 2.13. Rev. 4.20. or to
confirm, seal, and establish by his Spirit, John 14 20. Acts 23.28. Ephesians. 1.13.

Thirdly, It is mistically considered either in his coming in the type, in the
shadowy and legal dispensations, Acts 7. 1 Cor. 10. or in the Evangelical
Antetype, or Gospel dispensation.

Fourthly, He comes in his Providence, either to redeem, deliver and save his
people, Exodus 3.8. Lam. 18.8. Heb. 10.37. or to execute Vengeance in the
destruction of his Enemies, Isa. 63. Luke 18. Hab. 2. Mal. 2.

And it is the mind of wisdom that must rightly and duly apply each of these
according to the scope, drift and meaning of the holy spirit, and not mistake
the one for the other.

Secondly, What are we to understand by Christ's being with a people, or a
people with Christ? can that be otherwise than personal? for it is expressly
said, They Reigned with Christ?

Christ may be said to be with a person or people, when he is so virtually by
his spirit or spiritual presence, or when he is so by his Word, Rule, Law or
Precept.

Judah was said to rule with God, ( Hosea 11.12.) when they cleaved to Gods
Word and Rule.

When Israel rejected the Government by Judges (which was Gods Ordinance and
Appointment) for a King after the manner of the Nations, they were said to
reject God from being their King, who vertually went in and out before them,
and sought their Battles for them, 1 Samuel 8.

And therefore said Jer. 8.19. Is not the Lord in Zion? Is not her King in her?
why have they provoked me to anger with the graven Images?

Solomon was said to sit upon the Throne of the Lord.

And Jehoshaphat in his charge to his Judges (2 Chronicles. 19.6. bids them take
heed what they did; for you judge not for man, but for the Lord, who (he told
them) was with them in the judgment; being called forth as verse 8. for the
Judgment of the Lord, and for controversies.

Christ is said therefore virtually and spiritually to dwell, to rest, to walk
amongst his people, 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 2.1. Isa. 57.15. and they with him, to
live with them and they with him, to suffer with them and they with him, Psalm.
91.15: Acts 7.9. To dye, be buried, quickened, raised with him, Romans 6.4. Col.
2.15. 2 Timothy 2.12. To work with him, 2 Cor 5.6.1. Sup with him and he with
them, Rev. 3. To war and fight together with him and he with them, Rev. 17.
Joshuah 5. To be Captain of the Host and General of the Army, Rev. 19. When all
is but virtually and spiritually so.

So Satan is said to be with his Servants and Subjects acting and instructing,
when he is not personally nor visibly so. Satan shall cast some of you into
prison, Rev. 2.10. Where Satan dwelt, and Satan's Seat and Throne was, Rev.
2.13. When he was only so by his substitutes in his Authority, not really and
personally, but virtually and mistically.

And so to Reign and Rule, as God King'd it in Israel by his Word, Law and
Authority, by his influence and spirit.

As the Dragons Rule is called the Devils, because the Devil influences, acts
and spirits his principal Agents and Instruments, though not personally present.

So may the Rule in the hands of the Saints, be called Christ's Kingdom or
Sovereignty, though he be only virtually not personally present.

It is no new thing so to take it in his mistical Kingdom in the Church, where
his Laws, Statutes and Ordinances are dispensed in his name, and by virtue of
his spirit: It was no new thing to have it so esteemed in Israel in the Typical
Kingdom, when the Law was his, the Rulers by his choice and spiriting, the
policy his, called therefore his Rule, Government, Sovereignty, Throne,
Kingdom. And why then should it be thought strange in the Antetype.

When his Law, Rule, Policy, and Rulers called according to his qualifications,
and influenced by his spirit, shall according to promise and Prophecy come
forth again in the world, why may they not as well be said to Reign with
Christ, as suffer with him. If we suffer with him we shall Reign with him. We
do not think it any absurdity to say, The King of Spain fights and Conquers in
America, and Rules and Reigns there, though never personally present in that
other world, but only vertually so, by his Commissions, by his Laws Civil and
Ecclesiastical, that he has transferred thither; by his Officers and Vice
Roys, that he has appointed in his name to Rule and Govern there. Did not the
Roman Senate of old Govern the world at Rome by their Laws, and Edicts, and
Rulers of Provinces, that they Commissioned and appointed.

But by this Reason you seem to exempt Christ's person from any share of Rule or
Sovereignty in any Kingdom here; whereas it is expressly said, He is to judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing and Kingdom, by which it is most
manifest, that at his appearing he has a Kingdom, and you owning that
appearing to be personal, what do you make that Kingdom to be? And what share
has Christ's person in it.

In answer whereto I conceive it necessary in the first place, to give you the
distinction of a five-fold Kingdom, the Scripture takes notice of belonging to
Christ, viz. a Providential, Spiritual, Monarchical mistical, or Davidical and
Misphatical Kingdom: and then I shall give you my understanding and conceptions
of this Kingdom hinted at, that he is to have at that his appearing: And for a
want of a right distinguishing herein, proceds (as I humbly apprehend, all the
mistaken notions and differences about the Kingdom of Christ treated of in
these papers.

First, Therefore understand there is a providential Kingdom which Christ has,
and does (as God) manage over all the world, and that from the beginning.

Secondly, A spiritual Kingdom, which he does and has all along managed in the
hearts of his people, from the beginning of the world to this day.

Thirdly, There is a mistical Kingdom, or a Rule and Sovereignty, that he, as
Lord and King, has exercised in the Church, as well under the Law, as under
the Gospel.

Fourthly, There is his Monarchical or Davidical Kingdom, namely, that dignity
and Sovereignty, that is in time according to promise, and prophecy to take
place in and over the Nations, and to be managed by his Laws and Government, by
his spirit and vertual presence in his Servants and Substitutes: Which has
been the special Subject of this discourse.

Fifthly, There is that glorious Misphatical Kingdom, viz. Sovereignty, that
Christ Jesus in person (with all the Saints in their glorified bodies with him)
shall upon their general Resurrection and Judgment, exercise here upon the
Earth, before all is given up into the Fathers hands, which is further cleared
to you in the several parts of it in the Scriptures following.

Mat. 16.28. There be some standing here that shall not taste death, till they
see the son of man coming in his Kingdom. Which in a figure is performed in the
next Chapter. Mat. 17.2. And was transfigured before them, and his face did
shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light, etc. Compared with
Rev. 1, 13, 14, 15. 2 Pet. 1.16. For we have not followed cunning devised
Fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were eye Witnesses of his Majesty, viz. They had a vision of that
power and glory that Christ's Majesty shall have, when he come in his Kingdom.

Mat. 19.28. Ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit on the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me upon my Throne,
even as I also overcome, and am set down with my Father on his Throne.

1 Cor. 15.50. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption. Therefore 51.
Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed. Holding out the necessity of the changed, immortal incorruptible
estate to qualify them, and make them capable to partake of the blessings and
benefits of that Kingdom of God, which Christ enters upon at the sounding of
this last Trump, and the general Resurrection and Judgment.

2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
Quick and the Dead at his appearing and Kingdom.

Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
you your selves thrust out. 29. And they shall come from the East, and from the
West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom
of God.

Math 25.31, 32. When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And before him
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as
a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, etc. Which fully states and
clears up the thing:

1. That Christ shall come in his Glory with all the Holy Angels with him.

2. That he shall then in his Kingly state, (as Verse 34) Sit upon the Throne
of his Glory.

3. That this shall be at the general Resurrection: For all Nations good and
bad are gathered before him.

4. That this shall be at the general Judgment: For now is the Judgment and
Sentence to be pronounced, etc.

Secondly, This shall be upon the Earth.

Job 19.25, 26. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand at the
latter day upon the Earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me.

1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together
with him in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord: viz. Not to remain with him in the Air, but to meet him to come
with him to the Earth: For so

Acts 1.10, 11. And while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up,
behold two men stood by them in white Apparel, which said; Ye men of Galilee,
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. With

Zach. 14.4. And his Feet shall stand in that day upon Mount Olivet, etc.

Thirdly, The manner of his coming to his Throne; it shall be first Visible,
secondly Glorious, thirdly Terrible also.

1. Visible, Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see
him; and they also which pierced him, etc.

Matthew. 27.30. And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven
with power and great Glory.

Acts 1.11. He shall come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

2. Glorious, And therefore well called the Kingdom of Glory. Mark 13.26. And
then shall they see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds with Power and great
Glory. Which great Glory appears.

First, Because it is in the Fathers Glory.

Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful Generation; of him also shall the Son of Man also be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels.

Secondly, In his own Glory with the Father.

Luke 9.26. Of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his own
Glory, and in his Fathers, etc.

Thirdly, In the Glory of all the Holy Angels.

Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy
Angels with him.

2 Thessalonians. 1.7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels.

Fourthly, In the Glory of all the Saints, as is already largely proved from
Zech. 4.5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 17. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Luke 13.28. Luke 2.36.2 These.
2.10. There vile bodies being now raised, changed, made from Earthly to bear
the Image of the Heavenly, is to be made glorious like Christ's glorified Body,
1 John 3.1, 2. Phil. 3.21. 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 49.

3. Terrible also, With a shout, great noise, voice of the Archangel with the
Trump of God, the last Trump, with the dissolution of Heaven and Earth, as 1
Cor. 15.52. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Math. 24.31. Math. 24.24. 2 Pet. 3. Rev. 20. Rev. 22.

4. What shall be done in this Kingdom? 2 Thessalonians. 1. Christ shall be glorified,
and admired and praised. Saints shall be glorified and rewarded. Wicked Men and
wicked Angels shall by Christ and the Saints be Judged and Sentenced, according
to their deeds and demerits.

Of being Priests of God and Christ. But they shall be Priests of God and
Christ.
THis is another part of the Saints Privilege this thousand years, not only to
Reign as Kings, but be Priests too, as Rev. 1.6. ^ev 5.10. And have made us
unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign on the Earth. Alluding
hereby to that Dignity and Privilege of the Priesthood under the Law, who were
said to draw nigh to God in a more special and peculiar way in his worship,
which was

First, Patriarchal, (or the Priesthood belonging to the first born:) Number.
63.12.41.45.8.16, 17.

Secondly, Mosaical or Levitical, Numb. 3.18.7.22. Exodus 28.1. 1 Chronicles. 6.49.
Of whom

First, High Priest, 1 Chronicles. 6.14, 15.

Secondly, Chief Priests, Numb. 20.26.

Thirdly, Ordinary Priests of the same line. Lev. 6.29. Which were divided into
four and twenty courses; whose duty and privilege is held forth in Deuteronomy.
33.10. Levit. 10.11. Numb. 16.9.

Thirdly, Judaical of the Tribe of Judah: of which Melchizedek the Type, Genesis
14.18. Hebr. 7.1. And Jesus Christ the Antetype, our great High Priest, Heb.
3.1.4.14. And under him the Spiritual Royal Priesthood, Exodus 19 6. Rev 1.6. 2
Pet 2.5, 9.

Importing separation and consecration to God, and a nearness and constant
communion with him, Numb. 16.9. Ordering in special the affairs of his Church
being appointed and anointed thereto.

Now as in the Kingdom of Israel the Type of Christ's Kingdom, there was an
anointed Priesthood, a Ministry to manage the affairs of the Church: and an
anointed Kingship or Magistracy to govern and manage the State: So

Has Antichrist in his ^surpations in Imitation of them the Type, and as if
they were this Kingdom of Christ the Antitype, pretended not only to the
Kingship; but the Priesthood to the Ministry as well as the Magistracy; to the
Government of the Church as well as the state: putting their Holy Oil upon the
one and the other as (most Holy and Sacred things) Dedicated to the service of
Christ in both.

Which nevertheless their glorious entitling themselves to such his peculiar
service; he is pleased, as to foretell this horrid blasphemous usurpation, so
to renounce it with great detestation, calling their Magistracy an unclean,
filthy, blasphemous, bloody Beast, that comes not from him, but out of the
bottomless Pit, and must go into Perdition: and the other, their Ministry or
Priesthood, a vile, filthy, Idolatrous Strumpet, that must for her lewd
Whoredoms, Drunkenness, and Witchcrafts, have her flesh torn off and burnt with
fire. But his faithful Saints and Servants, that will neither bow the Knee to
the one nor the other (as being Blasphemous, Idolatrous Usurpers, not only to
the opposing, but outing Christ's Ministry and Magistracy) shall be found in
this his Kingdom (during this thousand years) to administer in both these
blessed Ordinances, being received in Truth, Power and Purity to the advantage
of his name and Glory, viz. as anointed Kings to manage the Affairs of State as
Rulers, and Magistrates under Christ the King of Kings; and as anointed
Priests, shall under Christ their High Priest manage his pure Worship and
Govern the Affairs of the Church, as his Elders, and Ministers, which in happy
conjunction makes up this Blessed and Glorious state of Christ's Rule in this
his Kingdom.

Of the second Death. On such the second death had no power.
THis is another Privilege of the Saints in this happy Estate, that they shall
not be liable to the second death.

By second death in the Letter is to be understood Hellfire, the place of the
damned, as interpreted, Rev. 21.9.

But Mistically and Metaphorically taken for utter ruin, destruction, and
perdition. As for instance, it is said in Rev. 19.20. that the Beast and
False-prophet were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with Brimstone,
which must Metaphorically be understood; because (as before explained Page 2*
by Beast and False-prophet) we are not to understand two persons, but states,
viz. the Magistracy, and Ministry of Antichrist, who being vanquished in the
great Battle, are now as utterly extinguished and put into perdition (never any
more to do mischief) as if two persons were cast into Hell fire, which gives
light to Dan. 7 11. Rev. 17.8. Rev. 18.8.

So also Rev. 20.10. It is said the Devil or Dragon that deceived them, was
cast into the lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and False-prophet
are, etc. which admits the same mistical signification, viz. that now the
Dragonical or Heathenish power (as explained to be Page 2.) that was only bound
in times past for a season, is after the Gog-Magog destruction, as utterly
ruined, raised and destroyed, as the Beast and false prophet, the Antechristian
stare before: Yea and as the Devil himself will be, when he is cast into the
lake at the last day, now never more to work mischief in the world.

And again the Worshippers of the Beast, whose names are not in the Lambs book
(the Beast and Dragon being thus in utter perdition) are now to share with the
principals in utter ruin and destruction, Rev. 14.10, 11, 13.8.17.8. compared
with the 20.15.

And lastly it is said, that Death and Hell (or the Grave) are cast into the
lake of Fire, which is the secon^ Death, Rev. 20.14. viz. Now after the general
Judgment, there is to be no more Death, Death is swallowed up in Victory; a
full confirmation of the former.

Of the Dragons Release. And when the Thousand years are expired, Satan shall
be loosed out of his Prison.
UPon the expiration of the thousand years, it seems Hell is to break loose
again; the Conquered and subdued Heathen Nations, and their Authority, that
during that space have by the Righteous Laws and Sovereign Authority of Christ
been as so many imprisoned, fettered Captives, yea as so many civil dead men
kept down and under subjection, whereby universal peace and quiet has been
managed and maintained all the world throughout, do now by Gods permission and
the Devils inspiration and sedition, again perk up for him; and in a rebellious
manner standing upon their feet again, do break off their subjection and
Allegiance from Christ's Rule and Authority; and by combination and confederacy
make head against him; and engaging under their old Captain general the Devil,
do rally from the four quarters of the Earth, an huge and numberless Host like
to the Sand of the Sea, which mighty gathering is called here by the spirit Gog
and M^gog, with design by besieging and compassing the Camp of the Saints and
beloved City, to raze and destroy the Sovereign Power and Authority of Christ,
that he has so long managed by the hands of his Saints in this World upon the
breadth of the Earth, even as the Syrian Host, the Prophet in Dothan; The
Assyrian, Jerusalem, the Sodomites, Lot, 2 Kings 6.14, 15. 2 Kings 25.1.

Of Gog and Magog.
ANd shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters of the
Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle.

This is the Name the Holy Spirit is pleased to give this great and last enemy
of the Church upon the Earth, which for your better understanding take the
pithy exposition given by Mr. Mead. It is (says he) to be observed, that the
Revelation is a Book of the Future estate of the Christian Church set forth by
Resemblances and Parables borrowed from the condition of affairs of the Jewish
Church under the old Testament, in which the Worship of the true God flourished
alone, the rest of the Nations serving Idols universally. Hence therefore that
Egypt and Babylon in the Revelations are not the Babylon and Egypt of the
Israelites, but the enemies of the Church of the Gentiles, like that Babylon
and Egypt being Types and Figures of these. In like manner Gog and Magog in the
Revelation, are not the Gog in Ezekiel of the Land of Magog the head of Mesheck
and Tubal the enemy of Israel, Gen- 10.3. Ezekiel. 38.39. For this came out of the
North parts, ours from the four corners of the Earth: This appeared at the
beginning of Isreal's Restoration, ours after the 1000. years of the Kingdom of
the Saints following the Restoration of Jerusalem: This before Christ's coming
in the Flesh, ours before his coming to Judgment; But another Gog the enemy of
the Church of the Gentiles to come immediately before the Resurrection of the
Dead: and farther it is plain that this Gog and Magog bear not the room of a
subject, but a convenient Title, by which those Nations of the four Quarters
might be declared, as if he would have said, the Nations in the four Quarters
Spiritually called Gog and Magog.

Of the Camp of the Saints and Beloved City.
THose terms of Camp and City are allusions to Isreal's twofold state under the
Tabernacle and Temple dispensation.

Of the order of Isreal's Camp state we read Numb. 2. Wherein the Tabernacle of
God with the 24 Courses of the Priests and Levites were placed in the midst,
all the Tribes under their four Standards pitching their Tents round about it:
Which is alluded to Rev. 4. And may greatly help the explanation thereof.

Then the City State was under Solomon, after the erecting of the Temple, to
which glorious and beautiful condition this alludes, Rev. 21.10 etc. Holds
forth the excellency it being c^lled the great City, the Holy Jerusalem, where
it is described in all its ^lory and Dimensions, called here the Beloved City.
In opposition to the City of the Nations, the great City, Babylon containing
the ^nti-Christian, nay whole World in their Policies and Governments. So here
the Extent of this City and Camp of the Saints is held forth to be no less then
the whole Earth, as large in extent as the City of the Nations; Christ's
Government extending all the World over from Sea to Sea. Ps. 72.8. Isa. 44.6.

Of the Fire from Heaven, that destroys Gog. And Fire came down from God out
of Heaven, and devoured them.
THis destruction as typt out in the Gog Magog destruction, Ezekiel. 38. Is here
alluded to, That as fire came down from Heaven to destroy them; So is it here,
for now is the time that Christ shall come in flaming Fire taking vengeance of
his enemies, destroying the Heavens also and the Earth and all its works by
fire, and this in order to the next Scene to be acted, viz. The Resurrection of
the Dead and Eternal Judgment.

Of the General Judgment.
AFter the Saints Reign, the Gog Magog gathering and destruction; Now in order
comes the Lord Jesus in person in the Glory of the Father, the Saints Glory,
and in the glory of all the Holy Angels with the sound of the Trumpet and Voice
of the Archangel; The Sea, Grave and Death giving up their Dead, that there may
be a general Resurrection of the Just and Unjust. And then the preparing of the
Throne, the sitting of the Judge; the opening of the Books, the producing of
the Witnesses in order to the general Judgment of great and small, who are to
be judged according to their works by Christ, who Judges the quick and dead at
his appearing and Kingdom.

A Paraphrase upon the 20. of Revelations.
THe Powers and Potentates of the whole World, 1. And I saw an Angel come down
from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his
hand.
whether Heathen or Antichristian being thus vanquished by Christ and his
followers under the terms of fighting with and overcoming a Dragon, Beast and
false Prophet with the Kings of the Earth, and whole World in the great Battle
in the former Chapter, and the Authority consequently now in the hands of the
Saints: John here in a Vision has represented to him the Churches Soveraignity
in a figure, viz. By the Emblematical Representation of a Chain and a Key
ensigns of Power in the hand of their Mystical and Spirirual Head, though in
this Vision (their Representative) the Lord Jesus is called here an Angel, as
Rev. 10.1.12.17. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is
the Devil and Satan, and bound him a 1000. years.


And having judged and utterly razed the Antichristian state both, in its
Magistracy, and Ministry, (by the figurative Representation of taking a Beast,
and false Prophet and casting them alive into a Lake of Fire) does here for the
better securing the Churches quiet and peaceable Rule, 3. And cast him into the
bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set a Seal upon him, that he should
deceive the N^tions no more, till the 1000. years should be fulfilled, and
after that he must be loosed a little season.
wholly cancel and vacate the Heathen Empire also for a thousand years, as in
the Vision is set forth by the taking a Dragon, and casting him bound into a
bottemless pit, and shutting him up, and Sealing him therein, the proper Emblem
of the now ruined Pagan State, the Dragon or Devil being also the Spiritual or
Mystical head thereof, and here in the Vision their representative: As in 12.
Chapter by an Angel fighting with, overcoming and casting to the Earth a
Dragon, is held forth the Victory, the Church at that day gets over the Heathen
Roman Empire: So here by the Angels binding him in a pit is the utter
extinction of that Power (a thousand years the time limited) plainly discovered.

4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given to them,
and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the Word of God, and which had not worsh^pped the Beast, neither his Image,
neither had received his mark in their Foreheads, or in their right hand, and
they lived and Reigned with Christ's a 1000.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not again, till the 1000. years were
finished; This is the first Resurrection.

6. Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such
the second death has no power* but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ,
and shall Reign with him a 1000. years.


The enemies of the Church thus casheired, and turned off the Stage, John has a
further discovery of their settled and happy Rule and Authority by the Vision of
the Resurrection of a company of dead and Martyred Saints, (the proper Emblem
of the Church during the Antichristian Tyranny, who for witnissing to Christ,
and not Worshipping the Beast, cannot (in a civil sense at least) be esteemed
other) ascending Thrones of Judgment; And as blessed and holy ones freed from
the second Death, Reigning with or under the Lord Jesus as Kings and Priests,
whilst their enemies the Worshippers of the Beast are now as so many dead men
at their feet, during this space of a thousand years, which is called the first
Resurrection, viz. The mystical general Resurrection, that in order of time is
to proceed the Corporeal general Resurrection.

Upon the Expiration of the said thousand years, 7. And when the 1000. years
are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison:

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters of
the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle, the Number of them
is as the sand of the Sea.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the
Saints and the beloved City.

And fire came down from God o^t of Heaven and devoured them.


the Nations revolt from the subjection under Christ's Rule in the hands of the
Saints, annoying and disturbing them all the World over, for a Season, though
to their own utter ruin and overthrow, under the figurative terms of loosing
the Devil their Representative out of Prison to deceive the Nations, and to
gather them in an huge numberless Host, called Gog and Magog, to besiege a Camp
and City; an Allusion to Israel of old, holding out the Saints politic and
settled state, by which Emblem of a City is represented also the Enemies settled
condition all the world over, and holds out their mischievous purpose to ruin
the Interest of Christ, and to root it up from off the Earth.

Upon this rebellious design of the Nations in this their treasonable and
murderous attempt, they are upon the personal coming of Christ to Judgment,
destroyed by fire, who comes in flaming fire, rendering Vengeance upon them,
foretold in the typical destruction of Sodom and Gog and Magog, their perfect
Types and Predecessors.

10. And the Devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and the False-p^ophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.
And now is the time come, that the Devil in a litteral sense, who has been the
Mistical head of the Pagan state is to be cast into the lake of fire, there to
remain for ever: But Mistically and Metaphorically is all Heathenish and
Worldly Rule and Authorities now utterly destroyed and vacated, as the
Antechristian Dominion was by casting the Beast and False-prophet into the lake
of fire, or as when the Devil himself is thither sentenced, never any more to
come out thence.

And then in order and according to the whole current of Scripture and scope of
it, 11. And I saw a great white Throne and him that sat on it, from whose face
the Earth, and the Heavens fled away and there was found no place for them.

12. And I saw the Dead, small and great stand before God, and the Books were
opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead
were judged out of those things, which were written in the Books according to
their works.

13. And the Sea gaxe up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead that were in them, and they were judged every man
according to their works.

14. And death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire This is the second
Death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the
lake of Fire.


comes the Resurrection of the Dead and Eternal Judgment in the Order and
Method, as here laid down, to be understood in the Letter, from which there is
no necessity to depart, or to conceive it Allegorical: Wherein we have Christ
the Judge appearing upon the Throne of Judgment, the Heavens and Earth
departing at his presence, The Dead small and great standing before him, the
Books opened, and Dead judged out of the Books according to their Works, etc.

XXI. CHAP. Of the Revelation.
ANd I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth: for the first Heaven and the first
Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea.

2 And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

3 And I heard a great Voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
for the former things are passed away.

5 And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he
said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.

6 And he said unto me, Is it done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, I will give unto him that is a thirst, of the Fountain of the water of
life freely.

7 He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son.

8 But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

9 And there came unto me one of the seven Angels which had the seven Viols
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will
show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife.

10 And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high Mountain, and
showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from
God,

11 Having the glory of God; and her light was like unto a stone most precious,
even like a jasper stone, clear as Crystal;

12 And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
Tribes of the Children of Israel.

13 On the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the South three
gates, and on the West three gates.

14 And the wall of the City had twelve foundations, and in them the names of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

15 And he that talked with me, had a golden Reed to measure the City, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16 And the City lies four square, and the length is as large as the breadth:
and he measured the City with the Reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length,
and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

17 And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel.

18 And the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure
gold, like unto clear glass.

19 And the foundations of the wall of the City were garnished with all manner
of precious stones. The first foundation was Jasper, the second Sapphire, the
third a Chalcedonie, the fourth an Emerald,

20 The fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth
Beryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacinct, the
twelfth an Amethyst.

21 And the twelve gates were twelve Pearls, every several gate was of one
Pearl, and the street of the City was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.

22 And I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are
the Temple of it.

23 And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

24 And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and
the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no
night there.

26 And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.

27 And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of life.


CHAP. XXII. Verse. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. And he showed mea pure River of water of life,
clear as crystal, prodeeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

2 In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River, was there
the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit
every Month; and the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.

3. And there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it, and his servants, shall serve him.

4. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

5 And there shall be no night there, and they need no Candle, neither light of
the Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall Reign for ever and
ever.


The City of God, or Kingdom of Christ in the thousand Years Reign further
asserted, from the 21th, and part of the 22th. of the Revelations.

THis portion of Scripture, viz. the 21. Chap. to the 6. verse of the 22 does
very elegantly hold forth the happy and Glorious condition of the Church in the
thousand years upon her deliverance from her Enemies (by their just ruin and
destruction) wherein the Angel gives John a larger and fuller discovery of that
blessed state* whereof he had given him some hints and glimpses in the
foregoing Chapter, so that what he called an enthroning, verse 4. and a City
state, verse 9. he here declares to be no less than a new World, a new Heaven
and a new Earth; Babylons old World, her old Heavens and Earth, viz. Sun, Moon,
Stars, Sea being burnt up and consumed; and no other than the taking place of
the New Jerusalem that holy and beloved City, after the ruin and destruction
of that filthy and bloody City, or the coming forth of the Spouse the Lambs
wife in all her beatiful array (prepared for her Husband) after the desolation,
ruin and destruction of that beastly filthy Strumpet, that gaudy painted
Harlot.

For you will find it naturally linkt to the foregoing story of the thousand
Years, and belonging to the State of Grace before the Judgment, and not
because it is put down after the Vision of the Judgment, therefore it must so
in order be reckoned, and then consequently to belong to the State of Glory, as
most Interpreters judge. For you will find nothing more frequent in this Book,
then to give brief hints of things in one Chapter, and then to prosecute them
more fully in the next, several occurrences of after dates intervening and
coming betwixt: As for instance that passage in the eleventh Chapter, where he
mentions first the slaughter of the witnesses by the Beast, then of the
Witnesses, Resurrection, enemies Destruction, and Christ's Kingdom, yet
afterward in the 13th. Chapter returns again to the Beast, and gives an
account of his rise and rage, which must not therefore be supposed to be a
Beast rising up; after Christ's Kingdom takes place, (because it is mentioned
after it) but a further and larger account of that Beast, that he had but
briefly hinted at before in the eleventh Chapter.

And that we are not mistaken herein, Let first the Prophet himself, from whom
the Prophecy is fetched, about these new Heavens, and new Earth, and new
Jerusalem, (which are both one) be the Judge. For you will find the time, when
he foretells such a state to take place, is not to be in a state of immortality
and glory, but in this World short of the Resurrection and Judgment, because
he says in the 21, 22, 23. Verses of that 65. Isa. It must be in a time, when
Building, Planting, and Procreating will be proper, which cannot possibly be in
the State of Glory and Immortality, as our Savior himself has over ruled,
Luke 20.34, 35.

And Secondly, Let it be considered that this new Jerusalem or beloved City was
in the thousand Years, otherwise why should it be said upon the expiring
thereof in the 9th. Verse of the 20th. that the Gog-Magog Army encompassed the
Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City.

And Thirdly, Consider that the Church is called here the Spouse, the Lambs
wife only prepared and made ready for her Husband, and not (following the
Allegory) yet in that full enjoyment and fruition, which the state of glory
brings her to.

And Fourthly, It may be considered that in this state, God is said to
Tabernacle and dwell with Men, which discovers it to be a state of grace here,
and not in that state when they shall always be with God in the state of glory.
And that we are not alone herein, you have Mr. Forbs upon the 21. Rev.
delivering himself thus, viz. All the dispensation of God toward this City,
being committed to the Lamb, the Mediator bespeaks it to be accomplished in
this World; because in the World to come he gives up the Kingdom to God, that
he may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

And further, That nothing is here so magnifickly spoke, which the Prophets
before have not almost in the same terms, uttered of the state of the Church
here in Grace; we will easily perceive that no such thing is here meant as
whereto most part of interpreters have drawn it. But even by this amassing
together of all the goodly promises in the Prophets, of the Churches graceful
and peaceable state to let us see, that all this time shall be the full
performance, never any more to be disturbed and so therein the Mystery of God
to be finished, nothing now resting to be either expected or wished, but that
the Lord Jesus come quickly.

And the Assembly in their Annotations upon Rev. 21.1. viz. As the Church is
altered, so must her dwelling; it may be spoken of a Glorious Church on Earih,
and then the day of Judgment is set before it in the former Chap. That the
downfall of the Enemies of Gods Church, might be set down altogether, and then
the Churches felicity after the destruction of the Whore, Beast, Dragon, and
all covert and open Enemies, which new state will abide till Glory come.
Bringing in of Eastern Kingdoms may well be called a new world.

And Mr Mede further very significantly to this point upon his sixth
Synchronysme in his Clavis Apoc. p. 24. gives the following four substantial
Arguments to enforce the same, viz.

First, The Marriage of the Lamb and that Imperial Kingdom of the Almighty Lord
God, both begin after the destruction of Ba^ylon, where the seventh Trumpet
begins; this appears out of the Hymn of the Elders and Beasts; which in
the former Synchronisme we have commended out of the Nineteenth Chapter, verse
6, 7. Hallelujah; for our Lord God Almighty Reigns: Let us be glad and
rejoice, and give honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
wife has made her self ready. Put the New Jerusalem is that Bride of the Lamb,
aborned and prepared for her Husband, Chapter 21. verse 2. And I saw (says he)
the Holy City, new Jerusalem coming down from the God out of Heaven, as a Bride
adorned for her Husband, and verse 9. Come, and I will show thee the Bride, the
Lambs wife, etc.

Secondly, Jerusalem is the beloved City, but that beloved City forthwith,
after he thousand years are ended, is said to be compassed about by those
Troops of Satan then let loose, Chapter 20. verse 9. And they compassed the
Tents of the Saints, and the beloved City, therefore it must needs have been
extant before, while Satan was yet bound.

Thirdly, The seventh Vial being poured out, wherewith the Beast is dispatched
and abolished, there came a loud voice from the Throne, saying (...), It is
done Chapter 16. verse 17. So also he that sat upon the Throne says to John
(beholding new Jerusalem descending from Heaven) Chapter 21. verse 5, 6. Behold
I make all things new; (...), It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the End: therefore new Jerusalem the Bride of the Lamb, begins at the last
end of the Vials (...), the Whore being already dispatched, and so it
contemporizeth with the space of time, which ensues the destruction of the
Beast.

^ourthly, One of the Angels of the Vials ( Chapter 17.) does show unto John
the Condemnation of the Whore, even while the Vials are in pouring out, and at
least by one of them to be executed. And the same Angel of Vials, Chap. 21.
verse 10. shows to the same John the Bride of the Lamb, the great City, Holy
Jerusalem to become Glorious, even when the Vials are now ended, that is, the
Beast and Babylon being destroyed.

In treating whereof we shall first give you a brief Analysis, then a short
Explanation of the most material and difficult things in the Vision.

The Analysis or Parts of the Chapter.
In this description of the glorious and happy state of the Church, we have

First, A more brief and general account, which is given partly by Vision,
partly by Voice, from the first to the ninth Verse.

Secondly, We have a more particular and larger account, which is visionally
expressed from the ninth of the twenty first, to the sixth Verse of the twenty
second.

In the briefer Account we have,
First, By Vision, the Churches happiness represented, and that

First, In respect to a new World. And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, for
the first Heaven and Earth was past away.

Secondly, In respect to the evils of Commotion and trouble, that are to be
removed thence; And there was no more Sea.

Thirdly, In respect of the new Jerusalem. Described by

1. Her Holiness in opposition to the unholy City, that was removed:

2 Her newness,

First, In respect to old Jerusalem the Type.

Secondly, In respect of her new state and happiness.

3. Her Heavenliness, or Divine descent.

4. Her Bridelike preparedness, Verse 2. And I saw the Holy City new Jerusalem
coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

Secondly, By Voice, Tending to explain and confirm the former Vision, which is
twofold: 1. From Heaven. 2. From the Throne.


1. The Voice from Heaven declares the Churches happiness.

First, Respecting the enjoyment of all good, consisting in the enjoyment, 1.
Of Gods Covenant relating to them. 2. His Co-habitation by his presence with
them. And I heard a voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God
is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God, Verse 3.

Secondly, Respecting the removal of evil, by the passing away of former
things, viz. Distresses, Persecutions, Slaughters, as Rev. 12.2.13.7.14.13.
Which shall trouble her no more. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain; for the former things are past away, Verse 4.

2. The Voice from the Throne, which is th^^efold from God himself confirming
this happy state.

1. Proclaiming himself the Author of this new Fabric. And he that sat upon
the Throne said, Behold I make all things new.

2. Commanding John to Write and Record these words as infallible. And he said
unto me, write, for these words are true and faithful. Verse 5.

3. Declaring the consummation of this happy state according to Prophecy, And
he said unto me, It is done: confirmed from his Omnipotency, I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the End described by the nature and excellency of this
happiness: I will give unto him, that is a thirst of the Fountain of the water
of Life freely: He that over comes shall inherit all things: And I will be his
God and he shall be my Son, Verse 6, 7.

Which happy state is illustrated by the contrary miserable condition, that
must attend the Worshippers of the Beast, and Vassals of Antichrist, who are
ranked in eight several sorts, describing their corruptions: But the fearful
and unbelieving, and the Abominable and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake, which
burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death.

Secondly, In the larger Account by Vifion to John, we have,

1. The preparation of John for the Vision.

2. The description of the Church and her happy estate, as represented in the
Vision.

First, The Preparation of John for perceiving and beholding this Vision,
wherein may be observed.

1. Who prepared, viz. one of the seven Vial Angels.

2. How prepared him, partly by words: And there came unto me one of the seven
Angels, which had the seven Vials full of the seven last Plagues, and talked
with me, saying come hither I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. And
partly by action, And he carried me away in the spirit to a great high
Mountain, Verse 10.

Secondly, The Churches Description; And she is showed here in the height of
magnificency and stateliness, transcending all the glory of the Kingdoms of the
World, which is displayed, 1. In her self. 2. In her Accessories.


First, In her self, Jerusalem is displayed according to, 1. Her glorious
beauty. 2. Excellent Fortifications. 3. Accurate Symmetry, or proportion. 4.
Precious Materials.


First, Her glorious Beauty consisting, 1. In her greatness. 2. Holiness. 3.
Original or Heavenly Descent. 4. Divine Glory. 5. Her Orient Light. And he
showed me that great City, the Holy Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from
God, having the Glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious
even like a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal.


Secondly, Her strong and excellent Fortifications, consisting in a Wall about
the City, which is described by, 1. Its Constitution, 2. Gates. 3. Foundations.


First, By the Constitution and Fabric of it, and had a Wall great and high.

Secondly, By the Gates, which excel,

1. For the Number, which is Patriarchal and Apostolical; And had Twelve Gates.

2. For their Keepers or Porters, And at the Gates Twelve Angels.

3. For their inscriptions upon them; And names written thereon, which are the
names of the Twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel, verse 12.

4. For their uniform order, viz. On the East three Gates, on the North three
Gates, on the South three Gates, and on the West three Gates.

Thirdly, By the Foundations of the Wall, which in Number and Name inscribed
upon them relate to Christ's Twelve Apostles, And the Wall of the City had
Twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb,
verse. 14.

3. Her Symmetry or proportion, as most exact, and accurate, wherein we may
consider,

First, The measurer, an Angel.

Secondly, The measuring Instrument a Golden Reed.

Thirdly, The things measured, viz. The City and Gates thereof, and walls
thereof, verse 15.

Fourthly, The figure of the City: And the City lies apiece, and the
length is as large as the breadth, equilateral.

Fifthly, The measure of the City, and wall of the City: And he measured the
City with the Reed twelve thousand Furlings, the length and the breadth and the
height are equal. verse ^6. And he measured the wall thereof, a hundred forty
and four Cubits according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel.

4. Her costly and precious materials.

First, The matter of the Wall: And the building of the Wall of it was of
Jasper.

Secondly, The matter of the whole City. And the City was pure Gold, like unto
clear Glass, verse 18.

Thirdly, The matter and Garnishment of the Walls foundations, all manner of
precious Stones. And the Foundations of the City were garnished with all manner
of precious Stones, The first foundation was Jasper, The second Saphir, The
third Chalcedony, The fourth an Emerald, The fifth Sardonix, The sixth Sardius,
The seventh Chrysolyte, The eighth Berill, The ninth a Topaz, The tenth a
Chrysophrasus, The eleventh an Hyacinth, The twelfth an Amethyst, verse 19.20.

Fourthly, The matter of the Twelve Gates; And the Twelve Gates were Twelve
Pearls, every several Gate was of one Pearl.

Fifthly, The matter of the City; And the street of the City was pure Gold, as
it was transparent Glass, verse 21.

Secondly, In her Accessories, viz. in those supplies from without her self,
making up her Beauty and Glory, consisting,

1. In that singular Spiritual presence of God in Christ, in the purity, Truth
and Spiritualness of Gospel Worship.

First, God and the Lamb are the Temple of it, And I saw no Temple therein; for
the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it: verse 22.

2. God and the Lamb are the light of it: And the City had no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof, verse 23.

2. The Conflux and great Resort of the Nations unto this City. And the Nations
of them which are saved shall walk in the Light of it. And the Kings of the
Earth shall contribute to the happiness thereof And the Kings of the Earth
shall bring the Glory and Honor of the Nations into it, verse 26.

Amplified by the security that shall be there. And the Gates of it shall not
at all be shut by day: as well as freedom from from fraud by night: for there
shall be no night there. As also the purity and integrity of all comers. And
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie, but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of life, verse 27.

3. The plenty of all things both for necessity and delight, which abundance is
comprised under the Water of Life against Thirst, and the Tree of Life against
Hunger, both for the supply of outward and inward man, both for Meat and
Medicine. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of the Street
and of either side of the River was there the Tree of Life and yielded her
fruit every Month, and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations. Chap. 22. verse 1, 2.

4. The perpetuity of this City and its happiness to complete its Beauty and
Glory, which is demonstrated,

First, By removing the Evil that might corrupt or oppose its happiness. And
there shall be no more Curse.

Secondly, By continuing the Good, in which its happiness does consist, viz.
the blessing and presence of God and Christ, viz. But the Throne of God and of
the Lamb shall be in it.

Thirdly, By the abiding integrity of the Citizens in new obedience and
habitual service, as their eminent privilege therein. And his Servants shall
serve him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads, and there shall be no night there, and they need no Candle, neither
the light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall Reign
for ever and ever, verse 3, 4, 5. viz. Their Reign shall be begun on Earth, and
be continued till consummated in Heaven.

Having thus gone through the parts of this Scripture, we shall in the next
place further enquire into the Spirits meaning of these Heavenly Mysteries, and
shall begin at the ninth ver of the 21 Chap: where the particular and larger
Vision begins.

The Exposition of the Principal things in the Vision. Of the Angel that
discovers the Vision. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which
had the seven Vials, full of the seven last Plagues;
THis Angel may be supposed to be the very same that showed John the Vision of
the great Whore in her filthiness, abomination, and judgment, Rev. 17.1. who
here discovers to him her Antithesis the Bride the Lambs wife in all her
Dignity, Glory and Exaltation.

Of the Bride the Lambs Wife. And talked with me, saying, Come up hither I will
show the Bride the Lambs Wife, verse 9.
THus Bride the Lambs Wife one of the Emblematical Characters here given the
Church in this State and Condition, and not unproperly since the Scripture
says she it espoused to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. Betrothed to him, Hosea 2.20. yea
married to him, Jer. 3.14. Romans 7.4 and therefore said, Her Maker is her
Husband, Isa. 54.5. And that by this Mistical Union, she is become flesh of his
flesh and bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5.30, 31. alluding to the first Marriage union
when the wo^^ that was taken out of the man was given to him, Genesis 2.3.

Called the Lambs Wife, as one well says, because when he was slain as a Lamb,
he espoused her, giving himself for her, Ephesians. 5.25. And that as the first Adam
in his sleep had his side opened for his wife, so the second Adam in his death
had his side pierced for his.

Who having by persecution and affliction been a long time in a forlorn state,
as a poor barren disconsolate woman, Isa. 54.1. And as a desolate forlorn
Widow, Lam. 11. In an oppressed, afflicted and bewildred Wilderness condition,
Rev. 12.14. Wherein her Beauty is turned into Ashes, her joy into Mourning, her
Garment of Praise into a spirit of Heaviness, Isa: 61.3. Her Gold is become
dim, and her most fine Gold changed, Lam. 4.1.

Is now represented as returned into an excellent Condition, the Scene being
quite changed, having here her beauty again, for Ashes the Oil of joy for
mourning; and the Garments of Praise for the spirit of heaviness now in a
beautiful dress and in a most lovely posture, viz. trimmed, prepared and
adorned like a Bride for her Husband, Rev. 19.7.21.2. Arrayed in fine clean
white linen (which is the Righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19.8.) And like
the Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing being of wrought Gold,
and in Raiment of Needle Work, Psalm. 45.13, 14. Clothed with the Garments of
Salvation, and covered with the robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh
himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels, Isa.
61.10. Being one that is now, no more to be termed forsaken, but to be called
Hephzibah and Bulah, Isa. 62.4.

Which excellent dress least any should sensually mistake or abuse the spirit
explains himself to hold out thereby the excellency, virtue and grace that is
found in the true Church: And therefore is her fine linen, white and clean,
expounded to be the righteousness of the Saints, viz her justification and
sanctification, her Gold, Jewels and rich Attire, to hold out the Ornament of
her inward and outward man, in the shining Graces of the Spirit, viz love,
meekness, patience, humility, long-suffering; and that so having Oil in her
Vessel and Lamp, viz. spiritual Grace in her Heart and Life, is said to be
prepared as a wise Virgin fitted for the Bridegroom.

And which the better to explain (as well as further to set off her beauty and
excellency) the false Church is also represented and pourtraied in her dress
and Colors* in her Beauty, Ornaments and Attire, viz. her Scarlet and Purple
Robe. and fine linen to hold on her violence, cruelty and oppression, her
Golden Cup and Jewels, her drunkenness, Pride and Idolatry, her beauty and rich
attire, her Witch-crafts, wantonness and Whoredom.

Being indeed represented under all the Characters of a vild Strumpet, viz. a
cruel, bloody, drunken, proud, wanton, common, filthy, rotten and abominable
Whore, that corrupts the Earth with her Fornications.

By which Bride-like beautiful state, as well as the new Jerusalem, illustrious
Glory following is figuratively represented one and the same thing, viz. the
Churches happy condition, and as both pointing out one thing, are also
represented as Synonimous; for the Angel calling up John here to show him the
Bride the Lambs wife, does when he comes up to him (as in the next verse) show
to him the new Jerusalem the holy City.

Of the Mountain on which the City stands. And he carried me away in the Spirit
to a great high Mountain,
John having seen the City Babylon upon her seven Hills, Rev. 17.9. Sees here
the City Jerusalem (heretofore desolate and trodden under foot, Rev. 11.2.) Now
restored and as most perspicuous raised upon a great high Mountain. And as
Moses in the Mount saw the pattern of the Tabernacle, Exodus 2^ 40. Heb. 8.5.
and Ezekiel upon a high mountain the City and Temple, Ezekiel. 40.2 The City and
Temple of old being built upon a high Hill, The Hill of God being a high Hill
as the Hill of Bashan, Ps. 68.15. So John here in the Spirit is he^pt to see
Mount Z^on the Antitype in her glorious exaltation to fulfill the Prophecy of
Isaiah and Michah, who foretell the Mountain of the Lords House to be
es^ablished in the last days in the top of the mountains, and to be exalted
above the Hills, Isa. 2.2. Mich 4.1. The understanding of which Mystery calls
for no less then the carrying away in the Spirit as the Prophet of old, Ezekiel.
2.1, 2.40.2. And John before, Rev. 1.10.17.3. Intimating thereby that these
were discoveries of mystical and spiritual rather then of material and litteral
things.

And what can this great high mountain be but that rock of Ages, the rock of
Israel, 2 Samuel 23.3. The Rock of Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15. The Rock that begat,
Ver. 18. And that is higher then we, Ps 61.2. Even the Rock Christ 1 Cor. 10.4.
upon whom the Church is built, so that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, Matthew. 16.18 That must in the latter days be exalted above all the
Hills.

And which Mountain the seat of the true Church (and upon which she is founded)
stands, you see in direct opposition to the seat upon which the false Church is
placed, and which for failing we find to be threefold, viz. Upon seven
mountains, Rev. 17.9. Upon a Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, 17.3. And
upon many waters, 17.15. And therefore called by one wittily her Topical,
Typical, and Tropical Seat, which Triple Seat, as well as Triple Crown will
shortly fail her, and leave her honor in the dust; while the City that is
built upon the Hill, even upon mount Zion will stand unmovable.

Of Jerusalem that great and Holy City. And showed me that great City the Holy
Jerusalem.
JErusalem in the Hebrew is a compound of (...) and (...), signifying as much
as a Vision of Peace, called heretofore only Salem, or peace, and afterward
so styled, Ps. 76.2. In Salem is his Tabernacle, the City which of old belonged
to Melchisedech, that King of peace and righteousness, Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.1.
(That lively Type and representative of our Kingly Priest and Prophet the Lord
Jesus.) Afterward that strong hold of Zion was possessed by the Jebusites, and
taken from them by David, 1 Samuel 5.6. And called the City of David, beautifully
adorned by Solomon his son, and long enjoyed by the Kings of Judah in David's
Loine, which was beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth, Ps. 48.2.
Wherein was Gods Temple and Throne, the principal place of Worship and Seat of
Judgment. A general, name therefore in a figure to the Church of God, both
under the Law and under the Gospel.

And which famous City, as considered under the Law, passed a threefold state
all very significant, viz.

1. Her pure and primitive state in the days of Solomon.

2. Her ruined desolate state in the time of the Babylonish Captivity.

3. Her renewed restored state after the return of the Captivity.

All which were eminently Typical to the Gospel Church,

First, Because her pure and primitive state in the days of Christ, and his
Apostles answered that of Solomon, wherein a City state was asserted, Ephesians.
2.19. Heb. 12.22. A greater then Solomon being there, Math 12.42.

Secondly, Because her Apostate and ruined state in the time of Antichrist,
wherein her City state was defaced and ruined trod under foot, Rev. 11.2.
answered that of the Babylonish Captivity.

Thirdly, Her renewed and restored state here foretold and Prophesied of, is to
answer that eminent and glorious restoration in the Type wherein the glory of
that latter House excelled, according to Prophecy, the glory of the former,
Hag. 2.9.

Therefore called New Jerusalem, because in all respects she is made so in this
her Renovation, and held forth in all this beauty and splendor, not only to
answer the Type, and to fulfill the words of the Prophets, that under the terms
of an illusterious, beautiful City, foretells the Churches order, peace,
purity, policy, gifts* grace, and flourishing state, in the latter day; but
also that she might confront and utterly confound her Antithesis that great
City Babylon, that as the Lady and Mistress of Kingdoms, a well favored Harlot
has by her counterfit glory enchanted and bewitched the Nations, called Great;

Because as Jerusalem in the Type bore sway over the Nations, and had her
Inhabitants all the World over, and as great Babylon extended her Territories
as well as her rule and authority all the world over, so must this great City
Jerusalem, extend ^^ her rule, authority, and influence all the ver, and become
the joy of the whole Earth, to whom the Kings of the Nations must bow and bring
presents, even all their honor and glory, Ps. 72.8, 9, 10, 11.15. Rev. 21.24.
Called Holy.

1. Because of that purity and holiness, that through the powering out of the
Holy Spirit upon her shall now abound, in so much that upon the very Bells of
the Horses, and upon the Po^s, in the Sanctuary shall then be Holiness, Zach.
14.1. Held out by this golden state, the City being all of pure transparent
gold, as well as the streets thereof of the same; implying, that the
constitution thereof is not only so, but the whole course of the conversation
is the same also;

2. Because of that exact keeping to holy rule and order in the faithful
observation of the form of the House, and the fashion thereof, the Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances thereof, the comings in thereof; and the goings out
thereof, etc. which being the law of the House upon the top of the Mountains,
the whole limit thereof shall be holy, Ezekiel. 43.11, 12. Rev. 22 14.

3. Because there is no unclean person or thing to enter or abide in it, as
Verse 8. and 27. Isa. 35.8, 9. Rev. 22.15. Zach 14.21. Joel 3.17.

4. Because of the abiding of holy presence therein, the Tabernacle of God
being now with men, who himself will dwell, and walk with them, 21.3. The Lord
God Almighty and the Lamb is to be the Temple thereof; and the Throne of God
and the Lamb shall be in it. 22.3.

Babylon its true her opposite, is represented to us as great, and called the
great City and reason good. Because she is said to Reign over the Kings of the
Earth, Rev. 17.18. Yet is she not said to be holy, but the quit contrary, being
the unclean, filthy, polluted, and bloody City, compared to Sodom and Egypt,
and apostate Jerusalem, Rev. 11. Being the hold and receptacle, not only of
every soul Spirit, viz. Filthy locusts, Rev. 9. Unclean Frogs said to be the
spirits of Devils, Rev. 16.13, 14. Z^im and Jim, Esai. 13.21. But the cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird, 18.2. viz. Owls and Satyrs, and such like
doleful Creatures. Isa. 13, 21. Whose Inhabitants therefore we have set forth
under eight Characters, Rev. 21.8. viz. To be the fearful, the unbelieving, the
abominable, the Murderers, the Whoremongers, the Sorcerers, the Idolaters, and
the Liars.

Of the Cities descent from Heaven. And descended out of Heaven from God.
THat the City or Church of God, especially in this state did descend from
Heaven, may appear, if we consider,

First, That all her Members are Heaven-born, viz. born of God, born of the
Spirit, born from above, John 3.7.1.13. begotten of his Will by the Word of
Truth, Jam. 1.18. and brought forth in Zion, where it must be written that
this, and that man was born in her Psalm. 87.4. And therefore called Jerusalem
from above the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.

Secondly, That all the Rules, Orders, Laws, Governments, are the Statute-Laws
of Heaven, her High Priest, Proph^^ and King coming from thence, John 3.13.31,
32, 33. Heb. 1.1.

Thirdly, That her raising out of the dust, her coming up out of the Grave, the
return of her Captivity, the advancement to this pitch of Beauty and
excellency, is by the special ordering of Divine power and Providence from
first to last, and that in such an eminent, and visible manner, that as the
Prophet says, It shall be seen, known and understood, that the hand of the
Lord has done it, and the Holy one of Israel has created it.

Fourthly, That the Glory and special presence of the Lord has descended from
Heaven, resting and remaining upon her.

The quite contrrry is true of that other opposite City Babylon, who ascends
with her Head and Governors from beneath, even out of the Bottomless pit; and
therefore has all her affairs, transactions, and concerns be managed by that
wisdom which comes from below, which is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish.

Of the Glory of God upon her. Having the Glory of God: and her light was like
unto a Stone most precious, even like a Jasper Stone, clear as Crystal, verse
11.
THis is a further and fuller discovery that the Church is returned out of her
Captivity; because the Lord has returned his Glory un^o her.

When she went into Captivity, her Glory departed from her, now she returns
again she receives therewith her former Glory, which begins upon the pouring
out of the Vials, Chap. 15.8. in allusion to Exodus 40.34. 1 Kings 8.10, 11.
Thus it was in the type when Jerusalem went into Captivity under the King of
Babylon, it is said the Glory of God departed from them and went by degrees
first, out of the Temple to the Threshold of the house, then off from the City,
then to the Mountain, and so by degrees quite away, Ezekiel. 10.4.18.11.22, 23,
etc. But when their Captivity returned, so did the Glory also, and that in the
same way it departed, as Ezekiel. 40.1, 2.3, 4, 5, 6.

In like manner also does the Glory here return to Jerusalem, and that in so
visible a manner, that all are enlightened by it, to fulfill the words of the
Prophet, Isa. 60.1, 2. Arise shine for thy light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee; for behold darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross
darkness the people, but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his Glory shall be
seen upon thee, etc. and which will be so splendid and shine to that
perfection, that (to follow the simile) Rev. 22.5. there shall be no night
there, and they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun, 21.23. compared with
Isa. 60.19. And again, The Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness, and all the
Kings of the Earth thy Glory, Isa. 62.2. And then shall also be accomplished
what is further said, Isa. 52.9, 10. The Lord shall make bare his holy name, in
the eyes of all Nations, and all the ends of the Earth shall see the Salvation
of God; So that not only the Glory of his presence and the Glory of his Grace,
but the Glory of his power shall be manifest for his people, to the fulfilling
also that word, Isa. 4.5. And the Lord will Create upon every dwelling place of
Mount Zion and upon her Assemblies a Cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night; for upon or above all the Glory shall be a defense;
alluding to the presence and Glory of old, the type hereof that came up with
them out of Egypt, Exodus 13.21. that was with them in the Wilderness, Exodus
33.9, 10. which was so to be their guide, that without it they must not stir,
Numb. 9.15. Exodus 33.15. that accompanied the Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34. and both
the Temples, 1 Kings 8.11. Hag. 2. 6, 7. in the enjoyment whereof, consisted
their Counsel, Comfort, Blessing, Protection, Strength, and therefore must the
High Priest (begging that Mercy) bless the people, Numb. 6.23. and in the loss
whereof the contrary attended, viz. all misery and mischief: But so eminently
shall this new Jerusalem be blessed herewith, that her name shall be called
Jehovah Shamah, viz. the Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. whilst it may truly be
said of her Opposite that other City, that by the smoke that comes out of the
Bottomless-pit, and by the indwellings of Satan, whose Throne and Seat is
therein, that darkness incompasseth her as a Cloud, and thick darkness as a
covering, that the height of her Glory is but in her own shame, which will
hasten her inevitable ruin and utter confusion, and for whom the mist of
darkness is reserved for ever.

Of the Wall And had a Wall great and high, and had twelve Gates, and at the
Gates twelve Angels and names written thereon, which are the names of the
twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel. 12. On the East three Gates, on the
North three Gates, on the South three Gates, on the West three Gates. 13. And
the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb. 14. And he that talked with me had a Reed to
measure the City and the Gates thereof and the Wall thereof. 15. And he
measured the Wall thereof a hundred forty four Cubits, and the building of the
Wall of it was of Jasper, etc.
HAving spoken of the City in general, he comes to speak of her strength and
splendour, being a City compact together, and the first thing he begins with is
the Wall.

A Wall is for safety, security, and defense, as well as for Ornament and
Beauty.

It is said, The Canaanites had Walls reaching to Heaven, Deuteronomy. 1.28. And that
Babylon had a great broad Wall, Jer. 51.58. That Jerusalem after the Captivity
had a Wall with twelve Gates. And so had Ezekiels City also, lying apiece,
and upon each quarter three Gates.

In allusion whereto the new Jerusalem is here described to have a apiece
Wall and twelve Gates therein, but such a Wall that in all respects transcends
all that ever was heard or read of in the world.

Which in its constitution, several parts, dimensions, and proportions, you
have thus laid down, viz.

1. In its regularity, laid out by the Golden Reed in the Angels hand.

2. In its materials of which it is built, all of Jasper stone.

3. In its foundation, viz. twelve precious stones garnishing the same.

4. In its figure, Quadranguler, four square, lying upon the four Quarters
East, North, South, West.

5. In its breadth, 144 Cubits.

6. In its height, which if agreeing with the City, is twelve thousand
Furlongs, or 1500. Miles.

7. In the number of the Gates, which according to the number of the Patriarchs
and Apostles, as the Gates of Jerusalem of old are twelve.

8. In its Emblematical inscription, twelve Tribes names upon the Gates, and
twelve Apostles names upon the foundation-stones.

9. In its Porters, assigned to keep the Gates, twelve Angels.

10. In the admirable, and wonderful matter of the Gates, twelve entire Pearls.

In all which (no question) singular Mysteries are intended, which for want of
light we may come very short in the understanding of, yet according to what we
have attained, you may upon the whole take these following general hints, from
whence light may be fetched to look into the particulars, viz.

1. By the exact mensuration of both Wall, Gates and City it self in all their
dimensions.

We may understand that as of old both in the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.4. as in the
Temple, first 1 Chronicles. 28.19. and second, Zach, 2.1, 2, 3, etc. Ezekiel. 43.11,
12. all things relating to the worship and service of God was to be exact
according to Rule, even to the very Pins and Nails of the Temple, etc.

So also in this Glorious state of the Church, how large and extensive soever,
yet is she not, it seems, in an arbitrary way to order and regulate her
affairs, either relating to the worship and service of God, or to her whole
Economy of Rule and Government, but must in all lie truly level to the square,
and even to the pattern, of the Golden Reed of Gods Word, which must try both
Members, Doctrine, Worship, and Manners.

2. By this wonderful great and high Wall, that is said thus to encompass this
glorious City, we may conclude that the Protection, Salvation and defense of
the Church shall be very singular, and that then that Word of the Prophet shall
be fulfilled, Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, nor wasting and
destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls Salvation, and
thy Gates Praise; And that when Gods encompassings and encampings shall be so
visibly without, as Isa. 4.5. Zach. 9 8. 2 Kings 6.16, 17. And his
co-habitation within, as Rev. 21.3.22, 23. Chap. 22.3. Then may the Church
safely conclude that Song may seasonably be Sung, Isa. 26.1. We have a strong
City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks.

3. That the matter of the Wall being of the same glorious substance that the
Glory it self and chief Corner Foundation-stone is of, viz. the precious Jasper
as clear as Crystal, denotes that the Churches Foundation, Glory and Salvation
is Jesus Christ; for he is the Elect and precious Cornerstone, and other
Foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, who
is also their Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.

4. That as the twelve Gates standing upon the four quarters within Jerusalem,
the Type were places through the Wall, that gave entrance into the City to the
twelve Tribes, coming up out of all the World, to worship and to partake of the
Privileges, that belonged to the natural Seed of Abraham, as says the
Psalmist; Our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusalem: Jerusalem is
builded as a City compacted together, whither the Tribes go up; The Tribes of
the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

So here these twelve Gates serve for entrance in the new Jerusalem to all the
Elect, who are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham (for they that are Christ's,
whether Jew or Gentile are Abraham's Seed according to promise) even those, who
are built upon the foundation o the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone: and so entering in by Christ the door, they have
admission by the Angels or Ministers of Christ, into the rights and privileges
of this Holy free City, the Mother of us all, and are to be esteemed as the
true Isaacs, the children of Sarah the free Woman, the marked sealed number
belonging to the twelve Tribes Spiritual. For as the twelve Tribes of old in
the Type comprehended all the natural Seed of Abraham; so under the
denomination of the twelve Tribes are comprehended in allusion thereto all the
Seed of Abraham Spiritual, as Mead well observes from the sealed Tribes the
144000 mentioned in the seventh Revelation, which you may read at large in his
Coment upon the Seals, Page ^9.

Whereas the security and strength, the broad and high Wall, that encompasseth
Babylon, the false Church, and wherein she trusts for Salvation, and has
boasted, saying, She shall sit therein as a Queen, and see no sorrow; Is her
wisdom, beauty, riches and strength, her Sorceries, and her Witchcrafts,
wherein she has labored from her yout^, Isa. 47. To the enchanting of the
Nations and the Kings thereof, and whereby the Waters have been gathered about
her for her security; for she sits amongst the Rivers, Nah. 3.8. viz. In the
midst of the people, Rev. 17.15. Whereby she has been enabled to impose and
establish her Idolatry by blood and cruelty, incompassing her self with
violence and spoil: For in her is found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints,
and of all that were slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24. Witnes^ her blasphemous,
murderous Edicts, her bloody cruel Inquisition, her Gibbets, Halters and
Stakes. But her Walls will totter and fall, her Sea will be dried up, her
wisdom and beauty, wherein she has trusted will fail her, and all her
Enchantments will be ineffectual, when all her violence must return upon her;
The ten Horns or Kingdoms that have supported her will eat her Flesh and burn
it with Fire, and by how much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow must be meted out to her, when Plague,
Death, Mourning, Famine and Fire shall be her portion; for strong is the Lord
God that will judge her.

Of the Cities foursquare Cubical Figure. And the City lies foursquare, and
the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the City with the Reed
twelve thousand furlongs; the length and the breadth, and the height of it are
equal.
THis Cubical Figure is just answering to the form of the Holy place: for as
that was just twenty Cubits high and twenty Cubits long, and twenty Cubits
broad, and the length, and the breadth and the height of it equal, and overlaid
with pure gold, 1 Kings 6.20. 2 Chr 3.8. Ezekiel. 41.4. And which is represented
to be the figure of Heaven it self, Heb. 9.24.

So this is just twelve thousand furlongs or fifteen hundred miles high,
fifteen hundred long, and fifteen hundred broad, the breadth and height, and
length being just equal, not only overlaid with gold, but all of pure
transparent gold, which great mystery may hold out thus much to us.

1. That all things relating to the City or Church of God in this glorious
state will exactly hold proportion with the word, and lie even every way to the
golden Reed.

2 That the Church in purity answering Rule, is even Heaven upon Earth, the
very figure and pattern of Heaven, where the Lord himself dwells and is
enthroned.

Whereas Babylon is without any regularity or order of Gods appointment, being
a City of confusion, for as is her name, so is she: and as she is the strong
hold and habitation of Devils and unclean Spirits, and the figure of Hell
(coming indeed out of the bottomless Pit) and ordered by the wisdom from
beneath; So thither must she go, both head and members: as Rev.
19.21.22.8.20.14.

Of the precious Materials.
And the building of the Wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold,
like unto clear glass. And the foundations of the wall of the City were
garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was Jasper,
the second Sapphire, the third a Calcedonie, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth
Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the seventh a Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl, the
ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysophrasus, the eleventh a Jacinct, the twelfth
an Amethyst. And the twelve Gates were twelve Pearls, every several gate was of
one Pearl, and the street of the City was pure of Gold, as it were transparent
glass. Rev. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
GReat was the splendid glory of the Tabernacle whereof we read, Exodus 25.26,
27. Chapters.

And greater that of the Temple and City in Solomon's days, as 2 Chronicles. 1.2, 3,
4, 5.9. Chapter when it was such a golden Age that silver was little regarded,
but was as the stones in the street, 2 Chronicles 9 27. And both of them herein
Types of this our City and Temple;

Great also was the riches of Tire, as Ezekiel. 27.28. Chapters, especially in
those remarkable precious stones, Ezekiel. 28.13. Like those in the Breast plate,
Exodus 25.15, 16, 17. And these mentioned here, who was a Type of the man of sin,
or mystery Babylon.

And greater was the beauty and splendor of mystery Babylon, its Antitype,
whose City was clothed in fine Linen, and Purple and Scarlet, and decked with
Gold and precious Stones, and Pearls, etc.

Yet all this put together falls unspeakably short, of the incomparable Riches,
and Glory, of this famous City, here delivered;

Whose City it self is pure Gold,

Whose Wall is built of the precious Jasper stone.

Whose street is Paved with transparent Gold.

Whose twelve gates are each of them of one entire Pearl.

Whose foundations are garnished with all manner of precious stones, even with
such as the Breast Plate of judgemen^ was set with.

The mystery of which immense and transcendant glory does even call for the
Urim and Thummum to unfold; yet what we have reached toward, an understanding
hereof you have as follows;

First, Negatively that these precious materials are not to be taken in a
natural and litteral sense.

1. Because the City and its Ornaments are no more to be taken properly then
the Bride and her attire; nor neither of them more so, then their Antithesis,
the City Babylon, and the Whore.

But in as much as the Spirit is pleased to tell us that the Bride and her
attire are mystically to be understood, interpreting her fine white linen,
Rev. 19.8. To be the righteousness of the Saints, and that the City Babylon and
the Whore are allegorically to be taken calling them, Rev. 17.5. Mystery
Babylon the great the Mother of Harlots, then are we instructed to judge no
less of the new Jerusalem that Mother of Saints.

Secondly, Because as John is said to be taken away in the Spirit to see
Mystery Babylon, Rev 17.3. So also to see the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.10.
Spiritual mysteries calling for spiritual minds to observe and understand them.

Thirdly, Because the holy Spirit calls new Jerusalem an Allegory, Gal. 4.24.
etc. Old Jerusalem outward and temporal glory, blessings, benefit, and
privileges, being Types of the new Jerusalem spiritual and Heavenly glory,
blessings, benefits and privileges;

Fourthly, Because these glorious Representations, if taken in the Letter are
but of Earthly, corruptible, perishing, and fading things, as says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.7.18. Therefore cannot be the glory that belongs to the new
Jerusalem which comes from God out of Heaven.

Fifthly, Because of the evil consequences that may attend such an
interpretation.

1. It would divert men, whose minds are taken up in the letter from looking
after a mistical and spiritual meaning.

2. It would have an ill tendency to harden the poor Jew's, who have the vail
yet before their eyes, looking only for an old Testament glory, according to
the bare letter, and not into the new Testament glory, which is spiritual; It
being only a temporary Messiah, and a City and Temple suitable to him (that may
be richly adorned and beautified with the riches of the names) that they hope
for, overlooking and dispising Christ Jesus and his spiritual grace, Salvation
and glory held forth and promised in the Gospel.

3. It would also have a sad tendency to confirm the poor deluded Papists, who
being intoxicated with the Whores Cup, and enchanted with her painted splendor
and beauty, do (respecting only Moses pattern) do place so much of their
Religion and devotion, in outward ornament, and pomp, whose decking of Churches
and bespangling Priests, Vestments and Alter clothes, takes up so much of
their Divine adoration, and reverence, as though gold and gain was grace and
godliness, and as that which would recommend them to God in his worship and
service, though if that be grace the Magul, Tartarian, and Iapan Empires,
exceed them far, and testify much more grace in the Devils service, then they
in their pretended worship of Christ; their Priests, Temples, Altars and Idols,
being more richly adorned with gold and precious stones, then those in Europe,
as Ogilbies Japan History informs us: And which would also too much
strengthen them in that horrible and blasphemous delusion; that the Popedom is
the new Jerusalem state, this glorious Kingdom of Christ upon the Earth,
because it is attended with so much outward pomp, luster and glory, by so many
Potentates bowing their knee thereto, and bringing so much of the glory and
honor of the Nations unto it; and which is just as (true to follow the other
Metaphor) as that the vilest and most impudent Strumpet in the world, ought to
be esteemed a modest and chaste Virgin.

2. But affirmatively, that these precious worldly transitory things, do
figuratively represent here as else where in the Scripture Spiritual, and
Heavenly things, viz. Christ Jesus himself, his Saints and Members, the graces
of his Spirit, here, and glory hereafter.

1. They are so represented in other Scripture, viz. Jesus Christ himself is
called the Elect precious, chief Corner, and Foundation stone in Zion, 1 Pet.
2.6, 7. A Pearl of Price, Matthew. 13.46. Gold, Cant. 5.14.

2. His members are also called Jewels and Gold, Cant. 1.10, 11. Lam. 4.1.

3. And so are the graces of his Holy Scripture, Rev. 3.18. Where the Church is
counseled to buy of Christ gold tried in the Fire, that she may be rich, The
Spouse, Ps. 45.13.14. Being richly adorned therewith, her clothing of wrought
gold, etc.

4 Heavenly Glory is also represented by it, as our Savior intimates Mat.
6.20. saying, lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth
nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through nor steal,
whereby it appears, that the excellency of Spiritual things are held forth by
the excellency of natural, representing them only in a figure; for though
Christ and the Saints were so rich it seems in spiritual sense, yet in a
Natural sense were poor and indigent enough, and beholding to others for supply
of necessaries, as it was with Christ, Luke 8.3. 2 Cor. 8, 9 And the Saints,
Acts 3.6. 2 Cor. 6.10. Paul being poor naturally, yet made many rich
Spiritually, Laodocea was rich outwardly, but poor inwardly and Spiritually,
Rev. 3.17. And on the contrary, Smyrna was poor as to man, but rich as toward
God.

Therefore let it not be thought strange that the riches here spoken of should
relate to Christ Jesus, and his Saints and Members, and to hold forth his
precious Doctrines, and the rich Graces of his Spirit; though considered in
themselves are infinitely of greater value than all the riches in the world, as
Job 28.12. etc. to the end of the Chapter. Psalm. 119.72 Pro. 3, 15. the outward
Glory of the old Testament, House or Temple, chiefly Typing out the Spiritual
Glory of the new Testament, House, and Temple, which is made up of Christ, and
his Members, and speaks hereby; but the Language of the Prophet fulfilling, Isa
54.11.

Now if Jerusalem gets the Grace, the Spiritual Gold, the Pearl and precious
Stones, which are the substance, the true and durable riches, the
Jasperlike-Glory, Wall of Salvation and precious Foundation stone, which
through the pouring out of the spirit in the latter days she is like so
plentifully to enjoy, then it will appear that Babylon will not have such cause
to boast and triumph in that which is less than the shadow, viz. In that
Varnish and Trash which she has so prided in, and which in the distress that is
coming upon her, will be so little available to her, when the Idols of Gold
must be flung to the Moles and to the Bats. Isa. 2.20 and which will but then
aggravate her torment, when it must be said, by how much she has lived
deliciously and glorified her self, by so much torment give her.

Of the Citizens.
Rev. 18.7. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
but they who are written in the Lambs book of Life, 22.27.
The free Denizens of this Glorious City, are only such that are of a noble
Stock, of a heavenly Birth and descent, born from above the true Jsaacks, the
sons of Abraham by the free woman, who as they are Believers, are the only
children of promise, Gal. 3.16.29. who as the called, chosen, and faithful, are
said to have laid Christ, and his Apostles and Prophets in the Foundation of
their Faith, Hope, and Practice, Ephesians 2.19, 20. and characterized to be the
Redeemed from the Earth, and amongst men that are not defiled with women, in
whose mouth there is no gui^e, that are the Marked, Sealed number, shall have
their fathers name in their foreheads ( viz. are in a visible profession and
Practice of those truths that have his name upon upon them) and therefore said
to be keepers of his Commandments to have the testimony of Jesus, to be
servants of the Lamb, and followers of him where ever he goes; and that are
separates and Non conformists to Babylon, refusing the Mark, Name and Number of
the Beasts, though without it they can neither buy nor sell, and that are
overcomers by the Blood of the Lamb and the word of their Testimony, not loving
their Lives unto death.

There they are said to be put into the City Records, even in the Lambs Book of
Life, and the having right to the Tree of Life, do enter in through the Gate of
the City.

Whereas contrariwise the Inhabitants of the other City are said to have their
descent from beneath, being of their Father the Devil, whose works they do,
having their Fathers name in their foreheads and right hands, who are
Earth-dwellers that worship, adore and admire the Beast, and are in Subjection
to his false prophets and particularly are deciphered.

To be the Unbelievers, the Abominable, the Murderers, the Whoremongers,
Idolaters, Liars, whereby the City becomes (as before) the hold of every foul
spirit, and Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird: Witnesss their Theaters and
houses of debauchery, to provoke lust and uncleanness, the innumerable company
of Stews, and Brothel-houses that bring so great a Revenue to the support of
the Catholic Sea, who are therefore said as Dogs, Whoremongers and Sorcerers
to be without the City, Rev. 22.15. And who must in no wise enter therein, Rev.
21.22.

Of the Tree and Water of Life.
And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and in the midst of the street of
it, and of either side of the River there was the Tree of Life, which bore
twelve manner of Fruits, and yielded her Fruit every Month, and the Leaves of
the Tree were for healing of the Nations, Rev. 22.1, 2.
HAving showed us the City, her Fashion, Glory, Inhabitants, comes in the next
place to discover her Provision and Maintenance, whereby her Life, Comfort and
Refreshing is preserved and mantained.

1. This water of Life so pure and clear, proceeding out of the Throne is no
other than the Graces of the Spirit that flows from the Throne of Mercy and
Grace, as Zach. 13.1.14.8. Ezekiel. 16.9. John 3.5. Tit. 5.35. And which is freely
tendered and held forth in the Gospel, Rev. 22.19. Isa. 55.1. and which the
Church does, ever had, but more plentifully shall enjoy in this latter day of
Glory, Isa. 44 3.35.7. Joel 2.8. John 7.38. with Isa. 41.17, 18. Ezekiel. 36.25,
26.

Called the water of Life; because it reviveth from the death of sin, Ezekiel.
47.9.

2. Because all spiritual quickening is in it, Psalm. 46.4. John 7.37. It is the
spirit that quickneth.

3. From the healing virtue that is in it. Ezekiel. 47.9.

4. Because they dye no more that drink it, John 4.10, 14.

The Tree of Life is no other than the Lord Jesus with his Blessings and
Benefits (wherein he alludes to the Tree of Life that was placed in the midst
of the Garden of God, Genesis 2.9) who is the Tree of Life as well as the Water
and Fountain of Life, and the Bread of Life; which is for shade, Cant. 2.3.
Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. for Food, Ezekiel. 47.12. Hos. 14.8. Cant. 2.13. Ezekiel. 36.30. for
Physic and Medicine, the Leaves whereof having a healing property in them, as
Ezekiel. 47.12.

But of that Food that Babylon affords her Inhabitants, may it not truly he
said of it, as Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. That their Vine is as the Vine of Sodom and of
the fields of Gomorah, their Grapes are the Grapes of Gall, their Clusters are
bitter, their Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Aspes: And
that they hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders web, he that eats of
their Eggs dies, etc. Isa. 59.5. of whose dainties eat you not; for poison is
in their Cup and death in their pot.

Of there being no Temple in it.
And I saw no Temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the
Temple of it. verse 22.
THe Temple of old was the place of Gods worship that stood in the City of God,
which was curiously built, by cunning Artificers of Wood and Stone, and richly
adorned with Gold, and precious stone, and to which worldly Sanctuary belonged
a Priesthood, viz a High Priest, Chief-priests and inferior priests or
Levites, whereof diverse Ranks and Courses and distinguished by different
habits, waiting at the Altar, and attending the Mosaical Service and Ceremony
both day and night, and maintained by Tenths, First Fruits and Oblations, etc.
besides the Nazarites and Votaries which was typical of the true Tabernacle
that was made with hands, even the New Testament Temple, viz. the mistical body
of Christ the Church, so called in the Gospel, as the Apostle witnesses, 1
Cor. 16.17. 2 Cor. 6.16. What Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols for
year, the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them and
walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people, compared
Rev. 21.3. and Heb. 3.5, 6. whose house are ye, built by Christ the
master builder, and which as the spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5 6. is built of
living stones, and has belonging to it the Golden Altar, spiritual incense and
sacrifices, a spiritual priesthood with a great High Priest that lives for
ever after the order of Melchisadeck, so that in the New Testament day there is
no other Temple to be seen but such as Christ and his mistical body makes, no
such Temple that was to be built after Moses pattern in the Old Testament day;
for the Vail of that Temple being rent, the Altar service, sacrifice and
Priesthood, Law it self being altered and changed, Heb. 7.12. to make way for
the new Temple Altar, Law-service, sacrifice, Priesthood, the old is no more to
be seen, but all the Divine worship and service to be performed in the new
^emple, where the Priests the sons of Levi Mal. 3.3. being purified, and having
on the white Robes, the pure fine Linen, which is interpreted to be the
righteousness of the Saints (in allusion to the linen Ephod of old) do stand
at the Altar with much incense in the Golden Censer, offering it with the
Prayers of all Saints, Rev. 8.34. and so serve him day and night in his Temple,
Rev. 7.15. And this to fulfill what Christ himself affirmed to the Woman of
Samaria, John 4.23, 24. That the hour was coming, and then was that the true
Worshippers should worship the Father in Spirit and Truth; and that he sought
to worship him, and that in opposition to their going up to this, or the other
Consecrated and Dedicated place, of worship as Samaria or Jerusalem.

Holding out hereby the truth, purity, and spirituality of Gospel worship, that
by the Lords Ministry according to his own order and appointment shall now be
performed, that will make it like the figure of Heaven it self as before.

The quit contrary is true concerning Babylon, for there is a Temple to be seen
in her; yea, and such a Temple too that is afte^ the old pattern, which is as
great a demonstration, as any of her Apostate state, and that she is old
Jerusalem, not new, the Harlot, and not the Bride; for have you not there the
Cathedral, that is just built after the figure and pattern of the Temple, with
the Porch, the Holy and most holy Place, with solemn dedication and
consecration to Divine worship, with all the holy ground it stands upon, and is
surrounded with; and richly adorned with gold and silver and precious stone,
having also its holy Water, Oil, Incense and rich Perfumes, Lamps, Tapors,
Candelsticks, and Instruments of Music, etc. And is their not a Priesthood,
belonging thereto after the pattern of Aaron, to serve at the Altar, for have
you not a Higst-priest the Pope, and chief Priests, the Cardinals, Bishops,
Deans, Abbots, as well as an inferior Priesthood, like the Levits, consisting
of several orders and ranks, distinguished by their names and Vestments, as
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Cannons, petty Cannons, Bural, Deans, Choristers,
Musicians, singing Nuns, Monks and Friars of diverse Orders, Votaries
unnumerable, who serve at this Alter day and night, and have their tenths,
first Fruits, Oblations, to support and maintain the same, with their Jubiles,
new Moons, Feasts, Fasts, and Saints days, and a hundred Heathenish additions
and inventions, to make this their Temple complete Babylonish, and for none of
which is their the least sylable in Christ's Gospel concerning his new Testament
Temple and service. Fully demonstrating and fulfilling what the Apostle Paul
foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Concerning this mystery of iniquity and man of sin: that
shall thus sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, who by his
thus changing times and Laws, Dan. 7.25. Esa. 24.5. shall oppose and exalte
himself above all that is called God and worshipped; And who hereby is truly
said, Rev. 13.6. To open his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his Tabernacle and them that dwell in Heaven: and to tread the Holy
City under his feet, Rev. 11.2.

Of the Kings of the Earth that bring their glory to it.
And the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory, and honor into it, 21.24.
AS it was in old Jerusalem the Type in Solomon's day, when it was said, 2 Chronicles. 9 23.24. That all the Kings of the Earth sought his presence, and
brought every man his present; Vessels of Silver, and Vessels of Gold, and
Raiment, Harness and Spices, Horses, Mules, a rate year, by year;

So must it be in the new Jerusalem, there shall be a coming up of the Kings of
the Earth with their glory and honor, which are to be understood, either such
Kings or Rulers that are converted to the faith, that being instructed, become
wise, do kiss the son, Serving the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling,
Ps. 2.11.12. Whilst others are broken to pieces in their opposition) or of such
that being holy and gracious are made Rulers and Governors, for only such that
are men of Truth and fear God, are to be entrusted therewith. And these Kings
in the Text that come in to the City can be understood no other, for we cannot
suppose any wicked unconverted persons have their admission, because it is
said, Rev. 21.27. That in no wise there shall enter into it any thing that
defiles, or that works Abomination, or that makes a lie, or that are not
written in the Lambs Book of Life.

And in such a sense that these following Scriptures be fulfilled, viz. Beeause
of thy Temple which is in Jerusalem shall Kings bring presents to thee, the
Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents to thee; the Kings of
Sheba and Seba shall Offer gifts, yea all Kings shall fall down before him, and
all Nations shall serve him; the Kings shall see and arise, and Princes shall
worship, because of the Lord, etc. The Kings shall come to thy Light, and
Princes to the brightness of thy rising, the Kings shall see thy Righteousness,
and all Kings thy Glory; All the Kings of the Earth shall praise thee O Lord,
when they hear the words of thy mouth: yea, they shall sing in the ways of the
Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord, Ps. 68.29. Es. 49.22, 23. Ps. 72.10,
11, 12. Isa. 47.6, 7.60.2, 3, 4, 5.62.2. Psa. 138.44.

It is true Babylon indeed has had the Kings of the Earth bringing glory and
honor into her, whereby she has gloryfied her self at that monstrous rate,
saying therefore she shall sit as a Queen and see no sorrow; the ten Kings
having to fulfill Gods words given their Power, Strength, and Kingdom to her,
Rev. 17.4.17. ^ut what Kings are they? not such Kings as are before mentioned:
but such as being made drunk with the Whores Cup, commit leudness and
fornication with her, Rev. 18.9.

But yet thus much for her comfort, let her know, that the day is hastening,
when the Nations that have supported her shall fall off from her, and the ten
Kingdoms that by their Power or Horns have born her up, shall by their Horns
also push her down, yea they shall hate the Whore; and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire, when those other
words of Prophecy shall be fulfilled. The delicates that thy soul lusted after,
thou shall find them no more at all, and Babylon the glory of Kingdoms shall be
as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, Isa. 13.19, 20. And God will be
avenged of thee, and will not meet thee as a man, Isa. 47.1 When all that knew
thee amongst the people shall be astonished at thee: thou shall be a terror,
and never shall thou be any more, Eze 28.12. to 20. And when thou art spoiled
what will thou do? though thou cloathest thy self with Crimson, though thou
deckest thee with Ornaments of Gold, though thou paintest thy face with
painting, in vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy lovers shall despise thee,
they will seek thy life, Jer. 4.30. And these are the true sayings of God, Rev
19.9. And this further know, that strong is the Lord God that will judge thee,
Rev. 18.8.

Of the Throne of God and of the Lamb.
And there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall
be in it, and his Servants shall serve him, 22.3.
A Throne or Seat, is that principal place, where Judgment is administered, and
from whence it flows, called therefore the Throne of Righteousness, the
Throne of Justice, the Throne of Judgment, and sometime put for Dominion, and
rule, 2 Samuel 7.13.16.14.9. Lam. 5.19. Because exercised thereon, sometime for
dignity and glory; because a place of chief renown and eminency, sometime for a
Kingdom it self, Jer. 33.17. 1 Samuel 14.9. Because the principal affairs thereof
are transacted there; And as respecting God sometime for Heaven it self, which
is called his Throne, Ps. 11.4. Math. 5.33. Acts 7.49. Because it is his
principal place and seat, where his Throne of Majesty is, and whereon Christ
sits with him upon his right hand, Heb. 12.3.

Holding out most commonly that rule and authority that is exercised in civil
states;

The Throne of God and of the Lamb here shoen by Vision, discovered to John to
be in the new Jerusalem, or new Testament Church, has an allusion to the
Throne of God, and Christ that was in the old Testament Church, and to which we
shall have recourse, for our better understanding of this mystery.

And which Throne of Old we find to be two fold, viz. either that upon which
God was said more petticularly and specially, viz. that which was erected in
the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.17. Or upon that which he was said more ordinarely to
sit, viz. that which the Judges and Kings of Israel sat in Judgment upon;

The former whereof we shall in a more particular manner search into, because
there much lies in it, and much light may be gathered from thence not only for
the understanding this Book of the Revelations; but the Prophecies relating to
the latter times, whereof it was a special Type. And which we find was that
Throne which God commanded Moses to make, and to place over the Ark betwixt the
Cherubins, called the Mercy Seat, or Throne of Grace, as Exodus 25.17. And thou
shall make a Mercy Seat above upon the Ark, where he promised to sit, govern,
and to give Law to Israel, Verse 22. And there I will meet with thee, and will
commune with thee from above the Mercy Seat, from between the Cherubins, which
are upon the Ark of the Testimony; of all things which I will give thee in
Commandment unto the children of Israel.

Which Throne was made accordingly and all things appertaining thereto, as
Exodus 40. and which no sooner was erected, and put into the Tent or Tabernacle
according to appointment, but the Lord came thereon, as Exodus 40.34. compared
Numb. 37. Then a Cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the Glory of
the Lord filled the Tabernacle, and Moses was not able to enter into the Seat
of the Congregation; because the Cloud abode thereon, and the Glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle, which was no other than that glorious presence that
brought them up out of Egypt, whereof we read, Exodus, 13.21. And the Lord went
before them by day in a Pillar of a Cloud to lead them by the way, and by night
in a Pillar of fire, to give them light to go by day and night, he took not
away the Pillar of the Cloud by day, nor the Pillar of fire by night from
before the people, and which was no other than Jesus Christ himself, called the
Angel of Gods presence, Isa, 63.0. and therefore said, Exodus 23.20. Behold I
send an Angel before thee to keep thee in thy way, and to bring thee into the
place which I have prepared: Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not;
for he will not pardon your transgressions; for my name is in him, but if thou
shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an Enemy
to thy Enemies, and an Adversary to thy Adversaries; for my Angel shall go
before thee, and bring thee unto the Amorites, etc. of whom Stephen speaks,
Acts 7.37, 38. This is that Moses which said unto the Children of Israel, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto
me, him shall you hear, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. This is he that
was in the Church in the Wilderness with the Angel that spoke to him in the
Mount Sina, and with our Fathers who received the lively Oracles to give unto
us, to whom our Fathers would not obey but thrust him from them: And this is
that Spiritual Rock that followed them, which was Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.

The Lord Christ being thus upon the Throne among them, you will sind how he
acted the part of a King, Ruler, Governor, Shepherd thereon, as more fully
appears by the particulars following.

First, By giving Law to them as a King and Legislator, whereof you have the
Account, Numb. 7.89. And when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation to speak with him (viz. with God as in the Margent) then he heard
the voice of one speaking him from off the Mercy Seat (or Throne) that was upon
the Ark of Testimony from between the two Cherubims. And he speak unto him,
etc. and so he goes on in the following Chapters: And Jehovah spoke unto Moses
saying, etc. Giving him all the Laws, Statutes and Judgments from his mouth,
who rejected says Stephen the lively Oracles to give to us.

And therefore you have Moses saying to the People, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7, 8. Behold
I have taught you Statutes and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me,
that ye should do so, keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes
and say, surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people; for what
Nation is there so great who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is
in all things that we call upon him for; and what Nation is there so great that
has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law, which I set before
you this day, etc.

Secondly, Because as a Shepherd and Guide he march before him, as appears,
Exodus 40 36, 37, 38. And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle,
the Ch ldren of Israel went onward in all their Jorneys: But if the Cloud were
not taken up, then the Journyed not till the day it was taken up; for the Cloud
of the Lord was upon the Tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the
sight of all the house of Israel, so again, Numb. 9.18. At the Commandment of
the Lord the Children of Israel Jornyed, and at the Commandment of the Lord
they pitched, as Long as the Cloud abode upon the Tabernacle, they rested in
the Tents; and when the Cloud tarryed long upon the Tabernacle many days, ^hen
the Children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord and Jornyed not, etc. And
therefore it is said, Exodus 15.13. Thou in thy Mercy have led forth thy people
which thou have redeemed, thou have guided them in thy strength to thy holy
Habitation, and again, Psalm. 78.52. But made his own people to go forth like
sheep* and guided them in the Wilderness like a flock, and he led them on
safely, so that they feared not, And Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12, 13. As an Eagle stirs
up her Nest, fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad her Wings, takes
them, bears them on her Wings; so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was
no strange God with him, he made him ride on the high places of the Earth, that
he might eat the increase of the fields. etc.

Thirdly, As a Captain saved, deefnded and protected them, as Exodus 14.19, 20.
And the Angel of God which went before the Camp of Israel, removed and went
behind them, and the Pillar of the Cloud went from before their face, and stood
behind them, and it came between the Tents of the Egyptians and the Camp of
Israel, and it was a Cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to
these, so that the one came not near the other all the night: And therefore it
is said, Numb. 23.2^. The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is
among them, God brought them up out of Egypt, he has as it were the strength
of an Unicorn, surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any Divination against Israel, according to this time it shall be said of Jacob
and Israel, what has God wrought?

And again, Deuteronomy. 33.24. to the end, There is none like the God of Jesurun who
rides upon the Heaven for thy help, and in his excellency on the Sky the
Eternal God is thy ^efuge, and underneath are the Everlasting Arms, and he
shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee, and shall say destroy them, Israel
then shall dwell in safety, above the Fountain of Jaoob shall be upon a Land of
Corn and Wine; also his Heavens shall drop down Dew. Happy art thou O Israel,
who is like unto thee? O People saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and
who is the Sword of thy excellency, and thine Enemies shall be found liars unto
thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

Fourthly, For Counsel and direction in all Cases, and to that end was the
Breast Plate of Judgment made, called the Vrim and Thummim, that the people
might approach the Throne with it, and enquire of the Lord on the peoples
behalf, as the matter required, Number. 27.21. And Joshuah shall stand before
Eliazar the Priest, who shall ask Council for him after the Judgment of Urim
before the Lord, at his Word shall they go out, and at his Word they shall come
in, both he and all the Children of Israel with him, even all the Congregation,
of which Breast Plate of Judgment you may read, Exodus 28.15.29.30. And again,
Numb. 27.1. That difficult case of the Daughters of Zeloph^ad, was in the fifth
Verse brought before the Lord, who gave direction therein* as appears, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11.

And Fifthly, as a great Captain General, To fight their Battles, and to give
them victory over their Enemies, whereof you have diverse instances, Number. 10.35,
36. And it came to pass when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up
Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee
before thee and when it rested he said, Return O Lord unto the many thousands
of Israeli^^^. Josh. 5 14. Nay but as a Captain of the Lords Host am I now
come, and Joshuah fell on his face to the Earth, and did worship him, etc. From
whence Caleb and Joshuah fetched strength for faith in that difficult hour,
Numb. 14.9. saying to their Brethren only, Rebel ye not against the Lord,
neither fear ye the people of the Land; for they are Bread for us, their
defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not, and it
is said, the Glory of the Lord appeared in the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
and by the Ark compassing of Jerico, Joshuah 6. the Walls thereof fell down,
which therefore gave Moses Cause in his Song, Exodus 15.3. to say, That the Lord
was a man of War, Jehovah was his name, and in the 11. verse, that there was
none like unto him amongst the Gods, being glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders, who does but stretch out his hand, and the Earth
swallows up his Enemies, where y that promise was fulfilled, Lev. 26 7, 8. And
you shall chase your Enemies, and they shall fall before you by the Sword, and
five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall put ten thousand
to flight, and your Enemies shall fall before you by the Sword, Deuteronomy. 32.30.
And again, Number. 14.24. Behold the perple shall rise up as a great Lion, and
lift up himself as a young Lion, he shall not lie down until he eat of the
prey, and drink of the Blood of the slain; whereby Jerusalem became a
burdensome stone to all people; for all that burdened themselves with them was
cut in pieces, and the Governors of Judah became a Harth of fire among the
Wood, and a Torch of fire in a Sheaf, devouring all the people round about, on
the right hand and on the left.

Sixthly, As a potent Monarch to give them ease and rest, Exodus 33.14. And he
said my presence shall go with thee and give thee rest, Joshuah 2^.43, 44, 45.
And the Lord gave unto Israel all the Land which he swear to give unto their
Fathers, and they possessed it and dwelt therein, and the Lord gave them rest
round about according to all that he swear unto their Fathers, and then stood
not a man of all their Enemies before them And the Lord delivered all their
Enemies into their hand, there failed not ought of any good which the Lord had
spoken unto the house of Israel, all came to pass.

From which six Considerations it might well be said, as Jer. 8.19 Is not the
Lord in Zion, is not her King in her, and by Gideon, when they would have made
him King, Jug. 8.23. I will not rule over, neither shall my son rule over you,
the Lord shall rule over you. And well might the Lord say to Samuel, when the
people would have a King like the Nations, 1 Samuel 8.7. That they have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not Reign over them,
the Lord God being their King, 12.12. And no wonder that such Rebellion should
be reckoned as one of their greatest sins and iniquities, 1 Samuel 12.16, 17, 18,
19, 20. with Hos. 9.15.

Which said Throne with the Ark and its appurtenances, golden Candlesticks,
Altar, Censures, etc. were put into

1. The Tent, and wherein it abode, till it was put into the Temple for about
five hundred years, except that time it was in the Philistians hands.

2. Which marched through the Wilderness, encompassed by the whole Camp, as you
may read Numb. 2. and 3. Chapter.

3. After the conquest of Canaan was set up at Shilo, Jos. 18.1.

4. In Elies days was brought into the Camp at Eben-Ezer, and taken by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.1. The Lord for the sin of his people giving up his glory
into the enemies hand, as 7, 8. Psalm. 60. So that he forsook the Tabernacle of
Shilo: the Tent which he placed among men, and delivered his strength into
Captivity, and his Glory into the Enemies hand; he gave his people also over
unto the Sword, and was wrath with his Inheritance, etc.

5. Which plagued the Philistines, Chapter 6. so that they returned it back
again.

6. Smote the Men of Bethshemesh for their sin, in looking into the Ark of the
Lord, even 50000. of them Verse 19. Fetched by the men of Kerjathjearim into the
House of Abinadab on the Hill.

7. Removed by David, with an intention to bring it to his own City, but
because of the disorder in carrying it on a Cart, which should have been born
upon Priests shoulders; Vzzah was smitten, and so the Ark was left three
Months at the House of Obed Edom, 1 Chronicles. 13.

8. Thence to the City of David, 1 Chronicles. 15.29.

9. Thence in the days of Solomon into the most Holy place into the Temple, 1
Kings 6.6. etc.

To which Throne there is special regard in this Book of the Revelations in
several respects; For

1. As the Lord was said to sit then upon that Throne.

So John has a Vision of the Lords sitting upon this Throne, Rev. 4.2.3.

2. As that Throne was posited in the midst of the Camp, viz. the Levites in
their 24. Courses being about it, and the whole Congregation divided into four
Brigades, under four principal Standards, viz. Judah at the East with his
fellow Tribes, with an Ensign as supposed of a Lion, because Jacob likened him
thereto, Genesis 49.9. And Ephraim on the West with a Bullock, being also called
the firstling of a Bullock, Deuteronomy. 33.17. Reuben on the South, with a man as
supposed in his, and Dan with an Eagle in his Standard, which with the number
of the Host surrounding the Throne, viz. 603555. which you have particularly
expressed in the second and third Chapter of Numbers.

So in this Book you have the Imperial Session of God and of his Church,
exactly framed according to the form of that ancient Encamping of God with
Israel in the Wilderness, where you have the 24 Elders sitting in 24 Thrones
round about the Throne, clothed in white Raiment, and Crowns of gold upon their
Head, in allusion to the 24 Courses of Levites, that incompast the other
Throne; and the four living Creatures, viz. the Lion the Calf, the Man, and the
Eagle were in like manner round about the Throne, answering not only the four
Standards before mentioned, but Ezekiels four Cherubins, Ezekiel. 1.10.
Discovering as one observes the various constitutions, frames and tempers of
the Saints.

All which both Elders and living Creatures thankfully acknowledge in their new
Song, to have been Redeemed out of every Kindred, Tongue, People and Nation,
(bespeaking them Saints) and that they are made unto God, Kings and Priests to
Reign on the Earth, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10. By which it appears they were the
Churches Representatives, and therefore are these Redeemed ones said to stand
before the Throne in white Robes, and Palms in their hands, and to be a great
multitude, that no man could number, Rev. 7.9. And who are said to be before
the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that
sits on the Throne, shall dwell amongst them, etc. the same that is said,
Rev. 21.3, 4. As he Tabernacled of old with his People.

3. As the Throne in the days of Solomon was put into the most Holy place, 1
Kings 6.6. etc. which was that Cubical square of twenty Cubits every way. So
was this Throne put into this Cubical square of 1500. Miles square, as before
in the Cubical figure, page 160.

4. That as there was pitched by the Throne both in the Tabernacle and Temple,
the golden Altar, the Candlestick, and the Sea; so in allusion thereto you
have, Rev. 4. seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne, interpreted to be
the seven Spirits of God, and the Sea of glass like Crystal, which in Rev.
21.1. is called, the pure River of Water of Life clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne; And also golden Vials, 5.8. And golden Censures, with much
Incense before the golden Altar, Rev. 8.3, 4. Interpreted to be the Prayers of
all Saints, 8.4. compare* 5.8. And their white Garments, interpreted to be the
righteousness of the Saintss Rev. 19.

5. That as the unity of the Godhead and Divinity of Christ was manifestly held
forth by Christ siting upon the Throne, who in all respects was owned to be
God, though sometimes called an Angel.

So is the same great and blessed truth, fully in diverse respects made out in
this Book, respecting Christ's (the Lamb) sitting upon the Throne with the
Father, as appears by the following instances.

1. It is called the Throne of God and the Lamb, Rev. 22.3. Thereby intimating
that Christ Jesus has equal property and Interest therein, accounting it no
robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.

The unity of the Godhead being made out in the next words, and his Servants
shall serve him, Rev. 22.3.

2. He that sat upon the Throne said, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the End, Rev. 21.5. Which is the same that is attributed to Christ, Rev. 1.11.
As also to God himself, Verse 8.

3. He that sat upon the Throne was to look upon like a Jasper, the very same
that is spoken of Christ; who is represented to be that Saphir like glory, that
Wall of Saphir, and that foundation Saphir stone

4. He that sat upon the Throne had Divine adoration and worship given him by
the Church or their Representatives, the 24. Elders and four living Creatures,
Rev. 4.10, 11. They also worship and adore the Lamb. Rev. 5.9, 10.

The whole Church with joint consent, and one voice ascribe the like salvation
and glory to the Lamb, as they do to God sitting upon the Throne, Rev. 7.9, 10.

And again, in the 11 and 12. Verses, falling upon their Faces do worship God
in unity, saying, Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
Honor, and Power, and might be unto our God, for ever and ever, Amen

Which also by the whole Church in that innumerable multitude is given to the
Lamb, 5.14. saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing.

And then every Creature in Heaven and Earth is heard, saying, Blessing,
Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever.

To which the Church again Echoes by their representatives, saying Amen, and
falling down and worshipping Him, (viz. the unity of the Godhead that lives
for ever and ever.

6. You have also an evidence of this great truth, out of the Mouths of the
enemies themselves, even Babylon that is to be destroyed, Rev 6.15 16, 17. And
the Kings of the Earth, and the great men and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty men, and every Bondman, and every Freeman, (compare
Rev. 19.18) said to the Mountains and Rocks, fall upon us and hide us from the
Face of the him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for
the great day of wrath is come (by way of unity and conjunction) and who shall
be able to stand.

6. That as Christ, God, was King, Lord, and Lawgiver of old unto his Church
and People, ruling and governing them upon that Throne in all things respecting
both Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military affairs.

So is he in all those respects upon his Throne here, who after he has as Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings judged the great Whore, and subdued the Beast, Rev.
19. And destroy them that have destroyed the Earth, Rev. 11.18. Will then in a
more visible way take to himself his great power, and Reign, Rev. 11.17. When
that voice shall come out of the Throne, praise our God all ye his Servants,
and ye that fear his name both small and great, and when the Echo shall be
with a joint consent with great acclamation, Alleluja, for the Lord God
Omnipotent Reigns, let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, Rev.
19.5, 6, 7. And when gathering round about his Throne, they shall fall down
upon their faces and worship him, ascribing Salvation, Glory, Blessing, Wisdom,
Power, and Might unto him, Rev. 7.9, 10, 11, 12, To the fulfilling such blessed
Prophecies, as these, viz. Isai. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he shall save us, etc. Luke 1.32, 33. And he
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall Reign over the
House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom, there shall be no end, Isai. 9.6.
And the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor to the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, of the increase his Government and Peace, there shall be no end upon the
Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it from
hence forth even for ever, the Zeal of the Lord of Host, shall perform this
that as David of old Ruled the natural Seed, so will our David govern all the
Spiritual Seed.

And not only so but the Kingdoms of this World must become the Kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. When
the whole Universe will submit to his Scripture, and as the desire of Nations,
that his Government be embraced, Hag. 2.7. And when all Creatures with
universal consent shall ascribe Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, to him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13. When all
Kings ^^all bow before him, and all Nations shall serve him, Ps. 72.

When at his name every knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall confess, that
Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.10.

Secondly, You have the other Throne, on which the Lord was said to sit of old,
hinted at here also, viz. that Throne on which the Judge or Elder of old sat,
wherein the Lord was said more ordinarily to sit, and it was called the Throne
of the Lord.

And not improperly,

1. Because the Lords Ordinance of Magistracy was managed thereon,

2. Because the Lords Law was to be the rule thereof,

3. Because the Judgment thereon given was said to be the Lords,

4. Because the Lords Servants, men of truth, and such as feared his name were
only to be entrusted therewith,

5. Because the Lords special presence was intayled thereto; concerning which
you have a particular and brief account in that most excellent charge that good
Jehoshaphat give his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. respecting the Duty, Dignity and Law
of the Throne, worthy to be written in letters of gold upon every Throne of
Judicature: Where he charge them after this manner, viz. Take heed (says he)
what ye do: for ye judge not for men but for the Lord, who is with you in
Judgment: Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do
it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons nor
taking of gifts, and he charged them saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of
the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart; and what cause soever shall come
to you of your Brethren between blood and blood between Law and Commandment,
Statutes and Judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against
the Lord, and so wrath come upon you and upon your brethren, this do, and ye
shall not trespass, deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good; And
to which may be added that of the Apostle, Romans 13. Holding out the great end
of the Thrones erecting, viz. for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

And which Throne of Judgment is here also intended and included, and on which
the Lord will sit in this his day, to the making his Crown to flourish;

For the Text says, when that Throne of the Lord and of the Lamb shall be in
it, that his Servants shall serve him, viz his Saints and people shall be
subservient to him in this great ministration of managing the Throne, viz. they
are especially to ascend the Thrones and Judgments, as Rev. 20.4. And I saw
Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgemene was given unto them, etc.

And in 4.4. And round about the Throne were twenty four Seats, (or Thrones)
and upon the Seats I saw twenty four Elders, sitting clothed in white Raiment,
and they had on their heads Crowns of Gold, being as Rev. 5.10. Made by Christ
Kings and Priest, viz. Royal Priesthood, l. p. 2. 9. To Reign with and for
Christ, and as his substitutes, in his Name, and fear, to his praise by his
Law, through his Spirit with his presence, are they to execute the judgment of
Truth, in continual subjection, and subordination to him, and therefore are
said, 4.10. to cast their Crowns at his Feet before his Throne, ascribing the
Honor, Glory and Power to him. Whereby that Sovereign Ordinance of Magistracy
that was ordained for the blessing and benefit of Mankind, shall now be
restored to its primitive luster and purity; when there shall be (to accomplish
the word of promise) Judges restored as at first, and Counselors as at the
beginning, that the City may be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful
City, Isa. 26. When her Officers must be made Peace, and Exactours,
Righteousness, Isa. 60.17. When their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their
Governors shall proceed from the midst of them, Jer. 30.21. And Princes shall
no more oppress Gods people, Ezekiel. 45.8. Nor any oppressed shall pass through
them any more, then may we expect that the Lords Law will be magnified and made
honorable, Isa. 1.42.21.23. And the Law must go forth of Zion, and the Word of
the Lord from Jerusalem, Mich. 4.2. Then Righteousness, Truth and Peace, shall
kiss each other, Psalm. 45. And the people shall be judged with Righteousness,
and the poor with judgment when there shall be a Spirit of judgment to them
that sit in judgment; and strength to them that turn the battle to the Gate,
Isa. 28.56. For the Spirit of the Lord must then eminently be given to Rulers
and Judges, who must be anointed for the due execution of that great
Ordinance, as the 70 of old, Numb. 11 17.27. Numb 27.18.20, 21. as the
Joshua's, Deuteronomy. 34.9. the Othniell's, Jud 3.9, 10. the Sampsons, Jud 14.6 the
Samuels, 1 Samuel 3.20. the David's, 1 Samuel 16.13, 14. when the feeble shall be as
David, and the David's as Angels, Zach. 12.8. When righteousness shall run down
as a mighty stream, and peace shall be extended like a River, Isa. 66.12. And
Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the stability of these times, Isa. 33.6.

And this shall be the season when there shall be no more Curse, as the Text
says, when the Throne of the Lamb shall thus take place, intimating that the
abuse of the Throne has brought in a Curse which is a great truth; for
righteous Rulers are not more to be esteemed a blessing than evil and wicked
Rulers are esteemed a Curse, which are given therefore as a judgment and Curse
for sin, as well as to be a Curse, as Lev. 26.17. Judges 2.14. Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
2 Kin. 17.19. Isa. 10.5.42.24. Isa. 3.4. Eccles. 10.16.4.13, 14 Isa. 3.4.13.

Thus have we taken a view of that Throne of God and the Lamb, that is to be in
new Jerusalem the City of God: We shall also observe to you that Babylon has a
Throne in her also; but it is the Throne of the Devil, Rev. 2.10. The Throne of
the Beast, Rev. 16. even that Seat or Throne that the Dragon gave him, Rev. 13
who resigned to him his Power, Seat and Authority, Rev. 13.2. A throne of
Violence, Mischief, Blood and Iniquity, from whence has proceeded all manner of
unrighteousness, they having thereon established mischief by a Law, and because
it has been in the power of their hands: therefore have they exacted it with
all manner of cruelty and oppression; for in her is found the Blood of the
Prophets and of Saints, and of all that are slain upon the earth, Rev. 18.24.
And therefore has the holy Spirit portraied the Beast, and where the Chief
Rulers upon this Throne are to have their Garments all stained with Blood of a
Crimson and Scarlet Color, and to be drunk with Blood, Blood within and Blood
without, a Scarlet Whore riding upon a Crimsom Colored Beast, and therefore is
that cry under the Altar, How Long ere thou avenge our blood at her hand.

But the day is hastening, when Inquisition shall be made after this Blood,
Psalm. 9.12. And when the Earth shall disclose her Blood, and no more cover her
slain, Isa 26.21. When the Righteous Sentence shall go forth from the Throne,
give her Blood to drink; for she is worthy, Rev. 16.6. with the reason of it;
for they have shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets; Fill her double in the Cup
she has filled, when that Song shall be Sung, even the Song of Moses the song
of the Lamb, viz. Great and Mavelous are thy works Lord God Almighty, just
and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, who shall not fear thee O Lord, and
glorify thy holy Name; for thou only art Holy; for all Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest, And again, Allelujah
Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and power unto the Lord our God; for true and
Righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged the great Whore, which did
corrupt the Earth with her Fornication, and has avenged the Flood of his
Servants at her hand. And again they said, Allelujah, Rev. 19.1, 2, 3.

If you desire better information into the Idolatries, Hypocrisies, Treasons
and cruel Butcheries of the Popish Antichristian Generation (if you have forgot
the Amarian Cruelties, the Bloody Irish and Peidmont Massacres, with the
burning of London) read two late pieces writ, one by Dr. Stillingfleet, and an
other (giving you the History of these things out of their own writing,) by Mr.
Foulis.

A Paraphrastical Exposition.
JOhn having seen a Vision of the Destruction of Babylons old World, viz. in
the passing away of her old Heaven in her Whorish Ministry or Church state, and
her old Earth in her Beastly Magistracy or Civil state, has now a Vision of
Jerusalems new World, wherein all things are made new, viz. In her new
Heaven-Bride-like ministry or Church state, and in her Lamb-like Magistracy or
Civil state, and which in Conjunction is discovered in the emblematical
representation of a Glorious City hereafter expressed.

9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials
full of the seven last Plagues, and talked with me, saying, come hither, I will
show thee the Bride the Lambs Wife.
And there was one of the seven Angels that having showed me the destruction of
the false Church, by the burning of a gaudy Whorish woman, Rev. 17. shows me
here the exaltation of the true Church, by the representation of a Beautiful
comely Virgin, prepared and trimed as a Bride for her Husband.

And then me thought I was carried unto the top of a great Mountain, and had
spiritual discoveries of the new Testament Church that is built upon a Hill,
Mat. 5.14. 10 And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high
Mountain, and showed me that great City, the Holy Jerusalem, discending out of
Heaven from God.
And as the Angel had discovered to me Babylon the false Church in the figure
of a great City was pleased by the emblem of a famous City to show me new
Jerusalem the true Church, and by the situation, grandeur, beauty and excellent
descent of the one, would have me to understand the Divine original
perspicuity, stability, greatness and holiness of the other.

And then by observing to me that Divine Glory, 11. Having the Glory of God,
and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone
clear as Crystal.

Ver. 23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

Ver. 25. For there shall be no night there.

Chap. 22.5. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle,
neither light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever.


which by a continued light as bright as the Jasper and clear as Crystal, so
shined upon it day and night, that there was no need of any other light (either
Candle, Sun or Moon to lighten it) would have me understand that eminent and
glorious presence of Christ that should now rest upon the Church, transcending
the Glory that shined about the Sanctuary, when of old he Tabernacled with men,
and to which he alludes, and by virtue whereof the Christian Doctrine and Grace
shall be so splendid and glorious.

12. And had a Wa l great and h gh, and had twelve Gates, and at the Gates
twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
Tribes of the Children of Israel.

13. On the East three Gates, on the North th^ee Gates, on the South three
Gates. on the West three Gates.

14. And the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the namer of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

25. And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no
night there.


The next thing that came to be observed in this glorious structure, was an
illustrious regular and well fortified Wall, planted to the four Quarters, and
accommodated with proportionable Gates and Guards.

Giving me to understand hereby the salvation, stability and security now
attending the Church in her freedom from all danger, both from within or
without; being not only encompassed with an infinite Arm and all-seeing Eye,
founded and environed with invincible Apostolical and Prophetical Doctrine and
Truth; but richly furnished with an Angelical faithful Ministry to defend and
keep the same, who are continually at the open Gates, as to receive and embrace
the faith from every Quarter, so as vigilantly to keep out and reject whatever
may defile.

Afterward the same Angel with a Golden Reed in his hand did measure, 15. And
he that talked with me had a Golden Reed to measure the City, and the Gates
thereof, and the wall thereof
and give me the exact Demensions and Symmetry of the City Gates and Walls.

Giving me to understand thereby the exactness of Rule and holy Order, that the
Church will faithfully observe in all her Ministrations, who in every thing,
both as to Doctrine, Worship and Manners, will lie level to the square of Gods
Word that Golden Met wand.

And that the Cubical square thereof so well answering the Figure of the holy
place in the Temple, bespeaks the Church in its now conformity to Divine
appointment, even no less then as a Heaven upon Earth.

The next thing that so signally called for observation and remark, 18. And the
building of the Wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure Gold, like unto
clear Glass.

19. And the Foundations of the Wall of the City were Garnished with all manner
of precious Stones, the first Foundition was Jasper, the second Saphir, the
third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald.

20. The fifth Sardonix, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth
Beril, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrisoprasus, the eleventb a Jacinet, the
twelfth an Amethist.

21. And the twelve Gates were the twelve Pearls, every several Gates was of
one Pearl, and the street of the City was pure Gold, as it was trnnsparent
Glass.


was the precious materials and the glorious Garnishings of it, which was most
manifest in that magnificent Jasper Wall, astonishing Golden City and street,
the most illustrious Pearl-Gates, and those wonderful precious Stones that
bespangled the Foundations.

Discovering to me no less than the incomparable excellency of Jesus Christ in
his Name, Nature and Offices, the incomparable precious head of their Glorious
body, together with his pure and precious Doctrines, and the inestimable Gifts
and Graces of his spirit, as manifested in the Hearts and Lives of the Saints.

22. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are
the Temple of it.
The City in all its parts being observed, the Accessories to render it
accomplished in all respects are nextly taken notice of, the first whereof is
the extraordinary Temple that was in it, God and Christ being the Temple
thereof, which instructed me that it was no litteral and material but a
mystical and Spiritual Temple, Christ Jesus, God Man, 24. And the Nations of
them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the Earth
do bring their glory and honor unto it.

26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations into it.


the living precious foundation corner stone, and the Saints as living precious
stones built upon him, making up together this mystical Temple, as 1. p. 2. 5.
2 Cor. 6.16.

The next thing that heightens the glory and increases the Grandeur of this
famous City, is the conflux and great resort of the Nations, and Kings of the
Earth with their riches and honor into it, in allusion to Solomon's days, as
expressed, 2 Cron. 9.22.

Intimating that in those days Christianity shall be esteemed the greatest
Honor, Grace and Godliness, and the presence of Christ will be most prized and
regarded. When there shall be such Kings, that will value Christ more then
their Crowns, as Rev. 4.10. When goodness shall go for true greatness, and
Godliness for the best gain.

27. And their shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie, but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of life.
Then are the Characters of those given, that shall have the honor to be
admitted into this famous place;

1. Negatively, viz. no Pagan Idolaters nor Antichristian liars, that belong
to the Beasts, Catalogue, But

2. Affirmitively such only as by the Lambs Register ought to have entrance.

Intimating that how ever there shall be such flocking into the Church of
Christ, and that it shall so wonderfully increase, as Isa. 54.1, 2, 3, 4. Yet
will she not greaten her self, as Babylon used to do, by taking in good and
bad, and letting in the World into the Church; No there shall be no such
admissions; but only such must enter therein, as answer the qualifications
laid down in Gods Word (or Lambs Book) that do by living fruits of Faith and
Repentance, witness Saintship, and testify thereby that they are called chosen
and faithful, and so entering the Gate Christ, do pass by the Watchmen, the
faithful ministry to share and partake of the Privileges of the Church.

The next blessing and benefit accrewing, Chap. 22.

1. And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal proceeding
out of the Throne of, God and of the Lamb.

2. In the midst of the street of it and of either side of the River was their
the Tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and y^ilded her fruit
every month: and the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.


is the plentiful rich provision, that is provided for the supply both for
necessity and delight, comprised under the Water and Tree of Life, alluding to
the Tree of Life in the Garden and Ezekiels River, Ezekiel. 47.

Intimating that the glorious presence, that had so inricht the Church, should
by a plentiful rich supply of Spiritual grace (flowing from the Throne of
Grace) so maintain the same continually, that each shall have such store, that
out of their bellies shall flow Rivers of living water, Jo. 7.38.

Lastly, 3. And there shall be no more curse; but the Throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it and his servants shall serve him.

4. And they shall see his face and his name shall be in their Foreheads.


To Crown this blessed and glorious state, there is a Throne erected as well as
a Temple, wherein his maked servants shall see his Face that serve him.

Intimating that Satan's Seat, Rev. 21.13. And the Beasts Throne, Rev. 16. That
brought the curse, being removed, the Lambs Throne instead thereof is erected;
wherein his Servants that are his Sealed ones, Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.19. And that
by a visible Holy profession bear the Lambs Name in their Foreheads and enjoy
his presence, shall serve him therein, and shall as his Substitutes and
Vicegerent manages the affairs of his Kingdom and Soveragnity, to his glory
and praise as Satan's instruments and servants did before, order and dispose in
the Beasts Kingdom. Amen, Allelujah.

The First Question necessary to be spoken to, for the better clearing what
has been before asserted relating to the thousand years Reign, is.
WHether the thousand years Reign is not yet past, as Brightman, Napier, Fox,
etc. formerly Hamond, Durham, Harvey, and others more lately do assert from
such like reasons as these that follow, which I have gathered out of their
writings, viz

1. Because (as they suppose) the Dragons casting down to the Earth in the
12th. Chapter is one and the same with his being bound and cast into the
bottomless pit in the 20th. Chapter, and therefore must the Epoch of the
thousand years, of the Saints Reign mentioned, Rev. 20. be reckoned from the
fall of Heathenism in Constantines time, and so is expired many years since.

2. Because of the Order of the Prophecy, as expressed in the 20th and 21th.
Chapters, the new Heaven, and the new Earth, and the new Jerusalem, containing
a visible Kingdom on Earth, is so long after, not contemporaneous with the
thousand years.

3. Because Christ is personally to appear in the new Jerusalem, so
inconsistent with the thousand years state.

4. Because of the duration of the new Jerusalem, so much beyond the thousand
years, one being limited, the other for ever.

5. Because of the agreement of the Heaven and Earth passing away, viz. the
matteriall Rev. 20.11. with Rev. 21.1.

6. Because the Gog-Magog Host cannot come out of the new Heaven.

To which I reply speaking to them in Order. And therefore in answer to the
first Reason I say,

That the subduing of the Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns with the Crowns
upon his Heads, and casting him out of Heaven to the Earth by Michael, Rev.
12.8, 9. Is not, nor cannot be the same with his apprehending, casting into,
shutting up, and sealing in the bottomless pit for a thousand years by the
Angel that comes from Heaven, which I prove from these four essential
differences.

1. From the point of time, when each casting down was.

2. From the different places, where done.

3. From the different actions and circumstances in each.

4. From the different ends in both.

First, From the difference of time, when these two castings down were, which
may appear in the particulars following, viz.

1. That in the 12th. Chapter was before the Beasts rise, that in the 20th.
after his ruin.

2. That in the 12th. was before the 42 Months or 1260 days, and that in the
20th. after.

3. That in the 12th. was upon the treading under foot the Holy City, and that
in the 20th. upon the erecting, or restoring it.

4. That in the 12th. takes place under the sixth Seal, and that in the 20th.
not till the seventh Trumpet, which is no less then 1260. years difference in
time.

Now that the Dragons casting to the Earth in the 12th was according to these
forementioned characteristical notes, viz. before the Beasts rise, or 42.
Months taking place, when the City was trodden under foot, and in the time of
the sixth Seal, is fully owned and asserted. And that this binding was not till
the Beasts ruin, end of forty Months, the restoring of the City, and the
seventh Trumpets sounding, I thus prove

If the Dragon was not bound, but free under the first six Trumpets of the
seventh Seal, it remains he must be bound under the seventh, and so
consequently at the end of the 42 Months, and Beasts ruin and restoration of
the City, which are all as contemporaneous as the other four. But that he was
not bound under the first six Trumpets, I thus prove,

1. Not under the six first Seals; for then he wore the imperial Crown upon his
head, and so fought Michael under the sixth Seal, Chap. 12. 3, 7. Chap. 6.12,
etc.

2. Not under the Six first Trumpets; for then was the time of the woman's being
in the Wilderness, wherein the Dragon is so far from being bound, that he casts
floods out of his mouth after her, and makes War with the remnant of her seed,
that keep the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.13, 15,
17.

3. Neither under the Beasts Reign; for they that follow the Beast worship the
Dragon, Rev. 13.2, 3, 4. The false prophet also being one of his Leiutenants,
and delegates, works wonders and deceives the Inhabitants of the Earth. And how
can he be said to be bound, and so bound too, that he shall not deceive them at
all during tha this binding, as Rev. 20.3. when he all along this time
aforesaid plays such Rex, not only by himself, but substitutes.

4. That he was (...) at liberty till the destruction of the Beast, which is
one and the same time with the six Trumpets, appears; for upon the pouring
out of the sixth Vial, there is a confederacy, combination, and conjunction, in
preparation to the great Battle, by sending their Emissaries to the Kings of
the Earth to gather them thereto, and accordingly we have these three great
Leaders, with the Kings, Captains, etc. gathered to Armageddon, Rev. 16.16. and
the success of the Battle, Chap. 19. viz. the routing and destruction of the
Armies, the taking of the three Generals, and the Sentence that was past, and
executed upon them, viz. the Beast and false-prophet to be cast alive into the
lake of fire, and the Dragon to be bound, and cast into the bottomless pit as a
close prisoner for 1000. years, and afterward to be cast into the lake, where
the Beast and false prophet were cast a thousand years before, being all one
and the same story.

By which it manifestly appears the Dragon was at liberty, and unbound, till
the Beast and false-prophet were ruined and destroyed.

Mr. Fox himself does in p. 130. of his first Book, calculate the 1000. years
to succeed the 12^0. days or 42. Months, and the Witnesses, death and
resurrection: But withal (it is true) does conclude those mistical Numbers to
contain no more than 294. years, viz. from the Death of John Baptist, to the
end of Maxentius and Licinius, and the 1000. years to commence from Constantine.

Secondly, As these two Actions differ in point of time, so also in point of
place, viz. that of the 12th appears (upon the War in Heaven) to be a casting
down from thence, by Michael and his Angels that subdued him: But this in the
20th seems to be a Scene acted in another place, viz not in Heaven, but by an
Angel coming down from Heaven, viz. to the Earth where the Dragon was, and in
the Armageddon rout apprehends him upon the Earth, and casts him not out of
Heaven to the Errth, as before, but out of the Earth (as it were under the
Earth) into the bottomless pit.

The one being a casting him out of that Empire he possessed in the Roman
world, when Constantine (as a type of the man-child that must rule the Nations)
did vanquish Maxentius in the West, and Licinius in the East, to the possessing
their Dominions (with his own) which extended over a good part of Asia and
Africa, and over the greatest part of Europe, with the Metropolis and principal
seat Rome it self.

The other a casting him out of the Empire, he shall enjoy at the Armageddon
Battle, which will comprehend no less than three whole parts of the world, yea
all that the ten horned Crowned Beast possesses not: the Dragons circuit then
containing Asia, Africa and America, whether Turk, Mogul, Emperors of Persia,
China, India, Prester John, or America, north or South, the Beast bearing way
in the European Territories only; the whole Heathenish Rule being then called
Dragon, in distinction from the Beast, or Antichristian powers, and yet both
together does but make up that fourth Monarchy, that extends it self to the
four parts of the world; for they in conjunction (as you find, Rev. 16.13, 14.)
command and influence the whole world, which Christ is to vanquish in the fifth
Monarcy, that the Kingdoms of this world may become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, and the City of God be of as large an extent, as the City of
the Nations, which Constantines Dominion heretofore was not; for he had no part
of America, but part of Asia, and Africa, and not all Europe, and of far less
extent is the Turkish Territories, supposed to be the Dragon.

And so upon the Dragons second foil, he is neither to have place in Heaven,
viz. in the Roman world or European Territories, the principal part thereof,
that was possessed by the Beast, nor yet in the Earth, viz. in the heathenish
Rule and Sovereignty, all which is to be in the hands of the Saints, during the
thousand years, and the Dragon as far from either as a person that is shut up,
and fettered and chained in a Dungeon.

Thirdly, From the different Actions and Circumstances relating to the one and
the other, as expressed in each Chapter; nothing related in the 20th appearing to
be in the 12th, nor any thing in the 12th to be transacted in the 20th.

In the 20th there are four things related of the Dragon.

1. That he was apprehended by an Angel descending from Heaven.

2. That he was bound or chayned by the said Angel.

3. That he was cast into the Bottomless Pit.

4. Shut up and sealed therein for a Thousand years, but none of these in the
12th Chapter.

Neither is that Fighting in Heaven, nor casting down of the Dragon from Heaven
to Earth, as expressed in the 12th, once so much as named in the 20th, but the
contrary as before.

Fourthly, From the different end of the Dragons dealing with, in one place and
the other; Because,

1. In the Twelfth Chapter he is cast out into the Earth (not there to be
Bound) but to wander up and down at his pleasure, which further appears;
Because he was

2. To torment, vex, disturb and deceive the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
therefore is Woe pronounced to them, because of that great wrath he comes down
to them in verse, 12

3. To annoy the Church by persecutions, stirring up of War, casting Floods out
of his mouth against her, as being full of wrath against the woman, and the
remnant of her feed that keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony
of Jesus; Whereas in the 20th it is expressly laid down as one essential reason
of his binding and casting into the Pit for a Thousand years, That he should
deceive the Nations no more, till the Thousand years were expired. And the
Church was to be so far from annoyance and disturbance by him, or any of his
accomplices, that they are said to sit upon the Thrones in a Reigning,
peaceable posture, and all enemies under their subjection; which state does not
possibly admit of such Satanical disturbances.

These things being so, it then appears, that there is a manifest mistake in
that first Reason urged,

And that the Epoch, that is made of the Thousand years in Rev. 20. must not
be reckoned from Constantines casting down Heathenism in the downfall of the 10
horned Imperial Dragon, which was before the 42 months under the Sixth seal,
during the treading under foot the holy City, before the rise of the Beast.

But at the binding and restraint of those Heathenish Governments influenced by
the Devil that shall be exercised all the World over, in distinction from the
Beastly or Antichristian powers and at the end of the 42 months, the finishing
of the Beasts reign, the building of the City or new Jerusalem and the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet.

But now in answer to that Objection; What Kingdom of Christ in the hands of
his Saints could that be, that during the Thousand years was so exposed to the
Dragons and Beasts rage, wrath, fury, persecution, so shut up in the
Wilderness, so hunted, slaughtered and destroyed? It is said in answer, that it
is only an invisible and spiritual Kingdom that is there intended.

But that it cannot so be understood, let the Text it self be the Judge, which
First assigns Resurrection and Life to be the undoubted marks and characters of
the Church of Christ in this their Reign, as death and not life to be the mark
writ upon Antichrists Church (the Antithesis) For as durcng the Dragon and
Antichrists Reign, the true Church was in a state of Death and Bondage, viz.
Civil death. Rev. 11.7, 8, 9. Romans 8.^6. So now is the False to take its turn
in the valley of the shadow of Death, and to give an account with their lives
and liberties for all the cruelty they have exercised to the members of Christ.
Rev. 11.13. ^8.6, 19.2. Who are therefore during the Saints Reign said not to
live, viz. a Civil Life; The Life of the one being the Death of the other,
which you will find are not only the plain words and true sense of the place, but
what is so agreeable to the parallel place. Rev. 11.12, 13, 14. 15. For when
the witnesses rise and ascend, then Woe and Destruction befalls their enemies,
which can no ways be confined to a Spiritual and Invisible Resurrection and
Life, without manifest injury to truth, and spoiling the very drift and scope
of the holy Spirit in the Prophecy.

Secondly, We have also in the Text, Thrones and Judgment assigned to this
Reign, which are certain infallible Ensigns and Characters of visible Rule and
Authority, when as Judges they shall sit upon Thrones, judging their enemies,
who have in a judicial way judged them all the time of their Reign, and which
by no means can be confined to Spiritual and Invisible Thrones and Judgment.

Thirdly, This Reign of the Saints is further held forth as a reward of their
sorrow and suffering and faithful witness to Christ, under Antichrists Reign,
which was not Spiritual and Invisible, but open and manifest, as now their
reward must be; Antichrist being now turned off the stage, and they having
suffered with, or for Christ, must now Reign with, or for him: As Rev.
5.10.7.14, 15, 16.

Fourthly, From what already has been said from the Text, as to the end of the
Dragons binding, that he might not deceive the Nations any more during the
thousand years, which is explained afterward to be a stirring them up to annoy
and disturb the Saints, which he does after his release to the encompassing the
camp of the Saints and the beloved City; Which is a further fuller
demonstration of their visible rule: For during the said season of a thousand
years, they are to enjoy absolute peace and quiet; for Satan being bound by
Christ's chains and Laws, the Nations are preserved from deceit, and the Saints
thereby kept in tranquillity, as the blessed effect of Visible Rule and good
Government.

Besides the confining of an Invisible spiritual Reign to the thousand years,
is in my judgment as inconsiderate, as inconsistent to the truth: for since
there were any Saints in the World, it may be said, they so Reigned, and so all
ages both before and since might as well be esteemed the Saints Reign, as that
thousand years; so that if the thousand years be past, then is the Saints
Invisible spiritual Reign past also, which none upon second thoughts will in
any wise affirm.

Object. But it is said if it be not s iritual and invisible, what will you
make of Rev. 12.10. It being there said upon the Dragons casting down, that now
is come Salvation and strength and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his
Christ, and in Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. As contemperaneous therewith, It is said that
the sealed ones are upon the Throne of God and serve him day and night, etc.
and the Lamb in the midst of the Throne feeds them, compared also with a
parallel place. Rev 5.9, 10. Wh re the new Song is sung upon the opening of the
Seals; Thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign on
the Earth. Now all this must either relate to an invisible Kingdom and Reign at
this time, or visible, but the latter it could not, because of the Beasts Reign
that so immediately took place.

To which I reply, First as to Rev 12.10 that that action of outing the Heathen
Rulers with their Gods and Diabolical worships, overturning their Temples,
executing Judgment upon those, that so long murdered the Saints upon the
account of Christianity, and this too to bring into the supreme Government of
the World, one that would manage it for and under Christ, and for the good of
his Saints, was no doubt as stupendous a change in the Roman World, as it was
a manifest real type of what should hereafter be, when the Manchild should
indeed take to himself his great power and Reign. And this no doubt was an
actual putting forth of Christ's visible power, Kingdom and Authority; For the
quarrel betwixt Michael and the Dragon, as the Text stateth it, was, whether
the Dragon or Manchild should rule the Nations; and the War accordingly was in
Heaven; not as some notion it, only in and concerning the Religions then
professed in the World, viz. whether Christ or Jupiter should be worshipped; but
who ought to have the Government of the World, without which their Idol Gods,
Temples, and Worship could not have been so abandoned, as thy were upon that
wonderful change. For by Heaven here where the War was and out of which the
Dragon was cast, and into which Constantine entered, was the Visible Government
and Authority that was exercised in the Roman World; as Mr, Mede very
learnedly, and the Assemb^ies Annotations with Mr. Bernard and others with
great demonstration do illustrate, as is before demonstrated, to which the
Reader is referred. Though this must also be granted, that this visible
Authority thus gained on Christ's behalf continued but a short space, and was
after Constantines time eclipsed, as one well observes, saying, Thus it was at
the beginning of this turn of things, this Reign and Kingdom soon clapped in
again as the Sun in a Cloud, in respect to the outward splendor of it, as
intimated. Rev. 12.5.

And as to that urged from Rev. 7.9, 10.15, 16, 17.5.9, 10. As belonging to
this time, I conceive upon better consideration it will be found to be a clear
mistake.

Because they properly belong to the Seventh, not the Sixth Trumpet being the
same Palm-bearing multitude, who are the Citizens of the new Jerusalem. as Rev.
21.4. with 7.6. where it is said in both places; They shall hunger no more nor
thirst any more, and that the Lamb shall feed them, and lead them to the living
Fountains of Water, and that God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

They are also the 144000 sealed and marked ones mentioned to stand with the
Lamb upon mount Zion singing the New song Chapter 14. which is no other then
the New song mentioned Rev. 5.9, 10. and so all belonging to one and the same
time, viz Christ's Reign, when they are made Kings and Priests upon the Earth,
to the New Jerusalem-state and to the Sounding of the seventh Trumpet.

But it is said, This Song was sung upon the opening of the seals; It is true,
it was so, and you will find upon the opening of the seventh Seal, brings on the
seven Trumpets and seven Vialls, and the seventh Trumpet and seventh Vial,
contemporize with the New Jerusalem or seven Mellennium, and so finisheth the
mystery of God, and therefore properly applied to them, but short of them, can
in no sense be either pertinent or true.

To the second Objection, as to the order of the Prophecy, I think I need do
little but return that Observation for the Solution, viz That for the order of
things to be done, whereof the Revelation speaks, we must search that in the
Seal-prophecy, which ends with the 11th Chapter; all that follows being only a
more plentiful declaration of things hinted before, and so the order is not so
much regarded in this latter prophecy, that (viz the Order) being to be fetched
out of the former. Which is true, For you will find in this latter Systeme of
Prophecies from the 11th Chapter that the former part of the 12th takes place
before much of the 11th; and the former part of the 13th the latter part of the
12th: And good part of the 11th contemporizeth with (if not precedes) much of
the 14th: The 18, 19 and 20th is an explanation of the 17th or rather all from
the 11th Chapter to the end is but an enlargement and exposition of what is
epitomized in the 11th, where under the witnesses prophecy, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension is held forth the Beasts rise, rage and ruin and the taking
place of Christ's Kingdom which the mind of wisdom (warily observing the
parallel of Synchronisms) must get the distinct knowledge into each, as laid
down mixedly from the 11th to the end.

And that no such order, as is suggested, is to be observed, nor any such
distance betwixt them as imagined; But that the New Jerusalem, beloved City,
new Heaven and Earth or City of God is one with Christ's Kingdom in the thousand
years, may appear from these following considerations, viz.

First, Because upon the destruction of the fourth Monarchy, viz. (the Whore
and Beast or the Magisterial and Ministerial part of Antichrist) the thousand
years Reign of Christ and the Saints begin; or the marriage of the Lamb, or new
Heavens-state (being both one, as Rev, 19.7.21.2.) takes place; and therefore
are the Hallelujahs sung by the Church for the Salvation, Glory, Honor and
Power, that Jesus Christ takes to himself thereupon. Rev. 19.6, 7, 8, 9.

Secondly, Because it is fully manifest, that the beloved City is in being
during the thousand years: For upon the Dragons release he stirs up the Nations
against the City of God, and accordingly is the Gog-Magog design to besiege and
encompass it, which is no less in circuit than the whole Earth, being the
Antithesis to great Babylon the City of the Nations: for as one goes down, the
other goes up, in the beginning of the thousand years, by which it is
undeniable, that during the thousand years the beloved City had a being, and
for better satisfaction herein, you may see Mr Mede p. 24. upon his 6th
Synchronism.

Thirdly, Because of the Harmonious marks, and Characters, that accord with
both in their taking place in the World, viz.

1. Does the new Jerusalem enter, when the seventh Trumpet Sounds and the
Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ? Rev.
11.15, 18. So does the thousand years. Rev. 20.4, 6. comparde with 19.6.

2. Does the new Jerusalem take place upon the pouring out of the Vials, and
finishing the mystery of God Rev. 10.7. when the Angel of the Vials says it is
done? Rev. 21.6. So upon the pouring out of the seventh Vial upon the
destruction of the Beast, when the thousand years begin, as Rev. 19.21, 22.
Rev. 20.1. It is also said, It is done. Rev. 16.16, 17.

3. Is one the beginning of Christ's visible Kingdom upon the Earth? so is the
other. Rev. 20.4, 6.19 6.

4. Is one the time of the Marriage of the Lamb with his Church and people.
Rev. 21.3, 9. so is the other. Rev. 19 6, 7.

5. Is one the time of Jacobs rest from his sorrow, and from his fear, and from
his hard bondage wherein he was made to serve. Isa. 14.2. So is the other, that
seventh day or seventh thousand years or great Sabbatism. Heb. 4.9. When all
enemies, Kings of the Earth, and their Armies are brought down, and Satan
bound, and Saints as Kings and Priests ascend the throne and peaceably Reign.
Rev. 20 4, 6.

6. Is there to be building, planting, marrying and giving in marriage,
procreation, enjoyment of Liberty, Peace, Ease, plenty in the new Jerusalem,
new Heaven and Earth-state? as is affirmed from Isai. 65.21, 33. So also must
be the thousand years; where Christ's virtual presence is in that mystical
Resurrection-state: For, neither before, nor after the thousand years shall
there be such a state to the Church; therefore it must be in the thousand
years: After the thousand years is the Judgment day, Corporeal Resurrection,
and personal coming of our Lord Jesus, as I have at large proved elsewhere,
when all the Saints are in glorified bodies, as 1 John 3.20, 21. Phil. 3.20,
21. 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. And that as well the changed, as
raised Saints in which state it is expressly said Luke 20.34. That they who
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World and the Resurrection from the
Dead, (Mark that not only the raised Saints, but whoever shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that World, taking in the changed also) neither marry, nor are
given in marriage, neither can they die any more; for they are equal to the
Angels, and are the Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection; so
that this above all contradiction asserted, that they which partake of the
Angelical glorious state in the World to come, are not capable of such
sensitive enjoyments; therefore of necessity must it be before in this new
Heaven, new Jerusalem, or 1000 years state.

7. Is the new Jerusalem or City of God, extensive over the whole Earth, as
great Babylon the City of the Nations was? So is the Reign of Christ in the
thousand years. Rev. 20.9.

8. Is this glorious City made up of living, not dead stones and materials? so
is the Church of Christ in an especial manner during the thousand years, Rev.
20.6. Ephesians, 2.19.

The third Object. against the Harmony or oneness of these two states is;
because of those Scriptures that so positively in their apprehensions assert
Christ's personal presence in the new Ierusalem-state, so inconsistent with the
1000. years, after which is to be the Gog. Magog attempts. The Scriptures
usually mentioned are, Rev. 21.3.22.22.3. The Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them, and God himself shall be with them. The Throne of
God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him, and they
shall see his face, etc.

To which I would say in the first place, that if I have reasoned right in
answer to the former Objection about the order, it necessarily and undeniably
follows, that these Scriptures that speak of Gods Tabernacling, and dwelling
with men, and men beholding his face, must be understood of a vertual presence
and co-habitation, and not personal and proper: which I think will be easily
granted by them, especially that acknowledge the thousand years inconsistent
with the personal presence, the Analogy of Faith being to be kept in all our
interpretations and expositions.

But secondly, neither is there any thing expressed in these Scriptures, that
necessitates literal understanding, so as to enforce a personal presence, much
of the same being expressed elsewhere relating to Gospel days, of the vertual
presence, as 2 Cor. 6.16. for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has
said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, Rev 2.1. Christ is said to walk in
the golden Candlesticks or Churches, and the great privilege of Saintship, is
to hold Communion with God, to maintain fellowship, to walk with him, to enjoy
the light of his Countenance, and to see his face; The Scriptures I need not
quote being so well known.

Thirdly, That the personal presence cannot be in the new Jerusalem state, as
granted it cannot be in the thousand years, I refer you to those many
Arguments, Reasons and Scriptures given in the former part.

The fourth Objection is from the duration of the new Heaven or new Jerusalem,
which is said to be set without date, and to be for ever and ever, Chap. 22.5.
and to remain before God as an immovable pillar, Isa. 66.22. and Daniel calls
it an everlasting Dominion, which a Kingdom expressly bounded with a thousand
years cannot be called.

To which I answer, that there is no concluding Argument in this neither; for
what is more frequent in Scripture, than by the terms ever, yea ever and ever,
and everlasting, to mean some space of time, yea and that sometimes a term
short of a thousand years too. Is not the Covenant of Circumcision called a
perpetual and everlasting Covenant? Exodus 31.19. Genesis 17.13. The Priesthood an
everlasting Priesthood? Exodus 40.15. The Temple is said to continue for ever?
1 Kings 8.13. with everlasting Gates, Psalm. 24.7, 9 The servitude of the
Israelites till the Jubilee for ever, Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17. Lev. 25.39. etc.
The Land of Canaan was given the Children of Israel to inhabit for ever and
ever, Jer. 25.5. The seventy years Captivity is called perpetual, Jer. 25.9.

Therefore I conclude, that there is no Ground or warranty at all upon such
niceties to draw such singular conclusions, and not only to slit, separate, and
divide these States, but to set them at such a vast distance, a thousand years
at least, which indeed makes a wide breach in the Prophecy, and run upon that
Rock of setting the thousand years so far off, as to be past already, which I
conceive is not to be reconciled either with the spirits interpretation in this
Book, the scope of the place, or other Scriptures, and necessarily runs upon a
thousand inconveniences.

The fifth Objection is, that out of the Rev 20.11. where because it is said
the Earth and Heaven fled away at Christ's appearance, so as there was no more
place for them: therefore it is concluded, that it is the same Heaven and
Earth, viz. that in the 21.1. is said to have past away, as the first Heaven
and Earth to make way for the new Heaven and Earth or new Jerusalem.

But I conceive they are as different in their Natures as they are in their
times, being a thousand years distant at least from each other; the one Rev.
21.1. being the mistical Heaven and Earth, outward, visible Rule, Dignity and
Sovereignty, such as the Dragon, Beast and false-prophet have exercised in the
fourth Monarchy, as is before largely proved, not only from the scope of the
place, and many Scriptures of the Prophets, but from the excellent observation
of Mr. Mead, Assemblies Annotations. Mr. Bernard, etc. in this place; for now
the old Heavens and Earth in the fourth Monarchy being past away in order to
its Antithesis taking place, the new Heavens and Earth or new Jerusalem, Saints
Reign, or fifth Monarchy in the thousand years, which the 65. Isa. 17. etc.
fully demonstates, evincing it to be a state, wherein there is to be Building,
Planting, Marrying and giving in Marriage, enjoyment of peace and plenty by the
Saints and Elect, which are utterly inconsistent to the personal Reign of
Christ, after the erecting of the white Throne in the Judgment day. The other
in the 20.11. is the material old Heaven and Earth, that at Christ's coming and
personal appearing pass away, as 2 Pet. 3.10. where it is said that the day of
the Lord shall come, as a Thief in the night, in which the Heaven shall pass
away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, the
Earth also, and the works therein shall be burnt up, and the Heavens being on
fire shall be dissolved, and that this intends the material Heavens and
Earth, beyond all dispute the seventh verse tells us; that as the former Heaven
and Earth, viz. the old world was by Gods Word destroyed by Water, so the
Heaven and Earth that is now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
fire against the day of Judgment and perdition of ungodly men, and this in
order to those material new Heavens and Earth, that in this time of restitution
of all things must take place, wherein Christ and all his Saints in the general
Resurrection and Judgment (as this Rev. 20.11.) in that his misphatical
Kingdom (after his Davidical or Monarchical kingdom is over) shall Reign and
Judge. Now the same Heaven and Earth, that Peter says, shall at Christ's
presence pass away with a great noise, John says here, The Earth and the
Heaven fled away at his presence (or from his face) erecting now his white
Throne, where he will judge the wicked and ungodly.

The sixth and last Objection that is to be spoken to, and indeed is
significantly urged, is this, viz. that if this thousand years ought to be
esteemed the new Heaven and Earth, how then can it bring forth such Vipers and
Monsters, as Gog and Magog, who must either be of the first or old Heaven and
Earth, or of the new: Not of the new; for they must remain, Isa. 65. And if of
the old, how then are they past away?

To which I reply, that this new Heaven and Earth, viz. the Monarchical Rule of
Christ in the hands of the Saints over the Nations of the Earth, has its date
and lasts but a thousand years, during also which time Satan is bound, viz.
all worldly Empire put down, no Government in the hands of any, but Saints, and
the Nations all in perfect subjection: But it is according to the decree of
Heaven, that at the expiration of these thousand years, Satan shall be loosed,
and then the Heathenish Nations, instead of subjecting to Christ's Rule, will
universally rebel and conspire against it; because they are only under, and in
subjection to the Government of the new Heavenly state, but never of it, none
of those that ever entered the holy City, and so in order to the fulfilling of
Prophecy, to the dissolution of the old material Heavens and Earth, and
bringing on the new, and to the introducing the misphatical Kingdom. All these
wicked Rebels must not only by Christ's appearing be destroyed by fire (who
comes in flaming fire to take vengeance of all that know not God, nor obey his
Gospel) but also with the same fire will the material old Heaven and Elements
(as before) melt with heat, and pass away; the Earth also and all its works be
burnt up, that the new Heavens and new Earth according to promise may come on.
And so will the Lord Jesus and the Saints continue therein to judge the quick
and dead in that his misphatical Kingdom, till he deliver all up into the hands
of the Father, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.

The second Question.
WHether the natural Jew is not concerned in the latter day, Promises and
Prophecies, and particularly in those that relate to the pulling down Babylon,
and building of Zion, as Maton, and Holmes, and others affirm.

Because as they intimate the promises, seemed chiefly to be made in their
names and for their sakes, viz. to Israel, Judea, Jacob, Ephraim, Benjamin and
their seed, and who by promise are to return to their own Land, under one Head,
Shepherd, King, to enjoy their Liberty and Privilege, their enemies being all
subdued, and then the Nations are only to expect good and blessing in and from
their happiness to whom must be the first Dominion, Mica 4.8. and the Tents of
Juda to be saved first, Zach. 12.7. and therefore all other hopes, expectations
and attempts for deliverance short of theirs to be vain, fruitless, and
ineffectual.

Answ. It is true, the Prophets do seem in express terms so to carry it in many
places, and which therefore gives the natural Jew, yet at such a distance and
enmity to Christ, having the Vail before their faces, so much confidence to
boast of their natural Privileges, looking only at the bare Letter, and not at
the Gospel mystery contained therein.

I shall therefore for your better information into this seasonable enquiry do
these two things.

First, lay down some certain plain Rules and Principles to help us in the
right reading and true understanding of the Prophets relating to the Jews, and
those good things promised in their names, etc.

Secondly, From them draw some sound and safe, Conclusions and inferences, for
the better clearing of this great Question, and whereby it will appear (I doubt
not) who are most concerned in the promises, the natural or spiritual Jew.

1. Rule.
THat no promise, prophecy, or precept of the Scriptures be interpreted
contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and the plain Principles asserted in the New
Testament, Romans 12.6.

Gospel Principles to be observed concerning the Jews.
1. Principle. THat Jesus Christ by his death has broken down the middle Wall
of partition, and of twain has made one new man, so that the believing Gentile
has the same privilege with the believing Jew, being both built upon the same
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner
stone, Ephesians. 2.14. to the end: insomuch that now under the Gospel neither Greek
nor Jew, Circumcised, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, but Christ is all, and
in all, Col. 3.11. and so he puts no difference betwixt any whose hearts are
purified by Faith, Acts 15.9. Romans 3.22. Romans 10.12. The inward Christian Jew
being now the only true Jew, Romans 2.28, 29. Rev. 2.9.3.9. Jer. 9.25, 26.

2. Principle, That the Jewish privileges of being 1. of the fleshly seed of
Abraham. 2. Belonging to this or the other Tribe, 3. Relating to their holy
City or Nation. 4. Concerned in their Priesthood, Temple, Altar, Sacrifices
were all Typical, and by the Gospel esteemed Carnal, and Fleshly, and were all
done away in Christ, Col. 2.17, as may more particularly appear by the
following Scripture instances.

First, As to the Natural seed of Abraham, Mat. 3.9. Say not within your selves
we have Abraham to our Father but bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance and
amendment of Life, Compared, Joh. 8.37, 38. and do the works of Abraham,
otherwise you are of your Father the Devil, ver. 44. Abraham's true seed which
are esteemed the seed of promise, is the believer, whether Jew or Gentile; for
if they are Christ's they are Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise, Gal.
3.16.29.4.28. Therefore whether to introduce a natural seed of Abraham to any
Gospel Privilege out of Christ does not deny the authority of these
Scriptures, and thwart the new Testament, is submitted to consideration.

Secondly, The distinction of Tribes was also Fleshly and Typical, Phil. 3. If
any other man thinks he has whereof he may trust in the Flesh, I more:
Circumcised the eighth day, of the Tribe of Benjamin an Hebrew of the Hebrews,
which he esteemed but dung and dogs meat for the excellency and Knowledge of
Christ. And therefore the same Paul 2 Cor. 5. says, That henceforth know we no
man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him no more: The only Tribe now is the Tribe of Judah into
which the Kingship, Priesthood, is transferred, the believers being Kings and
Priests, the true Jew that is only of that Tribe of Judah, being the inward
Spiritual heart Circumcised Jew: therefore whether to hold forth any Principles
or interpret any Scriptures to uphold a distinction of Tribes in this new body
and Corporation under the Gospel, whereby the natural fleshly typical seed was
distinguished of old, is not to thwart Gospel-principles, and no less than to
deny Christ, to be come in the flesh.

Thirdly, The City Jerusalem which under the Law was called the holy City was
typical, and so reputed Carnal under the Gospel, and therefore as belonging to
Hagar the Bondwoman, was to be done away, and is therefore put in opposition
to Jerusalem, which is above, viz. the new Jerusalem, which is the mother of us
all, Gal. 4.25, 26. Heb. 12.12. compared with Esaias 54. being an explanation to
each other.

Therefore whether now for any to interpret any Scriptures in the Prophets
speaking of Jerusalem a holy City to be meant a material City that is to be
rebuilt, and to become a Metropolis again amongst the Nations, and to be
esteemed a holy City is not certainly to advance again Mount Zina above Mount
Zion, is not to set up Hagar above Sarah, to bring in the City of Bondage again
to the defacing the free City the new Jerusalem, which is above all, and the
mother of us all, from whence alone the free Denizens the Believers, whether
Jews or Gentiles are to fetch their freedoms and Liberties?

Fourthly, That Territory called the Nation of Judea, whether the lesser
contained betwixt Jordan and the West Sea, and from Dan to Bersheba, or the
greater from Sea to Sea, viz. Mediterranean, Egyptian and Persian, and from
the River, viz. Euphrates to the end of the Earth, taking in the Arabias, etc.
that was called the Land of Promise; the Land of Rest was typical and fleshly,
and belonged therefore to the old Covenant, and is done away and no more to be
expected by the seed of Promise, the Israelites, the Believers, (though it is
not denied but that the natural Jew may according to the Letter become a
Nation, and dwell even in that Territory again) because they now enter into,
and must yet enjoy another Rest, Heb. 4.3. with that promised Land typt out,
the Believer whether Jew or Gentile being esteemed the only chosen Generation,
Holy Nation, peculiar people in the world, that either are or ever shall be, 1
Pet. 2.9. therefore whether for any to assert any Doctrines to make the Verge
or Bounds of any Country upon Earth to be now in the Gospel days to be set
apart for holy Ground, and entered and possessed in chief, and by way of
difference and distinction by any of the seed, is not to keep up Moses, and out
Christ, and to tie up Christ's Kingdom to a particular Region that is to be over
the whole World unbounded, unlimited.

Fifthly, That Priesthood under the Law to which belonged the Temple, Service,
Altar, Sacrifices was typical and done away by Christ; for as the Apostle
reasons, that Priesthood being done away and changed and brought into another
Tribe, there remains of necessity a change of the Law, viz. of all the
appurtenances thereto.

Therefore is the Believer the Royal Priesthood under Christ the high Priest,
1 Pet. 2.5.9 Heb. 8.1. they are the Temple, Tabernacle, the Mount Zion, Ephesians.
2.19, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 3.6, etc.

Their Prayers, Praises, Alms, Bodies, Spirits are the Sacrifices that in this
new Testament-ministration are to be only offered as the acceptable services
upon that Altar; whereof they have no right to eat, that serve at the Carnal
Tabernacle, Heb. 13.11. Therefore whether to bring in any other Seed, Tribe,
City, Nation, Priesthood then what is established by Christ in the new
Testament, is not to bring in Moses again, and to rebuild that partition Wall
that Christ Jesus by his death pulled down, is not to harden the poor Jews in
their enmity and superstition, and to cast a stumbling Block before the Gentile
believer, to the bringing back again into bondage?

2. Rule.
THat the new Testament Church and ministtion are by the Prophets frequently
repsented under the names, terms, state, and condition that the old Testament
Church was known by, and found in; As Jews, Israelites, and the seed of
Abraham, Jacob, Jerusalem, mount Zion, etc.

Therefore does our last new Testament Prophet, in holding forth the condition
of the Church, so deliver himself in such phrases and terms, alluding in all to
the old Testament Church, that we might the better understand and comprehend
what the prophets under like terms and Phrases hold out concerning it; as the
Learned Mead, Bernard, and others have at large observed, and whereof you may
read something in the 8 and 9th foregoing pages in the beginning of this Book,
and to which I refer you. And therefore do they most excellently unfold the
fourth Chapter of Rev. by comparing it with ^he 2 of Numbers the 7th Chapter;
holding out ^he new Testament Church, the sealed ones un^er the Jewish Names,
Tribes and Phraises.

Therefore whether for any to take these things (...) the Letter, when the
mystery is intended, to ^^ke them in the Figure, Type, Allegory, when the
Antitype is meant, will not be to invert the sense, and introduce great
confusion? meni legis est lex: not the bare words, but the meaning of the Law,
is the Law.

3. Rule.
THat the Israelites after their Captivity had a return, and were in
conjunction with the Jews, under one head David their Prince to the fulfilling
of many of the Prophets, and that as well in a Literal as a Misterial sense.

As First, under Hezekiah, especially in the keeping of that Passover whereto
many of the Tribe; came, viz. Ephraim, Ashar, Manasseh, Issacher, Zebulon (that
it is said had escaped out of the hands of the Kings of Assyria) came up to
Jerusalem to keep the Passover, and to pay their Tithes, offerings and
first fruits; 2 Chronicles. 30. So that there was great joy in Jerusalem; for since
the time of Solomon, there was not the like in Jerusalem; 20. The separation
between Israel and Judah having continued, during all the Kings in Israel for
the space of 250 years.

Secondly, In the days of Josiah a thousand years after, who in his eighth year
reformed all the Tribes, breaking down Altars, Groves, Images, taking away all
the abominations out of all the Countries that pertain to the children of
Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the
Lord their God; And all his days they departed not from following the Lord God
of their Fathers. 2 Chronicles. 34.4, 5, 6. And kept such a Passover, that there was
none like to it kept in Israel, from the days of Samuel the Prophet; neither
did all the Kings of Israel, keep such a Passover as Josiah kept, and the
Priests and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem

Thirdly, In Zerubabells time under him, When by the Proclamation of Cyrus,
whom the spirit of the Lord stirred up, all the Jews or Israelites within his
Territories the 130 Provinces, including the place where Israel was carried,
all Assyria had liberty to return; which was in these words: That whosoever was
amongst them of all his People, let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judeah,
to build the house of the Lord; And whosoever remains of any place where he
sojourneth, let the men of his place, help him with Silver and with Gold, and
with Goods, etc. And who accordingly came up by degrees, and did under one
Prince in their own Land, partake of their Legal rights and privileges
together.

Fourthly, In the Apostles days, it is said, Acts 26.7. Unto which promise or
12 Tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to come, and James directs
his Epistle to the 12 Tribes: and Peter, 1 Pet. 1. To them also, by all which
is it not manifest, that whatever the received opinion has been, that since
Isreal's captivity, they were never heard of, that there was a return in
Hezekiahs time of many of the Tribes, and in Iosiahs time a hundred years
after, many more of them inhabiting their own Land, under one King; and in
Zerubabells and the Machabees time afterward all of David's Line; as Math. 1.
and Luke the 3. And in the Apostles time there were Jews devout men of every
Nation under Heaven, dwelling at Jerusalem, and the 12 Tribes were then known
as Paul, James, and Peter discovers.

Fifthly, Mistically did the believing Jews and Israelites, whereof there were
great numbers, gather under David their King, the Lord Jesus in conjunction
with the believing Gentile in his new Testament, Rule, Government and
Sovereignty, which in express Terms is said by the Apostle James to be
restoring the fallen Tabernacle of David. Acts 15. And a fulfilling of that
blessed prophecy of Amos, and which is expected more amply to be fulfilled in
the great Conversion and Conjunction of Jews and Gentiles, that is foretold in
the latter days.

Therefore whether for any to assert, because the Prophets so often speak of a
Conjunction of Israel and Judah, and a return into their own Land, to the
building City and Temple, and enjoyment of legal rites and ceremonies under one
King, that therefore those prophecies are to be yet fulfilled in the Letter, is
not an absolute mistake and such a sense, that necessarily offers violence to
the principles of the Gospel, and not to be reconciled with the first Rule
before mentioned: and not only hardens their deluded Jews in their expectation
of a Temporary Messiah, of whom they have had already so many Impostures, but
teaches the Gentile Believer to Judaize also, of which there have been so many
in these Latter days, though in a mistical and Spiritual sense, all those
prophecies may admit of a larger and further Accomplishment, as before, and
which with the consideration of what is fulfilled in the Letter as before may
reconcile all.

4. Rule.
THat the great Conversion of the Jews to Jesus Christ is not to be till the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Luke 21.24. Romans 11, 25 Mat. 23.38.

Which fullness is not to be till Babylons fall, and preaching the everlasting
Gospel, and the erecting of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, for they are
contemporary and it is clear that the Gentile Saints, who have born the heat of
the day under Antichrist, and who have kept the Commandments of God, and
testimony of Jesus, must be the special instruments thereof; not the Jews who
have been such blasphemers of Christ, and all by his appointments all that
live; But then will they so receive the Gospel that they will bless those that
come in the name of the Lord, Mat. 23.38. And so in those great conversions
that will be effected in that day of the Lord, amongst Jews and Gentiles, all
Israel viz. The whole body of the Elect, the whole seed of Abraham spiritual
shall be saved; which is true only in that sense, for all Israel in a natural
sense shall not be saved, as Wollebius well observes upon Romans 11.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 7. l. 24. r. Conviction, p. 10. margent, r. 1 John 2. l. 14. r. 2 Kings
l. 15. Rev. 4 3. 11. p. 12. l. ult. or p. 14. l. 12. for 39. 3. 6. p. 21. l.
10. r. as, p. 23. l. 4. r. prophecy is p. 25. l. 27. r. Monarchies, p. 26. l.
15. r. he, l. ult. r. Psalm 72.9, 10. p. 27. l. 11. r. promised, p. 30. l. 8. r.
we are to understand, p. 31. l. 28. r. in order to the Whores, p. 32. l. 23. r.
Enemies will be brought to pass by, p. 34. l. 1. r. Angels, l. 5. r. their, p.
36. l. 3. r. same, p. 44. l. 7. r. 4. 6. l. 10. r. of the Dead, p. 45^ l. 21.
r. 21. 1. 2. p. 48. l. 10. r. 26. p. 54. l. ult. Rev. 1. for 9. r. 6. p. 58. l.
26. for held r. hold, p. 59. l. 20. r. their, p. 63. l. 6. r. a l. 21. r. Rev.
11.11. l. 22. r. 35. p. 66. l. 24. r. 60. p. 69. l. 10. r. 60. p. 72. l. 21. r.
blessed, p. 78. l. 20. r. its dignity, p. 82. l. 14. r. wiser, p. 83. l. 12. r.
God. p. 84. l. 10. after Throne, r. (the Heaven being his Throne) p. 93. l. 28.
r. 9. for Rev. 1.11. p. 127. l. 16. r. precede, in the margent add years, p.
130. l. 1. (...) l. 4. r. ibid. p. 132. l. 5. r. Relation, l. 19. r. three, p.
139. r. thus, the Lambs wife is one, p. 140. l. 7. r. woman, p. 143. l. 10. r.
Exodus 25. p. 144: l. 3. r. begat us, p. 147. l. 11. r. extend, p. 149. l. 16.
r. Prophet, p. 150. l. 10. r. been, p. 157. l. 18. r. 3. p. 168. l. 12. r.
Bats. l. 30. r. not defiled with women, p. 182. l. 23. r. to him, p. 184. l.
27. r. shout, p. 186. r. Zelophebad, l. 11. r. Israel, p, 190. r. 60. 35. 50.
p. 197. l. 19. r. Rev. 4.4. p. 204. l. 3. r, Doctrine, p. 210. l. 2. r. 2. 13.
l. 5. r. by, p. 214. l. 17. dele not, p. 215. l. 10. r. 6. p. 219. l. 3. 1. of,
p. 222. l. 13. r. had.


