A Looking-Glass FOR GOOD WOMEN TO Dress themselves by: Held forth in the LIFE
and DEATH OF Mrs. Katherine Clarke, WHO Dyed, Anno Christi, 1675. Late Wife of
Mr. Samuel Clarke, Minister.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, over against the little North Door. 1677.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mrs. Katherine Clarke, WHO Died Anno Christi, 1675.
KAtherine Overton (for so was her Virgin Name) was born at Bedworth in the
County of Warwick, Her Parentage and Birth.
four miles from Coventry, February the Twenty fifth, Anno Christi, 1602. of
Godly, and Religious Parents. Her Father was Mr. Valentine Overton, Rector of
Bedworth, where he lived a constant, and painful Preacher of Gods Holy Word
till he was almost Eighty two years old. Her Mother was Mrs. Isaverton, a
gracious Woman, and an excellent Huswife, who took off the whole burden of
Family affairs, both within, and without Doors from her Husband, that he might
with the more freedom attend his Holy Calling.

Her Education.
Our Katherine was, by these her Parents brought up Religiously, and it pleased
God betimes to plant the Seeds of Grace in her Heart, which first discovered
themselves, Early working of Grace.
when she was about fifteen years Old: At which time God was pleased to
discover unto her the corruption of her nature, and some common miscarriages
which are incident unto youth: And these made such a deep impression upon her
tender years, that whereas she was naturally of a cheerful Sanguine
Constitution, she now became serious, and somewhat Melancholy: Her Temptations,
And support.
Hereupon Satan, that Old Serpent, and Enemy to our Souls; assaulted her with
many, and various Temptations, whereby he sought to quench these Heavenly
Sparks, to stifle this New Creature in its first Conception. But by frequent
reading the sacred Scriptures, diligent attending to the Word Preached, and
secret Prayer, it pleased the All-Wise God to support, and strengthen her
against him, and all his Devices. Yet did these conflicts continue the longer,
because she had none to whom she durst unbosome herself, and make her Case
known.

When she was about seventeen years old, More Troubles.
she was by her Parents sent to Siwel in Northamptonshire to wait upon a young
Lady, that was somewhat Related to her.

Yet this kind of life was so tedious and irksom to her, that at the end of Six
Months she prevailed with her Parents to send for her home again. Her return
home.
Hear the Narrative of it in her own Word as they were found Written in her
Cabinet after her Decease.

Her own acco^^^ of her Conversion.
When (says she) I was but young, my Father being at Prayers in his Family, I
many times found such sweetness, and was so affected therewith that I could not
but wish that my Heart might oftener be in such a frame. But Childhood, and the
Vanities thereof soon cooled these Heavenly Sparks. But my Father caused me to
write Sermons, and to repeat the same; As also to learn Mr. Perkins his
Catechism, which I often repeated to my self when I was alone; And therein
especially I took notice of those places wherein he had set down the Signs and
Marks of a strong, and weak Faith, being convinced in my Conscience that
without Faith I could not be saved; And that every Faith would not serve turn
to bring me to Heaven.

Hereupon I fell to Examination of my self and though I could not find the
Marks of a Strong, yet (through Gods Mercy) I found the Marks of a true, though
but weak Faith, which was some Comfort and support to me. And that God which
began this good work in me, was pleased to quicken and stir me up to a diligent
use of such means as himself had ordained and appointed for the increase
thereof: As Hearing the Word Preached: Receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and use of other private Duties.

But when I was about seventeen years old my Parents sent me to wait upon a
young Gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, the only Daughter of Sr. W.W. At which
time being sent so far from my near and dear Relations, and meeting with some
other discouragements in the Family, through want of the means of Grace, which
I formerly enjoyed, I grew very Melancholy.

I began also to have great workings of Conscience in me, and Satan (that
deadly Enemy to the health, and welfare of our Souls, who like a Roaring Lion
walks about continually seeking whom he may devour) took his advantage (through
my Ignorance of his devices) to raise up fears, doubts, and terrors of
Conscience in me, by reason of my manifold Sins, and for walking so unworthy
Gods Mercies whilst I did enjoy them, and for being so unfruitful under the
means of Grace, and so unable to obey God, and to keep his Commadments.

And by reason hereof I had no Peace, nor rest in my Soul, Night nor Day, but
was persuaded that all the threatenings contained in the Book of God against
Wicked and Ungodly men did belong unto me, and were my Portion, as being one of
them against whom they were denounced; Insomuch as when I took up the Bible to
read therein, it was accompanied with much fear and trembling; Yet being
convinced that it was my Duty frequently to read Gods Word, I durst not omit,
or neglect it.

Thus I continued a great while, bearing the burden of grievous Temptations,
and inward Afflctions of Conscience, yet durst I not open the wound, nor reveal
my condition to any, as thinking and judging my condition and case to be like
no Bodies else: But God who is rich and infinite in Mercy, and Jesus Christ,
who bought his Elect at so dear a rate, would not suffer any of his to be lost,
and therefore he was graciously pleased to preserve, strengthen, and uphold me
by his own power from sinking into Hell through Despair, and from running out
of my Wits.

Thus by reason of my continual grief and anguish of Heart Night and Day, I was
so weakened and changed within the compass of these six Months, that when I came
home my Dear Parents they scarce knew me. Her growth i^ Grace.


Some years after her return, she (for the most part) continued in her Fathers
Family, where by a diligent and conscientious use of the means, both public
and private, she did thrive and grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, as she increased and grew in Days and Years: and
therewith also learned and exercised all parts of Huswifry, which might fit her
for the Government of a Family, wen God should call her thereunto.

Her Marriage.
February 2, Anno Christi, 1625. Which was the same Day on which K. Charles the
first was Crowned, she was, with the consent of Parents on both sides, married
to Mr. Sa. Clarke, who at that time was Minister at Shotwick, four miles beyond
West-Chester, who looked upon this Match as the greatest outward temporal
Blessing that ever God bestowed upon him; whereby he could experimentially say,
That a Prudent Wife is the Gift of God: And that in the enjoyment of her, he
enjoyed more Mercies then he could well enumerate. But to descend to
particulars, and to take notice of some of those virtues and Graces wherewith
God had beautified; and adorned her Soul.

First her Piety was signal and exemplary from her first Conversion to the Hour
of her Death: Her Piety.
Her life was not stained with any scandalous Sin, which might be a blemish,
either to her Person, Profession, or Relations. She was a constant, and
diligent attender upon the Public Ministry of Gods Holy Word; And when she
lived where she had the opportunity of hearing Lectures in the Week Day, she
made choice to attend upon those who were most plain, practical, and powerful
Preachers, from whose Sermons, and Gods Blessing upon them, she always sucked
some spiritual nourishment and came home refreshed from them. And when Days of
Humiliation, or Thanksgiving came, she never failed to make one among Gods
People in the Celebration of them.

Sabbaths Sanctified.
The Lords Days she carefully Sanctified, both in Public and in Private; rising
earlier upon them then upon other's, especially when she had many young
Children about her, that so she might have opportunity, as well for secret, as
for Family Duties, before she was called away to the Public. She was like unto
David's Door keeper, One of the first in and last out of Gods House. Her
constant Gesture at Prayer was Kneeling, thinking that she could not be too
humble before God. Her usual manner was to write Sermons to prevent drowsiness
and distractions, and to help Memory, whereof she has left many Volumes, and
her Practice was to make good use of them, by frequent reading and meditating
upon them; And if at any time she was cast into such Places, and Company as
were a hinderance unto her in the strict Sanctification of this Holy Day, it
was a grief and burden to her.

Scriptures read.
There was no Day that passed over her head (except Sickness, or some other
unavoydable necessity hindered) wherein she did not read some portions of the
Sacred Scriptures, both in the Old, and New Testament, and of the Psalms; and
in Reading she took special notice of such passages as most concerned her self.
She was frequent, and constant in Secret Prayer, and Meditation. She also read
much in other good Books, especially, in the works of those Eminent, and
excellent Divines, Mr. Ambrose, and Mr. Reyner: and in reading of them she used
to transcribe such passages as most warmed her Heart.

She never neglected any opportunity of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, Sacrament preparation.
and before her coming to it, was very strict, and serious in the Duty of
Self-Examination, and for her furtherance therein, at those times she read some
of those Books that treated upon that subject. And the Fruits of her holiness
manifested themselves in the exercise of those Graces which God required of
her. She was not a Wordy, but a Real Christian: A true Israelite in whom was no
guile. Her endeavor was to yield universal, constant, cheerful, and sincere
Obedience to all Gods Commandments, and wherein she failed, and came short, it
was her grief, and Burden. Her Meditations upon what she heard and read were
frequent: And her Heart having indicted a good matter, her Tongue was as the Pen
of a ready Writer, taking Opportunities to speak to the Edification of those
with whom she conversed.

She filled every Relation with the Exercise of such Graces, and Duties as were
suitable thereunto, knowing that where Relative Duties are neglected, and not
made conscience of, there also our pretended Religion is in Vain.

A good Wife.
First: As a Wife: She was singular, and very Exemplary in that reverence and
obedience which she yielded to her Husband, both in Words, and Deeds. She never
rose from the Table, even when they were alone, but she made courtesy. She
never drank to him without bowing. His word was a Law unto her: She often
denied her self to gratify him: And when in her sickness, and weakness he
mentioned her Case in particular unto God in his Prayers, the Duty being ended,
she would make him courtesy, and thank him. In case of his absence she would
pray with her Famliy Morning, and Evening: The like she would do in his
presence, in case of his Sickness, and inability to perform the Duty himself.
Her Modesty, and Chastity were rare, and remarkable: But fitter to be conceived
by those which know what belong, to them, then to be expressed in Words. For
there is a conjugal, as well as a Virginal, and Vidual Chastity.

In Case of her Husbands Sickness, she was a tender, diligent, and painful
Nurse about him; Skilful, and careful in making him Broths, and what else was
needful for him. If at any time she saw him in Passion, with sweet and gentle
words she would mollify and moderate it. She was often a Spur, but never a
Bridle to him in those things which were good.

She was always well pleased with such Habitations, as (in their many removes)
he provided for her; And with such Apparel, and Diet as his means (which was
sometimes short) would allow. She never grutched, nor grumbled at any of those
Dispensations which Gods Al-wise Providence carved out unto them.

As a Mother.
Secondly, As a Mother to her Children (whereof God gave her nine, four Sons,
and five Daughters) she nourished them all with her own Breasts; was very handy
and handsome about them in their minority; Kept them sweet and cleanly; In neat
and modest Habits; Knew how to order them both in Health and Sickness. She
loved them dearly without fondness; Was careful to give them Nurture as well as
Nourishment, not sparing the Rod when there was just occasion. And as soon as
they were capable, she was vigilant and diligent to season their tender years
with Grace and Virtue, by instilling into them the first grounds, and
Principles of Religion; And as they grew up, she did more freely discover her
tender Affections to them, by Instruction, advice, and good Counsel as there
was occasion; And when they were disposed of ^broad, by her gracious letters,
and hearty Instructions at their meetings, she labored to build them up in
grace and godliness: And God was pleased to let her see (to her great Joy and
Comfort) the fruit of her Prayers, and pains in keeping them from scandalous
Courses in these corruptions, and in working Grace in most of their Hearts.
When they were married, and had Children, she was frequently making one thing
or other for them.

As a Mistress.
Thirdly. As a Mistress to her Maids: She was careful (so far as she could) to
bring such as were Religious at least, seemingly, into her Family; And having
occasion to be much in their Company she would take all occasions and
opportunities to manifest her love and care of their Souls, by frequent
dropping in good Counsel, and wholesome Instructions; By Chatechising;
Enquiring what they remembered of the Sermons they heard, Reading her Notes to
them; Encouraging them in what was good, and with the Spirit of meekness
blaming them for what was evil. And for Huswifery, and Household Affairs, she
instructed their Ignorance, commended and encouraged what they did well, and
her self (being of an active, and stirring disposition, and having her hand in
most businesses) set them a Pattern, and gave them an Example how to order the
same. She was careful (so far as possibly she could) to prevent all spoil, and
to see that they did not eat the Bread of Idleness.

As a Friend.
Toward her friends, and her own, and her Husbands Relations she was courteous
and amiable in her deportment, free and hearty in their entertainment. She
would have plenty without want, and competency without superfluity; And also
neatly and well ordered, that none which came to her Table (whereof some were
Persons of Honor and Quality) but commended her Cookery, and were well pleased
with their entertainment.

In her Household Furniture she loved not to want, nor desired more then was
needful. It was, Her Houswifery.
though not costly, yet cleanly, and she was frequent in repairing and mending
decays, and what was amiss, both in Linnens, and Woollens.

For her Apparel, Her Habit
she was never willing to have that which was costly for the matter, or gairish
for the manner: Rather under then above her Rank. For the Fashion of it, it was
grave and Exemplary, without Newfangledness and Levity. She followed Peter's
directions which he gave to Christian Women in his time [1. Pet. 3.3. etc.]
whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting their Hair, and
of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel. But let it be the hidden man
of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this
manner in old time, the holy Women who trusted in God adorned themselves being
in subjection unto their own Husbands.

And whatsoever Apparel she had, she was careful to keep it from stains, and
rends, and so soon as any thing was amiss presently to amend it, insomuch as
she made it last long, and yet it was always whole aad neat. All her own, and
Husbands linnens, she made her self, and much of her other Apparel: And at
leisure times she employed her self in knitting Stockings for her self and
Grandchildren; and was as careful, and handy in mending her Husbands Clothes,
as her own.

Her Charity.
She was very Charitable to the Poor where ever she lived, according to that
Estate wherewith God had entrusted her. She was ready to relieve such as were
Objects of Charity, with Meat, or Drink, and to lend them Money, and to minister
some Physical things (whereof her Closet was never empty) according as their
necessities required.

She had a very melting Heart, and truly Sympathized Her Sympathy.
with the Church and People of God whether at home or abroad in all their
sufferings, and rejoiced in their Prosperity. She was much affected with, and
afflicted for that great loss which the Church of Christ had, when so many
able, Godly, faithful, and painful Ministers were ejected; not thrust forth
into, but thrust out from laboring in Gods Harvest; wherein her Husband, and
two Sons were co-sufferers, to the loss of their livelihoods; yet the loss of
their Liberty lay nearer to her Heart, and was a far greater Grief to her then
the outward wants they were exposed to.

Her Humility.
Her Humility was not inferior to her other Graces. She had always a very low
esteem of her self, and was ready to prefer others before her self, and would
not take it ill when her inferiors were set above her: She well remembered the
Apostle Peter's charge. All of you be subject one to another, and be clothed
with Humility. For God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. And
that of St. Paul, Romans 12.10. In honor prefer one another.

Her Love to God, and Man.
Her Love to God, to his Ordinances, and to his Children was hearty, and without
Dissimulation. She abhorred that which was evil, and clave to that which was
good. She was of so sweet and meek a disposition that she never used to speak
evil of any, but was ever prone to forgive and forget wrongs.

She was very prudent in managing her Household affairs to the best advantage.
Her Prudence.
She would have diverse Dishes of Meat with little cost; yet so dressed and
ordered as made them grateful and pleasing unto all: When they were alone, she
had such variety of Dishes and Dresses as prevented nauseousness. She was
careful to see that nothing was lost or spoiled. By her wise and frugal
managing her Household, though her husband had never much coming in, yet at the
years end he could always save something: So that her price to him was far
above Rubies: His Heart trusted in her. For she did him good, and not evil all
the Days of her Life. Prove. 31.10.11, 12.

Her Activity.
In her Younger Days she was healthful; Of a cheerful and active Spirit, and
abhorring Idleness; She would have her Hand in every business. In her Old Age,
though she was crazie, yet whilst she could stand, she would be about one kind
of work or other. Her Patience.
She bore her weakness and Afflictions with much Patience and holy submission
to the will and good pleasure of God, she was so uniform in the frame of her
Spirit, and so maintained her Peace with God through her Holy and humble
walking, that when Death, many times in her sickness, threatened to seize upon
her, She feared it not, as knowing that it would be gain and advantage to her:
Concerning which hear what she her self left in writing which was found after
her Decease.

In my younger Days (says she) my spiritual Afflictions, and inward troubles
continued long before I could attain to any assurance of my Salvation: But of
late years it has pleased God of his infinite Mercy, and Free Grace to give me
more Assurance of his unchangeable Love to me through Faith in his Rich and
free Promises of Life, Her Faith.
and Salvation, through Jesus Christ, who is precious to my Soul, and who is
the Author and finisher of my Faith; God blessed for evermore: To whom be
Praise and Glory World without end Amen.

Her amiableness.
In her converse with her Friends She opened her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her
Tongue was the Law of Kindness (Prove. 31.26.) which made her Company grateful
unto all, and burdensome, or undervalued by none.

Diverse years before her Death, upon catching Cold, she had many fits of
Sickness, and weakness, and some of them were Violent as brought her near unto
Death; Yet the Lord had mercy upon her Husband and Family in raising her up
again almost beyond hopes, and expectation: And she was always a Gainer by her
Afflictions, Afflictions sanctified.
God making good that Promise to her, Romans 8.28. All things shall work together
for good to them that love God, To them who are Called according to his
purpose. For after those fits she walked more humbly, holily, fruitfully, and
faithfully, both in her General, and particular Calling, as one that waited
daily for the appearing of her Lord, and Master. The Winter before her Death,
she enjoyed better Health then she had done for some Winters before.

May the 25th. Anno Christi, 1675. Some Friends came from London to dine with
her, and that morning (according to her usual custom in such Cases) She was
careful, and busy in providing for their kind intertainment: Her last Sickness.
But it pleased God whilst they were at Dinner to strike her with a kind of
Shivering, which made her look paler then ordinary, and after Dinner her
Distemper continued, so that she was soon confined to her Chamber, and not long
after, for the most part to her Bed. But herein God showed her great mercy, and
had respect to her weakness, in that, during all the time of her languishing
she was free from Sickness, and pain, only sometimes she was troubled with some
Stitches, Gods Mercy.
which yet were tolerable, not violent: She was also troubled with some
Vapors which made her Breath very short; Yet had she a pretty good Stomach,
and she relished her Food well till about two Days before her Death; But then,
though she did eat, yet she sound little taste in her Meat. Her sleep was pretty
good, and always very quiet. She was never ill either after Food or Sleep.
Only two Days before her Departure she slept little, by reason of the
continual rutling of Phlegm in her Throat, when she wanted strength to
expectorate.

As for the State of her Soul during all the time of her sickness, she enjoyed
constant Peace and Serenity, and had (through Gods Mercy) much Joy, and Peace,
by believing; Satan (that Roaring Lion) who uses to be most strong when we are
most weak being so chained up by God that he had no power to molest her. She
often cried out Hold out Faith and Patience: She told her nearest Relation,
when she saw him mourning over her, that she was going to be joined to a Better
Husband.

Her youngest Son, taking his leave of her the Day before her Death, she gave
him much Heavenly counsel for the good of his Soul, and Blessed him, and all
his, as she did the rest of her Children and Grandchildren. She earnestly
desired to be Dissolved, and breathed after a fuller enjoyment of Jesus Christ,
which she accounted best of all: She would sometimes say, that it was a hard
thing to Dye: And This is a hard work. Her Understanding, Memory, and Speech
continued till within two Minutes of Death; And a little before, her Daughter
speaking to her of Jesus Christ, She replied, My God and my Lord: And so June
the 21, about five a Clock in the morning, She fell asleep, exchanging this
Life for a better, without any alteration in her Countenance, but only that her
color was gone. She closed up her Eyes her self, as who should say, Death.
It is but winking, and I shall be in Heaven. She changed her Place, but not
her Company. She sickned May the 25th. Anno Christi, 1675. She concluded her
Days June the Twenty First, being Monday, about five a Clock in the Morning,
when having ended her last Sabbath upon Earth, she began to celebrate an
Everlasting Sabbath in Heaven. She was Aged Seventy three years and about four
Months, and had been married almost Fifty years.

Thus did this Holy Woman wear out, not rust out: Burn out, was not blown out:
Yea, she flamed, not smothered out, she served God in her Generation, and then
retired into that Place where is Health without Sickness: Day without Night *
Plenty without Famine: Riches without Poverty: Mirth without mourning: Singing
without sighing: Life without Death: And these, with infinite more to all
Eternity. There is unspotted Chastity: Unstained Honor: Unparalled Beauty.
There is the Tree of life in the midst of this Paradise. There is the River
that waters the Garden. There is the Vine flourishing, and the Pomgranate
budding: There is the Banqueting House where are all those Delicacies, and
Rarities wherewith God himself is delighted. There shall the Saints be adorned,
as a Bride, with rare Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds of Glory. A Glory fitter
to be Believed, then possible to be Discoursed. An Exceeding, Excessive,
Eternal weight of Glory (2 Cor. 4.17.) Even such a weight, as if the Body were
not upheld by the Power of God, it were impossible but that it should faint
under it: as an eminent Divine speaks.

After Mrs. Clerks Decease their was found in her Cabinet a Paper which by
frequent using, was almost worn out. Promises to strengthen her Faith.
It contained a Collection of these several Texts of Scripture which she had
recourse unto in times of Temptation, or Desertion.

Who is among you that fears the Lord: That obeys the Voice of his Servant:
That walks in darkness and has no Light: Let him trust in the Name of the
Lord and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

For the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower; The Righteous run unto it, and are
safe. Prove. 18.10.

Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee, Isa. 26.3.

Blessed is the Man that makes the Lord his trust, Psa. 40.4.

Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes not Sin. Psalm. 32.2.

Though our Hearts may fail us, and our Flesh may fail us, yet God will never
fail us. Psa. 73.26. For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13.5.

And again: I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.18.

I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy Sins, Isa. 44.25.

My Grace is sufficient for thee: For my strength is made perfect in weakness,
2. Cor. 12.9.

By Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: Ephe. 2.8.

I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall not perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my Hand, Joh. 10.28.

Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.

The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal; The Lord knows who
are his, 2. Tim. 2.19.

There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk, not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8.1.

Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.
Romans 4, 10.

It is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? Romans 8.33.34.

The promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off;
Even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39.

The Gifts, and Calling of God are without Repentance* Romans 11.29.

These Texts of Scripture having been as so many Cordials unto her in Times of
Temptation, it is hoped that they may prove so to others, and therefore for
their sakes they are here set down. And hereby it appears that she was not
without some shakings, but, through Gods Mercy, they were such as made her root
the faster: And by her prudent, and seasonable holding forth the Shield of
Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, she became more than a Conqueror, through
him that had loved her.

In another little Book, which was found after her Death, she gives this
account of herself and of Gods gracious dealing with her.

From the beginning (writes she) of Gods showing me Mercy in my Conversion.

I here set down Gods gracious dealings with me, Her Conversion
not for mine own Praise, but for the Glory of God, and to stir up my Heart
unto true Thankfulness for such invaluable Mercies. And then she set down the
time, manner, and means of her Conversion: And afterward proceeds thus.

What have been my Experiences of Gods gracious dealings with me at several
times under Afflictions: As

First when Personal Afflictions have lain upon me, in regard of Bodily
Sickness or Spiritual Distempers.

Secondly. Or, Family Afflictions, when God has taken away my dear Children.

Thirdly: Or, when I have been under fears that God would take away my dear
Husband, by some dangerous Sickness which he lay under.

Fourthly, Or when I have been under great fears in the time of our Civil Wars.

Fifthly, Or when I have been under spiritual Desertion, by Gods hiding his
Face, and Favor from me. Or by reason of weakness, and wants in Grace: Or by
reason of strong, and prevailing Corruptions. Or by reason of Satan's
Temptations: In all which Cases she left a memorial of Gods gracious
dispensations toward her. I shall set down only a few of them.

It pleased God (says she) for many years, to keep me (for the most part) in a
sad and disconsolate estate, and condition, not clearly Evidencing the certain
Assurance of his Love to my Soul: So that many times I questioned whether I was
a Child of God or no: Whether I had part in Christ Jesus or no: Whether I
should ever attain to Life and Salvation or no: And this made me walk with a
drooping, and disconsolate Spirit, so that I could take no true comfort in any
thing: But though heaviness endured for a Night, Yet joy came in the Morning,
when the Lord caused the Light of his Countenance to shine upon me, which was
better then Life.

It pleased God upon the Death of my youngest Child, that it lay very heavy
upon my Spirit, insomuch as I was brought often upon my Knees to beg support from
God and to crave his Grace and assistance that I might not break out to speak,
or act any thing whereby Gods Name might be dishonored, or the Gospel
discredited: And that he would be pleased to make up this outward loss, with
some more durable, and spiritual Comforts. And I found a seasonable, gracious,
and speedy answer to these my Requests. For though I lay long under the burden
of that loss, yet in this time did the Lord sweetly manifest his special Love
to my Soul, assuring me that he was my gracious and reconciled Father in
Christ; whereby my Love to him was much increased, and even inflamed; So that,
by his Grace, it wrought in me more diligence, and carefulness to maintain and
preserve these Evidences of his Love, and to yield a holy submission unto his
Will, as well in suffering, as in doing: As also by avoiding whatsoever might
provoke him to withdraw the Evidences of his Love from me, without the sense
whereof I could take little or no comfort in any thing.

And furthermore, I bless God for it, and speak it to the Praise, and Glory of
his Rich and Free Grace, My Prayers, and earnest Desires have been answered, by
Gods giving me comfortable Assurance, both from the Testimony of his Holy Word,
and the witness of his Blessed Spirit, of my Eternal, and Everlasting Salvation
in, and by Jesus Christ. Yet have I not been without fears, and doubtings many
times, through want of looking over my Evidences, or by neglecting to keep a
narrow watch over my Heart; Or from weakness of my Faith, and all through my
own default and negligence. The Lord pardon it, and make me more circumspect
for the time to come.

By all these I have gained this Experience.

First: That God is true and faithful in making good all his Promises
seasonably unto us: As, That all things shall work together for our Good. And
that God will never fail us, nor forsake us, etc.

Secondly: That it is not in vain to wait upon God, and to seek unto him in our
Straits, who is mote ready to hear then we are to ask.

Thirdly: That I desire to see: Yea, and the Lord has showed me the vanity,
and incertainty of the most satisfying Comforts that this World can afford, and
what an emptiness there is in them, that so I may, and I desire so to do, keep
weaned affections toward them and to sit loose from them, that I may be ready
to part with them, when God calls them from, me or me from them.

Again in regard of Bodily weakness and Sickness, my Experiences have been
these.

First: That as a broken Shoulder can bear no Burden; So the least Distemper,
when the Heart is not in an holy frame and temper is a burden insupportable. If
God hides his Face from us, and withdraws the Evidences of his Love, and denies
to assist us by his strength, we can neither do, nor suffer any thing. And on
the Contrary, I found by Experience, that I could with much cheerfulness, holy
submission and willingness, bear great Distempers, when I enjoyed the favor of
God in them: So that then I could readily say, Good is the work of the Lord as
well as his Word. And, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord because I have
sinned against him. Mich. 7.9. And, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
Job. 13.15.

Secondly, I found by experience also, that by my pains and Sickness I was the
better able to Sympathize with, and to pity and pray for others in the like
Case.

Thirdly, Hereby I learned the more to prize Health: And that: First, Because
in Health we have liberty, and opportunity to enjoy the Public Ordinances with
others of Gods People, whereby the Graces of Gods People are quickened,
strengthened, and increased in us which otherwise (by reason of our corrupt
natures) are apt to grow cold and languish, as will our Bodies when they want
food.

Secondly, Because in Health we enjoy the benefit and the comfort of sweet, and
quiet sleep, which much refreshes and cheers, and which commonly we want in
Sickness.

Thirdly, Because in Health we find sweet satisfying comfort in the use of Gods
good Creatures, whereas in Sickness the daintiest Food is lothsom and
troublesome. The consideration of these things made me the more to prize
Health; To be very thankful for it, and the more careful to employ, and improve
Health, and strength to Gods Glory, and the furtherance of mine own Salvation.

In regard of Public Dangers I have had a great deal of Experience of Gods
goodness toward me and mine several ways, and at several times. For

First: When in the beginning of our Civil Wars and distractions I was
sometimes overwhelmed with base and distrustful Fears, occasioned by my not
acting Faith upon the Promises, and not remembering my former Experiences, nor
considering Gods love, power, and fidelity to his Children, in performing his
so many gracious Promises, made unto them in all estates, and conditions, and
to me among the rest: Here upon I resolved, by Gods Grace and assistance not to
give way to this distrust and diffidence, praying God to assist me therein, and
found more courage then formerly, so far as I know mine own Heart (though truly
the Heart is very deceitful, as I have found by sad experience) The Lord teach
and enable me to rely upon him with more courage and constancy, and more to
live by Faith upon his Promises then formerly I have done.

Indeed I have been apt to fall into new fears upon approaching dangers; Yet
upon successes, and glorious Deliverances, I have often resolved never to
distrust God again, and yet my naughty Heart has deceived me, and made me
ready to faint. But this I found by Experience, to the Praise of my Gods Free
Grace, that as troubles have abounded, my consolations have much more abounded.
For God brought seasonably into my mind many precious Promises, which were as
so many sweet Cordials, which much supported and comforted my Heart, and upheld
my Spirit, when also new storms have arisen, and unexpected Deliverances have
followed, I have, and do resolve, by Gods Grace, not to distrust him any more.
Yea, though more and greater dangers shall arise, yet will I trust in, and stay
my self upon him, though (as Job said) he should slay me. The good Lord
establish my Heart in this good and holy resolution, who is able to keep us to
the end, and has Promised that he will preserve us by his Power, through Faith
to the Salvation of our Souls.

In regard of Satan's Temptations; Especially concerning my coming to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, my Experiences have been these.

Finding often that I was very unable to fit and prepare my self for a
comfortable approach to that Sacred Ordinance, I used to desire the Prayers of
the Congregation unto God in my behalf, and I used the best endeavors I could
in private, as God enabled me, though I came far short of what was required,
and of what I desired: So that I did trust, and hope, through Gods mercy, to
find a comfortable Day of it, and to have it a Sealing Ordinance to my Soul.
But on the contrary, I found much deadness, and little spiritual taste, relish,
and comfort in the use of it: So that my Spirit was often much troubled, and cast
down in me; fearing lest I had some secret Sin undiscovered, and unrepented of,
which caused the Lord thus to hide his Face from me.

But then my gracious God brought this into my mind, that the Lord does
sometimes afflict us for the exercise, and improvement of our Graces, as well
as to humble us for our Sins. I also considered, that as the Lord does tender
great Mercies to us in this Sacrament, renewing his Covenant of Grace, and
Sealing unto us the Pardon of our Sins in the Blood of Christ:

So he gives us leave to engage our selves (by renewing our Covenant with him)
to believe in him, and to trust upon Christ for Life and Salvation: And it
pleased God to give me Faith to apply this in particular to my own Soul: And a
while after, to show me, and to make good to my Soul that precious, and
comfortable Promise, That though he hide his Face from us for a little moment,
yet with Mercy, and loving kindness he will return to us again. This was a
wonderful comfort, and support to my dejected Heart: Blessed be the Lord for
ever, I desire to treasure up these Experiences, that for the future, I may
resolve in the like case to put my whole trust and confidence in him, that so
Satan may not entrap me in his Snares through unbelief, but that I may resist
him steadfast in the Faith: for I am not altogether ignorant, of his Devices.
Gods Promise is, that in all these things we shall be more then Conqueror,
through him that has loved us: And has said that this is the Victory which
overcomes the World, even our Faith. 1. Joh. 5.4.

In the year 1669: there came to us the sad news of the Death of my second Son
Mr. John Clarke, a godly, faithful, and painful Minister sometimes before
ejected out of the Rectory of Cotgrave in Nottingham-Shire, who died the 18th
of September.

Thus as the Waves of the Sea follow one another, so God is pleased to exercise
his Children with one Affliction after another. He sees that whilst we carry
about with us this Body of Sin, we have need of manifold Trials, and
Temptations, as says the Apostle. 1. Pet. 1.6. -- now for a season ye are in
heaviness (if need be) through manifold Temptations; to keep us under, and to
make us the better to remember our selves.

Indeed it has been the Lords course and dealing with me ever since he stopped
me in the way as I was posting to Hell, to raise up one Affliction or other,
either inward or outward, either from Satan, the World, or from mine own
corrupt Heart, and nature, not having Grace and Wisdom to behave and carry my
self as I ought under his various Dispensations and Providence, as appeared at
this time by his laying so great and grievous an Affliction upon me in taking
away so dear a Son, from whom I had much Soul-comfort, and ardent Affections,
which he manifested by his fervent Prayers for me, and by his spiritual
Letters, and Writings to me, wherein he applied himself sutably to my Comfort
in those inward troubles of Heart and Spirit which lay upon me. This caused my
Grief and Sorrows to take the greater hold on me, upon the loss of one who was
so useful to me: Yet hereby I do not derogate from my Elder Son, from whom I
have the like help, and Comfort.

Upon this sad occasion my Grief grew so great that I took no pleasure of any
thing in the World: But was so overwhelmed with Melancholy, and my natural
strength was so abated, that little Food served my turn, and I judged that I
could not live long in such a condition.

Hereupon I began to examine my Heart why it should be so with me, and whether
carnal and imoderate Affections were not the great Cause of my trouble, which I
much feared; And having used many Arguments and laid down many reasons to my
self to quiet and moderate my Passions, and yet nothing prevailed to quiet and
calm my Heart, and to bow me to the Obedience of his revealed Will: And withal,
considering that it was God only that could quiet the Heart, and set our
unruly, and carnal Affections into an holy frame and order, and, That he was a
present Help in times of trouble, I often and earnestly sought unto the Lord
with many Prayers, and Tears* beseeching him to quiet my Heart, and to over
power and tame my unruly Affections, so as to be willing to submit unto him,
and to bear his Afflicting Hand patiently and fruitfully, and to be ready and
willing to submit (either in doing or suffering) to whatsoever he pleased to
impose upon me: And to be ready to part with the best outward Comfort I enjoyed
whenever he should please to call for the same.

And it pleased God seasonably to hear my Prayer, to regard my Tears, and to
grant my Requests, by calming, and quieting my Heart, and Spirit, and by giving
me much more contentedness to submit to his Holy Will, and good Pleasure who is
a God of judgment and knows the fittest times and seasons to come in with
refreshing comforts and who waits to be gracious unto those that trust in him.
Yet surely I was not without many Temptations in this Hour of Darkness from
that subtle Adversary who always stands at watch to insinuate and frame his
Temptations answerable to our Conditions, and like a Roaring Lion walks about
continually, seeking to devour poor, yet precious Souls. Then I called upon the
Lord in my distress, and he answered me and delivered me.

Bless the Lord O my Soul; and all that is within me Praise his Holy Name. For
he has remembered me in my low and troubled estate, because his Mercy endures
for ever.

Having thus had new experience of Gods readiness to hear and help when I
called upon him; And having found that it is not in vain to seek to, and to
depend upon God in all our Straits, I could not but record these things, that
so Every one that is Godly may seek unto him in a time wherein he may be found,
who is a present help in times of trouble, and who does for us abundantly above
what we can ask, or think

The Lord knows that I write these things for no other end, but that God may
have the Glory, and that others, especially my Relations, may be encouraged to
seek God in their Straits, and to trust in him at all times. Amen.

After her Decease there was also found in her Cabinet a Paper with this
Superscrip.

My Will and desire is (with the leave of my Husband) to bestow upon my
Children these things as tokens of my Motherly Affections, and that I may be
remembered by them. She began with her Husband, and what she gave to him and all
the rest, were all wrapped up in several Papers, and each Name endorsed on the
outside to whom it did belong, And then concludes all thus.

But above all, my Prayers unto God are, that he would especially bestow upon
you, all needful Saving Graces, whereby y^u may be enabled to Glorify his
Great Name, in those several places and callings wherein he has set you. Amen,
Amen.

She left also Legacies to some Poor Neighbors: As also ten shillings to Mr.
W. the Minister of the place, to buy him a mourning Ring Concluding thus.

If God shall please to bring me to my Grave in Peace, let this be the Text at
my Funeral, Ephesians. 2.8. For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, This
Scripture I was often put upon to have recourse to in times of Temptations, and
Desertion.

In an other little Book she had collected sundry Texts of Scripture, which
might minister grounds of great Comfort against Satan's Temptations, whereby he
labors, by setting before us a black Bill of our Sins, and daily Infirmities,
and our great inabilities to every Good Duty, to blot out our Evidences, to
stagger our Faith, and to make us go heavily, and drooping in our way to Heaven.

Isa. 1.17.18. Cease to do Evil, Learn to do well: -- And then, Though your
Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow: Though they be red as
Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy Sins.

Ezekiel. 16.6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy Blood, I said
unto thee when thou wast in thy Blood, Live: Yea, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy Blood, Live, V. 8. When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold! Thy time was the time of Love: And I spread my Skirt over thee, and
covered thy Nakedness Yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with
thee (says the Lord God) and thou becamst mine. V. 9. Then washed I thee with
Water: Yea, I thoroughly washed away thy Blood from thee, and anointed thee with
Oil.

Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A New Heart will I give you, and a New Spirit will I put
within you: And I will take away the Stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will
give you an Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them.

Lam. 3.31. The Lord will not cast off for ever.

Joel 3.16. The Lord will be the Hope of his People.

1. Joh. 1, 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. He that believes shall be
saved.

Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God
that Justifies: Who is he that Condemns?

2. Tim. 2.13. If we believe not (that is, If sometimes we are not able to act
Faith) yet God is faithful: He cannot deny himself.

Ephe. 1.4 According as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the
World. V. 5. Having Predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Chrisi to himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will. V. 6. To the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved v. 7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of
Sins, through the riches of his Grace.

2. These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us unto Wrath: But to obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Joh. 10.28.29.30 I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand. My Father which gave them me
is greater then all, and no Man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand: I
and my Father are one.

Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that searches the Lord that obeys the voice of
his Servant; That walks in darkness, and has no Light: Let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

Psa. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the Man whose iniquity is forgiven, Whose Sin is
covered. Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes not Sin.

Ephe. 2.8. For by Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves: It is the Gift of God.

Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: For you are not under the
Law, but under Grace.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Psa. 73.26. Though our Hearts may fail us, and our Flesh may fail us, yet the
Lord will never fail us.

Jer. 31.3. For he has loved us with an everlasting Love.

Isa. 26.3, 4. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, whose mind is staid on
thee, because he trusts in thee. Trust in the Lord for ever. For in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting Strength.

Promises of Protection, Assistance, Comfort, and deliverance, whereby our
Hearts may be upheld in the evil Day.

Ezekiel. 9.4. Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the
Foreheads of them that sigh and cry for all the abominations that are done in
the midst thereof.

Psalm. 34.6. This Poor man cried, and the Lord heard, and saved him out of all
his troubles. v. 19. Many are the Afflictions, of the Righteous: But the Lord
delivers them ou^ of them all.

Psalm. 46, 1. God is our refuge and strength: A very present help in trouble.
v. 2. Therefore will not we fear, etc.

Psa. 42.11. My Soul, why art thou cast down, and disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God: for I shall yet Praise him, who is the health of my countenance,
and my God.

Isa. 3.10. Say ye unto the Righteous, it shall be well with him.

Prove. 3.25, 26. Be not afraid of sudden Fear, neither of the desolation of the
wicked when it comes. For the Lord shall be thy Confidence, and shall keep thy
Foot from being taken.

Psa. 3.8. Salvation belongs to the Lord: Thy Blessing is upon thy People.

Psa. 4.3. Know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: The
Lord will hear when I call unto him. v. 8. I will both lay me down in Peace,
and Sleep. For thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

Nahum 1.7. The Lord is good: A strong hold in the Day of trouble, and he
knows them that trust in him.

2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have believed; And I am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him against that Day. For: Genesis 17.2. He
is God Alsufficient.

Promises made to Gods People in the most dangerous Times. What confidence we
should have in God.

Psa. 27.1, 2, 3. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The
Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid. When the Wicked
even mine Enemies, and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled
and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear.
Though War should rise against me, in this will I be confidenr. v. 4. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: That I may dwell in the
House of the Lord all the days of my life. v. 5. For in the time of trouble he
shall hide me in his Pavilion: In the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide
me: He shall set me up upon a Rock. Therefore v. 9. Hide not thy Face from me.
Put not away thy Servant in Anger: Thou have been my Help; Leave me not,
neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation. v. 13. I had fainted unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. v. 14. Wait
on the Lord. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy Heart. Wait I say
on the Lord.

Psalm. 40.4. Blessed is the Man that makes the Lord his trust, and respects
not the Proud, nor such as turn aside to Lies.

Psalm. 32.1. In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust: Let me never be ashamed. V 3.
For thou art my Rock, and my Fortress; therefore for thy Name sake lead me and
guide me. v. 23. O love the Lord, all ye Saints: For the Lord preserves the
Faithful. v. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your Heart, all ye
that hope in the Lord.

Psa. 91.2. I will say of the Lord: He is my Refuge: and my Fortress. My God,
in him will I trust.

Psa. 94.14. For the Lord will not cast off his People, neither will he forsake
his Inheritance. v. 19. In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts
delighted my Soul.

Psa. 102.2. Hide not thy Face from me in the Day when I am ln trouble, incline
thine Ear unto me. In the Day when I call, answer me speedily.

Psa. 115.11. Ye that fear the Lord trust in the Lord. He is their Help, and
their Shield.

Psa. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings. His Heart is fixed
trusting in the Lord.

Psa. 118.5. I called upon the Lord in distress: The Lord answered me, and set
me in a large place. v. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what can
man do unto me?

1. Pet. 4.17. The time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God:
And if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? v. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of
God commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithfu
Creator.

^. These. 1.6, 7. It is a Righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, etc.

2. These. 3.3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil.

These I have thought fit to t^^nscribe, hoping that by Gods blessing they may
prove Useful and Comfortable to many others as they were to her. But besides
she had collected many others, whereof (to prevent tediousness) I shall only
give you the Heads. As

Promises to strengthen our Faith.

For Deliverance from all evil.

For assistance in times of trouble.

For the Resurrection of our Bodies.

For Eternal Glory with Christ.

That God will preserve his Children from Afflictions so far as it is good for
them.

That God will qualify, and moderate their Afflictions when they do come; And
proportion them to their Strength.

That Afflictions are sovereign Medicines to kill Lusts, and to cure spiritual
Diseases.

Promises made to such as suffer in a Good Cause, for the Truth.

Promises of Deliverances from the Evil World.

Of Comfort to such as fall through Infirmity.

Promises made to such as are Ignorant.

Comforts against doubts and fears of loosing the Love of God.

Comforts against forgetfulness of Good things.

Comforts against fears of falling from God.

Comforts against dismayedness under many and strong Corruptions.

Comforts against troubles arising fom the want of the means of Grace, either
in the whole, or in the Power of them.

Comforts to Gods Children in case of spiritual Disertion.

Promises of the continuance and Unchangeableness, of Gods Love.

Promises of Gods special and gracious presence with his Children.

Promises of Gods Protection and Providence over his.

Promises of bestowing Christ, and of many Blessings with him. As, of
Redemption: Effectual Calling: Justification: Reconciliation: Adoption: Of
bestowing the Spirit, for their Sanctification; and all Spiritual Grace, As
Faith; Confidence in God; Hope; Joy; Love to God: To Christ: To our Brethren:
To Enemies: Of Obedience: Of Repentance; Of Knowledge: Of audience of their
Prayers: Of Mortification of Sin, etc.

Promises of assistance in Holy Duties.

Promises of Gods acceptance of our spiritual Sacrifices.

Promises of a blessing upon Holy Ordinances.

Promises made to the conscientious performance of sundry Duties. As, to
Prayer: To a careful seeking of God: To watchfulness: To conscientious
Sanctification of the Lords Days: For the preservation of his Church etc.

In reading of Practical Authors she had collected, and set down many things
which she found useful, and Comfortable to her Soul: As,

Certain grounds of Comfort to build our Faith upon in times of Temptations.

Signs whereby we may know whether we be in Covenant with God or no.

Reasons why God made this Covenant with fallen Man.

What are the Gifts and privileges of this Covenant.

She has also set down many Helps to provoke, and enable us to wait Gods
leisure for the accomplishment of his Rich, and free Promises, though his
Providence seem to run cross t^ them.

And how we may be enabled to apply Gods Promises.

And in the Conclusion of all she thus Writes.

It was the goodness of my God to remember me in my Youth, that so I might not
forget him, neither in my Youth, nor in my Old Age.

By all this it may appear what were the Gifts, and Graces wherewith the Lord
had adorned her, and what her inward Beauty was: And as the Jewel was rare, so
was the Cabinet wherein it was lodged, comely. And the (...) tells us ^^^t^er est
pulchro veniens e ^^^pore Virtus.
That Virtue has the greatest Grace.
That shines through a Beauteous Face.


And such truly was hers in her younger Days, and some Characters, and
Lineaments of it continued in her Old Age, even to the last, as sundry Persons
observed.

Hallelujah.

What was long since said of Mrs Katherine Bretterg may be t^^ly applied unto
her.

Katherina Pura: Christoqua^ purgata, Vita, Christo p^eparata, Morte, Christo
dedicata, Coelis, Christo conjugata.


Prove. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a Woman that fears
the Lord she shall be Praised.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line 6. for Isa. read Isabel, l. 7. r. Overton f. verton, p. 6. l. 1^.
r. words f. word, p. 11. l 22. add to, p. 12. l. 15. r. when f. wen, p. 22. l.
9. 10. r. corrupt times f. corruptions, p. 24. l. 9. r. ^ll so f. also, p. 29.
l. 19. r. Household affai^, p. 32. l. 14. add so, p. 33. l. 1. add the, p. 35.
l. 3. r. rattling. f. rutling, l. 6. add it. p. 39. l. 4. dele an i, in
Excessive, p. 35. l. 6. add it, p. 60. l. 3. r. conquerours, l. 13. r.
sometime, p. 66. l. 25. r. Superscription, p. 72. l. 22. r. fears f.
searches.

Courteous Reader.
THese Books following are Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the
Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard, where also you may be furnished with
most sorts of Bound or Stiched Books as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations,
Speeches, Declarations, Letters, Orders, Ordinances, Remonstrances,
Commissions, Articles: As also Books of Divinity, Catechisms, Church
government; Sermons on all Occasions; and most sorts of Histories, Poetry,
Plays and such like, etc.

Books in Folio.
ASsemblies Annotations. Bakers Chronicle. Gesners history of Beasts and
Serpents. Heylin's Cosmography. Josephus History of the Jews Juvenal with Cuts
by Sir Robert Stapylton. Ambroses works. Cradocks Harmony. Churchil Divi
Britanici. Elson on Colossians. Knowledge and Practice, qua^ Quarto^
Principles, oct. Gunters works. Barbers Sermon, Isa. 9.6. J. B. Sermon, Survey
of Man Job 14, 10. Dod on the Lords Prayer. Medice Cura Teipsum, o^ the
Apothecaries plea against Doctor Christopher Meret. William Lord Bishop of
Glucester, Entitled a plain and full Exposition of the Catechism of the Church
of England. Edward Lord Bishop of Norwich, Entitled, a Sermon preached before
the Peers at Westminster the 7. Nov. being a day of solemn Humiliation for the
continuing Pestilence. Not. Hardy Dr. Entitled, Justice Triumphing, etc. a
Sermon preached the 5, of Novem. -- Entitled, The pilgrims wish, a Sermon
preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Anne Dudson. -- Entitled, A loud Call to great
Mourning, a Sermon preached on the 30. Jan. 1661. before the Parliament. --
Entitled, Lamentation, Mourning and Woe, a Sermon preached the Lords day after
the dismal Fire in the City of London. -- Entitled, the Royal Commonwealths
Man, etc. a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Sir Thomas Adams. Sam. Drake Dr.
Entitled, THEOY DIKONO, etc. a Sermon preached at the Assizes at York. 1669.
-- Entit. Totum Hominis, etc. a Sermon preached the 15, March at the Assizes in
York* Marriage of Arts a play. Miser a play. Bastard a play. Cheats a play.
Faithful Shepherdess a play. Horatius a play. Polyencles a play, Combat of love
and friendship a play. Spanish Gypsy a play. Fettiplace, the souls narrow
search for sin, oct. Fertiplace Christian Monitor earnestly and compassionately
persuading sinners unto true and timely repentance. English Dictionary, or
expositor, the 12 Edition Revised and enlarged, by S.C. duod. Complete
Bone-setter, oct. Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synop. oct. The famous game
of Chessplay, oct. Shelton's Tachygraphia, Lat. oct. Clarks Looking-glass for
persecutors, oct. Tillotson and Stillingfleets rule of faith, oct. Heathen
Gods, oct. Clavis Homerica, oct. Beverley Great Soul of Man, oct. -- Deathbed
Repentance, quar. Warren principles of Christian Doctrine, oct. Janua Janua
Linguarum Novissima, oct. Commenii Vestibulum, oct. Owen of Love, oct. Savage
Life, oct. Buttler's Life, oct. Syntaxis Erasmiana, oct. Johanne Betto M. D.
Entitled, De Ortu and Natura Sanguinis, oct. Thomas Elborow Entit. The famous
Epistles of S. Polycarp and S. Ignatius Disciples to the holy Evangelist and
Apostle S. John; with the Epistle of S. Barnabas, etc. oct. Martials Epigrams
by Busby, duod. Tho. Mall and Theoph. Pol. wheile, Entit. Holy Living, a
serious Exhortation thereunto, and choice Directions therein, etc. duod. Wit
Revived, duod. Supplication of Saints, duod. Butlers Rhetoric, duod. Clark
abour comfort which Gods children have, or at he least earnestly desire and
^ong after whilst they are in this World, together with the obstructions of
comfort, and the removal of them, duod. Jeofferies New years gift, duod. Divine
Examples of Gods severe Judgments upon Sabbath breakers in their unlawful
sports, Collected out of several Divine subjects, viz. Master H, B. Master
Beard, and the Practice of Piety: a fit monument for our present times, etc. A
brief Remembrancer, or the right Improvement of Christ's Birth day. A second
sheet of old Master Dod's sayings, or another Posie gathered out of Master
Dod's Garden. The Hunting for Money the first part: The Hunting Match for Money
the 2. part. Vennings Alarm. Muses fireworks upon the fifth of November, or
the Protestant Remembrancer. Perkin's whole Duty of Man.
FINIS.

