The Reclaimed PAPIST. OR The Process of a Papist Knight reformd by a
Protestant Lady with the assistance of a Presbyterian Minister and his wife an
Independent. And the whole Conference, whereby that notable reformation was
effected.

1655.

The PROLOG. To my Noble and ever honored Friend JOHN COMPTON Esquire.
FInding my self unable to master the trouble and alteration wherewith I was
surprisd upon the loss of two Friends about Christmas last, whom I had reason
to esteem, and several other afflictions that came upon me all at once; I took
the advice after a few days disquiet to divert my thoughts by some unusual
emploiment, which might turn the stream and not choke up the source, giving
work enough to entertain my mind and not tire it, being both substantial and
yet an easy exercise. Walking therefore all alone in your garden I fell into
remembrance of this present subject, which liked me well because my head was full
of the story and passages thereof; that it would prove easy to me on that
account to write it, and yet being unaccustomed to make books (this being the
first) I should be sufficiently taken up thereby, if not in the inventing of
matter yet at least in the ordering of words to the exclusion of unprofitable
passion which would otherwise creep in and to much annoy my mind.

The conceit has proovd right. For at two months end, wherein my mind as busy as
any Be was wholly taken up in inventing contriving writing and reviewing these
Dialogs, by that time I had fully finished them, I perceivd my passion wholly
allayd and my spirit in its wonted temper. And now I see clearly and do
publikly proclaim that every passion is in the command of reason, and that
industry both prevents sin and subdues sorrow.

The whole work consists of three parts wherein nine arguments ar handled, in
each part three. It Is disputed. I. Whether innovation of Christian doctrine may
be made by man, or has ever been made by the Papist. II. Whether it be
prudence to cast away our explicit articles of belief and betake our selves to
the Bible for our faith: and whether hearing and preaching of the Word of God
be the capital and essential work of Christian religion. III. Whether the
church may for the quiet of some person or nation comply with opinions she would
otherwis dislike of: and with opinions have happed at times contrary to popery.
IV. Whether it be sufficient to salvation only to beleev in Christ as the unum
necessarium. V. Whether the articles propounded in the oath of abjuration, as
the popes supremacy, real presence, purgatory, worship of saints, and merit of
good works, be plausible doctrine. VI. Whether the said oath may be honestly
taken by any man upon earth Christian Jew or pagan: whether in all and every
controversy of religion there may be given one general rule against which no
sectary can except that shall notwthstanding conclude infallibly for the
Catholic, wthout turning a leaf of Scriptur, counsels or fathers: and with may
be the grounds can retard a papist from reformation. VII. Whether the Apostls
and Evangelists were all papists, that is to say such Catholics as be at this
day. VIII. Whether any one text of Scriptur may justly be brought out of the
old or new Testament against the Catholic church, or any one article of her
faith: and whether reason may possibly frame an argument to convince a papist,
or remove him from the rock whereon he is seated. IX. Whether each particular
opinion or positiv article of popery rejected by the reformation will not seem
to right reason indifferently stated, if it allow of any religion at all, more
rational and pious than the contrary negativ.


These be the principal things disputed in my nine conferences; which be so
ordered that they have not dependence or connection one with another, but each
several Dialogue is a book by it self.

Some doctors have thought that the sacred Dialogues called the book of Job
are Historically true for the ground and subject of the Discourse; as that there
was such a person as Job; brought into such a dejected condition; set upon and
checked by three neighbor Disputants there named, and the like. But the words
and tenor of their speech this they think was ordered by the sacred Penman
according the property of the persons proportionable to his own drift and
purpos, not so much heeding to set down word for word what they did say as what
they might say.

The same is to be thought of these Dialogs; for the ground and occasion of
them is real History. A papist Knight offering love to a Protestant Lady could
not have audience but under condition of changing his religion For that purpos
she brought him a Divine accompanied with his wife a witty woman to confer with
him, and by their help reclaimd him. But my Vicares was you may think more
pregnant in her gnomeys texts and doxes, than I have suffered her to be in this
literal accoast, wherein she stands like a saltsellar at a banquet, only for a
grain or two of seasoning: for I was loath to have my book overswoln with her
witty vanity. I was somwhile in doubt whether I should let her com in at all or
no; but because in the last Dialog she alone with the Lady in the Ministers
absence reclaimd the Knight I had too much prevaricated from the truth of my
story and wronged her honor if I had quite left her out. Besides since the
Minister and his wife were commilitores in this employment, I could not well
separat whom not only the common wealth but even their common warfar had
united. Quos comune homine genus and telluris Origo,
Deinde thorus junxit, tandem ipsa periculajungunt.
That all the world may see and acknowledge how necessary it is for parsons to
marry, to the end they may have a fellow labourer in the harvest; and when the
good man is sick; his wife may be ready at hand to supply the place. You will
surely love my Vicares when you meet with her; for she is, in a right
description, a featous body and soul linkt together with words for the good of
something.

The work being ended (so much as I mean to put forth at this time) comes
running voluntary and of its own nature, as you see Sr unto your friendly hands;
where it doubts not but to find a favorable entertainment both by the candor
of your own nature, and your particular good will to the Author several ways
expressed. If it be so happy as to give you content, I shall applaud the evil
that occasiond me so much good; as indeed all crosses of this life if they be
well managed do operat unto further good and benefit than would have happed
wthout them. It will be to me a double comfort by these few exercitations both
to have overcom my own trouble; and also to entertain a friend I do so highly
respect.

Your many civilitys and much kindness toward me clayms a right in all my
thoughts and actions, and therefore indeed when they be presented to you they com
not as offerings of worth but of duty; though I should my self take most
pleasur in duty that is serviceable. Although Sr I had not a motiv of obligation,
the great temperance and moderation I have observed in you, such as I have
seldom seen in young Gentlmen of your age, your retired disposition and self
sufficiency to live contentedly in your own breast, whilst others with much
expens of time seck themselves abroad, would have invited me to the boldness of
this addres: for books love to be presented to the hands of such as will peruse
them.

Which way soever your inclination bends in matter of Religion, either my Knights
discourse will answer to it, or at least the reasonings of his three opponents
against him; either his valor in the defense of his Religion or his fall from
it.

Three things I have mainly aimed at in these conferences; that they should be
useful, familiar and new. Useful and beneficial both by the choice of a grave
and weighty subject such as is Religion and virtue, and also by a rational
vindication and defense thereof: Familiar and easy, both by an ordinary form of
words, natural and proper to the language wherein they be written, and by the
easy flowing strain wthout any logical collection of syllogism or citation of
authors and authority of Latin sentences: Unusual and new, both by handling
such things as have not yet (at least for aught I know) been treated of; and by
abstaining both from all common places and heads of controversys, well have
been already over and over and more than enough discust, and also from the
ordinary way of handling them if they do chance (as in the fifth Dialog they do)
to light in my way. For we find that a crambical repetition of the same things
brings a nauscousnes upon men how important soever the things in themselves may
be; peopl also are now run into new ways of error, and there for new ways must
be thought on to reduce them.

This purpos of mine, I am sure is good; but God knows how far I have hit it.
Where any man that is my friend perceivs me to fail, let him not spend time in
vain to chide and censur me but help me, for his helping hand I do humbly crave
of him; if he be an enemy let him use his discretion.

If I find these three Dialogues pleas, I shall be encouraged to bring up the
arrear. The book is perfect already of it self; yea each particular Dialogue is
a book wthout dependence of another: but the Papist yields not till the last,
where he submits either to the understanding of his two opponents, or to the
will of his Lady; either to the great beauty of their reason, or to the reason
of her great beauty. The parson is absent in the last Dialog, but the Vicares
fights it out to the last, and leaves not the field till she see the Knight
prostrated at the Ladys feet, whose constant champion she was.

So that the papists overthrow must indeed be attributed to the Vicaresses
valor, who therefore fell because she disputed, according to that kind of
demonstration Artistotle makes mention of, Sol lucet, quia Socrates ambulas.

Noble Sr continue still to love him whose gratest pleasur is to serve you. J.
B. V. F. C.

THE FIRST DIALOG.
LADY. I have Sr Harry according to my promis brought here a worthy Divine to
inlighten you in the way of truth: to the end that the lettance of popery
removd we may at length com to that period you have so earnestly and so long
desired. For I am resolvd before the conclusion of any such match either with
your self or any other so to provide aforehand, that I may meet with nothing
afterward to disturb my union repos and peace with him I wed my self.


VICARES. So indeed it is written: In the beginning God made heaven and earth.
And then afterward he gav himself rest: Genesis 1.


LADY. Your birth and breeding Sr is noble, your person pleases me well, and
your nature is very agreeable, I lov your deportment, your spirit is very
pregnant and its endowments numerous, your conditions all good, your fortun is
plausibl and kindred renownd, your knowledge and activity equally high and
comendable, your conversation toward all men sober prudent and sincerly just.
Only one things spoils all your other good qualitys; you are a Papist.


VICARE. It spoils all indeed, according as it is written. One knot of dead flies
spoils a whole box of ointment. Eccl. 10.


LADY. To deal sincerly with you, I lov not popery: this you must renounce or
me. If some few conferences with this worthy orthodox may avail to that purpos,
your conversion once effected I am yours.


KNIGT. Madam I shall be willing to learn, very glad you may be sure to gain
two paradises at once.


MINISTER. Well Sr, I will show you in scriptur, that there is not in the whole
word of God any such thing, as Masses, Popes, Breviaries, Missals, Monks,
Cardinals, Nuns, Beads, Liturgy, Shrines, Altars, Vows, Indulgences, Lents,
Purgatory, Dirges, Priests, Free Will, Rosarys, Merit, Jesuits, and the rest of
popish medly.


VICARES. Well don sweetheart, lay his load upon him that he may feel it and
couch under it: for so it is written, Issachar is a strong ass couching down
between two burdens, Genesis 49. You use to say that Issachar it Greek for a
papist, and the two burdens a pair of panniers filled with popish trumpery.


LADY. Fair and softly good D, that we may not irritat but heal. Proceed we
step by step, that my good Knight may cheerfully accompany us in our conference
beginning first with generalitys. Sr. Harry you must not be obstinat in old
errors, but be willing upon good sufficient motivs to leav any whatsoever
opinion be it never so ancient. It Is antiquity keeps you hood winkt.


VICARES. Old things ar past away behold all things ar become new, says the
Scripture, 2 Cor. 4.


MINISTER. The multiform grace and industry of several reformers raised by the
Lord have brought things to light which were hidden in former ages. And you may
see daily new discoverys made both by particular persons and parlaments,
Luthers lamp that was first held up in the midst of darkness reveald very much
of truth afortime unknown, but after him several other torches lighted at his,
opend yet more in several Christian Countries. I need not travel far to show
you this. Our English writers from Harry the eight unto this present day will
make it sufficiently manifest unto you if you could peruse them, how that still
the succeeding Doctors added ever new degrees of light to the discoverys of
forgoing divines. Parlaments in the sam manner did not all at once remov
superstition out of the land, but perfected the work of reformation by degrees,
which is indeed a progres most conformable both to to nature and art. Room was not
built in a day, nor will it in one day be destroyed. The path of the just says
Solomon is as the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect
day, Prove. 4.18.


LADY. This is handsomely spoken. Think seriously of this good S Harry: and be
as ready to suspect that for an error which lay hid longer as that which was
sooner discovered; so shall all your popery melt away by degrees like icicls
before the sun.


KN. I see and acknowledge that new reformations in Religion are daily made; but
whether to the edification or ruin thereof dos not yet so clearly appear. A
continual taking away is an odd kind of mending: nor do I know any thing in
nature made better or greater thereby save only a gap. The pretended lights that
have risen from time to time one after another I have hitherto taken to be mere
unwholsom exhalations, sulphurous meteors, or some ignes fatui good for nothing
but to lead men into lakes and ditches.


The daily rising of new opinions in Religion maks me rather suspect all than
approv of any innovation; because these opinions ar all of them but new denialls
of some part of the ancient Catholik-faith which former reformers had not yet
attained the confidence to reject: so that it is still but the same kind of
audacity and the very self same pres^^^ption, with an addition of some new degree
of daring. And there was never any harlot that cast of all her cloths at once,
but according as she grew by degrees more shamless. They that threw down the
altar left a tabl standing in the Church, and the first violatours of picturs
did not break all the glass windows, yet their succeslours have finished the work,
and the bare walls now standing ar dangerously threatnd. In the same manner be
articls of faith defaced and rased in the hearts and spirits of men by a
graduall proceeding of infidelity and heresy still increasing in its growth of
imodesty, til of the whole fabric of Christian religion there be not left one
ston upon another; which is the way not of composition but solution, it dos not
renew but impair.

I should look strangely upon that Phesition who will first make me believe I
am sick when I do not find in my self that I ill any thing or complain at all;
and then taking upon him even against my will to reform me in my health, purges
me too and again till I be not able to stand on my legs, drawing still from me
till my body be quit consumed, and never adding any positiv thing to sustain
me. Or if he should begin on the outsid, and first tear of my cloths, then my
skin, and so my flesh, and bones, still telling me it is for the renewing of my
health and cheerfulnes, I could not judge this other than outrageous mockery,
and most cruel inhuman abuse. Yet such and no other be all reformations in
religion; a continual cancelling of doctrins formerly receivd and practiced, a
daily taking away without addition of any thing, and that in despite of the
Church whose doctrine it is. This is one reason I like not to hear of these
reformations much les to behold with mine eyes the woeful ruins and disorders
accompany them both in Church and state.

Another is, I cannot see when there will be any end thereof, the successors
still pretending the unlimited right of innovation the unlimited right of
innovation left them as hereditary by their fathers, which right for aught I see
all generations ar equally ambitious to put in practis; so that nothing is
stabl or secure, nothing at all unchangeable; nor can any one tell either what
faith he livs in, or in what he is to die. Indeed such men as would not be
containd in their bounds by a profession of infallibillity which they had in the
Church, how shall a profession of fallibility exhibited by heresy contain them!
a fallible liberty and a free fallibility can never lin rolling; nor will they
ever rest stated, till they be fallen into the gulf of atheism.

MIN. Do not mistake us Sr Harry, we do not intend that variety of reformations
should afford an argument against your stiff standing Popery in that way you
take it. But desire you only to consider, that inventions have been perfected
by degrees, all arts and sciences, customs, garbs, languages and wtever has
been at any time invented or used by man, as you shall soon perceiv and grant
if you would let your thoughts descend unto any one particular: The art of
making of watches how is it betterd wthin forty or fifty years, and our English
tongue purified. Thus running over the whole employments of men's hands and
understandings you will acknowledge with us, that addition of new facultys in men
of succeeding tims has still perfected the rude and unpolisht works of forgoing
ages. In the same manner Religion afortim obscur and mixed with several
superstitions is by latter times illustrated and clensd.


LADY. It Is therefore no marvel that every ten or twenty years new ways ar
invented by fresher wits to oppugn Popery.


KNIGT. Madam, these several new ways of heresy argue first, that the
ringleaders and followers of the Lutheran faction the most dangerous
epidemicall revolt I think has ever happed since the Apostles days did not
forsak the church for any reason they had so to do, but first forsook the
church and then sought out a reason to color their revolt. For had they had
any one or many reasons for their division, these being once cleard and answered
by the Catholic church, so far that they could no longer insist upon their
scattered principls, they would have returned unanimously unto that body whence
they and their for-fathers had impiously apostatisd; and not have studied other
shifts as vain as the former and perhaps more wicked too, whereby to maintain
themselves and adherents in the wretched Schism whereunto they had formerly run
purly indeed upon sensual and carnal motivs, whatsoever themselves pretend.


Secondly these new ways and daily alterations of sectarys do sufficiently
demonstrat that out of the Catholic church there is not that unity consent and
stablnes which may mov a prudent man to beleev that either all those Sects
together, or any one of them ar that mystical body of Christ that keeps an
unity of spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.2. and which is fitly joind and
compact together; v. 16. since they neither agree together in the articles of
their heleef, nor yet in the motivs of their apostasy from that church that is
and ever has been so united and compacted in it self; nor have in themselves
any stability or consistency at all. That is not grounded which never lins
moving.

Again, these new ways of oppugning the church are not only new declarations of
former negativs maintaind by their for-fathers against the church, but
additions of new negativs and further apostasy: which infers as much division
from their predecessors, as they had from the first faith of the church; and so
they give me no security at all of adhering unto any, since I may still in
prudence doubt of any, even the last separation, whether that be the unspotted
spous of Christ or a new purification yet to be expected. And who can assure me
that any such thing shall happen in my life time to be made use of by me, or
that I shall ever see that glorious church not having spot or wrinkl or any
such thing, holy and wthhout blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. unto which I may incorporat my
self. For the last separation still exclaimes against' the former, as they did
against the mother church, and that which is to come will do the like against
this.

Besides, these several new ways if they be well examined appear so to dash one
against another, that although all of them strike expressy at the mother church,
yet they wound her through one another sides; and if any should beleev them he
shall not possibly find any thing to adher unto, unles he blindly close with the
first he meets and condemn all others with the sam folly he made chois of this.

Our later Writers here in England, L. Faukland, Chillingworth and others, driv
if I mistake not against Religion in general, and strike as much at any or all
as at the Catholic. The Socinians they have sprung a mine under the church so
deep and dangerous, that it makes the very battlements of heaven to shake, at
least in the eyes of man; openly and wthout dissimulation oppugning the very
divinity of the Son of God, and crucifying not so much the lord of glory, as
the very lordship and glory of that lord, finally calling many things in
question which former heretics left untoucht. And now one may meet here in every
town and villag with some or other blaspheming openly against the whole Gospel of
Christ, such as hear them laughing at the conceit without any sens at all or
zeal of Gods glory and their own final hopes. This is the fruit of these new
ways fresh wits and daily inventions, whereby the utter desolation is day by day
consummated. Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, no man on the sudden was ever made
stark naught; and be degrees does every heresy how slight soever it be in the
beginning, sink it self insensibly into atheism, containing most of Catholic
faith in the first and imediat separation, till by degrees it all expire. This
is the perfection Religion gets by the addition of new wits and the progres of
innovation.

The knowledge and experience of these mischiefs makes the Catholic church which
is the wisest congregation has ever been or possibly ever can be upon earth,
to curb and stifl every wtsoever innovation as far as lies in her power at its
first uprising how small soever it be, knowing full well that from such a littl
egg is by littl and littl formd a dangerous adder, and this in time wingd into
a flying serpent.

MINISTER. Can you deny Sr that arts and sciences are all perfected by time? so
is Religion likewise.


KNIGT. By your favor, you ar much mistaken your self in your similitud, or
would at least beguil me. If religion were a human invention the consequence
were good. For all inventions of man issuing from an imperfect principl, by the
application of fresh hands and understandings superadded to the former, as new
degrees of perfection in the principle, do receiv increas, and the arts ar then
com to the height when they have past through so many hands and heads as be
able to imprint so much perfection as the subject or matter is capable to
receiv. So that all those heads and hands put together, as well that perfected
as that first invented the science, do but make up one complet perfect
principle of the art or invention resulting thence, which receives perfection
proportionabl to the gradual acces of its original from whence it flows, and
still as nature and industry perfects that, so does the art increase. Thus much
I can grant. And if Religion were an human invention, the very same affection
would be found in it also. It Is here to be noted that we do not treat of
Theology or scholasticall learning, which is a science superadded to the primary
principles of Religion; for this I shall grant to be humane as Physic or the
civil law is, if it be taken precisely according to its conclusions and
inferences without respect had to the principles whence it flows, and it may
alter in its manner and method as they do. But I speak purely of those primary
principles whereupon this Theology is founded, for these only are faith, and
the unalterable doctrine of the Christian church.


This Religion and Faith deliverd unto us by God if the Gospel and Scripturs
be true, differs as to our present purpose in two points from all other humane
sciences. First, that it issued at first from a principle absolutely complet,
secondly that there is not upon earth any principl already existing or possible
to exist that can join with that principl to add to the perfection of the work.

God who reveald and taught this faith is an infinite intellect and an
understanding infinitely actuated, of such excessive perfection that it may
easlier be admird and worshipped than expressed. And therefore the faith that issued
from him must have its whole perfection at the first impression, and that
infinite degrees more absolut than arts and sciences receive at the last; that
coms forth absolutely pure and perfect, these receiv their perfection such as it
is in their progres. The further Religion proceeds from its first institution
or revelation, the more it is sullied by the comerce of man, whose practis by
deviating from its dictats fouls it as it were by contagion of the vessel: but
if he shall once dare to enterpose the results of his own judgment with those
revealed articles, to deny any or add to any, mingling his own urin with that
supernatural current, then does the water of life run troubled, muddy and
corrupted, and ceases to be divine; nor is there any way to rectify it, but by
having recourse to its first pure sours and according to that samplar to
clarify it again. But human inventions arising at the first unpolisht and
rough, if their perfection be to be measurd are not called back to their first
original, but examind rather by the nearnes to the last and final experiment.
This is the first difference as concerning our purpos in hand betwixt divine
faith and human sciences, Religion and arts, gods worship and man's works.

The other is, that there is not upon earth any other principl which may add any
thing to Religions perfection, renew or alter it in any kind.

Arts, sciences, garbs, languages and fashions of men, these do expect their
perfection from man's industry whence they had their first being: and humane
industry and wit presumes rightfully to make several additions, alterations
and changes in them according to the variety that is in men's fancies. These
alterations be either perfections or at least so esteemd by men who introduce
and receiv them, which is all one in human society; for amongst men that is the
best which is in use and fashion as may be seen in languages garbs and fashions
of attire which chang continually and still for the best at least in vulgar
opinion, till the fashions do insensibly wear out one another, and that return
again by degrees which afortime was rejected, rendering that fashion contemptible
by which it self had been in former times made vile. Thus man's thoughts and all the works of his hands run incessantly in a circular motion wearing out one
another with a strange restlesness conveyed into things from the instability of
fansy their first contriver, which can never stay, or remain in the fame state,
but likes and dislikes, creats and destroys, does and undoes continually, and
seems to be pleased with nothing but variety. And so all human workma^ships of
whatsoever kind they be, do meet with several fancies of men unto all which they
are equally subject, and apt at pleasur by them to be contrould alterd varied
and subdud according tot he diversity of imaginations they meet withal.

All this is apparently true, and lively set out by Solomon in his
Eccelesiastes, where he affirms that there is nothing new under the Sun and that
there is a season for every thing and a time for very purpos under heaven, a tim
to break down and a tim to build, a tim to rent and a time to so? As if he
should have said, man now fansyes one thing, and then is pleased with the
contrary, now heel plant an orchard and then heel turn it into a meadow, now he
will build a house in one fashion and then alter it into another, and the like;
so that all his works chang and run in a circl, till his former rejected fansy
perhaps return again, and seem to be some new business but indeed it is not: for
all that is now brought up has been afortime rejected, as that which is now
refused has been liked of and will be so again; so that under the Sun is nihil
novi no new thing; either in laws, states, governments, buildings, books,
fashions languages or other thing invented or contrivd by man. The very diet
and company which seven years ago displeasd us has now lost its taste. Finally all that one man does either himself or some other like himself will undo it again,
and mould it in another fashion, the works of man being totally subject to his
humor, and not issuing at first from any self-sufficient, self-singular,
self-eternall uncontrollable intellect, are apt indifferently to follow the
guidance of any thing that pertaks of that reason which gave them their first
being.

But religion is not thus subject to the understanding or fancy of any one man
or all men together. For man's understanding and gods do not agree together in
the same reason as two individualls in one species, and consequently with is
dictated by the one that is infinitely perfect, self-singular and
incomunicable, cannot be contrould by the other which is infinitely imperfect
common and accidentally singularisd. A thing is naturally subject to his own
cause or some thing at least unto which that principl it self is subject and
nothing else; the works and will of man to man, the works, and will of God to
god, the thoughts and actions of man both to man and God also to whom man
himself is subject, but the word and will of God are so his, that they can not
be in man's power who is a poor vassail both to God and his will and word too.
What man has once willed, not only God but man also may frustrat it by
willing the contrary; but he cannot alter the will of God nor destroy any of
his works: Towns he can overthrow, and Orcards and Gardens which himself has
planted; but where is the man can pull a star out of heaven, annihilat one of
the elements or add another to those which God has made.

In all reason I think it is apparent to every one that the will and Word of
the Allmighty cannot be subjected to such a poor pitiful thing as man is: he
must be led by it and not draw it to his pleasure, by adding or diminishing, by
chopping and changing as he lists. Wherefore our B. Savior, when some upon the
doctrine they had heard him deliver, doubted and asked him with a quomodo, how can
man forgive sins: and again others, how can he give us his flesh to eat: It is
very observable that our Lord never went about to satisfy their curiosity or
declar to them how or in what manner it might be don, it being indeed below the
Majesty of God to give his vassail a reason of his will: but he singly repeated
again his own assertion wthout showing the provability or possibility thereof;
thereby giving us to understand that the institutions and will of God are not to
be subjected to the understanding or man to be admitted or rejected according
to that probability they shall carry in it, but humbly to be accepted with all
submission and lowlines, as the will of that in finit suprem power unto which
man's understanding and the whole creation is subjected. And therefore good S.
Paul willed that every intellect should be captivated to the obedience of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10.5. that is to say, subject to the dictamens of his faith and
Religion as a captive slave to the will of his master; And consequently as a
slave cannot control his master, so neither has man's reason any right or
power at all to chang or alter add or diminish from Gods revealed will; holy
scripture denounceing therefore anathema to such as should dare to do it against
their duty and allegiance.

All this being assuredly true, there can be no place in religion for new ways
of fresher wits, for innovations, reformations, clearings, clensings,
additions, subtractions and other such like mouldings and workings upon it, as
there is in arts and sciences and other such like effects of man's own
contrivance. In these man's understanding is the workman, trades fashions laws
languages and the like human inventions ar the matter on which the fansy and
understanding works; and the matter is naturally subject to the workman, the
clay to the potter, the building to the architect, as reason and scripture
teaches, Romans 9.21. But in religion man's understanding is the clay and the will
and word of God is the workman or potter to fashion and frame it to his
pleasur. Man's inventions as clay are subject unto man's understanding as the
potter, and again man's understanding as clay is subject to faith as the
artificer: and the same reason that makes human inventions receive alteration
from man, makes man's will to receive impressions from religion: So likewise on
the other side Religion is no more in the power of man, then is the artificer
in the hand of his clay, but has absolut and full dominion over him, and every
created intellect is fully in the power and captivity offaith.

To conclud, the word and will and works of God are absoluty superior to every
created thing, and not to be alterd or innovated by man, nor to receive either
diminution or increas from him: and consequently the religion he has reveald to
the sons of men of his own free love and bounty is to remain sacred and
untoucht by any creatur, how ever man may domineer over his own inventions to
perfect and mend them at his pleasur. What is invented and made by man may by
man be either betterd or made wors at his pleasur by what change he pleases:
But Gods works are altogether above his creaturs reach, and his will is unch
angable: He made all things perfect, and if he did not, who is he can add to
their perfection. Children begot by men do by man's help and direction increas
daily till they come to perfect age, but Adam created imediatly by God was in
all liklihood made at first in his full perfection and growth.

LA. I must Sr Harry cut of the thread of your discourse, that the Doctor who
has in civility forborne to interrupt you may have his time to speak.


VIC. And indeed that is fulfild in me that is written: I held my peace even
from good things, I was dumb with silence and my heart was hot wthin me whils I
stood musting, the fire burned then spoke I with my tongue, Ps. 39.


MIN. Well Sr Harry, this your discourse is all good and orthodox: but it maks
so much to my purpos against your self, that I could not my self have contrived
a mor convenient battery against popery. For if you consider right, it rather
confirms than destroys our reformations. Religion is wthout all doubt above man
and not subject to any vassalage of his fansy. But you say with all and that
truly, that what man does, man may undo: And there is the point. Now popery in the
pure and formal sens and acceptance of the word signifys only that fardell
of human additions superadded by the ignorance and superst^tion of men to the
pure and sincer religion which the Lord taught us, and is therefore a sacriledg
not to be suffered in the Christian world but to be taken away and severd from
the sincerity of divin truth like chaff from the corn, so that our question is
not, whether you may add unto faith, or we take from it; (with is added or taken
away being granted on both sides to be a part of faith, and yet put in or out
by our selves; for it is agreed upon by us both, that neither of these things may
be don without sacriledg) But whether it be lawful for us to reform, or take
away from the body of divin faith with you have impiously added thereunto of your
own and obtrud upon us as divin revelation being indeed but human superstition.
This is the thing which Luther and Calvin began to do, and by other particular
persons and parlaments is daily mor and more effected, not only wthout
sacriledg, but with much comendation of piety, so that our reformations ar
indeed diminishments, not of Gods religion but* of man's superstitions; we take
from the church not the stones or rafters, but the rubbish mire and filth which
is brought in by slovenly autiquity even burdensome to the purity of faith.
Reforming religion we touch nothing at all we meddl with nothing that is Gods,
but leaving all that untoucht we cast out the ordur of human traditions whereby
the fincerity of faith was defaced, and so we give to every one his own, that
which in Cesars to to Caesar, and that which is Gods to God: the legends of Damasus,
Gregory, Anaclet, and I know not who, these being the dreams of his doting
predecessors we cast forth to the Pope and popish to put up in their archivs,
the pure tabls of the law remaining in the ark of the Testament with uswch being
once happily purgd we purpos ever to conserv underfiled. If it be a cursed
thing to add unto the word of God as Papists have don, it is blessedness to tak it
away again.


VIC. I may say to thee sweet heart as David said to Abigail; Blessed be the
Lord which sent the this day, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou who
have kept me this day from shedding of blood. For in very deed except thou
had spoken this wise word (which shall suffice at this time) I had brought a
reason that had destroyed the Papists at a blow, even every one of them that
pisseth against the wall, 1 King 25.


KN. It Is the good Dr agreed on all sides, that nothing is to be added unto or
taken from the word of God and our divine faith first delivered. You say also
that your reformations tak away continually, some less some more, but only such
things as be of human invention, affirming this action not only lawful but
comendabl. This is the sum of your reply.


That the articles of Christian religion rejected by the reformation, and by
you called Popery be no human additions I should easily make it appear, if I
should run over the whole body of them, and show from point to point that each
parcel and particl thereof is equally ancient and divine; which would soon be
evinced if the authority of those Scripturs you pretend to admit, the joint
acknowledgment and practis of all times, and testimony of all antiquity, both
counsels, fathers and doctors, and several other monuments left in the
Christian world (which be greater than any we have to evince that William the
Conqueror once raignd here in England) may sufficiently prove them to be such.
But this course I intend not to enter upon, at least at this time, because we are
but yet in generals; and besides this work is already done to my hands, so
magisterially solidly and copiously by many renowned writers especially in the
Latin tongue that it were superfluous to insist thereon, had I either time or
place or will to do it. If you will not beleev them, I have little hopes to
prevail over so prodigious and obstinacy, which after such ample satisfaction
given will say still that Catholic REligion so much as loos men listed (...)
superstition and inventions of men.

I have morover one general ru^ (...) I reserv for another discourse, to
demo^^^re that that Catholic faith you call popery ^s truly divine. For if you
do but read your own antiquities or the records of any other Christian kingdom
you shall find that the conversion of our own and all other nations from
idolatry and paganism was effected by that Catholic faith which at one and the
same time brought into the land both the news of Christ to the ear and the
sight of the Crucifix to the eye, both the necessity of faith and the merit of
works; both God in the fullness of time incarnat in the blessed virgin, and
incorporat really in the Eucharist; both feast days and lents: both the popes
supremacy, and Priests power; the news of purgatory as well as hell or heaven;
both contrition and penance; both God and his blessed retinu of Saints and
Angels; both preaching and Sacrificing: shrins, altars, unctions, seven
Sacraments, vows, Pilgrimages, and all whatsoever things the Catholic now
believes or professes even to the least drop of holy water. And if that faith
that has the virtue and power to trample down idolatry, to chase away paganism
and triumph over all the power of darkness be not divine, if this good tidings
of truth benot the virtue of God and power of God, which is it? From this power
of converting nations the Prophets of old magnified the word and Gospel of the
Messiah; and S. Paul upon that account calls it the virtue and power of God; and
yet this efficacy is only proper and peculiar to the Catholic Religion and non
else. I shall only at this time give some general conjectures in a familiar
discourse whereby we may be moved to believe with is indeed most cerainly true,
that popery is no addition of man's, at least suspect that the report our
reformers give of it sounds like a slander; leaving solider and more particular
demonstrations for some other time.

LA. It will not displeas us to hear you speak; so that after all is done you
will follow our counsel.


KN. I shall not be obstinat. But give me leave dear Lady, fully to vent my
thoughts. For I conceive that a man is not capabl of better counsel, till he
has utterly discovered all whatever things detaind him afortime in his sormer
purpos, wthout any reservation at all. For even small relics of former
courses lurking in the mind undiscoverd, will still be egging him on to those
ways again after he has embraced better counsel and repine against the
advice he has taken as ruinous and prejudicial although it were in it self
very behoofesull and good. So that the mind runs a hasard of lasting disquiet
which enters upon a new course before the old be totally dislikt.


VIC. I out with is Sr Harry, our with it fully, for so it is written, Counsel
in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw
it out. Prove. 20.


MIN. Well Sr let not my argument be forgot, where by I prooud that popery was a
human art, and therefore in man's power to reform, nay it is comendable to cashere
falsities.


KN. You said indeed so, but prooud it not; not was it ever prooud yet by any,
tho it be in all men's mouths, nor ever will be, so long as the world lasts. The
misery is, Sr that men of your opinion, that is to say not catholic are all
very little verst in our catholic authors especially such as be scholasticall
subtle and voluminous, love and care I mean wife and children happily not
permitting such brain-consuming studies; so that when we come to discourse which
you, it is as equally hard to perswad you as the vulgar of the parish, being all
of you equally ignorant of the Churches ways and doctrine. And yet popery, a
thing indeed unknown to you, must be jeerd at, spoke against, preached against
and happily writ against too, by some pert Gentlman that has never so much as
heard a whole course of philosophy in his life (for a whole course either of
philosophy or divinity is a thing now a days altogether unknown in both our
universities) and that with so many impertinencies lies and slanders, such
vanity fraud and cosenage, such insulting babl wresting of Scriptur texts and
falsifying of authors, that my heart has even startld within me to behold this
shamles dealing.


You say that all your reformations are but the taking away from the purity of
Gospel the vain superstructurs of human superstitions, commonly called popery.
This you say because other reformers said so before you, taking it one from
another since Luthers time, and your child will say it from you, and so will
every bastard in the parish. Nor does it avail us any thing by all manner of
proofs to assert the divinity and truth of our doctrine.

Although you will not read or cannot happily understand those sublim orthodox
divins that would fully inform your judgment in this point, and convince you
of an error no less notorious than dangerous. Yet me thinks there be many
things obvious and familiar might render you wary and suspicious of danger in
this your asserion, which concerns no les than your eternal salvation.

As first, that you never examend it; you know you did not, I appeal to your
own conscience. The Church has ever been in possession of this her doctrine,
and cannot possibly be dispossessed but by some evident demonstration, which I am
sure the power of man and angel can never effect: if you insist on any other
authority, as sacred scripturs or counsels, they are as sure hers, as any of
your proper goods is your own. Nor is there I am confident any one text, I say
not any one single text of Scriptur if it be taken together with the whole body,
scope and intention of the book whence it is drawn, that shall urg or proov any
thing for any Reformation against the Church, this I am able to maintain
against the wholl world. And yet you ar so far from considering or examining
any of these things, that you conclude upon bare hearsay or report wthout either
authority or demonstrative reason against the doctrine of the Church whereof she
has been time out of mind in possession: and all this slighnes is used in a
matter of the highest concernment in the world, as if the talk were only de
lana Caprina. Me thinks it should fright you to think, that if your assertion
should be falls as for aught you know it is, then are your certainly guilty of the
accursed sacriledg of diminishing from the word and will of God.

Again you know and do acknowledge that you have subtracted not only some part
but the most and greatest parts of that religion was found planted in the land
in Harry the eights days. Pray tell me, that whole mass or body of practical
doctrine that is now cut off in this year 1655, was it known in King Charles,
James, or Queen Elisabeths days to have been all of it popish additions? To
this I am sure peopl of several reformations will give several answers.
Independency the last and purest reformation will affirm it, but Protestancie
the first and oldest apostasy will deny it; nor will the Protestant endure that
his children should judge him as he condemnd his mother Church, or reform his
fallibility as he rebeld against the infallibility of his parent. And yet the
Independent proceeds consequently to those very principles which the protestant
laid for his own revolt; namely the fallibility of men, the solesufficiency of
scripturs, and the Spirit of God therein assisting his elect to the discovery of
truth: Nor can the Independent be blamed for any thing, but for striking these
principls further hom than the amphibian protestant did. This I am fully
assured of, that the Protestant is not abl to bring any one argument for
himself against the Independent but what he borrows from the Catholic church,
and which being admitted and pressed home will destroy all his own protestancy,
that is to say all thoss negative whereby he differs from the Catholic, and which
he has striven these hundred years to defend; and therefore it behovs him to
take heed with he does: for the Independent is quick and resolut and as well
verst in his principles as himself, and able I am sure with the Protestants own
grounds to convince him neither to be fish nor flesh nor yet good red herring
as the proverb speaks, neither sound Catholic nor pure reformd.

The Catholic doctrine is all fixed and permanent, and therefore every reformation
can find what to deny of it, but they can never all agree together with and how
much thereof to affirm; the latter still denying more of the Catholic faith
than the former had don alltho it proceed upon the same principles with it. The
Church will easily make good all her affirmativs against you all, so soon as
you shall agree al together how much you will deny. But so long as you jar one
amongst another and speak contraries, it is not possible to stop all your
mouths at once. In a word all the changes made by the Independent are either
legal just and religious, or else protestancy it self is an unjust, illegal
and impious apostasy: for if all men be obnoxious to error, and the Scriptur
sole judge and guide of faith; by with right can the Protestant oblige men to her
tenets further than they approov of them by the test of Scriptur which they have
in in their own hands: if those principles be falls with with justice did the
Protestant himself revolt from the Catholic upon those sole grounds? Nay the
Independent is far more honest and excusabl than the protestant, for he prefers
his judgment only before a Church that professed her self to be fallible; but
the protestant rebeld against an infallible guide and one that professed her self
such. And although the Catholic Church were not infallible, yet professing her self
infallible she has that cause of blaming the revolting protestant, which the
protestant can never have against the Independent: for an infallible Church may
well expect an universal subjection; whereas the protestant professing herself
fallible cannot in modesty either oblige peopl to her cannons, or dislik their
freedom of judgment however dissenting from her own. And so she must needs have
the Presbyterian excusd; and the Presbyterian he cannot do otherwise than
comend the Independent, as the nimbler work man. For since both of them went
about to mend the Protestant reformation, and correct the dictats of that
fallible mistres, the Independent did his work more speedily and fully than the
other, and so indeed may be maliced by him as the better workman but never
blamed. Finally, if this last reformation of Independency be indeed an
abolishing of all relics of popery hanging upon the Protestant and not
clearly casheerd by the Presbyterian; then does the Catholic and Independent
stand like extrems, having the intermediat reformations of Protestancy and
Presbytery and the like between then two, as white and black be the two extrems
of colors, between which are red blew green and the like borrowing their
existency from the nature of both in a several mixtur: And all other
reformations interjacent are diversified in themselves according as they do mor
or les partake of the Catholic positivs, and Independents negativs. These two
claim an absolute liberty of conscience in their own territories, the Catholic
a freedom of the Churches judgment, the Independent of his own particular. And
either all is true that the Catholic affirms, or all the independent denis.

MIN. I mean not to interpose my self in the business of reformations, let them
be as they will; but do maintain only in the general that reformation of
popery is good and lawful, and not executed without the special commission
instinct and Spirit of Christ.


VIC. So it is written, Without me ye can do nothing, Jo. 15.


KN. And I likewis do only in general wish you to consider yet two or three
things: whereby you may suspect this business not to be of God, and consequently
the whole work of reformation unlawful.


These special commissions do ever bring with them some peculiar seals and
letters patents such as heaven uses to send to mankind: as be signs, wondrous
operations and miracles, wthout which man cannot in reason desert his station.
Reformers had none of these to show. But I will not insist hereon (although it be a
worthy and weighty consideration) because it is copiously don by others. I say then

First it would seem strange to a reasonabl man and a thing of much suspicion,
that all reformations are but negativ abolitions of the ancient Catholic
religion without any positiv institution at all. It Is an odd kind of dressing a
garden still to be grubbing up trees, and never plant any in the place; nor is
it likly God should send workmen into his vineyard only to destroy and pull up.

Again reformers do all of them equally pretend to be sent from God with an
extraordinary commission to enlighten the world. And yet they all hitherto did
their work to the halfs, keeping still as much popery as they cast away. Gods
extraordinary messengers use not to do their work imperfectly, or remain
themselves in that error they were sent on purpos to correct Martin Luther that
extraordinary light of the world did if we may believe the succeeding
reformations both live and die in as much popery as himself abolished. If popery
be so damnable, as both Luther and other reformers cry out and say it is, I
should think that half a score swinging articles of popery are enough to sink a
man: and so much Luther must keep still if we beleev the following reformation,
and this detaind no les if we may credit the third. The purity of these times
found so much popishnes still hanging on Protestants skirts, that they thought
it worth the hazard of their lives to brush it off. And some think that even
these purest are not themselves absolutely free from it; and surely never will
be, so long as the Bible which is the Popes book and sent immediately from him
into this island, is yet in their hands.

Ar all these reformers sent from God? why then did non of them do their work
to the full, till at the end of a full age the Independent stepped in to
accomplish it, if yet he has himself don the deed to the utmost.

Why should I think ill only of the Catholic whom Luther raild against, and
not as well hate Luther whom Calvin condemnd; or judge Calvin whom the
Protestant church of England censurd in many things and forsook; or detest also
the Protestant Church which the purity of these times have destroyed. Since we be
all so much severd from one another, whence is it that we all conspire to hate,
condemn and rail against the Catholic Church, having as much cause to inveigh
against one another and let her alone, as to rail against her alone and applaud
one another. This is a shrewd sign we are all rebels to that one Church and have
no truth amongst our selves. For one truth is opposite to twenty falsehoods and
these falsehoods however they be contrary to one another, that one primary truth
still stands against them all. Catilin and Cethegus and the other conspiratours
against Rome their mother City could fall out one amongst another, tho they
jointly resisted her, and she as indifferently confronted them all.

Besides, these reformers must needs be liars all of them if we may believe any
of them. For as they did most vehemently inveigh against that part of popery
which themselves rejected; so did they tooth and nail defend the purity of that
portion they still retaind, which by the succeeding reformers was deeply censurd
and condemnd: And so from the very first to the last, they still condemned one
another for with they retaind, as the Church of God condemnd them all for with they
rejected. Who shall unfold this riddle or tell me in which reformation the truth
lies? Surely in non of them, if by the mouth of two witnesses a truth may be
established: for there is ever the Catholic Church and one reformation against
the judgment of any other reformation; and every sect has still the Church
against her for one, and some other sect if not all other reformations besides.

Ar all these men sent from God for one and the same thing, and yet all fail in
doing it, and al condemnd by one another in the deed? Still with any one of them
casts away is popery, and what he keeps is the sincere word and will of God,
tho not only the Church that censurs them all together but even all other
reformations say the contrary.

So that if we put all judgments together there will result thus much? That the
Catholic on the one side, and all sectaries of several opinions on the other,
they be all Papists; and differ but secundum magis and minus: So that the Roman
is a Catholic Papist, and all the rest be heretic Papists, but Papists all.
For every sect is condemnd by his fellows of some popery, and the Church as
the source of all. And indeed all sects do retain some thing more or les of that
religion and faith which our land received at first from the pape, and wtsoever
positive doctrine they still keep they had it onginally from him. At least they
keep all of them the Bible either whole or in part, which is the great book of the
pope which he ever sends with his missioners (since he orderd and canonised it) to
any nations conversion, as conformable to the great rule of Christian faith which
is tradition. And consequently if the Papist be a child of Antichrist, all
sectaries are no other, so far as they be Christian or have any thing of
Christianity amongst them: only with this difference, that the mark of the
beast, if he be a beast, is less in some than it is in others; but it is in the
for heads of all so many as be baptized and believe in Christ, by his means and
missioners, and by the Sacraments and precepts they had originally from him.

VIC. The Lord shield us from the fiend of darkness! the pope upon my
forehead! the Bible the popes! and all we Papishes! confute him husband some
way or other if this be true, heel not fear texts at all.


LA. S. Harry you have brought things about very strangly. Can you think ever
to persuade us that we have any thing of popery in us?


KN. Assuredly you have so much as is not yet clipped of by reformation, be it
more or les: And this discourse I have fallen upon insensibly, to mitigat the
strange rancour against Catholic religion which people conceiv by contagion of
custom, and not any true knowledge they have thereof; and the pleasing opinion
each one fosters of the reformation himself is part of.


Take the four general opinions that be now in England; the Catholic, the
Protestant, Presbyterian and independent: Consid er seriously and you shall
find that as they be antecedent in time, so still the succeeding is but a
deficiencie from the foregoer, and the last the greatest negation of the
positions laid by the first; yet still what he holds positively he has it from
him; and the first which is the Catholic had all his whole positive faith from
the Pope, as himself professes and our own histories witness; part whereof was
cut of by the Protestant, as the Presbyterian after him took away some things
which the Protestant still retaind, and the Independent others which the
Presbyterian kept.

He is very ignorant in history that discerns not by his reading, how the
Catholic now existent in England retains universally all the points of faith
which were brought hither into England at its conversion from paganism by S.
Austin and other good children of blessed S. Bennet sent hither to that purpose
by Pope Gregory eleaven hundred years ago; concerning priests, altars,
sacrifices, the real presence, merit of good works, consecrations, pennances,
purgatory, lents, pilgrimages, popes supremacy and the rest to the least iota
of with they then received. Nor has he any parcel of faith either over or under
with he received then, so that the Catholic is a papist in print, and a legitimat
child of that venerable pastor.

A thousand years after the Saxes or English-mens conversion, and the unanimous
profession of the Catholic faith all that while, in an unluky howt rises Luther
who having been himself born and and bred up in the bosom of the Church
through the instigation of Satan and his two instruments pride and lust
apostatised from the Church and made a reformation as he called it, whereunto
the worst of people at first adhered, although now both wise and honest minded
people go along with it, not so much by their own choice as unfortunate custom.
This protestancy took away at once almost three parts of the Churches
practical doctrine, retaining the speculative. Within the compass of ten
years, it had run into several divisions or subreformations in Germany,
Holland, Switzerland and Geneva. Upon Harry the eights schism and afterward
these people of several Reformations came flocking over into England, by whose
several directions to pleas all parties was made up that miscellan of the
English protestancy, by rejection of several points of the Catholic faith then
in our land, some according to Luther, others according to Calvin, Swinglius
and the rest, together with an establishment of an apish prelacy in stead of the
Catholic one (which had been overthrown) for the security of the state and of
the fond Church they had then set up; the other few remainds of our Catholic
faith now wholly dismembered, yet standing as the base of this humane
superstructur.

Under this Protestant prelacy differing from all other reformations in the
world bred the Puritan who was so chekt and kept under all the reign of K.
James, that when he came to be teemd forth, by strength of nature and multitud
of seed he was born double and came two forth together, the younger brother
supplanting the elder and thrusting himself into his place even in that instant
that the elder had eat himself a passage through his Protestant mothers
bowels. This was the Presbyterian and Jndependent both rejecting something of
that had been conveyed to them by the Protestant, but the Independent more than
the other. But what either of them kept he received it by the Protestant, as
the Protestant had done from the Catholic the sole universal Professor of the
whole Christian faith.

Now then the whole body of Christian faith and doctrine kept by the Catholic, as
it was wholly receivd at first from the pope the general father of the
Christian church, so must it needs be all indifferently Papisticall upon that
account, and not that part only which a Reformer dislikes and calls so; and
consequently every parcel thereof retaind by any Reformer is as properly
Papisticall as with he rejects, and although he calls it not so, yet it is so styled by
another Reformer who likes not to retain it as he does; and for no other reason
but because as it issued, so is it maintaind and practiced by the popish
Church; which reason holds good as well in him that likes it as him thy likes it
not.

By this rule it will follow irrefragably that all the four professors be
papists, as also be all others who profess Christianity upon the face of the
whole earth, either in whole or part, as well those that keep their whole faith
entire and respect the Pape, as they that retain only some part and defy him:
for ingratitud and pride can exempt no man from the denominatio^ so long as he
still believes or practices any part of that Christianity has been handed to
him from the Pope and Popish Church, as all men in England I am sure do; and to
avoid all further cavil it is solely of them I now speak.

If four or five generations of men arising from one stock should be all of
them shorter by the head one than another, the first generation completely
resembling the father, the second les by the head than he, and the third yet
less by the head than the former his imediate progenitour, so to the last in
like manner. It would be ridiculous for the last descendents because they want
much of the person and statur of the first original or stock, to deny that
they have therefore any thing of him or from him, and speaking against those
several inches they have not, at the same time to magnify the few inches which
they have and blaspheme him from whence they have received them. And yet this
is directly the case of all reformers and reformations, to boast of the
Christianity they keep and villify that part they reject, as superstitious and
popish; whereas both with they reject and with they keep did descend equally and
indifferently from the Popish or Catholic Church. And if our English sectaries
should render up to the Pope and Popish Church all they have had from her, I do
not know any one positiv point of Christianity, speculativ or practical they
should have remaining except that harmonious song of mellifluous Robin red
breast Preserv us Lord.

Thus much may suffice to show that all England be Papists, some Catholic
Papists other heretic Papists, but Papists all. Since every part of Christian
faith brought altogether in one entire body of doctrine by a messenger of Pope
Gregory to the English at our conversion from paganism was equally
papisticall, equally received in the Catholic church, and with the like
indifferency communicated to our land from her Head and Pastor. And the having
of it more or less maks some less papists than others, but not no papists Even
as in music if a sem breef be a full time, a minnom tho it be but half so much
is a notion of time, so is likwis a crotchet tho it be but half a minnom, and a
quaver which is but half a crotchet: so that a minnom is half a sem breef, a
crochet the fourth part, and a quaver tho it be but the eight part, yet a part
it is and nothing else. Even so be these four several religions in England every
one of them either complet popery or part of it, the Catholic as it were a
seem breef, the protestant a minnom, the Presbyterian a a crochet and the
Independent a quaver, And truly to keep one piece of popery and reject others
deliverd by the same hands, and upon the very selfsame grounds, seems to me
neither a safe course nor yet a reasonabl proceeding. For the whole stream of
Christian doctrine was deliverd unto us as issuing indifferently from a divin
original; and if this report be true, no man may tampar or meddl at all in
that sacred issue of divin will, as I have already shown: if falls, it is all
equally to be rejected, and paganism or atheism to succeed in its place.

But our reformers will have that to be popery or human which any of them rejects
wthout ever rendering a reason thereof, to satisfy any moderat and indifferent
man; since what ever they say against any one thing may be as well applied to
any other. Nor is religion like philosophy to be held by the propability it
carrys in our understanding, for then it were not faith but reason, nor should
our understandings be otherwis captivated to divin revelations that to human
positions, or subjected to God more than to man. And yet again, if probability
should carry it, a wise judicious man that is unprejudiced in his judgment
shall I am comfident find more difficulty to beleev the very history of the
Bible than any articl of the Catholic religion rejected by reformers; and as
much reason to keep all articles as any.

But since reformers will have that popery which any of them rejects, and that he
retains pure Gospel; I for my part grant both. But then I make no difference
at all betwixt popery and pure Gospel: nay the Gospel is so far pure as it is
conformable to popery and the traditionall doctrine of the Catholic church, which
is the rule and square of all preachings, Writings, Letters, Sermons, Epistls,
Gospel andall.

And therefore that any reformation in religion is a purification of the Gospel
from popery taken in your sens, that is to say from human inventions
superstitions and errors, this I must flatly deny; or that the popery men
exclaim against is any such thing. And as I can never my self be persuaded to
the contrary, so me thinks I should persuade even you my dear Lady and you also
Mr Parson with your witty bedfellow to be of my mind.

VIC. Who I? God forbid Let them cleav unto Baal that list, I and my people
will follow the Lord, as it is written in Scriptur. For I will never beleev but
this scriptur came from God and not from the Pope as you talk Sr Harry, from
heaven and not from Rome.


LA. By your favor sweet Mistres, I have heard say that S. Marks Gospel was
writ-ten in Rome, first and originally in Latin, I find also in my Bible that
some of Paul's Epistls were written and dated from Rome, as those he wrote to
the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, the second to Timothy, that
to Philemon and happily that to the Hebrews which was dated from Italy. And the
Epistle which was written on purpose to the Romans, was assuredly carried to
Rome before it was brought hither, and must come thence to us. So that if they
did come from heaven, it seems Rome is either heaven it self or in the way
twixt us and heaven, for they were there first either brought thither or
written there; and thence came over into England and other countries.


But to turn to you Sr. Harry, me thinks you ar now too confident, and seem to
put on a refolution too much opposite to the hopes I have of you, and
consequently to the hopes you may have of me, for I cannot love an infidel as a
friend much les as a husband.

VIC. So indeed Madam it is written. Be not unequally yoakt with unbeleevers:
for we fellowship has righteousness with unrighteous nes, or with communion has
light with darkness.


KN. I begd the favor Madam to utter my mind freely, and I think you granted
it. For it is with an il affected mind as with a diseased body; neither can be made
whole till they they have purgd themselves of their ill humors.


MIN. I am ready Sr to prove from point to point, that al we have in our
reformation rejected is the pure inventions of men, whereof the principal is
that tyrant of Rome that Babylonian Antichrist the Pope.


VIC. The whole Book of Revelations was made against that Beast. Let me but
read six or seven Chapters, and you will be affrighted I warrant you. Now he
rises out of the Sea, then tumbles out oath clouds, then ascends from the deep
pit, on a fiery red Horse, or black horse, with seven horns or ten horns,
accompanied with armed locusts death and dragons.


KN. We will not descend unto particulars as yet. Giv me leav now only to tell
you in general, that those rejected parcells of our ancient Catholic faith
cannot in any probability be thought human inventions.

For the Roman Catholic church whence all our religion issued, does own them
indifferently with the rest for integrall parts of the Christianity she at first
deliverd. And reformers never yet agreed together with or how many of those
parcells were human and upon that account to be rejected. And yet if they had
had any certain knowledge either from God or man, either by history or grounded
reason, they would not with so much disagreement amongst one another have by
degrees cast off some one part some another of that religion they receivd at
first altogether upon one and the sam motiv of the Revealers infallibility.
This disagreement of reformers as it cannot but bring themselves if they would
but open their eyes into some suspision of uncertainty; so to me unto whom
uncertain grounds of faith are no grounds at all, they are a sufficient
conviction of error and fraud.


Again, these presented popish superstitions and human inventions rejected even
by Protestancy were both very many and verry weighty, at about the real
presence, apostolical traditions, the papes supremacy merit of good works,
sacrifice of mass, sacramental absolution, use of images, invocation of
Saints, seven sacraments, vows, shrines, priesthood and the like, even in a
manner the whole body of practical religion. These if they be additions of man
must either be ignorantly taken up by the people, or imposed upon them by their
prelates. As for the peopl, if nothing at the beginning had ere been taught them
but only to beleev in Christ, it is not possible morally speaking that such
things as these should ever com into their heads: but it is altogether and
absolutely impossible that they should be taken up universally by all people of
the earth together, and that not by parcells as now they are cast away; but the
whole body of them together with such unity and consent as has been ever found
in all Christian kingdoms of the world, none of the peopl in any kingdom gain
saying their fellows, nor Prelates resisting.

If you say, the Prelates imposed them: This must be don either by violence or
fraud, either by strong hand or some insensibl introduction. Such main weighty
tangible points as these which were to be brought not only into peopls heads but
hands, and daily and hourly to be practisd, can never be thought by any sensibl
man to have been insensibly introduced or insensibly receivd or insensibly
liked of, with so much prejudice of carnal eas and sensuality; I say with so
much prejudice of sensuality as fastings, watchings, almsdeeds, justiciary
satisfaction, vows of poverty obedience and chastity, pennances, cloisturs and
religious monasteries must needs bring upon the world.

For the same reason violence offered to the people whether at the same time or
several ages in such businesses of main importance, of great weight, and of
much servitud could never pass so smoothly or be so tamly admitted by all
Christian kingdoms, whereof some be at deadly feud, opposition and war with one
another, others of a nature more refractory and not so carfull to keep with they
have once receivd, some sooner some later converted, so that no nois should be
made thereof, no course taken to resist it, no dislike of the doctrine, no
difformity of belief.

He can never believe this who knows either the nature of the world, or the
disposition of the Catholic Church. The world is naturally tumultuous,
impatient of new yokes, apt to insurrections, slow to admit a restraint, and no
les prone to omit neglect and reject with is servilely imposd upon them,
especially if it be don wthout just authority and contrary to peopls
inclinations.

The Catholic Church on the other side he that knows her and has beheld her
proceedings from age to age, may easily discern how ticklish and scrupulous she
is, how she startls at the very news of the least innovation or new fangldnes
in any of her peopl, which if it do increas how small so ever the matter may be
in it self, the Catholic body rises up against it and will not rest till by a
council it be condemnd. This is the motiv of calling so many counsels as have
been since Christianity first began, and of the severity there used even in some
things a man would hardly deem considerable. It would even delight a man
reading the history of the church in learned Baronius and others, to see the
Churches industry and watchfulnes on all occasions to prevent new fangldnes:
the labor and diligence of her counsels; their faithfulness study and
exactness in examining, discussing, refuting upstart opinions; their
uprightnes and wisdom in defining and confirming the ancient Catholic doctrine
against all innovations according to that general oracle of all Synods Nihil
innovandum, veterum traditionibus standum; and lastly the severe penaltys
inflicted by the church upon the authors of innovation if they did not humbly
recant their error, so that all things considered aright, it is as impossible
for human innovations to incorporate with the body of anicent Catholic faith as
for wood or stone to concorporate with the flesh of an animal.

You would M^. Dr. save me the labor of persuading this truth any further, if
you would pleas to call to mind, how several Reformers have taunted at the
scrupulosity of papists in this kind, yea and inveighed too against their
severity; telling us that popish councels are so scrupulously severe that they
question, meddle with and censur things that are of little or no concernment at
all in Religion and oftims pure Philosophy; that they condemn good books
written by their own people and those men of sincerity and conscience one can
hardly tell why or wherefore; that they so enslave excellent wits that they
cannot invent or utter any thing that may relish never so little of novelty;
that they judge the faithful and cast them out of the church even for small
supposed deviations; that they set up inquisitions to prevent and suppress
liberty of conscience even with un-Christian cruelty. And they tell us several
storys of the Catholic churches scrupulosity in this kind: of Heliodor put out
of his byshoprick for writing his fained Romance; of Virgilius displaced in
like sort for teaching that there were Antipodes, an opinion in those days new
and unheard of; of a Printer that together with the loss of his place sufferd a
heavy mulct for altering one letter which had been falsely transcribed in that
parable of the woman that lost a drachme and swept her house, and evertit
domum; the Printer for evertit made it everrit as it ought to be, and forfeited
say they his office for his pains.

It is possible that so much curiosity, so much scrupulosity and tenderness
should so tamely admit of an insupportable weight of popery wthout any
disturbance at all, nay with the liking and universal consent of all men. God
Catholics are as tender of their faith as of the apple of their eye; so that
if a friend or kinsman should once take up any noveltys therein, we are
scandalized at it, rise up against him and cannot but show our aversion and
dislike even where nature and custom had united us. Nor can any one of our
countrymen broch an heresy, but all sound Catholics will hate him for it and
rise up against him: forreiners if it ever com to their ears will detest him
much more; how ever he may draw some disciples after him, such light capritious
people as will be led away with every wind of doctrine: and some such there have
ever been who forgetful of God and their own safty will leav the rock of the
church whereupon they are built to follow the new fangldnes of a proud instable
mind; the whole Catholic body still resisting and condemning the insolence.
This is a quality as evident in good catholics as that a man has a nose in his
face, nor needs it proof.

How then can it be thought that whole Kingdoms and several nations should
submit to the judgment of one proud deviatour, be he never so witty ov
eloquent; as for example all the Prelates of Spain, Italy, Germany, France, East
and West-Judys, Asia, in a word all over the world, to one haughty self
conceited English Priest deviating from the ancient received faith of his ances
tours, wthout any resistance dislike or noise. It is not a thing by a
reasonable man so much as to be imagind. Nor has a prelate in one country any
more power over the prelates of another than wit and eloquence can afford him,
which reason and experience shows can never suffice for the bringing of all
mankind into captivity to it self wthout resistance and clamor. The chief
Priest is the fittest to offer this kind of violence: and yet how little he is
able to prevail in an opinion contrary to the Churches universal tradition
appears sufficiently in the fact of pope John the twenty second, who
propounding to the consideration of some Christian universities the negativ of
the souls fineal beatitud till the general judgment, effected no more but a
commotion of the Christian world against himself. And the thing is remembered
and spoke of to this day. Wherefore neither covin nor violence can be of any
avail to the introducing of innovations by any person wtsoever contrary to the
churches custon and tradition.

Deal sincerly with me, and take any one point of those many which English
Catheliks hold at this day, mass, pilgrimages, vows, penance, absolution,
real presence or with you will; and tell me in which of the Kings days between
William the conqueror and Harry the eight it was first taken up here or
brought into the land: look still further and see your self if the same was not
beleevd and practisd by the Saxons even from their first conversion until K.
William the conquerours days: go forward and you shall find that the religion
the Saxons receivd from Pope Gregory did both in that point and all others
agree with with the Brittons had receivd two or three hundred years before: This I
am sure you shall find if you be not wanting to your self. How then can you ever
hope to persuade me that all or any of these be innovations, whereof you can
tell me neither the motiv, nor the occasion, nor the time they were introduced,
nor the person by whom nor any event that followed thereon. It Is an argument of
desperate wretchedness to cast away all practical religion upon no other account
than the bare affirmation that it is popish superstition and popish inventions.

No Sr the inventions of men in matters of religion cannot be so universal in
men and Kingdoms of differing humors and at enmity oftimes with one another:
they cannot be so imutable in so many alterations of states and governments as
are and have been in the world: they cannot be so permanent, being both human
and unlawful; for as divinity and essential truth are therefore eternal and
unchangable because such; so humanity and falsehood must needs decay and moulder
away; contrariorum contraria est ratio. It was a golden observation that of
Gamaliel a great doctor of law among the Jews. If this counsel be of men it
will come to naught, if of God ye cannot frustrat it, Act. 5. You see by the
alterations that happen in human inventions, that it is much for men's conceits or
fancies to stand unch angd for one age or two: and all Reformations are by
their continual vicissitudes convinced to be human counsels and works of men:
whereas each parcel of the Catholic faith even those you call popish additions
have apparently stood permanent for eleaven hundred years together, as all men
know or may know if they will but read their own history; and by this
imutability they are convinced to be rays of that unchangeable essence and
truth which is eternally the same.

But if we consider the promises of God to conserv his church in all truth, and
for that end to be ever with it even to the worlds consummation; and that it is
now granted on all hands that the church has not been visibly existent in all
times and places, but only in and by the Roman Catholic: then will it appear
altogether impossible that human inventions and falsitys should ever be able to
thrust in to that church or go for truths.

Nor is it les improbable that the immaculat spous of Christ, wise, spotles and
unblamable should by an adulterous mixturs of errors destroy her self. We see
that an ordinary secular state, be it Monarchy, aristocrasy or others will
never admit of rules that be quite opposite to those in which she was first
founded, wherwth she has been fed and strengthend, and by which she has triumphed
and flourisht. And if she do it, she destroys her self. Which although it may
happen to worldly states built upon human prudence for to do; yet I do no doubt
but that your selves and all men will grant me that the church of Christ was
first raised upon divine principles, and settled upon the wisdom of God unto
eternal permanence. And yet if she should admit of all these mixturs she would
cease to be spotles and unblamable, and consequently cease to be her self. In
all things much of ill corrupts the good; but Religion if it be not absolutely
sincere is not properly religion. For there is something of good even in
paganism and mahometisme, which no man calls religion but superstition: the
denomination following the greater and worser part.

Reading Mr Chillingworths book not long ago, I could not but smile in my self
to see that flourishing Hixius Doxius so to play dance and triumph as he does
quite through his book upon a supposall himself never prooved nor any yet for
him; namely that the Roman church had admitted errors in it self. We, says
he, saw and beheld to our grief that the Roman Church had tainted herself with
errors; we called upon her to reform, she would not do it in her whole body; we
therefore being part of that body provided for our own safty, we reformd our
selves, which was lawful necessary and just both before God and man. This
discourse in substance, for I have not the book now by me to set down just
punctually his words, is over and over repeated in his book, and is indeed one
of the chief ropes whereupon that fanatic funambulo dances. Such empty words
may beguil others, not me dear Lady, they prevail nothing with me Mr Parson,
they do not indeed nor ever will Ms Persona.

LA. Come Sr Harry I hope we shall have you in a better mind to morrow. We are
now called in to dinner. Let Us go.


MIN. Let us in Sr Harry, there is the fittest time and place in my mind to talk
of religion. I never found that dry discourses wrought any great effect.


VIC. Madam a word with you now they are gone in. I marvel your Lap. would talk
of to morrow, I never read of any one in my life that was converted to morrow.
Is it not written, to day if you will hear my voice? Ps. 95. Had you given me
occasion I would have done the deed to dav even my self alone.


LA. How.


VIC. I would have fallen a dropping of texts with him and kept him close to the
word of God. I am sure where he has one text for him I have a thousand, and
where he has ten, I have ten thousand, according as it is written, One of them
shall chase a thousand and ten of them put ten thousand unto flight, Deuteronomy. 32.
I like not human discourse, it is tedious to me: I have filled al my bible with dogs
ears for good Sr Harries sake, and could not come in handsomely to use any of
them all this while by reason of his redious oratory. Indeed I needed not to
have bent down any one leaf at al; opening my bible at random I should be sure
to meet with something against popery; every chapter every verse cries it down.
Open it Madam, and you shall find so much. Read. The Epistle of Paul the
Apostle to the Romans. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, Romans 1. Look you there.
The Epistle not a legend, of Paul not of Peter, the Apostle not the Pope, to
the Romans not to the Romish, papish or popish, he would never write to them I
warrant him. O the father! I Am even as full of scriptur as a new laid egg, as
they say. I could confute Sr Harry, before dinner com up yet as near as it is.


LA. Sr Harry is not here now.


VIC. Although he be not. Well Madam there coms not a dish to the table, but I Will
have a text for it, from the very first dish of porredg to the apples and chees.


LA. Well, well.


VIC. Madam I could wthout the help of scriptur have mentiond twenty
innovations that Papists have made in the world had I been encouraged to speak.


LA. What I prithee.


VIC. The sect of Quakers lately brought up here in England is I think an
innovation in religion. And this was instituted by two friars and two Iesuyts,
as Mr Prinne witnesses in a book of his lately set forth for that very purpos.
For thou Mr Prinne be said to be a man of an ill hearing, yet is that defect
recompensed by a fair length of language; his text is so orthodox that the
Ministers have preached upon it all England over, and illustrated it by pretty
similitudes; as of those nine and thirty papists that flew over out of Lincoln
shire into Norfolk amongst a flock of wild gees to pick up their corn, for which
crime their houses were ransackt; of seven other papishes that taught children
to speak with their elbowes: against which innovation of nature our Ministers
inveighed bitterly in their pulpets; of three more papists that walked in the
air all over the city of London passing from steeple to steeple at a step, and
pist fire as they went upon the top of houses; which our Ministers were stark mad
at, and preached violently against the^ out of the Revelations; saying that if
they were not rooted out of the land they would sindg al their caps and fire
their hayry scalps, as they stood in their pulpets. Many other pretty
remembrances they had, which have been recorded by Mr Pyn and Prinne, Mr John an
oaks and Will styles: whereat people beat their breasts, shaked their heads and
cried Out upon these wicked papishes, it is pity they are suffered to live.


LA. I beleev papists will not own these things.


VIC. They must own them whether they will or no: printing and preaching,
press and pulpet, Mr John an oaks and Mr Prinne cannot utter any thing but
truth. Innovations! papists do nothing else but make innovations; they cannot
eat or drink, or sleep but the must do it; and mischief is their very life.


LA. God mend all.


SECOND DIALOGUE.
LA. I have Sr Harry brought you here again your souls phesitian, to understand
the symptoms of your diseas, and apply an agreeable remedy thereunto.


KN. I shall Madam as well as I may both declar my sickness, and respectfully
receiv his remedy.


LA. Com doctor you look blithe upont to day, I take it for a good sign.


VIC. And I am glad for sooth to see my husband cherfull; for sadness as it is
written dries up the bones, Pro. 17.


MI. I bring you good news Sr Harry. The work of reformation we persuade you
unto is as easily effected, as it is to cast of a heavy cloack in a burning
midsommers day. All popish practices as I in order shall name them to you, do
but you in the same method reject them, and you shall in one half hour become a
Protestant, in three quarters a Presbyterian, in a whole hour an Independent,
and so be reformed at your leysur and with eas.


KN. You say not all this while, what shall guide me in this action.


MIN. The word of God that guides you Sr to the will of God.


KN. The means and end of his motion being coincident, a man may well hope for
an undisturbd tranquillity in the period.


MIN. With can disturb you Sr being built upon the rock of the bible, with more or
les hold thereon according to the nature of the reformation.


KN. Which reformation has the best hold.


MIN. Let them look to that, I Will not meddle with those disputes.


KN. I have both read and heard of the rock of the Church, but the rock of the
bible you are the first man I know ever used the phrase.


MIN. The Church and her doctrine be all one: the Churches doctrine and scriptur
is the same; and so the rock of the church and rock of the bible cannot be two
several things.


VIC. Well said sweet heart. This is now a little above me. But so it is
written, The husband is above his wife and she shall be under and subject to
him, Genesis 3.


MIN. The sum of all is; Betake your self to the pure scripture. And it is
enough.


KN. There is much talk of Scriptur, and all the sectaries have ever risen tho
never so many or never so opposite one to another have still pretended it; nay
the devil urged his temptation with a scriptum est, Matt. 4. so that I fear
the proposal of this either means or rest will prove but wast of time.


Give me leav to tell you, that the messenger of the Gospel of peace who by a
mission from pope Eleutherius converted the Brittons from paynisme to Christian
faith in the second age of the church, and the other from pope Gregorius who
reduced the Saxes or English in the fifth gave them all their religion as well
explicitly in all the articles of their Christian faith, as implicitly in the
bible they deliverd into their hands, wherein those articles by incidentall
occasion lay casually coucht. Now to take away all those explicit articles
dressed and prepared already to our hands, and give us the bible, is the same
thing as to take from men all the gold and silver already coined with so much
care and industry of princes, and show them a mine whence such things may be
digd, wthout affording either work men skillful in the art or instruments for
the purpos.

Imagine in such a case with disorder and confusion would happen, when thousands
of people are gatherd together about a mountain; none verst in digging or
fitted with instruments for it, none accustomed to the hollowes of deep earth,
none skild in finding out the vein, none expert in discerning the oar, or to
melt it into bullion or stamp it into coin. And yet all of them equally
conceyted as undertaking ignorance uses to be, and indifferently judging and
condemning the works of each other. It cannot otherwise happen in such a case,
but that some should tumble into precipices, some be somtherd in the earth
below, some after much toil bring forth a handful of clodded earth, lead or
iron oar, and perhaps a slat or peble in the stead of metal: and if happily
any one meet with the right, he will either not heed it as not appearing to be
such, or loose it in the allay, melting or stamp. In fine, where so much
curiosity and art is required in the manifold degrees of procedur, yet none had
by any and professed by all to the disparagement of one another, with can result
from such an attempt but disorder and nois, confusion and hazard, emulation and
quarrel amongst themselves. Nov can they ever effect any thing to the general
agreement and liking of all, or repair the coin that is destroyed.

This is in all points our very condition; when the Christian articles of faith
wrougt out and stamped for us, and deliverd us by our primitiv pastors
according as they had received them from Jesus Christ the prime Inventour and
Workman of our faith are principitously annuld, and the Bible put in men's
hands to dig out from thence by their own skill and industry the results of
their religion.

Nay the case here is so much the more desperate, in that the common people with
the tradition of the Bible receiv this caution from the reformers; that they
take heed of such and such abrogated articles of popery, which as they do ever
and anon appear in the Scripturs they have to peruse, so are they indeed the
very pith and marrow of that sacred Book, and the golden metal they are only
to seek for. So that being left unto their own shallow judgments if it were
then improbable they should ever light upon the whole sincere truth of good: now
being adviced and prejudiced against it, although they should happly light upon
it, it is impossible with that prejudice they should ever embrace and adhere unto
it.

That the articles of Catholic religion abrogated by reformers were all stamped
out for us by our primitiv Pastors and have gone current in the whole Christian
world from the beginning to this day, has been proved a hundred times over and
over by learned Catholic divines both for the general and in each particular.
And that it is an impious tyranny to take them all away and put people to seek
new out of the Bible, I think it will easily appear to an understanding man, if
he do but consider the way-wardnes of man's will prone to evil and averst to
good, such especially as is annexed to bitterness and pains, the fallacy of his
fansy and weakness of his understanding which we cannot but perceiv to fail even
in things that be in our very senses, and that both by deficiency and error,
both by want of apprehension and falsity of judgment: or if we consider on the
other side the obscurity of Scriptur, not in it self but in order to our weak,
obscure, sens-perverted intellect. Upon which two general Heads it coms to pas
that men so frequently deprave the Scriptures to their own perdition* as
Scriptur it self complains 2 Pet. 3.

But over and above all this, to put men to put men to seek for a thing with a
fore-imprinted prejudice of that they go to find, to seek for faith with a
prejudice against faith, is a tirannous cheat and abuse hardly to be paraleld.

If to people met together to try or search for silver and gold, one should
give such like instructions, Take all that comes to hand; it is all good howsoever
composed or mixed, two kinds only excepted; such parts of earth as have much of
friability and inconsistency in them, lay hold of them: if there be any body
composed of impure earth liquefied take that: if the earth, be not well
vanquished, and the parts much dissimilar, it is good. But if the matter be more
hardened by the egress of tenuity, uniformly compacted, white and lucid: take
heed of that, cast that away. If the parts be yet more pure and equal, hardend
and made yellow by the celestial spirit an intrinsecall inmate in the body which
is thereby made most flexible by virtue of the similar softnes of the parts, and
yet most ponderous of all metals by the uniform closnes thereof and the little
porosity by which the air may enter to confer a levity; This is stark naught. It
will not rust by the similar purity of the parts, nor loose its weight by
melting, through the equality thereof, none being thinner than other to exhale
by heat as it is in bodies unequally composed. And therefore cast it away, as a
thing useless, and of no valiew or profit at all.

With these instructions shall they ever find matter for gold and silver coin?
I trow not. Nor shall they ever be able to repair the loss of their current
coin which was conformable to the hidden treasure of that mine by searching in
a place where it lay hid, with so much ignorance as is naturally in
unexperienced men, so much disagreement of judgment as is in a multitude not
subordinate unto any one, such prejudicate opinions given them quite opposite
to the design they have in hand.

With such like prejudice do all our English people take the Bible in their
hands and read it: being adviced aforehand by their reformers and fully
believing that the Catholic mass is abomination, the real presence a chimera,
the merit of good works a dream, fasting and all mortification of sensual
desires a fardell of superstition, all endeavor of fulfilling Gods precepts a
vanity, and the imagination of any possibility thereof a delusion, the
indifferency of man's free will unto good or evil an error, the making of vows
to god folly, restitution or satisfaction of injuries done to our neighbor a
prejudicial mistake, all expiation of our sins either for our selves or others
an inexpiable crime, the honor of blessed saints idolatry, and the imitation
of their severe and holy lives childishnes, sacrifice altars and the whole
priesthood of Christ prophanenes, the conscionable practice of sobriety justice
and piety as necessary unto life eternal, detestable popery.

For Gods sake with good can accrue to the soul of man by reading of Scripture
with these prejudices, these diabolical anticipations, these antichristian
preconceptions, these obstructions to all grace and salvation.

And yet thus forewarnd and prepossest do all our reformed Christians read the
scriptures; no sound or solid fruit ariseing thence to their souls, but rather
hardness of heart, pride, schisms, fearlesnesse of Gods judgments, and where
good nature (the best religion I know in England) hinders not, desperatenes in
all sin and injustice.

Nor can any forreiner brought hither out of Catholic countries ever discern
either by our Churches houses or practice of peopl, that we have amongst us any
knowledge at all of Gospel, unles happily he hear the good man leading his wife
to bed over night with a text, and the hous-wife next morning cudgelling her
maid with another, the country boys whipping their tops with a saying of Paul,
and the girls with another of Peter playing at last couple in hell, the drawer
bringing his canary with a verse of John, and the tapster filling in his beer
with a text of Matthew. This he may see, and this is all he shall find for his
edification.

And this indeed is all the fruit of our common and familiar reading of
scripture, when it is don with a prejudice against solid religion sincere
worship and Catholic piety: aerie shadows, empty sounds, prophanenes and
blasphemy. And therefore it was a heavenly caution and worthy of all
consideration that which we received by a voice from heaven (...). Act. 10. the
things which God has sanctified do not thou make common.

When therefore Mr Dr you advice me to apply my self wholly to scripture. You
either mean I should do this having a forehand renounced and precipitously cast
away all the positive articles of belief I have received from my forefathers
explicitly declared and formed for me by the primitive Pastors and Teachers
of my religion; and then go seek for the results of faith in the Bible, where
they be implicitly hidden conceald and coucht incidentally, wthout any method
or intended order of any such conclusions, under several parables, histories,
allegories, letters, canticles, psalms, prophesies, and the like. And then I
should run my self into that inconvenience I have upon good reason disallowed:
As to cast away all my gold and silver-coin that being stamped in primitive
times by the first master of faith has gone current in all ages, and go seek,
into the mine for new, with so much hazard trouble and danger, as I cannot but
see to be in such a work, whether I consider the weakness of mine own
understanding and my perverse inclinations which I my self must needs be apt to
favor in mine own cause; or the doubtfulnes labyrinthes and obscurity of that
hidden mine; or finally the ill success that all people have had in such a
search as their personable wretchlessenesse and dissoluteness, their disorder
and disagreement one amongst another may sufficiently witness.

Or else you mean I should apply my self to scripture with all my Catholic
positions in my head, which I conceive to be the very marrow and pith of that
scripture you advice me to peruse. And then I shall by reading of scripture
advance nothing at all either from my own way or toward yours whatever it be.
For finding my own positions to appear in scripture at every turn, I shall
still embrace and close with them as with matter that is genuin and connaturall
to my self, and by their light be enabled to understand and interpret all the
rest of scriptur I shall meet wthall.

Which way soever you put me to it, the rock of the bible will either keep me
still from you or split me with you.

LA. With shall we do with you Sr Harry since you decline scripture which as it is
the purest so it is the easiest way for your conversion.


VIC. Shall I tell you? he will even go out of his way as Balam and his ass did.
I Will show you the story as it is written in 22 chapter of numbers, it is a very
pretty one. There you will see how the ass confuted his rider, and said unto him
Am not I thine ass; so prettily. Read here from the 22 verse to the 36. If you
go not in the right way Sr Harry as we would have you, be sure you shall be
checked by a very ass. When any such thing happens you may take it for a
certain sign that you ar out of your way.


KN. Scriptur is a good instrument to drawn men from paganism to Christianity,
but no fit means to divert us from Catholic Religion to heresy. That heavenly
seed which makes sons of God can never make children of perdition except it self
be mischievously corrupted. And therefore I decline it not at all, but admit,
allow and embrace it, as containeing that irrefragable doctrine which eminent
persons in the church of God penned, which industrious and religious persons in
the same Catholic church coppied and transcribed with their own hands above a
thousand years together before printing was invented, to keep that sacred
letter alive; and lastly which by the Catholic body of the said Church has been
authenticated and canonised: and therefore it must needs be pure and holy being
mad^, conserud and ratified by holy Church. But its facility and easiness that
I do not so easily conceive or agree unto; especially if you separate it from
the Church whose book it is: The mind and meaning of any writing no man can
understand so well as the Author, no man can interpret aright contrary to the
Author, no man where it is obscure and uncouth may peremptorily interpret
wthout the Author.


MIN. You will soon grant it to be easy if you consider that it is called a light
to the understanding. With thing is there more apparent than light? And therefore
it is said in the Ephesians: if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.


VIC. Sweet heart you are mistaken, that sayeing is not in the Ephesians but
Corinthians, 2. Ep. and the 4. c.


LA. It Is no matter Mr person so we find out your riddle tho it be by plowing
with your heyfer according to the saying of Samson, Iud. 14.


VIC. I told you even now Madam that the ass will rebuk his rider when he goes
astray.


KN. A light if it be set behind us, or under a bushel, or to an eye ill
affected inlightens not, and a prejudiced mind is a veyld understanding where
light cannot enter. I must say more, he that goes out of the Church puts out
his own eyes, and he that never enterd in, never had any but gropes in darkness.
Light is come into the world says our Lord, but men love darkness more than
light, Jo. 1. namely, because they shut their eyes against it; and no marvel
that unto such the Gospel should be hid. Catholics all of them have indeed
the whole Gospel by heart, and comprehendit sufficiently for the life and
spirit of it; yet still the bark and letter of it has obscurity enough which is
opend and manifested as far as is needful and upon occasion by the lips of
priests which preserve knowledge. No man understands the mind of man but the
spirit that is in man, nor the meaning of scriptures can any comprehend but the
spirit of that Catholic body whose the scriptures be. For these be imediatly
the word and doctrine of the Church, and therefore called the Word of God,
because that Catholic body from whence it issued, is animated by the spirit of
Jesus Christ her natural head who is God blessed for ever, and the particular
penmen thereof being members of the said church were peculiarly illustrated by
that spirit unto such an effect. So then the word of God is a light and
enlightens good Catholics, it enlightens not others that remain blinded in
infidelity and separated from that holy mystical body of Christ: and yet it is a
light still, it is hid to them that are lost.


People that live in a family college or corporation, by the daily sight and
practis of things to be don therein do fully comprehend all that is to be said
or acted there. But others who be out of those societys shall never by bare
reading of books written of such emploiments, so long as themselves stay out,
attain to any satisfactory light thereof, but remain pusled in a wood of dark
words, and either mistake or not apprehend the reality and truth of things. So
our people wthin the Church see distinctly and clearly the truths of God, in
whose practis they are daily conversant; so that words and writtings are not
necessary unto such as be in a continual exercise of their trade; but
sectaries paymins and al infidels who be aliens and strangers to this Society
and out of the family; although they should look upon their book of statutes
scripturs or laws, yet will they still be pusling about words and never clearly
understand the secrets of the profession. One artist or tradesman knows more by
heart and practice, than the whole world besides that is out of that body or
not conversant in the society can ever attain unto by reading. A man may
demonstrat by Philosophical reason, that light it self enlightens not but by
reflection; no more do the word and scripturs except they reflect upon us from
the bosom of the Catholic body which actuats them in their operation.

If you would seriously ponder these few words, you should quickly perceive
unto whom the scriptures be obscure and unto whom they be easy; and how they
be easy to Catholics for the practice life and meaning of them, tho the letter
may still keep its obscurity: as children of a family may clearly understand
all the whole affairs and businesses of the house, tho if books should be
written thereof they might not so easily understand the letter of those books.
Yet these have great advantage in the understanding of such books abov those
who are not coversant in the affairs being aliens and strangers to the family.
For it is easier by the knowledge and perfect comprehension of things to
understand words that be written of them; than by reading of words to perceiv
things we are altogether unexperienced in.

But to speak abstractively of the letter of Scriptur wthout reference unto
persons: as if the case were that neither you nor I ever knew any thing of the
Christian religion but what we get out of the Bible or new Testament put now
into our hands. Could either of us or all of us together see clearly in this
letter the whole state of the Catholic Church? or without obscurity discern with
is to be said and done, with is to be thought and beleevd, with is to be hoped and
feared; with concerns God and his creaturs; with angels and men; with earth and
heaven; with our creation and redemption; with the beginning and end of things.
First where is the order and method to find out these things. You will find
that the story and doctrinall part goes hand in hand together, which is not the
ordinary way of teaching. If I peruse the story of Gospel by it self, I shall
scarcely find it answerable to my expectation whiles I find mention only of
one howr of Christ's birth and not a word more for twelv years together, and
then but one single action of his appearing in the public Schools, and not a
word again of his whole life till almost twenty years after, and then only
some works he did in public for the space of about three years, and so his
death: which is far less than I should expect or desire to know. And the doctrine
our Lord deliverd is no more of it set down, than what he spoke incidentally in
fields and streets and public places, the three years space of his publik
appearance, and not a word of any thing he taught his Scholars or Disciples in
particular, on set purpose (and without reference to public speeches) which
was without all doubt the main doctrine primarily intended both by the Master
and his disciples and most copiously explicated. Moreover those public
speeches of or Lord we have set down in Gospel, they are deliverd us but under
certain general heads and brief notes, wthout any order or connection at all
that can appear to any the subtillest wit that is. Our Lords Sermon on the
mount is the largest piece of doctrine we have of his deliverd at one time, (and
most heavenly and divine it is like its author) but he that reads the sift,
sixth and seven Chapters of S. Matthew, where it is set down, shall desire
connection. And indeed the holy Evangolists collecting their Gospels as brief
memorialls did it wthout all doubt the best way: And it is sufficient, and far
better than if all had been set down in that order and fullness of discourse our
Lord deliverd it. For the few separated notions of Christian morality set down
in Gospel were enough to give testimony to the traditionall doctrine the
Apostles had methodically received from their master for his Church. Finally
those speeches of our Lord recorded in Gospel be only some brief sentences,
and parables, questions and replies to interrogatories; which be far short to a
whole body of divinity, tho abundantly enough for a Church in whose bowels the
Messiah would imprint his law and entire will.

It appears then both by the mingling of the story and dogm together, by the
few parcells of the history it self, by the want of that method and connection
in the dogmaticall part which our dull capacities require for learning, and the
omission of great many things we should need to be imformd in far more amply
than we can find it set down in Scriptur concerning the use of Sacraments,
government of the Church and a thousand difficulties rising about the exercises
of charity and faiths; I say it appears by these and such like things that the
Scripture of the New Testament was never pend on any purpose to teach us our
religion, but rather to confirm and ratify by incidentall passages therein,
such religion and doctrine as should be deliverd by the Church the prime and
sole mistress of faith after God and in place of him, in all clearnes of
methodical belief and practice. To you, says our Lord to his Apostles, Luc.
8.10. it is given to known the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, to others in
parables, that seeing they may see and not understand. The Apostles and the
Church derived from them were made acquainted with the mysteries and secrets of
Christian religion for their belief and practice, and the same Church clearly
knows and understands them as the mysteries of her own profession and art, which
she has receivd and practisd from the beginning to this day. But to others
that be aliens and out of the Church it seems our Lord so orderd his speech
that they should hear and yet not understand; nor everfully perceiv his will
till believing they were incorporated into his mystical hody unto which alone
all the mysteries of religion are delivered in perspicuity and clearnes. This
general purpos and intention of penning the Gospel and other parts of the New
Testament as short manual notes for Christians within the Church or such as
are to be congregated unto it, from which Churches hands they have both a larger
explicit declaration of their faith and a full and ample practis thereof in her
bosom, must needs infer such an obscurity as shall obstruct all possibility out
of the Church of God by this bare letter ever to arrive to a clear
understanding of the ways of Christian Religion.

This is the first and great cause of that obscurity scripture carries with it
unto such as come to seek their religion in a Book which was never made to teach
it, nor written for such a propos. The churches doctrine as it comes out of her
lips, that is the thing that converts nations and regenerats unto heavenly
life: and this written word is a good milk to nurs us up after we are
regenerated; which made S. Peter to exhort Christians 1 Pet. as new born babes to
desire that sincere milk of the word that they may grow by it. 1. Pet. 2. But
it is not the thing that givs us the first life. Indeed the Scriptur does
little or no good, but as it is presented by the Church, and received with her
interpretation, and practisd in her bosom, wthout which three things I will be
bold to say it is not the Word of God, nor has it any virtue at all. The Ark
of God so long as it was upheld by the Priests it comforted and sanctified
them, but touched or looked into by others it destroyed them; nor was it unto
them an Ark of salvation but an offense and occasion of fall.

If we descend to particulars we shall espy reasons enough of obscurity, such
as will frustat all desire of any perspicuous discovery of faith to be made by
any man wthout the churches help. The very history does afford disputs enough,
hardly to be answered by the learned of divines; as they will easily grant
that have examind them. The Prophesies and mysteries of faith containd therein
who is able to trace them. And the moral or dogmaticall part, tho it seem
familiar yet has it a profoundnesse beyond all human writting. Indeed by this
it is demonstrated to be the Word of God which must needs be like himself,
unsearchable. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks says our
Lord; and where the heart is immense the word is also incomprehensible. I doubt
not but there be too many amongst our people in England who read the Scriptures
as our boys and girls do at school, judging the sense comprehended as soon
as the sillables be speld; I speak not to such.

Greater divines to whom I speak must and will acknowledge that the Scriptures
be often argumentative, passing from one point to another wthout giving any
doctrinall notice thereof. This will make the reader hable to continual
mistakes, whiles he conceivs the writer to go still along upon the same
subject, whereas he is past over to a new or a contrary one. As also in the
Psalms, canticles and Prophecies it is very familiar with those holy men under
one and the same number and person to act themselves in one verse, God or his
church in the other imediately succeeding; in one half line to decipher things
present, in the other conjunctivly connext, things only to come and not
appliable to with was then in hand tho the speech be united. The good Eunuch in
the Acts of the Apostles was it seems adviced hereof, when reading the Prophesy
of Isaias he asked Philip of whom does the Prophet speak this verse (he was
led as a sheep to the slaughter.) of himself or of some other man, Act. 8.34.

Again in the whole course of scriptur a man may meet with propositions here and
there desperst which being taken apart from the other discourse, and according to
their own bare sound are quite opposite to other formal assertions in the same
book, nay to the very drift and intention of the Author; as will soon appear
unto him that shall make an analysis of the whole book: such be the
semisentences, depraved texts and ill applied autorities used by sectaries. For
example in that sublime and learned Epistle of S. Paul written to the Romans,
our people of England do cull out many places for the solesufficiencie of faith
against the necessity and merit of good works, which is as far from the dift and
intention of the Apostle as hell is from heaven, and unbeseeming such a
Catholic doctor as S. Paul was, to write to such a Catholic place as Rome.
The business and occasion of the letter was an emulation risen in Rome between
the converted Jews and the converted Gentiles; those who had been made
Christians from Jews disabling the Gentiles, as being ever aliens from God,
whereas the Jews converted were first Gods servants under Moses and then under
Christ, and so pleasing God in the whole course of their lineage by their good
conversation according to the law they used: the Gentiles on the other side
diminisht the Jews, for that themselves by the very light of reason doing with
they could was a law to themselves, and so far pleased God that he therefore
brought them equally with the Jews unto the light of Gospel which the Jews
indeed deservd not, since they had* murderd the Messiah and Lord of glory. This
childish emulation arising happily upon some slight word at their meetings
proceeded so far that it brake forth into open rancour one against another,
insomuch that their Priests and Pastors who were amongst them could not well
allay it. Wherefore S. Paul notice thereof being given to him wrote that letter
of his to them, wherein he lays about him now at the Jews, then at the Gentiles
confuting their pride and folly and giving them both to understand that neither
of them had aught to boast of, since God of his free mercy had equally called them
both to the saving faith of Gospel and made them Christians: and therefore that
they should all live together in humility peace and brotherly charity. This is
the scope and subject of that sacred and most Catholic Epistle, so wretchedly
abused by our pitiful Sectaries, who understanding nothing of the Apostles
purpose deprave him as they do other scripturs to their own ruin. And it is an
odd kind of riddle, that Catholic divines who do only understand the
scriptures should affirm them to be hard and difficil to understand; heretics
who understand them not at all should maintain them to be easy.

Again we see that scriptur ever and anon takes up figures, allegories and
parables wherein are enclosed truths of a differing strain to with the letter
relates. This will cause an obscurity almost invincible. For who can look
through a veyl? none surely but the church and church men singularly assisted
and inspired; so S. Paul looked through the story of Sara and Agar, and perceivd
the two churches decipherd therein, Gal. 4. And this custom is it seems so
frequent in Scriptur that the same Apostle gives a caution against too much
adhereing to the bark and letter of sacred scriptur, averring peremptorily that
the letter kills, but the spirit or meaning couched under the letter, that is
life, 2. Cor. 3. For that the bare letter of the history too much insisted upon
will often lead if not to a contrary error vet besides the intended truth.

Besides, the same phrase or letter is used in scriptur sometimes one way,
sometimes another, as sin (not to stand upon further exemplification) is taken
commonly for an offens, and yet sometimes again for an expiation thereof, 2. Cor.
5.21. with is almost contrary.

Somthings in scriptur are spoken of God according to his essence, which wthout
good heed may prejudice the right belief of a trinity: some things of Christ
according to his humanity which may d^sh the conceit of the diety in him: some
things of the church triumphant which may falsely be applied to the militant:
somthings of the Messiah his second coming which may be a stumbling block to the
truth of his first. And contrary. All these things have caused errors mistakes
and heresies in the world. And may still do the like, if private judgment have
free and uncontrollable dominion over the letter and text of scripture to
interpret it at pleasur.

Lastly sacred scriptur being a mass or body of writing both made up by
several Authors, and a miscellan of several kinds of words, histories and
laws under a figure, histories and laws with out figure or dogmaticall,
Prophesies of several styles or phrases, and all of them obscure and
parabolicall, prudentiall Proverbs close coucht together, and so antimetrically
sited that rare wits can search into their depth; Psalms and canticles so
highly elevated above ordinary conceit, that for aught I see they may suffice
to amuse the understandings of all ages; parables not yet fully explicated; and
dogmaticall Epistles of the good Apostles, which if they be taken so far as may
concern pure Christianity wthout their economicall moral and political
precepts (which be easy and well enough known wthout them) are enough to exercise
the understandings of mankind. Scriptures I say made up of all these several
ingredients argue first, that they were never pend to teach us our faith; but
for a mere help of meditations, for exhortation and incitement of devotion and
piety in people already believing. Secondly that it would be a lost labor to
go cull our belief out of the^, where no such purpose is intended, no method
used for it, and all kind of obscurity contrary to such an end.

But to conclude; If Scriptur be indeed so clear and easy for each capacity to
read, out of them to cull his faith and by them to frame his religion, as
sectaries pretend, and this be indeed the judgment of all reformers; wherefore
do they themselves so multiply their catechists, interpretours and expositours
thereon? to with end is all their preaching and weekly teaching? this if it be
indeed to any end, must needs be either to expound faith, or promote good
works; if the faith be clear enough, the expounding is in vain; as for good
works they be long ago exploded and bannisht out of the land, and the empty
preaching for aught I know may go foot it after them: for words are in vain
that tend to no end. In fine, whence comes all these diversities of opinions
amongst us here in England about matters of faith and religion, and so opposite
one to another? and yet all grounded upon Scriptur. Is that way so uniform and
easy that leads men so diversely? Nor am I satisfied at all in hearing some
answer as they do, that this coms not of Scriptur but the disorder and mistakes
of men: so long as I see it may wthout the Churches help be so shreudly
mistaken, I have reason to suspect mistakes in my self too, if I once lean upon
mine own spirit and industry as others do, being my self no better than my
neighbors. And therefore I am loath nay I shall never be persuaded to leav the
secure footing I now have in all tranquillity peace and uniformity with the
Catholic body of Gods Church, by the result of truth delivered us by antiquity
consonant to Gods word both written and unwritten; and run my self with the
confusd rout of disagreeing sectaries upon the rock of the Bible, so apt as it
appears by the event to be mis-understood and and wrested awry, that I am clear
of the opinion that no man out of the Church of God, nor nobody of mee^ besides
the Church of God understands it right. Nor shall I be so mad now in my old age
to go to dig my self religion having so fair a one already stamped to my hands
which all the art of men and angels put together can never mend. Put him in
Bedlam that undertakes both labor and hazard for naught.

LA. Do you think Sr Harry ever to persuade me, that reading the Gospel I do
not sufficiently understand the story of Christ, his birth and life, death, and
passion, resurrection, and ascension. I fear not to affirm that I understand it
perfectly and (by your favor) as fully as is necessary. I do also conceiv well
enough (nor is it hard so to do) with his doctrine and miracles conduced to
mankind. I am moved also with the divine discourse of Christ and his Apostles.
Every Sabboth-day I go to Church and hear the word of God preached. I cannot see
with is more to be done, he that reads and hears and believes the word of life
cannot miscarry.


VIC. And I for my part understand all that ever I either read or hear. Alas
when I was a young girl I was even then so towardly that I could read the
Scripture as I ran up and down the house, according as it is written, write the
vision and make it plane upon Tables that he may run that reads. Hab. 2. My
husband and I every Sabbath day go hand in hand to Church together like the
beasts that went into the ark by two and by two, the Male and his Female, Genesis
7.2. Surely this is sufficient for the salvation of all flesh.


KN. Madam you have now touched upon the main business wherein all sectaries be
most pitifully deluded. If they do but go to Church and hear a Sermon, each
one according to his fansy, their duty is done and all his safe.


I will not stand now to examine whether the preaching be orthodox or no. Be it
what it will, It will not serve the turn.

I have already to my ability declared that the reading of Scriptur is no
sufficient means of finding out our faith, tho so much as it is, it does all of
it confirm and verify the Churches doctrine. I shall now go forward and evince
two truths more. First that reading or preaching of Gods word or the hearing
thereof (tho it be indeed Gods word and pure and orthodox) is not the essential
or cardinal work of Christian religion. Secondly that a man may hear and read
it all his life time and yet be lost at the end both for want of grace and
truth.

Our Lord wrote nothing himself, as all men know, yet notwthstanding he would
never have failed either to have done it himself or commanded others to have
done it, if reading or hearing had been the great work of his religion to be
imposed upon mankind. For reading you know, and expounding of Scriptur
presupposes writing, and his great work had been no other than to see things
written if our great work had been no other than to read or hear them. The four
Evangelists afterward put together some few heads of our B. saviors life and
doctrine, happily to carry about with them in their bosom, and entertain their
converts wthall. But we do not read that our Lord gave them any command to do
so. And this is an argument in your principles that he gave them none at all.
And as he gave them no order to write, so neither did the promise them any
assistance in their writing; for all the concurrence we find promised either
them or their successors, was only for the pectorall custody of their
traditions orall doctrine and Church- government. And therefore since you deny
the constancy of Christ's assistance in the continual government of his Church,
internal belief, and external doctrine unto which that assistance was promised,
affirming that the Church of Christ as it is not in it self infallible so has
it gone astray both in practis and doctrine; me thinks you might with as much
ease and indeed more plausibility deny the same concurrence to any of the
Churches writings whereunto it was never promised at all, nor the Scriptur or
writing it self so much as commanded by him wthout whose order nothing of force
or authority could be done.

Nor it is to be thought but that Peter, James, Andrew, and others of the
Apostles had been both as able and as willing to write Evangells as the other
four, whereof two of them were but disciples of a far inferior rank to the
Apostles and indeed but companions and attendants upon them as may be seen in
the Acts. Nay if writing had been such a capital work, S. Peter would never
have neglected to have writ a Gospel himself, especially when S. Mark his
pupil and companion wrote one. But this is an argument they had some greater
work in hand and more nearly enjoind than that was. Nor can we find by any
monument that any of the other ten Apostles who were sent several ways for
the worlds conversion carried any written Gospel at all with them which might be
made by themselves; much less is it to be thought that they stayed to write out
theirs, having their own breasts so well fraught with all that, and far more
than they found there written, especially considering that two of the
Evangelists were but their pupills and disciples. Nay before those Gospels were
written out and completed, especially that of S. John, the Church of God was
spread up and down the world and flourisht in all the duties of Christianity.
By which it may appear that even the written Gospel is neither it self necessary
to the being of the Church, nor the reading or expounding of a text the
essential work of Christianity.

As for the Epistles which be the other part of the new Testament written by S.
Paul and others. These it is well enough known were pend a long while after the
Church of God was perfectly formd and grown up in most parts of the known
world; and in particular after those Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus,
Galatia, Thessalonica and the rest unto whom they are addressed were perfected in
all the essentialls of Christian faith; and they were occasiond merely
accidentally upon the creeping in of some disorders and errors in those places
contrary to the tradition of faith they had received, as may soon appear to him
that reads and understands the tenor of those spiritual Epistles.

So then; the Church is antecedent to her Scriptur, and altogether independent
thereon either for her being or profession: helps of memory as all these
writings be do presuppose both the memory and the things to be remembered before
those helps were brought to light: And so, the reading of these Scriptures or
hearing them expounded can no wise be the essential work of Christian religion
or the total exercise thereof; but something that is altogether independent of
them, more ancient than they be, and that is more intrinsecally a worship,
homage, adoration and service of the most high God, than hearing or looking
upon words and syllables can be.

I make no doubt but the whole Scriptur or writing of the new Testament, both
Epistles and Gospells was merely casual and accidental. For I find it long
ago foretold by the Prophets that the law and government of the Messiah should
in this differ from the Law of Moses, that Moses Law was all committed to paper
but the doctrine of Jesus should be writ in the heart and entrails of his
Church. You may see one place in the Prophet Jeremy, c. 31.33. which the Apostle
in his Epistle, to the Hebrews applies unto Christ our Lords days, Heb.
10.16. and S. Paul does not obscurely allude unto it in one of his letters he
wrote to Corinth. c. 3.3. Indeed to imprint in the churches breast a law from
which she should never deviat, is in my judgment a greater argument of divinity
than any written Gospel could afford. The things which Solon, Numa, Lycurgus,
Draco, and other such like men contrived and dictated for the good of their
common wealths, did much commend their gravity, vigilance and wisdom; and
elevated them above other men, not above manhood. Moses himself the most
profound and judicious Lawmaker the world ever had, by the excellency of his
written Laws has merited the title of a divine and sacred legislatour: but he
is known to be a man by his handwriting, and the paper he wrote on. He is a God
that writes on the velin of the heart characters indelible unto eternity. The
Law of Christ only is written not with ink but with the spirit of the living God
not in tables of stone but in fleshly tables of the heart.

I do also verily think, that the religion which the Son of God deliverd to his
church was neither commanded by him to be written; nor yet ever intended either
by the Evangelists or other of those primitiv writers to be totally set down,
under the notion of a rule of faith: although so much as there is of it, drawn
principally for the use of devotion and charity, be a rule of faith also. What
the occasion might be that moved the four Evangelists to write their
compendious Gospells, by the little learning I have I could never yet assuredly
gather: although I remember I have read something thereof in a learned latin book,
made by a friend of mine called Systema fidei put forth some few years ago,
wherein be very many things of excellent learning worthy of the Author, but I
have not now the book at hand. With occasion moved S. Paul to write his Epistles
unto Rome, Corinth and other places is manifest enough, and I shall afterward
declare it, when I shall come to discover the religion of the Apostles and
Evangelists, and make it appear that they were all papists, and of the very
self same religion Catholics be of at this day.

All this put together; that Christ himself neither wrote any thing nor
commanded any thing to be written, yea gave notice that he would use his
special prerogative of legislatourship and write his law in hearts, promising
to animate the body of his Church with his own spirit which should lead them into
all truth; and that the church was dispersed over the earth before any Christian
writting was made, which was afterward drawn to confirm and strengthen the faith
and devotion it found already planted: All this being true, it follows
apparently that hearing or reading or preaching upon a text is not the great
capital work of Christian Religion. Indeed it is childishnes to think that God
unto whom all prostration, adoration, all homage service and worship both of
the outward and inward man is more than due, should be sufficiently served with
a little labor of the lips or ears when a man thinks good so to do.

Preaching is indeed necessarily antecedent to Christian faith; yet it only
disposes unto furrher actions, as may easily appear both by authority of
Scriptures, which exclaim bitterly against such as hear and go no further; and
also by the very nature of hearing and all kind of exhortation which ever tends to
something besides it self. For who ever heard only to hear and no further: who
but our mad reformers ever preached only to be heard? And how can speaking on
one side and hearing on the other complete the whole duty of man to his God? as
if one were nothing but tongue and ear, or had receivd nothing from him but
those two organs.

Tell me Madam ingenuously: Do not you think you have sufficiently done your
duty to God, if you go but forth once a Sunday to hear a Sermon? and if you
read a chapter or two in a week day, this is nothing else in effect: although by
your favor you do not think you self bound under sin to either: but if you
like the weather, or the parson pleases, or your clothes be neat and handsome,
then you will go forth to church, if not you will stay at home: if you find
your self disposed in the week time to be godly, you read a chapter, if not you
let it alone. And this is all you do or ever mean to do. And if your preacher
do sometimes upon occasion exhort you to the abnegation of worldly desires, to
the castigation of your body by fasting and discipline that you become not
reprobate, to hospitality or almsdeeds, to a general abdication of all things
for Christ by leaving father and mother wife and lands to follow him in that
nakedness himself practiced, finally to an universal conformity to the Son of
God in piety and poverty. These and such like things he speaks by course and out
of formality to make a plausible noise in the Church and fulfill his hour. But
he is not so mad as to think you will ever practice any of these things, nor do
you hear him with any such purpos; the practice of such things being well enough
known by both of you or at least believed to be down right popery by all
reformations discarded. His preaching is a talking to your ears, and your
hearing a listening to his lips, till the sound cease, and then the essential
work of your religion is done. But if happily you like the wit of the preacher
and give him your applaus, then you have both of you your final expectation:
and the whole work of religion both essential and accidental is accomplished.

This kind of hearing and preaching tending to no further end is so far from
being the sole act religion that it is no religion at all; nay it is a mere mockery
and abuse of religion condemnd by the Scriptures both of the old and new
Testament where it is concluded that not hearers but doers are justified.

VIC. I could wish you would remember Sr that Christ said more than once, he
that has ears to hear let him hear: but he never said, he that hands to work
let him work; or he that has knees to kneel let him kneel; or he that has
meat to eat let him fast. Leave your talking Sr Harry and read the bible.


MIN. The acts of the Apostles, will make it manifest that after Pentecost
Peter and John, and Paul, and others of the Apostles were wholly taken up in
preaching as the sole act of Christian religion.


KN. Christian preaching is of two sorts. The first is absolutely necessary, the
other only expedient. The first is made to Paynims and such as have not yet
heard of Christ or respect him not as they ought, to convert them to his
religion and faith; the other to Christians, to put them in mind of the practis
and end thereof: the first is the parent and productiv power of faith, the
second a mistres and overseer of works. Of the first kind of peaching is often
mention both in the Acts of the Apostles and other parts of the new Testament.
For both in Gospel when our savior sent out his Apostles to preach unto all
nations, and when they exercised this their mission in the Acts preaching
before Jews and Pagans, and when S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans and
elsewhere speaks so much of preaching, it is every where meant of this preaching
unto Gentiles, Paynims and unbeleevers for their conversion. But concerning the
second kind of preaching made unto Christians there is no news or mention at all
thereof in the whole book of the Acts; nor did ever any of those primitiv
believers come together to hear a Sermon, but only to supplication and prayer,
and fraction of bread which is the Catholic Mass.


Indeed on the day of Pentecost after the Holy Ghost had visibly descended upon
the Catholic church congregated together in one place, and made them all speak
with strange tongues: Upon noise hereof all sorts of people both Jews and Gentiles
came flocking in to behold the wonder, then S. Peter took the occasion to make
a Sermon to those strangers who stood amassed at the sight, Act. 2. but that
speech was not directed at all to the Christians, as may appear by the very
matter and tenor thereof; and all the Christian service was ended before the
people unto whom he addressed his speech came in. Nor for some hundred years
after do we find or hear tell of any preaching made to Christians; nor were
they ever accused by the Roman prefects for other, than for meeting together
and breaking of bread; whereas Sermons if they had had any made, had afforded a
more plausible accusation against such as already, tho wthout any desert of
theirs, bore the name of seditious.

As soon as any person or nation had embraced his Christian faith he then
wthout expecting further preaching fell presently to those works his faith
dictated to him, and according to his obligation applied himself to the rule he
had received, as may be seen in the book of the Acts. And doubtless all prelates
who had care of souls held forth unto believers that great dictamen of
perfection and justice which S. Paul calls (...). We will and command that all who
have once beleevd in God do make it their care to attend unto good works, Tit.
3.8. Tho indeed in after times when that first fervor of Christian charity
grew cold, and especially upon times of singular mortification and fasts, as in
Lent and Advent, as also upon high solemnitys, the Catholic Church has ever
made use of this secondary preaching which is made unto Christians for the
incitement of works of piety. This secondary peaching is indeed a religious
exercise and profitable to distressed and slack spirits for comfort and advice.
But no good Christian ever looked upon it as the great work of his religion or
ever thought his duty to be don when the Sermon was ended.

In a word, the Catholic church uses both these kinds of preaching, the one to
infidels for their conversion, the other to Christians for their exhortation.
But she places the sum of her religion in neither of them; but in the
performance of those things whereunto people are converted and exhorted. And a
third kind of preaching which is to no further end at all, but only to spend
time, was never thought of by Christians till this wretched heresy invented it.
For your preaching is not Mr Parson to convert your auditors, who have already
received their faith and be as good Christians as your self, nor yet to excite
them to good works which be in both your judgments justly casherd long ago as
popish. But your preacher, he preaches till for his livelihood he has stood his
howr, and the hearers hear till they have sat their hour, and then all hasten
home and the work of God is ended. This is all your holocaust, an ear-offering:
and he that wants his ears, or has them stopped by cold may stay at home as unfit
for service.

In my judgment it is pure non sens and no religion at all to be still preaching
faith as reformers do unto people which already understand their faith as well as
their teachers, or think they do at least: and if they chance for formalitys
sake to fall upon any practical point to speak thereof with no purpos, hope or
intention of their practice. For it is agreed on both sides, both preacher and
people that such practis is popery, and nothing requisite to salvation but only
to believe.

Hear a parable. Two artificers had each of them an apprentis. The first having
delivered to his servant exactly all the rules of his art, put him presently to
work and practis by them, assuring him that practis will better his knowledge,
which the servant in all singlnesse of heart applying himself to labor according
to the dictats of his rule advanced accordingly, and so became eminent in the
eyes of men, and excceedingly beneficial to the common wealth. The other
tradesman with drew from the sight of his prentise all the particular rules and
whole method of his art, and only deliverd unto him in gross some experiments
and feats thereof, by which notwthstanding he could not perceiv at all either
where to begin or how to go on; nay he gave his servant one general caution,
not to put his hands to any thing, his duty being only once a week to com and
sit down before him, and hear him discourse of the usefulnes and benefit of his
trade: Only believing in him his work is ended. The prentise under such a
teacher grew to be a great proficient in works and sentences, but never put his
hand to any thing either for his own credit or the benefit and service of
mankind. Nay he mocked at the other apprentis and called him simple drudg. The
first of these artificers is the Catholic church, the other is the Reformation.
Do you apply the rest.

The Catholic Religion is a noble, a rational religion, well beseeming a
complete man to profess, well beseeming the Son of God to plant. The
reformation a vain empty business, befitting none to receive it but a company
of cripples, that have neither hands nor feet to use; nor none to invent it but
dawes and magpies. It begins in teaching and ends in preaching. Woe to you
Pharisees says our Lord for ye tith mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and
pass over judgment and justice and the love of God* those ye ought to have
done, and not leave the other undone, Luc. 11. Preaching if it be right and
pious may be used; nay, when instructions, advise and comfort is necessarily to
be applied, it ought to be done: but the practice wherunton it tends, this is
not to be left undon. The tithing of mint, rue and cumin does but figur out
under a tipe a consecrating unto God part of the good things we do enjoy from
him, by fasting almsdeeds and prayer: that is to be done, these not to be left
undone. Preaching puts in mind of the works of faith hope and charity: that
where is need, is to be used, these not to be neglected. At one and the same
time to preach good things in the pulpet, and to cry down the same things by
the rules of Reformation is to open a man's mouth and stop his wind pipe. All
your people go to your Churches with such a prejudice against the customs of
Catholic Church, whence they are cut off by the reformation, that although the
minister should chance with singular zeal and eloquence to declaim against sin,
and cry up the exercises of Christianity; yet the auditory is promoted nothing
at all thereby, being aforehand prejudiced by the rules of reformation
incorporated and naturalised in their spirit. For who can take such words to
heart, or ever heed them effectually, that shall firmly beleev that all we do
or can do is sin, and with sin soever we commit, we shall sure enough be saved if
we do but beleev in Christ. People imbued with these principles shall never by
any Rhetoric either of man or angel, be either affrighted from evil, wordly
pleasures and sin; or persuaded to the laborious works of mortification and
penance. The sour grapes of Reformation have so set peoples teeth on edg, that
they cannot chew good mear. It Is in vain, it is utterly in vain to bid dead men
walk, or exhort those to the works of life who by the poison of reformation are
made dead and sensles. Preaching is to Catholics a profitable and religious
exercise; to heretics if it be orthodox it is a vain work, if pseudodox it is a
wicked work: but to no people nor in no kind is it or can it be the only work
or sole Christian duty.

LA. With be those works Sr Harry you require over and above preaching.


KN. Even such as the Word of God it self requires. The works of faith hope and
charity and use of Sacraments, prescribed in Gospel: a serious and effectual
endeavor against sin according as sacred scriptur prescribes, whose precepts
must be heeded as obligatory, and counsels respected as meritorious offerings.
We must both beleev in Christ as mediator, and beleev him too as our
legislatour. Both love him and observe his will; and when we do fail, reconcile
our selves unto him by the means-himself has ordained; captivating both our
will and understanding to his pleasure, who is our redeemer and master and
omnipotent Lord.


To speak more particularly; the works which Catholics by their faith are
directed and exhorted unto be of two sorts, personal and conventuall. The
personal works be first, a constant obedience to the Church in all her
dictamens of faith: upon this great hinge hangs indeed all true and solid
Christianity: then an effectual exercise of homage and piety to God, of
justice and charity toward our neighbor, of sobriety and continence in our
selves. These things must be done: he that does them best shall fare best for
it. The conventuall, a reverent use of Sacraments, and a presence at divine
psalmody and Sermons, according to our occasion and need.

But the great capital conventuall work and worship is the venerable and
blessed Sacrifice of the Altar, every holiday solemnly exhibited; and every
Christian stands obliged to be then present at it: tho his devotion may find it
each day of the week in our Catholic churches; and many thousands of good
people serve God every day in this holy rite. But this is a free offering of
their own not wthout great benefit and comfort to themselves, unto which Holy
church will not oblige.

This is that great work which constitutes and essentiates Christian Religion. By
this it was perfected in its fundamental worship and duty toward God long
before our people had any Scripturs to read; and by which, especially seconded
with its other Catholic appurtenancies, it would still remain entire although there
were no Scriptures at all either to read or hear. For Scriptur as it is
expounded by Holy church, or rather the traditional doctrine of the church,
whereof Scripture is a short and compendious copy, is to us Christians a
light, not to sit idle by, but to work by.

This is the work which the Disciples and Apostles fell upon imediately after the
ascension of our Lord according as he had taught them to do at his passion:
where by word and action showing his Apostles the manner of that great work he
added his charg, Hoc facite, This do ye. For says holy text. Then returned
they from Jerusalem, and when they were com into an upper room, they all
continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with the women and Mary the
mother of Jesus. Act. 1.12. The great work here was bowing of knees not
squatting down in a pew, supplication not exhortation, praying not sermoning.
And the sweet penman of that story speaking of the presence of the other sex,
out of his peculiar devotion expressed by name Mary the mother of Jesus who with
her presence graced the first high mass of the Church in all angelical purity.
And the church since that time had never high mass without her. The sacred text
insinuats that this great work held them no small time together, by saying that
they continued with one accord therein. It Is likely they were constant and daily
at it all the ten days between Ascension and Pentecost, for they were commanded
to keep together till they were endued with power from on high, Luc. 24.49.

And in some one of those days, (probably after the sacred ceremony was ended)
S. Peter stood up and propounded to the body of the church an election of some
one in place of Judas, that the sacred hierarchy might be made up against
Pentecost, when the holy Ghost was to descend upon them: when indeed he did
descend upon them all, united with one accord in the same exercise. S. Peter
declareing and defending the novelty of that strange infusion, to such Jews and
Gentiles as came running in amongst them at the noys thereof. And as before
Pentecost they Christians did constantly persever in that sacred solemnity, so
did they after the holy Ghosts descension with exceeding chearfulnes and joy of
heart persist therein much more. The same holy pen sets forth this their
Eucharisticall action both before and after Pentecost in most significant
terms: the words in original Greek are more emphaticall than can be rendered in
English. Our Lord ascending says the Evangelist, lift up his hand and blessed
his people, who having worshipped him as he ascended returned back to Jerusalem
with great joy, (...). Et erant omnino in sacro, lauda^tes and benedicentes
Deum. Luke 24.53. And they were wholly or altogether in the sacred action or
sacrifice praising and blessing God. I know Translatours read it thus, They
were continually in the Temple; for (...). sacrum in his primary acceptance
signifies the sacrifice, and secondarily the place where it is performed, or
the temple: and Catholics may render it the temple, because that sacred action
renders the place where it is done a temple or sacred ground. But that the word
in this place must of it self signify the religious exercise, liturgy of
sacrifice of the primitive Christians, and not the temple in that sense the
word temple is commonly understood, I am induced by three reasons to beleev.
First because the Christians had then no Church or Temple of their own, as it is
manifest: and as for the temples or Synagogues of the Jews, tho one or two of
the Christians might upon some occasion go thither, happily to inform the people
that went in and out, of the truth of the Messiah, and by some sign or miracle
to testify his power; as Peter and John heald a lame man at the Temple-gate,
Act. 3. Yet it is not to be thought that all the whole Flock and Congregations
of Christians people would be permitted to take up those places day by day, and
to fulfill their Christian rites and ceremonies in the Jews Churches, who looked
upon them all as apostats and excommunicated men, and hated and persecuted them
unto death. And therefore when it is here, and in other places of the Acts said
that the Christians were wholly or altogether (...), in sac^o this word in
sacro cannot signify the place of worship as it is usually taken, but the
action or worship it self. Secondly this will yet more demonstrativly appear, if
we join the latter end of S. Lukes Gospel now mentiond, with the beginning of
the Acts of the Apostles, wherein the story is continued and more largly
expressed. For in the end of S. Lukes Gospel are compendiously set down the
religious exercises of the Christians after our Lords ascension, who are said
to have come back to Jerusalem and there to be continually in sacro, blessing
God: v. ult. And in the beginning of the Acts the same thing is repeated again
with some addition and inlargment of the story; the text saying that the
Christians returning from the mount, whence our Lord ascended, unto Jerusalem,
they betook themselves in the City (...), unto a gallery or upper chamber to do
their devotions where they all continued with one accord in prayers. Act. 1.12.
This is spoken of the same people, at the same time and in the same action. And
therefore they were not in the Temple as we commonly take the word temple to
signify, but in a gallery or upper-chamber of some house, where mass or
Christian liturgy was celebrated: and yet they were (...), in sacro as S. Luke
expresses it. And men that are but meanly skild in Greek and Latin know that
(...) sacrum is a word of elegance whereby the sacred work of religion is
expressed: and to this day a Priest at mas is said to be in sacro or in sacris.
Thirdly the same holy Scripture expressing this Christian worship as it was don
after Pentecost, says of the Christians that they were (...) in sacro domi, in
this sacred action or sacrifice at home, or in their own houses, Act. 2.46.
(...). And day by day they strongly perseverd unanimously in sacro, and at
their houses breaking the bread they received the food in exultation and
singlenes of heart praising God and having grace with al people, Act. 2.46. The
whole Christian synaxy is here described, both the sacrifice and communion, the
circumstance both of the place and persons who were in sacro at their
sacrifice, and comunicated with exultation in their own houses. That his sacrum
and fraction of bread was a high religious ceremony is apparent by the constant
mention of it in such places of that book as do purposly treat of the religious
exercises, piety, and devotio^ of the primitiv Christians, who are commended and
described unto as persevering daily either (...) in sacrifice, or (...) in
communion, or (...) in breaking of bread, prayer, supplication, and the like.
As also for that the two Disciples traveling to Emaus with whom our Lord joined
himself in the way knew and discernd him (...) in fractione panis in his
breaking of bread, Luke 24.35. For that religious work they knew was done by
none but Christ himself or his Priests.

This discourse upon the words of Scriptur I have somwt enlarged beyond my
custom, not to teach Catholics; for although the Greek should be rendered by them
in templo they know well enough that every place where that most sacred rite is
done is a temple, and so it is indifferent to them to translate it either in
templo or in sacro, but to let others (who be not Catholic) understand that
more is implied in such expressions than they do ordinarily think of; and that
the religion of the primitiv Christians was not preaching (whereof here is no
mention at all) but prayers, supplications, sacrifice, or fraction of bread:
Which religious emploiment is in another place of the sam chapter yet more fully
expressed. They were says he firmly persisting in the doctrine of the Apostles
and in comunion and in fraction of bread and supplications, v. 42. They firmly
persisted both in the Apostles doctrine; unanimously united in faith wthout
schism, division or any singularity of opinions, which might separat them from
the main body into particular conventicles; and also in comunion one with
another both by fraternal charity, Ecclesiastical obedience and Christian
Sacraments: and in Fraction of bread which was the great Cardinal capital work
of their faith and the very quintessence of Christianity; and in supplications
(in the plural number) both for living and dead, both for pastor and people,
for every degree, for every necessity. This was a right Catholic body and the
right exercise of their Catholic faith. And such and no other is the faith and
religion of all Catholics to this day, those I mean who are traduced by
frivolous people under the notion and name of Papists, which is a barbarous word
and neither Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, nor yet good English; and if it signify
any thing it is as much as to say Fatherists, because they persist unanimously
and firmly in the doctrine of Apostolical pastors and fathers, in comunion
with them, in fraction of bread and supplications, day by day persevering in
sacro, and breaking the bread at their houses, which they take together in
exultation and singlnes of heart praising God, and having grace toward al good
people. Pray God bless the^ all.

To make themselves worthy of this Holy comunion our Catholics do frequently
examine and clens their consciences as P. Paul advises to do, which clensing and
examining of conscience none but Catholics know with it means.

This sacred Action and venerable service of God was by the first Christians
named Missah, a notion they had out of the old Testament, where the Sacrifice
of the Messiah peculiar only to his people and religion by way of constitution
and distinction from all others, is so named: and the Latin and western part of
the church did ever keep the name as well agreeing to the Latin tongue. But the
Eastern and Greek churches called it ordinarily (...) or Liturgy, which was their
own language, and o word whereby that sacred action was expressed in the new
Testament. In the Acts of the Apostles it is frequently called (...) breaking of
bread. The primitiv Christians gave it several names, the Eucharist, the
Synaxy, the Dominicum, and the like, changing the word as soldiers do the
watchword, that uncircumcised paynims should not know with they meant; as our
Catholics now in England use some by-expressions thereof for concealment. And
the ancient doctors of the church wrote very cautiously of it, especially in
such books as they thought might happily fall into the hands of pagans as may be
seen in several places of Origin, S. Austin and others. I observed the last
time I read over S. Austin de civitate Dei a very notable passage to this
purpose (tho I have not now the book to turn to it) where speaking accidentally
of the venerable bread of Christians he presently recalls himself saying, they
know with I mean whose bread this is and in whose cause I write. And a certain
Roman prelat in ancient times denied to send by writing an answer of some doubts
propounded by ultra-marin Christians concerning some circunstances of the mass,
least the pagans intercepting his letters should thereby discover the mystery of
Christian Religion; but he promised to send a messenger to the petitioners, who
should inform them by word of mouth. So carfull they were not to cast this
pearl before swine. Yet as soon as Paganism was subdued, their writings came
abroad copiously, and gave ample testimonies thereof. S. Ambrose was in the
third age of the church, and yet he began to be bold, and writ not only of the
substance of the thing, but betrayed the very name, whereby it was generally
known and called, namely missa or mass. But they all frequently spoke of the
Altar, and Priests, the Sacrifice and service of the most high God performd in
Christian Religion, and the like. And the writers of the last twelv hundred
years speak so amply and so plainly thereof, that the very citation of their
evidences would fill a volume.

For this divine service were all our churches in England erected by Catholics
in the form of a cross: the high Altar now called the Chancell being placed in
the head of the church, and the Tabernacle over it for the body of our Lord to
repose on for Christian men's solace, with candles and lamps before it; below it
was the quire for the clargy, to sing praises night and day before their
redeemer: on both sides of the church, lesser Altars for other priests to
celebrate in at their devotion; and the nave or body of the church kept clenly
and vacant for the people to kneel in, and continue with one accord in their
supplication and prayer, according as it is written, My house is the house of
prayer.

If churches had been only buylt for preaching and hearing Sermons they would
not have been made in the form of a cross as they be, but of a theater or
amphitheater rather, with scaffolds about for that purpose, and such stalls or
pews below as now all our churches are pesterd with, in Catholic times utterly
unknown.

And if a man look into the places of devotion the Christians resorted unto in
times of paganism before they had any churches erected, which were for the most
part in dens and caves and bottoms of mountains (whereof many are still to be
found in all Kingdoms of Europ) he shall easily discern what their business was
there. I once saw one of them in a hill near Paris called mount Dammartin which
descended as I remember three score steps into the hill; at the bottom there is
a place, of the bigness of a chamber, and an Altar stone at the head of it in
part still remaining, and a hole in the same rock over the Altar for the
Priests chalice to stand in. And generally, where ever such places are found,
there is either an entire Altar stone, or some remnants or signs of it.

This sacred Synaxy was the only thing that brought Christians together in
times of hottest persecution, at which most of our Christian Martirs were taken.
And yet notwthstanding others could not forbear; for that they could not have
that comfort any other way nor yet were they able to live wthout it: As appears
in the Acts and process of our ancient Martirs; particularly the proconsulary
Acts of S. Saturnin. Where we read that when the pagan emperors had given a
command that no Christian should dare to be present any more at their Mass, which
the Christians at that time called their Dominicum, the martirs replied sine
Dominico esse non possumus, we cannot live wthout Mass. And therefore S.
Saturnin being asked by Analin the proconsul whether he had been at Mass he
answered Christianus sum as if he had said being as I am a Christian I cannot
do otherwise; it is Christianity, it is my very life and being. If all the Religion
of those ancient Christians had been only a little bearing or reading, and
their only work to beleev in Christ; they had never needed to expose their
lives for that: for Reformers do not think themselves bound under sin to hear
any body; since they beleev already, which is all that is necessary to salvation.
We cannot live wthout absolution and Mass, they may live wthout a prattling
preacher which most of them do but censur; and none of them be advanced by him
either in their faith or good works: only their ear is sometime tickled a
little with a witty actour in the pulpet; as there be indeed some of them so
ingenious, that it is as much pleasur to hear them speak as Ben. Iohnsons Catilin
or Sejanus.

By all this discourse I would infer that hearing or preaching the word is not
the sole act of Christian Religion; nor yet the main and principal act thereof:
since of its own nature it is but a preparativ and disposition to some further
work; and the disposition is ever les noble than the form it disposes unto. And
if it dispos unto no other thing, as Reformers preaching does not, then is in
no Religion at all but a mere mockery. This was my first thesis.

My other was, that a man may all his life time either read or hear the word
and yet at length be undon both for his sin and infidelity, if in any one thing
he misbeleev or fail.

LA. If we let you alone Sr Harry, you will not com to a period wthin your time;
the glass is run.


KN. I will dispatch in a word.


VIC. Do so Sr Harry, for it is written; In a multitud of Words there wants not
sin, but be that refrains his lips is wise, Prove. IC


KN. That any one error in faith suffices for destruction, although a man
otherwise beleev the story of Gospel is apparent in reason: For all the
Articles of faith being received upon one and the same motiv which is the verity
of the revealer; the formal denial of any one must needs be a vertuall denial
of all; and consequently the destruction of faith, wthout which no man can be
saved. Wherefore S. Paul is bold to condemn Hymeneus and Philetus known
Christians for one only error. Shun says he profane and vain bablings, for
they will increas unto more ungodlines. And their word will eat as does a canker,
of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus who have erred from the truth, saying that the
resurrection is past already and overthrow the faith of some, 2. Tim. 2.16. By
this example we see that one error overthrowes faith. And yet it is worth noting
too, that the error those two are condemned for is not any thing formally
opposite to Scriptur; for Christ told his disciples of a resurrection to come,
but did not say that in Hymeneus his time it was not past: but their mistake
and misdemeanour was merely against the judgment of the church whose Priests
expounding Scriptur told them that the resurrection was not then past; and yet
they would not be quiet notwthstanding, nor resign their judgment.


Another like president we have in his other Epistle where he says; The younger
widows refuse, for when they begin to wax wanton against Christ they will
marry, having damnation because they have cast of their first faith, 1. Tim.
5.11. Tho marriage be in it self lawful, yet undertaken against the churches
authority as it is it self a mortal sin, so is it a casting off and a
destruction of all faith. And yet those widows were believers, and fill devotes
too, such as looked to the dressing of their churches and Altars, washing of
their sacred vestments ar^^ other works of charity.

As for mortal sin, that any one will ruin the soul even of a believer,
appears by the tenor of the whole new Testament, especially of S. Paul's
Epistles, wherein he dehorts the Christians in Rome, Corinth, Ephesus and others
from sin in general and each mortal sin in particular, because the wager of
sin is death, and neither adulterers, thieves, or murderers shall ever enter
into the Kingdom of God and of Christ. Which exhortation had been of no valiew
and nothing to the purpose, if sin had been nothing prejudicial to one that
believes.

By this account a man may both hear and read Scriptur all his life time, and
yet be condemnd at length both for sin and infidelity, if he do not adhere
closely to all truths revealed by the church, and use all Sacraments and helps
of salvation she propounds.

LA. This point requires further discussion than we have now time for. And my
servant has put me in mind that dinner is brought up. Wherefore break of and
lets go in.


MIN. Let Us in, lets in to the great work: where we shall meet with an abstract
of Metaphysiks, In vino veritas, in pane unitas, in carne bonitas. Nay there is
divinity and Sacraments too. Lets in good Sr Harry, on my conscience I have
such a gaping appetite, I could swallow a camel.


KN. Me thinks Dr we are at a good feast already, according to those sacred
words, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work,
Ioh. 4.


MIN. After two or three cups of wine Sr Harry I Will repeat over all this
discourse of yours, and refute it to the full. Foecundi calices. It was the
first and best miracle Christ ever did to turn water into wine, I would he had
turned a little more of it.


VIC. O Husband sweet wine and fair women are seldom found in the same
country. Content your self you had better have me with a pot of your ale, than
a french face with a whole Butt of claret. Go to now.


MIN. That's right too. But did you never hear with the Scotch-man said to King
James when he asked him which Byshoprick he would have, Bath or Wells. Marry
beath, beath, quoth the Scotch-man. The King for the conceit put both the
Byshopricks into one, and gave him beath together. Wine and wife are to me as
Bath and Wells. Let me have beath as the Scotchman said.


VIC. Go your ways, go. Were it not that you cast a glance of your eye now and
then upon me, when you ar in your pulpet, you would be but a dry preacher. It Is
even so Madam.


LA. Even so be it.


THIRD DIALOGUE.
VIC. LO I com, according as it is written, Psa. 40.9. Dear Madam good morrow
to your Lap. It seems I am the first to day, somewhat earlier than ordinary;
but so it is written. Thou shall hear my voice betimes in the morning, Psa. 5.
O Sr Harry, wellcom, wellcom; you could not stay long from us, when both the
spirit and the bride say, Com, Rev. 22. I Will be the spirit for once, especially
when I am got up in a morning out of my bed. And why not I pray you, since the
very ruler of darkness, when people are got up, for conformities sake transforms
himself into an angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.14.


KN. Health and happiness attend my noble Lady this day and ever. It pleases my
eye Madam to behold the cheer of your countenance this morning, which seems to
promis to my purposes a good succes.


LA. I doubt not of good success both to my wishes and your own, if you will
but relent a little of that hardness and obstinacy is in a manner natural
unto Papists. I would not Sr Harry proceed so rigorously as to request you all
at once to abjure the whole body of popery, but to let fall at first the super
fluous parts of it, that do ha^g looser on, and be of least concernment and
use; and to stand so disposed, as to think obstinacy unhandsom in any thing.
Papists say truly that they are built on a rock; I think all their whole
church is rock; for one may as soon with his teeth bite off a piece of marble,
as wrest from them any of their very least opinions: so firm, tenacious and
obstinat ye be all of you. Nay to save a whole Kingdom you will relent nothing
at all: What a mass of money did Harry the eigth spend for six years together
in Ambassadors and agents in Italy, France, Spain, and Germany to procure the
testimonys of Universityes; and yet he was not* able either for love or money,
although he were a magnanimous noble Prince, to purchase so much as the hands
or consent of any one University, for the lawfulness of his affection to his
sweet Lady Anne Bullen. And the popes Cardinals, although they received no
small weight of good English gold from our Princely Harry, insomuch that they
could have wished he had had his fill of her, yet would they not be brought by
any means to say he might lawfully do it. Your Popes themselves tho I confess
they have been many of them very holy and learned personages, yet some of them
have been known to be as bad as the worst; and yet even these have been as
Zealous of the integrity of their faith as the greatest Saints; and would
sooner do ill, than say it might be done. Simony, Pride, Gluttony, known and
acknowledgd sins these some of them would act of their own accord; but all the
power of earth summond together should not force any of them to abrogat one
article of their faith or traditions, though it were but the sprinckling of
holy water. I read not long ago in an authentic story, that the nobls and
Prelates of England perceiving the resolution and rage of K. Harry upon the
forementiond affront, certified the Pope by a private Ambassador, that if he
did not some what relent, and condescend to the Kings desires, the whole frame
of Catholic Religion in England which already cracked would be utterly overthrown,
the nobility disgraced, monasterys ruind, Bishops deposed, thousands imprisond,
and perhaps martyrd, and the whole land undon. To which the pope replied,
(frantic man as he was) though the whole body of Christ's church should be
destroyed, yea tho heaven and earth should mingle together in its old Chaos of
confusion, yet would he not declare that lawful which in conscience he thought
was not so. What a crabbed perverseness was this. He was certainly no Gentleman
S^ Harry, that would not be persuaded, tho heaven and earth should come
together, to chang his judgment.


KN. To be obstinat and heady in our own proper opinions is oftimes unseasonabl
and unhandsom. But the tradition which the Church preservs is the very depositum
of our B. Savior, whether it concern faith or manners, practical or
speculativ belief, (and no conceptions of private or human judgments) and
therefore in all honesty to be preserved entire by the trustee of our Lord, who
committed it unto his church with this caution that not one jota or apex thereof
should be altered. And therefore that Pope who would not declare against his
conscience, although heaven and earth should com together, did no more than
what his Lord and Master had said before him. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, my word shall not pass not one jota orapex thereof, Luc. 21. And it was a
doubl madness in Harry the eigth, doing himself evil to expect the church of God
should say it was good. Nor be there Madam in Faith any superfluous parts, but
the whole body of it hangs so co^catenated and cemented together, that the
taking away of any one particl would ruin the whole fabric; nor will you find
in faith any portion less strong than another, but al equally invincible: Some
may be more leading points, whereupon others depend, and more material in their
quality; but in respect of our belief the least has as much firmnes of truth
as the greatest. And wtsoever sophistry may seem to shake any one, apply the
like engine to any other and in shall do as much: that is to say, in very truth,
nothing at al, whatsoever it may appear to do in self beguiling minds. Wherefore
Madam bereaving me of any of my faith you rob me of all; for it is an
uncontrollable rule in faith what the Apostle also does as in a good sense it
may be applied unto manners. Qui delinquit in un^, factus est omnium reus, Jam.
2.10. He that fails in one is made guilty of all.


This you would easily understand if you would consider how we receivd our
faith and Christian doctrine. For it was all equally handed to us at once, and
that from the authority of one and the same original; and it was extant in the
world before any Scriptures were pend. And these sacred Scripturs, and other
pious Books, and also all general counsels that have ever been celebrated in
the Church were formed afterward, directed, swayed, rectified, and ordered by
this rule of Traditional doctrine committed to the Church and kept by her. So
that issuing conformably from one and the same sours, all points of faith have
an equal proportion of truth, however they may differ in their own material
weight. The intrinsecall valiew of some articles may infer more of necessity
and obligation to an explicit belief and practis, but the least and smallest
points do with as much right as the greatest exclude a positiv misbeleef. I am
not bound to know or practis all things of the churches doctrine, but I am bound
not to disallow condemn or reject any of her traditionall Christianity has been
equally handed from age to age unto us. He that formally rejects any thing of
this as falls, does vertually deny all the rest; since one and the same veracity
deliverd all. No man's private reason invented any part of my belief, and therefore
no man's reason can reject it. Nay the highest points ar oftimes most
contingent, and consequently the least capable of a proof, as Gods incarnation,
passion, and resurrection: and if man's conceits be once permitted to intermedle
and determine of the lesser or greater probability of points, and cast away at
his pleasur what himself thinks unlikly, he will undoutedly go on from one
negation to another, till all be overthrown.

It may chance, that in discoursing I may say sometime that all the articles of
our Catholic faith be taken out of Scriptur wherein they be implicitly
contained: But in this I do but speak with the vulgar and according to the
capacity of hearers; and it is indeed true in this sens, for that all Catholic
belief is conformable to those sacred writings. But in very truth (to speak
with wise men as well as we do think and ever shall beleev with them) the
Scripturs themselves (those I mean principally which make up the new Testament)
were drawn by the rule of our traditionall doctrine and explicit faith, and not
our explicit faith gathered out of them.

This may appear by part of my former discourse, wherein I declared that the
penning of Scripturs was mere accidental and casual; and that all our
traditionall faith was more ancient than Scriptur, and altogether independent
of it; So that Scriptur and tradition go indeed hand in hand together as a
joint rule of faith; yet so, as that Scriptur gives tradition the right hand as
being its elder and judge of it self, as well as as cojudg with it of all other
doctrins. For both Gospells and Epistles written in Apostles name were so far
approved or rejected by the Church (however they came equally armed with
Apostolical names prefixed before them) as they were found consonant or
dissonant to the churches tradition. For there were more Gospells written than
the four we have, and far more Epistles than those the church admitted to her
cannon.

And this is the reason: why the Apostles themselves and Disciples met together,
to try whether the preachings and writings of all their missionaries were
punctually conformable to the tradition they had received; from which meeting S.
Paul himself (though an Apostle not of men, neither by man but by Jesus Christ
and God the Father, Gal. 1.1.) Yet would he not be exempted from that meeting.
After three years says he, I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter and abode with
him fifteen days, Gal. 1.18. Then fourteen years after I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas and took Titus with me also. And I went up by revelation,
and comunicated unto them that Gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but
privately to them which were of reputation, least by any means I should run or had
run in vain, Gal. 2.1.2. By which I think it may be gathered that the church is
above the Scriptur and of greater authority than either Paul or Barnabas or any
wtsoever single man and member of the Church, since she judges every ones
doctrine, to the approbation or rejection of it: For a judge is more noble than
the thing which is subject to his censur, the rule than the thing examined and
ruled by it, and to giv an approbation is in that formality more excellent than
to receiv it.

Neither was ever any general council called together to teach the church her
doctrine. But upon the rising of heresys, judging by the rule of their tradition
the Prelates in council confirmd the Catholics in the way they found them in,
and declared against heretical innovations that they might desist from further
commotion.

This rule of tradition found in the hands and practis of Christians dispersed
over the earth, left them by their forfathers, could not fail so long as it was
found universally agreeing in the whole Catholic body which is animated by the
spirit of infallibility: especially being strengthened by testimony of
Apostolical writings which were nothing but a part of the churches tradition
coppied out, or the fathers that succeeded them, or other monuments that were
yet remaining amongst them. As for example the Christians found an injunction
of praying for the dead upon the very walls, windows, gravstones and monuments
of their deceased forfathers, commended also unto them both by teachers, their
living books, and by books, their dead teachers; and all children found their
parents in the belief and practice of it: And therefore it was concluded that it
could be no other than as it was the^ esteemd an article of pure Christianity;
since the whole body of Christians then present held it so, their forgoers and
fathers deliverd it, sacred Scriptures sufficiently insinuated it, Catholic
writings and monuments confirmd and commended it unto them.

So that Madam that piece of popery you would take from me, being a part of
this Catholic tradition, will be as hardly wrested from me as the Gospel it
self, which the same tradition has deliverd as a copy conformable for so much
as it is, unto it self the first and universal rule of faith; by which pape
himself and all general counsels are guided, and so subject unto it that
they can act nothing against it: as may appear by the proceedings of the
Catholic church from its very first birth and uprising unto this present day.
Pope John the 22d. a learned man, and much given to reading found in many
places of the Greek and Latin fathers, as also in texts of sacred Scriptur, as
he conceived, that the souls of Christians deceased went released out of
purgatory thence into some place of repose on this side heaven and eternal
bliss, where they expected the consummation of their number; that all the
Catholic body might at the end of the world enter paradis together. This
opinion by the multitud of autoritys and arguments appeard unto him so
probable, that he sent it to some Christian Universitys, to have their
judgment, if that were not indeed Christian belief. But they rose up against
it, and rejected it as dissonant to tradition. For the Pape, tho he be Overseer
of the whole church, yet being but one single man he cannot of himself discern
the universality of a tradition so well as the whole Catholic body may do, and
therefore he never defines faith but with that Body conciliarly assembled: and if
himself ith interim should light upon an opinion, how probable soever it may
seem by human arguments yet must he himself as well as other Christians lay it
aside if it be confronted by Catholic tradition the great and unresistable Rule
of Christianity, and resign himself. And it seems a principle of faith had
delivered unto Christians this belief, that a soul once expiated goes to
heaven. Pope John tho he had reason to suspect so much, so that he might have
abstained from propounding his thesis: yet he did not propound it in councels
where faith is determined, but in Schools where opinions are disputed, and
distinguished from faith; and upon that account was he justly to be excused. Yet
was that good Prelat so tender conscienced, that he is said to have asked the
world forgivenes at his death, if they took any offense thereat; adding wthal
that he did it only to give them occasion to search more narrowly whether the
opinion were not consonant to tradition, although it had not been yet heeded.

If then neither Pape nor council can go contrary to the received ways of the
Church in any thing: how shall I be able to do it, except I make shipwreck of
my faith as S. Paul affirms Hymeneus to have don even by one falls opinion,
though otherwis a Christian. 1 Timothy 1.19. For a lesser leak will drown a ship,
if it be not stopped or pumpt out; so will any one error in faith sink a self
opiniating spirit. For in the least we shall as truly resist God the first
revealing verity as in the greatest: and to gainsay him in any little thing who
is equally infallible in all, is no les than blasphemy and an insolence
intolerable. Since it stands not with his diety to be mistaken in the smallest
matter, or mislead his church therein.

LA. The church me thinks for the quiet and safty of a kingdom might well
condescend to some opinions that be not so much material, put case they were
falls: for in evils the les is to be chosen, and that opinion cannot be so bad
as the ruin of a whole Kingdom.


KN. The Church being a just depositary cannot teach otherways than she has
receivd in any affair. Besides Christ will have his spous to be wthout spot or
wrinkle or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. and that opinion being against her
tradition, it cannot but make a wrinkle or spot or some such thing at least in
her. It Is sacriledg with us to rob or steal any thing out of a material temple;
what then would it be to purloin the Churches doctrine. To rent her own seamles
garment or make the least hole in it, were an action unbeseeming the wisdom and
modesty of the heavenly spous. She will never do it, nor no member of her
body, (such as by Gods grace I am) can do it without death and ruin to it self.
Try that will; whosoever entertains but one particular misbeleef, he shall soon
find that being thereby separated from the Catholic body, he or his successors
will soon attempt another, and never lin till all be laid wast. Besides the
Church being but a depositaty, or keeper of the doctrine committed to her charg,
has not power over it to exhang, distrain or make it away at her pleasur,
against the rules of honesty. And if she should to content one sort of
innovatours, chang or relent in one thing; others that would innovat in another
may justly challeng the same favor, and what should she then have had
remaining to her self after so many innovations made by heretics in so many
ages? I think very little or nothing at all by this time.


It Is worth your consideration to ponder this. For so you may perceiv both the
integrity of this immaculat spous in conserving the doctrine wherewith she has
been entrusted entire and wholly sincere: and the madness of all sectarys, who
would each in their wild fansys have the churches compliance with them to her
own ruin: and being denied, flew out into all exorbitances against her, and
forfeyted at once by their self opinions and obstinacy both the title of
Catholic they had till then enjoyed, and the security they had in the churches
bosom. This is a worthy and profitable speculation. And therefore I shall
endeavor to speak thereof, with as much order and method as can well be used in
a matter of such disorder as the confused heap of heresys jumbled together may
admit.

THe Churches doctrine is partly about the creation and Scriptures of the old
Testament; partly about our redemption, and things peculiar to Christianity,
their persons or places, precepts or counsels, vices or virtues, Sacraments,
and works, either moral, natural or political; in all which several heretics
have at times sought to bring in innovations; which had the church complied
wthall, she had had little or nothing left her by this time. Nay she should
have contradicted her self continually, and said and denied the same things.

The extravagancys concerning the creation, either opposed the authority of
canonical books, or judgd amiss of the divine nature, angels and souls, the
beginning of the world, the condition of Adam and Eve our first parents,
Melchisedek and the like things which were antecede^t to our redemption.

Carpocrates and Cerdon in the time of pope Hygin rejected all the old
Testament; Ebion on the other side made the old Testament to be of equal
authority with the new, and out of the new he cast forth al S Paul's Epistles as
erroneous. Cerdon and Marcion disallowed all the Gospells besides S. Luke.
Cerinthus all but S. Matthew: the Alogians received all but S. John. Luther cast
away S. James Epistle, and the books of Maccabees; tho he knew that not only
S. Austin but the whole council of Carthage had received them as canonical.
Severus the Acts of the Apostles. Apelles taught that the Prophets spoke
contradictories and lies; Montanus, that they understood not what they said;
though they are called seers for their understandig, Isa. 1. and are said to
speak as inspired by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. With which of these should the
church comply? and how.

The Gnostics would have two Gods, one from whence issue good things, the
other author of evil. The Anthropomorphits in the time of pope Damasus would
have God to be truly corporeal as man is. The Armenians because God had said
that Cain should not be slain by any man, would needs have him a lier, because
Cain slew himself. Sabellius in the time of pope Sixtus 2. would not admit any
more then one person in God* Arrius in pope Sylvesters time opposed the
equality of the three divine persons. The Alogians acknowledged not the Son of
God to be the word. The Ignoites maintained that Christ was ignorant of some
things, in particular of the day of judgment. Macedonius in the time of pope
Liberius made the Holy Ghost inferior to the Father and Son, not of the same
essence with them, but a creatur. Petrus Abaylardus said that the Holy Ghost was
the soul of the world. The Greeks that he proceeded not from the Father and
Son. Abaylardus again, that power was not appropriated but proper to the
Father, wisdom to the Son, and bounty to the Holy Spirit.

The Manichees contended that the devil is evil by his own nature and not
made so by his fall. Origin, that the devils should at length be deliverd from
hell. Hermannus Risswick in the year 1512. held with much stiffnesse that
neither the good Angels nor bad were created of God. The church of God resisted
all these: could she do otherwise?

Others denied the creation of the soul imediatly by God; Seleucus affirming
that it is made by Angels, of spirit and fire. Tertullian, that the soul of the
Son is made by the soul of his Father, as his body by his body. The Gnostics
on the other side, said it was made of the substance of God himself: which was
afterward defended by the Manichees the wild offspring of Manes a Persian, who
affirmd himself to be both Christ and the Paraclet too, and sent out his twelv
Disciples about the world to spread abroad his haeretical dogmes, who were much
multiplied in the time of pape Foelix. Tertullian thought that the souls of
wicked men were after death turned into devils; which surely is an error if he
speak of a physical and not of a moral turning. The Arabians on the other side
affirmed that all souls quite perish with their body: which atheism was also
defended by the above named Rissnick the Hollander. The Albigenses in the time
of Pope Jnnocent 3. averd according to Pythagoras his doctrine that souls pas
from one body to another. Origin, that they were created before the body, and
imprisond therein for some offense committed; which opinion is assuredly against
the common judgment of Catholics. The Gnostiks, that all bruit beasts were
masters of understanding and reason. The church if she had desired to have
done it, would have found something to do to comply with all these men.

Seleucus and Hermias would have the matter whereof the world was made to be
coeternall with God and not created. Foelix a Manichean affirmd the same of the
Earth. Others of Water. The Albanenses said, that the world should never end.
Simon Magus, as also the Gnostics and Manichees said that the world was made
of the ill God, and not by the good one; and that corporal creatures and man's
body were therefore evil in themselves and in their own substance. Florinus in
the time of Pope Eleutherius, taught that God (whom he acknowledgd to be both
one and good,) did notwthsta^ding evil things with a positiv purpos of il, as
to harden men's hearts and deceiv them. Coluthius an Egiptian on the other side
denied God to inflict so much as the evil of punishment. Tatianus in the time
of Pope Julius the first, affirmed that Adam and Eve were for their sin
perpetually damned. And yet notwthstanding wisdom is said to have brought him
who was first formed and father of the world, out of his sin. Sap. 10. Origin,
that Adam lost by sin the image of God; which was an error surely, if he spoke
properly of his image that is founded in nature, and not of similitud founded in
grace and blessedness. Pelagius in the time of Honorius and Theodosius the
younger, avouched that Adam died not through demerit of his fault, but
condition of nature, and so had died although he had not find. The Armenians,
inhabitants of Asia betwixt Taurus and Caucasus after their separation from the
Catholic church (which happend as I remember upon the council of Chalcedon
wherein Eutiches Abbot and Dioscorus Bishop of Constantinople were condemnd,
whose conciliary acts the Armenians would not receiv but made themselves a primat
of their own) they fell into many errors; amongst which one was, that Adam and
Eve if they had not sind had never engendered children; and therefore they held
marriage to be unlawful. Philaster mentions others who maintained that Adam and
Eve before they had sinned were blind. These be blind guids for the church of
Christ to follow. How many ways should she turn to trace all these men's steps.
In a a word, (not to insist longer upon the old Testament) S. Austin and S.
Epiphanius in their Books of Heresys mention some who taught that Melchisedeck
was not a pure man but some divine virtue or Christ himself. It Is easy to say any
thing of every thing.

VIC. O the father, what a number of pretty opinions be here. Truly I find in
my heart to hold some of them. They were most witty interpreters of Scriptur.
Pray go on sweet Sr Harry, this is the best discourse you ever made yet, go on,
it delights me exceedingly, according as it is written Thy lips drop as the
honey comb, Cant. 4. The more you speak the more my appetit increases.


MIN. Pray Sr let us break this discourse which I was not aware of, and com to
matter I have furnished my self wthall for your conversion. This talk corrupts
my wife.


VIC. Earth to earth, and ashes to ashes. Pray be content and let me be
corrupted the^. Thou fool that which thou sowest is not quickend except it dye.
Look in the 15. c. of the Corinthians, and expound me that place. And then tell
me first, if in right Logic corruption go not before generation; tell me
secondly who is that same Thou fool.


LA. I could willingly have Sr Harry to go on in this his speech, for it is not
altogether unprofitable to hear it, and I conceiv not dangerous to us. For
nothing (I hope) can hurt such as be well confirmd in their religion.


VIC. No forsooth, for it is written of protestants and Independents, If they
drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, Mar. 16.


KN. The errors and wild opinions that have rose in Christianity about the
particulars of the new Testament have been so many and various in several ages
of the church, that it is hard to bring them into method. Our Doctors set them
down in every age as they rose; naming with them the Catholic divines who wrote
against them, the councels that condemnd them, the time they lasted, and the
mischiefs they did in the world. I shall endeavor as well as I may to reduce
them all according to my forementiond method unto three sorts; errors namely
against persons, places and actions of Christian faith. Persons, as Christ our
Lord, the blessed Virgin Mary, S. John, the Saints, Pope, Counsels, etc.


As concerning Christ our Lord I. Ebion about the time of Pape Cletus
maintained that Christ our Lord was but pure man; against whom S. John,
entreated by the Bishops and Priests of Asia wrote his Gospel. With Ebion joind
Cerinthus and Carpocrates; and after them Theodotus of Bizantium who being
under persecution denied Christ; also Paulus Samosatenus in Syria under Pape
Victor; with his disciple Photinus. II. Others on the other side denyd him to
have any human nature at all; as Cerdon in the time Pape Higin; and the
Proclianites, people of Galatia, who taught that Christ came not in flesh. III.
Apelles after them said that Christ took not flesh of his mother, but of the
elements; which at his resurrection he rendered again to the world, entering heaven
wthout any flesh or body at all. IV. The Manichees affirmd his body was
fantastical: so also Priscillianus, who therefore neither heeded his nativity
nor resurrection 5. Valentinus contemporary with Cerdon; that the body of Christ
was no true body, but heavenly, which passed through his Virgin mother as through
a pipe. VI. Apollinaris of Laodicea in Syria in the time of Constantius so^ of
Constantin the Great, that Christ in his incarnation converted some part of the
divine word into flesh, and so took not flesh of the Virgin. S. Athanasius,
Ambrose and Cyrill wrote against this heresy. VIII. Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople in the time of Emp. Theodosius the younger taught, that there were
in Christ not only two naturs, but two persons also; After him dead and
condemnd in the council of Ephesus, Gnapheus Bishop of Antioch renewed his
error; and was himself also condemned in the fifth Synod of Constantinopl. IX.
On the otherside Eutiches abbot of a certain monastery in Constantinople in the
time of Pape Leo the first, taught that there were in Christ not only one person,
but one nature also. This Eutiches was wthstood by Flavian Bishop of the place
who condemnd his opinion: whereupon arose a great feud among the Christians of
the East, some defending others condemning Eutiches; and in that tumult a Synod
was appointed at Ephesus by Theodosius junior, wherein Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria who was himself infected with Eutiches his error, presided; there
Eutiches was restored and Flavian condemnd: This was the second Ephesin Synod
which all Catholics abhord, being made wthout the presence or apointment of the
Pape, and consisting only of men infected with Eutichism. But the heresy was
afterward judged and condemned in a legal council at Chalcedon, and also an
Ephesin council called the third Synod about the end of their decrees. X.
Arrius and after him Apollinaris maintained that Christ had only a body and
not a soul: against this also is the said Chalcedon and Ephesin council in 13.
cap. of their Decrees, as also a Roman council under Pape Damasus. XI.
Macarius Bishop of Antioch with his Monothelits affirmed there were in Christ but
one will: for which he was condemnd in the sixth Constantinopolitan Synod under
Pape Agatho about the year 698. XII. Basilides, in the Apostles time and after
him Marcus and the Marcites said that Christo was not crucified, but Simon
Cyreneus who carried his cross. S Paul was of another mind, we preach Christ
crucified, 1 Cor. 1. XIII. Bassus about the Apostls times, taught that
salvation was not to be hoped for, either in Christ's corporal presence or
Majesty: And a long while after him Petrus Abailardus, that the Son of God was
not incarnat to the end he might redeem man, neither had Satan ever any right
in man. This heresy as it is against the Nicen creed, so also is it opposed by
a Creed made in the Constantin council called the second Synod, and by the
Ephesin council called the third Synod. ult. o. Decretor. and by the Chalcedon
council called the fourth Synod. XIV. Petrus Joannis, averd that Christ on the
cross was gored with the Soldiers Lance whilst he was living, and not after
his death: this opinion being contrary to Gospel was dashed in the council of
Vienna under Pope Clement the fifth. XV. Cerinthus affirmed that Christ was not
yet risen from the dead. But then says the Apostle, Our faith is in vain, 1
Cor. 1.


These be the principal heresies I read of concerning Christ our Lord, contrary
to the churches doctrine; which teaches that Christ our Lord was perfect God, and
perfect man, being one person in two naturs, the one divine by eternal
generation received from the Father of light and being, the other human from
the Virgin Mary, consisting of a true body and perfect soul; unto which two
naturs he had answerably two wills divine and human; the human nature
hypostatically united to God was nailed to the cross for our reconciliation,
and after he had rendered up his spirit, gored with a lance; which nature after our
Lords resurrection ascended up into heavenly glory.

Concerning the Blessed Virgin Mary ever most highly reverenced under God by
all Christians upon earth, till Luther opend to this wicked world a door of
blasphemy, I find few or no ancient heresys at all. Good S. Denis the Areopagit
having the happiness to see her while she was yet living, is said to have been
so astonished at the unusual Majesty of that sacred person that he is reported
to have said, that if Catholic faith had not taught him otherwise he should
wthout any demur have adored her as a diety. I have read also of some amongst the
ancient Christians that were blamed by the Catholic Prelates for some excess of
devotion toward that sacred Virgin; as if they had held her a diety by supreme
adoration and incense; but I have forgot their names; I suppose being better
advised by their Bishops, they soon conformed themselves to that reverence was
due to so blessed an instrument of our welfar, and so the error was redrest.
But who should dare to disable or diminish either in word or deed that divine
Virgin I never read of any who bore the name of Christian (according to her own
prophesy in Gospel, Lo from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed)
until Helvidius contemporary with S. Jerome was bold to say, that after the
birth of Christ she accompanied S. Joseph: which all Christians ears abhord, the
whole church ever reverencing her as perpetual Virgin, both before, and in,
and after childbirth: for which virginity and solitud our Lord upon the cross
committed her to the care of S. John the Evangelist, saying to him, Ecce matter
tua. The body of our Lord being indeed of so venerable a sanctity, that he
would not that any should so much as ly in his sepulcher, much less in the
temple of his nativity. I do not find that either Luther or Calvin vented any
blasphemy against this Venerable Creatur: but followers of heresy do some of
them out go their leaders.

Some Manichees held that S. John Baptist (that glorious morning star) was damnd
for not believing in Christ, as Bernard de Luxenburg recounts in his Catalogue
of Heretics. Yet Christ himself testified that there was not amongst men a
greater than he.

Concerning saints in general, their worship and power: I. That the saints in
heaven are not to be honored or prayed unto, was the heresy of Eustachius
condemned in the council of Gangres c. 20. decret. and after him Vigilantius,
Wicleph and Luther. This heresy is also judged in the council at Orleans, c.
23. decret. II. The Lollards in England following Wicleph, and before him
Vigilantius who was a French Priest, and before him Eunomius taught that the
Relics of Saints were not to be kept or reverenced. S. Jerome rose up against
this heresy, and the council of Lateran under Pape Innocent the third censurd
it. III. That no true miracles are done at Saints shrines was stiffly
maintained by the Waldenses a company of men no les insolent than ignorant, and
indeed plain idiots, who denied any Miracles ever to have been wrought in the
Church, not knowing perhaps that our Lord had said, In my name they shall cast
out devils, Mar. ult.


As concerning other persons in the church, Bishops, Priests, judges,
Magistrates, Religious. I. Wicleph following the simple Waldenses, and Huss
following Wicleph taught, that all Bishops are equal in authority and
jurisdiction. Luther being excomunicated by Pape Leo the tenth for his
innovations and pertinacy therein, following Huss said that the Pape was no more
than another Bishop. In the same error for some time were the Grecians who for
the heresies of Nestorius condemnd in the Ephesin Synod, and of Dioscorus and
Eutiches condemned in the Chalcedon council had separated themselves from the
unity of the Church; as also the Armenians who had don the like upon contempt
of the decrees of Chalcedon: but in the council of Florence under Pape
Eugenius the fourth, both the Greeks and Armenians after a long dispute
submitted themselves to the Church: and in that council the Papes primacy was
confirmed and acknowledged by all both Greeks and Latins. II. The
Pseudapostoli, Wicleph and Huss avouched, that both Prelat and Prince, by any
mortal sin forfeited all their authority; condemnd in the council of
Constance, Sess. 8. as also in the council of Trent both under pope Paul,
Sess. 7. and Julius, Sess. 4. III. The Waldenses, denied he had power of
indulgences, or remission of temporal penaltys; censurd by the council of
Constance, Sess. 8. VI. The Pseudapostoli denied any obedience to be due either
to Pape or Prelates, or any one but Christ: as also the Beguins and Bogards
taught that a man that is come to the state of perfection is bound to obey no
man. V. The simple Waldenses and their ape Wicleph affirmd, that neither the
Apostles nor their successors had authority to make any decretalls or cannon
Law. Against these is the council of Vienna under Pope Clement the fifth, and
the council of Constance, Sess. 8. and 15. VI. The Vadians or Anthropomorphits
and after them the Waldenses held that neither pape nor church could enjoy any
temporal possessions. The same mischievous doctrine was taught afterward by
Wicleph the poor men of Lions shadow, and after him by Luther that grand licker
up of excrements, who by that doctrine invited the German Princes to rob the
goods of the Church. This error is condemnd also in the said council of
Constance, Sess. 8. VII. John de Wessalia condemnd at Mentz in the time of the
emperor Frederick the third taught that both Pape and Church might err. VIII.
Donatus in Africa, in the time of Pope Liberius and emperor Constantius taught
that none but good men were wthin the church. This Donatus taking it ill that
Cecilianus was ordaind Bishop of Carthage, he calumniated him in things he
could not prove or make good, for the which he was declared by the judges a
juggling knave: upon this ignominy he divided himself from the Church, giving
it out that the true Church was only on his side, and not with them that
favored Caecilianus; and so going on from one thing to another infected almost
all Africa in the time of Pape Julius. This heresy of his was taken up by
Rogatus and the Circumcellions, and afterward by Huss and Luther; and written
against by S. Austin in very many places, and condemnd at last by the council
of Constance, Sess. 15. IX. That the noble senate of Christian Prelates met
together in general counsels erred in their decrees and canons was the
opinion first of Arrius, who was himself condemnd in the council of Nice;
then of Nestorius who had been censurd in the council of Ephesus; then of
Eutiches and Dioscorus who had been judgd in the council of Chalcedon; then of
Huss the Boheman and Wicleph who was cast in the council of Constance; and
lastly of Luther whose wicked doctrine was anathematisd in the council of
Trent. This heresy (if it may not rather be styled blasphemy against Christ and
his church whom he promisd to confirm in all truth) is largely confuted by John
Bishop of Rochester, Iodocus Chlitoueus, William Ockam, John Eckius, and
several other Catholic doctors. X. That all Priests are equal, and a Bishop
is nothing above an ordinary Priest was the error first of Aerius, then of the
Waldenses, Wicleph and Luther; condemnd by S. Austin in his book of heresies,
c. 53. Whether Episcopacy be another order or only another degree in the same
order, it is certain that in the old Law the chief priest or Bishop had distinct
vestments, and entered the Sancta sanctorum which others did not; and in the new
Testament a Bishop constitutes Priests, Tit. 1. not contrary; nor is any
Disciple in the Acts of the Apostles read to have used imposition of hands, but
only the Apostles. And so the second council of Hispala declares that
confirmation belongs only to the Bishop. XI. Luther more fondly added that all
Christians are equally Priests, forgetting that Holy Scriptur expressly speaks
of segregating or setting apart some from the rest to that function; I left
thee at Crete that thou should constitute Priests, Tit. 1. XII. The filthy
fellow added that Priests ought not to be unmarried or separated from women
(wherein he exceeded Iovinian who indeed equalled marriage with virginity, but
blamed none for remaining single, himself living so to avoid the troubles of
wedlock.) This he taught the better to justify himself who being a Priest and a
Religious man of the Hermits of S. Austin had revolting seduced a Nun. The same
was done and taught by Occolompadius who had been a monk of S. Brigit, Bucer a
Dominican friar, and the rest of Luthers retinue. Impiously wthout doubt for it
was prohibited a Priest to marry in the very beginning of the church by the
canons of the Apostles, can. 27. and afterward by the Neocesarian council, c.
1. decret. and it appears in sacred Scriptur it self that such was the practis
of primitiv times. XIII. The Pepusians of old promoted women not only to the
Priest but Priesthood too. XIV. All universitys or general studies for clargy
men are condemnd by Wicleph, as brought into the church by paganism;
forgetting, that the Apostle exhorts Timothy a good Christian to remain
permanent in the things he had learnd, 2. Tim. 1. and that in the very Apostles
days the Christians constituted schools at Antioch, Act. 14. and afterward at
Alexandria, wherein Panthenus was first prefect, then Clemens, then Origin. And
therefore the council of Constance justly condemnd this error amongst the rest,
sess. 8. against the 29. articl. XV. As also that other opinion of his, wherein
he taught that superiors, be they Ecclesiastical Prelates or Kings, may be
punnisht by subjects at their pleasur, by with drawing tithes or tribut, or
otherwise, sess. 8. against his 27. art. Indeed the opinion is a way to all
rebellion and disorder in church and state. XVI. Finally that no degree may
escape, the Waldenses and Luther inveighed bitterly against religious orders, as
the invention of the devil, affirming that the founders of them were damnd for
it if they repented not, and that none could be saved in them: which desperate
madness was censurd also in the said council of Constance, Sess. 8. And
strongly confuted, by Chlitoveus, Roffensis Albertus, Thomas Waldensis a
Carmelit, and before them by S. Thomas and S. Chrysostom. XVII. To prevent all
danger on any hand for any heresy or disorder, the Waldenses spread abroad that
no judge can condemn any man to punishment. But they either forgot or simple
souls never knew that S. Paul says, if ye do evil fear; for the magistrate
bears not the Sword in vain. XVIII. There were others who taught that no
heretics were to be punished but left to Gods judgment. 19. The Rhetorii says
Philaster, affirmed that al heretics thought aright. XX. Nicolaus Eimericus
reports of others in the time of Pape Gregory the eleaventh, who affirmed that
any one that commits a mortal sin is an heretic. XXI. S. Austin testifies of
the heretics called Ophitae, that they worshipped the Serpent that beguiled Eve;
and the Caiani respected Judas for a Saint, for that he was cause of our
redemption.


These be some extravagant opinions of sectarys concerning several persons in
the church, kings and subjects, religious men, clargy men, priests, students,
bishops, the Senate of prelates, popes, Saints, Christ and what not; so
sensles, so wild, so inconsistent, so contradictory, that the wisdom and
integrity of the Church of God were not able to suffer, much less approve
them; being contrary many of them to common honesty, others to right reason,
all of them to Christian faith. How shall the immaculate spous comply? heaven
and hell may sooner come together I think.

VIC. It Is a mavelous thing Sr Harry, you can have all these opinions in your
head, and hold none of them. What difference is there betwixt having and
holding. If I should ever think of them, they would mingle with my creed. I can
beleev any thing if it be not popery; and take all that coms, as I did my
Husband, to have and to hold for better and for wors, as it is written.


MIN. Com, you speak like one of the foolish women.


VIC. How did you speak when you took me with the very same words, and said with
a blithe and bucksom countenance I John. You have been a year or two at a pagan
university, where you learnt to worship Judas for a Saint, and you are so proud
upon it: deny if you dare that I understand the bible which is the highest book
in the world: wherein then can you exceed me? It Is true, you are a parson; but
is it not written, I have more understanding than my teachers, Psa. 119.99. You
would fain com in with your few texts against Sr Harry that you have been
scribbling out of a concordance, being out of all patience that his Discourse
keeps you back. Pray be content, it is as pleasing to me to hear talk of these
men, as of my own father and mother that begat me, expect your kue good sweet
Husband. Your hour is not yet come, as it is written.


LA. It Is agreed upon Sr Harry that you proceed in your discourse. Mr Doctor in
the end will I beleev make use of it all to his own advantage.


KN. I have declared some several odd conceptions of men concerning sundry
persons in the church. Others there be concerning places, as the temple or
place of worship; purgatory after life; hell and heaven: which opinions
maintained with pertinacy caused the authors thereof to be cast out of the
Catholic body of Gods church wherein they had been members.


I. Eustachius derided all Saints temples. The Waldenses afterward would have
all churches taken away as too much straitning the majesty of God whose temple
is the wide world. The Pseudapostoli added that a consecrated church is no more
worth than a swine sty; as also Zisca the German, who with his companions whom
he called Taborites from mount Tabor where Christ was transfigured, spoild and
defaced all holy places they came near: The council of Gangres defined
against this madness, c. 5. decret. II. The same Waldenses would not endure
that time should be spent in saying the canonical hours in the church: and
their ape Wicleph gave his reason for it, because forsooth it is not fit that
Christians should be tied to prayer at any time. This reason, if it were worth
any thing would destroy the Sabbath. But all singing in the church they scofft
at, as nois made to Baal. The Arrians before them disprooud singing in Catholic
churches; but their reason was, because of so many Hymns and anthems made in the
honor of Christ against their impious opinion. Against al these is the council
of Gangres, c. 30. decret. III. That all images are to be taken out of churches
was stiffly maintained both by the said Waldenses and their squire Wicleph: For
which heresy long before their time Leo the third, emperor in Constantinople was
excomunicated by Pape Gregory the third: yet notwthstanding the emperor
Constantin the fifth, and emperor Leo the fourth his son adhered still to it;
but after his death Irene his wife ruling the empire in the name of the Infant
Constantin the sixth, obtained the second Nicen counsel to be called, where by
three hundred and fifty Bishops the heresy was condemnd; though Constantin the
sixth being of age would not submit to the council: which was one of the mainest
causes of the dislike and grudg between the Latin and Greek emperors. The
error was afterward condemnd in the council of Frankford under pape Adrian
the first. IV. The adoration given in Catholic temples unto the cross and
crucifix, the above named John Wicleph an english Priest who lived about the
year 1380. would by all means have taken away; But Thomas Waldensis his
country man and almost contemporary still confuted him and his blind Lugdunian
guides, who were also judgd and condemnd by all the Prelates in Constance. V.
There also was censurd another error of theirs; that preaching in temples
should be lawful for any, although prohibited by superiors. VI. The said
Wicleph denied tiths to be due to Priests, serving at the Altar, preaching and
praising God; which error was also condemnd in the 18 place at Constance. But
this opinion he had from the Pseudapostoli whose ringleader was Gerardus
Sagarellus of Parma who was burnt in the year 1260. VII. Both the Waldenses
and Wiclevits blasphemd all benedictions of water, candls, palms, altars,
challices, churches; forgetting or not believing that every creature is
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, 1. Tim. 4. VIII. No less peremptory
was Wicleph, Huss and Luther against excomunications from church and altar,
inflicted on scandalous sinners and obstinate Heretics, calling them the
censurs of Antichrist; not heeding that S. Paul himself practiced it, I
thought good says he, to deliver him up to Satan, that his Spirit might be
safe, 1. Cor. 5. IX. Finally all Christian burial in holy ground the said
Waldenses contemned as impertinent and vain. These be the extravagant opinions
concerning Temples.


As for Purgatory: I. Some Greeks and Armenians avoucht there is no such place,
wherein souls after their separation are purgd from dregs contracted in the
body. But the council of Florence under pope Eugenius the fourth confirmd the
contrary Catholic doctrine. II. Luther afterward, allthough he held Purgatory,
yet he had three errors concerning it: first he taught that souls there might
themselves either merit or demerit; again that a soul there was not certain of
his salvation; thirdly that a soul there, does sin so long as it abhors those
pains, and seeks rest. The same authority from whence he had the belief of
purgatory, might if he had listed have conserved him from these misbeleefs
concerning it. III. That almsdeeds, prayers, pennances and Sacrifices made by
the living for the dead and souls in purgatory, do nothing at all avail for
their releasment; was the heresy and error first of Aerius, then of the
Armenians, then of the Albigenses then of the Waldenses, and lastly of Luther.
But it is confuted by S. Austin, S. Gregory, Theophylact and S. Chrysostom.
And four counsels have defined against it; Carthaginense quartum, c. 95.
Valense, c. 4. decr. Toletanum, c. 22. and Florentinum for the union of the
Greeks under pope Eugenius the fourth.


As for Hell. I. Almaricus stiffly denied it; affirming there was no other hell,
but only a man's own conscience guilty of sin; The Albanenses said that the
punishments of hell were no other than what we suffer in this world: Hermannus
Risswick wthout any exposition denied any such thing as hell at all. II. Origin
taught that the pains of hell were not to be eternal. Both these fancies are
against Gospel; and rejected by the council of Lateran under pope Innocent
the third.


Heaven the place of eternal bliss I make no doubt but that many men born
Christians if they fell into heresys came at length to that Atheism as to deny
it, since I meet with so many here in England who deride it as a fiction: But I
have not read of any in authentic authors who did so: though concerning the
resurrection unto that bliss, and final beatitud many are said to have held
erroneously.

As for Resurrection, there have been at times five erroneous opinions. 1. The
sadducees amongst the Jews, and among the Christians, first Simon Magus, then
Valentin, Apelles, Marcus and Cerdon, denied all resurrection of the flesh.
Against these writes S. Paul. 1 Cor. 15. II. Eutichius Bishop of Constantinople
taught that the body after its resurrection should be invisible and unpalpable.
S. Gregory (not then Pope) sent thither ambassador from the Apostolic sea
confuted him openly before Tiberius Constantin then emperor, so that Tiberius
caused Eutichius his book to be burnt. III. Origin said that our bodies after
resurrection should be still mortal, and after many ages fall to dust, never
to rise more. Expressly against Scriptur where it is said that mortal shall put on
imortality, 1 Cor. 15. VI. The Armenians, defended that all should rise again
in man's sex. But if this had been true doctrine, the^ our Lord by saying so, had
easlier answered the Sadduces argument, than by saying as he did, that none
should marry, but they shall all be as the Angels of God, Math. 22. Lastly the
same Armenians affirmd that our Lord rose not upon sunday, but on the Saturday
before. Me thinks it should be a hard task for them to show how he rose the
third day since he died on Friday.


As for Beatitude. 1. the Armenians, and after them Petrus Abailardus, a French
man in the time of Pape Innocent the second; then Arnaldus Brixiensis, from
whence perhaps came those heretics Arnaldistae excomunicated yearly at Rome in
caena Domini; and lastly Almaricus, affirmed that the blessed in heaven do not
see Gods essence, but behold him in his creatures. S. Paul is contrary to
these, Now we see by a mirror in an enigm, then we shall see face to face, 1
Cor. 13. II. Cerinthus would have heavenly beatitude to consist in the delights
of the flesh, and that Christ's kingdom after the resurrection should be
earthly: which error he drew from some carnal Jews, being himself contemporary
with S. John the Apostle. But it is gainsayed by S. Paul, The Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink but justice and peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis did indeed teach that Christ after the general
resurrection should reign upon earth with his faithful retinue, who had been
sufferers here, a thousand years; drawn to that opinion by such a speech in
Apocalips; c. 20. and after him Irneus, Apollinaris, Lactantius, Victorius
Pictavensis. But they held not the same as Cerinthus: nor were pertinacious in
their opinion against the church, which I think expounds that place of the
blesseds reign with Christ according to the soul, from the howr of death to the
general judgment: for there it is added Haec est resurrectio prima, this is the
first resurrection, namely of the soul after the bodies death. III. Origin
taught that neither misery nor beatitude should be eternal; for he conceived
certain alternations or vicissitudes of both; so that the blessed souls after
some years should return to mortal bodies, and thence be called again to
beatitude, in a kind of circle. But all Scripture is against this fansy.
Between us and you is a great Chaos, so that such as would pass from hence to
you, cannot etc. Luke 16. IV. That most perfect final beatitude is to be had
in this life, was one of the errors of the Bogards and Beguins, religious men
and women in Germany; censured as I remember in the council of Vienna under
Pape Clement the fifth. The Bogards suffered for their obstinacy, whereat the
women afrighted submitted themselves and remain to this day, living honestly in
a society wthout emission of any vow, so that when they pleas they may go forth
and marry. V. The same partys said, that an intellectual nature is blessed
naturally in it self. It had been well, they had remembered that the grace of
God is life eternal, Romans 6. VI. The Armenians taught that no soul is
beatified before doomsday (as also some Greeks, adding that sinners are not
punished till that day.) This is the opinion Pope John the 22. propounded to the
University of Paris. But it was gainsayed by the council of Florence under Pope
Eugenius the fourth, as contrary to the churches belief; and the Scripture it
self does in a manner expressly refute it. We know if our earthly house of this
habitation be dissolved, we have a house not made by hands eternal in the
heavens, 2 Cor. 5. At least Catholic tradition which is the only interpreter of
Scriptur and judge of all controversies has cast it. VII. That all shall be
equal in glory was the paradox of Jovinian a Roman monk in the time of Pape
Damasus and Siricius, who leaving his profession ran himself into many
heresies: this opinion is no other; for there is one clarity of the Sun,
another brightness of the moon, another of the Stars, and as one star differs
from another in glory, so also shall be the resurrection of the dead Cor. 15.
Jerome wrote two books against Jovinian; and this opinion is disabled by the
authority of the council of Theles in Africa under Pape Siricius; and of
Florence under Pape Eugenius the fourth.


VIC. You might Sr Harry have named my husband and me for many of these
opinions wthout troubling your self with such u^couth names; for we hold them
too, and so long as God gives us life and health shall do so still; according as
it is written, Hold that fast which thou have, Rev. 3.11. Nay I hold others too
which you now mentiond, though I never heard of them before according as it is
written, We beseech you brethren that ye increass more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.


LA. Pray S. Harry speak something concerning the Sacraments, and what devises
have been about them.


KN. Madam I am now come to it. I. the heretics called Cathari denied all
Sacraments; the Armenians, and long after them Martin Luther Father of the
Protestants admitted some according to their own liking, but denied that any
had intrinsecall virtue to confer grace. But the council of Trent under Pape
Paul the third, sesse. 7. both defined the Sacraments to be seven in number
according to the Catholic tradition, and to confer grace ex opere operato. II.
That sacred things and spiritual gifts might be purchased with money was the
error of Simon Magus, (and the action from him termed Simony) condemnd in the
11 Toletan council, c. 8. decret. and before by S. Peter himself, Non est tibi
pars, Act. 8. III. Luther taught that in no Sacrament was imprinted any
character: contrary to the churches doctrine which teaches such a seal to be
made in baptism, confirmation and holy orders; confirmd by the council of
Carthage, Florence and Trent under Paul the third. Sess. 7. can. 9.



In particular, concerning Baptism there have been many errors. I. Seleucus
and Hermias Galatians baptized not in water, but fire. But the council of
Florence under Eugenius the fourth defined water to be the natural matter of
Baptism. II. The Marcites, disciples of one Marcus a magician, about the
Apostles time changed the form of Baptism, doing it In the name of the unknown
Father of all things, and in truth the Mother of all, and in him who descended
upon Jesus. For they held that God preached in the old law was not the Father of
Christ, because he was unknown. The Cataphygians and Paulianists also did not
baptize in the name of the Trinity as Catholics do, according to command of
Gospel, Baptiseing them in the name of the Father Son, and holy Ghost, Mat.
28. III. The said Cataphygians baptized the dead: They had their name from the
Province of Phrygia whence they came; their leader was Montanus (who called
himself the Paraclet) and Prisca and Maximilla his two Prophetesses. The
Marcionists did the same, who finding any to dye unbaptised they put a living
man under the hers of the dead, and asked him as if he were the dead man, if he
desired to be baptized; answering yea, they baptized him for the dead, which
thing they said S. Paul himself did practice, 1. Cor. 15. although Marcion
their leader is not read to have don any such thing: but few heretics content
themselves with the errors of their leaders. Marcion himself was in the time of
Antoninus Pius, his country Pontus, a great stoic Philosopher, and being
converted to Christian faith, he followed the dogmes of Cerdon, intermingling
many Philosophical things with his Christian religion, and coming to Rome he
seduced many Catholics, where meeting with S. Polycarp, and asking him if he
knew him, I know, quoth S. Polycarp, and do acknowledge the eldest son of
Satan. But against this error both of the Marcionits and Cataphygias is the
definition of the third conncell of Carthage, where it is declared that neither
the Eucharist nor baptism may be given to the dead. IV. The Psallians and
Euchitae attributed no virtue at all to Baptism, but made all sins to be rased
only by Prayer: so likewise the Messalians and Enthusiasts. The Manichees also
thought that baptism exhibited in water was worth nothing. The Albanenses and
Albigenses likewise rejected baptism: and the Armenians took from the
Sacraments all power of conferring grace. Against this heresy is the decre of
the council of Florence under Eugenius the fourth. V. Petrus de Bruis a
Frenchman of Narbona, who was afterward burnt in the Town of S. Giles, said
and taught that baptism was of no avail to Infants that have not the use of
reason. After him one Henricus bore his Standard, from whom the followers of
the heresy were called Henricians and Brusians. After four hundred years the
Anabaptists raised up the heresy again. But S. Denis the Areopagite witnesses
that children were baptized in the Apostles time c. ult. Eccl. Hier. And S.
Cyprian two hundred years after, and S. Austin after him testify that it was
done in their days. And the Catholic practice is confirmd by the council of
Lateran under Pope Innocent the third, by the council of Vienna under Clement
the fifth, and the council of Trent under Paul the third in two Sessions, 5.
Sess. c. 4. 7. Sess. can. 19. VI. The Donatists rebaptised such as came over to
their side: believing that such as came to the true church was to be baptized
again. But the first council of Carthage, c. 1 decret. as also the council of
Vienna under Pape Clement the fifth, and the council of Florence under
Eugenius the fourth defined this opinion as erroneous. S. Cyprian and other
Bishops of Africa held also, that heretics coming to the Catholic church were
to be rebaptised; But this they did not defend against the church with pertinacy
as heretics did, but disputed it as a probable opinion not then in their days
defined, and happly upon suspicion that heretics used not the right form and
matter. One Baltasar a Dutchman of late held morover that all people are to be
baptized again when they come to years of discretion, because he thought the
baptism of infants were of no valiew. But faith teaches there is but one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. as there is but one death of Christ which it figureth: Do ye not
know that so many as are baptized unto Christ, are baptized to his death, Romans
6.3. VII. The Armenians taught that baptism ought to be conferred with the
Eucharist; and that none can be validly baptized unless he be anointed with
chrism. Claudius Taurinensis held baptism without the sign of the cross
imprinted on the forehead to be inefficacious. Indeed the church uses both the
sign of the cross and crism: which the ancient Christians would by no means have
omitted, and the minister of the Sacraments should sin in omitting those or
other rites of the church; yet if in case baptism should be administered in the
right matter and form wthout these, it would have its valiew; so the same
church ever believed. And the Eucharist though happily it might be given to some
with baptism, yet not of necessity; since baptism was instituted long before it.
VIII. The Waldenses on the other side, affirmed that baptism by all means ought
to be received wthout mixtur of holy oil. The leader of these so often named
Waldenses was one Waldo of Lions in France and therefore they were sometime
called Waldenses, sometime Pauperes Lugdunenses, the sect began about the year
1570. condemnd at Rome in a general council. IX. That infants are not to be
baptized was the assertion first of Pelagius, because he thought they had not
original sin; and then of Wicleph, because he thought that the faith and
prayers of their parents sufficed them. But the Milevitan council defined that
baptism was absolutely necessary to infants salvation, as also the council of
Florence under Eugenius the fourth, and the council of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 4.
X. Others there were on the other side, who held that a man in age and of mature
judgment could no ways possibly be saved wthout baptism, how much soever he
might be contrite in heart. But the said Tridentin council under Paul the
third silences these also, Sess. 6. c. 4. XI. Luther, Melanchthon and Bucer
taught that baptism takes not away all sin, because concupiscence remains. But
then baptism should not be a laver of renovation, Tit. 3. Nor should we by
baptism be buried with Christ unto death, Romans 6 Radical or habitual
concupiscence is no sin at al except it be actuated by the consent of reason.
XII. The Flagellantes maintained that in their time baptism of water had
ceased, and baptism of blood succeeded; which thing say they was signified in
Cana of Galile, when at the end of the feast water was turned into wine: And so
they went up and down France whipping themselves till the blood came: when they
were told by their Catholic Prelates, that castigation of body was good, and
allowable, and practiced even by the best Christians, but it ought not be don
with the prejudice of other parcells of faith, reveald in Gospel; they replied
that the whole Gospel at their coming had ceased. These be the principal
mistakes I have taken notice of concerning baptism.


As for Confirmation (which ancient Christians called Consignation from the fact
of the Bishop signing the forhead with crism) the Waldenses denied it to be a
Sacrament. Wicleph their squire did not com home with them in this point, for he
acknowledgd it a Sacrament, but taught it might be conserd by any Priest.
Against both these is the Ispalen council, c. 7. dec. the Tridentin under
Paul the third, Sess. 7. can. 1. as also the Florentin, Toletan, third and
fourth council of Carthage.

As for Penance; Luther bables odly about sacerdotall absolution; affirming
that it is not in it self necessary at all; and that it is efficacious not
because it is given, but believed to be given, whether it be indeed given or no;
and that a man believing himself to be absolved is absolved, whether he be so
or no, although he have not so much, as contrition. The Tridentin counsel
under pope Julius the third blasted this error, Sess. 4. can. 9. II. The same
Luther added that a woman or child gave as good absolution as the Pape. III.
Again he denied there were three parts of Penance, contrition, confession and
satisfaction, as the church had taught. But the council of Florence under
Eugenius, in their definition of faith about the Sacraments given to the
Armenians defined the three parts according to Catholic faith: as likewise the
council of Trent in the sixth session, c. 14. and again in its fourth session
under Julius, c. 4. IV. Novatus a priest in Rome was peremptory, that no
penance wtsoever should ever procure remission to one that had fallen and
finned mortally. The Roman council under pape Cornelius, of fifty Bishops and
as many priests disabled this pernicious error; as also the council of Trent
under Paul the third, the sixth session, in their doctrine of Justification, c.
4. V. Luther affirmed that contrition or sorrow for sins arising from the fear
of hell, was unprofitable; nay a mortal sin. Against this also is the council
of Trent under pope Paul, Sess. 6. can. 8. and again under Julius, Sess. 3. c.
4. VI. That confession to a priest was instituted by man and not by God, was
taught by Petrus Osmensis reader of divinity in Spain; but he was condemnd by
Alphonsus Carillo Archbishop of Toledo, and Primat of Spain by the authority of
pape Sixtus the fourth. Luther after him taught the same. Some oriental
Heretics called Iacobits said it was not necessary to confess to a priest but
to God only: Wicleph thought it superfluous, because of contrition. Waldenses
also took away all confession. But yet that this Catholic confession
notwthstanding was instituted by Christ himself, S. Leo, S. Austin, S.
Ambrose, S. Cyprian, S. Cyrill and all doctors agree; and that it was practisd
in the primitiv times is evident enough in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is
said that the new converts or believers came confessing and declaring their
deeds, Act. 19. And that it is necessary even with contrition is witnessed by the
council of Constance, Sess. 8. and by the council of Trent under Julius the
third, Sess. 4. can. 3.6. VII. Some Greeks also denied restitution to be
necessary. But against the very law of nature which bids to do as we would be done
by, and that famous aphorism of S. Austin, Non dimittitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum.

Against the truth of the holy Eucharist there have risen many falls judgments.
I. The Manichees made not their Eucharist of bare bread which they judged
unclean, but mingld human seed with it; for which purification, they were called
Catharists. II. The Greeks made their Eucharist in leavend bread, thinking our
blessed Savior had consecrated in leaven. And a very great dispute rose about
it; three Gospells saying expressly that our Lord eat his last supper in the
first day of azyms or unleaved bread, and S. John, the day before the Pasch;
which the Latins interpreted to be the evening or beginning of the azyms, the
Greeks the day before it, when leaven was eaten. He that thorougly ponders the
Gospel may see the Greeks were deceived: And though the church in her council
of Florence under Eugenius the fourth for the Union of the Greeks, acknowledged
that a consecration in fermented bread was valid, yet she binds all her priests
to consecrat still in azym. III. The Waldenses in their Eucharist are said not
to consecrat with the usual words of the Church, but with seven Pater Nosters.
IV. That in this Sacrament is not really contained the true body of Christ
several Heretics at times have avoucht it; yet disagreeing in their manner
and reasons for it. Nestorius putting two persons in Christ, said in the
Eucharist was indeed the true flesh, not of God but of pure man. Berengarius
placed the flesh of Christ the Son of God there, not really, but only
significativly. He was the first that broched this wicked fansy in the church;
he was by nation a French man and deacon in the church of S. Maurice, a
captious logician, otherwise wise of small learning in comparison of his great
pride and turbulency, which proceeded so far that pope Leo the ninth to prevent
the fall of Catholics called a council at Vercelles, where Berengarius not
appearing was anathematised; Victor the second succeeding Leo celebrated
another council at Tyrone by Hisdebrand a Roman Cardinal President therein,
wherein Berengarius appearing was confuted by many learned men, especially
Lanfrank our bishop of Canterbury: but he returned afterward to his vomit; for
which cause pape Nicolas the second succeeding Victor congregated a council at
Rome of a hundred and thirteen Bishops, where Berengarius being present
recanted, and died penitentially. About a hundred years after, one Almaricus
raised up the heresy again. A hundred years after him Wicleph revived it, and
in this last age Oecolampadius followed by Suinglius and Calvin. But Luther
cursed all these Sacramentaries with a bitter curs, as perverters of the last
will and Testament of the Son of God. V. Luther admitted the real presence of
our Lords body in the Eucharist, but the substance of the bread to remain also.
This companation is rejected as not conformable to Catholic tradition by the
council of Lateran under Innocent the third, and the council of Trent under
Julius, Sess. 3. c. 4. VI. The Aquari^ would not consecrat wine but water. VII.
The Armenians on the other side put no water at al in the challice, as
Catholics have ever done even from the first beginnings of the church, as
witnesses S. Cyprian. VIII. The Messalians, Euchetae or Enthusiasts, said that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist was of no worth. They attributed so much to
prayer as the Flagellantes did to their bloody discipline, that neither of them
esteemd of any other observance. But the excellency of this Sacrament is
maintaind by the council of Florence under Eugenius, and the Tridentine under
Julius, Sess. 3. c. 2. IX. Some Greeks are said to hold that this Sacrament
consecrated in caena Domini is of more worth than any other day. X. Luther
would that examination, discussion of sins and confession is no preparatory to
this Sacrament but only faith. Expressly against Scriptur, Let a man examine
himself, etc. 1 Cor. 11. XI. Magister sententiarum makes mention of some, that
held men comunicating in sin receiv not our Lords body. But Judas it may easily
appear received the same thing as the rest of the Apostles though not to the
same effect, Joh. 13. XII. Many Lutherans have taught that the body of our Lord
is only present in the use, and therefore not to be kept: yet this opinion is
not to be found in Luthers work, though it be in Bucer. XIII. The Bohemians
said that comunion is necessary to be given under both kinds, though they had
not this conceit from John Huss their prophet, but one Petrus Dresensis a
German, who being driven out of his country for the Waldensian heresy wherewith
he was infected, went to Prague in Boemia where having perverted one Jacobellus
Misnensis a notable preacher, by his means he drew after him great multituds of
people from the Catholic body. Something more than a hundred years after,
Luther infected Germany with the same error. But the church has ever taught
us, that Christ is wholly under any species for comunion; though she commands
consecration to be made in both: for although whole Christ be under either
either kind quoad continentiam, yet not quoad significationem; the consecration
or immolation must signify the effusion of blood, but comunion is of the thing
contaiend. XIV. The Quatradecimans would have the Christian Pask or Easter,
(when this Sacrament was instituted and first celebrated) to be kept expressly
on the fourteenth day of the first moon. This raised a controversy in the time
of Pape Anicetus between the Oriental and Occidentall Bishops; those standing
for the 14 day, these for the Sunday following: and the contention lasted till
the time of Pape Victor the first, who would have excomunicated all the Bishops
of the East for their contumacy, had not Ireneus strongly wthstood it. It was
raised again after Victor, but quite ended in the council of Nice, where it
was decreed to be kept on the Sunday. XV. That Mass was not instituted by
Christ, was the wicked belief of Wicleph condemnd in the council of Constance.
And its institution by Christ (clear enough in Gospel This do ye) is expressly
asserted by most venerable and ancient fathers, Rabanus, Isiderus, S. Ambrose,
Eusebius, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyprian, Pope Alexander the first, and sixth from
S. Peter, Martialis one of the 70 disciples and companion of S. Peter, and
Telesphorus.
That mass is neither sacrifice nor yet good work is blasphemously maintaind by
Luther and Calvin. But this venerable Liturgy is ratified by the first Toletan
council, c. 5. By the council of Lateran under Innocent the third, c. 1.
decr. by the sixth general Synod, and the Ephesine council, c. 32. decr. Me
thinks these men should not be ignorant, that the translation of the law infers
translation of priesthood, and where is a peculiar priesthood is a peculiar
sacrifice as the Apostle discourses, Heb. 7. Now Melchisedek is the only figure
of Christ and his priesthood, as it is there affirmed by the Apostle; and else
where by the prophet stiling our Lord a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedek, Psalm. 109. And yet that Priest of the most high God offered
nothing to him but bread and wine as Fathers and Scriptur testify. Genesis 14.18.
This very function of Melchisedek did Christ our Lord exercise when he offered
up to God his body and blood, telling his Apostles present what he did, and
what he would have done hereafter: what he did, when he said, This is my body
which is given, not which shall be given for you on the cross, but which is immolated
and offered now; This is my blood which is shed. He showed what he would have done
when he said Hoc facite, This do ye. Here is the order of the new priestood
according to Melchisedek set up. I would to God our Countrymen would seriously
ponder these things, and not so slightly pass over a thing of such importance,
saying that Melchisedek did but bring forth that bread and wine only to refresh
Abram and his Soldiers. If that were all, why should the Scriptur add
presently, for he was a Priest of the most high God, unless it were brought
forth to exercise his priesthood on: and if that were not an exercise of his
function, according to what rite or order must his priesthood be? for we never
read one word or any mention at all of him, but only there. Besides the kings
for whom Abram fought, whereof one went forth to meet him at his return, had
made provision enough for Abram, so that he needed not a poor priests bread,
especially returning back laden with the spoils of the camp of four kings. XVII.
That mass only availed the priest that offered it, and not others for whom it
is offered; was another assertion of Luthers Against which is Concilium
Cabilonense, put into the volume of the Decretes.

As for ordination Luther denied it to be a Sacrament. Yet Scriptur
sufficiently expresses both the sign and thing signified, imposition of hands
and grace accrueing by it, 1 Timothy 4.14.

As for matrimony, I. The Armenians denied it to be a Sacrament; so did Luther
after them. Yet it is expressly so named in the Scriptur, Ephesians. 5.32. II. Tatianus,
Marcion, the Aerians, and Priscillanists held marriage unlawful. This opinion
S. Paul seems to have forseen, and censurd it; In the last times says he some
will depart from faith, forbidding to marry. 1 Timothy 4. And it was afterward
condemnd in the council of Gangres c. 10. decret. III. The Cataphrygians whose
leader was Montanus, as also Novatus a Roman priest in the time of Pape
Cornelius condemnd all second marriages. But S. Paul does not so. A woman if
her husband be dead is not adulteres if she be with another man, Romans 7. IV. The
Anabaptists taught that one man may have two wives. But our Lord not only said
that the first wife remaining, a man cannot marry a second, but proved it also
by those words in Genesis, Erunt duo in carne una, Mat. 19. V. Montanus held
that the bond of wedlock may be dissolved at the pleasur of the married couple.
But the church teaches further, that nothing, no not adultery it self dissolves
it quoad vinculum, though quoad torum it may; as appears in the Milevitan
council c. 7. decret. and the general council of Florence in the definition
of faith given to the Armenians.


Extreme-unction is rejected from the Sacraments by Luther and his adherents.
But the council of Florence under Eugenius 4. and Trent under Julius the
third, in the fourth session defined in a Sacrament. And it is plain enough it
came from Christ himself; for when our Lord sent out his Apostles two by two;
in the execution of that command they preached and dispossessed people, and whom
they found sick they anointed them wthoyle that they were healed, Mar. 6.12.
This they could not do of their own authority; nor did our savior make surgeons
of them but spiritual phesitians and dispensers of his word and Sacraments.

LA. You have don well for one day Sr Harry, our hour is spent, and by reason
of this continued narration Mr Doctor has had no occasion to dispute.


VIC. O good Madam let him make an end, that he be not like the foolish
builder. My Husband may talk all dinner time, according as it is written, Open
thy mouth wide and I will fill it.


KN. Madam, that I may be yet more brief, the other extravagant opinions that
remain concerning actions, moral, natural and political, I will but merely
mention, wthout adding text of Scriptur or council against them.


As for Christian morality. I. Luther and Melanchthon taught that the
Evangelicall rule whereby our actions are guided, is no law at al; and that
there is not so much as one precept in the whole Gospel. II. Calvin, that
there is no difference at all betwixt a precept and a counsel. III. Spangeberg
a Lutheran, that nothing is pleasing to God except it be commanded. IV. Luther,
that all Gods precepts are impossible to be kept. V. Ebion and Cerinthus, that
the old Law is universally to be observed with the new. VI. Marcion and the
Manichees, that the old Law is wholly evil. VII. Others, that every man may be
saved in his own Law and religion. VIII. Luther, that al works of man
howsoever commanded by God are sins. IX. Bugaurius de Monte Falcone, that any
work don in hope of eternal reward is evil. X. The Bogards and Beguines, that
a perfect man ought not to exercise good works. XI. Luther, that no work is of
valiew unto life eternal, nor no hope in merits: that a man may be certain of
his salvation wthout them; and that servile fear is damnable. XII. Pelagius,
that life eternal may be obtained by our own working wthout the assistance of
grace. XIII. Iovinian, that a just man can never sin whatsoever he does, kill,
ly, swear, steal. XIV. That all Prayer is unprofitable was taught by Pelagius,
because he thought our nativ liberty sufficient for all; by Wicleph and Huss,
because they thought that all things happen by absolute necessity. XV. Wicleph,
that prayers applied to one do him no more good than al others. XVI. The
Messalians, that only prayer wthout other good works is sufficient to life
eternal; and that in no instant of time we are to cease from prayer. XVII.
Iovinian, that fasting is of no moment. XVIII. Aerius, that we are not to be
bound to any certain abstinencys. XIX. The Bogards, that a man come to
perfection is not bound to any austeritys. XX. Eunomius, that faith saves
wthout any good works at all. XXI. Luther, that faith is lost by a mortal sin.
XXII. Abailardus, that nothing is to be believed but what we understand. XXIII.
Bardesanes a Syrian, and Priscillianus, that all men's actions are to be imputed
to fate, and not their own free will. XXIV. The Lamperians, Pseudapostles, and
Luther, that all vows made to God are impious, paganish, judaicall,
diabolical. XXV. The Wittenburgians later Lutherans, that nothing can be vowed
but what is commanded. XXVI. Wicleph, that it is not law full for Christians to
give alms to the poor, and that all mendicity and poverty is unlawful; and
Desiderius a Longobard, that it is not lawful to leave our possessions for
Christ. XXVII. Guilielmus of Anwerp, that by poverty all sins are blotted out;
and that a poor whore is better than a rich matron. XXVIII. Wicleph, that every
sin is venial to the elect: Calvin, that there is no difference at all betwixt
mortal sin and venial: Jovinian, that all sins are equal: Aetius, that no sin
is imputed to a believer: Valentinus, that every sin is from the devil and not
from our free will: Pelagius, that there is no such thing as original sin: Some
Greeks that single fornication is no sin at all. XXIX. The Armenians, that all
were damned for their sin before Christ's passion.


As for things and actions natural. I. Abailardus held that nothing in
affairs is contingent, but all things of necessity; Wicleph, that God himself
cannot do things otherwise than they are done. II. The Turrelupini, that we
should be ashamed of no natural thing; and therefore they coupled openly like
dogs. III. Simon Magus, the Nicolaites, Adamites and Waldenses, that the
promiscuous use of women is lawful. IV. The Bogards and Beguines that a kiss
is a sin, but copulation is not. V. The Adamites, that corporal nakedness is
to be used; and therefore they walked and prayed naked, calling their congregation
Paradise. VI. The Valesij, that no man can pleas God, except he be gelt and
made an eunuch. VII. Severus, that wine is unlawful and the vine sprung up
from the earth and Satan. VIII. Tatianus, that it is not lawful to eat flesh
at any time or for any necessity; and according to the Catharists, neither
eggs, chees nor milk. IX. Iovinian, that a man upon any day may lawfully eat
any thing, either eggs or flesh in Lent, or upon good friday. X. The
Discalceati, (as S. Austin calls them) that no Christian man may wear shoos.
Lastly the natural liberty of man's free will is quite taken away by
Bardesanes, Manicheus, Abailardus, Wicleph; and Iovinian said, that no man can
do amiss after he has received the grace of Baptism.


As for things and actions political. I. The Waldenses and Wiclevists
maintained, that we must not obey to any power upon earth. II. Basilides, if
any power raise a persecution against Christians, that we are rather to deny
Christ than suffer martyrdom. III. Petilianus a Donatist, that it is a
comendable martirdom for a man to kill himself. IV. The Waldenses, that no man
can be justly put to death by any authority. V. Joannes Parvi, that a tirant may
lawfully be murdered by any vassail, and that of his own private authority,
notwthstanding any oath to the contrary. VI. The Waldenses, that it is never
lawful for Christians to take an oath. VII. Priscillanus, that Christians may
lawfully forswear themselves. VIII. Luther, that it is lawful in no case for
Christians to demand before a judge any reparation for an injury. IX. Manicheus,
that it is never lawful to wage war; and Luther, that it is unlawful for
Christians to fight against the Turk. X. Some Greeks, that it is lawful to cheat
our enemies, and that usury is no ways unlawful. XI. Diotrephes in the
Apostles time, that Hospitality is not to be showed to strangers, especially
Catholic Priests. XII. Willielmus de Sancto Amore and Wicleph, that monks and
Religious men are not to have any food but what they get by manual labor; as
on the other side the Psalliani, Euchetae or Enthusiasts erred no less in
affirming, that no manual labor was lawful for them; as also the Waldenses,
that no perfect man ought to labor with his hands in the common wealth. These
be the chiefest extravagancies I find concerning Christian actions moral,
natural and political.


VIC. O Sr you have made too much have, and crowded these brave spirits too
close together. Great wits love freedom and cannot endure to be straightened. Your
speedy narration makes them thrust and crowd and trample upon one another
heels, as the herd of swine in Gospel which the devils drove head long into the
Sea. In this great have of yours I have let slip not only their opinions, but
their very names. But so it is fulfilled that is written of you, I said in my
hayst, All men are liars. Psa. 116.


KN. To bring my speech to a period. The Catholic Church an indulgent mother as
she could not but be affected to see children that came from her own bowels
bandy and rise up against her so tumultuously from time to time, so has she
showed no less industry and watchfullnes to repress them all; being her self
still peremptorily resolved not to depart whatsoever should happen, so much as
an apex or jota from the word she had received. And truly her majesty and power
appears in that she still livs to see all her rebels under her feet: however
through the frailty of revolting men they may grow strong and multiply sometimes
for two or three ages together, in some parts of the earth against her. I shall
ever love and reverence this divine integrity wisdom and power of the
Catholic and immaculate spous of Christ; which can neither tamely let fall the
truths she has received, nor yet by violence be forced out of her right. Indeed
besides the general honesty whereby she stood obliged as a depositary to keep
unalterable and entire all the whole tradition committed to her custody; the
Paradoxes of Sectaries were so dissonant for the most part to right reason
moral justice and piety, that the wisdom sobriety and faith of the Church
Catholic could not in any sort comply with them though she should sink under the
persecution of Apostates. Nor had she more reason to comply with any one than
all, according as they rose: and so she should ever and anon gainsay herself;
do and undo, say and unsay, affirm and deny the very same things; for fectaries
were quite contradictory to one another: Nor by this time had she kept any
considerable portion of that body of tradition she received from her Redeemer
with the threat of a heavy curs on him should dare to altar or diminish from it.
Let him be accursed that loves it, the spous of Christ is blessed, and so
united with her head that she cannot depart from the truth emboweld wthin her
breast, and as it were identified in herself.


There is morover one thing I could wish you take notice of; That the whole
heap of Reformation, begun by Luther this last age, and made up by the
additions of whosoever will do it, is but only so many several hand fulls of
execrable ashes taken out of the urns of condemnd Heretics long ago deceased,
as for example.

LA. Nay Sr Harry if you mean to speak any longer at this time, you shall talk
to the carpet. The weather is cold and our howr past. Besides, dinner is not to
be lost.


VIC. Indeed, as it is written, There is nothing better for a man than that he
should eat and drink, and enjoy the fruit of his labor. Eccl. 2.


MIN. These extravagant opinions were doubtless heretical in the first
Authors, not afterward in us; Plures cum faciunt idem, non est idem.


LA. Let Us go, let us go.


VIC. Let them go Madam, there is not a dish brought to table yet I do assure you,
it is twenty pittyes time is so far spent, I have something to say would have made
Sr Harry blush; a whole half howrs talk Madam.


LA. When we are set at table I shall giv you occasion Mistres to utter it.


VIC. Sr Harry, if you observd so much, in his Catalog of errors made mention
of many that by those opinions were cut off from the Papists and excomunicated,
having been aforetime of their number; but the standing body of Papists he
accuses of no error at all. But Madam I have gathered nine and thirty Articles
which they hold contrary to truth.


LADY. Those that were made in K. James his days.


VIC. No, no; of mine own observation, which I noted at times in my own private
reading, never before taken notice of by any.


LA. So much the better, for new things do excite attention.


VIC. First you know, that the Papish church sends forth her Priests and
Religious to reduce nations from paganism and conveigh their faith up and down
the World, contrary to expres Scriptur; Have thou faith, have it to thy self,
Romans 14.21. II. Christ says, When thou do fast, anoint thy head and wash
thy face, Math. 6.17. Papists never observe this, nor do they think themselves
bound in Lent, ember and other fasting days, to put painting or black patches
on otheir face, to curl and powder their hayr, anoint their head with jessamy
butter, spiknard and other sweet ointments; but the Gospel is neglected by
them wthout any fear or conscience at all. III. They hold that no body should
forsake their religion; directly contrary to Gods will, The Spirit says
expressly that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, 1. Tim.
4.1. God says some shall, they say they shall not, and by their good will they
would let no body do it. IV. They hold that the virgin Mary was taken up soul
and body into heaven; and would persuade us we shall be so too; yet truth says
that flesh and blood cannot in herit the Kingdom of heaven, 1. Co. 15. V. They
will tell you punctually on what day of the month Easter Christmas or any
holiday happens. Of such it is written, Ye observe days and months and times and
years, I am afraid of you least I have bestowed labor in vain, Gal. 4.10. VI.
Such of them as be strong and healthy fast in Lent, and if any be sickly he
eats flesh; contrary to with is written; He that is weak let him eat herbs. To.
14.2. VII. It Is written, If thine enemy hunger feed him, and if he thirst give
him drink, Romans 12.20. here the Papists commit two errors; first they hold
that a man may give both meat and drink to one that is hungry, secondly they
will do this not only to their enemies but neighbors and friends. VIII. They
bring the Virgin Marys Pictur into the church with a child in her arms, tho they
cannot but know that she styles herself the handmayd of the Lord, and it is
written, Cast out the Bondwoman and her son, Gal. 4.30. IX. Papists will have
the church forsooth to teach us our Religion and faith. But it is written, Woe
unto him that says unto the wood Awake; and to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall
teach, Hab. 2.19. Is the church any thing but wood and stone? It Is flat idolatry
thus to worship wood and stone and the works of men's hands. Woe unto them for
it. X. They teach that righteousness pleases God and sin displeases; where as
indeed they are both equally reprovable: When the comforter is come he will
reprove the world of sin and of righteousness, Io. 16.8. XI. You know Madam we
sit in our pews all service and Sermon time wthout uttering word, nor can any
discern our lips to stir all the while; but the Papist women as soon as they
enter their churches, down they fall on their knees, and so long as they remain
there patter forth prayers; you may see hundreds of their lips moving together,
and sometimes you may hear them cry Jesu, Jesu: I dare swear they speak in the
church, and their religion teaches them to do it, contrary to what is written,
It is a shame for women to speak in the church, Cor. 14.34. XII. They hold that
both prodigality and covetousnes in respect of our own goods, fornication and
leache ry in regard of our own bodies is unlawful; contrary to expres Scriptur,
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own, Mat. 20.15. XII. They
hold that they abstain from all kind of flesh in Le^t and yet they eat fish
etc. not understa^ding the Scriptur, There is one kind of flesh of men, another
of beasts, another of fishes, another of birds, Co. 15.39.



VIC. XIII.


LA. Nay thirteenthly and fourteenthly be words too long, we have not time to
proceed sweet mistres, you hear I am called.


VIC. Many are called but few ar chosen says the Scriptur. Give me leav but to
say over my nine and thirty articles.


LA. They will serve for good discourse at table: how come they to be so many?


VIC. Articles against popery can never be more or les than nine and thirty. K.
James could have made his up to forty if he had pleased, but they must be no
more than nine and thirty nor yet no les, according as it is written, Of the
Jews receivd I forty stripes save one, 2. Cor. 11.24.


LA. You are so witty.


VIC. A parsons wise must needs be witty as it is written. He that walks with a
wise man shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. It should be she that walks, but the
Scriptur is compendious and sometimes leaves out a letter; nay sometimes a whole
syllable, as in that saying, God made man upright. Eccl. 7.29. There man is set
for woman; for it is well enough known that Adam had a stitch in his side, and so
went up and down stooping.


LA. Let us carry in your nine and thirty articles to the table.


VIC. For S. Harry now and then to bite upon, according as it is written, man
livs not by bread alone.


LA. Enough, enough.


VIC. So indeed it is written, Luc. 22.38. Satis est, It is enough.


FINIS.

