THE CITY ALARVM, OR The Week of our miscarriages, Which have hitherto
obstructed our proceedings, and will now retard them, if not speedily removed.
Whereunto is annexed a Treatise of the EXCIZE.

Luke 14.28.29.30. verses. For which of you intending to build a Tower, sits
not down first, and counts the cost whether he have sufficient to finish it?

Lest happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it,
all that behold it, begin to mock him,

Saying This man began to build, and was not able to finish.

Chi dinanzi non mira, di dietro poi sospira. London Printed for Joshua Kirton
in Forster-Lane next Goldsmiths Hall. 1645.

The City Alarm.
AS in natural so in Politic Bodies, the ready way to perfection is a
frequent and impartial view of their own abilities and defects, and look how
much these are usually Supernumerary, so much the more assiduity is required in
their search: conservation, which is grounded upon a right understanding of our
wants, in the very categorie of nature preceds acquisition, prevention of
imminent danger, the improveme^t of advantages.

Therefore flatterers are worthily exploded, as the moths of virtue and
underminers of merit, who by giving men false intelligence of themselves, and
corresponding with our hereditary enemy, self love, hinder us from persuing the
most glorious of all Victories, that of our own imperfections. I mean not
Princes earewigs, the scene is now altered, court and court parisites vanished
together: there is a negative as well as affirmative flattery, by silencing our
failings as well as over extolling our merits. Is It not strange that among us
who fight for truth it should be malignancy to speak it? We are contented to
ly complaining in the mire, rather then strive to rise, every child whispers,
no man speaks out our miscarriages, and how think we to be cured if we
conceal our wounds, the maine part of the cure consisting in the tenting?
There Is no good fencing without knowledge of the feeble of your Sword, and in
fortification we esteem that engineer a traitor, who conceales or lessens a
places weakness, first repair breaches, then make a sally.

Not many weeks are past since I exchanged foreign air for English. I have
heard of a misterious way of communicating intelligence between persons far
distant, by virtue of the Lodestone, sure I am, the same Lodestone, which
touched you at home, affected me abroad, and I might well make excursions with
my thoughts, but their continual revolution was about your affairs, so that
in what Climat soever I was, I felt the air of our English news very
catching, more especially it grieved me exceedingly to hear of our home bred
jarres, animosity and partiality whereby we curtailed our strength more
shamefully then Hanun did David's Messengers, exposing our nakedness to the
view of all the world, an object of pity to our friends, of scorn and
derision to our enemies.

The Parliaments friends abroad have hitherto looked upon their party, as upon
a goodly well built body, strongly limbed, and fairly proportioned only hindered
in its growth and thriving, by some sleeping ill humor whereby it wasted and
pined a way no man knew how, so that they commiserated and prayed for us, but
thought us irrecoverable by any other Physician, then God and Time.

Now that by Gods merciful providence this occult evil humor is broken out
into botches and boyles all over our body, (one great impostume already broken,
others ready to break, if seasonably crushed,) instead of rejoicing at signs
of health, we bemoane our loss of beauty, looking back (whiles we should
march forward) to our fair armies in the old Model, between whose ceremonious
proceedings, and those of the new, there is as great difference, as between the
Law and the Gospel. And if not the vastest but most spirited body, be the
usefullest, I know no reason why we should not make more account of this little
army, although but like Naam ans flesh recovered of his leaprosy, coming
again as a child's, then of all our former brawny armies, Men are to be
weighed, not numbered, and to be weighed by their usefullnesse, a little
treasure expended doing more good then a great deal hoarded up.

But what advantageth it us to have begun well, if we stop in the middle of the
race? Or to have projected a good Plan, if we neglect the superstructure,
perchance we think the name of a new Moddell a sufficient spell, without any
further provision, or has not indeed self interest bribed some men's passions
to rebel against their reasons, who not able to hinder the make of this
engine, now strive to impede its motion, some of these having most unworthily
transported what they could out of the ship of the state into their own
cockboats, now think to set up sail in a mist undescried, like silly birds
who thrusting their heads into a bush think no body sees them, but however
they turn away their eyes from their own unworthiness yet others see it, and
God will punish it.

In the mean time it concerns all men of integrity to rub their eyes, and
inquire out the reasons of our restivenesse, which has brought us upon
precipices before we were aware, and which will infallibly ruin us, (I speak
in a rational sense) if not speedily remedied.

I am not so childish as to imagine my eye sight sharper then other men's, yet a
boy upon a Theater may see more then a man in a crowd, and a stander by
sometimes you know, sees more then a Gamester. I easily believe, most men
apprehend the danger we are in, but either wilfully shun the thoughts of it,
as contagious; or amazed with the horror thereof, stand gazing with crossed
arms, as if they were metamorphoz'd into Marble, while the weaker sort of
people, like the Sea when moved with a tempest, roar and beat themselves
against the rocks, which they should rather strive with united force to eschew,
by struggling against the waves, which have cast us upon them. All in general
make difficulties, which should be wherstones to their courage, gravestones to
their resolutions, wherefore that I may not be guilty of the same sin of
omission I condemn in others, I will endeavor a discovery of the chief
Remoras, which I conceave to flick in our wheels, with a rude draught of their
removal, which wiser men may perfect.

The Spaniards reward those Messengers best, who bring worse tidings, whereby
their losses being timely redressed, seem rather slips then falls, and they
are no sooner down then up again. I expect no such welcome of my unsavory
intelligence, as mere duty ravished it from my breast, so the discharge
thereof, is all my pretended recompense. Yet I confess my satisfaction would
be doubled, if by ringing this Alarm, I could awake all those in this City,
whom it concerns, to shake off that frozen timidity, which a little winter of
adversity, has caused in them, and revest their wonted courage, which now
seems to lie bedrid.

Now to our Scrutiny.
ALL affairs move upon the two hindges of counsel and action, deliberation
and execution, whereof that seems to be as the head, this as the feet of every
great enterprise, or if you will, the brain conceives, and the hand is the
brains midwife. When either of these is out of tune, the consort is spoiled,
both pilot and mariners must concur to guide the Vessel. No wonder if our feet
sailed us in the beginning, and that our numerous Armies did so little, their
joints were goury. The Commander steered by a mere defensive principle, went a
way to plaster, not cure our wound, and the common Soldier soon caught with
the bird-lime of profit, was easily persuaded to keep out of gunshot,
contenting themselves to give us once in a year a bit of action to stay our
stomachs: whereas in our case not speedily to conquer, was to be conquered; for
seeing our strength was then in its flower, the Kings only growing, to expect,
was but to give his Forces time to accomplish their growth, and draw a
decrepitnesse upon our own. It Is easy traversing the head of a Spring, but
now that we have traveled along the bank-side, till this Spring is swollen
into a mighty River, we find it impassable.

1. I would not have looked so far back, having so much matter before me, were
not the same gouty humor, of late especially, crept into the upper Region of
our body. Have we not some envious spirits (an infallible indice of
self-emptinesse of worth) who sit in the manger, neither doing nor suffering
others to do any thing? qui jettent la pierre and cachent le bras. These State
juglers, are the States greatest enemies, who by underboord working conjure up
such foggy fumes into our head, that our eyes dazzle: our Counsels rurne round,
and such a thick mist has benighted our understandings, that few see upon what
ground we stand. But wherefore all this intricacy? I answer, some gouty old
Members now out of joint, strive to slip in again in the dark, which to
effect, they have attempted to put the whole body out of frame, wherein they
were not a little encouraged, considering there are as many Drones as Bees in
the hive, and the Bees more laden with wax then honey, their wisdom
miscarrying through abundance of facility.

Thus our ague is turned into a Fever, the distemper of our feet, into a
distemper of the brain, to teach us that the chain of humane affairs is
never complete, either the link of will, or link of power is wanting: for now
that we have a gallant and faithful Army, desirous to improve advantages,
their wings must be pinioned with expectation of Orders, whiles in the mean
time opportunity steals out of sight, which can only be hunted at view, not by
scent. Most businesses suffer shipwreck, because occasions are hasty, and men
slow, especially in war, occasions once lost are irrecoverable. Have is the
best friend, when time is the greatest enemy, as it needs must now be ours,
when as our strength is in its virility and age of consistency, and cannot but
in reason expect its decaying age to ensue; wherefore before arrant imbecility
seize us, we should do well with all intentness to put out our strength to the
uttermost. To which end no means would be more effectual then a standing
Committee in our Army, of such as are well affected to our new Model, who as
fresh spirits to the body, may add life and motion thereunto: All advantage in
war consisting in certain emergencies, which are swift in their passage, admit
of no delay, but must be apprehended on the place: and however this hint may
seem posthumous, the thing being already done (thanks to the City Petition;)
yet I leave to wiser consideration, whether we may not justly fear new rubs
and stops in the prosecution of this miraculous success, wherewith God has
blessed us, as long as those who have proclaimed their disaffection by the
opprobrious term of new noddell, have any share in its disposal.

2. Some are the backwarder in provision for this Army, because they fear the
advantage thereof will rebound upon the Independents, and the heat given
thereunto, hatch more of that faction; as if we were still in a condition, to
pick and choose. Is not the City exhausted, the Country in most places wasted,
every where discontented, our Coffers emptied, our spirits half spent, and all
struggling for life, and yet we must cut off the only sound limb we have left,
because, forsooth, it goes not so regularly as we could wish. Cannot lines meet
all in one point; though they go not all the same way? they may often meet,
yet differ. Though speech is necessary for all men, yet not this or that
language, so discipline Ecclesiastical is generally requisite, but not
material whether the way be left green or paved. It were to be wished
Christian charity and discretion had both, had more sway among us, as well
Presbyterians as Independants, whose imbittered zeal one against the other
has been so heady and preposterous, as if men thought the only way to be ripe
in faith, were to be raw in wit; whereas the only way not to be inveagled by
the guilefull through skill, is to be skillful against guile. Truth has no
such enemy as likelihood, Satan is never so terrible, as when he appears like
an Angel of light, presenting specious, but false appearances, to animate us
one against another, and cut asunder all ligaments and sinews of unity, well
knowing that the strength of the faggot consists in the bond. Weighty is defined
by Plato, that which is made up of most parts of the same nature, light, that
which has fewest; therefore stones sink, when great beams swim. If we desire
a true estimate of our strength, we must measure it by our unity. What availes
it to overcome others, whiles our dissentions conquer us? Dissension makes us
float in uncertainty, Unity only is able to bring us to the ground. I hate
irrationability in whom soever I find it, and can wish those Nadabs and
Abihues, who have offered up new and strange fires, no worse punishment then to
be still guided by their ignes fatui. But the passion of some, should not make
us passionate against all: if we lay aside prejudicacie, and examine the
unseasonable reasons, some out of animosity allege against employing active
Independents at this time, we shall find them resemble the colors of the
rainbow, which are but imaginary, and vanish for want of subsistence in a solid
body. And whatever some men conceive of their opinions in relation to the
State, were it not madness for fear of a future mischief to make it present?
as if for fear of dying so many years hence, a man should presently become his
proper executioner: of two evils being not both avoydable, the choice of the
less is not evil. Were it not folly in a storm to refuse the aid of some,
because their clothes and ours were of a different fashion? thoughts and
opinions are the apparel of the mind; and if the greatness of our misery had
not deprived us of the sense thereof, we should esteem those our best friends,
who first bring us ashore, and employ the forwardest men with what opinion
soever clad, as the fittest means to make an end of the work, which else will
soon make an end of us.

3. Next to our distractions, nothing has so much dampt the vigor of our
proceedings, as our antidated and abbortive hopes of final success, grounded
upon presumptuous thoughts of our own strength, and our enemies weakness;
whereby it has many times come to pass, that measuring our enemies rather
then our selves, and that by the diminutive glass of our simpring
intelligence, we have made our Armies, as some bad Tailors do childrens
clothes, too just to the body of our enterprise; not considering the infinite
consequence of a lost battle, whereto we expose our selves, at least if we
win: having not men enough presently to pursue a Victory, a valiant enemy
selling it, perhaps, so dear, that our Army is compelled to lose the fruits
thereof, we are forced to prolong the war, exhausting men and treasure, till
the process, though won, costs more then the thing is worth. The calling back
part of our Forces before the work was wholly finished, has likewise cost us
dear, witness the late business of Taunton. He that despises his enemy, puts
not out half his force, and that with little intentness, whereas a little
well-knit man, by wary husbanding his powers, often casts a mightier, blinded
with this passion.

The disease is grown epidemicall, our ears are so delicate, they are galled
with the rehearsal of truth, its a meat of too hard digestion for our tender
stomachs, as if it were not safer to give two false alarums, then neglect one
true, petty dangers may sometimes be wisely concealed for seat of uproars, but
apparent perils ought to be expounded to the people, least whereas they are
great, they be thought desperate. How can we make an even encounter, when we
are ignorant of the length of our adversaries weapon? Yet now a days its
malignancy to discover it: who ever makes a true map of the Kings strength is
reckoned among the Israelitical messengers, who brought up an evil report of
the land of Canaan, a disheartner of Gods people; Sure they have but Pigmy
spirits who dare not stand a relation of the Royal Anakims. But this
unevenesse of spirit, is self conceits constant handmaid, the fall is usual
from the pinnacle of presumprion to the dungeon of despair. Its observable, how
we have always hood winkt our selves with conceits of the kings impuissance
till it came to trial, and then finding him stronger then we suspected, we
suspect him stronger then indeed he is, it being natural for one contrary to
beget another.

Hope is the fawning traitor of the mind, whiles under color of freindship it
robs it of its chiefest strength, resolution. This over early expectance of an
end of our troubles, disinables us in the means, and is as much before time, as
our dilatory proceedings are out of time.

Hence flow present and tumultuary counsels, without any provision for the
future, circumferentiall deliberations without any fixed center. No wonder then
if every unexpected accident, whereof War is full, sets the Sun-diall of our
counsels ten degrees backward, since it is the nature of sudden and unlookt for
danger, to surprise and suspend the use of reason. Experience is the mistress
of fools, but distrust the mother of wisdom, because doubting the worst, it
represents future mischief as present, and provides against it, if we had begun
with doubts, we had ended long ago in certainties, but because we began with
certainties, therefore we remain in doubts. There is no prudence without an eye
in the forehead, or policy without foresight, neither is foresight availeable
without application of preventive physic. At the first we had undoubtedly a
foregame, of late we have been forced to alter our ward, and play an aftergame,
which our gamsters have so well managed, that we begin to set up all our sails
again. People naturally flow in confidence, ebb in despair, And from the
collision of these two waves, arises the foame of impatience: check me this
peccant humor and provide for the War, as if it were to continue a hundred
years, then with Gods blessing, it may end in one: we must work out our
salvation here, as well as hereafter, with fear and trembling.

4. A concomitant hereof is our greedy grasping of more business then we are
able to wield, this vice has been predominate both in our Counsels and
actions: Our striving to reform all at once has made us reform nothing, for
as it is not good to pass by the least error in an entire Commonwealth, so in
a corrupt one to appear too much a good Commonwealths man, is the next way to
ruin it; the same weight which preservs in safety an upright pillar, causes
it to fall, if the pillar lean. State alterations are best graduall. Our
passionate desire of an end, recoyles us from the end, whilst we embrace the
most specious not the most feasible designs, Oxfords seidge and Licesters
loss.
looking more at what should be done, then at what can be done, and weighing
only the conveniences of a design effected, but forgetting to put into the
balance, the difficulties of the effecting, the inconveniences other parts
suffer in the Interim, the gain of the enemy, who like a river overflowing its
banks carries all before him, for want of our timely opposing a Digue to stop
the torrent. Whereto have so many blockings, served but for stu^bling blocks to
our friends, bridges to our enemies; who have oftentimes eat the meat, whiles
we were knawing the bones. Have we not lost whole countries while like flies,
we were buzzing about some glimmering enterprise, where many times we burnt our
wings into the bargain? Chi troppo abbraccia nulla strigne, he that will do
all, shall do nothing, nay worse then nothing. War is too slippery a way to
stand at a stay in, we must either slide forward or backward; and if we stand
still, while the King goes forward, may we not properly be said to loose
ground? We do worse then stand still, in doing things by halves. Its
disadvantagious to a private man to have too great an opinion of his merit
preconceived, for Ideas are always perfecter then Existences, and men finding
not what they expected, slight what they find: much more dangerous is it to
States to occasion a greater expectation in the people, then can be answered,
and we occasion it by the multiplicity of our undertakings, which has not only
distracted our forces, exhausted the well-affected (whose subventions, as
certain, should have been reserved to a time of arrant necessity,) and by both
disinabled us to any business of importance, (for which we are always forced
to go a begging,) but it draws an inevitable consequence of leaving most
things undone and doing all the rest by halves.

Its incredible how much this humor of not pursuing the point of our designs,
has diminished our reputation abroad; Picolomini.
'Twas the censure of one of the greatest soldiers this age has produced,
that the King and Parliament were like two ill Gamesters at Chesse, who make
many remooves to little purpose, neither of both skillfull enough to give
check mate: how it squares with the Royal party, I know not, but fear he
lighted too unhappily on us, we dance about the board, run round like a horse
in a mill, and find our selves at the years end, where we were in the
beginning: every man is sensible of this circular mischief, but none mounts up
to the cause, I will give you my thoughts thereon, only as they may relate to
the future.

Its a great secret in war, when there are many gaps to stop, to know, which it
imports most to stop first. Herein consists the supreme degree of military
prudence, and as it were the precious Elixar, which we must seek out to
enhappie this war, by laboring to discern, which ought to be its principal
seat, and to bend our powers thitherward, ready to change our conduct, as the
war shall change its face. And because this seems to be of no small
consequence, give me leave to tell you the Spaniards proceeding herein, which
is admirable and thrice worthy imitation.

That which makes them possess in perfection this secret, so that they are
seldom cozened in the choice of what is most advantageous to their present
affairs, is the Symmetrie of their government, and subordination of their
Counsels, which are diverse, according to the several Territories of their
domination, where their Armies are employed. For example.

For the affairs of Italy, there is one Counsel established in Italy it
self, which is formed by the correspondence and relation, observed between
their Ministers there entertained, especially between the Governor of Milan,
Viceroy of Naples, and two Ambassadors of Rome and Venice. In occurrencies
then which concern this Country, the first deliberations are taken by these
four, who constitute as it were the first Tribunal, where the difficulties are
agitated, and the resolutions taken of what is most expedient to be done: the
result of their advise, with a faithful relation of the facts whereon it was
formed, and reasons whereon it was grounded, is sent into Spain to a second
Counsel, composed of persons intelligent in Italian affairs, who by having
passed through the greatest employments of that Country, have great lights,
and exact notions thereof; Here the reasons of the first Counsel are put into
the furnace again, and digested anew. And as in the Oeconomie of man's body, the
spirits which are formed in the liver, purify themselves in the heart, and
discharge themselves there, of what ever they have gross in them, before they
come to the brain, where they receive the last degree of subtilitie and light,
whereof they are capable, and obtain a certain vigorous quality, which
renders them the most immediate organs of the bodies motion, and senses
operation: so the resolutions of this second Counsel, are carried to a third,
which is the Princes Counsel of State, there to undergo a third Examen, and see
if there be any room for them in the order of his affairs, and whether that,
which relates to the good of Italy, (whereat only the two first Counsels
aimed,) would not prejudice the general good of their Monarchy. I have been
the more punctual in this description, because I judged it applicable to our
present way of Eastern, Western, Northern Committees, etc. wherein were there
a right subordination settled from those in the Country to those here, and from
these to a third grand Committee, we should not tread those Mazes of fortune,
wherein we have often wooded.

We must resolve to endure small losses in one part, to obtain great success
in another, for the branches will wither, when the trunck of the tree is rooted
up, and when the vitals are wounded, the other parts die of themselves.

We unbend in good success, and prosperity seems to soften and melt our
vigor; its too strong a licour for our weak vessels. We usually crack till we
break, we stop, as it were, to take breath, in the fairest part of our way, and
letting good fortune go before us, without having the courage to follow her, we
loose the sight of her. Whereas we should never repose less then after
success, nor ever be more desirous to fight then after a battle, or to
re-enter the carriere then after having been crowned. What profits it us to
have had sometimes the advantage in the race, while the King has recovevered
it in the turn, and when we thought we had him in our arms, he has slipped
away between our legs.

5. Another main obstruction in our Counsels has been want of secrecy, which
is the life of consultation, as expedition is of action, and here I must tell
you plainly the opinion of strangers, who think it impossible, the bell of our
counsels should sound so loud, if some clappers did not speak on both sides,
or that the King should so easily unfold our riddles if he plowed not with some
of our cattle. All is not gold that glisters, and its feared if some great
pretended zealots both to Religion and Liberty were well rubbed they would prove
but Alchimy.

Our greatest enemies sit at our tables, lie in our bosoms and as the heat
which rosts the meat on the spit, is invisible but by its effects; so we feel
an unnatural heat, gnaw and consume our very entralls, but either cannot or
will not yet discern it. Sure Westminster Hall breeds spiders, although it
breed no cobwebs; for the Royallists abroad could inform me better of what
past in Parliament, then the Parliaments Agents. Shall not this be searched out?
Poor England, what! Disperited so soon? London, what! so suddenly
disanimated? you, whose dread has been upon foreign nations, what! suffer
your selves now to be mated by a set or sect of home bred Achitophells? shall
wicked men dare to offend, and honest men not dare to punish? or will the
advantage perhaps not pay your pains? The routing of a traiterous crew may
prove as advantageous, as the gain of a battle, since by their treachery, we
are liable to the loss of many battles.

Besides its more unsufferable to loose by deceit then by force, because
cozenage is built by others craft upon the foundation of our
inconsiderateness. Neither let consideration of former merit plead pardon for
present misdeeds but rather further punishment, as upon those who having shown
they knew how to do good, would against knowledge do evil. But pardon this
transport which pure zeal to my Nation has extorted from me, and jealousy of
its reputation on wherein I know how much we suffer in foreign parts.

When the Venetians suspect any Patrician of correspondence with a foreign
state, they at the same time imprison his person, and search his house. For
State affairs, like mines, as soon as they take air loose their force, and
evaporate into smoke. Therefore the Spaniards, who are their craftsmasters in
the art of governing, are as diligent in concealing their designs, as if they
wrought in some new found Peru; they seem to repose and sleep, when most busy
and broadest awake: They are content to be accused of weakness, and themselves
sow abroad apparent reasons, and furnish specious colors, to render this
accusation probable. By this means they lull a sleep, and surprise, lightning
upon their enemies before they hear the thunder, and both history and
experience teach us what incredible advantage they have sometimes reaped
hereby, and what prodigious blows they have given.

Since we are so far in, it will not be amiss before we come out of this
Spanish road, to eye their dexterity in picking the locks of other Princes
cabinets, as well as double locking their own: for since the knowledge of
facts, and of the true estate of things is the base of ratiocination, and, if
that be loose this must needs be tottering; they provide two ways against this
inconvenience.

1. By giving power unlimited to their Agents, to spare no manner of cost to be
rightly informed of all passages, and to penetrate the deliberations and
resolutions of both friends and enemies, the expense is allowed them, without
any examen or restriction, upon a bare note of their presentation.

And although this seem to furnish matter of cozenage and to open a field
where covetousness may make an unjust harvest, yet they choose rather to run
this hazard, which is inconsiderable in respect of the great benefit they may
reap thereby, and they believe that any expense well made and one seasonable
advice, pays them with interest, for a hundred fruitless disbursements, and
improfitable advertisements.

2. Then, never were people in this world so industrious as they, to cherish
their correspondencies and those in great number, they affect not only specious
ones, and with men of high birth and wisdom; they entertain who ever will be
their Pensioners, having found by experience that a man of mean condition and
parts, will sometimes disclose unto them an important truth which has escaped
the care and Sagacity of an illustrious personage. So that I have often been
astonished at the multitude of their Secretaries, and at the incredible number
of letters which their Ambassadors dispatch by all sorts of Messengers.

We need not go to Madrit to exemplify this mystery, we may see the
consequence thereof in the Kings proceedings, who has done more by London
Intelligence, then by Oxford force: although he paid dearly for his trust to
this Intelligence at Naseby, where the institution of our new Model was sealed
from heaven with Gods approbation, and our despised army did that, may make
envy it self ashamed. Wherefore the miraculous success, wherewith God has
crowned our close uniting in the army, should animate us to search out the
accursed thing, which impeaches our union both in Parliament and City: the want
whereof bars us of foreign aid as well as good opinion, for when I have
pressed upon them in the low Countries, their interest involved in ours, many
have expressed great forwardness to assist us, if once they could, for their
security see us unanimous, to assist our selves. And take this by the way, that
those people owe more for their liberty to their * first Generals exact
intelligence from Spain, W.P: of Orange.
then to all his and their armies: in sense whereof they allow the Prince of
Orange every summer a tun or two of gold without examen, for Intelligence. If
we weigh the premises, and how much we have suffered by our crazy Intelligence,
we shall account it hereafter good husbandry to be prodigal in this
particular; or if we will continue to be penny wise, and pound foolish, we must
not wonder if our resolutions continue likewise to be uncertain, since built
upon uncertainties; for how can the building be firm, which is founded on
quicksands?

Dall'acque chete me ne guardi Iddio;
Che dalle correnti mean guardero Io.
6. And now I have done with the cracks and flawes of the house, give me leave
to hint at those of the field, for all reflect upon the public. I need not
insist on former abuses, of hurrying the poor willing country people to and
fro, as if they had been so many puppetts for our Grandees to play withal
Summoning them to appear one month with Horse, arms, and money of their own,
and dismissing them the next, tireing them out with continual expectation of
action, til they were unfit for action; as if their only design had been by
these mock proceedings to render them either unable or unwilling to help the
State in time of real necessity; to the infinite prejudice and dishonor of
the Parliament, who have by this means lost many thousand hands, if not hearts.

But that which is instar omnium and the Serpentive abuse that has devoured
the memory of all other, is the license (for it exceeded the bounds of liberty)
of free quarter, in Counties well affected. The rod of Moses was turned into a
serpent, and those who were raised to defend us from oppression most oppressed
us. The insolency of the soldier banished honest Gentlemen from their own
houses, and the Commonalty hereby left like a boat in a storm abandoned by its
pilots, let themselves drive, at the mercy of the wind and waves; so that few
of note remaining among them besides Malignants, no wonder if the honest were
shaken, the wavering perverted, and the Malignant hardened in their obstinacy,
by our miscariages. Whereto if we add the insupportable burdens laid on the
shoulders of the well-minded party both in City and Country, with the little
care taken for their future case, we need not go far to seek the cause why so
few, notwithstanding our conquests, leave the Kings shadow to put themselves
under the Parliaments wings: for who will be his friend, that treats his friend
worse then his enemy? Must the free horse always be spurgalled, and the dull
Ass favored in his opiniatness? shall the most affectionate, be still most
squeezed? Patience abused, you know, turns into fury. Popular insurrections,
like Mines, cannot be avoided, but by foreseeing them. Our cause stands upon
two legs, Religion, and Liberty: if we rub too hard, we may perchance rub off
many friends to the latter. Take heed how we irritate these; The taking away
their livelihood is the only injury which admits of no oblivion, want being a
continual spur unto revenge. As the stomach, which is the seat of natural
heat, as long as it has in it any nourishment, leaves the body in peace; but
if altogether without, it then draws nourishment from the head, and thereby
often destroys the body: so as long as the people have some matter of
subsistence left, they rest satisfied, but when wholly deprived thereof, turn
head upon their head, and often ruin the Commonwealth.

People are easilier ruled with the snaffle of love, then with the bitt of
fear: love is a silken thread, soon broken by harsh handling. We ride the
people every journey, as if we should never have occasion more to come of the
back of them: if we ride too hard, we may quickly run them out of breath, then
stumble, and both finally fall together.

I confess, either my eyes fail me, or I cannot see how the Royallists
themselves could have chalked out a broader way to our destruction, then that
we have hitherto trodden. For do but consider seriously what a horrid gulf of
danger, we had thrown our selves into by these extemporary courses, if the
late insulting enemy had prevailed, as what Patent had we to presume of
victory? Having dis-inabled our trustiest friends, disobliged others, and
discontented all, whence could we in reason expect supply? you will say, from
heaven. Sure, I know no promise, whereby God has bound himself to enclose
those, who break down their own hedges: Sure I am, the same God who commands
innocence, commends wisdom as the others best guardian. I have observed some
of opinion, that this work will never be finished with apparent means, because
they have remarked Gods arm highest lifted up against our enemies, in the
lowest ebb of our fortune. The root of this opinion is doubtless sweet, viz.
humility, but the fruit, I am sure, is bitter: its like Ezekiels roll, honey
in the mouth, but gall and wormwood in the belly: whiles we fear to rely too
much upon means, without God, we presume too much upon God without means.
Presumption, is the fault of the men, not means; of the workmen, not
instruments, which ought no more therefore to be cashired, then the use of
physic, because Asa trusted to it more then God. To extrinsecate my self
more plainly, this opinion is spawned by ignorance of our condition. For
consider first what a thread of time the German wars have spun out, beyond all
expectation; we imagining long since, that every day would usher in the evening
of their troubles: The Protestant cause there, is as good as ours is here. 2.
Consider, what difficulty the Scots find, in sweeping away a little rubbish in
their Northern quarters, with the force of their whole Kingdom. And tell me
now, what cause of confidence we can pick out of our own strength, were it
twice as big as now it is: since while we are Actors by winning, we lose and
suffer by working, wasting our force with using it, and like Bees, while we
hurt others, lose our sting. The evil spirit of war is sooner raised then
laid; like the stone Asbestos Pliny mentions, which once fired, can hardly
ever be quenched. The waters of the deluge fell in 40 days, but were almost a
year in drying; Devastations are quickly made, the reparations slowly. But what
talk I of reparations? This is our genrall fault, we mistake a possibility for
a certainty: like a raw gamester, who as soon as he gets his men over the
tables, thinks all his own, till a blot fetch him back to an after-opinion as
well as game. I wish we may not anticipate our happiness, and spoil our game
by presuming it too forward. For my part, I think all provision we can make
little enough, and, without Gods blessing, insufficient.

7. The formerly mentioned are but our working days abuses, now follows our
seventh and Sabbaticall error, wherein we seem to rest, and which compleats
the week of our miscarriages.

The most natural humor in man, is self-love, the most violent, Ambition:
that, enclines him to profit, this, to dignity. These two are like Rebecca's
twins continually struggling for precedence. Ambition like Esau, nips the other
for a time, and presses out first; but (violent things not long subsubsisting)
Self-love like Jacob, soon deprives it of its birthright. To men set in
office, at the beginning every little authority seems great, while their eyes
see double, dazzled with the dignity: afterward every great seems little, time
having wrought off the novelty, and turned the view another way: for now having
cracked the shell, they seek the kernel. Popularity for a while maintains
Integrity, but time corrupts both. Many great Patriots in the beginning, have
since byased: Gain has been to them like the golden ball thrown down before
Atalanta, which she stepping aside and stooping to take up, her race was
hindered. The Hebrew word for gold is therefore pithy, as derived from a root,
which signifies solicitude and distraction. Men naturally go down the hill, and
propend to self-Interest, and this passion is so prevalent, it can hardly be
mastred, but by that other of fear; as we use to hunt one beast with another.
There would be no wickedness, if there were no protectours of wicked men, and
permission is protection.

Why should a few Accomptants stand up like Hercules Colomnes, which no man
dares outrepasse. You, that have smitten the Lion and the Bear, shall a Cocks
crowing affright? Have you lost your courage with your money? and the metal
of your minds with that of your purses? if not, why are not money-mongers
called to account? why must the Commissioners of examination for accounts have
a lame and curtayld power? why must taxes run on in infinitum, and no body know
what becomes of them? It Is an old maxim. Acquaint the Commons with, what is
done, and they will think it done for common good, otherwise for private
profit. If these men were innocent, me thinks, they should be glad to
vindicate their innocence, and wipe off the stains, which blemish it: nay, if
others were innocent, me thinks, it should concern them, to give the Kingdom
this satisfaction. Sure there are Receavers as well as thieves, who occasion
all this tergiversation. What Is the reason else, that notwithstanding the
imposition of Excise, continuation of all former taxes, addition of new, and
turning the stream of the Association money, yet there is such extreme penury,
that our Army scarce paid wants recruits, Taunton cannot be relieved without
begging for it, nothing of moment done without fresh supplies? Can we see this
and not blush to be so notoriously gulled? I say notoriously, since all Europe
takes notice of it, and laughs at our simplicity. Ob. 1. Some have alleged
formerly, that if we should not connive at petty abuses, we could not be
supplied with great sums in time of extremity. Call you those abuses petty,
which make us a scorn and derision to all our neighbors? Again, what puts
you upon these extremities, but your own supine Carelessness? like some ill
husbands, who rather then trouble their heads with care of their estates, remit
all unto their Stewards, and if by them they may be furnished for the present
(although with spoil of their woods, and other squandring shifts) never dream
of the future, till by degrees, they enslave themselves to their own servants,
who often buy them out of all with their own money. Were it not better to call
your Stewards to a weekly account, and order your expenses according to your
incomes? Can we ever look to thrive, until we know upon what ground we build?
nay, with what face can we exhaust the Kingdom, under pretense of bringing
Delinquents to justice, while we cherish as great Delinquents in our own
bosoms? Besides, its folly to imagine we shall always have these Monopolizers
of Treasure, within our call: as long as there is hope of further gain, they
will inch out our necessities, but in time of extreme danger, what hinders
them, their estates being portable, to transport them, and leave us, like men
at a low water, upon the sands? for if we think them guilty, we cannot imagine
them so silly as to stay a whipping.

Ob. 2. Others allow of this motion, but not of this time, as thinking it now
unseasonable, and that it would retard the present prosecution of the business.
Before the relief of Taunton, many honest active Citizens were forwarding this
good work, as rightly apprehending it the only efficacious means, to make
strait what was crooked, and recover our pristine strength: but they were
staved off with excuses of our then present extremities. Now that God has
blown away our enemies with the breath of his indignation, and blessed us with
sufficient leisure to dress our present, and provide against future wounds; we
are told this is a time to reap corn, not to pick strawes in; a time to chase
in the field, not to sit potching at home. Thus the winter being too cold, and
the summer too hot; I wonder what time of year, these men would have us work
in.

We start well, but we pursue not: why did you show your teeth at Guild Hall,
if you intended not to bite? or if you be, indeed, still hungry, when can you
expect more leisure, to make a meal of these all-devouring pikes? can there
ever be a fitter time to squeeze the spunges in (if any such there be, as it is
mainly to be feared) then now, that we want money to complete our victory, with
our Army? Search but the Tents of these Achans, and doubt not, you will find
golden wedges, and silver shekels, enough to stop the Soldiers mouths one
quarter, perhaps encourage them so far, that the work will be half done by
the next quarter. It Is the property of quicksilver, to erect and set up an
end: if the Soldier be quickshod with this metal, its incredible how ayrie
his spirits will be, and how nimble-handed he will be to every enterprise.
Falsehood is a Viper which wounds with her teeth, and bears the cure in her
belly: Some horse-leaches are so full, that if you purge them not, they will
die of a surfeit.

If I thought all that are in our Israel, were of our Israel, it were bootlesse
to stir you up to such a duty: I would rather sound this Alarm throughout the
whole land, that all may come out of the caves and dens, wherein they were
hidden, and as one man pursue the enemy. But seeing most refuse to do their
duty except hired thereto, and seeing its hard to follow the chase we are in,
without continual fresh supplies; I hold it impossible to raise these constant
supplies, except the people be first satisfied in this particular. Field
action, and City consultation, are not like clock weights, when one mounts the
other descends: they are rather incorporated twins, which must always move
together. When the soldier is busiest in action, the Senator should be most
assiduous in Counsel.

To conclude then, there is no so ready mean to unty this Gordian knot, as my
Lord Majors Sword, I mean another City Petition, pressed with all modest
earnestness upon the Parliament, to Audit the Accounts of the Kingdom with all
the speed imaginable, for if you follow not the scent, whiles it is yet warm,
the next wind of success blows it quite away.

Flatter not your selves, neither pluck too early, the fruits of your labors:
remember from whence we are raised, by whom, and whither we may fall again.
What Is the reason of that mavelous vicissitude has been hitherto in our
affairs? our crying up man too much, too little crying up to God. Confidence
and security are the forerunners of danger: present success has only freed
the passage, and opened the way: we are far yet from our journeys end, if you
desire a sudden end, provide for a long journey, if a hasty peace, for a slow
War, not to make it so, but as if it were so. This provision cannot be better
made then by redressing excise abuses, and so settling it for the future, that
the people may be both satisfied and freed by frequent accounts, which would
produce rare taxes.

The advantage of this redress and settlement would be great. The Parliaments
honor would be hereby vindicated, who suffer extremely in the opinion of
those, who want the spirit of discerning between sound and unfound. The hands
and hearts of our friends would be strengthened, when they should see their
money as faithfully distributed, as cordially exhibited. The countenances of
all wicked Cains would fall, when they should see us in a constant course of
supply no more liable to the shoales of want, or rocks of cozenage.

Besides hereby we should be enabled to raise fresh forces in the Eastern
association, by suffering the current of their moneys to resume their proper
channel. Neither would this be of small moment, whenas the General discharged
from the particular care of those Counties, (whereto his army seems yet tied by
receipt of their pay,) should not need eye any other busnesse, then pursuance
of the King and the hindrance of his recruits: Then, the virtue of this example
would work upon other Counties, and animate them to the like association, by
not fearing (as they have hitherto had cause) a diversion of their levies, when
they should see a sollid establishment for our own. Its incredible what order
and due proportion will do in taxes. The united provinces with less then two
millions of revenue maintain a hundred thousand men on foot, whereof Amsterdam
more then a third part. And if the Dutch frugality be compared with our English
profusion, I see no reason why London may not exceed Amsterdams proportion, or
since the Beer excise amounts there to sixty thousand pound a year, why it
may not here be farmed at one hundred thousand pound, or if you will say their
multitude of Seamen, (who are usually troubled with dry livers) may make them
proportionably exceed us in that particular; Sure we exceed them more in other
domestic, and frivolous expenses. Unequal and jumping taxes undo us, while
no man knows how to proportion his expenses: how much better were it, both for
the Commonwealth and us to be at a certainty? Wherefore I will wind up my
alarm with a relation of the low Country excise as it was sent me last week
out of Holland; which although not altogether so perfect, as I desired, vet may
afford some light in things most material, and stir up others to lick this
rude draught into better form, which has been my maine intention.

But before the voyder come give me leave, instead of a Dessert to serve you
with one caution more. That as we have new modelized our army, and ought to new
modelize our excise, so (if we really aim at a speedy period of our miseries)
we must new Modelize something else of greatest concernment. If we look into
the Venetian government, we shall find their so much admired durability and
prosperity to flow from the frequent redintegration of their several
Committees or Counsels by their grand Counsel. Thus precedent Counsels were
obscured by the Septemviri, and these again by the Decemviri, who bear an
annual magistracy, and are accountable at the years end, to be according to
their merits, either punished or rewarded. In the Infancy of the Low Country
Commonwealth, their chief Counsel, was that of State, whereto both Governor
and General, had and have admittance, but soon after apprehending the danger
whereto they exposed themselves, by revealing the mysteries of their State to
strangers, and yet not daring openly to disgust the English, they ordained
another supreme Council, whereto their General has no admittance; whereby
they satisfied the Earl of Leicester, and secured themselves. When our
foreign friends saw us begin the year so resolutely with execution of
Delinquents, and removal of remiss Agents, they verily thought the hour of
our deliverance come, and expected we should have stopped at no mediums but gone
roundly on to the end proposed. What mean then al these rubs and sudden
stops, which come upon us like fits of the falling sickness? The ice is
broken, and we on the other side of Rubicon, by the cure of our feet and
reformation of our armies. The restoration of our withered hands, is the work
of another Sabbath, of such a day of rest wherewith God has now blessed us,
and is accomplished by opening the palms of all receivers; whereof enough has
been said, if rightly, too much, if slightly understood. But both these
remedies are insufficient, as long as the same evil spirit that possessed
heretofore the executive, now torments the directive power. When the feet are
lame, there is help by crutches, when our hands fail us, others may feed us,
but the distraction of the head, has an influence upon all the senses: It lies
neither in the forepart nor in the hinderpart it is in vertice. The only mean
to chase away this evil spirit, is the harp of David, i.e. the slip of unity
grafted in the stock of honesty: a true harmony between all the honest both in
Parliament and City.

Seeing God has abounded in mercy toward you, be not wanting to your selves;
when God goes before he expects you should remoove your tents and follow him,
and that not halting but running. Wherefore either let former success animate
you, or abundance of future fear drive away all present fear. Relapses are
dangerous, and therefore as the disease diminishes, so care of the patient
ought to be augmented.

I desire peace, no man more: yet let me tell you, those who have drawn their
sword against their Prince (rational men will understand me in a vulgar sense) I
will not say with Alexander of Parma should fling away their scabbard, but
surely should be cautious, upon what terms they sheath it. The Key of the
Kings Cabinet, as it has unlockt the mystery of former Treaties, so I hope it
will lock up our minds from thoughts of future.

A Treatise of Excise.
SInce there is no Peace without a previous War, nor war without stipends,
neither stipends without taxes; and since this is especially remarkable in the
United Provinces, whose several Signories, are bound to a yearly tribute for
defense of the common Cause; it will not be amiss to look more narrowly into
the Collection of those riches, which have rendered Holland, the miracle of this
latter age.

Tributes here are of two sorts, some ordinary, others extraordinary. Ordinary
are those, which once imposed, are ever after exacted. Extraordinary, such as
according to the vanishing or imminent necessity of the Commonwealth, are
sometimes exacted, sometimes remitted.

I find three sorts of extraordinary taxes; the first is of every head, the
second of every Chimney, the third is upon the whole bulk of a man's wealth and
possessions balanced together. That is called Head-money, the other Chimney
money, and this the two hundredth penny.

The Poll-money consists in two shillings, which the Commonwealth has for
every head within it. Which how it swells their Treasury, is easy to
conjecture, by the infinite frequency of its Inhabitants. Yet men of meanest
condition are exempt from this burden, and those accounted such, who shame not
to profess their extreme poverty before the Censors. This has been but once,
that ever I could hear of exacted, with great reluctance of the people,
whereof some apparently withstood it, which may be the reason of its
intermission.

Chimney-money, is nothing else, but a tribute, which owners of houses, whether
in Country or City, pay in behalf of their Chimneys, for every one two
shillings. Herein the Spaniards in the Kingdom of Naples preceded the
Low Country men, for this Custom is yet there observed.

The two hundredth part, is assessed upon the whole bulk of a man's substance,
so that whoever is worth two hundred shillings or pounds, pays in one to the
Treasury, for four hundred two, and so proportionably: but may some say, How
can the Magistrate make a true estimate of every man's private fortunes? Since
none easily betray their opulence or indigence; Whence may be inferred, that the
Magistrate often declines the way of equity, seeing it cannot be, but that some
will pass for poorer, others for richer then indeed they are. This difficulty
is prevented by a prudent temper and moderation. For the custom is, that in
imposing this two hundredth, the Consuls and other City Magistrates, according
to public fame of every ones wealth and fortunes, exact from some more from
some less, as they are vulgarly esteemed wealthy or needy: whereby no man is
forced to reveal his riches, which are rated at the arbitrament of the
Magistrate, and common rumor. Notwithstanding, if any will upon oath affirm
himself over-rated, what is just and equitable, is detracted.

In which proceeding this is observable, that most men being ambitious, and
affecting the repute of opulent, many from whom the Magistrate exacts too much,
choose rather to pay, then proclaim the slenderness of their fortunes. So that
vice it self supports virtue, and real profit is reaped from wealth
imaginary. This tribure is for the most part trienniall.

Ordinary taxes are manifold, I will only hint at the principal.

Salt Excise is thus exacted. The City Magistrate uses to view each family,
and the persons thereof, and according as the family is less or more numerous,
a greater or lesser measure of Salt is presumed to be annually spent, and
proportionably a greater or lesser sum imposed. In some Cities there is a
certain price appointed to every great and small measure, which the buyer
pays in lieu of tribute.

Beer excise, whereto all Citizens are promiscuously bound, is of twenty pence
a barrel. Only smallest Beer of three shillings the barrel is Excise free,
in favor of the poor. Besides the aforesaid, all Alehouses and Inne-keepers,
pay two shillings three pence the barrel. The excise which Brewers alone
discharge, is two pence upon every barrel. So much likewise pay the Mariners
or Merchants, who import Beer from England, Germany, and elsewhere.

Upon French wines six pence a gallon. Upon Spanish, Renish, and other sorts,
twelve pence the gallon.

Vinegar Excise consists of six shillings eight pence upon every Vessel of 40
gallons, two pence the Gallon.

On Strong waters, and Aquavita is imposed ten pence the gallon, if made of
Wine; five pence if of Beer,

Butter excise, consists of six shillings eight pence upon every barrel of
three hundred and twenty pounds, a farthing upon every pound; multitude of
pounds supplying the defect of magnitude in the imposition.

Oil excise, consists of six shillings eight pence the Pipe; upon each Vessel
of Whale Oil, five shillings.

Candle excise, both of Wax and Tallow, is four shillings two pence the
hundred, half a penny the pound.

The impost of round measure, is that which is upon all such Wares as are
measured with measures of a round form, as Corn, Salt, Seeds, Lime etc. for
every last or load of wheat, one shilling ten pence, of Rye 2s.1d. of round and
small seed, three shillings. For a hundred pound of Salt, three shillings and a
penny etc. Now this excise is paid by those Merchants, who buy great
quantities and measures of these necessaries.

Turfe and Coal excise, consists in one penny and a half, the tun of Turfe;
and one pound ten shillings upon a hundred pound, of great English or Scotch
coals.

Excise of ruder and harder Wares, vulgarly the Impost of great wares, consists
in five pence the hundred of Lead, two pence the thousand of Brick.

Wood excise consists in the eighth penny of what it is sold for; so that if it
be 8 or 12 shillings the load the Excise is 1 shilling, or 1 shilling six pence.

Excise of Clothes interweaved with gold, and of all silk, consists in the
twelfth penny of every ell, so that if it be sold for twelve shillings, the
Commonwealth has one, etc.

Upon every one of their own woollen clothes, ten shillings. Upon English
clothes undied, for every piece valued at 12 pound, one pound; and for every
piece above 12 pounds value, one pound six shillings eight pence, upon the
coursest Clothes, two pence the ell.

For Tapistry and guilt leather, and such kind of Wares, etc. the ninth penny
of their value. The value is enquired of the Merchant, who least he should
cosen the Farmer of this Excise, by dissembling and diminishing the true price,
it is prudently ordained, that paying one Flemish pound, i.e. ten shillings
more then the Merchants price is, the Farmer may (if he think good) retain
those. Wares as sold to himself.

Upon each Wagon and Boat two shillings: for greater vessels more, according
to the number of their Tons. Ten shillings upon every Coach.

The Excise of manured lands, consists in four pence half penny the Acre, with
whatsoever sown or planted, to be paid every month; the Months to be counted
from the sowing time until Harvest.

Upon all sorts of land, the sixth penny of what they are let for. And if any
hire not, but live upon their own lands, they are estimated by the Magistrate.

Upon houses, the eighth penny of their rent; but because the rent is not
always one and the same, therefore their estimate is taken by the Magistrate,
and the proprietaries more or less rated.

For every servant, the Master or Mistress pays two shillings.

Excise of all immooveables, wherein ships are comprehended, consists of the
fourtieth part of the price for which they are sold. Which, how much it
conduces to the increase of their Treasury, may be inferred from their
frequent sale of immooveables in Holland, testified by that Proverb; Once in
three years half the City of Leyden is sold and alienated.

The Excise of the great and small Seal, consists in two pence upon every
sheet sealed with the lesser, a groat upon every sheet sealed with the greater.
For you must know, The States of Holland, for this tributes sake only, have
decreed, that no Wills or Contracts, or any other Deeds valnable in law, that no
Petitions; and lastly, that nothing which should be admitted into public
Courts of Judicature, and Tribunals, ought to be written otherwise then in
these leaves stamped with the States Seal. The Seal was made diverse, in
regard of the greater or lesser moment of what is to be Sealed.

Many other species of Excise they have, which would be tedious to describe; Ex
vngue Leonem, etc.

But when the manner of their Collection was debated by the States; Some judged
it most expedient to ordain in every City, some City Magistrates, or other
mercenary Officers, who should take care of the Commonwealths revenue,
thinking it unsafe and prejudiciable, to farm out the taxes for a certain sum
of money, and that for these reasons.

1. Because public persons are more authoritative then private; and Authority
seems wholly necessary in a thing so odious, as is exaction of Tribute.

2. Because the annual profit of some taxes is uncertain, as of those of
wine, and beer, etc. for example, in the same City sometimes 100, sometimes
one hundred and fifty tons of wine are consumed; therefore the excise of wine
cannot be farmed out at a certain rate. For the Farmers will redeem the
excise either for more or for less then they afterward make thereof; If for
more, the farmer loses thereby, if for less, the Commonwealth sustains the
damage.

3. They added, that their Cities grew yearly more populous, consequently the
taxes would grow more profitable; wherefore if they should be let for any term
of years for a certain annual sum, the loss of the Commonwealth would be
too sensible.

4. Lastly they affirmed it perilous to entrust private men with public
revenews; for what if those Farmers promise much and perform nothing? how if
they therewith patch up private necessities? nay how, if they are found unable
to satisfy their yearly pension! wherefore those things which without, the
Commonwealth cannot subsist, ought to be in its immediate disposal.

Others were of opinion, that the excise ought to be let out to private men,
for certain annual sums, they had observed a two fold sort of taxes; some
imposed on certain commodities, and so likewise their revenew was certain: As
what is imposed on houses and grounds, is as certain, as is their number and
quantity. Other taxes are uncertain as the commodities whereon they are
imposed; such are those of wine and beer whereof now more, now less is
expended: look how uncertain the quantity of these is, so uncertain is the
profit of their excise. Wherefore they thought fit, for the collection of the
former as assured and constant, to employ a public overseer: but to farm out
the latter as uncertain for a certain sum of money, for which opinion they
urged these reasons.

1. Because these taxes are subject to infinite fraud and cozenage, whereby the
Subjects elude their payment. These deceits will be most diligently enquired
into by private farmers, as reaping so much the more profit, by how much the
more careful they are to detect and avert those frauds. For men are usualy
more solicitous about their private Wealth, then for the Commonwealth.

2. Those private men would be armed with authority sufficient: For after the
contract made for exaction of tribute, the Magistrate invests them with
convenient power, and they become, in a manner, public persons.

3. They added, because the profit of these taxes was uncertain, they were of
necessity to be farmed at a certain revenew; for its more behoovefull for the
Commonwealth to be assured of something then to have uncertain revenues, for
so they might measure their enterprises by the rule of their revenew, If the
farmers promise more then they receive, their contract obliges them to solve
their annual pension, if the receipts exceed the rents, the profit likewise
redounds to the Public. For when the same excise comes to be farmed again the
next year at a public auction, either the old farmer caught with the benefit
or others tolled on by hopes of the same gain, will proffer a greater sum
for redemption of the same taxes.

4. They professed their intention to let out the excise only from year to
year, or every six months, that so according to the melioration of the Cities
condition, the incomes of the Commonwealth might be yearly augmented.

Lastly they affirmed the danger was in vain pretended, of intrusting private
men with public wealth, for that fear and those mischiefs were easily
prevented, by the farmers presentation of sufficient sureties. It might also be
ordained; that a proportionable part of his yearly rent, be by the farmer paid
in monthly to the treasury.

This last opinion was generally embraced and is to this day followed; for
although its impossible to avoyde all abuses, since no man can be imagined to
undergo the hazard of such an office without great appearance of great gain,
yet that loss is but a fleabiting in comparison of what the Commonwealth now
suffers by the multititude of superfluous officers, who consume needlessely
more then two hundred thousand pound per annum as its easy to demonstrate.

Now the manner of letting out the excise is thus, Every year, or six months,
the States of every City, by their printed edicts affixed in all public
places, seasonably give notice of their intention at such a set time and place,
to let out this or that excise to whosoever offers most, with those cautions
and conditions contained in their edicts. At the day appointed, the States
deputies by public cryers, set upon the wrack the redemption of the foresaid
excise. The farmer is presently compelled to bring in sufficient sureties, that
the Commonwealth receive no detriment. For if the farmer fail in his payment,
the sureties goods are seized for public satisfaction.

For prevention of all deceit whereby the Citizen might defraud the farmers two
things are profitably instituted. 1. All porters carriers watermen, etc. who
carry any wares liable to excise are solemnly sworn to bring no such wares
into any private house, before he receive a note from the farmer, whereby he
acknowledges himself already satisfied. 2. Extraordinary fines are set upon
all such as are found to have never so little deceived the farmer. For offenses
easily perpetrated, and which are very lucrative, can hardly be prevented,
unless by severest punishment.

Postscript.
THe dying husbandman in the fable willing to engage his sons in a future
course of industry, recommended to them a hidden treasure in his vineyard: They
encouraged with these hopes fell suddenly to so laborious a digging that
although they found no treasure yet their vineyard was hereby soon mannur'd
and fenced: If honest men would be induced to take a little pains in the grand
business of accounts, besides the probability, of finding a real treasure, we
should at least reap this benefit, that by our digging herein, the fruit of the
vineyard would be improved for the future. As we are in our diet, so too often
are we in our Counsels; we tie our selves to beife and mutton, and scorn
smaller dishes as french Kick shaws, we look only upon the Gross of a business
and think the Beife (as I may say) of affairs only worthy our thoughts,
neglecting certain circumstantiall points, which are most essential and not
considering that in Politickes accidents are substantial. Because we have the
name of an excise among us, we think all is done, whereas until we settle all
particulars nothing indeed can be effected. I know no reason why the benefit of
all impositions, from the Crown to the ticket office, should not redound to
the public; This was impossible perhaps in the beginning; now the harvest is
ripe, and its high time to use the fickle.

Chi non puo dar al asino dia al basto.
FINIS.

