THE ABUSE OF GODS GRACE: DISCOVERED In the Kinds, Causes, Punishments,
Symptoms, Cures, Differences, Cautions, and other Practical Improvements
thereof.

Proposed as a seasonable check to the wanton Libertinisme of the present Age.

By NICHOLAS CLAGET, Minister of the Gospel at Edmundsbury in Suffolk, M. A. of
Magdalen Hall, Oxon.

(...) ^^st. Mart. Malorum morum licentia Pietas erit, occasio Luxuriae Religio
deputabitur, Tertul. Apol. adversus Gentes, c. 35. Shall we continue in sin
that Grace may abound? God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2. OXFORD, Printed by A.
Lichfield, for Thomas Robinson, and Samuel Pocock. 1659.

To his honored Cosen, WILLIAM CLAGET, Esquire. And his dear Consort, the Lady
SOUTHCOATE.
Dear Cosen,
YOur Friendship to me which was of old, and yet is not gray hair'd, but
flourishing, knows no Winter, but a constant Spring. In both your Universitie
and City life, the Rays of your favor have shoone on me. It is above twenty
years since we were Contemporaries at Oxford, under our Reverend, Pious, Sound,
and Learned Tutor, Dr. Edw. Corbet, who was a real Saint on earth, and is now a
glorious Saint in heaven. The mercy of our Tuition, is not to be forgotten of
us, nor can I forget your kindness to me, which has not been Aeffaeta
gignendo, barren by Production, like pregnant Animals, and vegetative Trees. I
am your Debtor, besides the due Debt of my Prayers for you, I here present to
you this (...), a Thank-offering, that it may from your Christian candor find
acceptance, and a sweet savor.

We live in an unhappy Age, wherein by many the Form, by most the Power of
Godlyness is neglected. Though it is a Mercy, Religion is in some Form and
Fashion, yet it is a misery, the Fashion is so Multiform, and in every different
dress so Obnoxious, and that Words and Works, are too common Antipodes.
Wronging Gods Grace is Englands Epidemical sin. None of the quarrelling sides
among us can plead Innocence. Though the spots of Gods children, and the Devils
are not the same; yet to our shame be it spoken, all sides have too much
darkened the glory of their profession, obscured the luster of the Gospel Sun,
and laid the Honor of Gods name in the dust. Seeing our streets are so foul, I
would mind every one to sweep their own doors, that the times of Liberty may no
longer be reproached, as they are, with a dirty, wanton, unjust
Licentiousness, in Opinions, and Practices. The sad experience that the old
man is in my self too much a Libertine, and what I have seen and heard of
others, put me upon large Meditations, sundry years ago in my Lordsday Sermons
to mine own Auditory, concerning the Pest of the Times, Spreading At
Edmondsbury in Suffolk.
Disease, Bane of Profession, Disgrace of Religion, Remora of Conversions,
Affliction of best hearts, Occasion of Blasphemy, Temptation to Atheism,
Merriment of Rome, which consists in the Abuse of Grace. Could I upon Englands
tallest Mountain speak with the loudest noise of Thunder, and articulate my
mind to every ear, I would say the Abuse of Grace is Englands sin; Repent of
it, O England, repent, repent. These were the words of that faithful Martyr,
Mr. Bradford, when he was burning in the flames. Though it is not possible I
should be so loud, vocal, and monitory, yet encouraged by some pious and
judicious friends, I am imboldned to take the benefit of the Press, and to
communicate thoughts in season, to as many hands, eyes, and hearts, as
Providence shall guide them to. I beseech you (Sir) the happiness of whose
Consanguinity and Amity, I have experienced, peruse and improve what you shall
read, to an holy conviction, serious bewailing, and deep abhorrence of an
odious sin which has too black a guilt, and is loaded with many aggravating
circumstances. This will be a choice divine Blessing on the Tractate, the
Authors Reward, and a Testimony of the Grace of God in you. The Gospel, the
precious Gospel, that has cost the Blood of Christ, and Christians, the sweet
word of Grace, the power of God unto Salvation, let it be precious in your holy
esteem: And though Papists Qui de evangelio Christ facium hominis evangeliu^,
vel quod pejus est diaboli. Hier. Epist ad Gal.
by their Derogatory Antichristian Traditions, Worldly Politicians, and Hellish
Libertines, do in Hieromes terms make of the Gospel of Christ the Gospel of
men, or which is worse, the Gospel of the Devil. Do you speak it and live it,
the Gospel of God and Grace. The things I would offer to mine own soul, I
tender to you. Be inquisitive what may deservedly bear the brand of Gospel
Wantonness, when it appears, and interpret it as the Messenger of Hell, the
Artifice of the Devil turned Angel of Light, the not more subtle than
pernicious Engine to ruin souls. Be one of Zions Mourners in your Closet
Retirements, to look over this worst of sins, the predominant wrong of Grace,
with a mourning spirit. Endeavor to live a severe, exact, spiritual, heavenly
frame of heart, that when you are to give up your Deathbed account, the Spirit
of Truth, Peace, Purity and Comfort, may witness with yours, that the Gospel
has transformed you into the Image of it is Glory, and has taught you to deny
that ungodlyness, and those wordly Lusts, which shroud themselves under the
protection of Grace.

And, Noble Madam, as the Tie of Marriage, and the Union (I hope) of Grace,
has made you and my dear Cosen one, so have I made you one in my Epistolary
address. If the divine principle of the love of God and his Gospel be implanted
in you, it cannot but urge you to the detestation of, and lamentation for the
prodigious sin of Gospel Wantonness: whilst some Femal wantons study their
senses and faces, not their souls, who beautify their outsides, whilst their
insides are altogether dis-regarded; be pleased among other spiritual
Looking-glasses, which religious Artists, and faithful Writers have with
elaborate thoughts composed, to honor this, so far as often to look on it, to
dress your better part by it, that when it shall reflect and reverberate your
gracious beauty, you may praise the infinite Beauty and Fountain of Holiness,
you may be Great and Good too; and this is a most rare, and happy combination.
A few there are in the words of an Ancient, that are eminent in both In utroque
tulo primi.
worlds, and but a few; Not many Noble. 1 Cor. 1. 26. are called to eternal
Honors. Goodness enamels Greatness, and shines like a precious Stone in a
Ring. I like not, but altogether abhor that morose Stoicisme and Quakerisme
that frowns on the Titles of worldly precedencies, as unbecoming Christians
ears and tongues. Due Titles are no crimes of Language, nor unconsistent with
Piety; yet I hope you have learned the vast distance between the style of
Madam, and Christian, and that in the divine Heraldry, the heavenly Descent of
Grace will outshine all the Escutchions, and the glorious aerie appellations
of worldly precedencies. The childless, holy Eunuch, was by the Gospel Prophet
comforted, that he should have a Name better than of Sons and Daughters. The
new Name, either Believer, or Child of God, out-titles, and out-glories the
highest worldly style. Fulgentius gave good counsel to Galle, a noble
Christian, of a Godly, as well as Gentile Extraction, born of the Spirit as well
as Kin to Roman Consuls; Learn to ascribe nothing to your Noble Disce nihil
tibi nobiluate generis assignare. Fulgent. Epist. ad Gallam. Inter saculares
illustris superbiae fomes. Fulgent. Tametsi speciem aliquam praese ferunt
homines, tanquam in agris flores, qui tamen refulget decori protinvs interit
atque evanescis. Calvinan Isa. 40. In saculi culmine constituti. Fulg.
Praebentmalae imitationis laqueum aut bonae conversationis exemplum -- Magna
tales aut poena manet aut gloria, Fulgent. de Conversione ad Theodorum.
stem. Although you have secular, illustrious glory, yet especially with a
perfect humble heart be ambitious of the Spirits Nobility. If, Madam, the
anointing of the Spirit teach you this lesson, that all flesh is grass, and
all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field, the glory, the
ornament, the glittering shine of it will disappear in pale, ghastly death, and
the chambers of silence and rottenness: I hope it teaches you this also, that
Regeneration is the birth of births; and that the thriving Graces of the
Spirit, bosom Communion with Jesus Christ here, and highest rooms in heaven,
will be the Honor of Honors. Consider, Great persons are great blessings or
plagues; a train follows them to Heaven or Hell, they are not saved, or damned
alone. They that stand in the worlds higher ground, who either lay the snares
of an evil imitation, or are the presidents of an holy conversation, shall have
great, either eternal Penalty, or Glory. Has free Gospel grace shined in your
soul? abuse it not: Hold forth the Word of Life in a gracious life. If you, and
the faithful conjugal guide of your soul shall speed your motions to those
heavenly, eternal Mansions, where the better than flowings of Milk and Honey,
the sweet heavenly Feasts, and unglutting delights of eternity shall be
enjoyed: If you shall avoid this common scarlet sin of perverting Grace, which
with an ungrateful Wantonness, treads under foot the Son of God, thinks,
desires, affects, and lives, as if the blood of the Covenant were an unholy
thing, and offers a proud despite to the Spirit of Grace: If the study of this
book shall help you both, and others to walk exactly, to redeem the time, adorn
the Gospel, credit Profession, glorify God, and promote your own, and others
eternal Salvation, you will both accomplish the design of publishing the
ensuing Meditations, and encourage him, who is your remembrancer at the Throne
of Grace, and remains

From Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Mar. 18. 1658. Your engaged servant in the Work
of the Gospel, NICH. CLAGET.

To the Christian Reader.
I Shall not detain thee with a long Preface, lest I may be injurious by
keeping thee too long in the threshold: Only a few things I shall premise
concerning the reverend Author, and his excellent work. As for the Author, he
has been well known to me at least Five and twenty years, as being of Magdalen
Hall in Oxford.
that Society with me (where from the first, even to this day, (through Gods
goodness I yet continue) which has bred and sent forth many faithful Laborers
into Gods Vineyard, and many Mr. Tyndal the martyr. Dr. Field. Dr. Hoyle. Dr.
Harris. M. Pemble. Mr. Leigh. Dr. Cheynel Dr. Wilkinson, now of Chapter Ch, in
Oxon. Dr. Wilkins M. Obadiah Sedgwick. M. Pocock. M. Pynke. M. Thomas Ford. Mr.
Simon Ford, etc. Edmunds Bury. Mr. Jet.
learned Orthodox Writers. Of later years my acquaintance has been much
increased with this worthy Author, and I rejoice therein: He has for these
fifteen years in Edmunds Bury in Suffolk, (Where he now resides) given abundant
testimony of his industry and fidelity, in the discharge of his Ministry, and
has studied to approve himself a Workman that needs not to be ashamed. He
has, (as it is said of Demetrius) obtained a good report, and of the truth: He
is sound in the faith, and holy in life, and both by his life and Doctrine,
makes it his business to win many souls unto righteousness. I add no more
concerning the Author, neither needed I have said so much, for he needs not my
Letters of commendation: His Works speak far louder, and praise him in the
Gate. That * Corporation (where those two faithful Servants of Christ do now
exercise their Ministry) has great cause of thankfulness, because God has
raised up such able Ministers now upon the place, in the room of their * worthy
Predecessors, (with most of them I rejoice that I have had the honor of
acquaintance.) And that people, who like Capernaum, have been lifted up to Hea
Mr. Claget. M. Sclater. M. Gibbons. M. White. M. Calamy. buroughs. M.
Sainthill. M. Wall. ven with Gospel means, ought to remember, That where much
is given, much is required. As for such who forsake faithful Teachers, and the
Public Assemblies, I heartily wish them timely and serious repentance, and
that their Palates might have a right taste, then they will conclude, that the
old wine is better then their new; and that godly ordained Ministers, are
better then upstart, un-called, self-conceited Seducers.

Concerning the Book (the whole design whereof is to advance grace, and decry
the abuse thereof) it cannot be expected, that I should engage to bring of
every Phrase, Punctillo, or Tittle, according to the curiosity of Critics. As
for such, whose fancies outrun their judgments, and with whom affectations of
new coined words, are more valued then the form of sound words; I am not
careful to answer them in these matters, neither do I think their exceptions
worthy of an Answer. However, I am fully persuaded, that the Treatise is solid
and profitable, tending to edification; and throughout the whole, there runs a
line of a gracious spirit: And whoever profits not thereby, has more reason to
question himself, then the Author: For if pride and prejudice be laid aside, I
doubt not, but (through Gods blessing) much spiritual advantage will follow,
upon the serious and deliberate perusal of this Book.

Now if any one Object that the World is glutted with multitude of Books; my
answer is, For good, Orthodox, solid Writers, we have reason to bless God, for
such helps we have by them, and ought to be desirous for the continual increase
of them: As for vain, frothy, unsound Writers, we wish that they were suppressed
altogether: For some Books, we have too many; and of others, which are rotten,
heretical, and blasphemous, we wish we had not any at all, but that they and
their Authors might be buried together, and never be revived, as now adays
(with sorrow be it mentioned) they are, and become voluminous, to the great
injury of the Church of God.

But as for such excellent Books as we have had of late years, I have cause to
bless God that ever I read M. Sheffield of conscience. M. Wall's none but
Christ. M. Ford of Adoption. Mr. Calamy's Ark. M. Reyners Precepts, etc.
them: I heartily wish that there were more of that kind: One of the same
stamp is this Treatise. The man and his Communication is one and the same: His
design, (I am persuaded) is in the singleness of his heart to bring glory to
God, in advancing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. He was hardly prevailed
withal to put this Work to Print; but having communicated it to me, and
referred it to my determination, after a deliberate perusal thereof, I would
not by any means suppress that which I conceived might conduce to the public
good.

Wherefore (Reader) be pleased to spend some time (and it will be no lost time)
in a careful reading of this profitable Treatise; and if thou be not wanting to
thy self, I conceive thou will reap much benefit for thy precious soul. And
this further request I have to thee, that thou would be mindful of the
Author at the Throne of Grace; and of him also, who rejoices, that he has
been in any way instrumental to bring to light this Treatise, which in love to
thy soul he has now made public, and remains,

Oxon, Magdalen-Hall. March 28. 1659. Thy Servant for Christ's sake, Henry
Wilkinson.

The Authors Preface to the unprejudiced Reader.
THE corruption of the best things is the worst corruption; of Sense bad, of
Reason worse, of Corruption optimi est pessima.
Grace worst of all. As crystal waters are bemired, fair faces besported, not
into ornament, but deformity; so the pure crystal streams of the Sanctuary
are defiled, and the fair face of Gods Grace, the most orient Beauty of Heaven
and Earth is bespotted by deforming Libertinism. There is no new thing under
the Sun. Eccles. 1. 9.
What has been is, and will be, while the old man, and the old Serpent, in
their impure conjunction, are apt and able to engender a numerous brood of
licentious wantons. The Abuse of Gods goodness is as ancient as Angels and
Adams fall. As Angels. They defaced the Primitive glory of their creation,
stood not in Inerat ei possibilitas peccandi, nec tamen fuit culpa Dantis, sed
Abutentis, qui ipsam facultatem convertit in usum peccandi quam acceperat ad
gloriam non peccandi. Non peccavit quia potuit sed quia voluit. Bern. de Gratia
and Libero Arbitrio, p. 1060. B.
the truth, John 8. 48.
but voluntarily depraved themselves from once pure, and blessed Angels, into
unclean, and cursed Devils. Adam abusing himself and his freewill, lost himself
and his freewill, perverted his sinless mutability given him to stand, to the
worst use of it, to fall. Abused his sovereignty over Eve and the creatures,
his bright burning candle of Reason, his Conscience fit to condemn, his Will
able to reject Temptation, his regular affections, his tenacious memory, his
natural homage to his Maker; in short, his created sufficiency. Since this
fall, and fatal epidemical degeneration, a loose wantonness has run through
the mass of all Mankind, by ordinary generation the Offspring of Adam. As
Aelian relates, there is a sting of poison that runs quite through the
Lampreyes, a fish of a delicate taste, so the Abuse of Gods goodness runs
through all the generations of men. The vilest of them are predominant wantons.
The best have been too much infected with the leaven of looseness. The impure
fire of the Sodomites Incontinencie, left the natural use, and burnt in lust to
men. Romans 1. 27.
Bring out the men that we may know them. Genesis 19. 5.
The lascivious Israelites sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Exodus 32. 6.
The degenerate Idolatrous seed of Abraham, often left the bed of chaste worship,
and the pure heavenly delights of spiritual conjugal communion for the filthy
exotic pleasures of superstitious Lovers. Hos. 2. 5. 7.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took
them wives of all which they chose. Genes. 6. 1.
Junius notes The daughters of men are opposed to the sons Filiae hominum
filiis. Dei opponuntur. Non viri mundani faeminas mundanas appetivisse
dicunt^r, sed filii Dei. i. e. homines ad Deum ex foedere, and ad ecclesiam Dei
pertinentes dicuntur scortari. Juni.
of God. It was not worldly men that desired worldly women, but the sons of
God, men in covenant with God, professed Church members that did fornicate
after unsuitable contagious beauties, and so infected the Church. The posterity
of Seth, who had the purity of Gods worship, as Otho Casman observes, we^e so
debauched by carnal sensuality, ut extincto filiorum Dei semine, The seed of
Gods sons being extinct, they set Eousque securitas progressa, ut carnis suae
desideria Religioni long preferrent. Otho Casmannus.
up their carnal desires before their professed pure Religion. Lot was first
abused with Wine, then with Incest Genesis 19. 32, 35.
Aaron the Saint of God Psalm. 106. 16
had a part in the guilt of the golden Idol Exodus 32. 2, 3, 4.
David was too lascivious in his house top. 2 Samuel 11. 2.
The Lords covenan^ed people were linsey woolsey in their Religion, feared God,
and yet served their Idols. 2 King. 17. 33.
Halted between God and Baal. 1 King. 18. 21.
Great Solomon was so enslaved to his wanton wives, that his hea^rt was after
strange Gods. 1 King. 11. 3, 4.
The temple of the Lord was converted into a den of thieves, and became a
sanctuary of wickedness. So under the New Testament clear Gospel Light has
been perverted to countenance works of darkness. Ranting Libertines have been
first poisoned in their Intellectuals. Jer. 7. 4. 11.
They count it pleasure to riot in the Meridian Gospel-day-time, 2 Pet. 2. 13.
and then they are infected in their Morals, and become adulterers, seducers,
covetous, cursed children that cannot cease from sin. 2 Pet. 2. 14.
Even the family of Christ had a licentious Judas that did personate, not live
the Saint, but was a very Devil in a Saints clothes. John 6. 70.
Simon Magus would buy, that he might sell the Spirit, make a worldly market,
not an heavenly negotiation of the Holy Ghost. Act. 8. 18, 19
The Apostle Paul blamed the Corinthians gifted, but infected Christians, with
^^dings, 1 Cor. 3. 4.
spiritual pride 1 Cor. 4. 18
contentions, 1 Cor. 3. ^.
and carnal uncleanness. 2 Cor. 12. 21
The Widow a Votary to Christ and his Gospel, waxed wanton against him, 1 Timothy
5. 11
preferred a life of carnal pleasures 1 Timothy 5. 6.
before spiritual delights. In the primitive Feasts of Love, licentious
Christians fea^ed their lusts 2 Pet. 2. 13.
as well as bellyes, Fed without fear, Jude ep. v. 12.
had the character of their wantonness set out by the Apostles Peter and Jude.
The deeds of the Nicolaitans were abominable, Rev. 2. 15. Execrabiles fuerunt
Nicolaitae, qui profanato Matrimonio stupra et Adulteria permiserunt. Gal.
lasius Annot. in Irenaeum.
Their error was accursed, who condemned Marriage, and gave license to
Adulteries and Fornications, pure instituted Ordinances, (as none can doubt but
they were such under Old and New Testament times) could not keep out impure
hearts and lives. If the presence, power, and Doctrine of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, ^vageli^^s, Apostles, could not prevent daring insolences against
the light of Gods truth, and holy profession, it is no wonder if in after ages,
from this impure spring, Abuse of Grace, noisome streams of loose principles
and practices are flown. Church History records how C^osticks, Valentinians,
Arrians, Marcionites, Manichees, and others, have depraved the Truth of God,
how under these and other Enemies of the Gospel, black egiments of Libertines
have abused the Colors of Christ, and sided with the Prince of darkness, by
wronging the Grace of ^od. Nor has the church of Rome, under the Papacy cause
to wipe her mouth and hug het self in her Paramount chastity, whose title is
Mystery, Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth. Rev. 17.
5.
She is a wanton Bawd (...). Her pompous Religion in her splendid garrish
Attire, her golden cup of Fornication, Rev. 17. 4. Romanum illud prostibulu^
spurcitiem suam legite, nomine Ecclesias and sanctitatis Gallasius. Lais
Philosophum and pro Leone Decere Libidine coepit mores suos d^ Lupanat ad
scholam stransulit diserens volup: esse summum bonum. Lact de Justitia l. 5. c.
2.
speaks her a Wanton of Wantons: all the eye pleasing Pageantry of her
unwritten Traditions, are but the wanton products of her carnal wisdom,
pretencing to, but never proving scripture allowance. As the Mystical
Fornication of her Idolatry is undeniable, so in a wanton indulgence, is she a
Fornicating Bawd in the Letter, besides the tolleration of stews in Rome, one
of her children Joannes a Casa has exceeded the impure Heretics of former
times, defending, yea extolling corporal uncleanness; and yet Romish impurity
must all be courted under the name of the Church and Holiness. This Romish
impudent Strumpet is like Aristippus a filthy Philosopher, who freely
Luxuriating with Lais an impure Strumpet, became a Pandor of a Philosoper, and
thinking it not enough to live wickedly, he began to be a teacher of Lusts,
translated his Brothel-house Life to the school, and taught the pleasure of
the body to be the chiefest good. Thus neither professed Philosophy, nor
christianity has been an expedient to curb the insolences of vile, carnal,
affections. Professed Heathens and Christians have been false to their lights
and convictions, yea have wantonly, either put them out, or turned their backs
upon them, and yet even in those times wherein looseness has abounded against
nature and grace, the Lord has stirred up witnesses to bear a severe
Testimony against both kinds of Abuses.

Among the Degenerate seed of Adam, loose Pagans, there were many that abused
their Gods, whereof some were whole, some half Atheists: Some whole, Wicked
men contemners of Religion, Denied the Being of a God, as Diagoras, Melius, who
was therefore called an Atheist, and Theodorus Cyrenaicus, Ob id' (...) dictus
Aristides (...) iustus. Phocion bonus, (...). Plutarch.
and Eumerius Siculus. Others half Atheists, acknowledged a Deity, yet denied
Providence, That God had any care of humane affairs, that he governed the
World, yea denied also the immortality of the Soul, and a life in the other
world: Lucian was such a semi-Atheist, making sport with Jupiter, for being too
cool and indulgent in his government: to condemn lewd unmorral Heathens, there
were, I may say, a stricter sort of Pagans, externally pure from the gross
crimes of the times, though guilty of innumerable blameable impurities of the
Heart, unwasht by faith. Such were Aristides, surnamed the Just. Phocion the
Good profitable Patriot, Cymon Incredibly beneficial and Liberal to the poor;
Epaminondas, modest, grave, true; Socrates, patient, meek; Xenocrates,
continent, frugal; Lucretia, chaste, Also Christianos pudore quodam suffundere
possunt, Rivius. Hoc majeres nostri questi Junt, hoc nos querimur, etc. eversos
esse mores, regnare nequitium, in deterius res humanas labi, Sense. de benefil
1. c. 10.
the Camilli, Curij, Fabij, Fabritij, Catoes, Scipioes, were eminent external
Moralists, whose examples may shame profane Christians. Seneca thus complained
of debauched Pagans, This said he our Ancestors complained of, this is our
complaint, this will be a complaints, good manners are overthrown, wickedness
reigns, men grow worse and worse; but because even among Christians, there are
that Pene supra modum, as one says, are excessive admirers of Pagans virtue,
yea some wanton wits among us, are more taken with Heathen, then protestant
writers, so thin in using these, so large in quoting those; it will be needful
to show the sad and dreadful desiciencies of the most shining Pagan morality,
it was ignorant, ill principled, and ill ended.

Ignorant of the true God, and the true way of his Worship; Sine cultu very dei
etiam quod virtus videtur peccatum est. Author de Vocat. Gentium.
and without the worship of the true God, ehat which seems to be virtue is sin:
They were ignorant of the main, viz. the knowledge of Jesus Christ, the deceits
of the heart, the mischief of original corruption, the fall of Adam.

So their Morality was ill principled, the product of self-sufficiency: They
went not out of themselves to be virtuous, made their own Reason and Wills the
sole Basis on which they built their most stately virtuous Edifice: Hence their
proud titles of fore-Election, and self-power, too high a style for lapsed
sinners: They were not poor, but proud in spirit, and arrogated too much to
their own strength.

Lastly, It was ill ended: Heathens virtue centred in vain Glory, not Gods
Glory. What a proud abominable speech was that of C. Cotta in Cicero, No man
ever thanked God for his virtue, Virtutem nemo unquam acceptam Deo retulit,
propter virtutem enim jure laudamur, and in virtute recte gloriamur, quod non
contingerit se donum a De^ non a nobis haberemus. Numquis quod bonus vir esset,
gratias Diis egit, at quod Inanes virtuta^
for we are praised for virtue, and rightly glory in virtue, which would not
be, if God gave it us, and we had it not from our selves; and a little after,
says he, Was ever man thankful to the Gods, that he was a good man? He may be
indeed, that he was Rich, Honored, Healthy. It seems they called Jupiter,
Optimum Maximum, the greatest and best, not because he makes just, temperate,
wise, but safe, honored, and wealthy: No wonder then if Augustine called the
virtues of the Heathens, Glittering sins: Rivius, The vain shadows of virtues;
and Lactantius, The Images of virtues: All which speaks morality, yea, the
whole Body of virtuous Paganism, without God and Christ, but as a Body without
an head.

Dives, quod Honoratus, quod Incolumis. Cicero. Splendida peccata. Aug. Vmbrae.
Rivius. Imagines virtutum. Lactan.

Further, as the better sort of Heathens were witnesses against the scandalous
and profane, whose yet moral Eminencies, were too low and weak ladders to climb
up to their Blessed Making, Summum Bonum, and its adjunct Perpetuity: So in the
evil times of Licentious Christians, God has been wont to enter in warnings
and protests, by his servants against them.

In this time, says Luther, There is no discipline at all, no Justice, Hoc
tempore nulla amplius disciplina, nulla Justitia, etc. Luth. in Genesis Multi
body doctrina evan g^lii abutu^tur, and interim sibi ipsis blandiuntur, etc.
Dicunt de Duce Georgio, potuit in ultimo vitae articulo converti. Antinomi
contemnunt benedictionem suam, Ecclesiam, etc.
no modesty among men: We cry, we urge, we are instant in season and out of
season, but the Magistrate winks at sin: So many now adays, says he, abuse the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and in the mean time flatter themselves, though I live
in my sins, and am wicked, I will repent at length. It Is said of Duke George,
He could be converted in the last Article of life. So the Antinomists say, They
can be converted in their own time, and so contemn their blessing, The Church
Baptism, the Keys, Remission, Repentance, Eternal life, and receive the grace
of God in vain.

Melancton, though a man of a very mild Spirit, thus hotly Execrandi su^t
Antinomi, qui nolunt docere legem in Ecclesia, fingunt omnes suos impetus esse
motus spiritus sancti. Haec deliramementa horrendi furores Diabolici. Melanct.
de bonis. Oper.
rebuked lawless Liberoines: The Antinomians are to be accursed (said he) who
will not teach the Law in the Church, and fain all their Impulses to be the
motions of the Spirit, and will not be governed by the Law: These dotages are
horrible, Diabolical Furies, such as were of old of many Sects.

Zuinglius sighed out these words, If we were called Satanists Si Satanici pro
Christian is diceremur. Nobile illud and vere pretiosum Christi nomen tanta cum
infamia conspunnus, perinde ac si instar Mercurii, Vsurae, Furti, etc. Deus ac
Patronus sit. Zuing, de Intemerata virgin. page 349.
for Christians, there were no need of other manners: O calamity, never enough
to be deplored! O inestimable misery! We do with such infamy disgrace the noble
and truly precious name of Christ, as if, like a Mercury, he were the God and
Patron of Usury, Theft, Rapine, and Robbery.

Brentius thus rebuked the loose Gospellers of his Age: There Quid confidas
his, quibus cares? Brentius in c. 3. Matthew. Quast Justificatis fide quidvis
liceret. Hemingius Opusc. Ineo.
is so great a corruption of manners, such fludious injustice, that we give no
occasion to our enemies, to believe we trust in good works; for how should you
trust in what you have not.

Hemingius, a Dane Divine, observing the abuse of Justification, thus writes:
It Is an error of Ancient and Modern Libertines, when they hear men are freely
justified by another righteousness, they teach carnal security, as if the
justified by faith many live as they list.

Musculus thus declaimed against visible licentiousness: It Is clearer then the
Meridian light: Unbridled men count nothing sin that Meridiana luce clarius
apud homines effiaenatos pro peccato nihil reputatur, etc. Vah! quanta infamia
pudenda turpitudine notamur. Musculus Dom. 1. Advent.
suits with their lusts: The Devil does not let loose the reins more on the
necks of the Heathens, Turks, and Infidels, than of Gospellers: with what
infamy and shameful turpitude are we branded? our reproach is our enemies
triumph.

Nicolaus Gallasias, taxed the Anabaptists of his time, that Sublimia spectare
alieni esse a mundo, and spiritu regi videntur. Nic. Gall. Annot. in Irenaeum,
page 358.
they were like the Valentian Sect: Various, Arrogant, Curious, subtle in their
error, resembling them in despising others, fained Holiness, fair Speeches,
soaring aloft to high things, seeming to be estranged from the World, and
governed by the Spirit.

Jacobus Andraeas faulted the debauched Germans: The Word was preached among
them with no Reformation; Their life and Horrenda, Epicurea, bestialis vita,
etc. Atque hoc universum genus ab illis Evangelicum dicitur Institutum. Jaco.
Andraeas, con. 4. ad c. 21. Luke
conversation was Horrid, Epicureal, Bestial: Christ was not so much blasphemed
among Turks; they were wanton in their most costly and foolish apparel, and all
this loose carriage was veiled under a Gospel cover.

Joannes Rivius, a Saxon Divine, in his Epistle to the Duke of Saxony, thus
complains: As of old, in the infancy of the Christian Church, Christ sent his
Apostles into the world to preach the Vt in primordio quondam exorientis
Ecclesis, etc. Joannes Rivius Athenodorensis, opera Theol. page 254.
Gospel: The Devil stirred up his Apostles, under pretense of Christ and his
Gospel, who used Scripture testimony to corrupt the Purity of Doctrine: So when
Christ has stirred up in this age pious Writers, to restore the Doctrine of
the Gospel; The Devil has stirred up Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, to
defile the purity of restored truth, under pretense of promoting the Gospel,
removing errors, and restoring Orthodox Religion: Thus the Prince of darkness
is transformed into an Angel of light.

Joannes Spangeburgius, thus blamed licentious Libertines, that would be kept
in no bonds: after they saw they were set at liberty Postquam a vinculis
Papatus, se liberatos esse vident, volunt esse liberi ab Evangelio and
praeceptis Dei. Joan. Spangeb. in Narrar. henes. Dei.
from the chains of Popery, they would be free and discharged from the Gospel,
and the commands of God.

Calvin called the Libertines of his time, Evil spirits, clothed Omnium
mortalium sceleratissimos. Adversus Libertinos. Calvinus.
with humane appearance, of all mortals the most wicked. In his Opuscula, he
has written a sad and severe Tractate against Libertines.

Salvians words were sad, What is the Assembly of Christians, but a sink of
sin? Why do we flatter our selves with the Christian Quid est aliud, caetus
Christianorum quam sentina vitiorum? Salv. de Gub. 91. Ideo plus sub religion
is titulo Deum, ludimus quia positi in religione peccamus. Salv. de gub. Dei,
l. 3. in fine.
name? When this most sacred name does load our guilt; for therefore, under the
style of Religion, we mock God, because we sin under its holy profession.

Thus we see the loose carriages of former times, has sadded the hearts, and
sharpened the style of Pious, Zealous, Judicious Writers: Well were it, if this
prodigious sin, perverting the grace of God, had been confined to former ages:
The same impure, corrupt Spring of dissoluteness, that of old has sent forth
muddy streams of polluting opinions and conversations, has run in our own
times in too offensive and plentiful a Current: No side or denomination of
Protestants, as Lutheran or Calvinist, Episcopal, Presbyterian or Independent,
but in something or other, either in greater or lesser spots, they have defiled
their Garments. Gods chastising hand has been very heavy upon the party of the
Prelatical persuasion, among whom (I hope) some have risen by their falls, been
enriched by their impoverishments, and endeavored to secure the certainties of
blessed Eternity, by seeing the brittle glassen Pomp and glory of Dum splende
scit frangitur.
the World, glittering and broken: and such a glorious fruit of the Cross, I
wish to all complaining losers, that they may see they have as well fallen in
their sins as their Estates: But alas! are not many of you wantons both under
and against Gods Judgments and Mercies, in your Principles, Fancies, Fashions,
sensual Pleasures, Visits, vain Education of your Children and Servants, Family
Irreligion, mis-spending precious time? Do you not throw the old scoff of
Puritans upon all that dissent Doctor Potter, once Provost of Qu. College in
Oxford.
from you: Read with patience what a learned Doctor spoke in an Holy Day
Court-Sermon: Our Profession is Christianity, but not our practice: We resemble
Paganism: We are so far from emulating gracious examples, that of all things we
cannot endure to be suspected of too much Holiness: therefore we choose to
swear, swagger, riot, quaff with profane company, rather then to be defamed
with the imputation of purity. If your own experience Echo with this
loosnesse, blame not what you read, but be humbled, zealous, and repent.

And Reader, if thou be such a one as have sought for a strict Government,
Order and Worship of God in his Church, thou have even cause to resent it with
grief, tears, and blushing, that there want not proofs, that endeavored
Reformation has been too impotent to prevent the wanton Abuses of Gods grace:
Have not some loose opinions been Preached, Printed, Dispersed, Believed,
Tolerated, yea infected Consciences and Lives? Do those that cry out against
the men, spirit, and ways of the world, stand at such distance from the World
in Lusts, Affections, Conversation, as they do in Language? Does their outward
garb show they are not fashioned to the world? Are not the Pleasures, gaudy
Fashions, Estates, Pomps of the World too grateful?

Tertullian has taught us, Thou art delicate, O Christian! If Delicatuses,
Christian, si in saeculo voluptatem concupiscis. Quid lucundius qua^ Dei
patris and demini reconciliatio? quam virtutis revelatio? quam errorum
recognitio? quae major voluptas, quam fastidium voluptatis? Hae voluptates,
haec spectacula Christ anoru^. Tertul. de spectaculis.
thou desire worldly pleasure: Thou art a fool if thou accountest this
pleasure: What is more delightful then Gods Reconciliation, Truths Revelation,
Errors acknowledgement, Sins Pardon? What greater pleasure then the contempt of
Pleasure? What greater liberty then an upright conscience, a contented life,
and a fearless death? These are the pleasures, these are the spectacles, the
merriments of Christians: How will standers by be convinced, that that
Reformation is of such a sublimate Heavenly extraction, which should better
appear by shining Graces, then glittering outsides. I know Christian liberty,
as it is now stretched, does not only allow monstrous long Hair, but glorious
apparel, glittering in gold and silver lace, and other sumptuous Gaudery, which
in the Judgment of Scripture, Conscience, and the last Tribunal, were better
bestowed upon the bellies and backs of the poor. That speech might here be
properly applied, Ad quid perditio haec?

I could wish Christians would learn of Proba, an heavenly Christian, descended
of Roman Consuls, brought up in Royal Delights, yet was such an humble servant
of God, that she forgot her high birth and breeding, contemned the delights on
the body, relieved the hungry by her abstemious fasting, and was clad in Suam
famem satiandis, deservire corporibus, vilibus tecta indumentis vestiendis
pauperibus curam impendit. Fulg. de statu viduali ad Gal. (...). Plato Tom. 1.
page 416. g Prove. 10. 20
mean apparel that she might the better cloth the poor. O ye rich professing
Christians, follow Proba, and abatements of your pompous glory on your backs
and tables will speak you less worldly, and fit you to be more merciful. It Is
a ground of sad conjecture that you are little taken with inward glory, when
you lay out so much in outward. Plato held it a notorious crime for a
Magistrate to touch gold and silver, to wear it in garments, to drink out of
it; because (said he) they have divine gold and silver in their minds, and need
none of man's, deeming it irreligion to profane the divine with humane. O
professed Christians! who if really such, do out-worth the gold of Ophir, and
the Spanish Silver Fleets, if you can study, value, get, and improve the choice
silver of Righteous Tongues g, and the richly wrought cloth of gold, h visible
shining Good Works, you will be very little taken with outward, splendid glory.
He humbled you are such worldly, gaudy fashion-followers. Besides, do not your
ungoverned passions and tongues want of Pity, courtesy, equity, external
reverence in the Worship of God, over-greedy, covetous purchases, selfishness,
slight, formal keeping the Sabbath, divisions, contentions, crying up and down
the Ministry of the Gospel according to your fancy and humor, not your reason
not grace, speak you Wantons, and in these things too much carnal, Psalm. 45. 13.
and walkers as men 1 Cor. 3 3.
Think of this, O all ye Reforming party, that decry abuses in Prelatical
Government, and spend much breath, heat, and time in declaiming against them
(though I excuse none of their faults) study, bewail, amend your own visible
miscarriadges, We can never confute, nor reform others faults by our own. Lets
take heed when we cry out against others, that we do not, as Diogenes did of
Plato, trample upon their Pride with greater Pride. O that all parties would
lay to heart their sad unanswerableness to Costel-grace, and by the wisdom that
is from above without partiality think themselves concerned in the Annon fere
omnes in foedissimo abusu denorum Dei vivimus? Luth. in Genesis
following Tractate. No Christian, unless he be drunk, and spiritually mad by
the Quakers cup of Error, the intoxicating fume or dream of Perfection, but in
some things or others has abused the grace of God. Do not all of us almost
(said Luther) live in the most filthy abuse of Gods gifts? We cannot know the
strictness of the Law of God, and Gospel-rules, and our own loose unconformity,
but we have cause to say guilty, and to cry mightily to God, Spare us O Lord.

And now whoever thou aot that read the ensuing Treatise, I beseech thee lay
to heart this great sin, branded in this Book with all its aggravating
circumstances of Abusing the Grace of God. Let thy whole life and conversation
evidence thy walking in the spirit, thy self-abhorrency, and universal hatred
of sin, that with David, every false way thou utterly abhorrest. The design I
drive (my conscience bearing me witness) is to advance Grace in my own, and
others hearts and lives, and to prevent the abuse of it. Let not any of us
abuse Grace, like Spiders, sucking poison out of so sweet an herb, which then
we do apparently when we turn the Grace of God into wantonness. If by these
Meditations God may have glory, and the Reader any spiritual benefit, I shall
abundantly rejoice that I have any way contributed my Mite toward assistance
of such as walk in the narrow way to life.

Lastly, I earnestly beg thy prayers, that I may be faithful in my Ministry,
valiant for the truth against all gainsayers, and instrumental to win many
souls unto righteousness. And so good Reader, I commend these my endeavors to
the blessing of God, and commit thee to Gods Gracious Providence, and remain,

From my study in Edmundsbury in Suffolk, March 18. 1658. Thy helper in the
narrow way to Life, Nicholas Claget.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Jude v. 4. TUrning the Grace of God into lasciviousness, page 1

CHAP. 1. Containing the coherence of the words, p. 1 CHAP. 2. Containing the
Explanation of the words, Deduction of the Doctrine, with the Method of handling
it, p. 3 CHAP. 3. Showing in how many ways or kinds the grace of God may be
turned into wantonness, p. 4. Sect. 1. Predestinating grace is turned into
wantonness, 5 2. Sparing grace is turned into wantonness, 7 3. Long-suffering
grace is turned into wantonness, 8 4. The whole time of grace is turned into
wantonness, 10 5. The inviting offers of Grace are turned into wantonness, 15
6. The means of grace are turned into wantonness, 24 7. The examples of grace
are turned into wantonness, 34 8. Reconciling grace is turned into wantonness,
37 9. Adopting grace is turned into wantonness, 38 10. Freeing grace is turned
into wantonness, 47 11. Pardoning grace is turned into wantonness, 50 12. The
grace of imputed righteousness is turned into wantonness, 55 13. Gloryfying
grace is turned into wantonness, 61

CHAP. 4. Showing when the grace of God is turned into wantonness, 69 Sect. 1.
The Grace of God is turned into wantonness, in reference to sin, four ways, 69
2. The grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the heart is fearless of
sin, 70 3. The grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the heart is
sorrowless for sin, 71 4. The grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the
heart is powerless over sin, 71 5. The grace of God is turned into wantonness,
when the sinner carries loosly as to God in 4. particulars, 75 6. The grace of
God is turned into wantonness, when the heart carries wickedly as to Christ in
3. things, 77 7. When the heart carries wickedly as to the Law of God,
Doctrinally and Practically, 82 8. The grace of God is turned into wantonness,
when as it carries wickedly as to the Gospel of Christ, 84 9. The grace of God
is turned into wantonness, when as the heart carries it wickedly as to the
creatures, 87

CHAP. 5. Wherein are set down the causes why the grace of God is turned into
wantonness, 89 Sect. 1. Want of knowing the work and abuse of grace, 90 2. Want
of Faith to believe the signal darger of sin causes ab^se of grace, 91 3. Want
of heat, intention, and livelyness in Religion, causes abuse of grace, 91 4.
Want of receiving of the truth in love, is an advantage to turn a Libertine, 93
5. Want of laying to heart Gospel-threatnings, causes abuse of grace, 95 6.
Want of grace, changing, and affecting the heart, causes abuse of grace, 96 7.
Want of the upright and genuine use of grace, causes abuse of grace, 97 8.
Want of sound conviction of the mischief of original corruption, is a cause of
turning the grace of God into wantonness, 98 9. Want of considering the
straight way to life, causes the abuse of grace, 101 10. Error in 5.
particulars, causes the abuse of grace, 103 11. The error of sufficient
seize in Religion, causes the abuse of grace, 104 12. A gross error, to
the abuse of grace, that what pleases the loose sinner, pleases God, 107 13.
Another error, that abuses grace is, that false evidences are true, 107 14.
The error of abusive interpretation of Scripture has produced the abuse of
grace, 113 15. The grace of God is abused by Presumption, 123 16. Presumption
of interest in the Promises causes abuse of grace, 126 17. The presumption of
setting Death and Judgment at a far distance causes the abuse of grace, 129
18. The presumption of time enough to repent, causes the abuse of grace, 131
19. Temptation causes the abuse of grace in 4. particulars, 134 20. Evil
company is a temptation to wrong the grace of God, 137 21. Scandalous sins of
the godly are temptations to abuse grace, 139 22. Divisions and contentious
about Christian Religion, cause abuse of grace, 144

CHAP. 6. Showing wherein the greatness of this sin appears, 143 Sect. 1. It a
sin of a more than ordinary profaneness, 153 2. It is an hypocritical sin, 154
3. It is an ungrateful sin, 155 4. Abuse of grace is a sin against experience,
156 5. Abuse of grace is a sin destructive to true faith, 158 6. Abuse of grace
is opposite to the power of godliness, 158 7. Abuse of grace is a reproaching
sin, 159 8. Abuse of grace brings daily loss to the soul, 160 9. Abuse of grace
is a despising sin, 161 10. Abuse of grace is a revo^t^ng sin, 162 11. Abuse of
grace is an unexcusable sin, 165 12. Abuse of grace is an heathenish sin, 165
13. Abuse of grace is an universal sin, 167 14. Abuse of grace is an
unchurching sin, 168

CHAP. 7. Wherein are set forth the punishments of this great sin, abusing Gods
grace, 171 1. It is a great judgment to be given up to carnal lusts, 171 2.
Spiritual blind^ess is a judgment inflicted on those who pervert the grace of
God, 174 3. Hardness is a judgment inflicted upon such as abuse the grace of
God, 175 4. Incurableness in sin is a judgment against those who abuse the
grace of God, 177 5. Profaning of Gods grace will bring a terrible judgment
at the last day, 178 6. The hottest room in hell will be the judgment of them
that abuse grace, 179
CHAP. 8. Containing an use of Infomation, 181 Sect. 1. Sin is of a poisonous
nature, 181 2. Ordinances of grace are no sufficient pleas for happiness, 181
3. The joys of carnal Gospellers are false joys, 182 4. The best things have
evil entertainment from hard hearts, 183 5. The grace of God is to be applied
with fear and trembling, 183 6. Carnal Gospellers never knew the grace of God
in truth, 184 7. It is a safe and wise course to be trying our principles and
practices in Christianity, 185 8. The Devil has his snares in the most holy
things, 186 9. Libertinisme puts the highest affront upon God, 186

CHAP. 9. Containing an Use of Humiliation, 187 Sect. 1. Upright hearted
persons ought to bewail the abuse of Gods grace, 188 2. The abuse of sparing
grace is sadly revenged, 189 3. It is our duty to bewail the abuse of Gods
long-suffering grace, 190 4. Bewail the abuse of Gods reconciling grace, 190 5.
Bewail the abuse of Gods freeing grace, 191 6. Bewail the abuse of pardoning
grace, 192

CHAP. 10 Containing an Use of Examination, 194 1. They are gross abusers of
grace who oppose gospel Merits and Mercies to the Worship of God, 195 2. They
abuse grace who formally and carelessly pray for it, 195 3. They abuse grace who
shroud unrighteous courses under the grace of God, 197 4. They abuse Gods grace
who content themselves with faint desires, 179 5. They abuse Gods grace who by
restraint at one time take liberty to sin more freely at another time, 200 6.
They abuse Gods grace who turn it into a sanctuary for unnatural sins, 201 7.
They abuse the grace of God who think it will afford indulgence to vile
affections, 205 8. They abuse Gods grace who oppose it to necessary civilities,
207 9. They abuse Gods grace who are eminent worldlings, 212 10. They abuse
grace who are senseless and stupid Libertines, 216 11. They abuse Gods grace who
are guilty of wrong to the creature, 218
CHAP. 11. Containing a second branch of Examination, how we may know the
secret, close, and morerefined abuses of Gods grace, 223 Sect. 1. A sinful
close of spritual cnjoyments is an evidence of the abuse of grace, 224 2.
Irreverence of Gods Majesty is an evidence of the abuse of grace, 228 3.
Forgetfulness of God is an evidene of the abuse of grace, 231 4. Secret acting
of heart-sinnes, is an evidene of the abuse of grace, 231 5. Adventuring on
lesser sins is an abuse of grace, 232 6. Abuse of Gods grace appears in
coffeehouse at Gods gracious corrections, 234 7. The daring to do that when
the Rod is off, which one would not when the Rod is on, is a sign of the abuse
of grace, 235 8. Shamelesness before the Lord for acknowledged sins, is an
evidence of the abuse of grace, 236 9. Insensibleness of others miseries is an
evidence of the abuse of grace, 238 10. Vn-improvement of grace received is an
evidence of abuse of grace, 239 11. Pride, and desire of prel^eminence is an
evidence of the abuse of grace, 240 12. Declining hardship in the practice of
Religion is an abuse of grace, 241 13. Neglect of daily repentance is an
evidence of abuse of grace, 242

CHAP. 12. Containing an Use of Caution. 244 Sect. 1. Beware thou put not off
the trial of turning the grace of God into wantonness, 244 2. Take heed of
denying the proof of gross affronts to Gods grace, 246 3. See to it that you
slight not the conviction, 247 4. Refuse not to put sad and ser^ous Queries to
thy soul, 8. especially, 5. The second part is an use of caution, concerning
the close wronging of Gods grace, 250 6. Beware of judging wantonness against
grace by a false rule, 251 7. Beware of Security, 253 8. Be not content with a
slight humiliation for close abuse of Gods grace, 253

CHAP. 13. Showing the difference between wronging the grace of God in the
Regenerate and Unregenerate, 255 Sect. 1. The abuse of Gods grace in a child of
God is only from the unregenerate part, 255 2. Though a gracious man abuse
grace, yet he is deeply humbled for it, 256 3. A child of God watches over his
heart, 256 4. A regenerate man abuses grace less and less, 257 5. A regenerate
repents and is pardoned, 257

CHAP. 14. Containing an Use of Exhortation, 258 Sect. 1. Learn of the
gracious, and precious heart, and life of Jesus Christ, 258 2. A cleansed,
purged heart is a special help to avoid abusing of the grace of God, 259 3. The
fear of God is an help against the abuse of grace. 260 4. Christian
watchfulness is an help against abuse of grace, 261 5. Prayer in the Holy Ghost
is a special help against the abuse of grace, 262 6. Walking in the Spirit is
an help against the abusing of grace, 263 7. Serious thoughts what it is to
crucify lusts, is an help to prevent the abuse of grace, 264 8. A thankful
spirit is a special help to prevent the abuse of grace, 265 9. Godly sorrow is
an help against abuse of grace, 266 10. Close union with God is a special help
against abuse of grace, 268 11. A constant subduing the first depraved motions
is a special help to prevent abuse of grace, 269 12. Planting the soul with
heavenly desires is an help to prevent abuse of grace, 269 13. Beating down
that grand Idol, carnal self-love, is an help against abusing the grace of God,
270 14. The lively faith and sense of the heavenly country is a special help to
prevent the abuse of grace, 271 15. Keeping up of grace in exercise prevents
abusing of grace, 271 16. The hope of glory is a special means to prevent the
abuse of grace, 272

CHAP. 15. Showing what great cause of thankfulness we owe to God for
preserving from this sin, 273 CHAP. 16. Containing an Exhortation, that souls
should always be jealous of this sin, 274 CHAP. 17. Containing an Exhortation
to long for a riddance from this sin, 275 CHAP. 18. Containing an Exhortation
to joy in the Hope of glory. 277 CHAP. 19. Containing persuasive Motives to
take heed that the grace of God be not abused, 278 Sect. 1. The consideration
of the titles given to holy Professors should excite us not to abuse Gods
grace, 278 2. The consideration of Christian Liberty should prevent the abuse
of grace, 279 3. The credit of the Gospel should engage us to beware of abusing
the grace of God, 280 3. The strict and high heavenly calling of Christians
should keep us from abusing the grace of God, 281 5. A lively sense of the
excellency of grace is a means to prevent the abuse of grace, 282


ERRATA.
Page 15. l. 24. for members read numbers. p. 32. l. 9. f. written r. writers.
p. 32. l. 35. f. eternal r. external. p. 51. l. 32. f. yea what tear, a
property of true repentance, r. yea what fear? Such a fear as is a property of
true repentance. p. 60. l. 19. f. by r. from. p. 61. l. 37. f. Now r. How. p.
63. l. 5. and p. 233. l. 22. f. lays r. lies. p. 69. l. 18. and p. 75. l. 14.
after carries r. himself. p. 77. l. 34. and p. 82. l. 24. and p. 84. l. 27.
and p. 87. l. 3. f. carries wickedly r. carries it self wickedly. p. 98. l.
22. f. as follows r. if followed. p. 195. l. 33. f. fromally r. formally. p.
150. in marg. f. Maia r. Maria. p. 152. in marg. f. carne^ nostra^ r. carne
nostra. p. 158. in marg. f. n r. non, and f. obcemperat r. obtemperat. p. 247.
l. 22. before slight r. to. p. 252. l. ult. before wholly r. from a. p. 109. l.
ult. f. It Is r. worst of all when a wicked life reigns. p. 110. l. 1. f. He well
knows r. It Is well known. p. 123. f. Sect. 11. r. 15. and p. 126. f. Sect. 12.
r. 16. and so correct the rest in order. p. 255. Sect. 1. in marg. f.
unregenerate r. regenerate. p. 182. in marg. f. damis r. damnis. p. 237. in
marg. f. nuderi r. nudari.

The Abuse of Grace.
Jude Epist. Ver. IV. Turning the grace of God into lasciviousness.
CHAP I. Containing the coherence of the words.
THE Doctrine of the Gospel, Coherence
a Cabinet of precious Jewels, the word of Truth, Holiness, and Salvation,
from its precious excellency calls for love and careful custody. It fares
with it as with rich treasures, in hazard of loss and abuse. The Apostle Jude
had written to converted Christians, the preserved and called in Jesus Christ,
v. 1. about glorious eternal salvation common to the whole household of faith,
that v. 1:
they would be faithful and zealous keepers of this sacred depositum, the
word of life, and not suffer the saving records of the Gospel, to be wrested
from them, but contend earnestly for the faith. v. 3. as men do for their
natural and civil rights. Good reason they should give proof of their
vigilant zeal, and steadfastness v. 3.
in the truth, for it was with them, as with a ship fraught with silver, silks
and other precious things, Their heavenly riches was in jeopardy of false
fingers. Certain men, rotten-hearted Professors, of the Christian name crept
into their assemblies unawares, v. 4. ordained, or (...), forewritten or
deciphered, to so wicked a frame of heart and life, as would bring them under
certain Condemnation; They were ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.
As when cut-purses creep and crowd into assemblies, there is need to look to
ones watch and money; so privy invaders and abusers of the precious and swing
reports of the Gospel, call for heedfullnes. Turning the Grace of God etc.

The words are a part of the sad description of some ancient Apostate
Christians, the sectmasters and Scholars in pernicious error and libertinisme,
no better then real blasphemers (though their tongues were gilt over with the
golden language of Gospel Grace) as if they would have the leave of God to do
the work of the Devil, they palliated their sin under grace, as if they would
make their wickedness sacred, the holy Gospel and the righteous blessed God
patrons of licenciousness; a sad copy of defiance against the majesty of
heaven, drawn of old by the first Arch deceiver, and Hypocritical lusts, too
skilfully, commonly, Simon docebat Turpitudinem, indifferenter utendi faeminis.
and scandalously written-after by the wanton loose Gospellers of the present
age. These Seducers were the Nicolaitans, says Illyricus, an unclean
generation. Such was Simon who taught community of women, and the Gnostickes,
who pretending to an eminent and superlative measure of divine knowledge, yet
were beastly wantons, using all uncleanness as the fruit of Gods grace, and
declaring that all holy and righteous courses, were at an end by the preaching
of the grace of God, were therefore called and accounted a dirty miry sect.
These and such as these turned the grace of God into wantonness.

CHAP. II. Containing the explanation of the words. Deduction of a doctrine,
with the method of handling of it.
THREE words opened will give the clear sense of the Apostle in the Text.
Turning, Grace, Lasciviousness.

1. Turning. The word imports Transplacing, (...). Turning.
Transporting, taking things from their due situation to a wrong place, so
Turning intends the transplacing and perverting of grace from the place God had
set it, into the place lust, and the Devil would set it: transferring it from
Gods end to the sinners, as if by a monstrous displacing and deformed error of
nature, the pure Crystal eye were set on the dirty feet, the Dungcart were
followed and served by Nobles in Scarlet, a clean sumptuous perfumed chamber,
should be debased unto the impure office of a vessel wherein there is no
pleasure.

2. Grace. By it one understands the Law of Grace the whole (...) 2 Grace
Gospel state. Another understands Christian Religion, a Third the Doctrine of
the Grace of God. We may also understand Gods love and the choice tokens of it,
Christ, his Graces and Spirit. The word Grace comprehends all. Gods favor, his
especial love tokens, his Gospel the great Epistle to his beloved. All this
grace by the concurrent wickedness of Satan and the flesh is displaced,
perverted and abused.

3. Lasciviousnes. The word is translated Uncleanness. The 3 (...)
Lasciviousnes. (...) Apparet intelligi obscenitatem in dictis et factis. Grot,
Gerhard in loc. Suidas. Jun. Selege oppidum propter libidines infamossimume
Lorinus (...).
Siriack interpreter has rendered it Faetorem, Stench, or stinking. It is
joined with the word uncleanness. The works of the flesh are manifest.
Uncleanness Lasciviousnes, Gal. 5. 19. Obscene words and actions are
understood, and by consequence their impure fountain whence they flow, The word
compriseth all kind of obscenitie and lust: Some affirm the word (...), is
from (...) and (...) a City between Galatia and Cappadocia, from (...) that is
an Intensive Enlarging the sense, and Selege a Town most infamous for Lust.
The word also is translated wantonness. Let us not walk in wantonnesses. The
term is Plural, Wantonnesses. Romans 13. 13. In it is full and comprehensive
meaning, it imports all loose profane abuse in heart and life of Gods grace,
and is extensive to all licentiousness in sin in all the filthiness of flesh
and Spirit, from the highest to the lowest unpurged defilement.

The sum is. These monsters of men, unworthy the name of Christians, the
Reproach of the Gospel, do transfer the grace of God in his favor, spirit,
graces, and doctrine of his blessed Gospel, from the high end God intended it,
of holiness and righteousness, into a wanton looseness, and daring
licentiousnes in sin.

This being done in the times and places amongst the persons of Gospel light
that own the name of Christian. The Doctrine will be. hat,

In Gospel times the Grace of God has such high abuse as to be turned into
wantonness.

In handling this sad truth I shall enquire into six things, Method of handling
the Doctrine.
1. What are the kinds of Turning Gods Grace into wantonness? 2. When it is
Turned into Wantonness? 3. Why it is Turned into wantonness? 4. How great is
the sin thereof? and 5ly What is the Punishment God usually follows this sin
withal? 6ly and lastly, What improvement we may make of it by some useful
Application?

CHAP. III. Showing in how many ways or kinds the Grace of God may be Turned
into Wantonness.
1. PREDESTINATING grace is Turned 1. Predestinating grace is turned into
wantonness.
into Wantonness. It is a wrested Conclusion from this glorious principle: God
has chosen me to life; therefore, though I live as I list, I shall be saved: A
bastard inference and practice, that this chaste truth never begat. The Contrary
deduction flows from the grace of Election. As the Elect of God, holy, not
loose, Col. 3. 12. He has chosen us to salvation through sanctification of the
spirit, 2. These. 2. 13. through it as a part of our salvation, execution of
Gods decree, ornament of the saving Gospel, fitnes for eternal life; not
through the filthiness of flesh and spirit, as if wickedness were the way to
happiness, and God had from Eternity designed an everlasting rest to the
industrious services of the Devil. He has chosen us in him that we should be
holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. That Holiness which lay hid in the womb of Gods eternal
purpose is infallibly brought forth in time, in all vessels of honor. The
Apostle inferred Sobriety, Faith, and Hope in the children of Gospel light,
from Gods appointments, not a loose sleeping in sin: Let us be sober, etc.
For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5. 9. God has not appointed us the Word, nor put us, or
set or placed us in a state of avenging (...).
wrath, but gracious salvation. He puts us in this blessed estate by
predestinating, calling, drawing, regenerating, and justifying; not by a
fearlesse, careless living, and dying in reigning sin. Musculus well taxes
this abuse: The contempt of Gods Non dicas nihil peri^uli quomodocunque vivam,
contemptus gratiae Dei, iram illius gravissimam reddit. Muscul. Absit ut peccem
in gratiam et voluntatem dei ac peream, potius accommodabo me gratiae illius,
ut salver. Geram me sicut homini convenit non ethnico sed christiano. Muscul.
Annon ejusmodi verba dementis. Muscul.
grace incurrs his heaviest wrath. Wherefore say not, There is no danger
however I live; God has put me into a state of salvation, his positive decree
is firm, I cannot be damned, I shall be saved. Rather say, Far be it that I
should sin against Gods gracious purposes and perish; rather I will a
commodate my self unto his gracious will, and be saved. He has designed me for
this, would have me be a Christian: therefore I must live the gracious life of
a Christian, not the infamous of an Heathen. Ho^ irrational and ungodly is the
inference of wickedness from Gods pure purposes. If a sick patient should say,
under mortal diseases, It matters not what I do, I will eat, and drink, and
do what I list, my Physician has not appointed me to death, but recovery:
Would you not think him a mad man, and self-destroyer? O impure disputer
against the holy purposes of God, it will appear to be thy folly and madness,
because God (thou think) has not appointed thee to Hell, but Heaven, to
live as a vessel of wrath, and yet hope to be saved, when the direct way to the
North leads to the South, shall thou go to glory in the way of Gods reproach,
the contempt of Christ, and thine own damnation? Gods gracious promises and
decrees tune with each other. As he never promised, so he never purposed
eternal salvation to an unregenerate heart, and a loose life. His
Predeterminations to a blessed end, involve suitable means. As he never
intended man should live by poison, but by bread, so it is absolutely distant
from the thoughts of his heart, that a man should live to God and with God for
ever, by an indulgence to the flesh in its lusts and affections, sensualities,
and Vides nautaru^ ministeri is opus fuisse, ut divina promissio adimpleretur.
Granaten.
delights. God appointed Paul and his company to escape shipwreck, but it was
by swimming on boards and broken pieces of the ship. Act. 27. 24. Thus God has
appointed some to escape the wrath to come, but it is by faith and
mortification, getting on the planck of repentance, swimming through by the
strength of Christ, not drowning in the sea of the world. God appointed Noah to
salvation from the worlds deluge, but it was by getting into the Arc. A Loose
heart and life is no accommodation to execution of predestinating grace, but
opposition. The eternal, Predestinatio Dei multis est Cauta standi, nemini
causa labendi. Aug. de Predestinatione Sanctorum.
saving, discriminating Counsels of God, are to many the cause of their
standing, to no^ chosen vessel the cause of their falling. The doctrine of
absolute and free election rightly understood, powerfully revealed in the
evidences of grace, well used, hinders no vessel of glory but helps him to
heaven. They that can without any Scripture warrant, any choice work of the
spirit, easily and presumptuously write their names in the book of life, and as
the Israelites wantonly played about their golden Idol, so in a lascivious
mirth are loose flesh-pleasers, and feast their Corruptions, will have a
dreadful demonstration after death in judgment, and to eternity, that their
names were written in the black book of death, not the white of life. The most
holy and righteous Judge of the world will never say, Come ye blessed
eternally prepared by a free choice to an heavenly kingdom, to those that
lived and died in their indulged cursed natures and lives, but to those select
happy ones, whose hearts were gloriously transformed, and conversation really
fashioned after the Gospel pattern. O the sad confutation of them that build
profane libertinisme on this firm and pure foundation, Predestinating grace,
their pretended interest in it and pleasing conceits of it will vanish like a
golden dream: They will not rise as Elect but reprobate; The Lord will say
with hottest indignation against unreformed Carnal Gospellers, Go ye cursed
workers of iniquity.

Sect. 2.
2. SParing Grace is turned into Wantonness. It was Gods 2 Sparing grace is
turned into wantonness.
complaint of the house of Israel; They despised my judgments, and walked not
in my statutes: nevertheless mine eyes spared them from destroying them,
notwithstanding they rebelled against me, and walked not in my statutes. Ezekiel.
20. 16, 17, 21. I have spread out my hands all the day long unto a rebellious
people. Isa. 65. 2. God is angry with the wicked every day. Psalm. 7. 11. Sin is
an abomination to him. Psalm. 53. 1. He can in Martial Law soon arraign,
condemn, and execute the sinner. The sword is whet, it is drawn, is near the
bold Transgressour, yet it strikes not. Psalm. 7. 12. The how is bent, made
ready, Psalm. 7. 13. The arrow is on the string: The divine strong hand of
vengeance could every minute draw it up to the head, let fly, pierce ungodly
men through and through, shoot them into hell, ye God spares the sinner, and
this is the unworthy and ungrateful return, he spares his sin, but forsakes
it not. Job 20. 13. Is like the Felon that is spared burning and hanging and he
grows more insolent and violent in his old wickedness, like the truantly boy,
that is spared whipping and he grows malepart, saucy, lazy, stubborn in his
Masters presence. The Lord spares the Liar, Swearer, Tipler, Whoremonger,
Adulterer, Defrauder, Oppressor, that Riots with the bread of deceit. Prove.
20. 17. and the wine of violence. Prove. 4. 17. The subtle, yet foolish
Hypocrite, whose craft and wisdom of the flesh is to undo his soul; and yet
these in a frolic dalliance and looseness of spirit, wallow in their old
wickedness, and pleasingly dance over Non dubitamus esse donum dei, ut quis in
see ere, aliquandiu toleretur. Pet. Matt.
the mouth of Hell. They abuse that Grace which was never offered to the fallen
Angels. God spared them not (no not a moment) but cast them down to hell. 2
Pet. 2. 4. Justice would spare the sinner not a moment, its free Grace that
spares. It is an undoubted gift of God that any man in his wickedness is
spared a minute. How full is the world of daring wantons, that sin securely
before, and against sparing Grace? The interceeding kindness of the Lord Jesus
is abused: Such as are Gods provoking Rebels, who are spared under the time and
means of Gospel grace, are beholding to the prevalent pleadings of Jesus
Christ, who has daily grants of his Father to spare carnal Gospellers, ad put
them to the trial, whether they will repent and be fruitful in obedience. The
vine dresser pleaded for the unfruitful vineyard, Let it alone this year till
I shall digg about it and dung it, and if it hear fruit well, and if not then
after that thou shall cut it down, Luke 13. 8, 9. This Vinedresser (says one)
is Jesus Christ the Colonus hic est filius Dei Jesus Christus, quem suae vineae
sacerdotem Deus Constituit. Fit Christi intercessione quod non semper illico
excidunt, qui hoc jampeidem suis sceleribus meruerunt. Gualterus in Loc.
Son of God, whom he has Constituted the Priest of his Vineyard: Were it not
for the intercession of Christ, barren Vineyards, fruiteless Churches would
soon be destroyed. Professed Christian Congregations, Private families, would
by the axe of death be cut down as fit fuel for hell fire.

Sect. 3.
3. LOng-suffering grace is Turned into Wantonness. Because 3. Long suffering
grace is turned into wantonness.
judgment is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of wicked ones are set
in them to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. My Lord delays his coming, and then the
evil servant is tempted to smite his fellow servant, and to be drunk, etc. Mat.
24. 28, 29. How often would Christ have gathered the Jews under his saving
wings as the Hen the Chicken under hers? Mat. 23. 37. But they proudly rejected
subjection to him, salvation from him. God endures with much long suffering
Vessels of wrath, and they abusively and foolishly are still fillng up sin and
wrath. Romans 19. 22. The (...). i. e. Deus pro sua lenitate expectabat
poenitentiam atque emendationem eorum. Piscat.
gracious long-suffering of God waited for the Repentance and Amendment of the
disobedient old world. 1. Pet. 3. 20. and yet the holy wooing Spirit of God,
speaking by Noah, soliciting and striving in gracious motions to reformation,
was rejected. Genesis 6. 3. The whole earth was corrupt and filled with violence.
v. 11. I gave Iezabel space to repent of her fornication and she repented not,
Rev. 2. 21. As a Creditor gives his Debtor long time to pay his debts, and yet
forbearing kindness is abused, by a profuse lavishing intemperate life and
running more in debt; and as a gracious Kings act of favor, that gives a
Condemned Traitor, a long time to sue out a pardon, is slighted and despised,
when he spends it in whoring, drinking and gaming; so the merciful and
liberal allowances of large seasons of grace, the Lord grants out to deeply
debted and Treasonable sinners, are signally wronged; when the more mercy
forbeares, and God is slow to wrath, the more sin abounds. Ah daring folly! is
there not difference between Long suffering and Eternal suffering? are there
not many sad monuments of divine justice? because Patience is lasting, will it
be everlasting? Long accounts are at length stated. The longest summer day of
Gods sufferance will have an end, and go down in an endless night of
unappeased fury. Provoking, slight gospellers are every day hastening to the
period of Gods reprieves. Writts of execution will be opened and served upon
incorrigible sinners, the worse for mercys warnings, and Judgments delay. The
Lord Christ his pleading that barren Figg-trees may stand a year, or years
longer, neither Non nequitiae impreborum hominum qui incurabili malitia peccant
Christus Patronus est. Gualther. Deus non perpetuo parcit sterilibus in
suavinea arboribus. Gualth.
speaks him the Patron of uncurable wickedness, not assures their perpetual
security, they were at length cut down as withered trees, and God will likewise
cut down withered Professors: God does not always spare barren trees in his
vineyard. Those Christians that are the shame of Gods Husbandry; The abusers of
Christ's Intercession; The contemners of the Gospel they boast of, that bear the
name of Believers, bear up in the repute of Christ's domestic Family, that
cumber the ground where they stand; useless to the purposes of holiness and
righteousness in the World, as dead, twice dead, at best but flourishing in the
leaves of a worthless profession, shall at length be plucked up by the roots, be
cast into hell fire, as the worst of men; reproachers of God and his Gospel;
destroyers of their bodies and souls for ever. The Devil the Father of lies,
keeps his children fast bound in the chains of destroying lies. Amongst the
rest this is a main one, and a common damning cheat: Poor deluded sinners, that
have numbered 40, 50 years forbearance in their sins, at once collect Gods
allowance of them and their own Necesse est ut ipsa prorogatae pietatis tempora
quasi damnationis tempora timeamus. Greg. Mor. l. 17. c. 3. Quanto vita nostra
est longier, tantoculpa nostra fit numerosior and gravior, etc. Otho. Casmannus.
Innocence, but without Book. After 400 years suffering the seed of the
Amorites to oppress Gods Israel, Genesis 15. 13. black doomday put a period to
their Prosperities and Persecutions: A long lived Libertine under the days of
Grace, has more reason to fear his approaching destruction then salvation. The
Counsel of an ancient is wholesome, well were it if accustomed slighters of Gods
grace would lay it to heart, it would fire them out of their perilous security:
It is necessary, said he, that we fear and tremble, lest the prolonged times of
Gods mercy do prove the times of our damnation: It is the lamentation of a
serious modern Writer: The longer we live, the more numerous is the account,
and the more heavy the weight of sin: Hence when the just Judge comes he will
turn the indulged times of mercy into an eternity of wrath and penalty.

SECT. 4.
4. THe whole time of Grace is turned into Wantonness; 4. The whole time of
grace is turned into wantonness.
not only sparing and long-suffering Grace, but all the days of Grace, even
to their late dying periods are also abused. Backsliding is perpetual. The
most under Gospel times refuse to return, Ier. 8. 5. The Lord questions in his
Word, O Jerusalem, how long shall vain thoughts lodge in thee? Jer. 4. 14. Will thou not he made clean? when shall it once be? c. 13. 27. How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning? and
fools hate knowledge? Prove. 1. 22. How long? The answer is not more sad then
true; for ever. Should the loose persons of unconverted hearts, and unreformed
lives, not bettered under a threescore years convincing and awakening Ministry,
and the frequent woings of the Holy Ghost be left to themselves, should they
live an eternity on earth, they would still wrong the grace of God. There is a
Country phrase, To while away the time: O how many do while away precious
time? most do the works of darkness, while Gospel light shines round about
them, yea in their minds, they cannot deny, and yet they defame the glory of
it. While Christ knocks at the doors of their souls for entrance, the Devil is
bid welcome; while the Spirit cries, Repent, repent, the flesh wallows in the
pollutions of the World; while he passionatly solicits and persuades to accept
of salvation upon salvations terms, the paths of damnation are still trodden
in: The hardened house of Israel will die: While God is tendered as an
everlasting portion, the world is violently pursued; while the pilgrimage
delights of the spirit, and the Heavenly Country Pleasures of Gods right hand,
are held forth to unregenerate minds: foolish souls hunt after the pleasures
of sin, and vanishing Creature delights: While precious seasons to sue out a
pardon are granted out for sins past, more Treasons and Rebellions are heaped
up against God: while this vanishing life is proposed as a probation for
Eternity, lying vanities are skilfully and uncessantly pursued.

Five things will load this ause.

1. Time, one of the most precious things in the world, is abused: 1. Time is
abused. Nil pretiosius tempore, and heu nil hodie vilius invenitur. Bernard.
Nothing, says Bernard, is more precious then it, and alas nothing now a days
is more slighted and vilified: It is made the numbering measure of unholy and
unrighteous motions, but very rarely of heavenly conversation; the thriving
opportunity of Satan's Kingdom, but rarely (as to the multitude) of Christ's: The
preciousness of time, industriously heavenly, as well as earthly merchants will
tell you: The worth of time an enraging afflicted Conscience on a death bed
will tell you, that breathed out lamentable cries, Call time again, call time
again: The excellency Veniet tempus quo vel unam horam ad resipiscendum
redimere, mirum quantum optabimus. Otho. Casmannus.
of time most awakened loose departing souls will tell you, who will abound in
fervent wishes to admiration, that they might redeem but one hour to repent.
The dignity of time, the damned in hell, were they among us, would tell us,
That had they a world, they would give it to escape their torments they feel
and shall endure for ever, and to be in a state of Grace, of Salvation. The
glory of time, the glorified in heaven would tell us, were they suffered to
acquaint us with their unspeakable Joys: Eternity it self will be little enough
to bless God they have not lost their time, but obtained salvation in the days
of Grace. It will ravish their hearts, when as one phraseth it, they shall
think within themselves, O blessed moment of Grace! O happy days of Conversion!
O choicely spent time in holy mournings O beatum momentum gratiae
and obedience! O rarely improved time to be the shining witnesses of God
against the wicked world! O Heavenlized time in communion with God, that
contemned the world! O 2. The possibility of escaping eternal misery is abused.
Quomodo eos pudebit pigebitque, qui videbunt se opportuno tempore gratiae
impenso, potuisse in vita sua acerbam illam horribilem and lamentabilem
aeternitatem evadere?
the wise use of time, that has laid up treasures in Heaven, and fitted
espoused souls for the joyous eternal imbracements of their heavenly Bridegroom.

2. The possibilities of escaping eternal misery and obtaining everlasting
life, are abused, when the whole provisional space of preventing the wrath to
come, of preparing for glory, in the foolish pursuit of the worlds shadows is
lost; when loose Prodigals of the time of Grace are impossibilitated to have a
moment more. What shame and grief will surprise them, when they shall consider
their secure neglect of the Jewel of time, and the force of Eternity;
prevailing thoughts (when set home on the conscience) to make the profuse
lavishers of the golden seasons of Grace, the most thrifty Husbands: How
stinging will this sad conviction be, if the opportune time of Grace were well
managed, they might have escaped that bitter, horrible and lamentable Eternity
wherein they are plunged, and safely arrive to the Port of everlasting rest?
These things were once possible, now they are not. O sinners fear and tremble,
your sporting with sin, your indignities and injuries put upon the grace of
God, does exceedingly slight and despise your saving possibilities! while the
mouth of the bottomless pit is not shut upon you, do no more disparage, but
honor your Gospel-seasons of Grace; if you crucify the Son of God, and still
despise the Spirit of Grace, either laugh at, or delay the necessary change of
your hearts and lives, be assured, the next minute after your death, you shall
see a dreadful, fixed, unalterable gulf before your eyes, that as the Saints in
glory cannot come to your Hell, so it will appear everlastingly impossible for
you to come to their Heaven.

3. The remembrance of lost time, will be an eternal corrosive 3. The
remembrance of lost time will be a corrosive to tormented consciences.
to the tortured awakned Spirit, and torment the wounded Conscience like fire;
when time-loosers shall call to mind, That they had a time to be converted,
but now they are hardened; had a season to come to Christ their ark, but now
they are drowned in an eternal fiery lake: They had opportunity to weep
heavenly Gospel-tears, and now they eternally weep hellish legal tears, under
the fear and hate of their angry Judge, and the intolerable smart of endless
avenging Punishment: They had leisure to store up Grace against the day of
Mercy, but now they see throughout the whole neglected time of Grace, they have
treasured up sin against the day of wrath: They had a long while Divine patient
woings, authoritative commandings, dreadful threatenings, melting beseechings to
be reconciled to God, and reformed; but now penal Justice, and their own
Wickedness, has sealed them up under the power of sin. In brief, they had a
sweet and fair day of mercy, to find favor with God through Jesus Christ; but
now it is gone down in a tempestuous night of endless and unappeasable fury.

4. It will not be the least part of Hells Torments, that hopeless, 4.
Tormented souls have helpless, hopeless, fruitless wishes.
helpless Spirits, shall be tortured with fruitless wishes, that they had not
lost the unvaluable advantages of their saving opportunities; When they shall
mourn, and say, How have we hated instruction, how have our hearts despised
reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of our teachers, nor inclined our ears
to our instructers? Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. Every unprofitable wish that the time
had been redeemed in this world, will be as a renewed bloody lash, on
exulcerated wounded tender bodies: O unwise children of men, that riot in the
liberal indulgences to your flesh, even in the noon-time of clear Gospel Light!
Take a serious view of these impertinent and afflictive wishes in the other
world: O that God would grant one day of Grace more! O that I were to live over
my time again, how would I look upon the flesh displeasing, sharpest severities
of repentance, as favors! O that I had kneeled on flints, and wept mine eyes
out in strong cries and tears for a pardon! O that I had given my Goods to the
poor! O that I had changed the delights of the flesh, for the pleasures of the
Spirit, that I had been filled with the Spirit, when I was drunk with Wine!
Ephesians. 5. 18. O that I had watched over my loose heart day and night! O that I
had fasted and prayed whole days and nights! O that affliction had driven me to
Christ, that I had rather gone through dirty Lanes to an heavenly Fathers
House, than through pleasant Meadows to a Prison, and a place of Execution! O
that a godly sorrowing life had ended in joy! Psalm. 126. 5. And that a carnal
voluptuous life, had not ended in eternal sorrows! Jam. 5. 1, 5. Have you seen
Bankrupts, that from the published Statutes of Execution, have their Goods
seized on, and their persons Imprisoned, wringing their hands, beating their
heads, bedewing their cheeks, breaking their hearts, with these words? O that I
had been a good Husband, that I had hearkened unto my friends, avoided
undoing-Company, kept my Shop, improved my time, I had never come to this; but
I am undone, I am undone: Have you seen a condemned Felon that must have no
Psalm of Mercy, suddenly screek and roar out in the Assizes, and swoon in the
torturing fear and assurance of death, when the Judge tells him there is no
mercy for him; this also adding to his woe: O that I had taken the counsel of
my dear friends, that I were to live over my youth and manhood! O that I had
not lost my time of Grace! O that I had kept the Sabbath better! O that I had
not rebelled against my dear Parents, and despised good men, and godly
Ministers! Think then what is and will be the woe of lost souls in the other
life, racking their Spirits with fruitless wishes, that they had not lavished
away the time of Grace.

5. Wasters of the time of Grace, out-sin the very Devils of 5. Wasters of the
time of Grace, out-sin the very Devils of Hell.
Hell: They never had a year, day, or minutes time of repentance and pardon:
The next moment of their Transgression, was a damning moment to endless and
remediless punishment: In this respect the Devils will load carnal Gospellers,
playing the wantons with the seasons of Grace, and rejoice in their society in
destruction, with this kind of triumph, Glad we are in your fellowship of
damnation: Is it just we are cast into Hell? your company with us in torments
is more just: You have outsinned us, we were never guilty of such an affront to
the Grace of God, merits of Christ, seasons of Grace as you are: The Son of God
assumed not our nature, undertook not our redemption, interceded not with his
Father to give us scores of years space of repentance, ten years, a year, a
day, a minute: He took your nature, died for you, pleads you may have the
precious saving seasons of Grace, your abuse of the Gospel, mis-spending the
space of repentance, is superlative guilt, of a deeper die then our
transgression: How sad a thing is it that loose Gospellers, that fill up their
time with secret or open wickedness, or both, should out-sin the very Devils: O
friends! did Christ speak it with passionate tears, concerning self-undoing
Jerusalem, Had thou known in this thy day the things belonging to thy peace,
but now they are hidden from thee, Luke 19. 42. How ought you to weep over your
turning the time of Grace into wantonness? Ah foolish sinners, that waste your
inestimable opportunities of getting Christ and Grace, walking exactly, dying
to sin, that you may not eternally die in it, and for it; honoring God in your
Generation, obtaining your souls Salvation, laying up treasure in Heaven,
preparing for blessed Eternity; if you bewail not this in hearty Compunction,
bitter Tears; if the sense of being Spend-thrifts of most precious time, make
you not ashamed before the Lord, know it, and believe, you shall in the next
life look over your ungrateful neglects, with unutterable mournings, and
eternal tears.

SECT. 5.
5. THe calling inviting offers of Grace are turned into wantonness: 5. The
calling inviting offers of Grace are turned into wantonness.
The great things of the Kingdom of Heaven were rendered to the Inhabitants of
Chorazin and Bethsaida, and to the Capernaites, but they gave still wanton
indulgences to their lusts, repented not, and this in the judgment of our Lord
Christ, should double their woe, aggravate their rejecting the way of
salvation, and plunge them deeper in Hell, Luke 10. 15. because Heaven on
Gospel-tearms was offered and refused: Be sure of this, the Kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you, ver. 11. As if Christ had said, You had inestimable
gracious proffers, but you have cast them off to your damnation. The like Grace
of the Kingdom of Heaven was held forth to the Jews in Paul's Preaching, but
they answered it with contradicting and blaspheming the Gospel, Acts 13. 45.
Thus in too many Congregations in England, where Heaven has been clearly
opened in the saving mysteries of salvation, which might even ravish the hearts
of humble intelligent and believing hearers, what wanton eyes, gestures, ears,
fancies, hearts, are brought before the public glorious discoveries of the
precious methods to be holy and happy to all eternity? with what levity,
looseness, frothy spirits, you have seen the slaves of carnal voluptuousness,
merry wantons, designed and resolved for their pleasing sensualities, come from
Stage Plays; without breach of charity, huge members of Gospel-wantons, have in
like manner come from the sacred, grave trembling Truths of the Gospel: How sad
is it that those, not only Law, but Evangelical severities, that should have
set eminent sinners on trembling, mourning, weeping, and resolving to repent,
(the best applause of a Sermon) should have Lachrymae vestrae applausus noster.
no better close, then profane, profuse gigling and laughing, it may be
sporting at the Minister and his Doctrine, slighting what they heard, driving
it out by idle talk, vain worldly discourses, or speaking of nothing to soul
advantage, carrying in uncivil and unholy carnal merriments, as if they had
been in a Theater, not the Church, and had heard a Stage Player, and not a
Preacher. Do Princes and States well resent the slighting and abusing of their
gracious offers? surely the heavenly everlasting King, nor will, nor can put up
the despisings of his gracious invitations, with everlasting patience and
indemnity. It is a matter of Lamentation, that many faithful and painful
friends of the Bridegroom have offered Espousals of highest profits, pleasures,
preferments in Jesus Christ, to Blackamore, deformed, worthless, loveless
souls, and yet they had rather match with Hell then Heaven, rather have the
Prince of Darkness, than the Lord of Glory to be their head; though there be
infinite more drawing encouragements for Espousals with Christ, than
covenanting with the Devil: Let not the Phrase seem harsh, There is truth in
it: Though few, like Witches, resign themselves up to Satan by an express
contract, yet most do by an implicit and interpretative consent: Is he not the
spirit that rules in the children of disobedience? Ephesians. 2. 2. Is he not called
from his destructive Sovereign Government in the World, the god of this World?
2 Cor. 4. 4. who has the Harvest of Service, when the Lord Jesus has but the
Gleanings: Is he not called the Ruler of the darkness of this World? Ephesians. 6.
12. that Infernal Jailer, that keeps his numerous Captives in the dark Dungeon
of Ignorance and Wickedness; yea, Do not his miserable Subjects love to have it
so? Jer. 5. 31. O you Inhabitants of England, that own the Christian name, and
that from year to year, from one passionate woing to another, have still turned
your backs upon Angels joys and admirations, the Mysteries and Miracles of
Gospel Salvation; be convinced of your perilous, dishonorable, loose refusals:
Are you wont to deal with necessitous Temporals, as you do with Spirituals and
Eternals? Will not catching presented worldly advantages and opportunities by
the foretop, condemn your soul-undoing delays of welcoming Heavenly calls,
which hearkened too, will make you, (I say not men) in the Worlds Phrase, but
Saints and Angels, fellows in glory to all Eternity? offer a pardon to a
condemned person, on exceeding hard terms, and what Felon almost will reject
it? But the offers of Gospel Pardons, to sinners dead in Law, the Covenant of
Works, upon sweet, easy, rational, honorable, and profitable terms, who
almost will entertain them? Offer Gold and Silver to needy Beggars, when is
this proposal refused? But Christ, the Pearl of great price, is offered to poor
sinners that have not a dram of Grace, and the Tenth Christian in external
profession, that bears much upon Baptismal Grace, gives no demonstration of
acceptance. Let a Physician offer his best skill without a see to the mortally
diseased, with a promise also to pay for his Physic, what patient, unless
unsensible of his danger, and frantic will despise this kindness? Christ, the
Almighty Sovereign Physician offers the recovering virtue of his Spirit, Grace,
Ordinances, Afflictions, to mortally diseased sinners, without a fee or reward,
yea has already paid dear for the Physic, and its successful application;
who then but self-destroying, frantic sinners, senseless in a deep Lethargy of
carnal security, had rather perish in their sin, than accept of the guiding
orders of Christ's healing? If you say this censure is over-rigid, pity he
should live that does not take the gracious invitations of Jesus Christ into
his heart. We willingly own his loving calls to grace and glory. It is not so
soon done as said. You may lodge the glorious tenders of the Gospel in your
fancies, understandings, memories, yea seem to honor them with your lips, and
yet your hearts may be very far from subscribing and saying Amen to them; as
an Adulterous woman's lips may consent to Marriage Articles, profess and
confirm Matrimonial union, when her heart was never Married. Oh Sirs! that
have shut your hearts against the proffers of Grace in many a Chapter, Sermon,
motion of the Spirit, me-thinkes your spirits should be astonished, and hearts
broken, by the serious consideration of seven things.

1. You and Satan your Father are fellow liars: You put a 1 There is a lie put
upon the report of Gods race.
great lie upon the report of Gods grace. The Bible lifts it up above the
world, and you almost set it below any pleasing worldly vanities. It is more
precious than Gold and Silver, its merchandise is better than the merchandise
of Silver, Prove. 3. 14. so 15. v. It is above all things you desire, and yet
you desire other things above it. Though your tongues would blush to say, yet
the frame of your rebellious, grace-refusing hearts and lives, really speak it
in the notice of the infinitely understanding God, the Gospel is folly, 1 Cor.
1. 23. the power and practice of Religion is a vain thing, Mal. 3. 14. and the
Grace of God is not worth the looking after. You live before God, Angels, and
Men, as if your tongues should say, Solomon was deceived, when he so cried up
gracious wisdom. Beauties are the pleasures of the Senses, Riches out-worth
it, the Honor of the world outshines it; the glorious applause of men out-goes
its commendations; the short enjoyment of the flesh exceeds its eternal
treasures; a short lease of this life's comforts, is better than its eternal
Fee-simple of delights.

2. You abuse Gods condescension in the offer of grace. Was 2 Gods
condescension is abused in the offer of Grace.
there any need for God to stoop to offer you a Covenant of Salvation, wherein
the whole Trinity does humble themselves? The Father, so much as to have
thoughts of grace to relieve and succor lost sinners; the Son that humbled
himself to an obscuring incarnation, a life of sorrows, spotless obedience, a
bloody death the price of Redemption. The Holy Ghost to come into vile sinners,
to plead the acceptance, and improvement of the Father and Sons love. O
inconsiderate sinners! of what a scarlet tincture is your unworthy slighting of
the Trinities kindness, your treading under foot the blessed Gods acts of
grace! might he not have left you as the fall of Adam made you to be, in a
lost, polluted, helpless, and damnable estate? Does he need your persons
recovery, services, holiness, and happiness? Does goodness in accepting
Christ and his Gospel extend to him? Is it his profit if you accept? Is it his
hurt if you despise him? Psalm. 16. 2. Job. 22. 3. and 35. 6, 8. Has he humbled
himself to enter into peace with you, when he might have proclaimed and
maintained everlasting War? Will a King bear it, that his descending below
himself to save obstinate Traitors, should be despised? Surely the blessed God
will not always bear the insolent refusal of his merciful condescensions,
who every minute could confound rebellious sinners.

3. You abuse the infinite purchase of that grace that is offered. 3 The
infinite purchase of Grace offered is abused.
Now Christ has by his active and passive obedience satisfied Justice, and
dearly paid for pardoning and purging grace; He sits at Gods right hand to give
unto Israel repentance and remission of sins, Acts 5. 31. to offer it in
common to the worst of sinners, has made an healing plaster of his blood.
Isa. 53. 5. and offers the application of it to diseased sinners; what else but
a spiritual madness is it to cry out, we will have none of the physic; away
with this mortifying Grace, severities of repentance? If we submit to
unpleasing medicines of strict Gospel prescription, we must never have merry
days, our dear lusts must be pinioned and starved; such ado about Religion,
the new creatures, that precise Puritans talk of will make our lives miserable:
We will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19. 14. Take Christ who will,
we have made, and we will keep our covenant with the world and the flesh; we
will have our ease and delights, come what will of it. Jer. 7. 9. Loose hearts
and lives speak these sad things, this deplorable injury to the Lord Jesus: He
is highly affronted, that the price of grace, the purchase of infinite
redemption should be so unworthyly vilified.

4. You abuse the heavenly messenger of Grace, the Holy Ghost, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, and comes 4. The Holy Ghost, the heavenly
Messenger of Grace is abused.
with sweetest intelligence of Peace, Pardon, Purity, and Glory. The heavenly
Spirits whispers would be powerfully taking, if vile sinners, their false
loves, and cursed lusts did not oppose them. Has not the Spirit told many of
us, a gracious conversation is incomparably better than a carnal, and that
there is to be found a more high, noble, pleasurable, satisfying, and gainful
life in Jesus Christ, than the world, flesh, and devil can possibly afford?
Have not these inward speakings, according with the outward written word, the
just standard, awakened the soul, that Sobriety, Chastity, Charity, Liberality,
Faith, Love, Heavenlymindednesse, a fear of God, a tender Conscience, redeeming
time, etc. are rather to be chosen than their contrary vices and corrupt
inclinations and affections that resist them? Have not many by the woings and
strivings of the Holy Ghost, with Agrippa, not only been almost persuaded to
be real Christians, but often promised God their utmost, and zealous
endeavors for a through change? But what is the issue? a wanton loose spirit
has banished former serious gravity: These warm, heavenly motions are soon
coold and dead, by the world and the fleshes cold pourings in. How ill does the
holy and delicate Spirit take it, soon sensible of affronts, that his gracious
inspirations, should either coldly be received, or positively rejected, or
after entertainment be ungratefully forsaken? The Spirits goads that prick and
stir up lazy sleeping consciences, are quickly blented. O our unkind abuse of
the good Spirit. Those Divinos instinctus vel non animadvertimus, vel
dissimulamus and in aliud tempus differrimus vel quod deterrimum est negligimus.
divine instincts wherewith we are excited and moved to holiness of life and
Gospel obedience, either we take no notice of them, or we dissemble them, or
we put them off to another time, or, which is worst of all, we totally neglect
them, says an holy writer. This, O this is the spirits punishment, not more
dreadful than disregarded, the heavenly messenger bids an eternal welfare,
and never knocks again at those rebellious houses, where he has been never bid
welcome, but constantly refused. My spirit shall not always strive with flesh.
Genesis 6. is a plague, a fearfully avenging one. Resolved Libertines will not
follow the wisdom, and saveing guidance of the spirit, and the Lord chooses
their delusions. Isa. 66. 4. What safe Leader they will not have, they shall
not have; they will wander from the way to heaven; divine power now shall not
stop them, they shall dye without instruction, and in the greatness of their
folly they shall go astray, Prove. 5. 23. Then those eyes deep security has
shut, wrath will open, either in a deathbed despair, or in hels flames after
death. O unkind Spirit greevers and resisters, lay it to heart before it is too
late. Ingenspericulu^ divinis inspirationibus resistere, Granatensis 5 The
Messengers of grace are abused.
It is an eminent danger to oppose Divine inspirations.

5. You abuse the faithly messengers of grace, the Ministers of the Gospel.
Their work is in the authority of their Master Jesus Christ to exhort and
enjoyne you to believe, and repent, and if this prevail not, to beseech you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled 2. Cor. 5. and if this mild course speed not,
but gospel grace is put away, as it was by the hardened Jews. Act. 13. 46.
Their other sad part of their Commission, is to tell them, He that believes
not shall be damned. Mark. 16. 16. and that very gospel grace that to others
is a savor of life unto life, embraced, will be to them a savor of death unto
death, when it is despised. As the Hanunites that cut of David's Messengers
garments had a war Commenced against them, for answering their kind errands
with such shameful indignities, 2 Samuel 10. 3, 4. 7. so the angry King of
heaven, will wage an eternal war against them that unnaturally abuse the
messengers, and messages of grace. O Take warning Loose-livers under the
convictions of Gospel strictness, that when you hear and read of the saving
overtures of the word of life, you may no more be as slighty and senseless under
them, as the Pues you sit in, and as walls, and rocks. The despising of
wholesome heavenly instructions, no less then the despising of the Lord Jesus
Luke 10. 16, is that which makes honest godly Ministers, to set down with
mourning and tears in their closer addresses to God, that their hearers will
not be converted, saved, and have eternal life. Act. 13. 46. and Phil. 3. 8.

6. You will be unexcusable, when you shall see the offers 6. Men will be
inexcusable, when they see offers of Grace at an everlasting distance from them.
and hopes of Grace, at an everlasting distance from you: How will paleness sit
on your faces, when you are before a dreadful Bar? what trembling will surprise
your hearts, when conscience shall terribly inform you, that the Lords
Messengers, in earnest desires and longings for your happiness, in zeal, love,
and tears offered you for Christ's sake, to embrace the Heavenly Treasures of
the saving Covenant, and you would not; or soon stifled your Convictions, lost
your good resolutions and affections; you secured the world, and that great
Idol flesh pleasing, but not Eternity; you can easily slight, it may be jeer
the Minister, but remember you will be enforced to call to mind his passionate
woings for Jesus; and that your blood would be upon you, that you would be your
own destroyers, if you disallowed and abhorred Christ, if you knew not God, and
obeyed not his Gospel. At such and such times in hearing and reading the Word,
in heart-searching godly Books, the Spirit of Jesus held forth before you a
Feasible, Justified, Adopted, Sanctified and Glorified Estate, and you liked
not Christ's conditions to fit you for and obtain Eternal Glory: How have you
abused Christ and his Gospel Ministry, when you were told his yoke was easy,
by Divine Power? Did not you look upon the Preacher, exhorting the duties of
Religion, as a proposer of intolerable and too severe tasks? as if the glorious
pattern of Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sweetness, should tyrannize over men, and
bid men be his servants to their loss, and the Devil and the World could make
more gainful, honorable and comfortable bargains.

7. You shall have no cause to blame the pure Justice of the 7. There will be
no cause of blaming Gods Justice.
angry Lamb, the Judge of the World, if when you shall cry Lord, Lord, he be as
deaf at your dreadful cries, as you were at his calls; if he know you not to
save you, when you knew him not to serve him: This will justify the direful
last Sentence, Go ye cursed, and clear your eternal stripes from cruelty, when
you have wilfully abused the infinite love of the Son of God: Grace was offered
you, but you would not be healed, nor reformed; you have destroyed your selves:
It Is Divine Justice that the wickedness of the wicked in due penalty should be
upon him, Ezekiel. 18. 20. Wicked Gospellers, even put fury into a gracious God,
and necessitate him to gain the reputation of his Holiness out of their
damnation: It becomes the natural Justice of his Majesty, to be the Avenger,
who is not the Author of wilful unbelief: The holy One of Israel is provoked,
Isa. 1. 4. The holiness of God is read in the Characters of those Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal Judgments, which he executes on the impenitent World.
Its just the heaviest of punishments should be the vindications of Gods
Dishonors by the affronts of his Grace, upon a threefold account.

1. The ungrateful and voluntary high indignities, that vain 1. Vain loose
people put voluntary indignities upon Gods Grace. Suadet, terret, hortatur,
excitat, monet, Clem. Alex. Ad Gentes.
loose hearts and lives put upon Gods Grace. Wisdom has sent out her maidens,
to invite sinners to be Saints, Prove. 9. 3, 4. and sit down at its heavenly
Table, v. 5. of all sufficient, satisfying, saving provisions, comes with
Persuasions, Comminations, Admonitions, to accept the Call, but the loose
guests either come not at all, or unprepared, surfeit on good food, turn it
into ill humors: The offended King of Heaven has sent out his Heralds of Arms,
to proclaim Peace and Mercy on most righteous terms; but stout rebels will not
resign up their hearts to Christ, but keep them strongly garrisoned for Lust
and the Devil; and this is the success the Calls of Gods Grace meet withal:
Satan and Christ knock at the soul for entrance: It is opened to Satan, and
locked to Christ: Shall obstinate, unprofitable hearers blame God under their
everlasting smart, when they have not so much despised their Ministers as Jesus
Christ? Shall loose unreformed Children, that despised their godly wooing and
warning Parents, cry out of unjustice under eternal wrath; when they did not so
much abuse their holy Invitations, as Gods? It was his Qui mihi monitus
muliebres tui erant. Aug. Conf. l. 2.
spirit that made by Religious Fathers and Mothers, gracious proffers to
gainsaying Children: Conscience will give in testimony on Gods side, that he
graciously called froward, wilful sinners, that they might be pardoned, not
abide under condemnation; they Libertatem pollicetur vos aufugitis in
servitutem.
might be Saints, not remain sinners; they might be free, not continue
Captives; obtain a blessing, not lie under the curse, and be saved, in
mortifying the deeds of the Body, and not be ruined by cruel mercy and
Indulgences to corrupt nature, the worst of enemies.

2. The bold abuses of heavenly inviting offers, though God 2. The bold abuse
of heavenly inviting offers.
has complained of this long before in his holy Word, and urged such injurious
dealing, as a most just Apology of his severest vengeance: I have called, and
ye refused: I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, Prove. 1. 4.
Therefore when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a
whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you, (I will be even with
you) you shall call upon me, but I will not answer; seek me, but not find me,
v. 27, 28. All the day long have I stretched out mine hand to again-saying
people, Isa. 62. 5. Therefore the Lord Christ threatened these unbelieving Jews,
that the Christ, and the Grace they rejected, should be offered to better
entertainers: He would have a Church among the Gentiles, the Kingdom of God
should be taken from them, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Matthew. 21. 42, 43. I said you shall die in your sins, for if ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, John 8. 24. He that
believes not in the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him, John 3. 36. How justly do the Wrongings of Gods grace bring endless
misery, when the Lord has often complained of it before hand in the
Scriptures, cautioned us to fear and tremble, lest we forsake our own mercies,
Jonah 2. 8. Threatening this abuse with eternal death?

3. The Lord has already acquainted us in his Word, that if 3. A Woe denounced
against them who make excuses and refuse to come.
like the guests in the Parable, we either find excuses not to come and feed
on Christ's heavenly dainties, Luke 14. 18. or we be unprepared, wanton, loose
guests, and come not to his Feast with the Wedding Garment, (i. e. Faith in
Christ) with the whole train of Graces, but in the deformed rags and pollutions
of our sins; I say, if we be like those that either openly and positively
reject his offered Grace, or like those wanton abusers of Gods grace, in the
Apostle Jude; tread in their steps, and die in this Libertinism, as a Woe is
denounced unto them, Jude Ep. v. 11. under condemnation, v. 4. to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, v. 13. So if we be fellow-wanton
Gospellers with them, we shall follow them in their everlasting misery. He is
deservedly hanged that sees a Felon die before, and yet greedily pursues his
wicked courses. We are told Sodomites, Apostate Angels, Abusers of
Gospel Grace, are already in Hell: If the examples of their torments make us
not to abhor and eschew their sins, divine justice wrongs us not in our
everlasting destruction, whom should self-destroyers blame but themselves? I
have been the longer in this Section, because of the mighty importance of the
matter, the common, woeful, lamentable, damnable refusal of Gospel gracious
calls, and invitations to everlasting happiness, unchristianly, profanely,
dishonourably abused.

SECT. 6.
6. THe means of Grace is turned into Wantonness. This sad 6. The means of
Grace is turned into wantonness.
experience I shall give out in three things; showing When the means of grace
are abused; The evil of that abuse; and What means of grace are abused.

1. When are the means of grace abused? They are so, 1. when they are set
higher than they are. Means are made Mediators, set in the room of Christ, when
an equal, yea a superior confidence is put in Instrumental institutions. The
hand and the courage of the Warrior is disparaged, when the Sword is set up
above him, and there be more confidence in a dead instrument than in a living
agent. The Word, the Sword of the Spirit, is dead and successelesse out of the
strong and living hand of the Spirit. It is a double and common wrong, both to
the means of grace, and to Christ, when Christ is not eyed, sought to, admired,
trusted in by the means: The error not only of ignorant, profane Christians,
that trust in a bare Baptism, and a following of their Church to save them; but
most real Christians, some whereof more admire their Preachers than Jesus
Christ; more look after an impotent man with all the glory of his gifts, than
the power, and the transcendently eminent endowments of the Lord Jesus. The
Apostle Paul taught a better lesson, who although he planted and watered
Churches, with miraculous success, owned his own nothingness, 2 Cor. 12. 11.
abhorred the thoughts of self-sufficiency, 2 Cor. 3. 5. was jealous of robbing
Christ of his glory, gave him the honor of his grace and power, that he was
used as the exalted and blessed instrument to convert multitudes of sinners,
and save their souls. Romans 15. 18, 19. 2 When mea^s of grace are set lower
then they are


2. When they are set lower than they are. Then they are so when they are
accounted as useless needless things, as if heaven could be got without them,
grace might be had and kept, though the means disused. Nothing is more clear
than that in ordinary dispensation (extraordinaries not being our rule) God
has confined grace and salvation to the use of means. Knowledge, Joh. 17. 3.
The Gospel preached, Romans 1. 13. Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Prayer, To. 10. 13. The
education of godly family guides, Genesis 18. 19. Excommunications, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
The holy counsels and examples of Husbands and Wives one to another, 1 Cor. 7.
16. The means of grace to the reproach of the God of grace, are exceedingly
undervalued, when the sottish and conceited generation, that live without
Ordinances, hold there is no dependence at all on holiness and eternal
happiness upon Gods instituted means. They are also set lower than they are,
when encumbred, with Martha, about needless things, in the brood of earthly
cares and employments, neglect their attendances on heavenly means, and make
their affairs below excuses (as too many do, to the dishonor of their
regenerate part, just as studious worldlings) to put by heavenly exercises in
the Worship of God.

3. When they are contradicted, and blasphemed, as Paul's 3 When means of Grace
are contradicted and blasphemed.
preaching was by the Jews, true Prayer by the Spirit, by unspiritual,
graceless Atheists, that revile godly care of holy household guides, to keep
their children and servants in the knowledge, fear, and love of God, whose
pious endeavors to save the souls of their families, condemning their wicked
neighbors irreligion, is the occasion, but not the cause, of their blaspheming
their Prayers, singing of Psalms, strict keeping of the Sabbath, and week
days, holy and righteous conversation; when the holy and heavenly institutions
of the Lord Jesus are the marks at which sons and daughters of Belial shoot
the arrows of their bitter words, the means of grace are eminently abused.

4. When they are judged, and rested in as the only evidences of grace. The
more ignorant, carnal, moral, hypocritical 4 When means are judged and
rested in as the only evidences of Grace.
sort of Christians have no better arguments that they are in the state of
grace than this, they have the means of grace. It is an irrational conclusion,
A patient has good physic, therefore he shall recover; a dunce has good
books, and a good tutor, therefore he will be a scholar; a great Army is well
furnished for war, therefore it shall overcome: The battle is not to the
strong, Eccles. 9. 11. As unscripturall an inference it is, The means of grace
are enjoyed, therefore the grace of the means is obtained. Capernaum was lifted
up to heaven in means, and yet cast to hell. Mat. 11. 23. Ordinances do not
confer grace, as fire does heat, by their natural virtue; but as the Lord
Christ healed the sick by supernatural. Grace is not in the means as causes,
but by them as instruments. Should many men have no use of the means to plead
for their spiritual estate, there would be nothing to speak them really
Christian, but they would be left as naked heathens. It is not the having, but
the saving using of means that will stand by us.

5. When they are made shelters of sin, as dens are for Lions, 5 When means are
made a shelter of sin.
clothes are for bodies. The Sacrifices and Temple were not to be a Sanctuary
of Murder, Adultery, False swearing, Idolatry. Jer. 7. 9, 10. Nor were the
Pharisees to make long prayers, to cloak the devouring of widows houses, Luke
20. 47. The Harlots beginning with Gods services were poor fig leaves to cover
her uncleanness. Prove. 7. 14. Prayers in the morning, and evening, cold and
barren, cannot palliate the licentious wickedness that is between them. They
may now quiet and stop the mouth of Conscience, they cannot in the other world.
It is the high dishonor of the means of grace, when they are but names, not
powers; when in attendances on them, there is but the color, not the heat of
Christianity. A painted, gilded Christian abuses the Ordinances, when he is
dead under them has no life, nor heat by them; he borrows from them a
Sheeps-skin, when he is but a goat; when it is seen that heavenly means mend
not hellish hearts and lives, the seeming is Saint-like, but the conversation
Devilish. This undoes two souls at once; The sin shrowding pretender to
Religion, and the profane blasphemer of the means of Grace. Both of them
perish as mock-gods; the one because he has hypocritically used the means;
the other, because he has blasphemously railed at the means.

6. When they are used in vain; when there is no health by 6 When the means
are used in vain.
Gods physic, no conversion and reformation by Gods Word. In the course of the
Ministry there is cunning and laboring in vain. The heavenly frequent fiegers
of the Ordinances are raised from the Devils garrisons re infecta, Satan's
strong holds are kept undemolished. 2 Cor. The real kingdom of Satan is in
the appearing kingdom of Christ. Under Gospel Ordinances men are worse and
worse; this is a profane disparagement to the Ordinances of Christ; an
unpleasing spectacle to the holy God and his Angels, the Spirits grief,
aggravation of sin, and treasuring up of wrath.

7. When they are totally neglected. Not only one, but all 7 When the means
are totally neglected.
the means of life and salvation are carelessly slighted, unworthily vilified,
as if God, Christ, the Spirit, Grace, Heaven, Hell, were not worth the thinking
of, such contempt is cast on the golden cisterns of Grace. There are too many
who proclaim their opposition to the God of Heaven, and the method of
salvation, who are so far from the power, that they abhor the very form of
godliness, so little care for service to Christ, that they detest the badges
of his government. These constantly profane the Sabbath, are never found on
their knees seeking God; hear no Sermons from year to year; care not for
Sacraments; have no good family education; are hardened by their afflictions;
deride holy examples; these are in Satan's full possession, take the liberty of
the times to be ignorant, and as to the Ordinances of Christ, quiet and
resolved Libertines. Be you entreated, that have seen the power, and beauty,
and glory of God in his Sanctuary, and that have had the waters of life running
into your thirsty souls through the precious pipes of divine Ordinances, that
really value them above the world, stir up those compassionate bowels, that the
divine nature has begotten in you, and if your counsels to Christianize these
Heathens will not prevail, pray and weep them into possibilities of salvation,
by attendance on the means of grace.

Secondly: The Evil of abusing the means of Grace, laid to heart, might be some
remedy to sin.

1. This is a wrong to God that appointed them. Man cannot bear the violation
of his household orders, and will God bear it? if so the Laws of his family
should be contemned.

2. They wrong the Spirit that acts in them, either by turning their backs upon
him, when he usually affords his presence in Gods ways, or by resisting his
gracious impulses, his sweet whispers, his terrible representations of an
accursed lost sinner out of Christ, Acts 7. 51. Either they will not hear his
inspeakings, or disregard them, both despise the Spirit of Grace.

3. They please the Devil, who has either way graceless souls in his
possession, either by not using the means at all, or in vain. Such abusers of
saving means, are an unpleasing spectacle to the holy Angels, enemies to God,
grieve the Spirit, and are the Devils triumph. Consider,

Thirdly: What are those means of grace that are turned into wantonness? They
are,

1. The holy Scriptures. In them alone eternal life is to be 1 The holy
Scriptures are turned into Wantonness.
found, Joh. 5. 39. They are styled, the word of Grace. Act. 20. 32. Their
abuse is in their disuse, when either they that may have Bibles, have none, or
if they have them, they suffer them to contract dust on their shelves, laying
them by as useless, are seldom, or never read; or in their ill use when they
are read, without reverence, diligence, observance, or any resolves, or good
desires and affections to follow the teachings of the Spirit without
understanding, esteem, remembrance, laying up, and laying out these heavenly
treasures in righteousness and holiness. Again, in their ill use, when they
are wrested to errors, heresies, looseness, covetousness, unrighteousness.
When Scripture is urged against Scripture, and the inspirations of the Holy
Ghost are urged against themselves. Such scripture deprayers are their own
destroyers. 2 Pet. 3. 16. 2 The Ministry of the Gospel is, when the Call,
Person, and Messages of Ministers are abused.


2. The Ministry of the Gospel is an abused means, when both their person,
calls and messages are uniustly despised, are accounted as offscouring, are
disenabled from doing good to scoffing and malicious persons, who either will
not hear them, or with scornful prejudices, amounting to no less wickedness,
in interpretation, than despising the Lord Jesus, and calling upon insolent
contemners irremediless wrath. 3 Sermons are means abused Vacuitatem timoris
Dei and (...) sequitur nausea verbi divini, contemptus lacrarum concionum. Qurt
sunt qui sacras conciones absque secaritatis soporc attente, intelligenter and
fructuose audjunt? Ah quam fastidiose etiam optimae conciones capiuntur?


3. Sermons are abused means; and they never are so, but when they are the sad
fruits and products of hearts void of Gods fear, and without repentance. No
wonder if the divine word be loathed, and holy Sermons be contemned, when
fearless, shameless, and faithless hearts have slight thoughts of them, and
care little for them, as if they were but scare-crows for children, very
fables, when sound, heavenly messages are either not heard at all, or not
attentively, not reverently, not understandingly, not wisely, not fervently,
not frequently, not perseveringly, not fruitfully, not resigningly, giving up
the judgment to be captivated to the obedience of faith, the heart and life to
the power of godlyness, but are heard with a contrary corrupt frame of heart,
then is a means of grace abused.

4. Sacraments are abused means, when the supernatural grace 4 Sacraments are
means abused.
they signify is not sought for, regarded, nor obtained. Their holy, eternal
obligations to sound faith and heavenly conversation, who considers? As the
Jews profaned their Sacraments, loose Christians do theirs. Those rested on
the Circumcision of the flesh, and the outward Passover; Jews without, and not
within, wicked in hearts and lives. These rest on Baptismal Water, Bread and
Wine in the Lords Supper, Christians without, and not within, unconverted,
unsanctified in hearts and lives. These do profane offered Sacramental grace,
utterly void of Sacramental graces and lives. These by their own confessions,
are dedicated and devoted to Jesus Christ, to forsake the flesh, the devil,
the pomp and vanities of this wicked world, and they do nothing less. These by
taking the Bread and Wine, the lively representations of the shed blood, and
broken body of Jesus Christ, are supposed, and obliged to have grace, and grow
in it; but they neither have the being, nor growth of grace; profanely take
the bread of the Lord, with unbeleeving, impenitent hearts, but not the bread
the Lord, with faith, repentance, Panem Domini, non panem Dominum. August.
and other graces. It will not be the least aggravation of Christians
wantonnizing with the grace of God. The wicked abuse of the Sacraments, will
prove them undeniable Libertines. What affinity is there between the cleansing
water of Baptism, and Baptized persons, wallowing in the filthiness of flesh
and spirit, lying and delighting, like swine, in the mire, in the pollutions of
the world? What agreement is there between a pretended feeding on the pure
immortal food, Jesus Christ, and feeding on Satan's provisions, the delicious
lusts, and sweet pleasures of sin? Is not this to turn the Table of the Lord
into the Table of Devils, an holy into a profane feast; as if the holy Supper
were instituted to pamper and quicken, not starve and mortify corruption? How
epidemicall and spreading is this abuse? They are the words of an holy,
affectionate Writer: Introspicite in omnes Christini orbis parts, and non
negabitis passim apud mulios solutarem usum Sacramentorum frigore. Otho
Casmannus.
Look into all the parts of the Christian world, and you will not deny many
Christians are remiss and cold concerning the saving use of the Sacraments: Be
they used or abused, there is rarely enquiring after their efficacy, or
contempt; what good is got by them, or what defaming contradictions and wrongs
there are against them?

5. Good Books are abused means: By them their holy Authors, 5. Good Books are
means abused.
though dead, speak to the living: We have in them the lasting Monuments of
pious Labors, the breathings of the Spirits, the experiences of Satan's Wiles
and Methods, the goings of God in his Sanctuary, the showing forth of his Power
and Glory in his living Temples, well-digested, and heavenly directions, to
walk holily, safely, joyfully in the way to Heaven, frequent and passionate
woings to receive the Lord Jesus Christ in spiritual Espousals; The necessity
and excellency of Regeneration, and the issue of it, the new Creature; The
unbottoming and discovery of the hearts deceits; kind and affectionate
warnings, in time, to get out of the state of sin and damnation, and be
delivered from the wrath to come; yea further, serious heart-aking and wounding
discourses of the woeful Eternity of Hells Torments, for the loose and ungodly
World; and ravishing Discoveries of the blessed Eternity of Heavens Joys, for
exact and Religious persons, with much more that may be said of the drawing
excellencies of holy Writings of old and the present age: Now what is the use,
indeed abuse of these glorious gifts of the Spirits; the Births not only of
understanding Brains, but holy Hearts; the wasters of Blood and Spirits
precious time and labor in the Lords Workmen? Are not these things the sad
testimonies of their dishonor? some never read Vtiles pii libri quam raro
pervoluuntur.
them, others very rarely; some rather judge and condemn strict truths, too
unpleasing Prisons and Chains for their loose hearts, then fall down before the
power of their truth and holiness; they rather come with Satan's Index
Expurgatorius, and by the spirit of error boldly blot out Heavenly Truths, and
neither suffer them to come into their Creed nor Practice, then rejoice at
their Imprimatur, that the helps and methods of godly lives, printed in Paper,
might be printed in their hearts: Others do, with the Books they read, as with
the Sermons they hear, lend them an eye, an ear, a few slighty careless
thoughts, but do never with Mary, ponder saving Counsels in their hearts: Some
when they read Divine Treatises, labor to pick what errors they can, and like
Spiders, suck poison out of the sweetest herbs, wherefore they intermix
worldly Lusts, the saving of their Diana and Palladium, the corrupt Idols of
their hearts; Their darling Peccata in delici is.
Benjamins, their sweet feasting and feasted sins; and these must comment on
the Text they read: If precious heart-purifying, life-reforming, sin-reproving,
and conscience-smiting discourses, cross error and looseness, then away with the
Book, it is stark naught: Others would read Books, but valued only by the
standard of a foolish Wit, accounting of Books by lofty Strains, fine gaudy
Phrases, not the golden massy worth of the matter, the Heavenly Treasures set
forth in a grave and sober significant Language, plain, yet eloquent
expression. I shall enlarge this point, with an hearty advice, to them that
have a mind and time to read Books, let them take heed what they read; Satan
(I fear) has the liberty of the Press, as well as Jesus Christ: There are
Books of Libertinism abroad: It had been well for some, had they never been
published in the world, whose minds are dangerously infected, without infinite
mercy, to their destruction: In the other World, what if undone souls, by
wicked Books, should wish the eyes of their flesh had been blind, and ears
deaf, that they could have neither read nor heard of Printed Error and
Looseness, to their destruction: The Devil has his market and merchants,
foolish Chapmen are deceived, and take the bad ware of darkness for light,
flesh for spirit: O ye simple gulled People of this Nation, cheated almost of
your Christianity and Civility, unless ye will be foolish and proud, take the
advice of your learned godly Ministers, of settled, sollid, experienced
Christians, and ask them what Books you should read. A few words of counsel I
have to you that are jocund, merry ones, boon Companions, if you read this
Section, I beseech you, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, as you tender your
Salvation, and the glory of God, spend your time better; It will never repent
you, when you die, you have left your covetous passionate Gaming, the too
frequent delights of the flesh, you drench, almost drown your souls in, for the
choosing, reading, meditating on Books of Mortification, Heavenly-mindedness,
and preparation for Death and Eternity: I am sure you cannot deny it now,
rationally; I am most sure your awakened minds cannot deny it on your
deathbeds, that your diligent reading of Dike, of the deceitfulness of the
heart; Baxters everlasting rest; Greenham, Bolton, Preston, Perkins, etc. and
such Books as those were incomparably better to be read, then wanton
Play-Books, Romances, debauching Amorous Writings: If you will not believe me
now, whether you will or no you shall in the other World: Read, O read what
will fit you for Heaven; for your souls sake, do not by reading vain, frothy,
written delight, and read your selves into Hell.

6. Prayer is an abused means, when this holy piece of Divine 6. Prayer is a
means abused.
Worship, the most sweet and frequent way of converse with God about Heavenly
affairs, is totally neglected: When men come unto God without any serious
thoughts of his Reverend Majesty, rushing to the Throne of Grace, as to a
Theater, a Market, a merry Meeting: When there are attempts of drawing nigh
before infinite Purity, with impure hearts and unclean hands, after hot pursuit
of the World, and fervency in the service of carnal Lusts, there is bold
approach unto Gods presence, as if God would regard their Prayers, who regard
iniquity in their hearts: When Supplicants do not so much pray, as complement;
in good earnest, not Petition God, but mock him, declaiming against the sins
they love, unwilling to part with the Lusts they chide, that God should take
them at their words: One would think that hears zealous arraignment, and severe
condemnings of some sins in Prayer, would think the hatred of them were
implacable, and the forsaking of them would be everlasting, when at the same
time there is a strong habitual league with them; yea after many hard words, a
securing of them, living and delighting in them: These, and many more affronts,
are put upon this Heavenly means of Grace, Prayer.

7. Education is an abused means: When lewd children and 7. Education is an
abused means.
servants are not taken with the holy Counsels, and exemplary Piety of their
godly Guides; Some either expressly hate instruction and correction, or do but
dissemble holiness, who while they are in strict Families, eternally conform to
Holy Orders, like the Fish Polipus, that can turn it self into the color of
the Rock; but when out of the Parents Wing, and the Masters Government, are no
more the children and servants they were, than a Player is a King when he is
off the Stage, or an Ape in man's apparel, is a man when undressed: How will
household Governors, warnings and chastizings, prayers and tears, sweetest
wooings, and drawing promises to rebellious children, and graceless servants,
that they may mind the marchless interest of Gods glory, and their own
salvation, rise up in judgment against them in the accounting Day, when it
will appear, exactest educations have been abused.

8. Scriptural convictions are an abused means: There are 8. Scriptural
convictions are abused means.
not a few that know their duties and their sins: It is as clear as noon-light,
that their intemperancies, incontinences, unrighteous dealings, oaths, lies,
neglect of Prayer, are sins: From a rouzing Sermon they can go home with
smitten hearts, grant that Sermon-Truths have been arrows directed to the
breast of their dead corruption, and in vanishing fits, and moods of appearing
goods, promise to leave their drunken company, oaths, lies, and worldliness,
yea, weep over their confessed wickedness; but after these sudden moods and
pangs of piety are vanished, the convinced sinner is as jovial, drunken, false
in his dealing, mad on his reprieved, not mortified Lusts, his sleeping, not
dead corruptions, as if his sins had never stared him in the conscience, and
been represented to him, as that which unforsaken would ruin him: These do the
works of darkness by Gospel Light, go without miraculous conversion, and exact
repentance, with open eyes to Hell: and knowing their Masters will, but doing
it not, shall be beaten with sharper Eternal stripes, then ignorant Heathens,
and blind vulgar Papists. O enlightened Christians, bless God for your light,
but fear and tremble, lest the wickedness of loose hearts and ungodly
conversation, be greatned by your clear informations: They who by the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, have escaped the pollutions of the world,
and are (out of choice and delight) again entangled in them: It had been better
they had never known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it,
to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21.

9. Afflictions are an abused means: They ought to be the discipline 9.
Afflictions are abused means.
of virtue, the purgatory of corruption, Isa. 27. 9. the teachers of neglected
holy duties, Psalm. 94. 12. The reducers of foolish wandering sinners into their
wits and way, Luke 15. 17. Wearers from the worlds sweet dugs, 2 Cor. 4. 16,
17. Strikers of holy awe of the Divine presence, in daring spirits, 1 Samuel 6.
20. Snuffers of the candle of well instructed reason, that it may give a
clearer light to the inferior faculties, Job 33. 16, 19. Monitors, not to
commit Vexatio dat intellectum, Mercerus.
over again the old sins, John 5. 15. Abasers of proud spirits, Job 33. 17, 19.
Converters of departed souls, Psalm 119. 67. Instrumental Saviors of lost
sinners, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13. When the Lords rods are spent in vain: These
Heavenly ends of afflictions are not attained, but hearts as hard as an anvile,
take no gracious impressions of Gods blows: In Gods afflicting Furnace, there
is no golden refinings of Grace, no purging the dross of corruption: The ill
humors of camal lusts and affections, and loose manners under his Physic are
more incurable; unbettered afflicted ones will not be purged, but revolt more
and more: Then afflictions, the means of Grace, are abused.

SECT. 7.
7. THe examples of Grace are turned into wantonness: They 7. Examples of Grace
are turned into wantonness.
are then well used, when from a right estimate of them, admiration of Gods
goodness in them, Thankfulness for them, Phil. 1. 3. Zeal to follow them, Heb.
6. 12. shaming and blaming our selves for our unlikeness to them, 1 Cor. 15.
14. Daily indeavoring to write after their fair, holy and heavenly Copies, Heb.
12. 1. Delighting in them above all persons of the World, Psalm 16. 3. choosing
of them to be our choice companions and bosom-friends, Psalm. 119. 63. resenting
them as shining Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15. to clear our way to the
Heavenly Country: Thus to improve the best of patterns, that reflect and hold
forth the glory of God in the World, the fruits of the direct beams of infused
holiness, and to be won to Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 1. and quickened to the power of
Religion, by others exemplary Piety, Charity, Innocence and Justice, is to use
well examples of Grace: But now when men and women regard not the most shining
Lights, sleep, and play the wantons before them, and with them, make them their
may game, their sport, the Theme of their profane jests and scurrilous wits,
in their Houses, Ale-benches, Taverns, the Road: When David was the Drunkards
song, Psalm 69. 12. the scorn of many, despised of Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 16. When
hypocritical mockers at Feasts make the heirs of glory their scoffing
Table-talk; when the Upright are called Hypocrites: Righteous dealers are voted
unjust, or for one piece of unequal dealing, are ever condemned so: When the
glorifiers of God before men, out of conscience of duty, because under a
command, are thought vainglorious: When exact walkers, fearful of sin, dare
not run with others into excess of riot, nor give allowances, fond and liberal,
to their fawning lusts, shall be called over-righteous, deemed needless
precisians, making too much ado in the Church of God; as if men could be too
godly, when the highest measures of holy strictness are exceedingly short of
the rule and the life of Christ; as if too much care, conscience, and pains,
according to requiries of Scripture, either could be, is, or ever was, in any
Believer in the World; as if when the word says, real Saints are to give all
diligence, in the exercise of all Graces, 2 Pet. 1. 5. etc. To work out their
salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. To make through work of it, to
redeem the time, to be followers of Christ, they could be too diligent and
strict, by the warrant of these and other Scriptures, to assure and promote
their eternal Salvation: Every serious dying-Saint, thinks he has done too
little for the honor of God and his Gospel, for his own soul and others: Every
glorified Saint sees his massy glory does exceedingly outweigh his most
diligent services and patient sufferings: The abuse of holy examples is too
general an injury to God and his choice servants: The gracious, the graceless
are both guilty. 1. The gracious, low spirited Christians, whose light is in a
dark lanthorn, that shine forth to outward view little or nothing of the glory
and power of Religion: O ye Christians of the lower form, look to those that
have out-learned you in Christ's School, continue not still in your weak Graces
and strong Corruptions! see you not some of your fellow-Converts are very
Heavenly? Let this correct your earthiness: Are some meek? let this shame and
cure your passions; Have they liberal hearts and hands? let this open your shut
bowels and purses; Can they forgive great wrongs? let this blame and mend you
that can hardly pass by little; Dare they not speak idely and frothily,
guarding the doors of their lips? Let this urge you to repentance, who speak
not only idly, but wickedly, uttering such corrupt communication, that
slanders by must needs conclude foul hearts, when tongues are so foul; Do they
grow under the means of Grace? Let their proficiency spur you to better
progresses by holy Ordinances: Do they practice Religion where they are most,
in their own Families? Let your sinful Household omission of holy Duties, or but
cold formal performances; your domestic disorders be reformed. Lastly, Do they
live in the power of godliness? let this warn your too powerless profession,
that you labor more for the power. 2. The graceless are guilty of abusing the
grace of God, in the examples of Grace: How will this load your guilt at the
great day, that as you have wronged the Gospel of Grace, so you have gracious
Gospellers? you look on them as the vile offscouring of the World, 1 Cor. 4.
13. of whom the world is not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. Can proudly judge them
sometimes base persons, for their despised, though honorable Divine nature, and
their loathed holiness, herein like to the Heathens of old, who made the
practice of Christianity, and the Christians owning the Christian name their
crime: Though you cast contempt on vessels of honor, whom you debase, God
esteems: It is no flattering, but Scripture Language: The Scripture styles them
Precious, Isa. 43. 4. Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Honorable, Isa. 43. 4. Noble, Acts
17. 11. Kings, Rev. 1. 6. Princes in all Lands, Psalm. 45. 16. that have the
happiness to enjoy them: If they be as dirt in your eyes, they are as gold in
Gods: Be entreated to take a measure by the golden line of the Sanctuary; whose
examples are most Scriptural, safe to the interest of immortal souls, those you
contemn, or those you follow: Though with a supercilious from, you disdain to
follow their sober, chaste, heavenly, pious, mortified, penitential, reformed
lives: Truth will make your awakned minds, when you die, wish you had traced
their holy steps, and when you would at the great day be glad to follow them in
glory, this for ever will shut the door of hope and happiness, you never
followed them in Grace: It is in vain with Balaam to wish the death of the
righteous, and with vulgar, dead, imaginary Believers, to hope for the glory of
the righteous, when there is not with upright Saints, living the life of the
Righteous: Holy and happy should you be that follow the huge multitudes that
troop to hell in the broad way of pleasing evil examples; if converting Grace
did powerfully whisper in your Spirit, and draw you back to the narrow way of
life: Here you should meet with a thin, but blessed company. Fellow, O follow
them, who through Faith and unwearied patience in well-doing, have their race
answered with an eternal prize; and them also, who after their holy course is
finished, shall inherit the promises. It will never grieve you, if once you
return from your mad errors and courses, to your sober spiritual wits, that
you have changed undoing for saving presidents, that you have left your
soul-ruining good-fellowship, for communion with Saints, Angels, the Mediator
of the Covenant, and with the blessed Trinity for all Eternity. Have any of
you ridden about life and death, and with exceeding grief lost both your time
and way? have you rejoiced to meet with an unerring gride, that has not only
brought you out from your wanderings, but set you in your way, yea rode before
you as a courteous faithful guide? The like joy, yea greater you will find, if
after you have strayed like lost travelers, God set before you leaders, and
you have the wisdom and grace to follow in the erring and dangerous wilderness
of this world, your holy guides to the heavenly Canaan.

SECT. 8.
8. REconciling Grace is turned into Wantonness. As in the 8 Reconciling grace
is turned into Wantonness.
former Section the choice Presidents of Grace, so in this, and the following
particulars, the choice privileges of Grace will appear to be abused.

God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 10. When we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Romans 5. 10. The
propitiatory atoning sacrifice of Christ's death, in putting away Gods
destructive wrath is rich grace. Even this is injured. Reconciliation with God
stands, in many, with agreement with Satan, what in them lies peace with God
and sin kiss each other, as if a league with heaven and hell could stand
together. Seditious persons reconciled to their Prince, abuse his goodness,
when at the same time they are Traitorous friends with his enemies, hold
intelligence with them, do homage to them, are ruled by them, and propagate
their dominions, are the picture of those wanton Traitors that abuse Gods
Reconciling grace. That grace of God whereby he is reconciled to the sinner,
and the sinner to him, begets an universal peace with all his laws and methods
of holiness, and war with sin. At what time friendship is commenced between
God and the soul, war is waged and maintained against sin. Reconciliation and
Alteration go together: Turning away his wrath from the sinner, and turning of
the heart of the sinner are undevided. What pleases a pacified God, pleases
the sons of peace: When the face of God shines in smiles of peace, the Laws of
God are favors, no offenses; privileges, no burdens; sweet delights, no
unpleasing tasks; the liberty, not prison of really pacified believers: Great
peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.
165. The Romans that had peace with God, stood in this Gospel Grace, engaged to
be holy, not allowed to be Libertines. The exercises of graces, not allowances
to lusts, were the fruit of this heavenly reconcilement. Romans 5. 10, 11, etc.
It is a choice blessing purchased by Christ's death. Romans 5. They are blessed
who are reconciled by him, and not offended in him, Mat. 11. 6. But they that
refuse the Laws of his government, had never yet the joy of atonement, though
they pleasingly vote themselves the friends of God, they will be made to their
own smart to know, it is one thing to be reconciled when enemies, it is
another thing to be reconciled and abide enemies: No enemies to the Laws of
Christ, and Gospel-holiness were ever actually reconciled; they are yet under
wrath that are under the reign of sin. Let them consider it that take up, keep
and use arms of Hostility against the God of peace. Thoughts of reconcilement
may be pleasing, they will be a vanishing dream: Divine Pacification is in
order to Communion. Libertines cannot walk with God, and see his smiles, that
turn back upon God, and hate his Laws.

SECT. 9.
ADopting Grace is turned into Wantonness. I have nourished 9 Adopting grace is
turned into wantonness.
and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. Isa. 1. 2. Ah seed
of evil doers, children that are corrupters, v. 4. A son honoreth his father:
If I be a father, where is mine honor? Mal. 1. 6. As Jacobs Sons, Simeon and
Levi's wickedness made him stink. Genesis 34. 30. Eli's wanton sons were his
reproach, so Gods Adopting grace is wronged by his professed children to his
dishonor. As when a Beggar is an adopted son, and is saucy, scornful, stout
in his fathers presence, this differencing grace is turned to wantonness; so
when a beggarly sinner in external Adoption, is admitted into Gods family, his
loose, unmannerly carriage in his Fathers presence, puts an affront upon
Adopting grace. To the Israelites appertained the Adoption. Romans 9. 4. They
owned the promotion. God is our Father. Joh. 8. 41. But the high abuse of this
preferment in Heathenizing, like Sodom and Gomorrah. Isa. 1. 10. wronging the
Stewards of Gods select family, the holy Prophets. Act. 7. 52. despising the
orders of his government. Jer. 13. 9, 10. Idolatrizing with the Gentiles. Ps.
106. 35. Their a Impudence, b Universality, and c Incorrigiblenesse of sin, a
Jer. 6. 15. b Jer. 6. 28. c Jer. 2. 30. turned their external adoption into
exprobation. Their professed owning of God their Father in an external
covenant of Grace, with unchild-like rebellions, did aggravate their
abominations. Their want on lusts spoiled their Adoption: God was in Title, the
Devil in reallity their father. Joh. 8. 44. His Lusts, but not the divine Laws
of Jesus Christ ruled over them. Too much a kin are dissolute Christians to the
Jews, dishonourers of adopting grace. The looser, the stricter sort of
Christians.

1. The Looser. With what boldness, confidence, yea impudence do many say,
Our Father, who have nothing less than the dispositions and affections of
children? as if God could own Satan's image for his living pictures, and
perpetual estrangements, disaffections, enmities, yea reproaches could have
any reconcilement with the heavenly dignity of Adoption. God that has taught
men to pray, has bid no man to lie, and to say he is their Father in Christ,
when they are unchristian in heart and life. I confess the worst of men may
wish they had real interest in Adopting grace. But under the Fatherhood of
Satan, to claim spiritual Sonship, is so to call God Father, as Judas called
Christ Master, Luke 14. 45. a mockery, but not a truth. How rare is it for the
profane pretended children of God, in good earnest to charge gross hypocrisy
on their profession, and thus to quaere; Can these oaths, drunken, unclean,
unrighteous, voluptuous lives bear any fair consistency with Adopting grace? Am
I not an impure offspring of Hell, though I pretend to an heavenly progeny?
Will these thoughts, words, and actions speak Gods children? These serious
reflections are very rare. The notorious seed of the Serpent will complement and
write themselves in their deceitful hearts Gods children. Many of them have
been, the rest will be blotted out of this blessed roll. Ah bold intruder! ere
long, in this life, or the next, thy Conscience will tell thee, Heaven holds no
such children, as will live as they list, reject the paternal government of God,
evidently darken the glory of God in the world, and yet call him father.

2. The stricter sort of Christians too much follow the dissolute Jew, in
blemishing the glory of divine Adoption, and these are of two sorts. Such as
really, such as are opinionatively godly, are indeed children, and that seem to
be so.

1. Christians of strict profession, that are indeed children. What do you for
your fathers name? Do not even you, that shall hear these sweet words from the
mouth of your Judge and Savior, Come ye blessed of my Father, hinder his
renown in the world? Are not you Key-cold, Hard-hearted, of dis-ingenuous
unchild-like spirits, when you see the dreadful testimonies of his dishonor?
Do not you, who in the next world shall lift up his name, and make his praise
glorious, cast down his name, and make it infamous? Your undutifulness to your
dear Father is too much, that your too loose hearts dishonor him, and inward
wickedness provokes his absence; but is it not enough in irreverence and
disobedience within doors to wrong your childhood? will you dare to dishonor
him, and your selves in the public street of common notices? Against the
precious fame of your Father, how are your tongues heated with a fiery satan,
and the flames of ungoverned passion, to abound in transgression before
malicious observers, glad of your halting? How unwarily do you publish your
over-eager, yea it may be in some things, injurious chases after the worlds
gainful prizes? Why discover you the nakedness of your dis-love and hardness
to forgive a saint or sinner? Why does your voluptuousness, too much declare
you yet live not above the world? Why are you silly chapmen to take off the
braid wares of corrupt errors? Have no opininions taught you looseness? Why
do you not show you are Christians to purpose, in doing illustrious singular
things; that the neighbors that study your lives, and are strangers to your
inward Faith and Love may say, These are children of God indeed, would I were
in their condition? It is not the language but the power of your Profession
that will draw hearts after it. How have you defaced your Adoption, when your
sinful omissions of convincing duties, and breakings forth of corruption,
sharpen the edge of bitter language, and tempt to these words of reproach; O
these are the children of God (in scorn) denying you the honor, because you
have denied God the glory, and your selves the credit of your Adoption. Let
this lord your hearts for your unwatchful and dishonorable conversation, and
call for future caution: Your public sins make your Father hear ill in the
world.

2. Christians of strict profession, that have only childrens name, not
nature, artificial, not supernaturally natural, not lively in external
exercises of Religion, that put over impious designs and practices, the too
good cover of a pious name, that are adorned, painted Sepulchers, unclean
within; that make not Religion the great expedient for blessed eternity, but a
fair net Quidam probitate fictac viam sibi ad potentia^ muniunt. Lact. de vero
cult. l. 6. c. 6.
to catch the world in: That in your zealous devotions, more hot in the mouth
than heart, call God frequently your Father, and make it the pleasing Prologue
and usher of many of your Petitions, Confessions, and Thanksgivings, and yet
have no filial affections of love, and fear, shame and sorrow, no pleasure in
pleasing him, no real godly sorrow for his dishonor: That betray the weakness
of your painted piety, having no real fervencie of heart for the interest of
Gods name, but your own concernments: That betray the whole body of your
Religion is a dead carcass, without the life and soul of it, the quickening
Spirit: No wonder if you stink, when the ill savor of your loathed pollutions,
intemperance, incontinence, unrighteousness, unnatural sins betray the power
of Religion was but feigned, never feared in the heart, that could never
disperse inward, nor outward beloved, and delighted in imperious sins. O you
that are strict in the exercises of piety, and do but feign, not really affect
and pursue Christianity, Gods most heavy, and smarting blows will be at you,
without great repentance, and singular reforming sincerity: Do no longer mock
God nor men: Hypocrisy at length ends in Apostasy: The feigned friends of
Christ are real enemies. O let not Religion, holy Religion be wickedly
blasphemed, nor be your play and game, but your serious business in good
earnest; and know when you dye, as well may you expect a painted fire should
warm you, as a painted Religion comfort your self-accused, and tempted
departing souls. Before I close this point, I must warn the loose and scoffing
generation that possibly may read this page, to forbear their triumph: Some may
say, The Author has hit the mark, and echoes with our thoughts; we are glad
he has paid the Hypocrites; out upon these Precisians, they are all
Hypocrites. And are you glad indeed; Where is your charity? That would not
rejoice in iniquity, 1 Cor. 13. 6. What if your merry sarcasmes, and satyricall
invectives against the Hypocrites, be an arrow justly shot against your selves?
Did you never read, there are hypocritical mockers in feasts? Psalm. 35. 16. The
severe censurers of Hypocrisy had need be upright. Are not you eminently
grossly guilty of the crime you cry down? If you will not believe it, it is
easy to prove it, deny it if you can: Do not you profess salvation only by
Jesus Christ? Do not you know, except you be born again, you cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven? Joh. 3. 5. Is it not plain Scripture, He that is in
Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts? Gal. 5. 24. Are you not commanded to
redeem the time? Ephesians. 5. 16. Are not livers in pleasures dead to God while
they live? 1 Timothy 5. 6. Must not he that abides in Christ, walk as he walked? 1 John 2. 5. Now I beseech you that throw the dreadful charge of Hypocrisy, and
it may be truly against some persons, and yet care not though through the sides
of Hypocrites ye wound the generation of Gods children, are not you gross
Hypocrites your selves? You profess Christianity, credit Gospelrevelation, call
Christ your Savior, dare not say you will not be ruled by his Laws, expect
salvation by him, own his Ordinances, and if asked the question, before a
Sacrament, or on a sick bed, by Ministers that please you, will you follow the
rules of the Gospel to fit you for heaven? My charity persuades me you would
say yea, God forbid but I should be ruled by Jesus Christ. It is very easy
then to conclude from your own concessions you are Professors, now what is
Hypocrisy but a constant contradiction to the profession of the power of
godliness; Is not yours such? Be not angry with this home-speaking to your
bosoms, your consciences, if you repent not, will speak a thousand times more
after death than a few pages. Can your studious, and ordinary giving up your
selves to the lusts, pomps, and vanities of the world, be interpreted a
devoting, or resignment of your persons up to Jesus Christ? Are you born of the
Spirit that show no scripture proofs of your high heavenly birth, the life of
the Spirit, the graces of the Spirit, the leading of the Spirit, that are not
acquainted with the breathings of the Spirit at the throne of grace, who never
made your families houses of prayer? Are you indeed new creatures? Is it
possible that the old oaths, drunkenness, uncleanness, slighting, and
contemning the Word of God, laughing at those truths you hear, that should set
you a trembling, loathing of religious exercises, living in the old affections
and conversation, should prove you were new creatures? Can you believe Christ
in you has crucified the flesh with its affections, and lusts, which you
pamper and keep alive? Do you redeem precious time, all which should you live
an hundred years, abating the necessary and moderate attendances on the things
of this life, would call for all time in the numerous services of Religion,
conquests of Temptations, subjection to the Gospel, and preparation for
Eternity? Will you call your covetous, costly, passionate gaming in the
afternoon till night, yea sometimes from night till morning, redeeming the
time? Is your sleeping till nine or ten a clock on the Lords day, time
Redemption? Is your earthy, frothy, unedifying discourses one with another,
when you are commanded to provoke one another to love and good works. Heb. 10.
28. To speak what may minister grace and soul advantage to the hearer. Ephesians. 4.
29. Time improvements? Are your tyring attendances an hour or two on Gods
Worship time advantages? Are your many hours attendances on your flesh-pleasing
sensualities, the shortest and sweetest hours, the real profit of time? I
beseech you in good earnest, study how Christ walked, and then judge your
selves, whether your debauched loose lives, strangers, yea enemies to the
strict ways of Christianity, will prove you walk like Christ; what remains
then, but if your eyes be open, the fruit of this arraignment of you, before
the word of truth, will be real conviction you are gross hypocrites your
selves. I say not this delighting to discover the nakedness of your deceits,
but if Gods grace help, to reform them. It is true, there are that make strict
profession, are hypocrites, but will this help you when God sees, and your
selves know your palpable hypocrisies? As drunkenness condemns drunkenness,
treason treason, uncleanness uncleanness, covetousness covetousness, passion
passion, so too Clodius accusat maechos, Catilina Cethegum. Juven.
often hypocrisy hypocrisy. How is the Devil pleased to see fellow sinners
peal and deeply charge one another, who without infinite mercy, are fellow
travelers to hell; and will have no pleasure in accusing each other there? O
you that are the looser sort of Christians, deal not with the stricter, who
abuse their eminent religious appearances, as Diogenes did with Plato, Calco
fastum Platonis, Majore fastu.
coming into his adorned and stately room, he trampled on his braverie; being
asked the reason of this incivilitie, the Cynick answered, I trample on Plato's
pride: Yea (says Plato) with greater pride. Do you see and comment on the
errors and scandals of strict profession? Take heed you do not trample on
their hypocrisy with greater hypocrisy. I shall finish this digression, with
an humble and hearty admonition to larger, and stricter professors, to fear and
tremble, lest they live and die under the dominion and damnation of hypocrisy.
Ah Christians, who are too Eagle-ey'd in discerning each others hypocrisies,
and are too guilty of this sad retaliation, to charge one another with bitter
words, but are too Mole-like in seeing your own dissimulation; study both I
beseech you, your own bosom Arch-juglers, your own deceitful lusts: Let your
chiefest anger Me me adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum. Virgil.
and revenge be against the craft and willnesse of your own corruption; Be
willing, O be willing that the word of the Spirit should slay your own. See you
of loose, and you of strict profession one another hypocrisies, O turn your
declamations into lamentations, your sharp charges into prayers, your scoffs
into tears for one another; and you that need bowels of compassions, and a
mantle of charity, to put over, not to blaze Veniam damus petimusque vicissim.
one another hypocrisies, return piety and tenderness of spirit to your
fello^ deceivers; I mean not soul-ruining flattery, but regular
Gospel-charitie.

To return to the abuse of Adopting grace. Whosoever they are, as there are but
few that are guiltless, very few but dishonor the glory and dignity of their
Adoption, I could wish that it might be laid to heart, three things may be
seriously considered.

1. The natural respects, reverence, lively affections, and zeal that children
bear to their parents, ^ho^onow the guidance of that engraven Law God has put
into the^^ spirits. The force of this consideration is this: Is it not an high
dishonor to the Father of spirits, that the Parents of the flesh should have
most regard? It is storied of a dumb son, who seeing his fathers life
endangered, in mighty zeal burst open the long shut doors (...). Herodotus.
of silence, and said, O kill not the man. Do we not see the name of our
heavenly father, we call so, endangered, his Gospel in peril to be lost by
common contempts and barrenness, our own soul; endammag'd, and yet we are not
delivered from a dumb devil, we want hearts and words to speak for our Father,
to cry mightily to him that his glory may not be so obscured, his Gospel may be
preserved, our souls may be sanctified and eternally saved? Where are our
suspicions lest we darken his name by our dis-ingenuous unchild-like carriages?
I am afraid, said the son of Declus, lest when I am made Emperor I forget my
Vereor, inquit Decii filius, ne si fiam Imperator, dediscam esse fictus.
Valerius Max. 1. 5.
self to be a son. ^re we as zealous in our ease, prosperities, sweet creature
enjoyments, Lest fullness rempt to forgetfulness, lest we should be less
reverent and obedient children, when our Tables are most delicious, and beds
sofrest? Does the light of nature say, Parents can never be recompensed? Does
the Scripture bid children to requite their parents. 1 Timothy 5. 4. which
endeavor they may, fully accomplish they cannot? What shame is Parentibus
nunquam redditur aquale.
it when we are infinitely more indebted to our heavenly father, then our
earthly progenitors, that we should return him irreverence, daily dishonours;
but be very rare and cold, and weary of religious, loyal, and filial returns?
We reverence (says the Apostle) the correcting fathers of our flesh, shall we
not much rather be in sub^ection to the father of spirits and lives? Heb. 12.
9. There (...).
is a much rather for an honorable deportment, under the heavenly than earthly
adoption: But the fathers of the flesh have a large harvest of respect and
service, our heavenly Father has s^^rce the gle^nings of duty. Would
Chrysostom have children Tanquam verna genitoribus euis servito. Chrysostom.
serve the careful and zealous instruments of their worldly being, with as
close a constraint and duty of love, as slaves do their masters from servile
fear? How do we abuse our high, holy, and heavenly relation of children, when
neither out of fear of his hot displeasure, nor love of his drawing goodness,
we do to God faithful service?

2. It is an eminent piece of most abominable ingratitude to abuse best
friends, dear parents; vengeance would not suffer Absalom to live, that rose up
against his Fathers Crown and life; and they who would not obey their Parents
(a sad monument of divine wrath) have obeyed the Hangman. Has God borne so
severe testimony against the dishonours of fleshly parents, will he not revenge
our unthankfulness, who profess him our heavenly Father, live every moment by
his protections and provisions; spend upon his creatures, his bounty, his care,
his patience, yea hope to be with him in heaven, and yet riot, grow unruly and
insolent with his goodness, wax wanton like well fed heifers in fat pastures,
refuse his sweet Gospel yoke, deafen our ears to our fathers call; kick at the
tender bowels of his love, not only reject, but some of us jeer at the orders
of his family discipline? Can we think that the zeal of God, that has burnt
hot in dreadful examples against the abuse of Parental rights, will not break
out in dreadful flames against all of us very mock-gods, that complement God
our Father, and take it for granted, we are his children (as indeed we are in
external Baptismal Covenant) when it will be found, as the degenerated seed of
Abraham, were ranked with Sodom and Gomorrah in wickedness, so without
exceeding practical repentance, we shall be found no better, casting off our
Fathers holy government, than very heathens, yea worse than they, by how much
the more we have put the cover of an heavenly adoption over hellish rebellions.

3. In the great day God will strictly examine all those that 3 In the great
day God will examine Professors.
passed for the members of his family. Admission unto his household, and calling
him Father, will not secure from the wrongs of this heavenly relation. It is
impossible now infallibly to discern between the spurious adulterate issue of
the serpents seed, and the newborn real children of the most high God; but at
the great day, when the thoughts of all hearts shall be opened, and the lives
of all Professors, stricter or larger shall be examined, Quomodo Christus
filios regni appellat, qui nibil minus erant quam Abrahae filii? quamvis ex Dei
ecclesia vere non essent, quia tamen in ecclesia locum occupabant, hunc ipsis
titulum concedit, Marlorat, in loc.
then (which is a dreadful place) The children of the Kingdom shall be cast
out. Mat. 8. 12. Those that had a name without the heavenly nature,
dispositions, affections, and conversations of Children that have blotted their
Fathers name, with inward filthiness, and outward pollutions of the World, that
have clearly proved Gods House has been haunted with unclean Spirits, that
have owned God in title, the Devil in reallity their Father, that have as many
times mocked God, as they have called him their Father in Christ: Then shall
these, not Children of God, but Rebels; not the Image of Christ, but Satan; not
the exalters, but debasers of Gods name, be set on their proper side among the
children of the Devil, and publicly before God, his holy Angels, his real
Saints and Children, be everlastingly disowned from being reputed and rewarded
as his Children, and be banished from his blessed and comfortable presence, to
the Devil their Father, to keep company with all the Apostate Angels, and the
Serpents seed, whether Pagan, abusing the light of nature, or Christian, the
glorious Gospel of Grace: O consider this, all you that are called Christians,
that either are more open and gross, or close prophaners of your Fathers Name,
Fear and tremble still to abuse it, lest as the degenerate Children of the
Kingdom, ye be cast out: Then all thin fig leaves, and external pretensions,
you are Gods Children, will vanish from you as darkness before the Sun, and
flee away as chaff before the wind: It will be found, that Profession of
Christianity is easy, but a suitable disposition and conversation to it is
hard and rare; Lord, Lord, will not alter the purposes of that angry, natural
Justice, that will take vengeance on the dishonors offered to adopting Grace.

SECT. 10.
10. FReeing Grace is turned into wantonness: The sweet 10. Freeing Grace is
turned into wantonness.
name of liberty, but not rightly stated and understood, has been one of
Satan's snares, and is still to undo precious souls: We are bid to stand fast
in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1. but not in the
liberty that Satan, the lusts of men, the spirit of error, carnal Interests and
Policy makes us free: Jesus Christ never died to give the Devil a free trade:
Gospel Grace has glorious freedom, from the curse of the Law, ^al. 3. 13. the
guilt of sin, the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. These are purchased liberties
by the blood of Christ, and are all abused by licentious spirits, who turn
Christian liberty into un-Christian Libertinism: They are free from the curse
of the Law, as they believe, but are cursed Children, 2 Pet. 2. 14. have
unmortified cursed Corruptions, do accursed things, and lead accursed lives; so
their freedom from the guilt of sin, is abused to wallowing in the filth of
sin; and their fancied liberty from the wrath to come, is to enjoy the present
pleasures of sin, and by treasuring up of sin, to treasure up wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. Too many sleeps on this sweet pillow, pleasing
indemnity, freedom from hell, and abuse this liberty, by a secure walking in
the way to hell: How 2 Pet. 2. 19.
is liberty mistaken? It is a freedom from sin, not in sin; It is putting the
old man in chains, not allowing him enlargement; It is absolute denying of
unlawful things, yea limitation and omission of lawful: It is a free service of
God, not a servile freedom of lust; It is confined to Scripture rule, not left
loose to a selfish arbitrary will; It is full of humility, fear and trembling,
not audacious, adventuring on any thing: It must write after the copy of
Heavens liberty, which is to do the will of God, not the flesh: Holy Angels are
free, but it is to duty, not rebellion. A wonder it is, that under
Gospel Light, Christian liberty is made so broad a cover, as almost to hide any
thing: How many come in here for their share? lavish Gaming, that throws away
that in an hour, which would feed and cloth several poor Families for many
years; spotted, yea painted faces, shroud themselves under lawful liberty:
Excessive gluttonous Feasts, have their freedom too: A Cup too much, that
tempts to many more, is made bold with, though it load the stomach and brains
to staggering, vomit, laying reason asleep, mis-spending time and money:
Covetous getting and keeping Estates, has its patronage from Scripture
liberty: Parents must lay up for their Children, 2 Cor. 12. 14. It is
Infidel-like not to provide for them, when under this pretense the numerous
Texts of Scripture, concerning giving to the poor, are made of none effect:
Every absurd and sottish opinion in Religion, among the sides of needless and
offensive divisions pleads Christian liberty; yea which is sad, horrid, not
only unchristian, but uncivil and unnatural practices have the same refuge: O
when that arch Libertine the Devil shall once gull men, that his hellish
suggestions have the leave and liking of Christ and his Spirit, wickedness will
be boundless: It is sad to think how slily and successfully the Devil has made
prodigious Errors and practices pass^ble, as in former times, so in the present
age: O you that are falsely so called free men and women, know whom the Son
makes free, they are free indeed: You do but dream of true freedom, who are the
slaves Non unius hominis, sed quod gravius est, lot dominorum quot vitiorum
servi, Aug. l. 4. de Civ. Dei.
not of one man, but of as many Lords as lusts: Who will believe he is free,
who goes rattling up and down in chains, with his keeper by him? Alas! carnal
Libertines conceive they are free, when they go up and down in chains of
accustomed sins, and have their Keeper with them, yea in them, (i. e.) the
Prince of this wicked world.

How not only unreasonable, but unchristian, has been the practice of loose,
not Christian Reformation: Satan can ruin by extremes: Some Protestants in
Germany, that did well in leaving Antichrist, did ill too in Apostasy from
Christ: It was the complaint of Mencelius: O sad and shameful disgrace! After
the power of the holy Gospel had set enthralled Consciences at liberty O de
decus, tostquam per sanctum Evangelium, a Papae tyrannide and potestate
libertas. Volunt homines esse liberi, nec d quequam prohiberi, quo minus
arbitratu suo vivant. Joan. Mencelius, l. de Pastore.
from the power and tyranny of the Pope, men would be free from all bonds, nor
suffer any to hinder their licentious lives. Are not these sad extremes the
practice of these times? After many amongst us are freed from humane
Conscience-yoaks, they complained of, have they not also thrown off the
Government of Christ by his Word and Spirit, and do as much boggle at Divine,
as humane impositions? as if the pure and strict Laws of Christ were equally
intolerable with the erring Laws of men. Surely Christian liberty puts an
universal confinement upon corruption, forbids every proud, wanton, erring
Judgment; is prone and free to pass a sentence upon, and crucify carnal Lusts
and Affections; dares not adventure on a vain thought and idle word, much less
monstrous opinions, and courses of old and present times. Some men so fearfully
manage their Gospel liberty, as if they might have leave to desire, think,
affect, believe, speak, Ac si evangelium esset talis doctrina, quae unicuique
potestatem faciendi and credendi quod illi placei Concedat Joan Mence. lius, l.
de Pastore.
and do whatsoever they please, under Gospel-allowance, which interpretative
Blasphemy, speaks the Gospel a profane, not an holy Gospel: But it need fear
no such reproach: Its pure rules will vindicate themselves from looseness; Its
sound words, from corrupt opinions; Its condemning holiness, shine in the
threatened damnation of all those that make its liberty an occasion to the
flesh: yet far be it from me that I should so reproach Christ's free ones, that
better improve their glorious Liberty, in these trying times, as to deny, there
are many who through preserving Grace, hold fast to the form of sound words,
and do more warily manage Christian liberty by others Libertinism, that dare
not live as very many do, that do not allow and follow, but reprove, pray
against, and weep over their looseness; a better course then they take, that
rebuke sin with sin, and while they declaim against unwary Christians use of
liberty, do fearfully abuse it themselves: But the working out Salvation with
fear and trembling, will prevent among us many Libertines. Ah dear Christians,
are you called to liberty? see to it, that you be guided by the life and laws
of Christ: Utter disproportions from these, are none of Christ's purchase nor
dispensations: Your dangers are fearful, in common liberty of Conscience to be
unconscionable, Qui liber est natura, servus est conscientia. Eusebius Hom. 3.
de Pascha.
while you may have nature, state, and Church-freedom, you may be Conscience
slaves: No thraldom like that wherein the Devil rides and drives Consciences
where he please: If he can once be master in the Conscience, the Soul, and all
else, in his own.

SECT. 11.
11. PArdoning Grace is turned into wantonness: Apprehended 11 Pardoning Grace
is turned into wantonness.
Remission has proved the corroboration of sin: How many are there that sin,
because they think they are pardoned, and though they drive on the trade again,
it is but suing a Pardon, and the corrupt Libertine has peace again? Sin and
pardon, pardon and sin, is their circle of delusion: But sin and repentance are
strangers to each other: What a dishonor is this to pardoning Grace? It is made
by these men, the Incourager and Patron of sin, as the Popes indulgences, and
large Pardons for sins past, present, and to come, out of his rich, cheating
pardon office, are to blind Papists: How do Libertines turn the pardon office
of Heaven, and throne of Grace erected by the Lord Jesus, into a Stews of
uncleanness, a free opening of Hell Gates, an open Market for any to buy the
Devils Wares? Hearken all ye that wrong pardoning mercy, to nine things. 1
Ungrateful wickedness in undervaluing the price of forgiveness


1. You, in ungrateful Wickedness, ^ndervalue, yea tread under your feet the
infinite price of forgiveness: The state of pardon, and every act of pardon,
cost the blood of the Son of God: We have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. Because this blood has bought you a
pardon, will you sell your selves to work wickedness, and disgrace your
Redeemer and redemption?

2. You abuse the riches of Gods grace: Forgiveness of sins 2 Riches of grace
are abused.
is according to the riches of his grace. Ephesians. 1. 7. The pardon of every
sin, of infinite numberless sins, is a distinct act of grace. That must
needs be rich, exceeding rich grace, that pardons innumerable sins; as that
must be an immense treasure of money that paies as many debts as there be Stars
in the Firmament; yea more than that the rich grace of God does, when he saves
a sinner: Will you now frolic in your carnal wantonness, because rich grace
will forgive you? it is as if you should cast a Kings pardoning act of grace
into the dunghill, or tread it under your feet.

3. You cross the very end of Pardon, which is the destroying, 3 The ends of
pardon are crossed. Fit nobis venia, non quae peccata foveat, sed quae ad pie
sancteque vivendi studiu^ nos revocet. Marlorat. in Mat. 9. 4 Christ's errant in
being sent into the world is crossed. 5 Gods designs what in you lies are crossed.
not the favoring of sin; the healing, not increasing the wound; a pious and
holy, not an impious and profane life. Christ never blotted out believers
sins, that his Pardons might be Indulgences to sin, but purges: He never
put any into a new state of pardon, but he made them new creatures. Sin no
more, followed the pardon of the Adulteress, Joh. 8. 11. Sin is still the
Devils and the fleshes allowance, not Jesus Christ's.

4. You contradict the very errand of Christ sent into the world; He came to
call sinners to repentance, Mat. 9. 13. not to give them leave to live in sin.

5. You deprive God, what in you lies, of another of his designs in forgiving
sinners: The planting of his holy fear in their hearts not to sin again: There
is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. 4. not that
thou may be still dishonored by the old sins. Yea what fear, a property of
true repentance? 2 Cor. 7. 11. 6 A choice Gospel blessing is denied.


6. You deny your selves a choice Gospel blessing, which is the turning of you
from your iniquities, Act. 3. 26. Joyful news to sound hearts to be rid of the
power of their tyrannizing sins. 7 A choice fruit of Christ's Intercess^o^ is
mist.


7. You miss a choice fruit of Christ's intercession, which is to give
repentance to Israel. Act. 5. 31. One of the great donatives of the Prince of
Life, installed in his heavenly glory, a choice Royal gift to fit for Heaven.

8. You divide what God has joined together, Remission and 8 That is divided
which God has joined. 9 Selfishnesse appears in thoughts, hopes, and desires.
Repentance. Act. 5. 31. Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. 1 Pet. 1. 2.

9. You are wholly selfish in your thoughts, hopes, and desires of pardon,
would have God blot out your sins to serve your own turn, not to serve him;
to sin with a peaceable spirit, not serve him with a pure conscience; That
you might not go to Hell, not that you might be fit for Heaven. O Christians!
abuse not upon these accounts pardoning grace: If you do, and die in this
wickedness, be sure these considerations, will like fire flashing about the
ears, in the other world, flame upon your consciences, as daring wantons, that
have played and sported with Gods pardons. If you say, God forbid we should
abuse pardoning grace, we are free from so great a sin; Take heed you dream
not of innocence, where the Word charge you with guilt: Surely you play the
wantons with pardoning grace, if seven things are verified of you.

1. If you sin in hope of pardon, which is wretched presumption, 1. To sin in
hope of pardon is wretched presumption.
Are you not like those ill nurtured, and impudent children, that are vile and
wicked, because they expect their fond and indulgent Parents forgiveness? or
like those Rogues, that rob and steal, because they hope for a Psalm of Mercy?
or like those tempters of God, that wound themselves because they look for
healing from a sovereign Balsome? What is this expectation of pardon, but a
confirmation in sin, and an encourgaement to do still more wickedly?

2. If after your assurance, that you are pardoned, you boldly, 2 To sin upon
hopes of pardon is to welcome the flesh.
willingly, and delightingly bid the next temptations welcome, this is in
effect as if you should say, Welcome flesh, we are your servants; welcome
devil, we are your subjects; welcome world, with all your snares, sinful
pleasures and pollutions, we will refuse none of you, we are out of gunshot,
you can do us no hurt; we had lately a pardon sent into our bosoms, and now we
may have liberty of sport and dalliance; we have a gracious God that will
forgive us, and a surety who will pay all our debts: If this be your case, do
you not clearly affront pardoning grace?

3. If your design of desiring and obtaining pardon be only 3 Such as sin in
hope of pardon, can easily bear the pollution of sin.
to have a quiet conscience, but not a good one, you can very well bear the
obstruction, the rebellion, the pollution of your sins, but only dread their
damnation. If the use you make of pardons, is only that you may not be
troubled, not that you may be holy, here is evident injury to Pardoning grace.

4. When you go on in sin, after thoughts of pardon, you 4 To sin after
thoughts of pardon, shows no love unto Jesus Christ.
have no sincere love to Jesus Christ. Many rest in hopes, yea some in
assurances, they are forgiven, who yet never heartily loved the Lord Christ.
They never had a love to labor for his name. Revel. 2. 3. to prize his
presence, Psalm. 16. 8. to stoop to his strict spiritual Government, Mich. 5. 2.
to regard his image, to be living Saints, Romans 8. 29. To have evil, Psalm. 119.
104. An eminent, yet pardoned sinner, will prove this high abuse of pardoning
grace: Much was forgiven her, for she loved much, Luke 7. 47. She could not but
answer love for love. If you that write your selves down in your quiet
consciences, absolved persons, love not the Lord Jesus, you are worse than
Publicans, they love those that love them. Mat. 5. 46. If a liberal creditor
should freely forgive all your debts, could you deny your lovelesse carriage to
him is an high abuse of his goodness? Should you hate your surety, conscience
would tell you his love should be abused. Thus do you deal with God your
creditor, Christ your surety, you disgrace the pardoning grace you think you
have from them, when you hate the Father and the Son, yea abhor the guiding
your hearts and lives by the Spirits motions.

5. If after thoughts of obtained pardon, you have no tender 5 Then pardoning
grace is abused, when there is no tender conscience, etc.
conscience, no mournings, weepings, meltings of love, of Gospel joy for
Absolution, no serious sense of the dishonorable evil, even of pardoned
sin, no watchful, fearful thoughts of the next transgression, no
sorrowful apprehension of renewed sin. When you came over a narrow bridge, and
very hardly saved your life, are not you tender of coming that way again? You
have narrowly escaped hell, do you think pardoning grace has kept you off it?
O where is your tenderness of sinning there again, where you had been almost
plunged into the bottomless pit. An heart hardened in sin, after thoughts of
granted forgiveness, is an evident wrong to this Gospel grace.

6. If after thoughts of getting a pardon you have no holy 6 Pardoning grace is
abused, when there is no shame for sin
shame for your sins: Mary Magdalen was pardoned, but in an holy shame she
stood behind her Savior, Luke 7. 38. The absolved Romans were ashamed, even of
their pardoned sins, Romans 6. 21. Ye are now, said the Apostle, ashamed of
them. Ingenious children of God are ashamed, when renewing repentance in their
Fathers presence, they look over the black roll even of pardoned sins.
Surely you that have impudent reflections on your conceited sins, yea have no
shame to keep you off from renewed and pleasing sins, do much disparage
pardoning grace.

7. If after thoughts your sins are pardoned, you cannot, you 7 Pardoning grace
is abused when you will not pardon others.
will not pardon others, not your enemies, not your friends, not your joint
professors of the same heavenly faith and hope, not your loving reprovers, not
your hearty intercessors at the throne of grace for you. Are you indeed
pardoned that cannot pardon? Pardon of sin is an eminent part of Gospel-glory.
True believers are changed into it, 2 Cor. 3. 18. When they see how much they
are forgiven, they cannot but forgive; when they see an hundred debts are
forgiven, will they strain at it to forgive one? Yea when God forgives a
thousand to one, shall they not blot out a few? I dare boldly say, Those that
take it for granted their sins are pardoned, that are implacable, that write
wrongs in marble, not in the dust, be their confidences never so high, do both
un-Christian, and un-Man themselves.

1. They strip themselves of Christianity. Its a choice, and hard rule to flesh
and blood to forgive enemies; but this is neglected, despised. How can you say,
Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, when your consciences tell
you, that you cannot forgive? you do not so much pray for, as curse your
selves; as if you should say, Lord forgive not my sins, for I will not
forgive others. Do we not read the example of Christ, that forg^ve his
enemies; He prayed for it, Father forgive them, Luke 23. 34. this difficult
piece of Christianity was in Stephen, Act. 7. 50. That choice Apostolical
precept to the Colossians, As Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Col. 3. 13.
And is it Christianity never to forgive nor forget, ever to treasure up wrath
and revenge? Certe consanguinei sumus, and ideo maximum scelus putandum est,
edisse hominem vel nocentem. Propterea Deus praecepit inimicitias per nos
nunquam faciendas, semper esse tollendas, scilicet ut eos quisint nobis
inimici, necessitudinis admonitos mitigemus. Lactant. l. 6. c. 10. Notanda est
Carnis appellatio, qua intelligit universes homines, quorum neminem intueri
possumus, quin velut in speculo carnem nostram contemplemur. Summae igitur
inhumanitatis est eos despicere, in quibus imaginem nostram agnoscere cogimur.
Calv. in loc.


2. They strip themselves of humanity: Even the Law of nature requires
forgiveness: We are all the offspring of Adam, come of one blood, Acts 17. 26.
There is a cons^nguinity in all mankind: We have kindred with all the
children of men: It is therefore the inference of Lactantius: We are all of a
blood, and therefore it is to be reputed the greatest wickedness to hate any
man, although an hurtful enemy: And upon this natural consideration, enmities
between men and men are never to be practiced, but ever to be abolished:
Inspiration of souls, forming of Bodies from the same common Heavenly Father,
speaks us Brethren: The admonition of the universal natural kindred of the
World, should allay, yea, and break the spirit of enmity into love; we little
consider it, but it is a real truth: When we take revenge of any man, we are
revenged of our selves: Every ones flesh is ours: The Prophet Isaias calls
every ones flesh our own, Isaiah 58. 7. That thou hide not thy self from thine
own flesh: Calvin's exposition is pertinent to this purpose: The word flesh is
to be noted, whereby the Prophet understands every man, of whom we can behold
none, but as in a glass we contemplate our own flesh: It is therefore a part of
highest inhumanity, to despise those in whom we are constrained to behold our
own likeness: Consider this, all ye Christians, who think your selves safe
under the security of Gods pardoning Grace: How have you abused this
Gospel-priviledge, whom neither the serious sense of Christianity, nor the
common tie of humanity can prevail with to forgive? When you cannot give, nor
forgive, reason thus; Shall I not succor and pardon mine own flesh? Shall I both
sin against grace and nature? Shall I by my uncharitable and implacable Spirit,
sin both against redemption and creation goodness? Such Meditations cannot be
too frequent to drive away irreligious and unnatural hardheartedness and
revenge out of the spirits of Christians.

SECT. 12.
12. THe Grace of imputed righteousness is turned into wantonness: 12. The
grace of imputed Righteousness is turned into wantonness.
Even the everlasting Righteousness, Daniel prophesied, which should be wrought
in the Person of the Messiah, Dan. 9. 24. has had no little Injury in the
World: This stupendous Gospel-mystery, That a lost sinner should be justified
by another righteousness, which is the holy Angels wonder, and will be
glorified Saints ravishing admiration, has been ill entreated, even of
professed Christians. And lest the charge seem too general, I shall clear it in
two particulars: The Grace of imputed Righteousness is wronged, when this is
abusively pleaded against inherent Righteousness: When inherent Righteousness
is foolishly and perilously rested on for salvation, without imputed
Righteousness: The former is a plain Libertine in wickedness, the latter does
play the wanton with Christ's goodness.

1. The grace of imputed righteousness is abused, when it is 1. Imputed
righteousness is abused, when it is pleaded against inherent righteousness.
pleaded against inherent righteousness: This is an easy and common cheat:
Corrupt flesh, and the arch Deceiver, can easily please the Fancy, and persuade
the Judgment, that the fair hand of Grace has put the rich and large Robe of
Christ's Personal Righteousness, on the leprous and unmortified Body of sin;
yea, that this holy cover is so thick, that in the absurd Antinomian, God does
not so much as see Believers sins; as if one Divine Attribute had swallowed up
another, his mercy his omniscience: Now when the loose sinner can say the Lord
is his righteousness, he believes himself in a state of Grace, as if now
nothing could endanger his immortal Soul, and he had enough for Glory: If
unregenerate nature give the deceived Transgressor the largest line and scope,
to live in sinful lusts, pleasures, and idolized sensualities, and the
Conscience begin to grumble in the free choice affections and pursuances of
sinful courses; This is ever the remedy at hand: We are all sinners: This is
our infirmity: Christ died for us: Has satisfied his Fathers justice: He is
our righteousness: Thus while they plead to Christ's legal righteousness without
them, they live without Christ's Gospel righteousness within them. It is enough
for them they are justified above, they seek not to be sanctified within, as if
there were not need as well of an Evidence to Salvation by inherent
righteousness, as of a Title to eternal life by imputed righteousness: This
great abuse of the glorious imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ, in
opposition to inherent, and the singular peril to be lost for ever, that they
are in, who are contented with a bare imputed righteousness, will appear in
seven things: As,

1. No glory will redound to God in such a contentment: Can the free gift of
Christ's perfect obedience, made over to the sinner, have the glory of praise,
when it has the infamy of this dishonor? This heavenly Robe is purposely put
on the most licentious persons, to hide them, not to amend them: Though there
be no absolute change from the state of sin, to the dominion of sanctifying
Grace: Though the state of total unregeneracy, be enmity to the holiness of
Christ and his Gospel: Sins servants, are Heavens darlings, by the favor of a
pretended imputation: Can God have the glory of bringing forth much fruit,
while there is no implantation in Jesus Christ? John 15. 5. Can God be honored
in his Sons honor, John 5. 23. and magnified in the glorifying of his name, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 12. when there is no new nature to honor him, but the predominant old
man to abuse him? A solitary imputed righteousness without, is wronged without
a righteousness within: God misseth of his honor where these are put asunder.

2. No honor will be to the Gospel: Bare appropriating Christ's obedience, will
not secure the glorious Gospel from that unrighteousness and unholiness, that
licentious wickedness would pin upon it: This part of Gospel, Christ is our
righteousness, the flesh will like; but that part of it, The Justified must be
holy, penitent, mortified, it cannot endure: It pleasingly believes the Gospel
is to them the power of God unto salvation, though it never was the power of
God unto Conversion. It is a Gospel Precept, we should walk as becomes the
Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. Can an unregenerate man so walk? Can night Birds abide the
noon Light? Can Children of darkness walk as children of light? Can they be
thought translated into the Kingdom of Christ, that are strongly kept and abide
in Satan's Kingdom? No confidences of imputed righteousness can keep a wicked
man from an infamous un-gospel life: When his corruptions break out, the Gospel
suffers: Then Satan jeers in his Instruments; These are your Professors; These
are your Gospellers, as if the holy Gospel gave liberty to sin: But nothing
less, for as it proclaims imputed righteousness, so on pain of damnation it
requires inherent.

3. No thankful return will be to Jesus Christ: The gift and benefit of
everlasting righteousness, deserves everlasting thanks: It was never yet known,
that an unsanctified person was thankful to Jesus Christ: He challenges
cordial, verbal, vital thanks, but all this is above the reach of unregeneracy:
A carnal person can complement Christ with the cheap praise of the lips, but
his soul, and all that is within him, Psalm. 103. 1. His conversation can never
bless him: He wants the Gospel-power of an holy and a righteous life.

4. No reputation will be to Faith: Indeed it has the honor to be the Grace
that lays hold on Christ's perfect Righteousness; but this is not its only
office, It sanctifies as well as justifies, Acts 26. 18. Romans 5. 1. It purifies
as well as pacifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. Romans 5. 1. The Just lives by it, as
well religiously, Hab. 2. 4. as safely and peaceably, Mark 5. 34. and is not
only freed by it from the guilt but the filth of sin: The name of Faith
divided from holiness, has this aspersion and dis-reputation, to be styled a
vain faith, a dead faith, Jam. 2. 20. a faith like the Devils faith, Jam. 2. 19.

5. No conviction will be to unbelievers: Can the Christ rejecting World, be
drawn to own and love such pretenders to interest in his perfect righteousness,
who live unrighteously: They are apt to think the happiness of this imputation
is but a fancy and a fable, that produces not shining and glorious fruits:
When they that for Christ's sake stand righteous in Gods account, arise and
shine, and the glory of Gods holiness is seen upon them; even wicked men will
enquire after Christ, and be constrained to think well of that Master, whose
name is so sanctified and illustrious in his servants.

6. No communion will be with the holy God: Were it possible an ungodly Man
should be clothed with Christ's righteousness, yet if he have not Christ's
Spirit, Christ's Image, God and such a one could have no fellowship: Communion
requires likeness: Contrary natures can have no converse: Two cannot walk
together except they be agreed: How can a wicked person, and the pure God walk
together?

7. No capacity nor ability of new obedience: Suppose a Rebel against Christ's
Crown and Government were justified, yet if he were not sanctified, he could
not do the will of God, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Till sanctifying Grace subdue the natural
rebellion of the heart, Gods commands will be laid aside; as if a Traitors
heart be changed, he will be subject to his Prince; if unreformed, he will
still rebel.

2. The Grace of imputed righteousness is abused; When 2 Imputed righteousness
is abused, when inherent righteousness is rested on for salvation, without
imputed righteousness.
inherent righteousness is rested on for salvation, without imputed
righteousness. This is one of Satan's wiles to ruin souls: If there be
appearing strictness in the ways of holiness, and godliness be deemed a
sufficiency for eternal life, so that Christ's perfect righteousness be cast out
of the Saint-like Professors Creed, and the great weight of the souls
confidence of happiness, laid on the sandy foundation of imperfect obedience,
then the great title to eternal life, Imputed righteousness, is shouldred out
and abused. The largest tale of duties, and sharpest sufferings of this life,
cannot make up a complete righteousness. When personal, deficicient
performances, will wantonly get up into the throne, and justle out the absolute
obedience of Christ: This setting up of a weak righteousness within, above
Christ's perfect one without, will to the hazard of the guilty sinners
perishing, fail in seven things.

1. There will be no pacification of an angry God: No gracious hearts nor godly
lives atone God. Christ's Sacrifice only was Propitiatory: We joy in the
Atonement, said the Apostle, Romans 5. 11. but by Christ's death. The highest
measures of Believers doings or sufferings, cannot turn away Gods wrath for the
least sin: It was Jobs Faith, when a penitent sinner sees his righteousness,
he sees his atonement, Job 33. 23, 24. That is only by Christ, not a
Believer: His own Prayers, Tears, Alms, Duties, do not pacify God, but the
righteousness of Christ. It is a common practical error, we will be weeping and
doing to turn away Gods avenging displeasure: For though these duties are means
appointed by God, yet we must look through them unto Jesus Christ.

2. There will be no satisfaction of Gods Justice: Sin has done infinite
wrong: Justice would have an infinite reparation: Now it is impossible that
finite doings and sufferings can make infinite satisfaction: A rest then in
failing inherent holiness, at once leaves infinite Justice unsatisfied, and
souls unsaved, Who of the best can tell that he has done and suffered enough
to make God amends for his sins, yea for the least sin?

3. There will be no proportion to the rigid Laws requiries; It will not abate
one Law nor Circumstance of Duty: The Law is exceeding broad. The eminentest of
Saints that have studied the Law, and their own hearts and lives, could never
bring before God an exact obedience parallel to command: Had not Christ
perfectly fulfilled the Law, the exactest Christians could have no grounded
hope of Heaven. The Law would say even to a Paul, Here is much wanting; He
durst not expect Justification from the unparalleled services, sufferings, and
success of his Apostleship; I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified. 1 Cor. 4. 4. The Lord Christ his personal duty is believers perfect
righteousness, not their own sanctification.

4. There will be no escaping the curse of the Law: Christ crucified was made a
curse for his people. Galat. 3. 13. that they might not be accursed. Their
services and penalties are no deliverances from Gods curse, which unremoved
will flame in everlasting burnings. All believers have infinite reason to say,
The Lord Jesus, not their own Graces, has delivered them from the wrath to
come.

5. There will be no refuge against conscience storms, in a 1 These. 1. 10.
trusted-in righteousness of graces. Bare inherent holiness, failing and
polluted, with corrupt mixtures, cannot secure a tempted soul by the Laws
arrests, the accusing conscience, and Satan's indictments. This subtle and
potent pleader will drive assaulted Christians from the weak holds of their
petty performances, yea bring them to the brink of despair, until they run to
the Cross of Christ, and get within the invincible and royal Fort, Christ's
imputed Righteousness: This is the Saints refuge against their sharpest
temptations, and conscience-stormes. Heb. 9. 12, 14. and 10. 2.

6. There will not be a sufficient Argument, utterly to strip believers from
all glorying in themselves about a perfect Righteousness: Would our own bare
obedience be a current title to glory, believers might wantonly applaud
themselves, and dance about their high duties, as the Israelites about their
Golden Idol, they might commend themselves, and boast in heart, for the glory
of their holiness, their Prayers, Tears, Alms, Mortification, as they are too
apt to do. But when they know and believe the Lord 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Christ is made Righteousness unto them, there was not so much as a good
thought either in them, or from them contributed, to the making of this
glorious robe imputed righteousness; now they are denied all glorying in
themselves. As to their perfect legal obedience, they only glory in Jesus
Christ: He is of God made our righteousness, that according as it is written,
he that gloryeth let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 2. 30, 31.

7. There will be no sure title to eternal life. The perfect and infinite
righteousness of the God-man Jesus Christ, is an equivalent intitling purchase,
to the Gospels infinite reward of the next life. As God is just and a justifier
of believers, so he is just and will be their glorifier, Romans 3. 26. 2 Timothy 4.
8.

Let these things be a warning to all those that would secure their hopes,
confidences, and joys of salvation, from miscarrying, to study that
righteousness, which will fully and equally answer the demands of infinite
justice, and as to a justified estate from the guilt of sin, to account their
imperfect obedience, polluted, defective, yea as dung, compared with the
complere personal righteousness of Jesus Christ: But alas! this error is too
common, yea too much an error in real Christians, very ignorant of the mystery
of an imputed Righteousness, to lay either the whole, or the greatest weight
on a weak foundation. The Philosophers spoke much of virtue, but their external
shining virtues were headless virtues, because they were without the knowledge
and worship of the true God; so were it possible that an unjustified person
should eminently shine in all the graces of the Spirit, and be voted the
nonesuch of the Age in contempt of the world, mortification, and new
obedience; these graces would be headless graces: Christ would profit him
nothing in his choicest doings and sufferings, while his active and passive
obedience is nor a sinners infinite, complete, and everlasting righteousness.

SECT. 13.
13. GLoryfying grace in the hopes and confidences thereof is 13 Gloryfying
grace is turned into Wantonness.
turned into wantonness. It is called the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and
eternal life is the gift of God. Romans 6. 23. The crown of Glory is a crown of
Free Grace, adorned with that most orient Pearl, the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, and the Jewels of the graces of the Spirit, in their most perfect
splendor and exercise, that stand with the full fruition of God. It is Grace
that rewards Grace with Glory: It is Grace that begins, increases, and
consummates Grace: Now many hope for gloryfying grace, who almost but hope for
heaven? Who that have most just cause to fear, yet are afraid in the serious
and sad dwelling thoughts of their condition, they are in eminent danger of
Hell? Instead of the blessed hope, or hope of blessedness, the regular and
warrantable expectation of glorifying grace, there is a common hope and a
cursed hope of Satan's suggestion, and corruptions entertainment, though men
continue in their sins they shall have heaven at length. This hope never
purifyed the heart and life, 1 John 3. 3. but will prove to them that trust in
it, like the thin and weak webb to the spider, be swept away with the besom of
destruction: An evil conscience Pessima spei contubernalis mala conscientia.
Granat.
is the most dangerous companion of Hope. Because many hope to be saved in the
way of ruin, their diseases become incurable, like foolish patients that
conclude health from that which increases their disease, and hastneth their
death. Carnal hopes might have been cured by conditional despair, that ever
souls should be saved, while false hopes are rested in. An hope of life in the
paths of death, is destruction to the soul. A despair of ever getting good by
such an hope, might make men look out for better hopes, and more saving
securities. There are doubtless many that will in the other world curse their
irrational, unscripturall, and groundless hopes of Heaven. A Prince hopes to
wear his Fathers Crown, How does he abuse his hopes by living like a scullion,
and consorting with beggars: Dishonorable employments are below Royal state.
Many hope to wear the white robes of glory, Rev. 3. 4, 5. and yet embrace
dunghill lusts and courses, live dishonourably and abusively under their high
expectations. These resemble the Lapwing (accounted an Emblem of infelicity)
which feeds on dung, though it wears a Coronet on its head. In the common
abused hope of glory, Hope is put out of office; the springs of Hope are not
regarded; the work of hope is not done; the properties of Hope are not to be
found.

1. Hope is put out of office.

It has the office of a settling Anchor in heaven, in tempestuous and
troublesome times. But the vulgar hope, though it pretend heaven for its hold,
casts Anchor only among the creatures of which is worse, among the Devils,
staying and strengthening it self in their counsels and lusts.

It has the office of a saving refuge, against Afflictions, Desertions,
Temptations, Corruptions, Heb. 6. 18. The carnal hope of glory has no City of
Refuge but below, viz. Wits, Riches, Friends, Honors, etc.

It has the office of purging water, which makes inside and Job 31. 24. 1 John
3. 3.
outside clean: The false hope of heaven, wallows Swine-like in the filthiness
of flesh and spirit, lays in the mire of wickedness, but rises not out.

It has the office of a diligent servant; It looks for an heavenly reward, and
it serves God day and night, Act. 26. 6, 7. But the bare fancy of the hope of
glory, is content to serve the world, flesh, and devil. It looks for an
heavenly harvest, and yet follows Satan's Plow, and sows to the flesh. Gal. 6.
8.

It has the office of a comforting cordial: Good hope through Grace is the
hearts comforter: But the feigned hope of glory gives no more real comfort than
the dream of a cordial does a sleeping or dying man. Carnal hopes never drinks
out of the cup of heavenly consolations; no draughts really please them but of
earthly solaces. Thus do unregenerate men, what ever they think, put the hope
of glory out of office; so in the common abused hope of glory.

2. The springs of hope are not regarded.

The Free grace of God is a Spring of Hope. Good hope through Grace, 2 These. 2.
16. But loose spirits are as much strangers to the glory, purity, and power of
Free grace, as true Hope. They have not good hope through grace, but ill hope,
through presumption. The holy Ghost is a spring of hope, that ye may abound in
hope by the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. But un-Gospel wantons have their hopes
from the evil spirits suggestion, not the good spirits inspiration.

The perfect righteousness of Christ is a spring of hope: The hope of
righteousness, Gal. 5. 5. But the dreamers of Heavenly hopes, take the rise of
their high hopes from their opinionative righteousness, their good meanings,
good works, as they think, and external either moralities outward, or religious
exercises, or both.

Justifying Faith is a Spring of hope. Romans 5. 1, 2. The hope of glory grows
out of it. But the vain barren hope of Glory issues from self-sufficiencie. As
it comes not from a justified estate, so neither does it show any evidence of
sanctifying Grace.

The Promise is a Spring of Hope. The Hope of the Promise, Act. 26. 6. but
lying hope of glory never sprang from any Gospel-promise. For the promises have
a cleansing virtue. 2 Cor. 7. 1. The hope of the wicked has none.

The Love of God shed abroad in the heart, is a spring of Hope: It makes not
ashamed from the sweet sense of divine love, Romans 5. 5. But a sensual, brutish
hope of glory never felt the sweet pleasures of Gods love. They that are
acquainted with the Paradise delights of it, are not wont to run a whoring
after creature sportings, much less after sinful joys. The glorious
feastings of the delicious, eternal, distinguishing Love of God in renewed
souls, have a mortifying virtue of pleasing vanities below.

Gracious Experience is a Spring of Hope. Experience works Hope. Romans 5. 4.
The Experience of Regenerating Grace, of those sweet whispers, Thy person is
accepted, Fear not, I am thy God, Christ is made to thee Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, of the mighty awe of Gods
presence in the soul, of hating vain thoughts, of cleansing from secret sins,
of sealing of promises, of victory over corruption, and much more, work renewed
hopes of glory, that God will both perfect and reward his own work. The filthy
streams of a dissolute hope of heaven, that are strangers to these pure
springs, betray their impure originalls. The unclean spirit, the filthy heart,
the worlds pollutions, are the common abused Hope of Glory.

3. The Work of Hope is not done.

The work of Hope is to work patient and diligent continuance in well-doing: We
desire you to show diligence to the full of assurance of hope unto the end,
Heb. 6. 11. But Hypocrites most heavenly hopes are both impotent and transient,
they neither communicate strength, nor will they hold out; they have short
breath, lame legs, and withered hands; and are a mere vapor, a fancy, and
work no diligence, nor perseverance in the ways of Godlyness.

True Hope will work the soul out of the vanities, dependancies, inordinate
rejoycings of earthly Hope. Job had the hope of glory before his eyes; hence he
was assured, that he should see his Redeemer; this swallowed up earthly hopes;
If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold thou art my
confidence. If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, etc. Job 31. 24, 25. But
the dissembled Hopes of Glory never dead the heart to the vain trusts and
joys of earthly Hopes, when these are gone, those have no estate in the other
world.

It is the work of Hope to work up the soul to the infinite Riches, Pleasures,
and Honors that are above: The Hope that is laid up for you in heaven, Col. 1.
5. But the adulterate hopes of heaven show their falsenesse. Real worldlings
hopes under Gospel pretensions, are fastened only to perishing things, and must
perish like themselves.

It is the work of Hope to succor the hearts of fainting believers, to
strengthen the feeble knees, as a good daughter helps a sickly mother: When
Faith, the Mother Grace, is ready to faint, Hope the daughter lends it a
supporting hand, and says, hold out Faith. There is an expected end of
corruptions and afflictions: Look Faith, O look within the heavenly vayl, even
Holy of Holyes. Conflicts are sharp, O Faith see thy Crowns: Wants are many, O
Faith see thy Supplies. The race of obedience is tiresome, O Faith see thy
Prize: Now there is sowing in tears, O Faith see thy joys: The sweet
countenance of God is clouded, O Faith see his eternal smiles: Believers are
tossed with the waves of doubtings, despondencies, sometimes despair, O Faith
see thine unshaken assurance, and everlasting rest. But the easy,
false-hearted hopes, of notional Christians, can never succor their fainting
Faiths. At best their Faith was but fancy, their confidence presumptuous; and
when their false faiths expire, their groundless hopes are gone too. Ah
miserable selfdeceivers, that wrong the Faith, and Hope of Glory, In the common
abused hopes of Glory.

4. The Properties of Hope are not to be found.

The Hope of Glory is a regenerated Hope. Begotten to a lively Hope. 1 Pet. 1.
3. It is one of the new births graces: The Hope of Unregeneracie then is a
spurious hope. New hopes never grow out of the old soil. The Hope of Glory is
an high born grace, its pedigree is abused, when a vile, sensual, wicked life,
a bastard issue is laid at its doors.

The Hope of Glory is an Active Hope. High hopes oil the wheels of motion.
Hopes of great Matches, Pardons, Liberty, sweetest earthly Pleasures, Riches,
Crowns, shake off sluggishness. A real Christian has the highest hopes, and
this makes him go, yea run the ways of Gods Commandments. Too many abuse the
hopes of glory: They are negligent, lazy, indifferent, yea opposers in the
methods and unpleasing services of Gospel Hope. What do most that hope for
Heaven do to get it? Where are their wrestlings at the Throne of Grace? Where
their self-denyals? Where their Fightings in Spiritual Arms against their
corruptions? Where are their Conquests? Where their labors of Love? Where
their zealous pursuances of their own, and others salvation? Where the diligent
improving of their general and particular calling for the glory of God? Where
their working out their salvation with fear and trembling? Where their giving
all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure? Where is their making
Religion their business to be found? Most have the hopes of heaven, but they
are drowsy, idle, have no power of godlyness. These in an especial manner are
the Abusers of true Hope.

The Hope of Glory is a Rejoicing Hope: We rejoice in the Hope of Glory, Romans
5. 2. When the Perspective of Faith has fetched in the far distant blessed
objects of Eternity, has realized, and substantialized them to the soul, so
that Faith says to Hope, I see the glory of Heaven, I see the infinite rewards
of sound Christians, I see the infinite pleasures, and satisfactions, and
ravishing joys of those blessed Citizens above: Then says Hope, I look for
them, I expect them with unspeakable joy, I wait for their Revelations and
Fruitions. A real Christian will not part with the joys of his Hopes for a
thousand worlds. He is incomparably richer in hopes than worldlings are in
hand; but a delusive hope of glory continually joined with joyous, solitary,
worldly hopes, is a stranger to the joys of heavenly hopes. The Hypocrite has
the fancy, but never the reallitie of these hopes. The joys of these do not in
him out-joy the joys of earthly hopes, they do not lighten and sweeten the
loss of worldly expectations: Experience will prove it of unsound pretenders
to their rejoicing hopes of Glory. That if their hopes and the joy of their
hopes below are gone, they have no rejoicing hopes above.

The hope of Glory is a Lust denying hope. The grace of God teaches us the
denial of worldly lusts, looking for that blessed hope. 11. 12, 13. As
pilgrims and strangers here (and therefore looking for your heavenly country)
abstain from fleshly lusts. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Ye shall appear with Christ in glory:
Mortify therefore your fleshly lusts, fornication, uncleanness, covetousness,
your inordinate affections, the root of all evil concupiscence. Col. 3. 4, 5.
They then that obey sin in the lusts thereof, Romans 6. 12. that walk after their
own lusts, their ungodly lusts, as these wantons in Jude did. Epist. Jud. v.
16, 18. and live and die in them, and yet hope for heaven, they clearly
contradict Scripture, that the servants of carnal lusts shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. That the wicked shall be turned into hell, Psalm.
9. That the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience, Col. 3. 6. That
Libertines, that count it pleasure to riot in the day time of Gospel light, The
Churches spots and blemishes, not jewels, sporting themselves with their own
deceivings, in their fearelesse feastings, adulterous infectious examples,
covetous, impenitent, shall perish in their corruption, and receive the reward
of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13, 14. That what a man sows, that shall he
reap, if to fleshly lusts, an harvest of eternal torments; if to the spirit, a
rich crop of eternal life. Gal. 6. 7, 8. All these eternal Truths that divine
Justice will infallibly make good, Lust-pleasers, not denyers, nourishers, not
crucifiers, do blot out by their unchanged hearts, dissolute lives, and real
unbelief. The slaves of their absurd, unreasonable, ungodly lusts, do in
effect and interpretation speak these blasphemies, God is an holy and righteous
God, and he will reward our unrighteousness and unholynesse with eternal life.
When we play the wantons with our lusts, we think God and our selves alike:
Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm. 50. 21.
That God has not so pure a nature, and pure eyes. Hab. 1. 13. but when he
sees sin, he likes it well enough, he delights in wickedness: Ye say every one
that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them, or
where is the God of judgment? Mal. 2. 17. That the Word of God is false, that
godliness is true gain, that the righteous only go into eternal life, that
there is danger in sin, that the wanton abuses of Gods grace perish in their
corruption, that the blackness of darkness for ever is reserved for them: Thus
does Lust-favouring and pampering Hope, abuse the Hope of Glory.

The Hope of Glory is a well living Hope. The saving grace of God teaches us
to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for the
blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2. 12, 13. I have hope toward God, that there shall be
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and the unjust, and herein do I
exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men. Act. 24. 15, 16. He that hopes for the full sum, is glad of the
assuring earnest; he that would have the full harvest, is pleased with the
first fruits. The hope of glory that rejoices to think of the eternal sum
and harvest of holiness, is careful to get, and joyful to obtain the earnest
and first fruits of the Spirit of grace. But the common, absurd, foolish hope
of glory, expects an heavenly, eternal sum, when it has no earnest here;
looks for an eternal harvest, when the first fruits are neglected and despised;
it pleasingly dreams to live happily with God in glory, when it never lived
holily with God in grace.

The hope of Glory is an Affliction-enduring, and sanctifying Hope. For this
Hope the Apostle Paul was called in question, Act. 23. 6. Judged, Act. 26. 6.
Accused, v. 7. Imprisoned, chained, Act. 28. 20. suffered any persecution with
patience, contentment and joy: For the hope of the Resurrection, he took
pleasure in his infirmities. As the hope of Riches makes the Merchant Cum est
propositum cum host certamen, esuriendum, sitiendum, vigilandum,
periclitandum, ut omnibus pacis, and victoriae bonis per frui possis ^prius
laborandum ut sis postmodum in otio. Lact. l. 6. c. 4.
cross the Seas at any hazard, even to the utmost Indies, and of victory,
which makes the Soldier endure, hunger, cold, watching, blows, and wounds.
It Is hope of gain makes the industrious Tradesman to be up early, encounter
all Highway storms. It Is hope of a good crop makes the painful Husbandman to
endure Winters cold, and Summers heat. It Is hopes of Crowns which makes the
ambitious run the hazard of losing their liberties and lives, and undoing their
families, to hew out their way to Sovereignty by bloody deaths, that stare them
in the faces: So the heavenly expectations of immortal Riches, Victories,
Pleasures, Crowns, are Affliction-enduring hopes: But the Imaginary hopes of
Glory, are cowardly, effeminate, soft, lascivious, and are founded in policy,
not in piety; measured by the interests of the body, not the soul, are pleased
with the fair, not the foul weather in heavens way. They engage in the
Christian Warfare no further th^n the flesh may be pleased, a safe retreat to
the world may be obtained; and this counterfeit hope in trying hardships, is
ever offended in Christ, Mat. 13. 57. One hard saying or another, and
unpleasing religious severities, make Christianity a scandal: The voluptuous
professor turns from the power of it, and in time of temptation falls away.

CHAP. IV. Showing when a Sinner turns the Grace of God into wantonness.
THis may be known in all the thirteen Sections of the foregoing Chapter: But
because the fullest discovery that can be, to strip naked this hideous Monster,
Abuse of Grace, next to the unpardonable sin, the worst of sins will all be
little enough: I shall therefore more fully show, when a sinner may be
concluded, even in the Judgment of his own enlightened Conscience, to turn the
Grace of God into wantonness.

This Scarlet Transgressor does so, when he carries wickedly in reference to
Sin, God, Christ, the Law, Gospel, and the Creatures.

SECT. 1.
IN reference unto sin, there is wantonizing against Grace, in 1. The grace of
God is turned into wantonness, in reference to sin Quasi Deus testatur de
gratia sua, ut non solliciti simus de cavenda ipsius offensa, Piscator. (...).
four things.

1. When the heart is careless of sin, does not cast about which way to avoid
it; but if the coat of Profession be stained with it, if the heart be a sink of
uncleanness, if the hands be defiled, the daring sinner makes no matter of it;
as if God in testifying his Grace, should give liberty to cast off all care of
avoiding offense: The Apostle has recorded other things, of the truly
Christian repenting Corinthians, mentioning their carefulness to admiration:
Behold what carefulness your godly sorrow has wrought in you? 2 Cor. 7. 11.
What sollitude and diligence not to fall into the old sin? But it may be said
of many l^s^ivious spirits, Behold, they dwell carelessly, as the men of Laish
did. Temptations, like the children of Dan, may invade, plunder, and spoil
them, Judge. 18. They care not for their precious souls, though they perish: But
the Lord will deal with them, as he said he would with Magog, send a fire among
them that dwell carelessly in the Isles, Ezekiel. 39. 6. The ease of these simple
ones will slay them, Prove. 1. 32. Though they are careful to secure their
fleshly, worldly interest, and wholly careless of the main concernments of the
glory of God, their own salvation, and the honor of Gospel Grace: God will be
careful to exalt his own Name, in avenging the dishonors of his Grace.

SECT. 2.
2. WHen the heart is fearless of sin, there is a loose Libertine: 2. Grace is
turned into wantonness, when the heart is fearless of sin. ubi timor non est,
ibi dissolutio vitae est. Isidorus.
It is one of the Characters of these wantons in the Text, They fed themselves
without fear, Jude ep. v. 12. No wonder they were disolute, when fearless
Spirits: Job was afraid, that when the goodness of God had provided Feasts for
his children, the Devil should be paid the shot; Lest they should sin, and
curse God in their hearts, Job. 1. 5. Therefore he sent and sanctified them,
and offered up sacrifice for them, that in the name of Christ his Redeemer,
their sins might be expiated and forgiven them: But fearless Sensualists, eat
and drink, and sin with and against the Creatures, but fear no hurt; yea, What
fear was said of the repenting Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 11. What fearlesness may
be said of loose persons? They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, 2
Pet. 2. 10. to set their mouths against Heaven: They speak wickedly and
loftily, not tremblingly concerning oppression, Psalm. 73. 8. They fear not to
sin in lawful things, never regulating their use by expediency, and the grace
of Temperance, and so wantonly dance on the pits brink; fall from lawful
allowances, to unlawful things: They fear not the reckoning day, like loose
Debtors, while they spend on the stock of their Creditors Estate, and patience:
Well were it for these, if awakened out of the deadly Lethargy of this carnal
Security, they would hearken Time vel hoc ipsum quod te invenis non timentem.
to the counsel one gives, Fear for this reason, because you have found the
want of fear.

SECT. 3.
3. WHen the heart is sorrowless for sin; As an offense to 3. Grace is turned
into wantonness, when the heart is sorrowless for sin.
God, an unkindness to Christ, a defilement to the Spirit an obstruction to
fellowship with the holy God; and upon Gospel considerations of spiritual
Ingenuity, and love to the Lord, has not a broken heart, and a contrite
melting Spirit, in close Soliloquy with God by meditation and supplication; but
is as hard as an Adamant, without all mournings and relentings, upon the
forecited grounds; Here is clear abusing of Gods Grace: It was never offered to
harden, but soften the heart, as it did the hearts of Peter, Matthew. 26. 75.
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. 38. and humble Paul, Romans 7. 24, 25. O Lord, are not
thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved,
Jer. 5. 3. God strikes wicked, rocky hearts, with Afflictions, Reproofs,
^errors, smitings of the Conscience, fears of Hell; but their sorrows are not
to be discerned, but hypocritical, or slavish and brutish, which vanish when
the smart is off. Tantum sunt brutae Lamentationes. Calv. in Jer. 5.
These are strangers to godly sorrow, which works out the loveliking delight,
the reign of sin: While Gods mourners are in secret, and looking over their
sins with heavy hearts and weeping eyes. They are wantonly leaping and
triumphing in the hellish mirth of sporting in sin, Prove. 10. 23. Taking
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. It is a clear evidence, that they
who never had true Gospel mourning for sin, or have forsaken Gentes qui dolere
desierint, dediderunt se lasciviae. Pet. Martyr. 4. Grace is abused, when the
heart is powerless over sin. (...). Oecumenius. Disruptis his vinculis, praed^
sua spoliatus. Daven. in Colos.
the exercise of it, or think it needless, or scoff at it (as if there were no
Scriptures: Blessed are they that mourn: Godly sorrow works repentance: A
broken heart, O God, thou will not despise;) are wanton abusers both of the
time and Grace of Repentance.

SECT. 4.
4. WHen the heart is powerless over sin, there is a licentious abuse of Grace:
Surely Grace is victorious, and will in time, in the conscientious and
spiritual use of means, rout the powers of Hell. Satan, before the rescue of
Grace comes, binds his Captives fast in the chains of their own sins; But,
when they are broken, he has lost his prey; and the tyrannizing Prince of the
world, John 14. 30. That has the power of binding; lost sinners, under the
power of the spiritual death, and guilt of eternal, Heb. 2. is cast out, in the
merits and power of infinite redemption, John 12. 31, 32. Grace is not a
shadowy, but real war, though it be often worsted, yet it rallies again, and by
the renewed Auxiliary Forces of Divine power, it beats down strong corruptions
before it. What injury is it to Grace, to contemplate, but never practice
Mortification; to profess the Christian warfare, but never to fight; or in
undue arms, or without skill to put on Gods Armor, or to sleep in them, or to
lay them by, or to run to the enemy, and so to do no execution on carnal Lusts
and Affections? What is this, but to disparage, and endeavor, what in us lies,
to degrade Divine Power, from the glory of its victorious ability, as if the
contracted corruption from the first Adam, could still be too hard for the
Grace of the second? How does a powerless profession over sin, proclaim it self
a stranger to the mighty Arm of the Prince of Grace, never feeling the power of
these truths: Christ brings forth judgment unto victory, Matthew. 12. 20.
Greater is he that is in victorious Believers, than he that is in the world, 1 John 4. 4. Are there not many among us that have notions, fancies, expressions
of Grace, yea, infused, gracious, heavenly motions, speaking in them: But do
they leave these sins and do these duties, in the fear of God? How can they
that are false to their own Convictions, Confessions, and the Holy Ghosts
Inspirations? What mocking of God is there in unmortifying profession, as is
too legibly to be read in the lives of men? Does not all the Grace of vain,
idle opinionative Christians, that seems to be expressed in Prayer ex tempore,
or of set forms; in appearing to be taken, with gracious examples, Sermons,
Chapters, good Books, and Conference, evacuate into lazy Speculation, and
powerless profession? In holy duties of worship, there seems to be Evangelical
Grace; but in the frame of the heart and course of life, in dealings with men
in Callings, Conditions, Relations; with many there is no being of Grace, and
with the gracious, no constant, sufficient, convincing exercise of Grace, a few
excepted, that make Religion their business. What a disgrace is put upon the
grace of God? What temptation to blaspheming Sons of Belial, that the Grace of
God men speak of, is a Fable, a Dream, a Fancy, no Reality? Such do-nothings,
or nothing to purpose, as beat the air in their cold profess^ons, and dead
convictions of Gods grace, may bl^sh and be ashamed of their wanton spirits and
conversation, when they read these Scriptures: From the day the grace of God
was known in truth by Deus ex peccatorum sordibus, ad frugem meliorem ^ecare
dignatur. Gualther. de Matthaeo.
the believing Colossians, they brought forth fruit, Col. 1. 6. We beseech you
receive not the Grace of God in vain, by offensive conversation to God and men,
unrepented of. 1 Cor. 6. 1, 3. The Gentiles had their understandings darkened,
alienated from the life of God, past feeling, given over to lasciviousness,
working all uncleanness with greediness, but you have not so learned Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. The grace of God, O holy Ephesians, has overpowered your
hearts to an abhorring, and declining these sins, and to walk in the blessed
paths of holiness. Grace acting to purpose in regenerate Zacheus, put him upon
liberal contribution to the poor, and honest restitution of ill gotten estate.
Luke 19. 8. When the Gospel came to the Thessalonians, not only in word, but
in power, it enabled them to turn from idols (in the zealous worship and
preservation whereof, Idolaters are usually mad. Jer. 50. 38.) to serve Idolis
renunciaveritis, vosque in servitiu^ Dei addixeritis. Diksonus. Magices libros
intelligimus. Gualt. in loc.
the living and true God. 1 These. 1. 5, 9. when the same word of grace took
possession of the hearts of them that used curious and Magical Arts, they
brought their books together, and burnt them before all men, though they were
worth fifty thousand pieces of silver. Act. 19. 19. O shame of the common
powerless Christian profession of the Age! The Gospel of grace, by the mighty
breathing of the Spirit came near the hearts of Magicians, made them
Christians, and open penitents, even to a public sacrificing of their wicked
Propriori numinis afflatu tacti, libros public, congestos exurunt.
books to the flames; but a thousand Sermons of Gospel grace may reach the
ear, the fancy, the understanding of professed Christians, but never change
the heart to a powerful reformation. Oh that bare Illuminists and verbalists in
Religion, that live as if the essentials thereof were only notions, and words
would consider three things.

1. The Kingdom of God stands not in word but power. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Its real
subjects are as well diligent doers, as good speakers: Lay more^ stresse on
hearts and lives than lips, had rather be than seem to be penitents, rather run
in the way of Gods Commandments, than talk of them. A groundless intitling to
Christ Lord, Lord, will speak no faithful Subjects of Christ at the great day,
why should it now? The kingdom of God is righteousness Romans 14. 17. not only
imputed, but inherent, not only of Justification but Sanctification. In the
Kingdom of grace, all saved Professors have holy hearts and good lives. Satan's
subjects, though they take Christ's Press-mony in Baptism, use the badges of
his Government, yet never did set one foot into Christ's kingdom.

2. Such as call Christ their Lord and Savior, yea often bind their sayings by
these words, as they hope to be saved, when they neither rightly understand
salvation, nor true hope; yea all Libertines of stricter profession, that have
carnal, loose, epicurean hearts, and lives, they are no better than the
enemies of Jesus Christ, and self-destroyers. The compassionate Apostle could
not but speak of these with tears; They are the enemies of the Cross of
Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Let them look over this Text, and weep, who either in
larger professions, or stricter, but easy religious formalities, are
effeminate, delicate, flesh-pleaser, belly-students, and gloriously
back-adorners, money-idolaters, almost in nothing denying themselves in their
sensualities, they are enemies to the cross of Christ. Did they Epicurei jur^
dicuntur hosts Christi, videntur enim velle regnum suum, illis restituere,
quod Christus ^n cruce spoliavit. Daven. in Colos.
never read, Our Old man was crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6. That as
corruption was crucified meritoriously on the cross, so it should be crucified
efficaciously in the heart? was it not the great design of Christ crucified,
that the body of sin should die? are not these enemies to his cross, that
pamper it, and keep it alive? Besides are not they enemies to Christ's cross,
who though they read and cannot deny it that Christ triumphed openly in his
bloody passion over his enemies, a World, b Flesh, and c Devil, a Joh. 16. 33.
b Romans 6. 6. c Col. 2. 15. yet by their graceless hearts, and dissolute lives,
like Traitors to their professed Lord, restore to his enemies what in them
lies, their vanquished Kingdom, which the Lord Christ died for to destroy in
the Cross.

3. From an holy profession, powerless over corruption, the Lord Christ is
like to have no followers in the world. Primitive Christians won repute to
Christ and his Gospel, not by their shadowy forms, but substantial powers of
Godliness. The Apostle Peter exhorted Christian Wives, so powerfully to adorn
their Profession, that their lives, as really converting Sermons might win
their idolatrous Husbands to Jesus Christ and his Truth. 1 Pet. 3. 1. when
powerless good speeches do no good, the practical power of godliness would
make converts. When heathens found the christians not only holy lives, but
miraculous power of casting Daemonibus ejectis omnes quiresanali fuerunt,
adhaeserunt religioni cujus potentiam senserint Justitia. De Lact. l. 5. c. 23
Devils out of their bodies, they stuck close to that Religion, whose power
they felt. Were the lives of christians now adays shining and convincing, did
the miraculous power of casting Devils out of souls appear, not only the
delivered themselves, but profane observers would magnify and keep close to
that religious profession, whose glorious victorious power is admirably
discerned.

SECT. 5.
2. THe grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the The grace of God is
turned into wantonness, when the sinner carries loosly as to God.
sinner carries loosely as to God, he does so in four things.

1. When Pretenders to Gods grace, do not retain the light of God shining in
their minds, so that truths, that would be saving and sanctifying, are
imprisoned in unrighteousness, and God is not with liking and love in all
their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. He is known, but not glorified as God, Romans 1. 21.
By the sin as well of wanton christians as wanton heathens, Gods grace is
injured. Impure hearts, and evil lives are sad contradictions to divine
informations: Careless servants mind not their Masters pleasure, not
careless Christians the pleasure of God.

2. When the commands of God are cast behind the back, the grace of God is
abused. As his Laws are sweetly qualified in Christ, they are all Acts of
Grace. God favors us in requiring obedience of us on Gospel terms: His Laws
are known to Jacob, and his Statutes to Israel, he has not dealt so with any
Nation, Psalm, 147. 20. To the Israelites pertained the giving of the Law, Romans
9. 4. Now to cast his gracious pleasure behind the back, is such an
indignity, as to cast away a Princes gracious Proclamation, wherein his
pleasure is sweetened with many acts of grace. God needs not our obedience, we
need his commands, and in their obediential service there is not only work but
wages. The sweet peace and comfort of sincere gospel duty pays for its
performance. In conscionable and spiritual obedience, as God is glorified, so
there is great reward, Isa. 49. 4. Psalm. 19. 11. What wrong do they to the
grace of God, and their own souls, who under the favor of Grace neglect that
holy compliance with the Divine Will, which is rewarded with present purity and
delight, 1 Pet. 1. 22. Romans 7. 22. and shall be with promised eternal
happiness? Romans 2. 7. Heb. 6. 12.

3. When there is impudent irreverence in the presence of Erubescentia virtutis
tinctura. Laertius in vita. Diog.
God: There is no fear of God in the eyes of daring sinners, Romans 3. 18.
whereas true Grace would put on an holy blush, either to prevent sin, or repent
of it: The Philosopher resented modest shamefastness, as virtues color; and
the Scripture accounts of holy shame, as the complexion of Grace: O my God, I
am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, Ezra. 9. 6. so Romans 6. 21. O
our hypocrisy! we that style the Lord our gracious God, are ashamed of sins
before men, but blush not to sin before God: O our slighting of Gods presence!
Though we see Gods All-seeing eye upon us, and are convinced, the Lord knows,
and exactly weighs our sinful thoughts, reasonings, desires, affections,
Perturbations, close Atheism, irreverence, filthiness, pride, envy, malice,
and Books of sinful words, Actions, to be read over again in the great
examining and Judging day: yet the audacious sinner will pour out his
pollutions before the seen face of God, with a shameless whores forehead, Frous
illis erat meretricis, nec vellent erubescere, nullis Dei judiciis, se corrigi
sustinerent. Calvin: in Jer. 3. 3.
and a spirit senseless of his severe judgments or prying presense. Too many
that go for Gods servants, are like the loose ones of men, that know their
gracious Masters eye is before them, yet abuse him, and slight his pleasure
before his face; such a frame of spirit speaks this wickedness, as if such
Language were uttered before the Lord: O Lord, thou art my loving Master, but I
so little regard thee, that though I know thou feast me, yet I will dissemble,
be unclean, passionate, unjust in my dealings, worldly, and follow the swinge
of my corrupt lusts in thy sight; such kind of excuses carry great filth and
guilt -- But be not deceived, God will not be so mocked.

4. When pretenders to the Grace of God live wholly to themselves, Nisi quisque
a semetipso deficiat, ad eum qui supra ipsum non appropinquat. Greg.
and not to him; This is an affront to Gods Grace. It is the genuine and proper
work of Grace, to live to God: He cannot draw nigh unto him that departs not
from himself. Grace is water of life, it is with this, as with other water, it
rises as high as the Spring from whence it came: The God of grace is the
spring of grace; this living water runs up to its own Spring: He is the Sea of
grace, this sweet stream in a supernatural gratitude, runs into its own Sea.
The Lord Christ designed this in his death, that his redeemed ones should not
live unto themselves, but to him that died for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.
15. But now when carnal Gospellers follow the guidance of their own reason, the
imperious Law of their desires and affections, like Israel, bring forth fruit
unto themselves, Hos. 10. 1. Center their Religious services, hearing, fasting,
praying, reading, for self, not God, Zach. 7. 5. When shining, glorious
profession, is but a more unsuspected and politic sacrifice to that grand
Idol, Carnal self, either in the whole or main of its services, the grace of
God is abused: When all Christians by their profession, should lay out and
consecrate themselves wholly to Christ, they are unworthy that the earth should
bear them, that do not fully resign and devote themselves to Christ. They are
not worthy of the name of men, false to the Law of natural gratitude, that
serve not their deliverer; and are not they as unworthy of the name of
Christians, false to the Law of supernatural thankfulness, that serve not their
professed infinite Redeemer? Pretended favorites of Heaven, are like those
selfish Courtiers who abuse their Princes ear, Smiles, Grace, Honors, and
Bounty to Chambering and Wantonness, to the greatning of themselves and
families, but improve not their Sovereigns Grace to his Honor, the glory of his
Crown, the increasing of his Treasure, the establishment of his Dominions; the
lively Pictures of them that go for the Spiritual Darlings of Gods Court, who
live not to the glorious interest of their Heavenly King, but bias all his
gracious dealings, according to the motions of worldly and corrupt 6. The Grace
of God is turned into wantonness, when the heart carries wickedly as to
Christ. Thesaurus omnium Christus donorum. Marlorat.
selfishness.

SECT. 6.
3. THe Grace of God is turned into wantonness: When the heart carries
wickedly, as to Christ, in three things.

1. When the profuse riotous sinner, runs in Gods Debt, because Christ is his
surety: Indeed, upon this truth and rocky foundation, that Christ is the
faithful surety of his people, Heb. 7. 22. is built the eternal salvation of
his Church: It is the richest, right orient Pearl, in the Gospels Cabinet: A
Believer would not be without this everlasting prop and succor to faith, this
assured conveyance of eternal happiness for the world: It is dross and dung to
this excellent knowledge, Christ is a surety: But to whom, and for what? To
refusers and despisers of him? to loose the reins on the neck of lusts? to
privilege the liberties and power of Satan? to sin without control and
remorse? Surely Christ as our surety on the Cross, sustained our person, and
Christus ut sponsor personam nostram gerebat, ut vetus noster homo in nobis
necaretur Diks. in Romans 6. Faedus gratiae habet Christum sponsorem, ut tanquam
Dei amici ambularemus. Diks. in Heb. 7.
made to his Father an engagement for us, that our old man in time should die,
Romans 6. 6. Yea, in the great agreement of the holy and everlasting Covenant of
Grace, there was this part of suretiship, that ^e should walk in holy
fellowship with God and Christ, by the Spirit, as the friends of God, and
therefore it is an intolerable indignity to our heavenly surety, at once to
believe him an undertaker, that corruption should die, and to live in sin. This
makes him a surety, and no surety: A surety, in the professed Faith and owning
of this suretiship; no surety in the Preservation, and not Mortification of
wanton Lusts. Consider this, all ye that sin against the grace of your
professed surety, but without his leave, or the least allowance of his Gospel,
was a gracious pardon-office, dearly purchased, by the infinite price of the
blood of the Son of God, that it should lavish out forgiveness of sins to
dissolute livers? Did God decree, and Christ accept of a weighty, costly, and
suffering suretiship, that profuse, Iewd Debtors, might spend more freely,
merrily, and daringly, on the stock of their sureties satisfactions? Such
indignity carnal profession imposes upon Christ's saving undertaking: The Lord
invites the humbled, burdened sinner, to accept of Deus nos invitat ad veniam,
and nos quo^idie cumulamus offensam.
his pardoning mercy, and proud Libertines heap up sin: These spots and
dishonors in Christian Assemblies, are like to a young riotous Gallant, that
spends largely, in Gaming, Feasting, Whoring, and comfortably stays upon
this, he shall not be Arrested, not Imprisoned, because he has a rich surety
will pay all: So expensive Libertines give large vent to their corruptions, in
their sinful creature-excesses, in their abominable hypocrisies, in their
unrighteous dealings, in their idolized sensualities, in their carnal
securities, and yet they cheer, and fully stay themselves in this Indemnity,
the Law shall not arrest them, nor cast them into the eternal prison of utter
darkness, because they have a rich surety, Jesus Christ, who (as they presume)
will pay all.

2. When the faith of redemption, by Christ, works not Redemptio nos
obstrictos tenet, ac sub obedientiae fraeno cohibet Carnis nostrae lasciviam.
Calvin. in 1 Cor. 6. Qui redemptus est alter us beneficio, non est sui juris,
Calvin. in Jer. 2. 20.
subjection to him, the grace of God is turned into wantonness: Eternal
Redemption, is an eternal obligation to service, a bridle to curb our
lascivious flesh, not a Feast to feed it: God has on purpose decreed Christ a
Redeemer, that he might be sovereign Lord over all his purchase, as we have
dominion over that we pay dear for: Now where redemption by Jesus Christ is
preached in common, that the price of his blood was a sufficient ransom to
redeem the whole world; there are very few but believe Christ died for them:
But how is the mystery and mercy of Redemption abused? the Faith of Redemption
works not subjection in most professed Christians: They would be saved in
their sins, not from their sins. Christ has redeemed his people out of the
hands of their enemies, but they are content to be in them still; He died to
rescue them from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. but they are vain, Jam.
2. 20. Walk after vanity, Jer. 2. 5. and shall find vanity their recompense,
Job 15. 31. He was crucified, to deliver from the power of Satan, Heb. 2. 14,
15. but they are still his possession, Ephesians. 2. 2. as taken Beasts are the
Hunters prey, as Prisoners are the Conquerors spoil, to be carried up and down,
dealt with at their pleasure, 2 Timothy 2. 25. O that such as are by profession
Subjects, and by disposition and conversation Rebels against Christ, would
seriously ponder these things.

1. Both the Scriptures and experience of loyal Subjects to Christ, do clearly
evidence, that effectual, beneficial Redemption, is proved by subjection; that
he died not to redeem us to the life, but death of sin; not that we should live
and die in sin, but Non ut nos vivendo pecca it is, immorarmur, and tandem
immoreremur. Otho Casmannus.
live and die in the state and power of Grace.

2. They that believe themselves the redeemed of Christ, and yet are the slaves
of their lusts, the vassals of Satan, have either not considered at all, or
very slightly, That the proper intention of Redemption was Dominion; Ye are
bought with a price, are not your own, your Body and Spirits are Gods, 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20.

To this end Christ both died, and rose and revived, that he might Nullus
fidelium juris sui sed alieni. Dicksonus. Vtinam hoc altissimis radicibus in
mente figatur. Pet. Martyr, in Romans 14.
be the Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14. 9. Surely no Believer is of
his own right, but another: His Person is deeply and dearly paid for; now what
is bought, passes into the dominion of the buyer. The ransomed of Christ are
Peculium Christi, Christ's own possession. It was an holy wish of an holy
Writer, O that Christ's Lordship, with deepest impressions, might be rooted and
fixed in our minds: The loose depravers of Redemption, run the hazard of
perishing, when they refuse to be Christ's possession.

3. The greatest freedom, pomp and glory of the world that Impii pre vilisfimis
and abjectissimis habentur, licet spiendeant in oculis hominum. Davenant: in
Coloss.
takes carnal eyes, discharges no wicked Libertines from being the most vile
and abject slaves. Nobles, though bound in silver chains, are Prisoners. The
Devil and the old Man will never envy their spiritual Captives outward
freedoms, while efficacious Redemption has made no powerful Translation unto
Christ's Kingdom of salvation.

4. Carnal walkers conceits of Redemption by Christ, are pleasing, delusive and
vanishing dreams: While the Israelites served Quicquid somniant homines
carnales de liberatione sua est vanissimum. Nam ut Israelitae dum Phaaroni
inserviebant, non erant liberate donati: sic Christiani dum Diabolo parent,
dum peccati delitiis diffluunt. Davenant.
Pharaoh, they were not delivered; so titular Christians never, felt the power
of Redemption, while they obey the Devil, and abound in the pleasures of sin:
The chained Prisoners thoughts of Ransom, are very sorry ones, while he still
starves, and dies in his Irons.

5. The avenging jealousy of the Lord Christ, will flame out against them, who
rest, yea boast in heart, yea sometimes in tongue, of his ransoming Grace, and
yet shake off his rightly purchased Government: He counts them no better than
enemies, that refuse his dominion, and threatens their destruction, Luke 19.
27. He shall come from Heaven to revenge their disobedience to his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1. who profanely rested on the Grace of his Redemption. How can they
answer their undoing fallacy, of dividing what God has joined, parting
Redemption from iniquity, and Redemption from Hell, as if the whole of it were
to rescue lost sinners from the smart, not the filth of sin; to give them a
licentious ease, not to fit them for their professed Lords use, and their own
eternal sweet communion with him, to keep them from being vessels of wrath, not
to make them vessels of honor. What a dishonor is this to the grace of God,
That Lust, the Devil, and the World, should Lord it over Christ's purchase?
What reproach to Redemption, that those who believe they are ransomed by him
will not be subject to him, but abide, Col. 1. 21. Enemies to him in their
minds, declared by wicked works? Are not these men like ransomed captives,
bought by a dear price, who are so far from subjection, and paying honor to,
that they rebel against their Lord?

3. When Christ is desired for his comforts, not for his service, Gods grace is
turned into wantonness. Thus many take Christ to serve their turns of him, not
to serve him, for a shelter to comfort them in storms, not a Master to do his
will. When under the terrors and sorrows of death and hell they would have
comfortable words from Christ, even then when they have rebellious hearts
against him. I have heard from an eye, and ear-witness, a sad report of a
tippling, adulterous, profane man, when he had the terrors of an angry God on
his wounded soul, and not only fear of Hell, but confessed feeling of the
pains and flames of hell in his spirit, was in his flesh (like another
trembling Balshazar at the hand writing against him) a real afflicted Quaker,
sent for the Minister, cried out of his gross sins, yea his barren and
forsaken use of reading and prayer, but the slavish sorrows were soon wasted,
and the terrified sinner soon grew vain, frothy, sensual, and voluptuous. Such
as like only the pacifying, but not the purifying part of Religion, have
whorish hearts, wandering from God to other Loves, even then when they are
afraid of him. Wanton, unclean wives, would have their husbands good looks,
words, and gifts, though disobedient to them, and defilers of the Marriage bed.
Thus too many adulterous hearts, when the lips only matched with Jesus Christ,
would have the comforts of Reconciliation, Remission, Adoption, the peace and
joys of the Holy Ghost, even then when they contemn his holy strict
Gospel-government. The Apostle Paul will be a condemning instance against these
selfish wantons. As he obtained Pardoning mercy. 1 Timothy 1. 13. So he was the
servant of Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 1. yea labored in Christ's vineyard more than
any of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Should God put sound hearts to the choice,
whether they had rather have eminent grace to do the will, than see the sweet
face of Christ, they would prefer dutifulness before joys, and rather obey the
commands than see the smiles of God. But rotten hearts are all for the
comforts, Hypocritae magno supercilio jactant pietaetem, sed pias monitiones
rejiciunt. Calv. Isa. 50.
nothing for the self-denying, mortifying precepts of the gospel, would be
content to spend their days in carnal rejoicing, not working for the Lord
Jesus. It is just with God, that all such who only seek the comforts, but not
the labors and tasks of christianity shall everlastingly be strangers to the
solaces, who were enemies to the duties of the Gospel. They who center Optimo
jure nobis adimitur gaudium ubi in ipso gaudere nescimus. Calv. in Isa. 24.
their joy in themselves shall never have true joy. O that these men that fear
no evil but wrath and Hell, and so do keep in, not leave their wickedness,
and see no good in Religion, but its comfort and peace, would seriously
consider the experimental words of Zanchy: Evil men do but inwardly restrain
their wickedness, which without fears they would wantonly power forth, Suam
pravitatem intus cohibent, qua^ ^lioqui petu^^nter effusuri erant. unde nec
meliores nec justiores apud Deum, quia licet timore impediti, suam iniquitatem
exercere non audent, tamen intus habent cor peccatis aestuans neo renovatum ab
obedientia Dei. Zanchius de legis officio.
and this makes them not the better, nor more righteous in Gods account,
because though chained up by fear, they dare not act their iniquity, yet within
they have sins impure flames, pent up, but no heart renewed by the obedience of
God.

SECT. 7.
4. When the heart carries wickedly as to the Law of God, The Grace of God is
turned into wantonness. 7 When the heart carries wickedly as to the Law of God.
This is done Doctrinally, and Practically.

1. Doctrinally: When the Justifying grace of God is made 2 dis-obligement from
the obedience of the Law: Because they that are under grace, are not under the
damning power of the Law: Therefore loose Opinionists teach, they are not under
the commanding power of the Law, as if Christ dyed to free from the
malediction, that men might be free from the direction of the Law. This
abolishment of the pure divine Laws Authority, betrays as a cracked brain, so
an unholy heart. An holy Law cannot but be bid welcome of an holy heart, and a
spiritual Law will please a spiritual heart. It is too clear an evidence of a
loose spirit to disanull the government of a strict Law, They are wanton Sons,
who because they are free from their Fathers disinheriting, will therefore be
free from their Fathers ruling. The Lord Christ has set a black mark of
displeasure upon these dissolute Opinionists, and has taught us, They that
teach believers (...), i. e. minimi siet, imo nihili, vult, e. dicere, illos
irie regno coelorum. Pisc: Schol: in Mat.
are quit from the obedience of Gods commandments, shall be least in the
Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5. 19. He shall be called least, that is, he shall
have the least, yea no account with God at all; for thus Christ would be
understood, they shall be banished from their hopes of having a part in the
Kingdom of Heaven. A severe threatening against doctrinal Antinomianisme.

2. Practically: When under pretense that Christ has redeemed sinners from the
curse of the Law, they really lead accursed lawless lives: They grossly err,
that think, the wrath and hell of the Law shall never reach them that are
lawless. Assurance of saving Grace, joined with a disordered life, seems to
fasten a disgraceful agreement on Christ, which he will never own, that he
shall take off the Laws curse, that they may shake off the Laws yoke: Hence
Libertines take a course by their false Faith and covenant, that all the
volleys of the Law, discharged from a jealous angry God against them, are but
naked powdercracks, a scaring noise, not killing bullets, not do execution
upon them. Now Lust and the Devil in these Practical Antinomians (for such are
wicked men that abuse the grace of God) gain a priviledging license from the
death of Christ, to sin securely, as if an open trade in Hells commodities,
were allowed and sealed by the blood of Christ. The Apostle has told these to
their terror (unless the hardening habits of constant irregular courses have
(...). Lex posita legis contemptoribus, and iis qui subjici nesciunt. Dum legem
divinam deseris, salute^ propriam derelinquis, Salv.
put them past fear) The avenging Law is made for the lawless and disobedient.
1 Timothy 1. 9. for ungoverned practical Antinomians, that live as they list,
under the favor, as they think, of Gospel grace. But little do daring Rebels
think, that have made void the Laws of God in their hearts and lives, That
while they leave Gods Law, they forsake their own salvation; it being a signal
part of their salvation to be saved from sin, Mat. 1. 21. which is a
transgression of the Law. 1 John 3. 4. How little do these abusers of Law and
Gospel consider intention, which was not only to save sinners from Hell, but
his Law from wilful, constant disreputation and violation in the world: He
has magnified his Law, and made it honorable. Isa. 42. 21. not only by his
own personal obedience, but commending it to, and commanding it of all his
followers, as a most equal rule of life, and way of happiness. They that
oppose freedom from the Laws curse, to binding in the Laws bonds, should
remember, that this spiritual blessing is a deep obligement Oritur hoc de.
bitum ex beneficiis in nos collatis, ne amplius semper secundum carnem vivamus.
Peter Mart. in Romans Carni nihil debemus nifi mortifieatione^. Ex. eod.
to abhor a carnal conversation, and that they are not debtors to the flesh but
the spirit, not to sin, but Christ. Romans 8. They owe on provisions to, but
mortification of their lusts. Yea further, they should consider, the Spirit,
voice is the Laws, and the leading of Gods Sons by the spirit, is leading them
in the clean paths of the Laws obedience: Such as dare abolish obedience to
the Law, because the grace of God in Christ has freed from the curse, should
do well to fear and tremble, they are the men and women that shall never
escape the curse, who ever abhorred and cast off the authority of the Law. It
is a word of eternal verity, equity, and purity: The Idaea of eternal right
reason in the mind of God, most fit to be an immutable and eternal rule of
duty, and will justly and infallibly call for eternal punishment upon all loose
Rebels against it, hatsoever sanctuary they think to Lex in sanctis aternum
durat
find in Gospel grace. Well were it for Lawless Libertines, could they see
themselves under the cursing Law, and feel the smart of it, as a severe
Schoolmaster, to lash them unto Christ, that being rescued from the curse, they
might be enabled by the spirit of Faith, love and power, to perform the
duties of the Law. The Grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the heart
carries wickedly as to the Gospel of Christ. Audiunt voce^ servi ejus, Isa 50.
10. Subesttacita Antithesis, inter audientiam quam exigit and licentian
spernendae doctrinae, calv.


SECT. 8.
5. THe grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the heart carries
wickedly as to the Gospel of Christ, and so it does.

1. When the Gospel comes in Word only, not in Power, when all its sweet
invitations, entreaties, wooings, exhortations, do but bear the air, are never
entertained by the true hearing ear, into the believing heart; when Gospel
Sermons, Chapters, Discourses, Examples take no impression upon hard hearts;
when glorious Evangelicall mysteries, Angels admiration, are slighted by the
carnal, ungrateful world, yea when a long, barren, uneffectuall living, under
Gospel saving discoveries, sadly declares, it has not yet bin the power of
God unto salvation when after ten, twenty, forty years convincing, inviting
ministry it may be said of too many under souls Physicians, what was said of
the woman with the bloody issue, under bodily Physicians, They are nothing
bettered, but grow worse. Mar. 5. 26. when the most favor carnal spirits give
the gospel, is to give it the hearing, and that is all; like wanton sons that
give their Fathers the hearing of their commands, and that is all; in this case
the grace of God is highly abused. Against such as oppose the word of Holiness,
Life, and Salvation, and have no faith to mingle it in their hearts, as if it
were a fable, a lie, a loss, so do, injudicious slighty, careless, ob^linate,
though professed christians; these are witnesses. The Thessalonians, who did
not only hear the word, but felt the power of it. 1. These. 1. 5. The fruitful
colossians who heard it, and knew the grace of God in truth, Col. 1. 5, 6. The
Romans who after it was delivered unto them, were delivered in its tranforming
mold, as metal into the Bell-founders, or clay into the Potters shop. Romans 6.
17. The whole number of (...)
the saved that in the word of grace have felt and demonstrated the revealing
of Gods arm, are mightily translated from Satan's kingdom into Christ's. Col. 1.
13. have mightily experimented the casting out of the Prince of this world,
Joh. 12. 31. will be astonishing witnesses against them, who indeed have heard
and read, and have had cold and lazy convictions of the gospel, but with stony
hearts resisted the fastening and saving powerful impressions of it.

2. When the Gospel does not dismantle the Devils garrisons; does not by its
storms, or friendly sweet Parley, get the Royal Fort, the Will for Christ, and
does not set him there as commander in chief. When the Forts of hell do not
fall before heavenly Diabolus vinctos nos ten^bat (...). Oecumenius. Qui hujus
imperium adhue ferunt, scelerum licentia^, and satanici regni fulc^a
instaurant: Ganlt: in Luk: 10
Gospel batteries; when its sweet trumpet sounds to the battle, its weapons
are handled and used, but all the while pretenders to Christ's colors, fight on
the side of the Prince of darkness, and are faithful to him as their Liege
Lord, here the grace of God is injured, as being appointed to be the conquering
arm of God, but is blessed with no victories over formal professors. Satan
cares not how much we have the nations of Gospel in our minds, and mouths, so
he may still bind us fast in the chains of our own sins. They who yet can bear
his destructive government, they are the supporters of a sinful licentiousness,
the props, not the ruins of Satan's kingdom. He will resent Gospel Faith, and
profession, as a mere mockery, that does not deny his service, nor disturb his
possession He has too clear demonstrations of a carnal gospeller, that bare
words cannot cast him our, that nothing beneath Almightiness can do it, until
the chains of our own making, the reasonings, lusts, affections of the flesh
are broken assunder; he loses no Prisoners, until the Captain of salvation
lead captivity captive; there neither is nor can be any deliverance: Such as
under Gospel-means of rescue, that never yet had the victorious power of Grace,
Disruptis hisce vinculis, ille praed^,sua spoliatus, nos liberati sumus.
Davenanat in Goloss. Satis oftendunt se in foelicem illam-tyrannidem non
agnovisse, and proinde Evangeliun n^nquam in animum admisisse. Gualther. in
Luke 10.
sufficiently declare they never had a serious sense of Satan's pernicious
Tyranny, nor ever received the power of the Gospel in their hearts.

3. When the Gospel has no becoming conversation in the World: It is so, when
it and the Author of it are owned in words, but in works denied, Tit. 1. 16.
When un-Gospel livers are so far, like Demetrius, to have a good report of the
truth, 3. Ep. Joh. 11. and adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior, Tit. 2.
10. That the word of Gods Grace is blasphemed, Tit. 2. 5. and hears ill of
carping, graceless Critics, almost as fabulous, that is, so impotent over
dissolute lives: Herein is Grace abused. It was a sad saying of Linacre,
reading the severe requiries of the Aut hoc non est Evangelium, out nos non
sumus Evangelici. Linacr.
Gospel; Or this is no Gospel, or we are no Gospellers: Such as have an high
calling to Earthly Crowns and Thrones, usually live worthy of their high
promotion; Their Spirits and Places are equally high: God has called his
people unto a Kingdom, and Glory, and this calls upon them to walk worthy of
God, 1 Thessalonians 2. 12. It was good counsel Agapetus gave to Justinian the
Emperor, (...) Agapetus ad Justinianum. (...) Ex eod.
To walk worthy of God, saying, He indeed is worthy of God, who does nothing
unworthy of him: The thanks he seeks, owns, and delights in, is not the easy
tender of good words, but the real production of pious works: When the mouth is
hot with GospelRedemption, Reconciliation, Pardon, Sonship, and the like, but
the heart is cold in the thoughts of these things: Gospel -duties and
confessions keep no even pace; when there is Gospel in the lips, but no tuning
harmony of it in the life, here the grace of God is wronged.

SECT. 9.
6. THe Grace of God is turned into wantonness, when the 9. The Grace of God is
turned into wantonness, when the heart carries wickedly as to the Creatures.
Difficile est ut quis de deliriis transeat ad delitias, ut in utroque saeculo
primus sit
heart carries wickedly as to the Creatures: Even these the good blessings of
God, through the corruption of nature, are back friends to godliness. It Is rare
to find the high blessings of the upper and lower Springs to kiss each other:
It is not ordinary to see Heavenly and Earthly riches to meet together in the
fame persons. Its hard, said Jerome, to pass from delights to delights, from
the pleasures of this life, to those of the next;to be eminet in the great
Estates, Honors, and sweetnesses of both worlds. There wants not sad and common
experience: This World becomes the immortal souls enemy; it is an eminent part
of Gods Grace, when a precious soul is delivered: from the burdens, the
snares, the pollutions of it: A corrupt stomach turns good meat into bad
humors; and a corrupt heart Creature delights, into bad manners: They
accidentally prove the souls bane: They make God and souls Strangers, prove
intangling snares, and lead immoral minds Captive. Bruit Beasts go heavily
under a weighty pressing burden, and wealthy ones move faintly and wearily in
the ways of Godliness, under a great load of riches. The Lord Christ knows
well, that his heavenly Racers can run best; and Soldiers can fight best, that
are least burdened; therefore ordinarily he gives not out to his people vast
Estates; Not many mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 26. The poor in the world, rich in faith:
The lighter, the happier, the speedier is motion Heavenwards. As the Redeemed
by Christ were given him of the Father, to be taken out of the world, John 17.
6. So it is a main part of first conversion, to be turned from the Creatures
unto God, and therefore it is an abuse of Gods grace, to be licentious among
the Creatures: That is done, when the use of the Creatures is intemperate and
idolatrous.

1. Intemperate, when so much is taken in as wholly unsuiteth Non inducunt ad
bon^rificandum createrem, potius abdus ^^, in ^bl vionem. Parisiensis pars 2.
de Universo.
for the service of God. Creature-surfets, unsit for glorifying of Gods grace:
They are not coards to draw to God to honor him, but fetters to draw from God,
and forget him. It Is hard at once to have a full purse and belly, and a soul
filled with Spiritual Riches and Delights. Seneca's saying is too frequent
experience: A liberal use of the sweet Creatures, makes a strong Body, but
niverso. a weak mind. Bodily delights, are like an intoxicating Wine, and Sunt
in vinum inebriatienis and augmentu^ Corruptionis. Ex eod c. 58. Nulla est
carnis cupiditas quae non hominem inebriat. Marlorat. Qui honoratur in via in
perventione damnabitur, and quasi per amaena prata in car^erem pervenit.
Gregor. in Moral. Danda esf opera ne se mundo ingurgitent, si volunt ad Christi
regnum properare. Marlorat.
the improvements of corruption: There is no lust of the flesh, that the unwary
sinner is not drunk with: Its cravings and service unfit for duty, as the
overcharged Drinker is for his work. It was therefore Christ's caution, Take
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares, Luke 21. 34. God has not given the Creatures to hinder, but
promote obedience: It Is a sad exchange, when the abused Honors of this life,
shall be swallowed up in the damnation and contempt of the other, and the
worlds voluptuous wantons, pass through the pleasant Meadows of present
delights, to the stinking, howling, and smarting Prison of Hell: They that
would make haste to Christ's Kingdom of glory, had need be careful, lest they
cram and surfett their souls with the world. Too much of thoughts, desires,
affections to this, is sadly punished with nothing in the other. Woe to them
that are intemperately full here, they shall hunger hereafter; and their
dis-satisfaction will be a part of their Hell. Christian liberty, and Gospel
grace, will be no Patrons of Creature excesses.

2. When the use of the Creatures is Idolatrous, Gods grace is abused: Joseph
should be great in Egypt, but Pharaoh would be in the Throne above him: We may
use the creatures, but they must not be set in the hearts Throne above God: We
make that an Idol, that has an equal or higher room in our hearts. It Is a
kind of Idolatry to place happiness in the Creatures: Covetousness Est quoddam
idololatriae genus, foelicitate^ in rebus creatis ponere. Granatensis.
is styled Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. Inordinate sweet worldly loves, are heart
Idols: God never gave the Creatures to be set in his room: It Is his high
dishonor, when the love of the world swallows up the love of God; trust in the
Creatures, denies confidence in the Rock of Ages; rejoicing in things of
naught, obstructs Joys in the things of Eternity: The service of the Creature,
puts by the service of God, Blessed for ever. A Prince will not bear it, that
his promoted Creatures should be set above him; so neither will the Jealousy
of God bear it, that the creatures he has made should be set above him: We
usually say, stand by, and remove those things that stand in our light. O our
little account of God! we say not, stand by, nor remove from our irregular
esteem and affections, the things that stand in Gods light. If we have not
Grace enough to take our hearts off from the dark Eclipses of Gods glory, and
God intend mercy to us, he will either remove them out of his light, or
imbitter their use. Hence Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, have been
bitter-sweet one to another, yea often times more bitter then sweet; Lest a
constant tenor of undisturbed contentment and delight, should tempt and turn
Relations into Idols: upon this account too, riches, health, and friends, have
fled away; lest the Lords people, too prone to adore and admire Creatures into
Idols, should set them too high. The words of Augustine are not more true, then
sad experience: Whatsoever you love that is from God, will be justly imbittered
to you, because Bonum quod amatis ab illo, sed amarum erit just quia injuste
amatur deserto illo. Aug. Conf. I. 4 Misera anima a te refugit, cum quo semper
gaudet, and sequitur mundum, cum quo semper dolet. Aug. in Medit.
it is injustly loved by departure from him. They are also a part of his sweet
meditation: The miserable soul runs from thee, in whose sweet presence it is
feasted with joy, and follows the World, with which it meets with thorny
vexations.

CHAP. V. Wherein are set down the Causes, why the Grace of God is turned into
wantonness.
SATAN, a malicious enemy of Gods Grace, knowing that the abuse thereof is a
sin of aggravated and accumulated wickedness of a deep scarlet tincture, and
the highest affront that can be offered to a gracious God, The Mediator and
Spirit of Grace, has many pernicious Methods, and destructive Wiles, to tempt
to this heinous sin: Though all of them are not in every abuse of Gods Grace,
yet some of them in some, and some of them in others, are the causes of this
eminent and dishonorable injury to the God of Grace: I shall consider them
under four Heads; Wants, Errors, Presumptions, and Temptations.

SECT. 1.
1. WAnts: The failings or omissions of nine things, are 1. The omissions of
several things are the causes of playing the wantons under Grace.
the deficient causes of wantonness under Grace.

1. Want of knowing the work and abuse of Grace: Many have confused notions of
Gods grace, who are ignorant of the wrongs they do unto it, and think they are
under the privilege of grace, when they are strangers to, and enemies against
it. Many say that God is gracious, and by Gods grace they will amend, when they
consider not that renewing active grace, would put them upon constant,
conscionable, regular and vehement endeavors for reformation, when they
practice, but neither know, nor are humbled, for the contradictions to grace;
when they are not soundly convinced, that saving Grace teaches to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which they out of choice and
delight fulfill; That it abounds with faith and love, 1 Timothy 1. 14. when it
never produced these Graces in them; that the will of God is their
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. when they never saw the amiable beauty, nor
practiced the duties of holiness; that grace changes the heart, when they know
nothing of the inward, mysterious, miraculous work of conversion in its
Doctrine and experience; that grace is an effectual curb to, and a cleansing
Purgatory of vain and impure thoughts, when they know no hurt in the vanity and
pollution of them; that grace leads the heart daily to the Throne of grace,
when they are strangers to Prayer in the Holy Ghost, and think there is no hurt
in its irreligious omission; that it is Grace must save them, when they know
not that a principal part of its salvation, is the mortification of lust and
reformation of life: Ignorance of the wrongs done to grace, is a black
concealing vail over them, which at once hinders the accusing conscience,
tempts to dreams of innocence, imboldens to a carnal indulgence to beloved
sins; were the eyes of the Doctrinal and Practical Adversaries of Gods grace
clearly opened, to see the Insolences, Indignities, and Injuries they do
against it, they could not but in a trembling conviction conclude, these and
these things are certain dishonors of grace, Stains of holy Profession,
Inconsistencies with the new Creature, Lust and Satan's methods of Damnation,
and denials of the hope of Glory. As when Paul said to Ananias, God shall smite
thee thou whited wall, he had not said so, had he known he was the High
Priest. Act. 23. 3, 5. ^o had the bold abusers of Gods Summus Lethargus, and
quasi mors humanae conscientiae, ignorantia voluntatis divinae.
grace, strong and clear convincements, the frame of their hearts, and
carriages of their lives, were the high injuries of Grace, eminent perils of
destruction, and demerits of the hottest room in Hell; in the noon-light of
such an acknowledgement, they would fear and tremble to stumble upon their
own ruin.

SECT. 2.
2. Want of Faith to believe the signal danger of sin, this 2 Want of Faith
to believe the danger of sin is a wrong to Grace. Caecus assensus and plane
temerarius sine praeeunte notitia, non potest induere rationem fidei. Parkerus
de Traduct. peccat. ad Deum. Thesis 56.
huge sin is the wrong of Grace. It is no wonder that the evil which is not
known, is not believed, nor declined. Unbelief is the evil heart that departs
from the living God. It sets not to its seal, that God is true, in his promises
nor threatenings; believes not the abominable, damnable nature of sin, and
dallies with it. As daring wantons, who know that the cup that stands before
them is of poison, yet believe it not, but drink and burst; or the plague is in
the house they go into, believe it not, are mortally infected, and die: And as
the Egyptians believed not that the cattle and men that were found abroad one
storming day should die, adventured abroad, and were slain; so dallying
adventurers that believe not the mischief of their sinful pleasures, contempts
of Christ and his Gospel, they are dancing over the mouth of Hell, by the
sudden push of death are kicked into it. The loose old world believed not the
destruction Preached by Noah in the making of the Ark, were not moved with his
holy example, and penitential instructions; The Sons of God played the
wantons with the fair idolatrous daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2. and were at
length swept away with the flood. Faith would make Libertines fear and tremble:
Unbelief is daring. Minatur Deus, and negligitis, minatur terrenus Judex, and
contremiscitis
The wrath of man is more feared than Gods. When God (says one) threatens
eternal punishment, ye neglect it, when an earthly Judge threatens temporal, ye
tremble at it.

SECT. 3.
3. WAnt of Heat, Intention and Liveliness in Religion. If 3 The want of life
in Religion causes abuse of Grace.
God be not served in fervency of Spirit, Lust will. If Satan cannot keep from
Religious exercise, he tempts to Luke-warmnesse, yea Key-coldnesse in the
performance of them. Instinctu Satanae, faith one, by Satan's deading and
flatting instinct, a drowsy tyring in good things steals upon body and spirit.
Faint fighting is not wont to overcome, nor faint service of God to mortisie
Lust. How fe^ are there in a Christian congregation superabounding in spiritual
joy, always pleasant and merry in the Lord, fervent in spirit, day and night
meditating in the Law of God, lifting up pure hands in prayer, follicitous
observers, and students of their own hearts, zealous witnesses of holy
affections to good works, to whom Christian discipline is amiable, Fasting
sweet, long Watching short, the whole piety of a regular conversation is a
delitious feast, yea does exceed the sweetness of the Quorum brevis and rara
compunctio, animalis conversatio, sermo fine circumspectione, oration sine
cordis intention, lectio sine edificatione. Bern. Virga and calcaribus
indigentes.
honey and the honey comb? Alas, how many are there who in an impartial inquest
will be found remiss in the studies of Holiness, fainting under Christ's easy
yoke, and light burden, whose compunction is short and rare, conversation
natural, speech without circumspection, prayer without intention of heart,
reading without edification, good purpose without execution, religious exercise
without fervencie, who in the ways of godliness want the whipp and spurs, but
in the too prone and nimble motions of dislolute looseness, need curbing
bridles. Licentious courses are so strong and impetuous, that the modest shame
of uncomeliness, the bridle of reason, yea the fear of Hell, can hardly
restrain them? No wonder if corruption be daring, dissolute, and potent, when
religious exercises are flat, dead, cold, and feeble. We blush not Sine debita
attentione and fervore spiritus. Bern.
(said one) to pray to God without due attention and fervor of spirit. He that
has no sweet communion with God, will seek it in the world, and pleasing his
enticing lusts. When the mind is senceless in reading and meditation, and
affections are dull, corruption will be lively. It Is sad to consider how many
seemed to discover the fervor of a pious conversation, in whom by degrees
charity has waxen cold, and iniquity abounded, and what appeared to be begun
in the Spirit, ends (it is to be feared) in the flesh. Gal. 3. 3. Draw me and
we will run after thee, because of the savor of thine ointments. Cant. 1. 3,
4. Therefore there is need of Opus habeo trahi, quia refriguit pauli^per in
nobis ignis amoris tui. Bernard.
drawing, because the divine fire of the souls love, for want of fuel to it,
and blowing of it, by degrees abates ad cooles. Drawing nigh the fire is for
warmth, and drawing nigh of God is for holy heat. In near approaches to him,
the new creature is a zealous enemy to wanton looseness. Cockering cooleness in
the severe religious exercises of Mortification is the bane of Profession.
Adonijah was a very goodly man, David his Father displeased him not at any
time, in saying why have thou done so? 1 King. 1. 6. In the sist verse you
sinde him a daring Rebel; you may read in the Contents of the Chapter, Adonijah
David's darling usurpeth the Kingdom. Thus is it with every fair faced goodly
lust. The indulgent Christian is it too remiss in rebuking and chastizing it,
and it rises up in arms against him. Cockering Mothers cold in rebuking wanton
sons, teach them to be Libertines, ost-times train them up for the Gallows and
Hell, so when the heart is remiss and cold for good and against evil. Lust
will have its reins and lawless liberty, and ruin its servants.

SECT. 4
4. WAnt of receiving the Truth in the Truth in the love of it, is an Advantage
4. Want of receiving the truth in the love, is an advantage to turn a Libertine.
to trun a Libertine. The Apostle describes the Antichristian spirit, that
waxed wanton in taking pleasure in unrighteousness; receiving the Truth for
by-ends, not the love of it, 2 These. 2. 10. So Heretical, loose, profane
spirits are not in love with truth; and as a Wife who is not in love with her
Husband, abuses his kindesse, so do these the truth: Love is kind, behaveth
not it self unseemly, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. True love of truth is so kind to her, as
not to put unseemly affronts upon her. I wonder not when David setting up a
pair of balances, and weighing truth in one scale, and the greatest glories of
the world in the other, in his judicious esteem, Truth as most weighty and
massy did preponderate: His love run out in fullest stream to the Truth; O how
do I love thy Law! Psalm. 119. 97. The joy of his high love was not only
parallel to the joy of all riches, V, 14. accounted as a rich fee-simple, an
heritage for ever, V. 111. but the beauty and treasure of truth was better unto
him than thousands of Gold and Silver, V. 72. Above Gold, yea above fine Gold,
V. 128. And now as a faithful Spouse, deeply in love with, and betrothed to
her dear ^ridegroom, by no difficulties and afflictions is beat off from him,
quickens and sharpens her zeal after him by opposition, so David, espoused to
the pure and lovely truth of God, V. 140. was faithful to the interest of it
in all affictions; the whetstone of his holy profession, meditation of, and
conversation by it. This was the sweet song of his pilgrimage, v. 54. Neither
trouble and anguish that took hold on him, v. 145. nor Princes persecutions, v.
161. nor the presence of Kings, v. 46. nor his enemies despising of him, v.
141. nor proud men's forging lies against him, v. 69. nor their digging pits,
nor laying snares for him, v. 85. 110. nor their waiting to destroy him, v. 95.
nor their almost consuming him upon earth, v. 87. could bring down his high
esteem, nor cool his burning love to the Truth, whose guiding, purifying,
comforting influence he had found in his heart and life. Buy the truth and sell
it not, Prove. 23. 23. buy it at any reat, sell it at no rate, as it is with
persons deeply sick of love; they will have such a man or woman, though they
beg with them, so it is with the lovers of saving truth, they will be matched
to it, though they perish by it, though it cost them the loss of their
estates, liberties, and lives. The word of truth, the Gospel of salvation, has
been dearer to blessed Martyrs than their hearts blood. The Apostles could do
nothing against the truth but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. and then no wonder
they were zelots for the truth, did neither Sancti viri amando discunt, quod
docendo proferunt: Greg. super Ezekiel.
deny the profession of it, nor wantonly abuse it. Real Saints learn the truth
by loving it, profess the truth they have learned, and stick to the truth they
profess. It Is a true and sure experience they who have not received the truth
for the love of it, rience they who have not received the truth for the love of
it, but for, and by carnal ends, will make it their decoy and stalking Horse;
and as it was never heartily loved for it self, in time Mollior and solutior
vita, est quast lascivia adversus Christum. Calv. in loc.
of Temptation, they will reject it, or dissemble it, with which they have ever
played the wantons, to which they never yielded hearty obedience. The Apostle
tells us, that younger widows, professed Christians, waxed wanton against
Christ in their too soft, and delicate life of pleasures, 1 Timothy 5. 6, 11. a
reason is subjoyned, Nemo vel tantillum potest a Christo deflectere, quin
Satanam sequatur. Hinc admonemar quam exitialis sit ^ etc. 1b.
beca use they cast off their first faith, v. 12. The faith of (...) severe,
mortifying Christianity: These also are said, to go after Satan, v. 15. A sad
Text, that will prove many specious, pompous christians, to be fatanicall.
Calvin begins his Exposition of those words, Some are turned aside after
Satan, with a Notanda loquutio: Note the words well; No man can a little turn
from jesus Christ, but he is in a ready way to follow Satan, Hence we are
admonished, how deadly a sin it is to turn aside from the right course, which
of the sons of God will make us the slaves of Satan, and being drawn off from
the government of Christ, sets Satan over us to be out Leader.

SECT. 5.
5. WAnt of laying to heart Gospel threatenings, contributes 5. Want of laying
to heart Gospel threatenings contributes to the Gods grace,
to the Abuse of Gods grace. The Lord has to prevent the abuse of it, annexed
the threatenings of the covenant of works, to the violation of the covenant of
grace. Death, Hell, the wrath to come, the curses of the Law, were the threats
of the covenant of Works. These are used to Hedge in a reverend regard to, and
obedience of the covenant of grace. God in infinite wisdom and love, jealous
of the Apostasy of his peoples hearts, and zealous of his own glory, and their
salvation, has annexed dreadful threatenings to the Preaching of the Gospel,
to keep down proud wanton flesh, to be a thorny thick-sett preventive of
over-leaping rebellions, and preservative of obedience The fear of anger is a
good expedient, left the hope of Gods goodness be abused to carnal neglect.
Hence we read these comminations; Expedit esse sub (...) ne (...) divinae
benignitatis solvamur in negligentiam. Orig.
We are not of those which draw back to perdition, Heb. 10. 38. Perdition is
implyedly threatened against A postasie from Christ; He that loves not the Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity, let him be Anathema Maranatha; accursed,
excommunicate for ever, 1 Cor. 16. 22. The everlasting curse is threatened to
Christ's false friends: He that believes not is damned, Joh. 3. 18. Except ye
repent ye shall perish, Luke 13. 3. Yea there where the Lord proclaims the
glory of his name in grace and mercy, left it should be wronged to wantonness,
he mentions a terrible threatening, That he will by no means clear the guilty,
Exodus 34. 6, 7. Such as by unbeleeving loose impenitent courses, a second time
crucisie the Son of God, and prostitute his metits to wicked courses, should
do well to study those angry words, He will by no means clear such guilty
ones. Because pround secure Libertines, either Impii simul and metuunt and
contemnunt saenas. Luth. in Gen:
consider not, or fear not, or positively contemn Gods threatened wrath, Hence
it is that they securely play the (...) in the hopes of mercy. It Is rare these
sad and serious thoughts are laid to heart; If I do not believe in Christ I am
lost for ever; If I live in my sin I shall perish; If I depart from Christ I
shall be. (...) one; If I abuse the long-suffering, goodness, truth, and
pardoning mercy of God, Ishall never be cleard of this guilt, the glory of his
Justice will shine in my ruin, the glory of whose grace, has been darkened by
my looseness. The daring thoughts, counsels, words, and practices of all
Libertines do betray such a spirit as was in Marcion of old, who fancied God
made all of mercy and grace, and removed severities, and judicial penal
authorities from the good God, as if he were a stupid Essence, insensible of
any affronts and indignities put upon him. Thus as if God were not essentially
just as well as merciful, he is by impudent Libertinisme spoiled of his
Justice, who as he is just, and a justifier of true believers, so he is just
and a condemner of all his enemies, the greatest whereof are they that continue
in sin because grace abounds.

SECT. 6.
6. Want of Grace changing and affecting the heart, that 6 Want of Grace
changing the heart, causes Gods grace to be turned into wantonness: (...),
violent u^ quiddam significat: Beza. Vsurpatur de iis qui in carcere and
custodia detinentur. Genesis 39. 20. Quotquot in officio suo tor, pent, and dona
spiritus ignavo otio defodiunt, and nec propriam nec alioru^ salutem provehunt.
Gualt: in Luk: 19. Hom. 174. Verba in opera: Bernard.
shines in the Head. Convictions may, and do often stand with positive
Rebellion. The truth of God is held prisoner in unrighteousness. Romans 1. 18.
takes no hold on the wills and affections of men: such violent restraint is
laid upon it by over-powering worldly lusts, that its sanctifying reforming
liberty and authority is quite suppressed. It is with the lightsome beams of
Gods grace as with the Sun: The light may shine in the upper sleeping room, but
be shut out of the lower working rooms: The grace of God shines often in the
upper sleeping room, idle, drousie Speculation, and conviction in the mind, but
is shut out of the lower working rooms, the Will and the Affections. Evil
servants know their Masters will, but have no hearts to do it. They are evil
servants, who, in the Lords spiritual husbandry, trading and occupation, are
negligent in their duty, and hide the talents of the Spirits gifts in sluggish
idleness, and neither promote their own, nor others salvation. Family-guides
cannot bear it, who see their loose Attendants waste and abuse the light of
great Candles, to wantonness, when their more conscionable Ministers do much
work by lesser lights. What a shame will it be in the reckoning day, when
persons of vast apprehensions, but loose hearts and lives, shall be condemned
from the vast practice of Godliness, in men of mean, yet sound intellectuals,
who turn a few gracious notions, into holy motions, and words into works.

SECT. 7.
7. WAnt of the upright and genuine use of Cods grace, 7. Want of the genuine
use of grace, causes it to be turned into wantonness. Of (...), an assault,
because if the flesh have never so little liberty, it will assault us.
as a Medicine to cure, not as a Cloak to cover sin: We read 1 Pet. 2. 16. a
Cloak of maliciousness, or wickedness, (...), and the danger of us^rg liberty
an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. which let alone, will make assault upon
us, as the word (...) imports: The Sheeps-skin on the Wolves back does indeed
cover, not alter the ravenous Creature: While the cloak of grace does but hide,
not heal the old Man, he will be a Libertine. The matter is not with carnal
Gospellers, whether they sin or no, but whether concealed. Unsound hearts are
not so much troubled with the conscience, as infamy of sin: Much wickedness in
the world, appearing in its native colors would be abominable, but when it
borrows a dress from the grace of God, it looks lovely, and is unsuspected: A
pity it is, so fair a cloak as Gods grace, should be put on so foul a body as
sin; it is as if a leprous Body were covered with Purple, and a Dunghill with
Scarlet. It was a part of Jeremiah's Lamentations, That the Sons of Zion, that
were clothed in Scarlet, embraced Dung-hills, Lam. 4. 5. It should be for a
lamentation, that spurious Gospellers, the false sons of Zion, clad in a rich,
scarlet, glorious profession, should stain themselves with durg-hill words and
works. To put the cover of nature upon unnatural, unmorral sins, is abominable;
to put the cloak of grace on works of darkness, to wash the Devils face with
holy water, is much more detestable: It is as if Satan should court God to
license his wickedness, as if his pure nature should privilege uncleanness.
They were false Jews, uncircumcised in Spirit, though not in flesh, who made
their ceremonious services, which Jer 7. 8. Plus licentiae sibi in ceremoni is
sumebant, quae debebant esse paenitentiae ^^^ercitia. Calv.
should have been exercises of repentance, the Patrons of Licentiousness; and
so they are adulterate Christians, who prostitute their Religious Worship, to
irreligious designs and practices: But sure Grace was never intended to cover,
but cure sin. As the God of grace has clearly vindicated grace from this
dishonor, in his Scriptures, and in the mortified conversation of his real
^aints, so will he in the great day of restitution of all things, all things by
their proper names, set them on their own bottoms, arraign sin as sin, grace as
grace, the enemies of Christ as enemies, and friends as friends, and avenge
before the world dishonors done to his Gospel Grace, and invincibly clear it to
the judgment both of elect and reprobates, that grace is a destroyer, not a
Savior of sin, an help, not an hindrance of good life; Take with you words,
and say, receive us graciously, Hos. 14. 2. This grace was an healing remedy; I
will heal their backslidings, v. 4. Grace, like the covering wings of the
Chicken, like the covering Plaster of the wound, does both cover, and cure:
Pardoning and purging Grace go together. As the wisdom, so the grace that is
from above, is pure, as well as peaceable. It is the constant Petition of the
sound Spirit of Prayer, Lord pardon, Lord heal my sins.

SECT. 8.
8. Want of sound conviction of the mischief of original 8. Want of conviction
of original corruption, is a cause of turning the grace of God into wantonness.
corruption, and severe mortification thereof, is an experimented account why
grace is abused: Here are two branches.

1. Want of clear convincement of the old man's mischief: The Character of his
wickedness is very large, when it is not known at all, or but slightly; no
wonder if the bosom Enemy play Rex, and rule as he he His sinfulness, as
follows not discerned nor regarded, begets high abuse of the Grace of God.
Were these things known and believed concerning original corruption, professed
Christians could not be so licentious: Sad experience will give this evil
report of it. One says truly of carnal concupiscence.

It Is a numerous pregnant mother of sins, and has a vast Womb, Faecunda
peccaetorum matter.
in which infinite transgressions are conceived, out of which they are by the
Midwifry of Satan and the World brought forth.

It Is the standing Forest, in which Beasts of prey are nourished and abound,
harmful destructive lusts are fed and grown, that spoil the bodies and souls of
men.

It Is a deaf Adders ear to the Words, Wisdom and Whispers of the Spirit, that
will not hearken to the saving voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely;
will never hearken to the Counsels of true Wisdom, till miraculous grace open
and boar the ear.

It Is a rooted, and deeply fastened evil in all the faculties of man, written as
with a pen of Iron, the point of a Diamond, graven upon the hard Table of the
Heart, Jer. 17. 1. The deep Characters of its malignity are not soon and easily
razed out.

It Is a vast Sea, that notwithstanding the infinite streams that Inexhauslum
malum peccatum originis. Lu^h in Genesis
flow from it, is not drawn dry, but as full as ever, without the exhausting
miracle of grace, gradually lessening, and at length quite drying it up.

It has an Whores face and tongue: it is besotted Lovers believe it is
permicious bewitching flatteries, are enticed by its lusts, as Fishes by baits,
Birds and Beasts by snares, Jam. 1. 14.

It Is like an untractable Heifer, that will not bear the yoke of Cum carnis
voluptatibus la^amus habenas, caro redditur intractabilis. Pet. Mar. in Rom 13.
Cupiditates effraenes Deo adversantur. Pe^petuo velut e regione Deo opponu^tur:
Grace, but kick and winch, and run away from service, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. A wanton
and unbridled Nag, that will not be handed by the Riders pleasure, will, if
left to it self, neither be backed by reason, nor the Spirit of God.

It Is not only an enemy, but in the abstract enmity against God, his Laws,
Sovereignty, Holiness, yea his being: The Divine nature, and corrupt nature,
are terms which can never be reconciled: The flesh uncrucified will
everlastingly lust against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. Jer. 13. 27.

It Is fortified in its ruining Art, by diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Titus 3. 3.
like an old Soldier, has many stratagems, and an old Angler, many Baits of
ruining deceit: In its methods of destruction, if one way miss, another will
hit.

It Is the Sin that easily besets, Heb. 12. 1. and like an heavy (...), ad nos
circumcingendos (and in cursu proinde impedie^dos) proclive. Glass. Philolog.
Sae. Mollis carnis educatio atque indulgentia, nos in spirituali studio
magnepere remorantur. Grana^
Chain tied to the affections, the feet of the soul, hinders speedy motion in
the Heavenly race set before us; or like a begirting Army, or long Garments
that hinder running, obstructs speed in the way everlasting; over pampering,
even to an heavy, sluggish, sweating fatness, tires the Racer; So soft
indulgencies to the flesh, are a great Remora and constant stop to spiritual
and heavenly motions.

It Is a subtle Orator to defend it self, when its wickedness is impeached,
decried, discredited, condemned; it is the witty Mother of crafty Inventions,
to prove it harmless, secure its Indemnity, to elude all Indictments of reason
and the word; has a wily head in all those distinctions, extenuations, mental
reservations, Paintry of deceiving Sophistry, mis-naming and mis-naturing
things, for self preservation and soul ruin.

It Is it alone that has made the heart desperately wicked, a Concupiscentia
est lenge majus malum, quam ut ejus magnitudo a ratione perspici possit.
Melancton Catech. p. 24. Rara hora, brevis mora.
bottomless pit of sin, a nemo scit of abomination, Jer. 17. 9. They that with
longest Plummets would sound it, cannot reach the bottom of it: Hence to the
old stock of corruption, new sinful inventions are added.

It Is the heavy Pully that hangs upon the soul, when with much ado, it has a
flight Heaven-wards, not more sweet then short; it is like the string tied by
the leg of the Bird, whereby the Boy pulled down the nimble Creature when he
pleased, which occasioned Anselmes serious Meditation, making it the Emblem of
corrupt customary sins, which pulls down the soul, when alost in Heavenly
things; It never flies in a free air, till the string of corruption be cut from
it.

It turns spirits into Rocks and Adamants, hardens them in evil, yea, rejoices
and triumphs in it.

It Is a stout Enemy, which though often worsted, is not quite E^^ugata redeunt.
Putata repullulant. Sopita denuo accenduntur.
overcome, will rally and recruit: Though it be forced to depart the Siege, yet
it will set down again: Like the Luxuriant Vine, though pruned, grows rank
again: Like fire, though much quenched, yet flames again.

This ugly hideous Monster, the old Man, is not seen but by spiritual eyes:
Hence it is, that its wanton abuses of the Grace of God are so frequent and
prevalent.

2. Want of severe mortification of the flesh, conduces much to the wrong of
Grace. These false Christians in the Epistle of Jude, who turned the grace of
God into wantonness, and their fellows are said to walk after their own lusts,
v. 16. their ungodly lusts, v. 18. to walk after them, not to crucisie them:
Indeed it cannot be otherwise, for if grace be not so strong as to subdue lust:
Lust will be so strong as to banish grace, so impudent and daring as to abuse
it. Corruption fed and nourished will wantonnize; The hugging, dandling,
kissing, feeding, carnal lusts, makes wanton professors: They dare sport with
edge tools, and riot in the ways of damnation: Study, O you that profess
Christianity, and you will find it Flesh-pleasers, that in a delicate
tenderness, neither dare, nor will, nor can mortisie their corruptions, these
eminently abuse Gods grace.

SECT. 9.
9. WAnt of considering the straight way to life, and the 9. ^(...)^ of
^(...)^ing ^(...) straight ^ay life, causes the abuse of Grace
blessed end thereof: Most Gospellers would have Heaven at the close of their
lives in the broad way of wanton allowances and indulgencies to the lusts and
pleasures of the flesh, had rather have inlargements of their desires in a way
of damnation, then the streightning of them in the way of salvation. The wisdom
of the flesh, wise only to destruction, suffers not inconsidering men,
seriously to weigh the unspeakably, safe, sweet and glorious Issue of strict
Christianity. Holy reason would thus consider: Though that great Idol carnal
self were beaten down, sweet lusts and pleasures were mortified, dreadful
guilt, and dishonors to God, were looked over with broken hearts and weeping
eyes, the vanities and pomps of the world were renounced; the frequent
requiries of the Scripture, and necessities of the poor, call for, and command
costly alms: Though Fastings and Watchings, continual spiritual Arms and
Combats, Prayers and Tears, Desertions and Afflictions, denial of unlawful,
yea often times of lawful things, render practical christian Religion, a
formidable, unchoosable and intolerable thing: Though the entrance and
progress of godliness be strict, severe, painful, and rigid to the flesh, and
bears an unpleasing dominion over the sensitive appetite; yet on this sour
crab-stock is engraffed, by the hand of Gods Spirit, sweet fruit: After this
dirty Lane, the reproaches and sufferings of this life, there will be getting
unto the Heavenly Fathers House: I say, spiritual reason will assure, that the
sharpest storms of Religion, will do the kindness as to drive Heavenly
Passengers, to the Port of their everlasting Rest; and though the spiritual
Battles may be long and sharp, yet they will end in eternal Peace, Victory and
Triumph. Satan knows the Discipline, Life, and strictness of Grace will have
a blessed Issue, and therefore in conjunction with the wisdom of the flesh,
suffers not deluded sinners to be so wise, as to remember the latter end of
Religions Severities, and saving Experiences. Hence the Sirens of the world the
sweet enchantments, pleasures, profits, vain-glories, the sensualities of this
life, make carnal Gospellers, even while they hypocritically chide their sins
to love them heartily, while they easily cry up holiness, strictness, heaven
and happiness, yet to give way to loose and wanton hearts, language and
conversation, and while they have good words, and seeming good belief, they
clearly confute both by unsanctified hearts, and unreformed lives, for want of
spiritual serious dwelling consideration of the strait way to glory, is the sad
miscarrying of holy Profession.

Ah Christians lay to heart what one says; It is to be considered Via ad vitam
non quam sit aspeta, sed quo nos deducat est cogitandum, non quam (...) arcta,
sed ubi desinat; Vis caelestis spins horrentibus aspera: Lact. de vero cul. tu.
l. 6. 0. 4.
not how sharp the way of life is, but where it leads, not how strait it is,
but where it ends, not how it is strewed with thorns, but to what rosy and
sweet spicy delights it brings. Though this world be a valley of tears; Heaven
is a mountain of spices, Can. 8. 14. The difficulties and severities of
Religion, that are as a Lion in the way to Mansions of glory, should rather
call for resolution, and sharpen the edge of affections, than blunt endeavors?
As our Mediator went through infinite difficulties of Redemption, so all the
methods of its application, from conversion, throughout the progress of
Sanctification unto a dissolution, are very difficult. The righteous are
scarcely saved with much ado, 1 Pet. 4. 18. O you tender, delicate, spurious
Christians, who dream of heaven, and the way of it: you fancy it broad, but
the Scripture and experience will everlastingly prove it narrow. Do you think
in good earnest, that the carnal latitudes, the broad allowances of the flesh,
will end in eternal peace and delights? Will your studied, idolized, sensual
delights carry, as in a Chariot, V^luit Deus nt mysterium religionis suae esbet
arcanum, at proposita difficultate angustissimus trames, ad immortalitatis
praemium sublime perduceret. Lact. de. Justiria, 1. 5. ^ 19.
your departing souls into an eternal Paradise? Do Christ's Soldiery come out
of great tribulation unto the eternal Palms and Crowns of their victories? and
can your effeminate, wanton, dissolute, brutish lives give you the least
assurance, that your voluptuousness below will end in the delights above? Have
the noble Army of Martyrs, the whole Church of the firstborn, found the way of
life a narrow strait way, and do you make it broad? The Word has told you,
and Death and Judgment will be an infallible Comment on the Text, Broad is the
way that leads to destruction. In a broad champion, and Regimental march,
hundreds may pass on a breast; but in a very narrow lane the passage is but two
by two. O all you dismal, black Armies, that march under the King of the
bottomless pit, your Captain-Generall, you may troop, yea you may speed in the
broad champion of corrupt nature, and walk in a full career and march to Hell,
but Chriss, soldiery pass in a strait lane, a thin company hedged about with
commands, that connot, dare not frolic in the large green plains of carnal
delights. If you think, or hope your large professions, or large lives, under
strict profession, will bring to, and leave you in the heavenly country, you
then must impudently and blasphemously charge the lie upon the faithful and
true witness Jesus Christ, he has told you the broad way of loose Principles
and Lives, will lead you to hell, if you will not believe, you shall see and
feel the truth of Christ by the light of eternal flames.

SECT. 10.
10. THe second head of causes, that are experimentally influentiall into this
great sin, Abuse of Gods grace, is Error. 10 Error in particulars causes the
abuse of Grace.
This will appear in five things.

1. The error of a corrupt palate. Sin is man's disease which makes him
dissavour the best things. Sickness takes away the sweetness of wholesome meat,
and Sin of the hidden Manna, most heavenly Feasts. God has the best furnished
house for his Family. We read the fatness of the Gods house, Psalm. 36. 8.
afeast of fatthings in the mountain of the house of the Lord, Is. 25. 6. A
sweet mer ry feast. They shall be joyful in my house of prayer. Is. 56. 7. but
it is to them only, whose palate is rectified and judicious, that relish
their heavenly food, that taste and see the Lord is good. Psalm. 34. 8. and
gracious, 1 Pet. 2. 3. who can say with David, How sweet are thy Words unto my
taste? Psalm. 119. 103. and with the Spouse, His fruit was sweet unto my taste,
Cant. 2. 3. But to the injudicious, unregenerate, the choicest spiritual
dainties are unsavory; they are unto Good works, though they profess the
contrary, void of judgment, Tit. 1. 16. They have no a sweet, judicious sense
of soul food. Have you seen delicate wantons better fed than taught, that do
more censure and play with, than eat heartily and work by their diet, abuse the
precious creatures, may be throw it to dogs? or a diseased patient, vitiated in
stomach and palate, disrellish the best diet, make faces at it, spit it out,
cry out it is naught. Here is the emblem of carnal spirits, vitiated with
corrupt, unsavory humors, the best provisions of Gods house will not down
with them: They vilify Angels food, Gospel-banquets, cry out upon it, in their
distemper, or if they take in a little of it, they spit it out again, or it
runs through them. Holy convictions stay not to concoction and nourishment.
Their palates do only relish the world, and delight in worldly things.

SECT. 11.
2. THe error of sufficient seize in Religion. This opinion 11 The error
of sufficient seize in Religion causes abase of Grace.
is practically debauching. Those that seemed to make have heaven-wards, and
think they have traveled almost enough in the way everlasting, that have
dreamed either of their possible or actual perfection in this life, need no
better discovery of their nakedness than themselves, they are their own
sufficient confutation. How far are the generation of Popish and Quaking
Perfectists, from the prize they seem to run after? further off, were their
eyes opened, than those they un-saint from Gospel-attainments. This sottish,
supercilious opinion of enoughs in the knowledge and practice of Religion has
begotten monstrous libertines in the present age. Such as have been filled,
with windy swelling conceits, not the real fruits of the Spirit; like some of
the high-flown puffed up Corinthians, reigned as Kings, 1 Cor. 4. 8. blessed
themselves in their high seize, viz. Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Mortification, Communion with God, Joys of the Spirit; and noy, as if rich
enough, they had nothing else to do but to contemplate their e^^ate, and gaze
upon their glory, their lazy contemplative life has swallowed up the active;
they lay by trading in heavenly commodities, religious attendances and
exercises: Their name is up with their deluded fraternity, yea in their own
foolish brains; and now they may lay abed till noon, yea sleep in carnal
security, in and before the light of their high-noon seize. As some men
that have gotten vast estates, look over their rich Lordships with much
contentment, are knighted, trade no more, have goods laid up for many years, so
many rich Laodiceans, that think they abound in spiritual goods, and want
nothing, and have nothing, no more than an empty sounding barrel, and are
sainted in Satan's Calendar; these trade no more in heavenly negotiation, as if
they could too much increase their Lords Talent, and give fearful symptoms,
that for all the puffs of their spiritual estates, they are but bankrupts.
That generation is well known, who have already decried and voted down Gods
standing Ordinance, the Ministry of the Gospel, as needless, who load them
with no better honors than the style of Baals Priests, Deceivers of the
people, the Locusts of the bottomless pit, the fuel for the fiery furnace of
Hell, and so bind up all Preachers in the same bundle of death; as well the
most industrious, circumspect, and conscientious, as the most lazy, loose, and
unconscionable. Has not this wanton, daring Age brought forth such proud,
pitiful, poor (it is to be feared, but nominal) christians, that have had the
boldness to call mourning for sin, a low attainment; daily prayer, a poor
sapless business; all private, solemn, as well as public, vanities, carnal
things, too low for their spiritual, seraphical spirits, as if they were not in
the body, nor had no body of sin, as if they were so Angelical in their high
Revelations, and maintained so constant, blazing divine fire of love to God, as
that it needed no further fuel, nor bellows of Ordinances, nor the Spirits
hands to use them, for holy and heavenly heart inflammations. Now behold with
fear and trembling the spiritual Judgment of spiritual Pride, spiritual
Blindness, spiritual Wickedness, spiritual, yea visible gross Apostasy. It Is
just with God, that they which will not keep in the safe plain, the secure
beaten valley, but they will be mounting up to the narrow tops of hills
perilous pinacles, they should fall, and that deadly. Some men and women have
not contented themselves (yea to their shame it must be spoken, some Ministers)
with the safe plain, the Ordinances of Grace, the Doctrines of Faith,
Repentance, Mortification, and New obebedience, nor keep in the secure valley
of walking humbly with God, but mounting up in their lofty minds, to the tops
of Hills, Doctrines too high for them, injudicious unscriptural Altitudes; the
perilous Pinacles of conceited Perfection, a stupid, and senseless assertion of
a kind of Adam-like Innocence before the Fall; That they that are born of God
sin not at all: I say some are the spiritual black marks of Gods vengeance,
from these perilous heights: The visible and fearful falls of haughty
adventurous wantons, are legible demonstrations to the observing world, written
in broad characters, that without infinite mercy they are very deadly. How have
some in their scandalous falls from pretended spiritual eminencies, betrayed a
double fearful loss, both of Christianity and civility of Christianity? either
with Arrians denying the Deity of Christ, or blasphemously and sacrilegiously
getting into the Throne of his Godhead, using these wicked Phrases, they are
Godded with God, Christed with Christ, yea that there is no difference of the
Godhead dwelling in the flesh of Christ, and the flesh of the Saints; as if
their flesh did as equally subsist in the Infinite person the Son of God, as
the flesh of Christ did; whence it would follow, that the fullness of the
Godhead did dwell corporally in them, as it did in Christ, of consequence
speak them sinless, perfectly holy, and contradict the pre-eminence of Christ's
Mediatorly anointing, who was anointed with the oil of gladness, the Holy
Ghost, above his fellows, the highest measures and graces in Saints and Angels.
How unchristianly do some of those fearful children of error, set up a
Christ within them, in opposition, in abolishment of a Christ without them, who
poring upon their spiritual transcendencies, have either quite put-out of their
Creeds the imputed Righteousness of Christ without them or else forgot it. As
little honor, it is to be feared, has Christ from some of these monuments of
delusion, as to the faith of the bodily resurrection, whereof he was the First
fruits; and as if his Ordinances were dead and buried, they have no more
Communion with them than we with the dead; and lastly, as for his visible
Image, living Christians, they are boldly styled the Devils children. As sad a
fall is there from pretended perfection, even to the abolishment of civilitie,
as if external Morallities, contained and required in the Second Table, were
no Ipsa est perfectio hominis, invenisse se non esse perfectum. Aug. Indefessum
proficiendi studium, and jugis conatus ad perfectionem perfectio repu^adar. Bern
no part of of Gods will. How far are they from growing to the full stature
of Christian practical Religion, whose errors in opinions and practices, have
made sad breeches upon all civil and natural callings and relations? It had
been well if these sad objects of pity, prayers, and tears had learned of
Augustine a truth, which would have kept them safe, humble, diligent, and
zealous after true perfection; It Is man's perfection, to find that he is not
perfect: and of Bernard; The unwearied study of proficiency, and constant
e^deavour after perfection is perfection; and of Paul, I count not my self to
allain, but I persson to the mark; and of Peter, (...) que hic viaee imas,
Taantum cunque h^c proficerimus nemo dicat, sufficit mihi, etc. August. Inter
profectum and defectum nihil medium. Nolle proficere non nisi deficere est.
Bern.
Grow in the grace and the knowledge of Jesus Christ. It is a true saying of
Augustine, Let no man say, though the longest liver, and highest proficient in
Religion, I have enough, I am righteous sufficiently: He that says so, he
stays in the way, he shall never reach his journeys end. Happy had it been for
these wondering falling Stars, had they considered, there is no middle state
between Proficiencie and Deficiencie, going forward, and going backward, if
they had considered, it must be with Christians, as it was with the Angels on
Jacobs Ladder, as to perpetual motion. The Patriarch saw them ascending and
descending, but no standing still. The stands of religious sufficiency, have
been, and are fatal to Imaginary Perfectists. O the rare artifice of Satan to
ruin souls! where he does it not as a Prince of darkness, he speeds as an
Angel of light. He puts the veil of imaginary perfection of holiness over
almost perfection of sin, votes a nothingness, an emptyness in Religion, a
sufficient attainment, tells real carnalists, they are high spiritualists, cheat
them with dreams, they are the darlings of heaven, when they are like to prove
firebrands in hell; while in the pleasing folly of spiritual pride, vain
self-lovers, admire themselves as the none such of the world, and cannot judge
in their coldness, yea death of Charity, that they are real Saints, vessels of
mercy, it is to be feared without extraordinary repentance, these not fixed
stars, but blazing comets, will go out in darkness, vanish in a stink, and
appear in the great day in the left hand as vessels of wrath.

SECT. 12.
3. THe Frror, a very sottish one, of Opinion, That what 12 A gross error to
the the abuse of grac is this, that what pleases the loose sinner pleases
God. Insipientes credunt, does amare, quicquid it si concupiscunt. Lact. l. 3.
0. 6.
pleases the loose sinner, pleases God: These things have thou done, thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm. 50. 21. an
erroneous and impious parallel, and the cause of much looseness. These things
have thou done; What? these sins are charged on the wicked Libertine; an
hypocritical owning of Gods Statutes and Covenant, ver. 16. His hating
instruction, and casting Gods word behind him, v. 17. His consent to the every,
and partnership with adultery, v. 18. His evil unbridled tongue, v. 19. His
slander even of a natural brother, v. 20. All these are put down as the sid
fruits of this cursed error, and real blasphemy, God and the sinner are alike,
Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self; I was as well pleased with thy
baseness as thy self. This is a tyring wearisom error to the pure God. Ye have
wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, wherein? when ye say every one
that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and be delights in him, or
where is the God of judgment? Mal. 2. 17: There are not a few gross carnal
Gospellers, who when their unwasht heart, impure and wicked lives, are covered
over with a white and beautiful veil of professed Christianity do as heartily
write themselves in their absurd, flattering, injudicious minds the children of
God, the dearly beloved of his soul, as if they were the exactest walkers:
Certainly those grossly intemperate, incontinent, covetous, malicious,
unnatural, profane ones, that would rage at a Minister or private Christian,
that should but so much as tell them, they fear and suspect their persons,
hearts and lives, are abominable to God; do not so much as scruple it, but
they are the objects of divine loves and delights: What does this amount to
else, but this virtual and interpretative persuasion the holy God, and the vile
sinner are alike? O that such wretches would consider, as the holy Scriptures
in multitudes of places, so Gods angry avenging Providence, are the
vindicating Patrons, and infallible maintainers of Gods purity, and after
death, the great day, and to all eternity, he will prove by sadly convincing
fiery arguments, the infinite distance between the holy blessed God, and the
lewd cursed sinner. Did either gross, or close hypocrites under
Gospel-profession, seriously consider, and deliberately reason, their own
wickedness, and Gods holiness, what likes them, and what pleases God, search
Scripture Records what the Lord hates, and what he is ravished with, and so
ingeniously and faithfully conclude, these and these things according to the
word of truth, are detested with a perfect abhorrence of the pure heavenly
Majesty, and we are guilty of them, and are as loathsome in his sight as Toad,
a Carrion, are in ours; it were impossible there should be such liberal and
large allowances of carnal liberty, as there are too much under the favor of a
divine approbation and delight. It Is too common an error that prospering
Providence are encouragers of wicked designs and practices. The Devil is a
Devil still, lying and unclean, though his temptations prosper.

SECT. 13.
4. The Error that false evidences of Grace are true: An erroneous rest on
these, has begotten too much Libertinism 12. Another Error that and buseth
grace is, That false evidences are true. (...) Non beat inanis theoria.
in the Church of God: As,

1. Bare knowledge of Divine things, is too weak a proof of goodness: The
Devils know but are unclean, full of wickedness: In their enlightened
intelligent natures, there are the spiraul things of wickedness; The Apostles
expression, Ephesians. 6. 12, The light of the Sun speaks not a Thief honest, nor the
Adulterer chaste, who are both lewd by the beams of it: Bare Illumination
speaks no man holy nor happy, to infer a good heart from a knowing head, is not
a more common, then a foolish and pernicious inference. Ah foolish, impudent
Christian, has God laid thee in with a stock of knowledge, to licentiate thee
to sin by the light of it? Will the aggravation of your sin, be the evidence of
your good estate? A stock of Knowledge is one thing, of Grace another. The
Gnostics that vaunted much of their knowledge, were a beastly Sect: The bare
light of Gospel propositions, will not fit for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light: Surely light is never gracious and saving, unless it Transform its
receivers: They are children of light, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. and they do not only see
it, but walk in it as children of light, Ephesians. 5. 8.

2. An Orthodox Judgment is no conclusive ground of grace: It Is gross error,
from Doctrinal soundness, to argue Cordial and Practical. A man may be sound in
the Faith, Tit. 1. 13. but Metuo magnoque tremore constringer, ne qui
Orthodoxam sidem habere videmur, eam vacuam honestarum actionum conjugio
oberrare permiserimus. Sophronius Hierosalymitanus Orat. in Natal Christ.
not by the Faith: His light is sound that speaks against Theft and Adultery;
but he is not found by his true light, that is a Thief and Adulterer, Romans 2.
21, 22. A form of knowledge is one thing, Romans 2. 20. A transforming into it is
another, Romans 12. 2. A man is sound in the Faith, that believes without
regeneration no man can enter into the Kingdom of God: That Justification and
Sanctification must go together: But he is not sound by this faith, that is
neither regenerate, justified, nor sanctified: It Is a loose deceit to argue a
good spiritual estate, from a good speculative judgment: Spirits and Lives may
be and are graceless, when contrary informations are bright and clear. Orthodox
heads are too often contradicted by Heretical Hearts and Laws. It Is a sound
confession, that the Scriptures are the word of God, and Christ is the Son of
God: There will be a day of Judgment, and a contrary everlasting Estate of
Heaven and Hell; but do not all false Christians live as if those holy Articles
of Faith, were Fables? Hear some men and women's sound expressions of their
judicious intellectuals in matters of Religion, set off with seeming good
affections, and you would conclude them Saints; Vanum est esse judicio bono
praeditum, and non ex judicio operari.
but watch their lives narrowly, and without wrong to charity, you must judge
them reigning sinners: It Is true one says, It is a vain thing to conceive, or
speak judiciously, and not to live judiciously.

3. Outward Baptism: This alone is to weak a Plea to speak a Christian. Too
many loose Protestants are practically Popish, who conceit, and trust to it,
that Sacraments by the natural Elementary power, ex opere operato, confer
Grace: They doubt not that they are actually regenerate, because Baptized, that
they have had the sprinkling of the Blood and Spirit in their conscience,
because they have had the sprinkling of Water on the flesh, whose unpurged
hearts before God, and impure lives before Men, speak them strangers to the
washing of Regeneration. Chrysostom was of another mind: In his Judgment a
bare outward Baptism, and a vulgar Faith, were not enough to get and keep soul
Purity: Ad animae puritatem servadam, non satis est Baptizari duntazat, and
vulgi more credere, sed st ea frut munditia and pulchritudine volumus, dignam
te vitam exh bore oporter. Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Joan.
He that will give proof, he is clean and glorious within, must show it by a
worthy conversation without. O the sad reproach of Christ and his Ordinance of
Baptism: Under the sanctuary of Baptismal Christianity un-Christian hearts and
lives, enemies to the Laws, the Spirit, and Cross of Christ, do shroud
themselves, as Thieves in their Den: Scandalous abusers of Baptism, will one
day know to their shame and smart, this pure institution was never appointed as
a Protector, but a Destroyer of their wanton corruptions.

4. Bare stirrings of the affections toward good things, will not be current
witnesses of Grace: It Is too common experience, good motions on the affections
have vanished into evil, honorable into vile. The stony ground had joy: Light
impressionsof Heavenly things, vanished into Earthly: Some sorrowand tears have
been swallowed up in profane mirth; a caroufing rouing meeting, has stilled
the raging, smarting conscience: Superficial delights in the grace and mercy of
God, have been soon crowded out by worldly pleasures: Zeal has ended in
Luke-warmnesse, yea Key-coldnesse: Shame in impudence, courage in
faint-heartedness, the fear of sin in carnal security. O Christians, deceive
not your selves! It is one thing to move the affections, it is another thing to
spiritualize and change them: They are not light touches, but mighty power on
the affections, that kill sin.

5. A partial Reformation in doing some good, in abstinence from some sins,
reputed Grace stands with much abuse of Grace: Partial duty, did not Saint
Herod: He was a Wanton with his Herodias. The Wisdom that is from above, is
without partiality, James 3. 17. is not fast in some duties and loose in
others, but as the Counterpane of the whole Law, has respect to all Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. and would be complete in the whole will of God. The
old Man is loose, if in any parts of the Divine pleasure, or the least
commands, he be willing to rebel: Christ's Laws are coards, Psalm. 2. 3. If
strong lusts break any of them, with Love and Delight: The Government of Christ
is thrown off. Innocence also, or abstinence from gross sins, is far from
Grace, yea, is accompained with high Dishonors to it. Freedom from Oaths,
Lies, unjust Dealings, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, are too weak premises to
conclude Saintship: True Grace washes inside and outside, does not only
ordinarily rescue from gross, but close sins. The Pharisee vaunted of an
outward strict abstinence, while he was loose within As the sober in the
streets, are dissolute within doors, so the Pharisees Austerity, is but the
vail of inward carnal Liberty: Christ saw their hearts, and discovered their
self-justifying pride, the Extortion, Excess, Hypocrisy, Iniquity that lodged
in their hearts, Matthew. 23. 25, 28. The spiritual sins of Unbelief,
Covetuousness, Heresy; the secret Atheism of unclean, shameless Hearts, in
Gods presence, inward Apostasy, hardness of Spirit; the dominion of vain and
worldly thoughts, and loose security in sin, are concealed abominations, which
unrepented of, will infallibly cast sinners into Hell: Let such as are
outwardly strict, and inwardly loose, who in words declare against Libertines,
and yet have ungoverned wanton hearts; consider, the Devil himself would be
content that they should leave some sins, if others reign: He well knows, that
partial reformation is but changing the Master, not the Mastership; no ending
the War, but alterning the seat of it; if he be driven out of some holds, he
may domineer in others; where his mischief is less suspected, more fortified
and pernicious: The flesh has diverse lusts: Deliberate choice service of any
one, is enough to ruin: One disease may be healed, while another kills; one
leak of a Ship may be stopped, while another drowns. Ah wanton Gospeller, be
ashamed of thy wicked and deceitful reserves: God sees what carnal close
Dalliances and false Loves thy soul runs after; for thine outside abstemious
wary walking; thy self and others may style thee a Saint, but thou art the
black mark of Gods avenging destruction: The Psalmist sets a Lo upon thee and
thy fellows, Lo they that are afar from God shall perish; yea further, he said
to God, Thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee, Psalm. 73. 27.
Thy severities against some lusts, will never speak thy chaste obedience to
thine Heavenly Husband, whilethy willing wanton indulgencies to, Kisses of, and
provisions for other lusts, speak thine whorish heart.

6. A groundless persuasion of Grace, as it argues none, so it exposes Grace
to notorious abuse: How irrational are carnal Gospellers, that vote bare
confidences Arguments? that have no better reason to prove that they are
Gracious, then Persuasion: What a silly argument is naked assurance in other
things? A chained Prisoner is no free man, because in a sottish frenzy he
persuades himself he is walking in the streets; nor is an unlettered man a
Scholar, who is confident of his learning: A cracked Title, will not bear out
the cheated Purchaser in Law, though he is assured of the contrary. O the
sottish condition of unregenerate Gospellers, whose only or main argument of
their good Estate in Christ, is because they are assured it is so, and so
neither dare nor will, by so much as questioning it, disturb their false peace!
Is it possible this evidence should pass for Grace and Glory? How long, O
self-deluding Wantons, will ye love simplicity? When you have given almost as
large allowances to your lust, as the flesh will require: Can this support a
persuasion that you are gracious? The Word did never witness to it, nor will
the Spirit of God ever seal to it, that you are the servants of God, while the
Devils Subjects; you are the children of Light, while you walk darkness; you
are in the straight way to life, while you are in the broad road to
destruction: A bare persuasion of being in a state of Grace, is a palpable
delusion; where ever this is, by constant experience we know, that the Grace of
God is abused.

7. Counterseit Grace conceived and believed real Grace, begets Libertines: The
Devil appeared in Samuels Mantle, and reigning sins appear to Gods discerning
eye, in the vail of counterfeit Grace. The old Serpent and the old Man, care
not how glorious the notions and pretensions of Grace are: These are their
friends; It Is real Grace only is their ruin: What grace is there, that is not
without it is counterfeit? The Devil is Gods Ape, and Corruption is Graces Ape:
There is a shadow of true faith: Some things have a fine semblance of the love
of God: That passes among men as repentance, that is none: Pride is clad in
Humilities clothes. There is a natural unsanctifying meekness, that was never
taught in Christ's School, Matthew. 11. 29. Wild Passion puts on the name of holy
Zeal: Pleasing and deluding carnal hope, is as easily perishing, as the Spiders
Web is swept away. False uprightness, makes the Hypocrite pass for a most
plausible honest man. The Ape in Man's apparel will have Apish tricks, and
corruption in the clothes of Grace, will and can do no otherwise then act like
it self, a lewd Wanton; It ever makes the Devils trade, it is good earnest, and
Religious profession it is pastime and sport.

SECT. 14.
5. THe error of abusive Interpretation of Scripture, has sadly 14. Abusive
Interpretations of Seriptures has produced the abuse of grace
produced loose Monsters in Religion: The Devil, the Arch-Antiscripturist, well
knows, that the Scriptures rightly understood and used, are the downfall of
his Kingdom: If he cannot banish the faith of its Divine Authority out of the
world, he does what he can to hinder it is efficacy: Among sundry ways he uses
to make void the benefit of it, this is one to deprave the sense: If he can
make Gods word speak his own interpretation he has his end, a dark mind, a
loose heart, and a debauched life: By turning the pure and genuine meaning of
the Scripture, into strange and adulterate, he has a double success; first the
obedience of his own will, and then the color and Patronage of Gods word, to
make his cheats sacred and unsuspected: He has Scripture on his side to
consecrate and facilitate his wickedness, and his Scholars of sad delusion,
wrest it to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Is it not made a Sanctuary for
Popery, Herisie, Hypocrisy, Cruelty, Worldliness, yea, gross Profaneness? O
high dishonor to the Holy Ghost, who revealed to holy Men, who wrote and
published the Scriptures, that spurious, idolatrous, silthy senses should be
laid at the chaste doors of Gods holy word! O eminent peril to immortal souls!
When bold Ignorance, carnal Affections, Lusts and Interests give the sense of
the Word! The sad issue is, The word of life is turned into a word of death:
The true Light of Divine Knowledge is dimmed or blown out: Sincere Milk is
turned into deceitful Poison: The Crystal Waters of the Sanctuary, are
bemired, from holy turned into impure: The Hellish Archer endeavors to
out-shoot God in his own Bow, and by the leave and license of abused Scripture,
he lures brain-shot erring Christians, into the ways of sin and death. To open
this, wherein abusive sense of Scripture does advantage a loose Faith and a
wanton Life, as in Church History, in all Ages since the Apostles, and in the
present Age, would be fitter for a Book then a Section. I shall instance in
some Sect-Masters, or sides of corrupt Glossers and abusers of the sacred Text.
Where were your understandings, O Arians! who could not see the plain Godhead
of Jesus Christ, in that you read him equal with the Father, without any
robbery to his Glory, Phil. 2. 6. and that by him were made all things that
were made, John 1. 3. Did ever mere Creature make all things? What though he
said my Father is greater then I, John 14. Could you not distinguish, he was so
as Christ was Man, or as Mediator, but not simply as the Eternal Son of God:
These wanton wits, that by wresting the word, have denied Christ's Godhead, the
Mediator of Grace, and so possibility of Grace, have (as History Records) been
abusive enemies of the Gospel of grace, and most bloody Persecutors of Orthodox
and gracious Christians. So what high dishonor to God, the Law, the Gospel,
Christian Liberty and Profession, have the Antinomian party published to the
World, who have made these Scriptures, Ye are not under the Law, but Grace,
Romans 6. 14. The Law is not made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. and such
places, to speak that it never intended a discharge from obligation to the Laws
direction and obedience; as an erring Preacher of this way, alleging this
Text, Wherefore, my Brethren, ye are become dead to the Law by the Body of
Christ, Romans 7. 4. roundly said, Believers are not only free from the Minatory
and Promissory, but Mandatory part of the Law. A gross Opinion, which as it
blots out the Ten Commandments out of the Canon, so it opens a door to all
dissolute Conversation.

Further, What infinite mischief to the comforts of the Faith and hope of
Christians, and to the power of godliness, have that pernicious Sect of
Allegorists done, as to the glorious Article of Christian Faith, The
^esurrection of the Body Hymenaeus and Philetus, held the Resurrection was past
already, and overthrew the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 18. It is thought by some,
they held no Resurrection but of Baptismal Regeneration, in which there is
rising to a new life: The confounding and wresting the Corporal into an
Allegorical Resurrection, was in Tertullians Sunt qui resurrectionem mortuorum
manife sio annunciatam, in imaginariam significtionem distorquent. Terful in
lib. de Resurrect. Hodie sunt suriost quidem ^ Daemonibus obsessi, qui se
libertinos vocant, qui all gorica resurrectionem imaginando, veram illam quae
nobis promissa es solvunt. Marlo. in Cor. 15. 1.
time; His words are, There are those, who do wrest the resurrecion of the
Body, manifestly declared in Scriptures, into an imaginary signification, a
resurrection from the death of ignorance to the life of truth. Marcion,
Basilides, Valentinus, Apelles, were poisoned with the same Error. Marlorat
noted also; the same evil spirit surprised a sort of furious men possessed with
Devils, who called themselves Libertines, who imagining an Allegorical
Resurrection, deny the true, literal, promised resurrection of the Body. Satan's
grand design in overthrowing this great truth is a carnal, voluptous, dissolute
life. Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall die, will be the counsel and
practice of the flesh, if the dead rise not, 1 Cor. 15. 32. The genuine fruit
of such a corrupt error, is playing the wanton under, yea against the light of
nature and grace. At what door any unstable, licentious Christians of the
present Age, have suffered first the questioning, then the slight assent to,
and lastly, the positive denial of the bodily Resurrection to come in, the care
of good life goes out. Moreover, The party of Perfectists, under the
pretensions of a complete transcendent grace, inherent in the regenerate,
having first abused the word of grace, have eminently dishonored regenerating
grace. That sweet and grand truth, whoever is born of God, sins not, and Joh.

3. 9. That is, either the sin unto death, or reigning sin as in the
unregenerate, is wrested as the support of a possible perfect innocence, yea as
the cover of any sin, not to be accounted sin; if in the regenerate. The
Pelagians and Catharists abused this place, so called, because they seigned
Believers in Libertinorum insana opinio, qui persuadent omnem sensum peccati
abjici endum, quod hominum imperfectorum sit conscientiae motibus perturbari:
and eos dicunt vere in Chris^to renatos and a mortuis excitatos qui nullum
peccati sensum amplius habent, et existimant quicquid agant, vel tentent,
placere fect Deo unde quum apudipsos adulteria and facinora hujusmodi
deprehenduntur, ea ne quaquam insiciantur, sed aiunt sibi non esse peccata,
quod ea pro peccatis non habeant: sed illis ad pecca tum imputari praedicant
quiper infirmita tem peccata esse existimant. Marlor. in 1 Cor. 9. 9.
this life have an Angelical purity: some Anabaptists have renewed this dream.
The same folly the Spirit of Error has transmitted to the sottish Quakers. All
which depravers of the holy Text, the same Apostle John that wrote it, has
sufficiently confuted in these words, If we say we have no sin, we decieve
our selves, and there is no truth in us. How easy is it for ignorant, loose.
stupid sinners, to persuade themselves they are born of God? And if nothing
they do is sin, with what bold security, unbridled liberty, and
unconscionable insensibility, will they give themselves up to the uncontrouled
swing of their domineering Lusts? How sadly has the word of truth, concerning
Regeneration and Perfection been abused, of old and present times. The saying
of Marlorat has been transcribed in the erring brains, and loose lives of
some Monsters of Christian profession among us. It Is the mad opinion of
Libertines who persuade (said he) that all sense of sin is to be cast off, that
it appertains to imperfect men to be disturbed by the motions of conscience:
And therefore they say they are truly regenerate in Christ, and raised from the
dead, who have no more sense of sin, and think what sorever they do or hold
pleases God. When they are taken in Adultery, and such kind of villainies, they
do not deny them, but say they are no sins to them, because they do not
account them so but they affirm they are only imputed to them as sin, who
through their weakness think they are sins. If this be weakness to account sin
sin and to be troubled for it, and it be Christian perfection not to think sin
sin, nor to have an awakened sensible conscience of sin, I know not what
wickedness is. O sad, and desperate delusion! Here is the plain efficacy of
Satan, to, miscall an admantine, remorsless heart, Chriperfection of life and
healths activity? Yet the of the Christian name, dare call the stupidity of a
dead and seared conscience, Perfection. If we right name and nature it, let it
be called Perfection, but of wickedness, not holiness. It Is a character of
sinners past grace, They give themselves over to lasciviousness. to work all
uncleanness with greediness; and that a licentious impenitent liberty may never
meet with check again, they are said to be past feeling, the word imports, past
grieving. Ephesians. 4. 19. There is some hope of recovery in a troubled conscience,
none a sorrowless. Trouble of spirit for wickedness, may stop a bold careere
hell- wards, and beget thoughts of returning, but he that gallops to
destruction, has not an inward pang, a sing, a groan, a tear in his way, must
infallibly perish. Well were it if this vile spirit of error had been in that
hell of gross darkness ^hence it came; but the same impudent Diabolical
looseness, that Reformed Writers condemned and discovered long. ago, a
generation of false adulterate Christians have revived, in our sad, infamous,
and spotted times; I mean the Ergtish Borborities, impure Ranters, whose
toadish natures have sucked up that venom their loose fraternity powered out in
the time of Calvin, Marlorat, and others; as Calvin's Opuscula, especially his
judicious and Zealous Tract against Libertines; and Marlorat in his New
Testament Expositions. But O you scandals of the English name, and bolts of
Christianity, Heavens scorn, and Hels triumph, the highest form in Satan's
School, that rant it out, in most free and liberal allowances of your
uncontroled Lusts; that make not sins definition The transgression of Gods Law,
1. loh. 3. 4. but a Thought an Opinion! Nothing is sin with you, unless you
think and account it so, who have so much sinned against conscience, that you
have quite cast off the sensible conscience of sin, if your debauched looseness
has not cast off the Eible and s^n-discovering books out of your hearts and
hands, and providence may lead you to the reading of this Section, I beseech
you fear, tremble, repent, and know the holy Text of which your impure hearts,
unmotified lusts, vile affections, have given a depraved Exposition, be no
patron of, but severe enemy against your monstrous impieties, impurities and
unrighteous dealings. Will you not be speechless in the arraignment of the Last
Judgment, when from a double Tribunal of Nature and Grace, Reason and Religion,
Paganism and Christianty, you will be infallibly condemned; You will learn that
Virtue is Virtue, Vice Vice, Grace is Grace, and Sin, is Some, whether they be
thought or believed so be or no, and a stupid conscience in a stupid hellish
Liberty to sin, is no Christian but Diabolical Perfection. Consider from what
stairs you have almost descended into the bottomless pit. Have you not in
spiritual pride despised the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ? Have you not
been formal and dead under them, when you used them? Have you not often blunted
by your stony, hearts, the home and wounding Arrows of informing reproving
convictions? When you could not could your works of darkness with the divine
light of truth; Have you not then to cover your old man's deeds, and quiet your
often barking, yea sometimes biting conscience, called Gods lightdarkness, and
Satan's darkness light; Yea by a surer artifice to make you quite dead as to
unquiet conviction? Have you not first given way to wicked skepticism, doubt
almost every thing; and which is a further degree of soul-ruining delusion, the
difference between Turpe and Honestum, Moral Malice and Goodness? Have you not
by a cursed, indiscriminating difference, jumbled Holiness and Wickedness
together, and made nothing sin, but what you thinks to be so? I cannot but tell
you if all the Apostate Angels should sit in counsel, why would most
ascertayne the the damnation of the children of men, pluck up all religion, and
righteousness by the roots, destroy Churches and commonwealths, questionless
your opinion and practices, would be the Devils masterpiece to do it. O
Remember whence you are fallen and repent. Be convinced the Law is holy, Just
and good. God has (...) Iren. adversus Hare. (...) Iren. Ibid.
pure eyes. No evil can dwell with him. He has no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. Study the Ten commandments, read Mr. Dod and
others. Know and believe the Rules of the Gospel are strict and severe against
Libertines; and be sure of it, your soul wounds are so deep and dangerous, that
it must be an extraordinary repentance that must heal them. You that have
wrested the pure word of Gods grace, and followed seduced Christians in the
time of Ireneus, who held perfection, boldly asfirmed, they knew more then
Paul, Peter, or any other Apostle, and yet ranted it like you in this opinion
and practice, they freely did all things they pleased, without any fear in any
things. O trace the penitential steps of a seduced sifter of your in error,
the beantiful wife of a Deacon in Asia, who being by an enchanting love-cup
defiled in soul, and Prostituted in body, by one Mark an unclean Magician,
pretending to make the most rich and best apparelled women Prophetesses, was
with much labor converted, from her irreligions, and impure error and practice
by the Christian brethren of that time, and ceased not to confess with bitter
tears and mourning the impure violation of her body and spirit from that
wicked Magician. Your Apostasy from Christ, into the impure sink of corrupt
opinion, and it may be ansverable practice, is very grievous, your return had
need be eminent in constant mourning, bitter weeping, pure and strict living.
So I pass from you to other Abusers of the Scriptures, Christian Profession,
and themselves. The Apostle Peter has an high expression of a real Saint, the
living Id est, quasi Deisicari, ut loquamur. Marl. Notandum cst naturae nomen
hic non substantiam sed qualitatem designate.
picture of Christ. He is partaker of the divine nature, anhigh expression
Marlorat thinks not to be paralleled in the Old be paralleled in the O and New
Testainment, it is as if we should say the Saint were deified; Quasi, as if,
not that he is so. The holy Writer well expounds the word Nature does not
design substance but quality; or, as I heard judicious Master Whitaker, now
with Christ, interpret, The divine nature is not the divine essence, but the
divine resemblance. The Manichees, a dissolute Sect, dreamed we are the
offspring of Gods substance, and at length after death Hodie fanatici, nos in
Dei naturam transire imaginattur.
shall return into his Being our Original; so some fanatical men fancy, we
shall pass into the nature of God, and his divine nature shall swallow us up,
abusing as this Text of the Apostle Peter, so that of the Apostle Paul, 15. 28.
God shall be all in all. Not that we are, or shall be, or can be parts of the
divine essence, a blasphemy against the simplicity of God, which is incapsble
of composition or division, but because being partakers of Quantum modulus
noster feret.
divine, created glory and immortallity, we shall be as it were one with God,
in the light and life of a glorious estare, as much as vessels of honor are
capable of. Some loose Libertines among us, the sad monuments of Apostasy from
the Truth, have come near the brink, yea sunk into this blasphemous error.
Moreover those Texts which answerable to natural reason, give God as the first
cause and being, an universal causalitie and efficiencie in the Acts of second
causes contirgent as well natural and Rational, as of Sense and Vegetation, as
That in him we have being and motion: He workssall things according to the
Counsel of his will Go does all and the Creature does nothing without him:
From the wrested truth of the divine concourse to secondary acts, doubt not
boldly to lay their spurious wickedness at the doors of the holy God, as if
Gods motions in the creature pure, and innocent, could justify the
irregularities and monstrous exorbitances of sinful men, when they know without
Coaction, they with a willing spontaneity, vile affection, and evil custom,
do mingle their corruptions with Gods innocent operations. These wantons that
shroud their sins under the Apology and sanctuary of Gods Agency in second
causes, will be one day without repentance, informed in a distinction to their
everlasting shame and punishment, That Gods working in vicious Actions, and
theirs, are as different as light and darkness; His motion is Metaphysically
and naturally good, theirs morally evil. His moving the faculries of the soul,
and members of the body, are pure, unblameable, and necessary upon the
presupposal of his being the first mover, intimately cooperating in every
second motion, as also upon the necessary reputation of his infinite purity and
goodness, which cannot be the least causative influence, in the least evil
disposition or action, as formally evil, but it is they have blended divine
pure activities with their own evil mixtures; as for example, It is Gods
efficacious concourse, that the hand with a sword in it is stretched out, it is
man's wickedness that has made the motion murderous. Gods motions are strait,
loose walkers motions are crooked. Gods actions are the fruit of his operative
Providence, whereby being and moving is supported. Their actions are the impure
results of depraved corruption. Last of all, among many revishers of the sacred
Text from its pure and chaste meaning, in reference to the Abuse of Grace,
Mammonists with their filthy lucre, cast dirt on the holy Word, and are cum
Privilegio worldlings by Scripture license and countenance. Two texts among
others, are the strong hold for their earthly minds: Parents lay up for their
children, 2 Cor. 12. 14. And he that provides not for his own is worse than an
Insidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8 ^oth are true, but miserably abused by uncompassionate,
covetous hearts. The first of laying up for children, was never intended to
swallow up laying out in works of Charity and Mercy. But what though Gods
allowance, and Parents indulgence may lawfully make their children, the heirs
in part of their Estates, will this excuse their dis-inheriting Christ in the
necessitous poor? will this excuse their rebelling against the Gospel? Old and
New Testament requities for liberal alms; giving nothing, or next to nothing,
in no proportion to estates. Amongst the sayings of ancient and modern holy
writers, yea the confessions of heathens, that might easily swel into a Book:
Some sayings out of Salvian, might make Scripture Worldlings to tremble, who
profess their portion is in God, and give sad grounds of Jealousy, it is only
in this life. When they thus Apologize, we know what Gods Justice demands, what
sacred truth requires, but we ^^rfess, we are bowed under the yoke of our
fleshly allience, we Dedimus cap^^^ manus vincal^^ charitatis, c^ss^ saenguint
^^^es, and vicerunt devotione^ rel^gionis jura pictatis. Salvian. contra
Ava^iti^^. Vi^^^^ excu^^^un^^^^ non excusans.
have given our captive hards to the chairs of our Parental affections: The
voice of blood is louder then that of faith, and the rights of nature have
swallowed up the devotion of Religion. Something may be said to cover, but not
to cure the disease of worldliness, a shadow of excuse, not excusing, giving to
the guilty a show of deprecation, no security from the cry of guilt. O worldly
I arent, whose all it is, to heap up estates for thy children, or the main of
thy earthly travel and solace! The unhappiest man in the World! Do thou
think how well others shall live after thee, and not how ill thou art like to
die? Tell me, I pray thee, O miser! O Infidel! when many are enriched with thy
divided Patrimony, and greedy Purchases, have you so ill deserved of your self,
as not to advantage your soul, by charity to strangers? (...) de (...) es ^am
male meritus?
Take this choice admonition, Let no man prefer his dearest child above his
soul: Christians are so to consult the good of their Heirs in this life, as to
accommodate themselves in Eternity: Facilius est hic deesse quippia^, quam
parentibus in futuro: and multo est levior praesens tenuitas quam aeterna
paupertas, ib.
It Is better that children should want something here, then Parients all
hereafter: Present mean estate, is better then eternal poverty: Better that
Heirs want a large Patrimony, then the Testators their salvation; yea, they to
whom Inheritances are left, if they have any piety, bowels, mercy to them that
leave them, should be glad of their pious liberality lest they perish. Hearken
hide-bound heart-bound Parents, that have the judgment of withered hands upon
you, to the words of Christ, He that loves Sonor Daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me, Matthew. 10. 37. Have ye banished self-love from your selves? soul
love, is true self-love: O unbelief! O perverseness! It Is a vulgar saying,
Charity begins at home: This is a new kind of Monster, to consult the
welfare of any one but ones self: Behold, thou art to go, O man of matchless
misery, to a sacred trial, to that trembling and intolerable Judgment, where
only a good Conscience, an innocent Life, and works of Mercy, will refresh
thee: Where a liberal mind, a fruitful repentance, and copious alms will
befriend thee. What if immoderate scraping together for thine bei^s, shut
Heaven against thee, Men's larga, Paenitentia fructuosa, Eleemo synae copiosae.
and open hell to receive thee; Will the memory of thine heirs vast and
voluptuous Estate, ease thy Bed of flames? Will the thoughts of their delitious
tables, even to glut and wantonness, afford thee a crum of mercy, a drop of
water to cool and abate thy torturing pangs? Had thou not been better by a
Bill of Exchange to have sent a great part of thine Estate in works of mercy
into the other world?

As to the other refuge of Tenacious, covetousness, he that provides not for
his own house is worse then an Infidel, how is this Text made to speak on the
Misers side? and how far from his Protection? The mind of the Spirit and the
Apostle in those words, was not to countenance a confined use of christians
estates within the Pale of their own families, but to tax and caution against
the Abolishment of natural affections, and necessary provisions in careless
family-guides, under the Pretensions of piety. This inhumanity to ones own
flesh and blood sets professed christians Sunt (...).
below Heathenish Infidells, who are by the guide of Nature, propense to love
their own: Of kin to this, is that Popish Inhumanity, which is cried up for
superlative Piety, if any leave their wife, children, and aged Parents, or go a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, or cloister up themselves in a Monastery. The
Catabaptists, as Marlorat noted, were besotted with the same madness, for
leaving their wives and children; as astonished witless fanatic men, they run
up and down, To propagate (as they fancied) the Dominions of Christ. The same
wild course, the brainsick Ita se pomeria Christi propagaturos dixerant.
Marloin 1 Timothy 5.
besotted Quakers take in these days, leaving their dearest Relations, in
tedious journyes, where Satan called the spirit is pleased to send them, whom
the Holy Spirit calls worse then Infidells for undoing their families to
propagate the light within them, from County to County, such as these as oppose
Religion to the necessary provisions of this life, are here intended. But Non
ita claudenda est res familiaris, ut eam benignitas aperire non posset, neque
ita referanda ut pateat omnibus, Cicero 2. Offic.
what speak those words for worldly Christians of the other extreme? Are not
they worse then Infidells, whose improved natural reason and moralities, have
made them liberal to the poor and needy? Have not these denied the Faith of
Scripture, that abundantly commands charitable distribution? yea the True faith
in God, that is ever fruitful in the compassionate works of Almagiving? Thus
too many with Scripture leave as they think are Bad Stewards of their Wealth,
let the large waters of creature mercies, run out almost only in the channells
of their own Families, are not the blessed cisterns to convey them into wanting
houses.

Trace all the kinds of abusing Gods Grace to their proper Oirginalls, and it
will be experimented, the wresting of some Scriptures or others, has been the
cause of loose hearts and wanton lives.

SECT. 11.
THe third head of causes, why the Grace of God is abused, Sect. 11. The grace
of God is abused by Presumption.
is Presumption, this also I shall branch out in five things.

1. The Presumption of a Preposterous Confidence in Gods mercy, this has
begotten carnal security, and strengthened the hands of wickedness. Dreams
of mercy have been the bane of duty, Patrons of looseness, and soft pillowes
for delicate wantons to sleep on. God is good, God is merciful, and therefore
the old man dares be sinful; as if God were not a prudent and pure dispenser,
but careless prodigal of his rich mercies: he is believed to wast them on the
Devils service, and to rain down their Heavenly showers, upon a barren
wilderness, an unfruitful Profession. But where have we a word in sacred
Writ, that the servant of sin must first be confident of Gods mercy? Did Bone
Deus, misericors Deus faciam quod mihi liber Aug.
eyer mercy privilege and own a lost sinner but on its own terms? It Is true,
mercy is to be found to the praise of the glory, not the infamy of mercy, as a
cordial to the fainting, a plaster to the wounded sinner, a spur to service,
not a Feast to riot on, when loose Libertines take not mercy (the childrens
bread) by Gods allowance, but like Dogs, endeavor to get it from his Table,
and are cudgelled off from it: did they seriously consider the way of obtaining
mercy, the Lessons mercy teaches, the evidence of mercies possession, the
Distinction mercy makes, the reputation mercy must have in the world, they
would soon be convinced, they are at as infinite a distance from mercy as they
are from innocence and duty.

O that all loose Libertines that feast their lusts at mercies Table; and that
commit this spiritual Burglary, of breaking into Gods house, to snatch away
his mercy, would lay to heart five things.

1. They are not yet in the way of obtaining mercy, they understand not the
method of mercy. As that 1. Christ is the mercy seat, the Throne of mercy, a
merciful High Priest, the great High Steward that gives out Alms of mercy,
and gives it to Subjects fit to receive it. 2. That none enjoy it bit themthat
are deeply sencible of their misery by sin, despair of mercy by any but Jesus
Christ. 3. That the obtainers of mercy are still knockingat the beautifullgate
of mercy, get Heaven by violence, wrestle for a Coelum tundimus Deum tangimus
misericordiam extor ^uemus Tertul. Apol. c. 40.
smile, a word, a Dole of mercy, as the Christians did in Tertullians time, We
strike at Heaven (said he) with our desires: We are close suitors to God, we
pull down mercy from him, as Jacob did, that wrought hard in prayer for mercy,
as the importunate Woman was, Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on me,
speeders for mercy are not cold, careless, indifferent Suitors. 4. That mercy
receivers are humble, selfe-abasing, condemning Soliciters, wonder they are not
in Hell past mercy, and the asking of it, like the Servants of Benhadad that
came with ropes about their necks, at once confessing their deserts, and wooing
the favors of a merciful King. 5. That the privileged owners of mercy, in an
holy importunity will hear no ^ay, but still lay prostrate before the Father of
mercies, until he show mercy, Psa. 123. 2. A sweet warm look of mercy
beaming upon a cold fainting soul; the ordinary invaders of Gods mercy, who
are not so much the Almes-men as the Thieves of mercy, ascend not to the Mount
of mercy by mercies stairs: but feed on a presumptuous fancy of mercy,
wantonize with it, and have no saving part in it.

1. They learn not the Lessons mercy teaches, in special two, Resignation,
and Subjection. 1. Resignation, the giving upthe whole person in a real
gratitude to Gods service, who instead of a wonder of mercy, might have made
the provoking sinner a Monument of vengeance. I beseech you by the mercies of
God, give up your bodies, etc. Pom. 12. 1. 2. Subjection, As many as walk
according to this rule mercy be on them, Gal. 6. 16. Every mercy says, be
dutiful; but choice, saving mercy calls for regular walking. Those licencious
daring ones that challenge mercy, say with those in Jeremiah, We are Lords, we
will not come to thee, are their own Masters, live as they list, know no Law
but their Lusts, were never Scholars well trained up in the School of mercy.

3. They have no evidence of mercies possession, the fear of God is this great
evidence, The mercy of God is from everlasting to everlasting on them that fear
him. psalm. 103. 17. Gods fear stands between two happy Eternities of mercy, as
the fair mark of both; the decree of mercy from Eternity, the enjoyment of
mercy to Eternity is the sure Felicity of all that fear God. O falsehood, folly,
madness! Too many that neither fear God nor sin, conclude a part in the mercy
of the Book of life, and look for the endless mercy, of the other world, and
by the prefamed license of mercy, live wickedly.

4. They study not the distinction, mercy makes, surely all designed for
mercy, are vessels of mercy, all that are, and shall be without it, are
vessels of wrath: an unchanged heart, and unreformed life under mercy makes
no difference between the persons of mercy and wrath. If vessels of mercy may
be Libertines, they and vessels of wrath both will be carnal walkers, mercy
and duty, wrath and sin, will be an everlasting distinction between the heirs of
Heaven, and the purchasers of Hell. Vessels of wrath will be Libertines if
vessels of mercy are so too, the one is as good as the other.

5. They bring not Gods mercy in Reputation in the world, what honor has God
in pretenders to mercy, that abuse his Grace? They who are designed to mercy,
are vessels of honor. 2 Timothy 2. 21. Not only to import they are called to
honorable privileges, but honorable services: As God honors them in holding
out his golden Scepter of mercy to them, so they are to honor God in being
glorious within, and wearing without the golden apparel of an heavenly shining
conversation, ps. 45. 13. paul obtained saving mercy, he was an high and
eminent vessel of Honor, and he honorably used his mercy to the praise of
its Author, I obtained mercy, and the Grace of God was abundant in me through
Faith and Love. 1 Timothy 1. 13. 14. The garment of mercy God bestowed on him, was
honorably and richly adorned by sanctifying grace. Licentious Professors do
not honor but cast dirt upon the Robe of mercy; were it not for presumptions
of mercy, false Christians would not so play the wantons under Gospel
Profession. Did they think and speak the truth in our unregenerate
hypocritical and profane Estates, that there is no mercy for us, we are
children of Wrath, if we live and dye so, we perish, this would damp the
pleasing merry fits of sin, if this do not turn them Heavenwards, it will force
upon them inward gripes and conscience pangs in the way to Hell. The same
prophet that says, There is no peace to the wicked, Ifa. 57. 21. says also,
He that made them, will show no mercy to them. Ifa. 27. 11.

SECT. 12.
12. The Presumption of Interest in the Promises, is a cause Sect. 12.
presumption of Interest in the promises, causes abuse of Grace.
why Grace is abused, as unreasonably do foolish Gospellers fancy a part in the
great Charter of the City of God the gra cious covenant of promises, as fools
o^ madmen imagine the Immunities and Privileges of the City of London, belong
to them who were never Apprentices there, nor in any other regular way got
their Freedom. This glorious Interest a part in the Promises, too many vain
walkers in the Christian name, no less falsely then boldly do assume. It Is ^ith
false Christians as Jews, those made this their vaunt and proof, That the
Promises belong dunto them, Romans 9. 4. And those at every turn, after renewed
dishonor to the Grace of God, can shelter themselves in the Promises; but
where in the word, is there a title of a promise made to the wrongings of
Grace? Has the word of Promise made a soft bed for effeminate, delicate, lazy,
lustful, carnal security to sleep in? the promise of life to unreturning
sinners, strengthens the hands of the wicked, and is a lie, Ezekiel. 13. 22. The
God of Truth never promised life, ever threat neth death to the impenitent: The
Devil, the flattering world, the wicked promise themselves life in the ways
of Death. The word does note sour things, will discover the wickedness of
their Presumption, that impudent, unmortified christians, lazy convictions,
have a right to the promises.

1. They have not, while the Abuse of grace reigns in them, a right to Christ,
therefore not to the promises, Christ is the great gospel Promise, the great
moving Wheel, by which all the Whee's of the promises move. In him all the
promises are ^ea and Amen, 2 Cor 1. 20. To him they were made, therefore he is
called The covenant of the people, Isa. 42. 6. so then no part in Christ, none
in Promises, no taking of the person of Christ, no child of promise: Now its
evident, that unreformed abusers of the grace of God, Lusts-servers,
Flesh-pleasers, have no part in Christ, for they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. and therefore as
yet, are strangers to the promises, and children of Wrath under the curse,
every moment in danger of Hell, the promises have not a good word for them. The
confidence of being armed with the promises, will not keep such black marks,
as are carnal wantons, shot free, from the mortal charges of the Laws
threatenings.

2. The promise is an holy promise, ps. 105. 42. Now an holy promise was never
made to encourage and bolster up unholy hearts and lives: It Is true, immediately
before the sinners taking Christ, the promise found him unholy, but it does not
leave him so. In the first moment of taking Christ and right to the promises,
an holy nature is infused, and its impossible that such a one should infuse the
Grace of God and make void the promise.

3. The Spirit that seals the promise to the believers Soul in an holy
spirit, Ephesians. 4. 20. Now as the seal leaves its own print on the Wax, so the
holy spirit seals the holiness of the promises on the Soul: Where the heart
is still unholy, the Devil seals his false promise, the spirit seals not his
true one, the spirits applications of promises, are purifying and fortifying.

4. The use of the promise, is the improovement of Grace, not dishonor, it is
for Gods sake and service, not the sinners, not barely to comfort, but mainly
to cleanse; Having these promises, let us Impii rapiunt in sui consolation em
promissiones grutiae Luther in Genesis
cleanse our selves, 2Cor, 7. 1. Lust and the devil says, having these
promises, we may boldly sin, the promise will help in case of sin, guilt, and
disquier. Most true is that of Luther, The wicked filch and take the promises
of Grace to themselves, for their carnal comfort.

SECT. 13.
13. The presumption of a false Peace, has betrayed many to Sect. 13. The
presumption of false peace causes the abuse of grace,
the injury of Gods grace, quiertnesse speaks no safety nor goodness of
conscience, the Dormant Lion when awakened will roar and tear, the Prisoner is
neither secure nor clean, because he sleeps in a cold and filthy dungeon,
though he be merry and loose in his restraint, he is under the lash of the Law,
and near the sentence of the Judge. Though there be no true Peace to the
wicked, Isa. 57. 21. Yet they please themselves with the Devils peace, Luke
11. 21. While God lets them alone, and the Devil disturbs them not, in mean
while the old man (upon presumption of Liberty of conscience) shelters himself
under the Tranquiliias ista tempestas.
wing of grace. This security is not long lived, though it be lasting, it is not
everlasting, sins calms prove the worst storms, a calm air has ushered in sea
storms, and Earthquakes; the wind in the bowels of the Earth is silent and
quiet for a time, at length it breaks out, roars, and hurls Hills, Feilds, and
Houses into a dark and ruinous Abyss. Indulged, pampered sin in the soul is
silent and quiet for a time, but at length it breaks out, and roares in horror
of conscience, and hurles all false comforts into the dismal pit of despair:
Although blood touches blood, Hos. 4. 2. And there be a contiguity, a close
addition of sin to sin, drunkenness, be Pax mihi futura ad appectum, i. e. ad
studia cordis mei ambulabo Junius.
added to thirst, yet many bless themselves in the imaginations of their
hearts, and say they shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. yea walk according to the
deluding Dictates of their hearts, because they say so: Had it not been for
Lust and the Devils peace, the awakning terrors of the spirit of bondage might
have driven many out of Hells way into Christ; but because stupefied
consciences are peaceable, they dare be filthy and abominable, and this is the
sad tragical issue of the merry comicall Acts of sin, in the stage of this
life; That ease which has first tempted to sin, ends in torment, The ease of
the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them,
Prove. 1. 32. When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape,
1 These. 5. 3. They shall say: who shall? the next verse 4. Tells us, they who
are in darkness (and do the works of darkness by the comfort and confidence
of peace) that the day (of angry Justice) overtakes as a Theife, they shall say
peace: Ah sad peace worse then war, the snare and trap-doore to fall into
destruction! Happy had it been for the filthy Peace-dreamers of bad hearts and
lives, that with the repenting Jaylors, they had had heart tremblings, then
with the secure Sodomites a fair morning, a sunshine of prosperity, should
usher in fiery avenging storms of warth. How wise and safe had been their
estate, that at once have peace with sin, and (as they think) with God, had
they at once seen God, and sin their enemy, their softest beds had been to them
beds of Thorns, their sweetest comforts, bitter vexations, the creatures armed
against them, feared their very meat might prove their poison, every night
might be the last, that these awakening driving terrors might chase unquiet
afrighted spirits into Jesus Christ, that the fear and war of the spirit of
bondage, might end in the joy and peace of the spirit of adoption, that
tempestuous souls might hear these sweet calming words, Be of good cheer, it is
I, be not afraid, Mat. 14, 27. Fear not, I am thy God, Isa. 41. 10. My Person,
Spirit, Graces, Comforts, Glory, infinite merits are thine: Some in the
Wilderness of their sins, fears and sorrows, have at length leaned on their
beloved, when the false peace of most presumptuous ones has lured them into
Hell. As many there, as have been tempted by secure flattery, into their
tormenting easelesse bed of Tribulation, will have cause to think and say
within themselves, accursed be that calm of our polluted quiet hearts and
lives, that has brought us to an eternal storm, accursed be that peace that
has cheated us into an eternal war, accused be that sweetness that has
enticed us into eternal bitterness, accursed be that friendship with the
world and Devil, that has betrayed us to an eternal enmity with God.

SECT. 14.
4. The presumption of setting death and Judgment at far distance, Sect. 14.
The setting of death and judgment at far distance causes the abuse of Grace.
1. Death, Resentment of it as of a Traveller, thousands of miles off, at
scores of years removes, begets through the deceits of the flesh, and lies of
the Devil, a tolleration, yea, a resolution to play the wanton, not only
against Nature but Grace. The Epicure that believes not the Souls immortality,
concludes and wanton voluptuous life from probable short life, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor. 15. 32. And the Christian, though he
believes his Soul shall live for ever, does wantonize in carnal delights,
from probable length of days, he shall have time enough to get the Grace of
Repentance, and therefore he abuses the space and call, yea, the conviction of
returning: the vilest of Christians, while under the sentence, and on the bed
of death, seem to have some sober thoughts of the excellency and necessity of
Grace, and of some complying desires and wishes: O that they had it, who when
they believed it, yea found it at vast distance from them, despised and abused
the motions of the spirit and word and of Grace. How Saint like is the
enlightened Libertine, within a few hours of his death, how dissolute ten
years, scores of years before it? 2. Judgment, Because particular Judgment
after death, and the general Judgment of the great day, is delayed, Therefore
The heart of the Sons of men is set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. wanton
scoffers walk after their own ungodly Lusts, saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? 2. Pet. 3. 3, 4. That cooling word in the Indulge, exple animi
cupiditates scito tan them sis ratio. nem Deo red. diturus. q. d. fac quicquid
mali poteris tandem vapu labis aut in manus carnificis incides. Mercer: l. 5.
c. 2.
hot chase of sin Remember God will bring thee to Judgment. Eccl. 11. 9. is
too little remembered: the words of Mercer are observeable, Feed and dandle thy
lusts with most cockering indulgence, coming to every desire of thy carnal
mind, yet know at length God will reckon with you: fill up your measure of sin
to your utmost possibilities, at length you shall smart for it, and fall into
the hands of avenging Execution: my Lord has delayed his coming, said the
loose evil servants, and therefore they were intemperate and injurious, rioted
in drunkenness, and Beat their fellow servants, Matthew. 24. 48, 49. As the
wanton whorish woman argued to uncleanness, Come, let us take our fill of
Loves, let us solace our selves with Love, for the good man is gone a long
journey, Prove. 7. 18. So the wanton Christian argues to licenciousnesse, he may
in the spacious intervalls between his healthy time and the last Judgment,
bathe his fleshly mind in fleshly loves and delights, for it will be long ere
the last. Assizes come: and will it be long? what if millions of years, it will
come at length, too soon and too sore upon the injurious slighters of Gods
Grace. Ah Christians that sport your selves with your own deceivings,
Irremediabile periculum sit, aliquem cupiditatibus fraena laxare, ut se
rationem Deo non meminerit redditurum, Bernard.
that Gospel Grace and liberty will favor your disordered walking, that give
your Lusts too large room, under the plain hearing and convincements of
strictness, that stumble in high noone day; slacken the Reins to your head
strong desires as if God would call you to account. Bernard tells you this is
an irremedilesse soul danger: If the Faith of the last Judgment do not teach
men holy Wisdom Repentance, Temperance, Obedience, what will, what can? weep
you (said the Apostle James to the rich loose wantons of his time) And howl
for the miseries that are come upon you; Jam. 5. 1. why? Ye have lived in
pleasure in the earth and have been wanton. ye have nourished your hearts, as
in a day of slangther, v. 5. The coming of the Lord draws nigh. As if he had
said, you play the wantons with creature mercies, forgetting God and your
duties, but the accounting day is nigh, Faciat jructu^ qui potest, adest
dominus, qui fructum requirit, faecundos vivificet, steriles depre: hendet. Am.
Super Luc.
The Judge is at the door. They are good words of Ambrose, Let every one bring
forth the fruit of Grace, the Lord is present (in his word to faith) who will
require fruit (will not be put off with leaves) He will give eternal Life to
fruitful trees, will take and cast barren ones into Hell.

SECT. 15.
5. The presumption of time enough to repent, has brought 15. The presumption
of time enough to repent, does cause the abuse of Grace.
forth this uncomely Monster, The abuse of Grace: There are not a few incurable
instances in the other World, who have first delayed, and then everlastingly
lost the space and Grace of repentance: Those words of Christ concerning
Jerusalem, may be truly and sadly said of Grace-refusing and abusing
Christians: Had thou known in this thy day the things belonging to thy Peace,
but now they are hidden from thine eyes. Hannibal bewailed the loss of his
opportunity to master Rome; when he would have taken it, he was twice forced
from his attempt, to a sad retreat, by almost vehement shower of rain, and is
reported to say, When I could, I had no mind to take Rome; when I would, I had
no power. There are too many, that will to all Eternity confess, that when
Grace has wooed them for their eternal salvation, and repentance to life, they
had no mind to it, but when they would on a deathbed repent, they could not.
It Is never enough considered by them that put off their repentance, what
infinite hazard they run to be lost for ever. Subtle Satan and the wily flesh,
does against deceived sinners, as ill Debtors carry to their Creditors, promise
to pay, but beg a longer day of payment, and when that is come, another, and so
another day, and never pay: Flattering Lust begs a longer day of repentance,
and being loath to leave Lusts dear sweet services and delights, craves still a
longer day, and so the Debt of repentance is unpaid. This cursed and common
frame of Spirit, does in effect speak thus to God, The real love and delight of
my soul is in my sin; I delay repentance, not out of love to the duty, or
hatred of my delicious Lusts, but to quiet my conscience, and for fear of Hell;
I mean not to delay a repentance once, but often, yea always; yea, should I
live an Eternity in the World, my delicious sins shall have my heart, my
service: Mortification is an idle dream: The death of sin shall neither have my
sentence nor endeavors: I am loath to leave my sweet Companions. Hence is it,
that from youth to manhood, from that to old age, from that to Eternity, there
is no repentance in hardened vessels of wrath: A while longer, and a while
longer is the constant importunity of the flesh: Backsliding is perpetual,
Jer. 8. 5. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be?
Jer. 13. 27. This lazy disease of sluggish putting off repentance, was in
Augustine, yea had ever been in him, had not Grace cured it: When he could not
answer the convictions of the necessity Non erat quid respondere^ veritate
convictus, nisi tantum verba lenta and somnole^ta. Modo, ecce modo sine
paululu^, sed modo, and modo non habebat modu^, and sine panlulum in longum
ibat. Aug. in Confess. Nitido cum flore juventus, Number satanae? and senii faex
erit apta Deo?
of repentance, he craved forbearance not to do it yet; I know not, said he,
hat to answer, being convinced of the truth, but only sluggish and sleepy
words, Anon, behold anon, suffer me a little: But anon and anon had no measure,
and bear me a little held long: Thus Satan has the flower of age, the strength
of manhood, and God the dregs of old age: It Is man's folly and madness to give
God the worst: It Is ordinarily his angry Justice not to accept it. He that is
denied the sweet Rose of the Spring, cannot be pleased with the dry Thorn: Had
God no delight in the yong-long-standing fruitless tree; surely he can take
none in it, when it is withered, It Is no longer for the soil, but fire, Matthew.
3. 10. If it be said God works Grace on a sick bed, as one said: An early
Saint, now in glory, answered him in two things: This is extraordinary. It Is
not Gods usual course, to begin and period deathbed repentance; and further
said he, Do not you trust to that.

How reasonable will Gods usual refusal of sickbed and old Non illos qui
necessario sed qui sponte vitiis abstinent, Coronat Deus. Chrysostom.
age returning thoughts, appear in the other world? They that put off
repentance to the last, do it not out of choice, but necessity; and God is not
ont to crown forced and artificial, but free and natural repentance: It is a
poor, weak, and unconvincing demonstration, that a man delights in wholesome
severe exercises of repentance, who never set upon them, but when going out of
the World: Their sins leave them, before they Priusqua^ peccata relinqua^t ^
peccatis retinquuntur.
leave their sins: They think of leaving them, because they have no more active
spirits, strength, time to besto upon them, not because of holy hatred against
them, indignation at, and weariness of them: Had this frame of spirit been
infused by the holy Ghost, in the renewed heart long ago, sin had not had so
many years faithful service: This adjourning repentance reprieving not
executing the flesh, makes foolish men, like bad Gamesters, that throw up the
Cards when they have lost the Game; so these faint woulders after repentance,
never think of throwing up their sins, till in their disease they have lost
their lives; they never think of ending their iniquity, till the pleasure of
their iniquity be at an end, Ezekiel. 21. 25. But O dallying sinner, that h^st a
long time been caught in the snare of deep carnal security! Hear the Apostles
warning, Awake, thou that sleep, from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light: Hearken not to the Ravens Song, Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow, That
morrow comes not to many lingering sinners: Art thou sure the repenting morrow
will come unto thee? The saving motion of the spirit often abused, never comes
again: The safer and wiser words are, Cito, Cito, Redi, Redi, Quickly, quickly,
Return, return. Hearken, O foolish sons and daughters of men! to that of the
wise Solomon: How long will ye love simplicity? sit in the region and shadow of
death, be the Devils Prisoners, and your Lusts Captives, and abide condemned
under the curse of the Law? Would you quickly run out of an House fired about
your ears? Would you fly from a drawn pursuing Sword to run you through? O
while under Gospel time and means of grace, you are Wantons, and pamper the
flesh, slight and contemn the ways and methods of Eternal Life; even all this
while the wrath of God, the malice of Satan, the killing Law, is pursuing you
for your immortal ruin. O take the counsel that once a friend gave to
Brentius, when his enemies were suddenly plotting, determining, and endeavoring
his death, he wrote a Letter to him, Fly Brentius, with all possible speed, Fly
for your life: O lingering sinners, within Cito, Citius, Citissime. Melch. Adam:
a little of the Grave and Eternity, that have abused the grace of God, Fly
with all possible speed, from the state of damnation, the wrath to come, while
your day of Grace is spending, and it may be shortly will be quite spent, your
damnation slumbers not, but with terrible awakened Lion-like eyes, will stare
on your departing souls, if you go with the un-repenred, unpardoned mountain
load of all your sins into the other World: As Solomon spoke concerning flight
from ens^^^ing, undoing suretiship: Deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of
the Hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler, Give not sleep to thine
eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, Prove. 6. 5. So take counsel concerning
flight from the gall of bitterness, the bond of iniquity, the bondage of Satan,
the infinite danger of impenitence, that seals the guilt of infinite sins upon
the soul: Deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of the Infernal Hunter, as a
Bird from the crafty destructive snare of the invisible Fowler, do not creep,
but fly from his Hellish mortal Gunshot: His name is Abaddon, Apollyon, so is
his disposition and conversation. It was mercy that made lingering Lot to get
out of Sodom and haste to Zoar: It would be infinite mercy, did you hasten your
escape from the dominion and damnation of your pleasing Lusts, to the reign and
security of saving grace.

SECT. 16.
THe fourth head of causes, that fathers this adulterate offspring, 16.
Temptation causes the abuse of Grace in four particulars.
The abuse of Gods Grace, is temptation: There are four temptations to this sin.

1. Temptation, a voluptuous life: The Widow that lived in pleasures, waxed
wanton against Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 11. As the Apostle opposes the Spirit of God
and the World, 1 Cor. 2. 12. so mostly spiritual and worldly pleasures are
inconsistent. Such as are ravished with the delights of the Spirit, are
crucified to worldly delights, unaiding and unconducing to higher comforts; and
the intemperately toxicated with worldly delights, loath the delights of the
Spirit: Voluptuous, prosperous, secure ones, that joy in their Possessions and
Relations, feast their senses with creature-suitable sweetnesses, That spend
their days in mirth, as Job says, in this wanton brutish life, disparage and
abuse the God of grace, and the life of grace, the fountain and the streams of
highest sweetness; The God of Grace, in these words, They say unto God, depart
from us, Job 21. 14. They had been as good have said, Depart Heaven and
Happiness: It Is his presence which makes Heaven; so they despise the life of
Grace, desire not to be acquainted with it; We desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, v. 14. nor to walk in them; all whose paths are pleasantness, yea
matchless delights, What is the Almighty, that we should serve him; or what
profit should we have if we pray unto him, v. 15. What profit? Ah beastly
Atheistical Sensualists! What not? The gain godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 6 The Pearl
of great price Jesus Christ, Mal. 13. 46. Saving wisdom is better then gold or
silver, Prove. 3. 14. The spirit of Grace, Luke 11. 13. Precious Faith, 2 Pet,
1. 1. The gain of the Soul, Mar. 8. 37. Treasure in Heaven, Luke 12. 33. Rich
commodities, in which, prayer in the Holy Ghost trafficks, These high gains
and joys, Epicurean Pleasurists, with an ignorant and supercilious disdain,
abuse, as not worthy their thoughts, estimate, affections, as if they were
Mahumetans, not christians, had only studied the Alcoran, not the Bible, were
Deos nihil curare dicit, non ira non gratia tangi: infercrum poenas non esse
metuendas: quod animae post mortem occidant: voluptatem esse summum bonu^: eius
causa nasci hominem, Lactan. l. 3. c. 17.
poisoned with the persuasion of Epicures, That the Gods care not for the
things below, are neither pleased nor angry with humane affairs, infernal
punishments are not to be feared, souls and bodies die together, pleasure is
the chiefest good, that it was the end why man was borne. If irreligious
pleasure-hunters say they are neither Atheists nor Epicures, they do as well
follow Heavenly as Earthly delights, they say more then their hearts and lives
p^ove. Are not the pleasures of sense their delight in good earnest, the
pleasures of Faith their jest, their fancy, their dream? Can the strength of
the Soul go out to both? I say not it is impossible. '^ is very rare to be high
in Earthly and Heavenly delights, their number is very thin of delicate, high
fed, rich christian professors, that can say, and not lie, high joys below are
out joyed by higher joys above, that do but use them not enjoy them, that are
crucified to them, that can at pleasure retreat from them. The better fed
Quemadmodum impossible est, ut ignis flammam concipiat in aqua (...) est
voluptates mundi, cum poenitentia Christiana manner Otho Casmannus.
then taught, Peastiall Christians, wantons in the worlds large and high
Pastures, speak but the flattery of the Flesh and Devil, when they say the
severe discipline of serious Repentance can consist with carnal earthly
delights. It Is a saying of a good writer, that has too much experience for its
Probatum est, As it is impossible that fire should burn in water, so its
impossible that the pleasures of the world and Christian Repentance should
dwell together. I cannot therefore but admire and adore infinite wisdom, who
knowing the worlds higher ground is dangerous, and high sensual pleasures are
as slippery places, Psa. 73. 18. Has ordinarily made the rich Heirs of Glory,
the poorer sort of the world, Jam. 2. 5. Lest the palate of their Souls
should be vitiated and corrupted with too much savouring of Creature
sweetness. The wholesome and prudent design of left hand streightnings is to
brighten the future Crown of Glory, by coming to it through much want and
labor; the great Heirs of Heaven are usually kept low, lest they should come
to their immortal inheritance Ne immortalitatem delicate assequerentur and
molliter Lact. l. 7. c. 5.
too delicately and softly. God will not honor Grace despising voluptuous
worldlings, so highly as to remove, yea in some, not to imbitter those outward
delights, which in angry providence he gives and knows will turn to their
bane. It Is a sad saying of Lactan. God suffers corrupt and vicious men to live a
luxurious delicate life, because he looks on them as worthless persons, and
he will not honor them so as to amend them. I wonder not that a poor
Christian that walks with God, feasts, lives, hopes, high values estates by
their spirituallity, invisibility, eternity, and not by the worlds accounts,
would not change his hard bed, threadbare garment, dry crust, small drink, for
the graceless pomp and Deus corruptos and vitiosos luxuriose ac delicate
patitur vivere, quia no^putat emendatione sua dignos. Lactan. l. 5. c. 23:
fulness of beds of Down, delicious Tables, soft, costly, and shining changes
of Raiment. I knew a very poor and very rich godly woman, that would not change
her holy poverty, for her rich neighbors unsanctified estate: indeed the
meanest judicious Christian in his spiritual wits, resents not the civil
honors and vast annual wealth of carnal wantons with envy, but pity, they
are rather to be looked upon with weeping then fretting, whose way to Hell is
strewed with Roses, who go through pleasant meadows to Execution. Rejoice poor
Christian that stands in the worlds lower ground, be not troubled that wicked
sensualists now stand above thee, thy right hand promotion is a coming, thou in
low temporal allowances sowest in penitential tears, they in high enjoyments
even to surfeit, impiety and Atheism, sow in carnal merriments, thine Harvest
and theirs, will be as different as Thorns and Wheat, thou shall reap in
joys, they in sorrows: Christian Repentance is incomparably above carnal
pleasing voluptuousness. This is the mother of wordly laughter, that of
Christian tears, this inlargeth the flesh, that strengthens it, this puts a
leaden weight upon the Soul, that wings it to fly to Heaven, this serves the
flesh in every thing, that crucifies the flesh, and brings the body into
subjection, this calls off a man from God, that calls him back again to God his
Savior, this obeyes the Devil, that is devoted unto God.

SECT. 17.
2. TEmptation to wrong Gods grace is evil company. What 17 Evil company is a
temptation to wrong the grace of God.
more unworthy abuse than a ransomed captives ungrateful denial of their
Redeemer. Self-destroying Heretics do thus deny the Lord that bought them:
They go not to Hell alone with their wanton loose wits, argue others into
their company, and make them fellow wantons of damnation; for so the Greek
Text, and word in the Margin will bear it; Many shall follow their damnations,
or destructions; the abstract for the concrete, their damnable ways: Our
English is, pernicious ways; (...): The Margin in the Greek is (...); in the
English, lascivious ways. The import of the Original is, That lascivious
Heretics are very fruitful; some Masters of Heresy beget numerous Scholars,
which argue and believe themselves out of their Faith into Damnation: Their
word frets as does a Gangreen, 2 Timothy 2. 17. The leaven of loose wits did
spread abroad in the purest times of the Apostles, to speak perverse things,
and draw away Disciples after them, Act. 20. 30. Chapmen of error, will bring
custom to the Devils stall. Have any of the Pharisees believed in him? Joh. 7.
48. The fast brotherhood of Antichristian Pharisaisme was Argumentative to
despise and oppose the Grace of Jesus Christ. Thus the dissolute walking of a
pack of Hypocrites imbolden one another to frequent indignities, unbecoming the
Gospel; the society of Mammonists, sainted by their faith in Gods mercy and
Christ's merits, bow down to Money, their Idol; and while they profess God
their portion, and Christ their Lord, and pay to both some easy and cheap
religious formalities, they dishonor both by paying that adoration, estimation,
and affection they owe to both, to their worldly gain. Reputed devout godly
men's covetousness is infectious. Thus professed Christians follow worldlings
reason, such and such are devout godly men that keep the Sabb^th, they fear
God, and will go to heaven, and yet do so and so, and we do no worse. Thus a
company of earthly minds, that have grace and heaven in their pretensions, but
the world in their hearts; sow pillows under one another elbows. He that will
go about to drive the world out of his heart and life, by following the
instances of some eminent Professors, will never do it, but in the issue fall
short of heaven. The herd of Swine too, tippling good fellows, can lick one
another clean by the grace of God, and the allowance of Christian liberty, yea
Gods beneficence, that he made the creatures for man's use; and hence they
conclude that there is a latitude allowed them. The excessive gaudinesse of
apparel grows in fashion with the Christians of the higher form, as they
pretend, by Christ's license. As if, forsooth, no bravery, nor splendid
gallantry could be too good for Christ's disciples. High-flown wantons in the
nation should rather follow Christ in his contempt than courting of the world.
He is their president in the glory of Grace, not in vain ways, indecent
habits. The gaming away of time and money, mispending companions, if they look
to the throne of Grace, in a few cold, heartless desires, and be devout a
Christmas day, or Good Friday, it may be hear weekly Sermons, yet may be
utterly strangers to the mysterious way of walking with God, and spiritual
recreations, yet notwithstanding can judge one another as excellent Christians,
aun doubt not by Gods grace to be saved, as well as the most mortified, strict
believers. O the horrid abuse to the Gospel and Grace of God, that is too
frequent in our times by evil examples and instigations! There are not a few
soul-murdering presidents under Christian profession. What is said of the
heathenish guides of their Mortifera sacra. Suarum and alienarum interfectores
animarum. Lact. l. 5. c. 20.
Religion, whose deadly, idolatrous worship did ruin their disciples, is true
of many Christian guides and followers in looseness, they are their own, and
others soul-killers. Were the question put to the profane generation of the
Age, that hate the power, yea scorn the form of godliness, whose loose wits
jeer, and Atheistical religion neglects family duties, who speak dung, but drop
not the honeycomb, vent rotten, not gracious words. Do you think to be saved?
Yes, the Answer would be, by the grace of God and merits of Christ. Thus in
loose company Profani homines multos sua petulantia in similem contemptum
inducunt. Calv. in Is. 50. Plus exemplo quam peccato nocent.
the grace of God is at once contemned and trusted to; and that of Calvin is
sad experience; Profane men by their wantonness invite others to the same
contempt. O the sad consequence of exemplary sin, what mischief does it in
Families, Churches, Commonwealths, the world? the Leaders in sin under
profession of grace, are doubly blameable and pernicious to themselves and
others, by their sin and their example; yea more guilty by their example then
their sin. Dear Christians, of more shining, and obscure profession, take heed
of that root of bitterness that is in you, for your own sakes, but let it not
spring forth for others sakes. If it be kept within you, and wither not, you
loose your own souls: If it spring forth without, and defile many, Heb. 12. 15.
you ruin others. Satan's Kingdom is too much in Christ's. Perditi spiritus,
solatium perditionis suae pe^dendis hominibus operantur.
The visible subjects of Christ's kingdom too much promote Satan work, the
damnation of souls. It Is the solace of lost Apostate spirits, to increase
fellows in destruction. If they be capable of any feli^ity, it is in others
everlasting misery. We read of heaps upon heaps, the bloody ^ork of Sampsons
body-slaughter, Judge. 15. 16. So heaps upon heaps is the bloody business of
the Vtinam soli errare, soli desipere vellent: Alios etiam in consortium sui
mali rapiunt, quasi habituri solatium de perditione multorum. Lact. l. 5. c. 20
Devils soul-slaughter. He goes about seeking whom he may devour. And loose
destroying instances promote his work. The wish of one concerning professed
seducing Heathens may be used concerning professed seduced Christians, O that
their error were solitary, they were foolish alone, but they draw others into
the fellowship of their sin, as if society were the solace of destruction. The
huge fellowship of the damned will be no diminution but aggravation of their
torments.

SECT. 18.
3. TEmptation too sadly and commonly effectual to abuse 18 Scandalous sins
of good Christians are temptations to abuse Grace.
Gods grace, is the scandalous sins of good Christians in the main, orderly,
and upright, in some things irregular and hypocritical: their Falls are too
often the plea of sin, and used by Satan as the protection. The old man is a
loose Libertine, where ever he is, the new creature is not perfect. Spiritual
soundness is not without some grudgings of the old distempers: A most eminent
servant of God said, in his flesh he served the Law of sin, Romans 7. 25. The
flesh will be insolent and unruly in the spiritual part. Hence there are
Scripture records of loose practices in good men. We read of Abraham's
equivocation, Jacobs dissembling, David's infamous uncleanness and murder,
Jonahs pettish passion, Peter's denial of Christ, aggravated by repetition,
swearing, perjury. The Corinthians spiritual pride and division, and some
carnal acrimony and bitterness of thought and language between Paul and
Barnabas. So the present age, to the deforming dishonor of reforming
endeavors, has too much abounded in the offensive notices of pious persons
miscarriages, for which they are unsainted by malicious, critical observers,
who better observe a mote in the eyes of Gods servants, than a beam in their
own; yea look upon a gross sin in strict walkers, contrary to the vent and
stream of their conversation, as the unpardonable sin, or next unto it, who
bind up them and their hated fellows in the same black bundle of death, as
hypocrites. What we experience, that acute students of true believers scandals,
who hate their power of godlyness, and without charity rejoice in their
iniquity, feast themselves with their sins, not their graces, had rather feed
on the Devils dung, than Angels food, at every turn of wry words and actions
thus flout and scoff; These are your Puritans; thus do your Puritans; thus do
your Puritans say and do, and believe: O that the nicknamed Puritans would be
more humbled, and loath themselves, and repent of their polluted hearts, lips
and ways then their impure deriders, do take a disallowed liberty to sin
and blaspheme the ways of God. O sad dishonor to God, and reproach to
Religion, when a Prince in Israel is fallen, choice Christians reveal their yet
unmortified corruption; it is the Devils Gawdy-day; he plays no small game now;
he spits on the face of God: through the sides of the miscarrying Christian the
name of Christ is wounded; he hears ill from the disordered house of his
friends, And now a Saints sin becomes a wicked man's license to make a trade of
it. Men and Women dare to be profane excessively, voluptuous, irreligious, yea
turn Papists, because some Professors have spotted their garments. The Devils
swine with delight will wallow in their mire, because Christ's sheep, contrary
to their cleanly nature, are fallen into the dirt: Because unwary walkers have
with great smart broke their bones, desperate mad ones will break their necks.
It Is not more irrational than unsafe, because one man against his serious
purpose is self-wounded, therefore another will kill himself. Seeing it is
thus by experience, which is to bewailed, if possible, with tears of blood,
that visible looseness in Gods servants, is a speeding temptation to
unconscionable Libertinisme in wicked persons. O visibly scandalous, but in the
main, pious Reader, read this Section with a mourning heart: thou art not the
cause, thou art the occasion of others licentiousness, rebellion, impenitence,
and damnation. Should thou occasionally tempt another to kill himself,
ensnare another to fall into a scalding cauldron, betray another to fall from a
fair estate to beggary and imprisonment, urge another to fall into a
tormenting disease, which makes him roar night and day, if there be any thing
of natural bowels left in thee, thou will at once bitterly bewail thine unkind
(what lies in thine example) undoing others, and be fearful for the future to
tempt any to their ruin. How then should thou resent the soul-ruining
tendencie of thine offensive and infectious conversation, with bitter tears?
Have not vessels of wrath sin enough in them to cast them into the fie^ie
furnace of almighty eternal vengeance? Have they wanted the Devil to ride and
spur them in the broad way to destruction? Do they need to mend their pace by
the encouragement of thy sinful practice? Suppose forlorn, desperate, damned
souls in Hell should thus cry out, Cursed be the time and occasion that ever I
kne^ such and such professors. I saw covetousness and oppression in such a
one; I saw uncompassionate and unmerciful carriages in such a one; I saw
spiritual pride, and despising of others in such a one; I saw excess in eating
and drinking in such a one; I saw mad and furious passion in such a one; I saw
breach of covenant and lies in such a one; I saw disordered loose life in such
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; I saw corrupt
opinions of such a Learned one; I saw prayers and practice rare in such a one;
I was wont to hear little but frothy, and vain language from such a one; I
curse the time that ever they were born; they did so and so, and I thought the
allowances they gave themselves, were venial faults; Peccadillo's would not
prejudice their salvation, and therefore not hinder mine; what will become of
them, I know not, but sure I am, here I am in intolerable torments; and I may
thank their examples for my damnation. O unwary Chris^ian, who have been the
Devils instrument (for ought thou know) to expedite and hasten souls
everlasting misery, now mourning ever in the other world, following of thy
steps! would such news as this from Hell make thine heart to ache, wound thy
soul, spoil thy rest, bring thee with sorrow to thy grave? it is probable, very
probable, O ye offensive children of God, whose dark side has tempted others
into eternal darkness, that the observance and following of your sins, has
snared others into the state and feeling of eternal damnation. O heirs of
glory! for the Lords sake, for the Gospels sake, for precious immortal souls
sake, yet under the means of Grace, for the future fear and tremble, to woo
and solicit any more foolish and daring sinners, by your visible corruptions,
into the ways of sin and death. Be no longer Satan's Merchants to put off his
wares. The least part of his drudgery ill becomes Gods servants. If vessels of
wrath will perish, and they will do it by bad examples, Satan has too many of
his own to show them. The broad road to hell has too numerous travelers. Your
work is (what in you lies) to save, not destroy souls: Speak, live so, that
you may convince, convert, not pervert, undo your wicked neighbors. Before I
leave this point, I am constrained to warn and exhort all you that are carnal,
wicked Libertines of the present adulterous generation: Make use, I beseech
you, of your reason, I say not of your grace (for yet you have none) to argue
down your wicked piece of nonsense; Godly men sin, and therefore you may. Will
their falls privilege yours? Seriously consider three things.

1. You should reason, Gods children sin so and so, therefore I must not, I
dare not: If their grace has not kept them innocent, how can I be clean that
am wholly corrupt? If they trade poorly in heavenly commodities that have a
stock of grace, must not I be a bankrupt in goodness that have not a dram?
If they sin thus that have a principle of life, what danger am I in, a dead
sinner of eternal death? To follow a good man's sin, is at once sin and
punishment; a piece of sad vengeance; God in wrath against me, may suffer them
to fall and break their shins, that I may fall and lose my life. Non voluit ea
scribi spiritus sanctus, ad statuendum morale exemplum, sed in censolarionem,
non ad confirmandam licentiam, peccati in posterum, sed ad spem and fidem
excitandam. Luth. in Genesis


2. Scripture examples, and present instances of scandalous Saints, were not
proposed for, but against sin; not to embolden the presumptuous, but comfort
humble, afflicted consciences. Luthers saying is notable: The Holy Ghost would
not have the sinful examples of the Saints recorded in sacred Writ, that their
examples should teach sin, but to comfort fainting, tempted penitents; not to
confirm a bold license of sin for the future, but to stir up the faith and
hope of pardon upon repentance. Since their great, yet purged sins, have not
blockt up the way to glory. The Saints falls should be like fire in the
chimneys top, and the roof, to warn neighboring houses; not like to fire in
the hearth to warm and encourage others; like a stake in the water, to avoid
it, where some were drowned, not to come near it.

3. You will learn to your smart and shame (without repentance) in the great
day, a broad difference between the sins of the godly, and your own in seven
things.

1. They sin, who are in a state of Grace, espoused to Christ, and have him to
be their surety for pardoning and purging grace, and their advocate to plead
the infinite merits of his obedience, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Heb. 7. 22. but you sin and
are in the state of fin, and wantonly run a whoring from Christ, whom you
pretend to match with, and have him not your surety, to pardon and purge you
by the benefit of his intercession, Heb. 7. 25. Act. 5. 31.

2. Sin is not their deliberate purpose, but obedience is, Psalm. 17. 3. Psalm.
119. 106. They cleave to God with purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. even then when
they sin against their purpose. As the Mariners purpose is to sail to his
intended Port, when cross winds drive him off from his Compass: But your heart
is set in you to do evil. Eccles. 8. 11. Why will you die? Ezekiel. 18. 31. We
will not come to thee. Jer. 2. 31. We will not do the word of the Lord, Jer.
44. 16.

3. Sin is not their choice. The evil I would not do, Romans 7. 19. But duty is
holy wisdom and understanding, Prove. 16. 16. The way of truth, Psalm. 119. 30.
Christ the good part, Luke 10. 42. One day in Gods service, Psalm. 84. 10. Above
a thousand in vanity and sin, yea an eternity. But you choose not duty, the
fear of the Lord, Prove. 1. 29. but your own ways, Isa. 66. 3. The life of
sense, not faith, earth, not heaven.

4. Sin is not their love, but loathing: They abhor it, and themselves, Romans 7.
15. Ezekiel. 6. 9. They love God, Ps. 18. 1. Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 14. The regenerate,
1 John 5. 1. The commandments, Ps. 119. 127. The divine presence in
Ordinances, Psalm. 16. 8. When coming of Christ to Judgment, 2 Timothy 4. 8. But
you love simplicity, Prove. 1. 22. secure slumbers, Pro. 20. 13. covetousness,
Hos. 4. 18. to wander, Jer. 14. 10. Sin is your darling, the dearly beloved
of your soul, not your abhorrence, Ps. 36. 4.

5. Sin is not their delight: The joy of their souls is the Law of God, Romans
7. 21. Doing his will, Psalm. 40. 8. The sweet fruitful graces of Jesus Christ,
Can. 2. 3. The Spirits comforts, Psalm. 94. 19. The excellent, The Saints in
earth, Psalm. 16. 3. But sin is your delight: It Is clear it is so, you are glad
to borrow a cloak to cover it, made of good men's sins; you sport in sin, Prove.
10. 23. Take pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 12. Scorning, Prove. 1.
22. Frowardness. Prove. 2. 14. Abominations, Isa. 66. 3.

6. They rise from sin, and after their falls turn to God, Jer. 31. 19. but you
are not renewed unto repentance, Heb. 6. 10. but lie in wickedness, 1 John 5.
19. Refuse to return, Jeremiah 8. 5.

7. When they are risen, they dread falling again; have care to please God,
fear to offend him, 2 Cor. 7. 11. You sin without fear in lawful things, Jude
ep. v. 12. and unlawful things, 2 Pet. 2. To have no care nor conscience to
please and honor God; and therefore the eternal difference between them and
you, is, They sin and will be saved, you sin, and (unless you draw better
Arguments, then looseness from the sins of Gods servants) will be damned.

SECT. 19.
4. TEmptation that has much contributed to the abuse of 19. Divisions and
contentions about Christian Religion, ecause abuse of grace Bona pars
Christiani orbis, hoc tempo re, potius videtur esse bustu^ quam Christianae
gregis domicilium. Otho Casmannus. Miseram Christianitatem wiseram Ecclesiam.
Sententiarum and animorum divortia.
Gods grace, is division and contention about Christian Religion: That in
Christian Churches, there are too sad contentions, Men's spirits, pens and
tongues, being dipped in Gall, and that Victory mostly is more contended for then
verity, wants not truth nor proof. Wrangling warring Divinity, has made the
Church to be rather like a Bon-fire, then the House of God: One speaking of
Christianity, and the Church, affixeth to them a sad Epithete: Miserable
Christianity, miserable Church. Indeed Scriptureless rending division is not
her glory, but misery: Divisions of opinion and practices beget divorce of
affections; yea it is too much a fault, a siding Opinion is cried up above a
Saint, and the shriller the voice is for highest discovery in point of Doctrine
and Discipline, sometimes the lower and calmer, the truer and safer is more to
be attended too: It Is sad experience, in our Contests our Moderation is not
known; there is running from extremes to extremes: While Satan has the
boldness and success to get into Christ's Quarters, and in the visible Kingdom
of Christ, not in all his Subjects infallibly true nor holy, but a part of the
Devils Kingdom is slily admitted; standers by, seeing divided Sects and
different Opinions in Religion yea, each party entitling its Tenent and
Practice, to the Scripture, the Truth, the Spirit, the Glory of God, conclude
in this dust, they cannot see their way to Heaven. In this season, Satan the
Arch Heretic, Divider, Deceaver and Libertine, plies his Market to persuade to
dissolute life; some he tempts to be of any Religion, some none; to be stark
Atheists, and debauched profane ones, and many in the true Religion to be cold
and formal, much heat and strength being spent upon the outside, that should
have been bestowed upon the inside, the vitals of Christianity: In the Pro and
Con Disputes about outworks, the inward Guards have been neglected: Sound
Christians holy walking is not so lively, and wicked Libertines sit down
contented and resolved, to allow and follow the pretended felicities of their
unmortified Lusts. Satan through Church contentions tempts to believe, that
Religion is a bottomless Pit, not to be sounded, a mere fancy: And while men of
piety and learning cannot agree, there is in some a pleasing agreement, about
Whoredom, Drunkenness, railing at all Ministers, contempt of Ordinances; yea
the bloody subtle Jesuit, and his blinded Popish Votaries, stand behind the
Curtain, and cry Heretics, Schismatics, Libertines: Among Protestants, no
Ministry, no Ordinances, no Church, no Salvation: Happy had it been in our
sinning days, if Unity, Truth and Peace, had prevented this great temptation:
Put though the healing of our deplorable diseased Zion, be rather to be wished
then to be hoped for, yet two sorts of abusers of Gods grace, discontented
Protestants, and seducing Papists, that warm their hands by our fires, will not
find the least real Sanctuary for their injurious reflections upon the Gospel
of grace, in past and present Divisions and Contentions: I shall apply my self
to both the parties, that it is to be feared, are glad to see the offensive
dishonors to the grace of God, yea are much injurious to it themselves.

1. To discontented exceptious Protestants: O you Sons and Daughters of Belial,
Ignorant, Profane, Irreligious! Have you reason about differences of Religion
to grow secure wantons, to Sleep, Drink, Game, Swear away your time, profane
the Sabbath, keep the worship of God out of your Families, and the fear of God
our of your hearts, to live a brutish, sensual, voluptuous life, to resent the
thoughts of Heaven and Hell as idle Fables, to live as if there should be no
resurrection of the Body and Judgment to come; to mis-spend your precious
hours in carnal visits, no way relating to Gods glory, and your everlasting
salvation; to neglect provisions for Eternity, to be as great strangers to the
beneficial practical thoughts of Religion, as if you were born and brought up
among Heathens: Did the Corinthians make this use of their Divisions and
Erroneous Opinions, to justify and support a Godless, Graceless conversation?
Can you prove that every different Opinion in Religion, is a different
Religion? May not you find in unhappily divided Christians among us an Harmony
of Religion, in the vitals, essentials thereof, referring to the life of Christ
and the power of godliness? May not dissenting ones, tune in a thousand places
of sacred Scripture, which teach soundness in the Faith, necessary renewing
grace, and godly life? Will not common acknowledged Principles of Believing,
Repenting, Obeying, Persevering, arraign and condemn your looseness? If you
Object, Some Sects are Heretical and Blasphemous, deny Christ, the Scripture,
the Resurrection: Let these Apostates that hold not the head, Col. 2. 19. Jesus
Christ un-christian'd, and become Heathens themselves, answer if they can for
themselves: These Renegado's, sad Revolters from Christ's colors to the Devils
Camp, have a worse Judgment on them then Prisons and flaming Stakes: They have
denied the Lord, whom they professedly owned to be their Redeemer, and in the
Judgment of the Apostle Peter, have brought upon themselves swift destruction.
These do not only bring themselves into the Order of Heathens, but are worse
then they, for they have cut themselves off from the way of salvation; there is
not another Christ to be their Mediator, and there remains no more sacrifice
for sin: Do you that declaim against the errors of the time, know any such?
Carnal mirth becomes not such a notice, you should go into your Chambers, and
bitterly mourn over their Apostasy: They are the black marks of Spiritual
Judgment, are fittest Objects for Christian compassion: I beseech you, after
you are somewhat off the hears of pursuing in an Hellish Chase, your ungodly
Lusts; after your fiery tongues, scorching the precious name of sound
Christians, with the hot charge of Hypocrites, Heretics, Persons unfit to live
in the common Air; In cool blood and serious earnest, consider whether
Contentions and Divisions, about Truth in Religion, will be a Cloak broad
enough to cover your excess of Riot, contempt of the Laws, Requiries, and
Gospelduties, your Heathenish, and worse then Heathenish practical Atheism,
whereby you live in your Families without Prayer to God: Has natural Religion
taught Pagans Devotion to their apprehended Deities? The Mariners in the
tempest called upon their gods, Jonah 1. 5. yea probably at other times also:
Can your Chambring and wantonness, your Oaths and Scoffs, at the shining
presidents of practical Piety, your desperate security in sin, without the
least remorse of conscience, and least harkening to the motions of the Spirit,
now and then shaking you by the conscience, if it be not cauterized and dead;
your Graceless devouring the Creatures, without serious thoughts of your deep
Engagement to your abused Benefactor, The blessed God; your dreadful
carelessness of your own souls, not much mattering whether they be saved or
damned; your casting off the thoughts of Gods strict recording of your
thoughts, words and actions, in the Book of his Remembrance; your dissolute ill
good-fellowship; your treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath; your
slight thoughts of the last Judgment: Will this and other sad Bills of
Indictment be answered and crossed out by Christians dis-agreements in
controversal Points? If you shall be so blind and bold, as to conclude, in
your Deathbed, and in the accounting Day, different Judgments about Religion
will Apologize for your Libertinism: Will not the Judge of all the world
convince and condemn you, out of the Ten Commandments, the rules of the Gospel,
the Wisdom and Piety of standing Saints in evil tempting times, whose soundness
in the Faith, Lamps burning, Loins girt, Garments kept clean, upright
Conversation, have been an Antidote against public Infection? Will not God
find plentiful matter of your damnation from your own sins? Yea further, which
is a sad Quaere; should not you who sport in sin, and scoff at holiness and
holy Ones, live without God and Christ in the World, rather make another
construction of Errors, Janglings, and intemperate heats about Religion! What
if God suffer these scandals and stumbling blocks, to ruin us for our contempt
of the Law and Gospel, that we should securely fall into an Heathenish loose
life, that he might find more abundant and effectual Arguments for our
everlasting destructions? O I beseech you reason more wisely, and thus speak to
your selves! Though others contend about doctrine, worship, government: Shall I
rebel and contend against God? Though christians are divided among themselves,
shall I divide from the profession and power of Christianity? Because there is
no visible Religious Unity among professed Christians, shall I have no Unity
with the invisible Church of Jesus Christ? Because I cannot find Peace in the
Church, shall I have no true peace of conscience, nor peace with God? Because
Reconciliation, as to serving God in one way, with one shoulder, and in points
of Faith is fled away from the jarring Congregations of Christian people, shall
I live in an irreconciled Estate with an angry God? When every day his wrath
hangs over me; and if I die without a Christ and true conversion, I am damned
for ever. I could heartily wish, and O that I could fervently pray for it, that
such sober and serious thoughts, in order to the conversion, and extraordinary
repentance, of the discontented dissolute ones of the times, were the happy
product of the observed Division and Debates of the dis-joynted age, in and
about the things of God, and not a foolish, senseless, mad arguing into
Libertinism, and undoing of the precious soul.

2. To the seducing, triumphing Papists, I shall next give a seasonable
Hortative: Do you fear and tremble in the sense of your high dishonors, to the
grace of God and Gospel of Christ? Though you hope the Fires of divided
Protestants, will make way for the Prisons, Chains, Faggots, Flames of your
Spanish Inquisition, though you see some wantons among us; though you discern
the want of that Scripture-charity, Unity, Peace, and in some things Truth,
that should be among us: Will this excuse you in the wanton dalliance of your
Religion? An Whore is wanton: The Scripture styles the Papal Antichrist, A
great Whore; she is richly and gaudily attired in her pompous worship, glorious
outside, to take her Lovers. The Church of Rome, at Rome, looks more like the
Court of Rome, then the Church of Rome: ^er Temple-service is more like a
Theater, a Stagedelight, then the sober, chaste, humble, yet reverent worship
of God; she has an enchanting, bewitching Love-cup in her hand, that has
intoxicated the greatest part of Christendom: It Is styled a cup of Fornication;
she has drunk an health to her spurious, ill begot, and bred children, and
whether their pledging of the Church-mens adulterated, spiced Cup, with
fleshpleasing, will be health or death, will infallibly appear in the other
World. O you Jesuitical observers of our Divisions, that congratulate and bless
your selves in your Union! Have you no Divisions? What mean your multiplied
Sides and Sects of Popery, your party-colored different Votaries in Error?
your Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelites, Capuchins, Benedictins? Are there no
Jars in your Schools between Thomists, Scotists? Do all your Chairs and Pulpits
sing Even Song? If you say, In many Rites and Points of Worship and Doctrine,
Laws of your Monasteries, you differ; but in the main, your Trent Counsel, your
Traditional Religion, you agree: I say the same, We Protestants have the same
Essentials and Vitals of Religion, though we differ in sundry superstructures;
as the Body is the same, though it wear different Apparel; the Bulk and ^ody of
our Religion, as to practicals and saving things, is the same, though it be
clothed with different Administrations: But suppose you were perfectly United,
Are you not Brethren in Evil, and Confederates in Error? Unity in sin is but a
more fortified Satanical combination: Is the Harmony of Devils among themselves
to to murder Bodies and Souls, amiable and excusable? Nor will the falsehood,
dissoluteness and danger of your Religion find Apology, from your holding many
Truths, in which we concur with you, for which the Churches of Christ never
separated from you, nor call you Papists; we divide from you, where you have
divided from Christ, his Evangelists and Apostles: We rather believe you the
Apostatical, then Apostolical Church: What is more frequent and ^loud in your
mouths, then Heretics, Heretics, Schismatics, Schismatics: And what are
you? Monsieur de Croy has proved, That your Papal Unity is a Miscellany of
Judaism, Heathenism, and ancient Here^ies: Are you not proved to be the
greatest Schismatics and Sect-masters in the World? Do not you make Schisms
from the worship Purity, Piety, of Primitive Apostolic times, the great
temptation of multiplied offensive Rents among Protestants; many tender
consciences, so much fearing the corrupt leaven of your Government, Worship and
Doctrine, in a too timorous indiscreet and ignorant Jealousy, never thinking
they can go far enough from you (so far have you gone from Christ) till they
have gone beyond truth and sobriety, into some error and dissoluteness, calling
that Popery that is not: You are pleased to confine true Christianity and
Salvation, within the Pale of your Roman Catholicism, as if you were the only
vineyard and garden of God, and all Protestants were a vast Common, a desolate
Wilderness; but in the Pupper-Plays of your Religion, your richly arrayed
Sainted Idols, your veiled heads before them, cringing, bowing, kneeling,
making vows unto them, who are as senseless of your Devotion, as the ignorant
besotted Votaries are of the true nature of a Religious Vow and Invocation: How
do you, and Idolatrous Heathens, kiss each other? Nor will the shuffling
distinction of your Schools clear you from gross Idolatry: You say your
Religious Worship is not terminated in your Images, it is relative only, to
carry your Devotion off from them, to the Adoration of God and Christ: Does not
this justify the Israelites Idolatry, when they said, These are thy Gods, O
Israel, which have brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 32. 8. Can
we think they had so much forfeited sense and reason, as to terminate this high
Religious acknowledgement of Deliverance from Egypt, on an artificial,
senseless, irrational, weak Idol? Surely they meant the living God, represented
by the Molten Calf: Will not this distinction also color Heathens palpable
Idolatry? Worship is not ultimate, but mediate; not terminative, but relative,
so taught the Heathens in their Writings: Their Religious worship did not stay
and dwell in their Idols, but they used them as a Chariot to carry their
Devotion to their Gods represented by them. How Summus Mariae Honor, ipse est
filius Christus. Zwinglius de Casta Virgin Maia.
do you wantonly court the Virgin Mary, to the sacrilegious dishonor of Christ,
her Lord and Savior, without her knowledge and thanks? Her greatest honor is
Christ her Son, yet Lord: How will she abor your senseless School Distinction,
at the great day of (...): The first you give to God, the second to the Saints,
the third to her: when you are told that in the new Testament, (...) and (...),
are words indifferently used for divine worship, what then do you make of the
Blessed Virgin, to give her more then divine Adoration? will she bear your
wanton and saucy addresses to her, to pray her to command her son? Does she now
admire and adore him as her Redeemer, and does her being the miraculo^s Mother
of his sacred sinlesse flesh, give her the least part in Redemption? Do you not
embolden one another to sin, by your trust in Popish Indulgencyes, may not the
most profligate Libertines of your way shroud themselves secure in a wicked
life, from your rich pardon Office? Is not your absurd Doctrine of Merits an
high injury to the Merits of Christ? do we not read in your Writers, the Terms
Aequivalence, commensuration to the Reward, if any of you say merits,
especially on a death Bed, are disowned? yea your Bellarmine teaches, For the
uncertainty of Salvation, and the peril of vain glory, it is safer to trust to
the merits of Christ. Why is there such juggling in your Schools and Pulpits,
about merits, are not the ignorant people undeceived and told, there are no
merits of an infinite reward, but those of Jesus Christ: How do you abuse the
infinite satisfaction madeto the Justice of God by Jesus Christ? as if an
All-sufficient Surety had not paid the utmost farthing, as if his sufferings
need the supplement of the Saints, further tosatisfy the demands of angry
Justice. Will your distinction of Mediatorship of Redemption and Intercession,
cloak your Idolatrous Prayers to Saints and Angels? Is not Christ the only
Mediator of Intercession and Redemption? Is not the prevalency of intercession
founded on Redemption? what else cries for peace and pardon, Grace and Glory
but the blood of Christ? Heb. 12. 24. Jesus Christ the Righteous, that is an
Advocate with the Father, is the propitiation for Believers sins, Totus Papatus
est ipsissima Crucis Christi inimicitia idque multo amplius quam Judaismus.
Musculus in Phil. 3.
1 John, 2. 1. Yea therefore an Advocate, because a propitiator. Could holy
Creatures be proved Redeemers, they might be argued speeding Intercessors. The
Cross of Christ has not only had Turks and Heathens, and false Apostles, who
opposed themselves to the Doctrine of the Cross, the Doctrine of the Law and
Circumcision, but Papists also: The whole Papacy says Musculus, is the worst
enmity of the Cross of Christ, yea worse then Judaisme. Although it set up the
Wood, and the form of the Cross in all its Temples, show it and carry it in
public streets, adorn it with gold, silver, and precious stones, yet none of
these things befriend the Cross of Christ, but the believing of Christ
crucified in the word; the true heart and life crucifix, by Geramus crucem non
in ve ste aut pallio, sed intus, in cord and carne^ nostraa^, dum hic vitam
agimus, carnem nostram clavis seu spiritualibus armis in cruce agamus. Otho
Casmannus.
which the true Christian is crucified to the world, and the world to him, Gal.
6. 14. The flesh is crucified with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Is not
the power of the Gospel crucifixion denied, evacuated, made nothing by your
Artificial Crucifix? Is Crucifying grace given out but to Gods own
Institutions? Is God wont to bless men's superstitious inventions, are not your
single lived Priests and Nuns, by your Church-Lawes denied Marriage in constant
Temptations to inward, wanton, burning flames, and outward impurities? unless
in rare Heavenly ^unuchisme: Is it not the Ordinance of God rather To marry
then burn? 1. Cor. 7, 6. Are not Priests Fornication in your account more
tolerable then Marriage? Have not public stews too much favor at Rome? Is
not the mutteting over some Rosaries to the blessed Virgin, an Atonement of
filthy sins: yea, are not your Holy days, your Saints days, unholy allowances
to the wanton flesh? Nor will some Lent, Good Friday, will worship severities,
clear you from carnal Libertinisme. To conclude, the whole Mass of Popery, as
it stands contradistinct to sound protestant confessions, as it does appear, to
our solid, Orthodox, examining Writers, to it will appear in the great day, a
body of carnal Wantonness, a mere politic Engine for worldly glory, a product
of proud, erring, self-admiring fleshly minds. If though Providence, popish
eyes may read this partition, I humbly request the selfe-applauding, observing
Romish children of error, that have the fearful Judgment on them, of strong
delusions to believe lies, and have departed form the Faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, to study and be ashamed of the wanton principles, and
practices of their own Religion, before they triumph in the looseness of
carnal protestants and false Christians, who by the principles of our
Religion, are taught more regular, acceptable Gospell-strictnesse, then their
traditionall, and most religious, severities pretend unto. I again humbly
request the protestant, unsettled, discontented Reader, who it may be has too
favorable thoughts of Popery, to take heed lest he in heart turn back to
spiritual Egypt, and hearken to those English Jesuit Captains, that (in
different disguise of their Names and Habits, tempt Wantons in opinion and
Practice, dissavouring the Heavenly Manna of our pure faith, and lingering after
the onions and leeks, the poor food of popish Traditions) would lead them from
the fatness of Gods house, to Romes unwholesome provisions. If, O unwary
Reader, thou do abuse the unvaluable Treasure of that gospel grace that is
taught among us, that does not only require faith in Christ, but a necessary
and severe mortification of worldly Lusts, of absolute necessity to obtain
Salvation, and be fit for Heaven, thou have a wanton heart, and do live a
dissolute life, believe not the Jesuits nor the Papists among us, that thou art
like to prove a better christian, if thou once prove an Apostate son or
daughter of the church of Rome. If thou do seriously weigh this Section, and
meditate on the wanton Principles and practices of the Mother of Harlots, thou
art not like to better thine heart and life, by being a child of spiritual
Whoredoms, but ruin thy self by drinking off the Whores cup of Fornications.

CHAP. VI. Showing, wherein the greatness of this sin appears.
ALL sins are not equal, some are clothed with Chap. 6. Shows wherein the
greatness of this sin appears. Ex nobili falerno lutum Salvian.
more odious circumstances, and appear to rightly discerning eyes, more
abominably monstrous, As backsliding Israel justified her self more then
treacherous Judah, Jer. 3. 11. so some sinners may justify themselves more
then others: They are more faulty that sin against the remedy: sin against the
Grace of God is of a scarlet dye, has aggravated guilt, in twelve things the
huge a accumulated evil of it, will appear

SECT. 1.
1. IT is a sin of greater profanesse, it is a more then ordinary profane sin
toabuse the Creatures, Food, Raiment, Health, Riches, is an injury of natural
goodness; to wrong strong drink, generous Wine, by vomit or casting it into
the mire and dir^ its profanesse, but to abuse the most precious things, God,
his Christ, his Spirit, his Gtace, is deeper dyed profanesse. One says of want
on rich heirs, that they are lascivious in in Tapestry, and fornicate in
Silks; what wretches are they that are lascivious in Christianity, and
Fornicate in Grace, that make it as a Pander to filthy lusts, that prostitute
it to unrighteous, and ungodly ways? Sin, the great injury of God, is cried
down by the natural voices of the creatures: Their natural forms, properties,
motions, are regulated according to the divine pleasure. The body, the health,
and strength of it: the soul, the noble faculties of it, cry, sin not,
dishonor not your Creator; much more the voice of grace says, sin not, I am
clean, wallow not in filth; I am chaste, think not I favor adulterous embraces.
The Word, the Name, the Spirit, the Son of God, are all profaned by the
filthiness of the flesh and spirit. Esau, that debased his birthright, the
type of an eternal inheritance in heaven, was called profane Esau, Heb. 12.
16. And they that debase the grace of God, the Hopes of glory, the love of
Christ, their heavenly prayers, to their worldly, voluptuous, vainglorious,
impure, selfish ends, commence the highest degree of profaneness, and are more
profane than the Drunkard in his vomit, the Adulterer in his filthiness, and
such like notorious sinners, who have only been brought up in the school of
natural reason, and abused their Moral principles. The corruption of the best
things is the worst corruption. The abuse of the glorious Grace of God is
Corruption optimie est pessima.
the highest profanation.

SECT. 2.
2. IT is an Hypocritical sin. There is no man that wrongs the 2 It is an
hypocritical sin to wrong the grace of God
grace of God, but is a pretender to beftiend it. Heathens and strangers to the
offers and acceptance of grace, contract not the shame of abusing it. But the
carnal Gospeller, the familiar friend of Grace, lifts up the heel against it:
He seems to take sweet counsel of it, but follows the counsel of the flesh.
Thriving sin under professed grace is a lie in Hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 2. It is
the power of wickedness, under the form of godliness. Its eye is in heaven,
when its heart and hands are in hell. It kisseth like Judas, when it goes
about to kill the grace of God, with Ehud, that made a message from God the
Prologue of hiding his Dagger in Eglons belly. Judge. 3. 20, 21. So it uses an
errand and warrant from the Lord, when it stabs the heart of Religion. It says
Hosanna with the lips, where the heart and Dum hypocritae volunt ceremeniis
sepelire gravissima scelera, annon trahunt Deum in parts suas? annon faciunt
quasi lenonem, cum volunt ipsum tegere Adulteria? Calv, Jer. 1. Perinde ac si
instar Mercurii cujusdam, usurae, furti, rapinae and latronurs Deus et Patronus
fit. Zuing. sermon. de Cast: Virg. Mar.
life says, Crucify. It professes no King but Jesus, and obeyes no King but
Lust, but the black one of the bottomless pit While Hypocrites (said Calvin)
would make their ceremonious, outside Religion, a grave to bury their most
heinous sins out of sight, do they not make good their party? do they not make
him as their Pander, when they would have him cover their Adulteries? Yea so
they live, as if Christ, like a very Mercury, were the God and Patron, said
Zuinglius, of Usury, Theft, Rapine, and Robbery. Yea was not this the specious
cover of Ezekiels seeming devout hearers, who though they fate before him as
pleased, attentive auditors, yet their hearts ran after their covetousness?
Are not such Christians real Pharisees, who in their prayers do not design
heavenly graces, but worldly estates? How sad is it, that in their devotion,
they should like the Kite fly high, but it is with an eye to the prey below?
Such Kitish Christians, if the eye of man sees them not, God does, and will
unbesome and unbottom rotten intentions in the grand discovering day. Loose
want ons in heart, Sainted by themselves and others; yea loose Libertines
within and without, the profuse Drinkers, Camesters, Swearers, Wasters of Time,
Money, the Creatures, the Strength of their Bodies and Souls in carnal
Voluptuousness; that can saint one another in their sickness, or a little
before, in or after a Sacrament, should do well to consider that abuse of
Grace, by the leave and cover of grace, is notorious grace elesnesse.

SECT. 3.
3. IT is an ungrateful sin. As it is high ingratitude not to return 3 Abuse of
Grace is an ungrateful sin Ingratusgratiae negator. Non erubescimus pretiosum
sanguinem Christi, impiae ingratitudinis pedibus conculcare.
good for good, so the highest to return evil for good. Lewdness under Gospel
grace, is an ungrateful denyer of grace. We are not ashamed (said one) to
trample the precious blood of Christ under the feet of our ^mpious ingratitude.
Is this thy kindness to thy friend, said Absalom to Hushai, that revolted from
David his Prince. So say loose soul to thy self, under thy ungrateful abuses
of the grace of God, is this thy kindness to thy friend Jesus Christ. They
that rendered David evil for good were his adversaries, psalm. 38. 20. And can
Christ hold them his Qui ex vinculis aut triremiredimuntur, iise totos debent
redemptori suo, and si huic ingrati sunt, quovis supplicio digni judicantur.
Gault. Gualt. in 2 Cor. 5.
friends, that always, or mostly return him evil for good. O the sad, common,
scandalous returns to the Lord Christ, by them who profess him their
Redeemer! They who are ransomed by a mighty power, and costly sum from Iron
chains and Gallys^^ery, owe themselves to their Redeemer: If they be
unthankful unto him, are thought worthy of any punishment. O their prodigious
unthankfulness, that while they prosesse a spiritual redemption, run from the
colors of their owned Captain of Salvation unto the Enemies camp, fight on his
side, and sweat at the Devils oar, and make this the real all of their thanks
for the blood of Christ, to please the Devil, and have more uncontroled liberty
for their lusts. unthankful, unholy are coupled together, 2 Timothy 3. 2. The
unthankful abuse of Gods grace speaks unholy hearts.

SECT. 4.
4. It is a sin against experience. He never made a true trial 4. Abuse of
grace is a sin against experience. ps. 34.
of the grace of God, that abuses it to the reign of sin: For sin has no
dominion where grace has any. O state and see the Lord is good. O fear the
Lord ye his Saints. This double expression, O taste, O fear, does lesson us how
to judge of the exhortation of Gods grace. They that taste it fear him. If you
have tasted how the Lord is gracious, to whom coming as a living stone, ye are
built as living stones, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2. 3. They that
taste how gracious the Lord is, they come to Christ, they leave him not, they
live to him, they are built up in him, they do not by their works deny him.
The vine and Figtree ^ould not leave their sweetness, nor real saints the
sweetness they tasted in Gods grace, for the bitter sweets of the world. Light
come, light gone, is proverbial. Things hardly (...)
come by, are highly prized, not easily parted with. How does the tender Mother
kiss and prize her dear babe, for which she has gone through a long and sharp
travail; so they who after a sore and lasting travail of deep sorrow, and
smart for sin, are at lenght delivered of the sweet babe of Grace; prize and
kiss it, and will not abuse it. The soul sick of love, that has at length
found its heavenly Bridegroom, recieves him greedily, and joyfully, and holds
him fast, and will not easily let him go, Qui sponsum invenerit, avidius
assumit. Greg. Mor. 1. 27. c 1. Optimum vivendi genus consuetudin: jucundum.
Doubt. Answ.
Cant. 3. 4. Besides, it is the Christians heaven upon earth, to accustom and
familiarize communion with the God and Mediator of Grace. Custom must needs
make the hest life pleasant, and a real pleasant life will not, cannot out of
judgment and choice be left for real vexations.

May not one that has had sweet experience of the power and comfort of Grace,
abuse it?

True believers may, and do wrong the Grace of God (as shallbe showen) but not
as believers, but sinners; for,

1. The new creature calls not this spurious brat, brat, Father; it is the old
man only in the new born turns Libertine. This dishonor of Grace is not
imputable to Grace, but to the remains of sin.

2. A found Christian has either forgotten the sweet Feast of the Grace of
God, or questions whether ever he fed at its Table, or misseth his former
favor of gracious exercise, or communion, though he remembers he has
sometimes had it, or has pleased his palate with earthly delights, or is
sadly forsaken for a time by the Spirit of Grace, or strongly assaulted by Lust
and Satan, and in these cases he wrongs the grace of God; but when he has a
lively sense and remembrance, even a close,sweet, intimate, experimental sight
and feeling of Gods grace. It Is impossible he should play the wanton, he never
fears the abuse, then when he sees the propriety, feels the power, and
enjoyes the sweetness of Gods loving kindness; he is so ingenuous as not to
spit on his Fathers smiling face, and kick at the hand of special grace.
Conscience is most tender when its once most pure and peaceable, and has
learned a better lesson than to go from the bosom joys of Christ, and to
fornicate in the creature and sins softest bed of Down:

As for them that ordinarily and habitually wrong the Grace of God, with
choice, without remorse, it is certain they never had an experimental taste how
good and gracious God is, nor have had a sweet relish of the heavenly gift,
nor feasted their souls at the heavenly banquet of grace. Had they once this
heavenly privilege, former sense would beget prizings of, and hunger after
renewed sweet communion between Christ and the soul, mutual supping in gracious
entertainments of each other.

SECT. 5.
5. It is a sin destructive to true Faith, and inconsistent with it, 5. Abuse
of Grace is destructive to true faith, and inconsistent with it,
There are no greater riches, no greater treasures, no greater honouts than the
holy Faith of the whole household of Faith. The Just lives holily by his Faith,
the Unjust loosly by his unbelief. To them that believe is precious: Grace is
glorious. They that know and believe the worth of Jewels, will not hang them on
a slender third: they that know and believe the glory of Grace, will not debase
it by unglorious sins. They saw Putasne silium Dei (...) esum, quis^^^^ ille
e^^ homo,(...) nterretur com, minationibus, nec attrahitur promissionibus, nec
praceptis (...) Nonne is,sisateator se (...) deum, (...), Bern.
no comeliness and beauty in Christ, but despised and rejected him, who
believed not his report, 53. 1, 2. 3. In the Apostle who lived by Faith in the
Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. the grace of God was not abused, but improved; not
recieved not recieved in vain, to an idle, loose, offensive conversation, Cor.
6. I, 3. but operative to holy, and heavenly labors for the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15.
10. Does he believe to be saved by the son of God, who is neither terrified by
his Threatenings, allured by his Promises, (...) beyes his commands; though he
prosesse he knows God, does he not in works deny him? Unbelief, that neither
puts on Christ to Justification not Imitation, will impudently frolic, in
riot, and drunkenness, chambering, and wantonness, strife and envying. But that
Faith that on Christ, puts off these things, Romans 13. 13, 14.

SECT. 6.
6. It is a sin opposite to the power of Godliness. They were 6. Abuse of
grace is opposite to the power of godliness.
called un godly men that turned the grace of God into wantonness: the true
love, fear, worship, obedience to, trusting in God, would deny profane license
to sin from the countenance of Grace. A gracious, tender, trembling heart, will
abhor to corrupt the loving kindness, compassions, bounties of God to loose
principles and practices. What ever godliness is pretended, the perventing of
Gods grace springs from ungodliness, the dominion of godly lusts. Godly
Joseph, that had sweet experience of Gods grace, durst not be unclean in Gods
presence; Shall I commit this great wickedness and sin against God? ^en.
(...) quod vacui omni omni pielatis sludio, (...)ralis legis conscientia
humanis rationibus et exemplis,(...). jun. in Ep. Jud.
39. 9 No man ever abuses the goodness of God, Those ungodly wantons of the
text (faith Junius) are such as are void of all study of piety, unto which they
are provoked by the conscientious instigation of the natural law, humane
reasons and examples, and divine testimomies. The more godliness the less
licentiousness. It Is no wonder we read he Libertines in sob were loose wantons,
they said to God, depart from us, Job. 21. 14.

SECT. 7.
7. It is a Reproaching sin, of multiplied dishonor and disgrace. 7. Abuse
of grace is a reproaching sin (...) nimis contumeliose cum Deoagunt, sum
impliment (...) celeribus, ac (...) etc. Call, Jet; 7.


1. To God the Father. Hypocrites (said Calvin) deal too contumeliousy with
God, they were what lies, bring him within the guilt of their sins, as if he
had fellowship with them. The Name, Worship, Grace, Spirit of God is blasphemed
by abusing his grace.

2. To Christ. He suffers reproach in loose Gospellers: His Name is not as a
precious ointment, but unfavoury; His Inflitutions of grace contemned; His
Government refused; the Holiness and Strictness he enjoyneth is questioned,
disregarded, yea positively opposed: With infamy we spit upon, (faith one) with
our base life we destroy, that noble and truly precious name of Christ. He is
wounded in the house of his of his pretended, yea sometimes of his real
friends; a proof of their old old man's real enmity against him. His Followers,
and Disciples loose walking, is the Devils (...) to sharpen and keen the
weapons of calumny against him.

3. To Christianity. The Law of Christ (faith Salvian) suffers disgrace by
uncircumspect Christians; when under the Wing of the blessed Gospel, cursed are
shrouded, the Gospel it self is cursed.

4. To exact Christians. The most untainted professors are blasphemed by the
censorious world, because of the scandals of some ni Christ's Family: The
Tabernacle is blasphemed, Rev. 13. 6. The true children of Zion are villified;
They are all Hypocrites.

5. To loose Christians. Their looseness is their reproach; they foam out
their ownshame, as Jude speaks, v. 13. they manifest their folly, 2 Timothy 3. 9.
discover their nakedness, Exodus 32. 25. declare their sin as sadom, Isa. 3.
9. show the Plague is on them, and warn others to turn from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
By the manifest fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. they do evidence it, that
they are not led by the holy, but overruled by the unclean spirit.

SECT. 8.
8. It is a sin bringing daily, and sensible loss to the soul. 8. Abuse of
grace daily brings loss to to the soul.
Look to your selves, that we loose not those things which we have wrought, but
that we recieve a full reward, Joh. Ep. 2. ver. 8. Carnal spirits under Gospel
grace, take a course to loose the grace of God, Gospel blessings, all the means
a grace, Christ, his Spirit, Hopes, Confidences, Joys, Prayers, Tears, Almso,
Body, Soul, Time, Heaven, all the ways and seize of Everlasting Mercies.
Christianity is Fighting, but Wantonness under, and against the Gospel, beats
the air, does not pull down, but promote sin and Satan's Kingdom. Christianity
is a Race, but Si inveniatur in circumciso transgressio Legis, perinde habet ad
justiam operum circumcisio et praeputium. Dickson.
the Injuries of Gods grace keeps a man short of the Eternal prize; he runs
in vain, comes short of glory. As to the loose Jew, his circumcision was lost,
Christians, as if he had never heard of Gods grace. We see riotous ill Husbands
spend freely on their estates, and they vanish as if they had never been. Do
we not see in these Grace-abusing days, false Christians riot in Libertinisme,
and their gracious profession vanishneth, as if it had never been. Sodom had a
fair morning, but was consumed with fierieshowers; some have had a morning of
early shining profession, but playing the Wantons in spiritual pride and
carelessnesses, fiery indignation has soon punished the pretended glory of
their Religion. A I have seen beauteous bloossoms, that have made a gallant
show soon blasted, so there want not instances of fair blossoming Christians
soon blasted, by corrupt opinions and practices: Yea, which is sad, as
travelers have gone half their way, but are plundered and slain by Highway
cutters and Robbers, so some seeming heavenly travelers, have gone half their
way with Christ, but being careless, solitary, disarmed, are soulrobbed and
slaughtered by Satan's Highway men. The erroneous and dissolute; and further,
which is faddest of all, as wel-guided- ships, in their perilous voyage, within
a little of Harbor, either spring a leak, or run on sand or rocks, and lose
their long sailing on the hazardous Main; so old seeming Christians, that look
like Monasons, that appeared to be long passengers in this worlds Sea,
heaven-wards, by the leak of some secret unmortified lust, let in destruction,
are swallowed up in the soft sands of a voluptuous life, or spit on the Rocks
of Despair or Presumption. O its sad to be considered, and with bitter tears to
be bewailed, what promising hopes, youth-Apostate Christians have lost, what
soul-shipwracks manhood-Apostate Christians have made, what bankrupts as to
saving grace, old Age-Apostate Christians have been. O mournful spectacle, that
an old Professor, that was thought to be almost ripe for heaven, should prove a
Wind-fall, and turn a Libertine, a Ranter, a Quaker. Look to it Christi-ans,
fear and tremble to be wantons with heavenly Ordinances, your Christian
Profession, your shining Gifts, your glorious Seize, your hopes of
Heaven. Assure your selves your unreformed abuse of grace will prove a sin
that will continually cause you to be on the losing hand for your souls.

SECT. 9.
9. It is a despising sin, it despifeth the Spirit of grace, in 9. Abuse of
grace is a despising of the Spirit of Grace. Inaudita non faciunt; nos lecta
calcamu^.
Light, love and holiness. Heb. 10. 29. why have thou despised the Commandment
of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 9. ^n home and a sharp question, implying a cutting
reproof of David, he sinned against the known Commandment of God, and its
called despising, The servant that knows his Masters pleasure and willingly
disobeyeth, despises this government. An enlightened Christian sins at an
higher rate, then an ignorant Heathen. Minoris reatus legem noscire quam
spernere. Salvian.
Those that fit in the Region and shadow of death, do not what they hear not,
we read the pleasure of God, and cast it under our feet, in is less guilt to
be ignorant of, then despise the Law, informed Rebellion shall have more
stripes, sinful ignorance fewer, it is rarely considered, that when daring
Christians abuse the Grace of God, they despise the God of Grace. What
wickedness is this to despise infinite goodness, and communicated kindness?
Should that leads to repentance tempt to carnal indulgence? The wonder is not
so great that that the damned in hell torments despite God in his vengeance. O
stupendous folly and madness carnal Gospellers despite God in his Grace.

SECT. 10.
10. It is Revolting Sin. The wanton widow that waxed wanton. 10 Abuse of
Grace is a revolting sin.
against Christ left first Faith of Christianity for an Idolattous Husband, I
Tim. 5. 10, 11. When men are evil because God is good, they cannot but grow
worse. and worse. I have nonrished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me, Isa. 1, 2. Gods goodness was abused to Apostate: They are
gone backward, ver. 4. ye will revolt more and more, v. 5. Near spiritual union
unto, and close walking with God, keeps the heart in awe, but abuse of Gods
grace men turn their backs upon him. Evil servants at distance from their
Masters, are wantons and riotous; and evil men when they go away from God. Two
sad characters of a vile person going a whoring from God, and being far from
him, are put down in the same verse, Ps. 73. 27. And they are ever in the fame
carnal wanton way. He goes a whoring from God, and is far from him; but, said
David, it is good for me to draw near to God. The nearer to God, the more
strictness and Holiness. Christ was nearest to God, and holiest in heart and
life. The Father has not left me alone; for I do always those things that
please him. Joh. 8. 29. The holy Angels are near God; They always see his
face, Mat. 18. 10. and are ready to do his will, Psalm. 103. 20. (...) was near
to God in a sweet vision He would now preach, though to Reprobate hearers.
Satan knows this, that the awful spiritual presence of God begets reverence
and obedience, and therefore he tempte souls to fall into hell of Libertinisme
by three stairs of Apostafie. First to turning the eye from God, then the
heart; and lastly the feet. To debauch the sinner, first he must not see God,
then he must not love him, and Lastly he must not walk with him. Then from,
this Aversion, loose conversion is easy. First he will behold vanity, then fet
his heart on it, and lastly walk after it. The wanton sinner cannot possibly
have an impudent whores forehead in the serious trembling presence of God, as
he has in his absence. The saying of (...) is sad experience, They that In
obfirmation diuturna malorum consuetudine, qui so-llent, quiaverfrom indulgent
Jun. in Deu. 29.
wantonly turn their backs upon God, by the custom of sin run into hardness of
heart. They are the monsters of imprudence, unthankfullness and madness, that
hope yea are assured their sins are washed in the blood of Christ, who
therefore boldly cast themselves into the old mire, prefuming they shall be
cleansed again. Does this speak Christ who therefore boldly cast themselves
into the old vomit and mire? Wanton Christians that know not the bitterness
wounded sinner that has almost sunk in despair and narrowly escapt hell, will
be afraid of the old sins and have sober, serious, trembling thoughts of his
gracious rescue. They are wholesome words of Zuinglius. When Cum in tanta^
desperationem, per peccatorum conscientiam redactus antea feurim, nonne slultus
merit^ dicerer, si nune sponte eidem naufragio me committerem. Zuingl. Evan.
Isagog. De aquis extractus denuo se immergens, de incendio reptus iterum se
praecipitans, magis malus tanto, quanto adit peccatn^ reciduum ex ingratitudine
Parisi. de sacram: poen itentiae.
through the Conscience of my sins, I was brought to so great a despair,
should I not deservedly be called a fool, if now I should willingly expose my
self to the same shipwreck. I am cleansed from mine impurities by the blood of
thy son, and shall I again desile my self? That of shall close this point. He
them being is snatch out of the fire, does again cast himself into it, by so
much the more desperately evil, by how much be does the more ungratfully add
sin to his deliverance?

SECR. 11.
11. It is an unexcusable sin. Enlightened sinners have no cloak 11. Abuse of
Grace is an unexcusable sin.
for sin Joh. 15. 22. The word will bear it (excuse) did so and so,
ignorantly, is some excuse. It cannot be said of them that never heard of the
grace of God in Christ. They read the Gospel and are They hear the Apostles
doctrine and are drunk. They prosesse following of Christ, and are given to
rapine; They lead a wicked life, and have a Godly Law. All these things may be
said of them, that wrest the grace of God, to unrighteousness and ungodliness.
Wicked gospellers pretend to come to Christ feast, as fit and thankful guests,
but the King shall say where is the garments? when he shall see they come with
their filthy garments, when with Plague-sores running on them, they shall be
speechless, not be able to speak a word in their own Apology, as the muzzled
mouth of a beast (...) at ille Capistratum. Piscitor. fraeno coercitusest.
Arias Montanus,
opens not: the import of the Greek word translated speechless. It Is our
common fault. Seneca has truly noted we had rather excuse then forsake our
vices. There will be no plea for Abusing Grace. There will be none for the
loose Jew, his externalt(...) with God in a Convenant of grace, in
circumcision, sacrifice, the Temple, ^ltar, Priesthood, Passever, is not
alleged to lessen but greaten the Abuse of grace. Therefore Calvin in his old
Testament Expositions often notes. That the terms and expressions of scared
propriety, as holy feed, people, my people, your God, the Holy one of Israel,
and the like, are not commendations, but exprobation, of their deep ingratitude
and Aposicy, that they who were singled out to be near God, above all the
world, to be the vessels to bear up his name, should degenerate from the glory
of their adoption. Israel was called holiness Vt illic resulgeat Dei gloria.
Calv. in. Jer. 3.
to the Lord, Jer. 2. 3. A people separate from all others, devoted only to
God, that among them the glory of his holiness might shine forth to take and
enlighten the eyes of the observing world. And therefore when the ten tribes
espoused to God, wantonly. played the harlot, in idolatry and other sins, with
other lovers, God writ her a bill of divorce; in her sad banishment and
Captivity among Heathens: when the old Churches religious relation was abused
to loose superstition and and Conversation, then we read God disowed his
people, who disowned him. I have forsaken Practica notitia Paulus dcet eos
fuisse abusos, quod eum nossent fas and jus rerum agendarn, partim aliis
indulserint, partim, quod si in alios animadvertebant, in seiphs tamen eadem
peccate dissimularent: Per. Matyr. in Romans 2.
mine house. I have left mine heritage: I have given the dearly beloved of my
soul, into the hand of her enemies. Jer. 12. 7. The degenerate feed of Abraham
had no plea for, but smarted for their wantonness. Yea further the Heathen
sinning against his light of ^^ure, will have no excuse, why he should not
endure the vengeance of eternal fire. His unanswerable indictment will be re^d
against him out of Romans the second. Many principles of the Moral Law were
naturally written in his heart. He had a Conscience to excuse in duty, accuse
in disobience c. 2. 15. yea in retained not God in his knowledge 27. cast good
convictions out of his mind, gave himself up sinfully, as he was given up by
God judicially, to vile affections and a reprobate mind. 26. 28. Sin enough to
clear divine justine, and merit hell: Peter Martyr thus Comments. Paul teaches
said He. They abused practical knowledge, in that they knew what was just and
equal to be done, partly they were indulgent in others, partly what they taxed
in others they dissembled in themselves. With what color of excuse, will the
Christian Libertine stand dim light of nature, and above the Jews dark fight
of grace, gospel twilight and dawning, he lives in high noone vangelicall
light, if he riot before and against ^s clearer sunshine irradiations? By how
much the more Capernaite Christians are lifted up in abused, heavenly, gospel
ordinances, so much the Lower, dismal, hot room will have in Hell.

SECT. 12.
12. It is an Heathnish sin: I mean not this, That there is no more sin in the
Christian then the Heathnish wanton, for he is 12. Abuse of Grace is an
Heathnish sin
an higher-forme-Scholler in the Devils school, that sins against grace then
who sins against reason; but thus the Christians wantonness is an Heathnish
sin. The loose conversation and abuse of Religion is alike in the dissolute
Christian and Heathen. They agree ^^in Conversation. Some Heathens imagined a
stupid Diety, nor Angry, nor pleased, and so they were careless Volu^latis
capiende causa, nasci hominem putavit: Lact. 1. 3. c. 17. Cum disputat omnia
sapiente sua cause fa^ere, adsuam ad utilitattem refere omnia; Ib.
of virtue, and fearless of vice: do not Atheistical Christians live, as if
God would neither reward, nor punish? Epicurus thought man was born for
sensual voluptuaries among us so live in fleshy delights, as if they came for
no other end into the world? Do not the common worshippers of that great Idol
carnal self, make self interest their Alpha and their Omega? yea all the
letters of the Alphabet, the whose of whose life is to consult and advance
self? The body was the all Heathens looked after, did nothing for their souls.
Is not the body the all loose Christians regard while the souls. is neglected?

2. The loose Heathen and the Christian, both agree in the loose abuse of their
respective Religions in four things: In the worshippers Ad Corpusre. serunt
omnia, nihil prorsus ad mentem. Lact. 1. 3. C. 9.
frame of heart: In the unprofitableness of worship: In the design of heart:
In the event of worship.

1. In the worshippers frame of Heart. The Heathens in their addresses to their
false Gods, came not in a virtuous but vicious frame (i. e) not in a virtuous,
when they come to sacrifice to their Gods: They bring not their hearts due
observance, Quomado Deus amabit coleutem, si ipse non ametur ab eo? Cum neque
ex animo neque obseruanner accedit, lsti cum ad sacrifi^andum Diis suis
veniunt, etc. Lact. 1. 5. c. 20 Flagitiis omnibus inquinati, veniunt ad
precandum. Lact. 1. 5. c. 20. I^ic nibil exigitur aliud qua^ sanguis pecudu^,
fumus, inepta libatis: sepie sacrificasse ^pinantur, si cutem laverint, tanquam
libidines intra pectus inclusas, ulli amnes ablaunt aut ulla maria purisicent.
lb. Preoantur nihil aliud quam ut scelera inpune commitant. Ib. Peractis
sacrificiis inanibus, omnem Religionem in Templo, and cum Templo sicut
invenerant, relinquunt, nihilque secum ex ea neque affe. runt, neque referunt.
lb.
love, integrity of mind, Reverence and fear. Are not these the failings of
Carnal worshippers of Jesus Christ? nihil intimum afferunt. The inwards are
not in sacrifice, as if an Idol God, not an omniscient Christ were worshipped,
where is the due observance of his presence, do not hearts run after other
things? Where is Reverence, fear, love, upright service of the Lord Christ.

2. They came to their gods in a vicious frame: They come to pray in the
pollution of all their sins, immodest Adulterers, Thieves, etc. without choice
of worshippers, no matter who came: Do not many impudently and unpreparedly
come to God, stinking in their filth, with unclean hands and impure hearts?
Jam. 4. 8. that have need of the washing of faith and repentance, Isa. 1, 16.
18. 2. The wanton Heathen and Christian, both agree in the unprofitableness of
their Religion. The Heathen put himself and his god off, with the blood of
Beasts, smoke, a silly scarifice, thinks he has piously sacrificed, if he has
washed his skin, when no Rivers can wash, nor Seas purify inward Lusts: His
Religion could neither make good, nor establish in goodness: There was no good
life, wisdom, nor faith to be learned there; does not the dissolute Christian
make his holy Religion as vain unto him? Is not Christ and his own soul, with
good words that vanish like smoke, a silly Sacrifice of heartless praise? Does
he think he has piously sacrificed, when he has given God his eye, ear, knee
and tongue, when the Waters of the Sanctuary have never washed his impure.
inside, no good life, wisdom, nor faith is learned? 3. The licentious Indemnity
in sin, sin freely, and never smart for it. They pray for nothing else, but
that they may sin with Impurity, faith Lactantius. The Christian worship his
God, that he might sin without restraint and penalty: though his tongue says
not so, his heart and life does. 4. The dissolute Heathen and the Christian
agree, in the event of both their Religious worship. When the vain Pagan
Sacrifices are ended, the blind Worshippers leave all their Religion in the
Temple, and with the Temple, as they found it; they bring nothing to it, nor
carry away nothing from it. Is it not common sad experience, Profane
Worshippers of God get nothing by the Ordinances? Leave all their Religion as
they found it, in and with the public Assemblies; they bring no godliness to,
nor carry none away from them: AS they come, so they return, Dead, Hardened,
Proud, worldly, Impanitent Libertines: We see the sad Parallel between the
wanton Heathen and Christian, under both their Religions: The abuse of Gods
grace is an Heathenish sin.

SECT. 13.
13. IT is an universal sin: It reigns in all carnal, wordly professed 13. The
abuse of Gods grace is an universal sin
Christians, yea something of its corrupt leaven is in the real, yea strict
servants of Christ, as shall further be shown, when the differences of this sin
in found and rotten persons shall be ^id down. Among the ungenerate crowd that
Proh dolor ^ Inspice Evangelicos in civitatibus, vide Magistratus et nobitiu^
mores, deinde civium and rusticorum, nonne decebat pariter omnes, die noctuque
Deo gratias agere, quod sint liberati ex furnace ferrea Papae and ex illis
miserrimis ignorantiae tenebris, sed hoc non sit, omnes autem in
idunumincumbur. ut impossu. ris, fraudibus, injuriis alios premant, ipst autem
ditesca^t. Luth. in Genesis
own the Christian name, this horrid abomination has universal dominion: It
was Luthers Lamentation: It is a sad thing! Look upon Gospellers in Cities, eye
Magistrates, and the manners of Noble men, and view the Life of Citizens and
Country People; ought not all of them, night and day, give thanks to God, that
they are delivered from the Iron Fornance of the Popes Tyranny, and the most
miserable darkness of Ignorance? but this is not done, for this is the great
business that all pursue, that they may heap up wealth; so they grow rich, care
not how they abuse one another, by Impostures, Frauds and Injuries: As all
earthy nominal Christians slight that Gospel grace, in which they prosess their
felicity is wrapped up, and more industriously pursue that which is a shadow,
then substantial happiness; so in spiritual real ones, through the inclinations
and temptations of the old man in them, there is some abuse of Gods grace:
surely they know wherefore Grace is recieved, what hinders but that it should
teach them how they ought and might improve it, who have more abilities then
others to walk close with God, deny themselves, be fruitful in good works, live
in Heaven, honor their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, by a shining, convincing
conversation, be the presidents of mortifying grace; and in brief, to hold
forth the glory and power of Religion, to make it amiable in the eyes of wicked
men, even these cannot but be conscious to themselves, how far short they are,
and live up to the dignity, essicacy, and majesty of that Gospel Holiness and
strictness they profess, and in some measure but too little discover: That real
servant of Christ is one of an hundred, yea one of a thousand, that does not in
one thing or another spot the garment of his holy Profession, and in some lower
degree, yet intolerable and unallowable of wantonness, fall short of the honor
and power of Gospel grace. Happy is the person, The Nonesuch, The Phaenix of
the Country, who is so eminently mortified, so self crucified to the world,
empowered against Satan, grown in Grace, dwelling in Heaven, makes the practice
and power of Religion the great business, has such daily and hourly assisting
grace, is in such constant guard of his heart, and fear of God, that the
transcendent Professor rather lives as an Angel, then a Saint among men; but it
is very rare to find Christians coming nigh this Character: Who are there that
know the large and hard things required in the Law, and strict rules of the
Gospel, and his swervings from both, but has cause to charge himself with some
inward or outward looseness, or both, and say with David, I have done foolishly,
with Job, I am vile, with the Publican, A sinner, O God! with Paul, In me, in
my flesh dwells no good thing; though in my mind I serve the Law of God, yet
in my flesh I play the Wanton, and serve the Law of sin? This great sin, The
abuse of Grace, is Epidemical, and so much the more abominable: As that Plague
is worst that Eo graviora sunt peccate, quo magis Catholica, zanch.
is generally raging and infections: That of Z^^by shall period this point: The
more Catholic sins are, the greater they are: Generality of any sin is its
aggravation.

SECT. 14.
14. IT is an un-Churching sin: It provokes God, to take away the 14. The abuse
of Grace is an unchurching sin.
gospel, the golden Chandlesticks, that hold sorth glorious, Gospel, saving
light, and to give the abused good tidings of grace to them that will bring
forth the fru^s of it, Matthew. 21. 43. Abusing Gods grace was the sin of Sardis;
who had a name to live the life of grace, but was dead, Rev. 3, 1. It was the
sin of Laodicea, that boasted her self rich in gifts and graces, in gospel
Treasures, when she was poor and miserable, but rich in sin, Rev. 3. 17. It was
the sin of the Jews that cried the Temple of the Lord, bo^e much on Sacrifices,
the types of Gods grace in Christ, which was abused to stealing, murder, false
swearing, idolatry, and so perverted the ceremonial Religion of Gods grace,
into a securing Den of Robbers, Jer. 7, 9. 11. but used it not as an healing
Medicine. If God enter into judgment with England, he may, and there is cause
to fear he will, un-Gospel, and un-Church her: He may justly do with than part
of his loose Family, as Masters do with their loose servants, take away those
Candles, and that Food they play the wantons with. Is not Evangelical Doctrine
sweetly, clearly, plainly, and commonly Preached throughout the Nation? Are we
not like Capernaum, lifred up to Heaven in Ordinances? Deserve we not to be
like Capernaum too, cast to Hell for our impenitence, barrenness, thriving
wickedness, wanton abuse of the means? Are not the plentiful showers of
Heavenly Doctrine, the sweet and warm Beams of the Gospel Sun, dishonored by a
plentiful Spring of Thoms, Hemlock, noisome Weeds, cursed Opinions and
Practices? We are Judgment proof, and Sermon proof, neither the voice of Gods
Word, nor Rod amends us. O incurable England! Are we not sick of the remedy?
Are not Soul Physicians now adays Physicians of no value? And O sad truth of
little, yea in some places of no success! Did it kill the heart of Eli, that
the outward glory, the Ark was departed from Israel? O our stupidity, spiritual
death, hard heartedness, want of zeal for the honor of God, credit of his
gospel, salvation of Souls! The inward glory of the Ark is gone, or almost
gone; the astonishments, the conversions, the Devil-banishing, the
World-conquering, the heart-changing, the soul-warming, the Lust-mortifying,
the Spirit-quickning, the Grace-growing power of the Ordinances, is by many degrees
ees from what it was, gone from us. Many years ago the terrible and needful
truths of the Law Preached, have made the Auditors hair even stand an end;
trembling and weeping, resolving and practicing Reformation, were the happy
fruits of ^ rousing Ministry. The same Truths, with some suitable affections in
their godly Messengers, are Preached now, but with little success: How thin, O
how thin are the numbers of repenting, reforming Believers! How rarely are
spiritual Fishermen, and the Words Net blessed by a draught of souls? How
seldom do we see and feel the beauty and power of glory, of Christ in the
Sanctuary, as experimented in former times? Are not multitudes of Christians,
of large profession, grown more debauched, sensual, careless of their souls?
Yea, Are not stricter Christians grown looser then they were? Is there not a
sad fall from degrees of prizing the Ordinances, first Love, tenderness of
Conscience, the fear of God, guard over thoughts and words? Is it not true of
many, that have the root of the matter in them, They are not so fruitful as
once they were? Good Trees that should be better, are worse; and are not evil
professed Christians grown stark mught, thrive only in sin, and grow worse and
worse? yea, Do not the convictions of these truths lie dead upon the spirits of
the most lively and best approved Christians? Is there not even in quickened
souls a kind of dead insensibility of Gods dishonor, the abuse of his Grace,
the reproach of his Gospel? Is it not very rare to get a few hearty sighs and
groans, to wring a few tears, that the Gospel grace of God, the Christians
glory is universally abused? May we not fear this spiritual Judgment of
hardness of heart, is the forerunner, and will be the procurer of a Gospel
Famine? That the word of God, the God of the word will depart from us, and
leave England in that Death, Darkness, Destruction it has deserved: May we not
from likeness of sins, fear likeness of Judgments? Abuse of Grace has been,
we may fear it will be an un-Churching sin. O all you Zions mourners, who are
what you are by distinguishing Gospel grace, bewail your own unsuitableness to
Gods grace! Sigh and cry for all the Abominations that are done in the midst of
our sinful Jerusalem, if days of desolation come, it will cheer your hearts;
you were affected with Gods dishonor, you will be marked out either for
deliverance out of common evils, supportance in them, or an happy issue out of
them.

CHAP. VII. Wherein are set forth the Punishments of this great sin, Abusing
Gods Grace.
WE have seen the aggravated evil of this too common and dishonorable Sin,
the Abuse of Grace. We can be in nothing more cross to the choice design of
God, than in wronging his grace. Not to give God the praise of the glory of his
goodness in nature, is deep ingratitude; but to deny him the praise of the
glory of his grace is deeper indignity. The wrath of a King will be more
enraged when he is abused in his Throne, than in his Common Highway. The Gospel
acquaints us with Gods Throne of grace: God slighted in his grace is an abused
King in his Throne. This without repentance will turn the Throne of grace into
a Throne of angry Justice. They that abuse the blood of the Lamb, shall feel
the wrath of the Lamb. No damnation like that which is heightened by the abuse
of Salvation. For the Gospel to be a savor of death unto death, puts a sharper
and fiercer sting into eternal death, than when it punishes only unnatural
sins. God sets black marks of his displeasure upon the Abuse of Gospel grace.
He is wont to plague it with these punishments; in special six sad ones,
wherein he expresses dreadful vengeance.

SECT. 1.
1. Judgment is giving up to carnal Lusts. As God has punished the abuse of
his Goodness in nature, so he has revenged 1. Shows the greatness of the
judgment to be given up to carnal lusts.
the wrongs of it in grace. He shined forth the glory of his Godhead, Eternal
Power, Love, Wisdom, and other glorious Attributes, in the Workmanship of the
World, the Glass of his Glory, the great Folio, every Leaf whereof proves his
Invisible Deity; but when the goodness of God was abused to Idolatry, the
creature was served and worshipped more than the Creator, the Lord in just
wrath gave up wantons against the light of nature to their own lusts, Romans 1.
24. to vile affections, 26. to a reprobate sense, 28. to receive in themselves,
by these spiritual Judgments, the recompense of their error, v. 27. whip them
with their rod, choose their own delusions, and suffering them justly to perish
in their own choice. The like vengeance he has exercised on the injuries done
to his Gospel grace. The Lord proclaimed himself to the God of Israel in an
external Covenant of Grace. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt: typifying the Grace of Redemption from Saran and the world,
sweetly inviting them to desire and accept his grace, with enlarged hearts,
open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. But this sweet tender of
grace in postive rebellion, was wantonly rejected: But my people would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; and thus the Lord plagued
them with their own choice and ways; So I gave them up to their own hearts,
and they walked in their own counsels, ver. 12. The sadness of this Judgment
in giving sinners up to their carnal Luds, for the perverting of Gods grace,
appears in four things.

1. It is a sad judgment for a sinful, weak, erring creature to be deprived
of a safe, unerring guide, the Grace of God. When Contumaciae pana gravis,
desertio spiritualis. Ames.
the offers and restraints of his Grace are removed, man is like the Philistines
house, when the Pillars by Sampson were removed, an heap of ruin; like a Coach
without a Coachman to order it, like a Ship without a Pilot, like an Infant
without a Nurse, like an heady people without a Magistrate. The spiritual
departure of Gods grace is a great punishment of obstimte contumacie. It is
just that grace should forsake those that forsake it, 2 Chr. 24. 24. that they
should have none of its safety, that will have none of its sovereignty; that
they should perish without it, that would not be ruled by it. It is
Chrysostomes resemblance, when a King sees Rex cum perditum vidit fidium suwn,
abdicat eum boais suis, and deserit. Chsys.
his Son lost, and past recovery, he casts him out of his Royal Protections,
Provisions, and forsakes him, so God strips loose sinners of his aid and
grace. As it is great mercy to be guided by Gods counsel, so it is great
severity to be deprived of it. The way of man to obtain everlasting happiness
is not in himself: He is safe in Gods way, but perishes in his own.

2. It is a sad Judgment for a sinful, weak, erring creature to have a false
deceitful guide, and so have all they that are given up to their own lu^s: They
are like Traitorous Colonels that lead their Regiments into the very mouth of
ruin, within the Enemies Ambush. Besides they are foolish Guides, and
unskillfull, they know not the way of peace. Who will take a natural fool or a
stranger to be guided in a journey? That Ship with it is Fraught and Passengers
is in a poor case, that has an ignorant Pilot, and the full Coach that has a
blind Couch-man. Carnal Lusts are foolish, 1 Timothy 6. 9. O the folly of immortal
souls that are led by the foolish guidance of their lusts!

3. It is a sad judgment to be given up to carnal Lusts, because these are
Gods ^vengers. He is revenged of men where they least believe it: Even in those
sweet Lusts they hugg and pamper, will God plague the enemies of his grace. No
need of Non opus e^ carnisicibus externis, domesticos habemus ultores. Pet.
Mart. in Romans
Outward Punishments, if we will pl^y the wantons with his grace. He has his
Avengers in our very bosoms: The Lusts of wicked men are Gods ^ods, xes,
Halters. The servants of sinful Lusts, are an inestimable, infinite mass of
misery; when they shall feel it in the other world, they will believe it. Men
sins are Gods punishments, though they see it not.

4. It is a sad judgment to be given up to carnal Lusts; because such are
Volunteers in their own destruction. It is sad to fall by the Sword, but more
sad, like Saul, willingly to fall by ones own Sword: It is a sad judgment to
die by Poison, but willingly to drink up a known cup of Poison, is more sad. O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13. 9. Why will you die, O house of
Israel? The Law of sin and death are yo^ked together, Voleutes and ultronei cu:
iditatuvus inserviunt. Pet. Mart. in Romans
Romans 8. 2. They that will walk after their lusts, will perish, 2. Pet. 2. 10,
12. Now the practical adversaries of Gods grace do most willingly and freely
serve their own lusts, and necessitate their ruin; are like Phalaris, that was
burnt in his own Engine of cruelty; like him that hangs himself in his own
Halter. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his sins, Prove. 5. 28. He shall die without (refused)
instruction, and in the greatress of his (deliberate, voluntary) folly he shall
go astray, ver. 23. He shall find no shelter in Gods decrees. His wilful
abuse of grace will be his self-condemnation. He shall have his sentence at the
great day, not qua now electus, but qua impius; not depart you cursed, because
I chose you not, but because ye are workers of iniquity.

SECT. 2.
2. Judgment of Perverting the grace of God is spiritual 2 Spiritual blindness
is a judgment inflicted upon those who pervert the grace of God.
blindness: I am come for judgment (said Christ) that they which see might be
made blind, Joh. 9. 39. Isaias saw the Gospelglory of Gods grace, and p^eached
it to the loose reprobate Jews, and the Lord in wrath blinded their eyes that
they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, Joh, 12.
40, 41. Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords servant?
Isa. 42. 19. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, ver. 18. A sad reproof of the
wicked Jews, that did unworthily profane the most excellent gift of
gospel light: Though all others might be blind and deaf, yet they that had the
most bright Nulli coeciores, nulli surdiores. Probrose meminit. Calvin.
Lamp of Truth shining, the Silver Trumper of the Gospel sounding before them,
should not; yet none more blind, none more deaf than they; an heavy judgment.
But if blind, how Perfect? how Servants? They are the words of Exprobration,
not Commendation. They should be perfect Duces via, Leaders to others, but were
not. They were punished with Blindness. This sore punishment is clear in four
things.

1. They whom God punishes with Blindness of mind, are given up to the Devil
to be blinded. The god of this world blinds the eyes of them that believe not,
lest the light of Go spel-grace should sevingly shine in their hearts, 2 Cor.
4. 4. It was a judgment on the wanton Sodomites, that the Angels Diabolus est
Dei carnifex, atque divine ultionis execu tor. Pet. Mart.
blinded them, Genesis 19. 11. It is a Judgment on wanton Gospellers, when the
evil Angels blind them with the dust, dirt, and srno^k of abused creatures,
corrupt principles, carnal reason, their o^n ungoverned passions. It is a
Judgment when the Judge commits evil doers to the Jailer and the Hangman for
execution. The Devil in blinding the minds of those that are lascivious with
grace, is Gods Executioner.

2. They whom God punishes with Blindness of mind cannot find the way of
Life: And now sad is that to wander like the blind man that gropes for the way,
but finds it not. The blinded Sodomites wearied themselves to find the door,
and found it not, Genesis 19. 11. So many there be that grope after the narrow way
of Life, and find it not, Mat. 7. 14. Strive to enter into the door of
happyness, but find it not. The Jew wronging the grace of the gospel, was
blinded, and found it not; The Papist is blinded, and finds it not; the loose
ignorant, yea the loose, though kno^ing Protestant, yet is blind, and believes
it not. How many grope for the way of eternal life in good meanings, and
supposed good hearts, in Civilities, in Formalities, in Comparative goodness,
in partialities of Obedience, and the like, and yet darkness has blinded their
eyes, that they see not the way of Life.

3. They whom God punishes with blindness of mind, they fall on every
stumbling block they meet withal, are taken in every snare of Company,
Relations, Possessions, Prosperity and Adversity, sa. 8. 14, 15. yea shining
spiritual gifts, yea the sweet Promises of the Gospel wrested to looseness,
are turned into snares. The blind man scapes not the block in his way, nor the
snare and gin that is laid for him, Levit. 19. 14. And the blind Libertine
scapes not stumbling blocks in the ways of death. The worst things are causes,
the best things occasions of stumbling. Yea the Lord Christ, and Gods grace are
a stone of stumbling unto unbeleevers.

4. They whom God punishes with blindness of mind, fall into the pit of Hell,
Mat. 15. 14. As saving grace in Christ delivers souls from going into the
bottomless pit, Job 33. 24. So blindness of mind infallibly delivers into it.
The blind man falls into the Lime-pit, the Cole-pit before him, and the blind
sinner into the pit of destruction. Did he see it, he would tremble to move
toward it.

SECT. 3.
3. Judgment of Dishonor done to the Grace of God, is Hardness 3 Hardness is
judgment inflicted upon such as abuse this grace of God. instrumenta
indurationis.
of heart. The Jews abused Isaias ^ospel-ministry, and God plagued them with
Hard hearts: Make the heart of this people^ fat, Isa. 6. 10. He hardened their
hearts, Joh. 12. 40. Let my people go that they may serve me. The words of the
Lord by Moses were the Instruments of Pharaohs Hardening, is the Sun the means
of the Clayes Herdning. ^^ grace of God in h^i^ was preacheo o the Israelites
in the Wilderness, they heard the lively Oracles, the gracious Truths of
Salvation, and Eternal Life in the Water from the Rock, in the Manna from
Heaven, in the Teachings from Moses, Act. 7. 37, 38. in the in^ructions of the
good Spirit of God, Nehem. 9. 20. But they hardened their hearts in the
provocation in the day of temptation, ^eb. 3. 8. they obeyed not the gracious
voice of God, v. 7. by the Ministry of Moses, and the Lord plagued them with
their own hard hearts. Three things speak this an heavy judgment.

1. There is no Impression of saving grace in an hard heart: Where God hardens
the hardens the heart he converts not, he heals it not, Joh. 12. 40. A Seal
leaves no print on an Anvil, or an hard Cervix ferrea, frons aenea, flecti and
mitescere nescia, cor intractabile, quavis incude and adamante darious.
Diaholica (...).
stone, but on the soft Wax. The holy Spirit does not seal his grace on an
hard, but a soft heart. The Iron sinew, Isa. 48. 4. the brazen brow, the
untractable heart that is harder than the Anvil and the Adamant, Diabolical
insensbilitie, an inflexible spirit to the divine pleasure, are the spiritual
penalties for Graces injury. Paul persuaded loose hearers concerning the
Kingdom of Gods grace, but they that were hardened believed not, Act. 19. 8, 9.
The hardened metal cannot be run into, nor take the shape of the mold, but the
melted and soft. Carnal gospellers, after thousands of Sermons of Gods grace,
are not changed into the Image of its glory, because their hearts are hardened.

2. Hearts h^r^ned by occasion of Gods goodness, ripen for ruin After the
hardness of thine heart thou treasurest up wrath (...) Colligere and reponere
thesourum in longum tempus. Polyc Lyses.
against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. Alluding to an huge bank of money, unto
which there is sil adding of hundreds and thousands. or to an hoo^ding or
heating up of store of Corn. Hardened Libertines under grace, are ever swelling
the bank, increasing the board of sin against the day of wrath, by thoughts,
words, and actions, their real impieties, and unrighteousnesses, yea the
un^ardoned iniquities of their holy things, filling up their sin always, I
These. 2. 16.

3. Their destruction who are punished with hardness of heart is infallible.
The Oath of God makes it sure; I have sworni^ my wrath they should not enter
into my rest, Heb. 3. 11. As the Ifraelites, while the day of grace lasted in
the wilderness, were hardened, v. 7. 8. so are loose Christians under, and
against the voice of Gods grace. The oath of God reaches these to
hastenwithout fail their everlasting destruction.

SECT. 4.
4. IVdgement of injury offered to the grace of God, is Incurableness 4.
Incurable ness in sin is an injury of fered unto the grace of God.
in sin. Gods Ordinances of grace, and his Chas^sements are his Physic; the
fruit is to purge away sin. God would have diseased Jerusalem take a Purge, but
the Physic w^ought not; Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged,
thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused my fury to
rest upon thee, Ezekiel. 24. 13. As if the Lord had said, Purgingme^nes have not
had Purging success; therefore let thy wickedness abide on thee to thy ruin:
Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? is not the health of
the daughter of my people recovered? Jer. 8. 22. What is here said of a
diseased lost State, is true of lost souls past cure, past hope, when Gods
Physic does no good. Is there no Palm? is there no Physician? why is not the
health of diseased, loose sinners recovered? There are means of grace; Christ
is a Sovereign Physician, but the wanton, disordered Patients play with their
Physic, take it wrong, cast it away, and use it not aright; and no wonder if
the disease be incurable. Two sad things speak this an heavy judgment.

1. God is pleased with the destruction of those who are voluntarily
incorrigible under the means of grace. The Apostle gave thanks to God that the
savor of Christ's knowledge was made manifest by them in every place, 2 Cor. 2.
14. One would think at first view this savor of Christ's knowledge, should be
only the sweet power of it to salvation. It is true, that is the prime, not the
only savor of Cospel-grace, It is a sweet savor in Damnation as well as
salvation. in hardening as well as softning: So is the Apostles distribution, for
we are unto God a sweet savor in Christ in them that are saved, and in them
that perish, ver. 15. Though the gospel be a damning, deadly gospel of death
unto death, of the death spiritual unto the death eternal unto them that
perish: Yet it is a sweet favor unto God, as savoury ointment is to the smell,
and savoury meat unto the taste. Though God takes no pleasure in the death of a
returning sinner, yet he is ple^sed in the destruction of the impenitent. He
that made them will show no mercy on them.

2. God is eminently delighted in the destruction of incurable sinners, under
healing means, I have called, and ye have refused; I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded: Ye have set at naught all my counsel. Knowledge is
hated, the fear of the Opprobrium medici and medicine.
Lord not chosen, reproof despised, Prove. 1. 25, 26, 29, 30. Here is no cure by
healing means. Now see the judgment on these wantons the disease of the
Physic and Physician. I will laugh at your ^alamity, Prove. 1. 26. Laughter
proper to man, is improperly said of God. He speaks after the manner of men.
Men express their high delights by laughter, and God his joyous complacencie,
in (...)
incurable sinners ruin. This laughter of God might make the proudest and
stoutest sinner mourn. Eternal weeping and wailing, the everlasting testimony
of Gods infinite delightful vengeance, will be the true and sad exposition of
Gods laughing.

SECT. 5.
5. Judgment of profaning the grace of God, will be a terrible 5. Profaning
Gods grace will bring a terrible judgment at the ^st day.
Judgment at the last day, Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2.
Cor. 5. As if the Apostle had said, the judgment will be terrible to such as
are not reconciled to God. Kiss not the Son, Ps. 2. but wrong him. Therefore
we persuade men to be careful and diligent, that they may be accepted, and to
adorn the Gospel of grace. Abide in him, says the A postle, that when he shall
appear we may have confidence and not be ashamed, 1 John 2. 28. Implying that
such loose Christians as abide not in him, but depart from him, and are enemies
to him, his merits, and grace, shall come with shame, and despair before him.
Three things will show the terrible Judgment on them that in heart and life
wrong the grace of God.

1. Their standing in Judgment will be terrible: The ungodly shall not stand
in the judgment, Ps. 1. 5. The Apostle says, all shall stand, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
They shall not stand with comfort, but terror, not as the Image of Christ, but
Satan, not in the righteousness of Christ, but their own nakedness, not as the
Friends of Christ, but Enemies, not as the Saved, but the Damned, not-as
absolved Innocents, but guilty Felons.

2. Their Self-condemnation will be terrible. There will be a testimony against
them out of their own mouths and hearts, that they knew the reign of sin and
grace could not consist; they were told Mammon and God could not be served
together; that the called by grace were to live as Saints, not in old sins;
that the grace of God shining in the heart teaches to deny, not fulfill ungodly
lusts; that that grace that reconciles the soul to God does not reconcile it
with the least sin; and yet their consciences cannot but accuse them, they
wilfully profane the precious grace of God to vile affections and courses. How
dreadful will this be, though there will be Juries enough to cast the enemies
of Gods grace, yet the conscience shall need none of them, but be forced to
confess, even to eternal judgment, their high indignities to verbal and
blasphemies againstGods grace.

3. The sentence of the Judge will be terrible, when he shall s^y, Depart ye
cursed, to all them that have discredited the blessed gospel, and made the
grace of God a patron of sin, and that in high reproach to the grace of God,
continued in sin because grace abounded. What frowns will sit on the face,
terrors take hold of loose guilty hearts from the sentence of Christ, when he
shall vindicate his own and his Fathers glory from all the dishonorable
dis-services done to his holy Religion?

SECT. 6.
6. Judgment of abusing Gods grace, will be the hottest room in hels flames:
Its eternal vengeance is called, The 6. The hottest room in hell will be the
judgment of them that abuse Grace.
The portion of Hypocrites, Mat. 24. 51. Whether gross, or close ones who
profane their Baptismal grace, the Word of grace they hear, to profane
abominable courses, or spin a fine thread of hypocrisy, reigning, though
undis^erned, shall both be doomed to their own place. That it is rational the
defilements cast upon the clean grace of God should have severest everlasting
vengeance, consider,

1. The lowest abuse of Grace is above the highest in Nature. The dishonours
offered to grace by Professors of Christianity, carry higher guilt than the
most infamous Idolatries, Murders, Adulteries, committed by Heathen men, that
never heard of, nor pretended to e^brace the grace of God in Christ. The
Heathen abuses Creation mercies. The Christian, Redemption mercies, the
Heathen is wanton with the dimm candle of reason, the Christian with the
gospel Sun, the Heathen defaceth the remaining natural image of God, in
Intellectualls and Moralls, the Christian pretends the spiritual Image of
Christ in supernatural divine mysteries, and fowls the face of it, by filthy
affections and conversation. The Heathen prostitures a man to his Beastliness,
the Christian debaseth the Son of God to his bruirishness. The Heathen treads
under foot his reason, the Christian the blood of Christ. Well therefore says
our Lord Christ, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, Sodom and
Gomorrah, than Chorazin and Bethsaida, than Capernaum, Mat. 11. 23, 24. then
all the places of Goshen-light, where there has been fellowship with the works
of darkness.

2. If every transgression and disobedience against the Word of grace, spoken
by Angels, received a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2. 2. Shall not every
wanton rebellion against gospel grace, spoken by the head of Angels, have
without repentance, an eternal avenging recompense?

3. According to the different degrees of abusing Gods grace will be the
different degrees of punishment. Some wicked ones abuse it, but not so
wilfully, delightingly, impudently, blasphemously, constantly. These will feel
the smart of it, but others abuse it with more resolvedness, shamelesness, open
shame and reproach to Gods grace, and more persevering indignities; these shall
commence the highest degrees in torments: As in Earth, so in Hell, disparities
of sin shall bring different punishments.

CHAP. VIII. Containing an Use of Information.
IS the grace of God pervetted to Lasciviousness? for Information.
For Application, this sad, and (as has been shown) common sin, a multiplied,
monstrous evil, of eminent guilt, of eternal bad consequence to all that live
and dye in it, calls for serious meditation, and fruitful improvement.

1. Information, in sundry Inferences, or Consectaries from this sad truth.

SECT. 1.
INference, that sin of a poisonous nature. It will do evil 1. Sin is of a
poisonous nature. Antidotum Lex vitiositas venenum (...).
because God is good, continue in sin that Grace may abound, Romans 6. 1. It
powers its poison upon Gospel Antidotes. It is like the Spider, that converts
wholesome things into poison. It is like the Vintner, that dasheth and corrupts
wine with water. We do not so corrupt the word, faith the Apostle. It is like a
corrupt stomach that turns good food into crude destructive humors. It is like
a corrupt bitter Fountain, that running into sweet ^holsom waters, turns them
into bitterness; they are all corrupters, Jer. 6. 28. It is the genius and
brand of envenomed natures. They corrupt good manners, yea the highest things
in Religion, are depraved by them. The very Grace, Word, and Spirit of God by
corrupt sophistication, are made to speak and patronize, what they never
allowed. See in this the sad picture of man's fallen nature. That vitiosity that
first abused nature, ever since turns the grace of God into rank poison, so
little cause has any man to pride himself in any excellency, that makes in any
an occasion to sin.

SECT. 2:
2. INference, that the Ordinances of grace are no sufficient 2. The Ordinances
of grace are no sufficient plea; for happiness.
plea for happiness. Their Abuse marrs their enjoyment. it is not the having,
but the blessing of good Food and Physic that procures health: diseased men
may perish in their enjoyments: Capernaum suck the deeper in Hell, by high yet
injured Ordinances of grace, Christ's commission to his extraordinary Ministers,
his Disciples, employed men may be accursed under blessed means, they were to
offer the gospel of grace and peace to wicked men, Luke 10. 5. And to bring
near the Kingdom of God unto them, v. 11. But if the Son of Peace were not
there, if the hearers were not worthy, that is fit to receive it, and welcome
the Messengers, the very dust of their feer they shook off, should be a
Witness against the despisers and rejecters of grace, v. 11. Many shall say,
Lord, Lord open unto us, Luke 13. 25. Who shall find access to glory, blocked
up for abusing the offers of grace, they are not happy that barely wait at the
posts of Wisdom, and hear her instructions, but that find wisdom, get
understanding, Prove. 3. 13. That take fast hold of instruction, and let her not
go, but keep her as the life of the Soul. v. 18.

SECT. 3.
3. INference; The Joys of carn^l Gospellers are false joys. 3. The joys of
Carnal Gospellers are false joys.
not only the Joys in their sins, the Creatures, but their Religious
Privileges will fail them. They who delighted to know Gods ways, and in
approaches to God, and Pervetted their joyous enjoyments of ordinances, to a
retaining their corrupt will, strife and debate, smitings with the fist of
wickedness, continuing the bands of wickedness, heavy burdens and oppressions,
are abominated of God, as loosing all fruit by their religion Gravissimum malum
quando quis gaudet de propriis damis. Chrysostom. Miserando Laetitia. Pet. Mart.
Luctuosa Lae. ^itia Fulgent.
I sa 58. 2. etc. All fasting, praying, preaching, hearing, professing joys,
all the joys of confidences and hopes in services and sins will prove like a
Widows joy, an expiring blaze, the cracking of Thorns under the Pot. They
shall vomit up all their sweet morsells, disgorge their false joys, that have
pleased themselves in their impieties, and unrighteousnesses, under the favor
of grace. They rejoice in a thing of naught. Amos 1. 13. When thou do evil
then thou rejoycest. Jer. 11. 15. The Lords charge against wanton Israel, under
means of grace, and the just reproof of wantons, under the gospel, when they
do evil they rejoice, it is but looking up to Gods grace, and all is well.
How miserable are those men, who rejoice in their loss. It is woeful,
mournful, mad joy, to found on the abuses of grace, and the dishonors of God,
the Triumphs of sin and wickedness, which causes bitterness in the end.

SECT. 4.
4. INference. The best things have evil entertainment of hard Sect. 4. The
best things have evil entertainment from hard hearts.
Hearts. Israel had gracious Propheses; but they hardened their necks, did not
believe, rejected Gods statutes, followed vanity and were vain. 2 Kings 17.
14. 15. Christ's family experienced his gracious miracles; but their hearts
were hardened, and considered not the miracle of the loaves, when brought to a
new strait Mark. 6. 32. If Christ upbraided their hardness of heart for not
believing the reports of his Pesurrection Mark. 16. 14. How blameable is that
Phamonicall Hardness of Heart, that receives no impression of grace, by the
privileges, promises, word, and spirit of grace, that are pretended to. The
sweet enriching dewes, do no good upon the hard rock, nor do the sweet dews
of instructions and motions of grace do good upon rocky hearts. Weeds spring
and grow by the rain and the sun. Corruptions rise up and increase by occasion
of Gods grace.

SECT. 5
5. INference. The grace of God is to be appropriated and applied Sect. 5. The
grace of God is to be applied with fear and trembling.
wi vbth fear and trembling. With it work out your salvation is the Apostles
counsel. Phil. 2. 12. Rejoice with trembling the Psalmists Psalm. 2. 11. The
fancy of saving grace is easy It Is good to fear deceit, about interest in
Grace. The Synagogue of Satan may boast themselves to be the City of God. This
high gospel Grace, God is my reconciled father, his Convenant-Promises are
mine, the Grace of Christ is mine, is foolish and common intrusion, like the
vain man that says, the house and land is his, for which he has no good
title. ^surping wantons are audacious, and boldly write down themselves in the
book of Life, living members, covenanters of grace, heirs of glory, which
happiness, many an humbled broken hearted, combating Christian, cannot see in
many years attendance on the Ordinances, walking with, and waiting on God, and
are only borne up in the Waves of Doubts, Despondencies, and Fears, with
probabilities and weak hopes, enough to uphold, not to comfort in the ways of
Religion. The grace is glorious that is contained in those exceeding, great,
and precious promises, I will be their God, and they shall be my people: Their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more: Israel shall be saved with
everlasting Salvation, and the like, fear and tremble, lest these be abused,
unrepented wrongs to these favors, will prove their eternal forfeiture, the
wanton pursuit of lying vanities, is the way to be outed of those mercies.
Think with thy self, what if the Lord, whom I take to be my gracious God,
prove my avenging Judge, if the sins I conceive are blotted out, shall appear
against me in legible characters? if instead of free love, I meet with just
wrath? if the presumptions of everlasting salvation be conf^ted by eternal
damnation? If I wrong his grace, and repent not of the unkindnesse, how can I
escape a fearful looking for of fiery indignation, which will devoute so
wicked an adversary?

SECT. 6.
6. INference: Carnal Cospellers rever knew the Grace of God Sect, 6. Carnal
Gospellers never knew the grace of God in truth.
in truth: It was never known, and de^iberately, constantly abused, if ye have
been taught by him the truth as it is in Jesus, That ye put off the old man,
and put on the new, Ephesians. 4. 21. 22. Christ's disciples that have learned the
truth, not only as in books, Sermons, the Letter, the Notion, but in the
teaching Heart, fixing transforming power of Jesus, by the anointing of the
Holy Ghost, are taught not to dandle, and nourish, but to put off and starve
corruption; not to hate but love, not to oppose, but to embrace and exercise
the quickening grace of God: If envy and strife ragin in the heart, glory not,
lie not against the truth, Jam. 3. 14. He that says I know him, and keeps not
his Commandemants, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 4. He that
consents not in Judgment and Cons^ience to practice the Doctrine according to
godliness, is destitute of the truth, I Tim. 6. 5. Sanctisie them with thy
truth, thy word is truth, Joh. 17. 17. The grace of God known in truth,
sanctifies and gives no allowance to sin. It is not because men know, but
because they truly know not the grace of God, that it is so dishonored.

SECT. 7.
7. INference: It is a safe and a wise course to be trying our Principles 7. It
is a safe and a wise course to be trying our principles.
and practices in Christianity.

1. Our Principles, whether they tend to godliness, whether they are not
grace-destroying, heart-hardning, the fear God banishing, carnal security
nourishing Principles; such as these, God observes not believers sins: They
must live above, that is, in a wicked sense, without Ordinances: God chastifeth
not his people for sin: Mourning for sin is a low attainment, a legal busness,
a double lie.

1. It is so high an Atonement, that the high and the holy God of all hearts
in the world, prefers the lowly mourning broken heart to dwell in.

2. It is a mere Gospel grace, the Law accepts not an Eternity of tears, nor
repentance.

This also is a loose Principle, that a Christian in his obedience, is to look
only to the love of Christ within him, not the Law a rule of life without him,
an impious Atheistical opinion; for when the sad experience of the best of
Saints gives true report, that too often there are no stirrings of love to God,
if there be not a fixed rule of duty without, what is left to hold a man in
obedience? ^lso this Maxim, that Believers have nothing to do with the
threatenings, because there is no condemnation to them, is an engine of the
Devil to pluck out of the heart the fear of threatened sins: How contrary to the
Scripture, is this setting the fearless daring heart, out of the threatening
Law, yea Gospels gunshot? and so the Libertine, that neither has fear of God
to love him and obey him, nor fear of Hell to keep him from sin, fails with
full wind and tide to the dead Sea of eternal desruction. Try, Christian,
whether as the Philistines put out Sampsons eyes, the Devil has not pulled out
thine, to believe Doctrinal lies to debauch thine heart and life. It Is further,
an high point of Christian care and wisdom to try,

Our practices. Gods grace may be, and is prostitured to wickedness, Is it not
so with thee? Inquire in thy Vocation, Condition, Relation, wherein thou
stand: Has not thine heart and conversation been tainted with this curfed
Leaven, The abuse of Gods grace? When the Plague is at thy neighbors house,
there is need to watch and try the soundness of thine own: Since this worst of
Plagues, The abuse of Gods grace is abroad, happy are they that search and
purge their hearts and lives from licentiousness.

SECT. 8.
8. INference: The Devil has his snares in the most holy 8. The Devil has his
snares in the most holy things.
things: His great fear of War is in and about heavenly things: We wrestle
against spiritual wickedness in high places, the original is in heavenly
things, Ephesians. 6. 12. Satan stood at Joshua's right hand, Zach. 3. 1. The Pulpit,
the praying Closet, the public Oratories, humbling Sackcloth days, the great
and blessed truths of the Gospel, the Orthodox, as well as the Heretical head,
is not exempted from his snares; The saving things of Gods grace, Christ's
merits, the promises of the Covenint, the Spirits Gifts and Operations, are all
made Satan's occasional baits to sin: Where is weak sinning man safe, who is in
danger of abusing the holiest things? How many have been tempred to be overcome
by, and perish in reigning sins, under the pleasing conceit and deceit of a
favoring propriety, in God, Christ, the Spirit, and Grace? Happy are they that
fear always the sinners of the Fowler, not only laid in Creature Comforts, but
Ordinances of grace, in the very grace of God and Christ: Most happy are they
that are out of the enemies Country and reach, that are in the state of
blessed Indemnity, without the fear of being overcome by Satan's snares, laid
most cunningly, and vain pretenses, though never so fairly gilded over.

SECT. 9.
9. INference: Libertinism puts the highest affront upon God: 9. LIbertinnism
puts the highest affront upon God.
It abuses him there where he is most glorious; should have most praise, his
grace; The praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. Moses said to God, I
beseech thee show me thy glory; and God said, I will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious, Exodus 33. 18, 19. They are LIbertines in nature that abuse the
Creature: God has given the sweet succors of this life to be rightly used not
abused, 1. Cor. 7. 31. To serve him, not lusts; to be stairs of Assension unto
him, not Aversons from him: The rich wantons of the world, the Apostle James
tells, shall pay dear for abusing his Creatures, to Voluptuousness, Oppression,
hard heartedness, forgetfulness of God: But the Libertines in grace are the
worst and most injurious. To cast dirt on Canvase is a wrong, but on Scarlet is
a greater: To abuse a great man in his servant, is an indignity, but in his
Wife, in his Sons, a greater. The abused goodness of God in his grace and
Christ, goes nearer his heart, then in his Creatures. Grace is Gods saving
Arm; The Libertine does what in him lies, to weaken, yea wound the arm of God,
that it cannot save: In some things Almightiness is at a stand. He could in his
own Country do no mighty works, but heal a few sick ones, because of unbelief,
Mark 6. 5, 6. The grace of God cannot save the constant and wilful abuser of
it: Paul was careful, lest he should abuse his power in the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.
18. Be careful, O Christian! lest the Indulgences, Powers and Liberties of the
Gospel be abused.

CHAP. IX. Containing an use of Humiliation.
PErverting of Gods grace, calls for Lamentation: For Humiliation.
if prizing the gospel, the love of God, the zeal of his name, the honor of
Christ: Gratitude for the infinite mercy of redemption, are mighty arguments to
move serious Christians, to magnify the grace of God in their hearts and
lives, and to rejoyce^ its exaltation, then surely the sense of undervaluing
the gospel: The want of love to, yea, positive hatred of God, luke-warmness,
yea key-coldness for his name: The dishonors of the Mediator of Grace,
unthankfulness for the costly grace of Redemption, should load the heart with
deep sorrow, and draw forth holy mourning and tears, and that for two sorts of
injurious dealers with Gods grace; the best and the worst of persons under the
profession of Gods grace.

SECT. 1.
1. BEwail, O upright, tender hearted Christian! thine own 1. Upright hearted
persons ought to bewail their abusing of the grace of God.
and thy fellows unsuitableness and dishonor to the grace of God: It Is too
much, the old man has been too dissolute within thee; I know thou see, and
when thou art thy self, can not but bewail the neglect of the holy government
of grace in thy soul, the wanton uproars of thy unruly affections, the swarms
of undisciplined, unregarded loose thoughts; the secret filthiness, which for
shame thou dare not word, but shamelesly give way to in thy watchless mind,
thy backsliding in heart, and in some things whoring imaginations, fancies,
contemplations, affections about false loves, it is too much thou have a bosom
Libertine: But art thou convinced thy self, and thy coheirs of glory, and
live shamefully and dishonorably below the hopes of Heaven, the high, holy,
and heavenly profession of propriety in God, an everlasting Portion? Does the
guilt of abusing Gods grace visibly and scandalously appear against that holy
principle of immortal life, that is in thee and others? Never leave thinking of
this, till thine heart be broken before the Lord: O what reproach is brought to
the God and Gospel of grace, when his precious name is wounded in the house of
his friends, when he hears ill in the world from the dishonors of his own
Family. As David upon the death of Saul lamented, The shield of the mighty is
vilely cast away in Gilboa, as though Saul was not anointed with oil, 2 Samuel 1.
20. So may it be for a lamentation, The shield of the mighty, endowed with
grace, is vilely laid aside, as if he were not the anointed with the Spirit: As
Jeremiah lamented, That the precious stones of Zion, comparable to fine gold,
were esteemed as earthen Pitch^^s, Lam. 4. 2. So it is deplorable, that the
precious living stones of Zion, darkened by some loose scandals, are esteemed as
dirt.

Five things may urge thee, O gracious soul! to mourn over thy wrongs to Gods
grace.

1. Thou sinnest against a Principle of life, that should and would, if
excited, make thee sensible of Gods dishonor.

2. Thou abuses that that sets thee off from the lost world, distinguishing
grace.

3. Thy injury against saving grace, is deepest ingratitude, it is walking
unwo^thy of that which must fit thee for Heaven.

4. Thine offensive discove^ies of wronging grace, tempts carnal observers, too
prone to be loose, to turn more bold Libertines.

5. Thy open offenses, may be, yea probably have, been prevailing temptations
to speed others damnation.

These and such like considerations, set home by the Spirit of God, on quickened
sensible spirits, will put them in a mourning frame before the Lord.

2. As pious hearts should bewail their own and others dishonors, who have
abused the love of God to them, and the grace of God in them; so also let them
lay to heart the loose, general, carnal profession, of them who in unregeneracy
wrong the grace of God, in five things.

SECT. 2.
1. IN his sparing grace: How sadly has the abuse hereof been 2. Sparing Grace
is abused.
tevenged: God has not only spared the sons that serve him, but the enemies
that rebel against him: When this goodness has been answered by insolent
provocation, God has dealt with the darers of his Majesty, as Abner did to
Asahel: The adventurous man, to his own ruin, would needs be following Abner:
The angry man bid him once turn aside, but he would follow; a second time, Turn
thee aside Asahell, why should I smite thee to the ground; but he follows
still, was smitten and killed, 2 Samuel 2. 21, 22, 23. so audacious, wanton
sinners, in the ways of sin, are on^^ ^id to turn aside, and are spared, but
following on still in wanton provocations, are smitten dead and sent to hell.
The Lord of Hoasts deals like men of War, that meet with galloping Travelers,
charged to stand, or else they die for it; are spared, and bid again to stand,
or they are dead men; but pressing on, are shot and perish. Many now in Hell
have heard the Lords warning stands, but though often spared, would still
gallop in the road to destruction, and their blood is justly upon themselves:
Sparing grace abused, has been repaired with unsparing vengeance.

SECT. 3.
2. BEwail the abuse of Gods long suffering grace: Though 3 It is our duty to
bewail the abuse of Gods long suffering Grace.
Gods patience be lasting, it is not everlasting; Vessels of wrath turn it into
fury: ^ow sad is it, That which leads a few to salvation, accidentally ripens
others destruction: As they fill up sin, they fill up wrath. God, that is angry
with the wicked every day, smites not every day, but has the reserves of
wrath, which is paid out in wholesale vengeance: His sword is whet, his bow is
bent, the arrows are on the string, instruments of death are prepared, the
un-erring eye and hand of vengeance cannot miss the mark, when the Decree comes
forth to let fly, Psalm 7. 4. Damnation slumbers not: The fierce anger of the
Lord shall not return, until he have performed the intents of his heart, Jer.
30. 24. Phar^ohs personal destruction spared Plague after Plague, was at length
effected in the Red Sea: Visions of destruction, as well as of salvation, are
for an appointed time, and then terro^s and sorro^s come, like a Woman in
travel: Long prosperious wickedness should be pitied, not envied. Fret not at
the full Tables, the silken Scarlet glory, the gold of Ophir, wherewith sin is
served: How sad will the ^eckoning be, when the transitory s^eets of sin, must
have ete^n^l sow^e s^wce. Habakkuks sense of su^e, though long delayed
venge^nce on the enemies of God, made his elly tremble, his lips ^uiver, and
rottenness to enter into his bones, Hab. 3. 16. The imagined Idea's of the sad
ends of abused long-suffe^ing, will make tender Bowels of compassion to yearn,
hearts to pray, lips to cry out to God for mercy, yea, and eyes to wee^ out
charitable desires, that those who are unbettered by large ^pace to repent, may
return and live.

SECT. 4.
3. BEwail the abuse of Gods reconciling grace, who almost 4 Bewail the abuse
of Gods reconciling Grace.
under Gospel preaching, but believe God, and they are (...) by Jesus Christ.
It is ^^d to think how this is abused. May not the Lord jesus say of his false
friends, as David of his, they that fed on his bounty lift up their heel
against him, Psalm. 41. 9. As Job of his Friends that forgot him, Job 19. 14.
How is Christ forgotten, when those who pretend interest in him, wantonly cast
his Laws behind their backs, and are malepart in his presence: ^his loving
style Friend, the title Christ gave to Judas, Matthew. 26. 50. was for his
reproach, not his honor, that he, who should have been the friend, was the
enemy of Christ. You know his woeful end who eminently wronged the grace of
Christ.

SECT. 5.
4. Bewail the abuse of Gods freeing grace. How many boast of christian
Liberty, while they are loose Libertines. Christ 5 Bewail the abuse of Gods
freeing Grace
has bought them to do his own will, whom he intends to save, not to do their
own. This pleasing misery is common. Outsides in christianity vote themselves
f^ee, as the Jews did themselves, Joh. 8. Christ's Freemen, ^hile they are the
servants of sin, the light is as sorrowful, as to see a Prisoner in chains cry
out of his civil freedom. Can you believe him free, that cannot stir from the
block he is tied to. Christ has called men to be free from the reign of sin,
and they think sins service liberty, which is their thraldom: yea, which is
lamentable, after (as one complains) by the admirable and singular grace of
Christ, men are delivered from the chains of Papacy, they would also be free
and loose Posteaquam a vinculis papatus se liberatos esse vident, volunt etiam
esse liberi and soluti ab evangelio and praeceptis Dei. Johan: Spangenburgius
in Narrat Benif. Dei. Horrenda Epicures bestialis vita cernitur -- Aeque libere
ac impune volunt peccare, si^ut Papistae in sua Idololatria-Christiana
disculina apud nos novus I (...), n^vusque Monachismus Jacobus Andraas, Conc,
4. ad cap. 21. Luc.
from the gospel and commands of God, and that only they would account right
and just that seems so in their own eyes. May not the complaint of the loose
German Protestants be verified of the loose English prophaners of Gospel grace.
They are content the Word should be preached ^^out there is no Reformation of
manners, but an horrid Epicurean bestial life, in their drunken meetings,
worldly pomps. Prophanations, yea Blasphemies of the name of God. They would as
freely and impudently sin as Papists in their Idolatry; God requires serious
and Christian discipline, but this is among us a new Papacy, and a new
Monckisme. The thanks we mo^ly give to God, for being rescued from the yoke
of Antichrist is mostly casting off the yoke of Christ. O God provoking
England, that so abusest Christian Liberty! Thine ungreatful and wanton
throwing off the golden yoke of Christ, cries for vengeance to put upon thee
again to bear the Iron yoke of Antichrist. It is, O it is, a sorrowful
consideration, that men count it their freedom under the gospel, to sin freely,
and without sorrow. O the numerous Libertines among us, past feeling! and, as
the word bears it, past sorrow, Ephesians. 4. 19. that have given themselves over to
Lasciviousness. Unsorrowing sinners are most sad spectacles for yearning
bowels. O tender hearted christians! in your secret Indolentia non sentiunt
naturales conscientiae morsus. Dicks.
mournings, pity hardened Libertines that pity not themselves; weep for them
who neither can, nor care, nor desire to weep for themselves. A sorrowless
stupidity and lethargy, that feels not the check, and lash of the natural
conscience, and is deaf to the Spirits motions, that is contracted by a
benumming liberty and custom in sin, is a woeful judgment.

SECT. 6.
6. Bewail the abuse of Pardoning grace. How sad will be 6 Bewail the abuse
of pardoning grace
their account, whose Faith, or rather Presumption of Pardon, adds to their
sin? Christ said to the pardoned woman, sin no more. Carnal confidence
says, Sin more, you shall be pardoned; though daily dear sins are written
down in the conscience, the Sponge of pardoning grace will blot them out. The
truly tender conscience cleared from old guilt, would not willingly, but is
afraid to contract new; but the brawny seared conscience makes use of Christ's
indulgence, to ease his spirit, not to heal his lust. Its a lamentation, M^
wallo v^ in their pollution because of free remission. The Lord has spoken in
that verse, where he proclaims the glory of his grace, a sad word, He will not
clear such guilty persons.

To lay the Dishonors of gospel grace to heart, three things may be
heart-affecting expedients.

1. Such as are grieved for this sin, write after the copy of Jesus Christ, and
the choicest Saints, of Christ: He beheld Jerusalem, where the Messengers of
grace, the Prophets were abused and slain, where himself, the author of grace,
was to be condemned and crucified, where the sweet Messages of grace were
delivered and despised, and wept over its sin and punishment, Luke 19. 41.
Again, a dolorous sense of the injuries of grace, is like to that mourning
frame of spirit that was in the pious Jews, who sighed and cried for all the
abominable planings of Gods grace, Ezekiel. 9. 3, 4. This suits with eminently
holy Paul's spirit, who spying looseness among his knowing, but wanton
Corinthians, expressed thus his jealousy, I fear lest when I come to you, my
God will humble me, and I shall bewail them that have not repented of their
wantonness, 2 Cor. 12. 12, 13.

2. Such as are humbled for this sin, discover a child-like in-genuous
disposition. A good Son is afflicted for his Fathers dishonor. If I be a
father, where is mine honor, Mal. 1. 6. It speaks us Strangers, not Children,
the born of the Flesh, not the Spirit, if we see the reproaches of Gods grace,
with contented spirits.

3. Such as mourn for this sin in others, and have some taint of the guilt of
it in themselves, shall find this a sovereign preservative against it for time
to come. Godly sorrow works repentance, and by the real sadness of the spirit
and countenance for sin, this great sin, the heart is made better, Eccles, 7.
3. The ingenuous child that feels the smart of the rod, will be fearful of
falling into the sin that brought it. Holy anguish of soul for abusing Gods
grace, will be a memento, and a Medicine to heal it.

CHAP. X. Containing an Use of Examination.
IN that Gods grace is turned into Wantonness, for Examination
its useful for Examination; Whether or no this odious guilt be fastened upon
us. We may know it by a serious perusal of the kinds and ways wherein this
great sin is committed, laid down in the Doctrinal part. If the trying,
reflecting conscience, find any of the particulars, wherein grace is abused
experimented either in heart or life, there the sin is impartially to be
charged home. In, and about the great duties of conviction of sin, sorro^ for
it, and returning from it, we ordinarily through self-love, carnal flattery,
supine carelessness, yea too often wilful ignorance, put off particular
arraignments, close inditements, self-condemnation, and so resolutions and
endeavors to reform. Though, as has been showed, the abuse of Gods grace is
an universal sin, yet there is not one of a thousand that seriously and sadly
says, I am the wretch that has wronged Gods grace. Who almost, though
eminently guilty, but can smooth and applaud himself in the thoughts of
innocence, he is no enemy but friend of grace; or if f^ulty, but a very little
inconsiderably peccant? Though all are offenders, yet very few lay it to heart,
by sound conviction, and say, We are the persons that have vickedly aff^onted
the grace of God. Unless reason, and conscience be feared, and judgment
besotted, and spiritually mad, if thou have any degree of the fear of God, and
sober sense left thee, and thou will be judged by the Word of God, wherewith,
whether thou wi^^ no, thou shall be at the great day: I shall set before thee
guilty Reader, a glass wherein thou may see the spotted, deformed face of
this ugly sin, be ashamed of it, be humbled for it, and repent. No becauseit is
in this kind of sin, as it is in Hypocrisy; there is a gross and a close
hypocrisy, so there is an evident and notorious, and less discemed and
suspicious perverting the grace of God. I shall therefore endeavor to discover
the more visible and palpable symptoms, and the more hidden, close, and less
evident tokens of this disease. As touching enquiry, who are more notoriously,
clearly, grossly guilty of this s^nne, I shall lay down many symptoms.

SECT. 1.
THey may know themselves to be manifest gross abusers of 1 They abuse Gods
grace who oppose gospel merits and mercies to the worship of God.
Gods grace,

1. Who first oppose Gospel-merits, and mercies to the Worship of God. Such as
call God gracious in himself, and to them, and yet call not upon him, how do
they vilif^e his grace? He makes light of that thing which he desires not, and
he of the grace of God that he prays not for. God is free of his grace, but to
them who by the aid of the same grace ask it. The spirit grace is a spirit of
supplication, Zach. 12. 10. A man may pray and have no grace, being a trifler,
cold, hypocritical, unbeleeving, tired in his Devotion; but no man ever had
grace, but in faith, fervency, and perseverance prayed to God for it.
Prayerless are graceless souls. Families past Prayer, are past grace. If
Prayerless, professed Christians were asked the question, Have you any part in
the grace of God? The Ans^er would be Ignorantly, ^oldly, Roundly returned
from some; Yea I hope I have; from others, Yea, I thank God, his grace has
helped me; from a third sort an answer in angry looks, sharp words, that the
Questionist should doubt it the confident Atheist has not Gods grace in him.
All take it for granted they are the favorites of grace, though they pray not
to the God of grace by the Spirit of grace. Do not these clearly proph^ne Gods
grace? Things we basely account of, we think not worth the craving. O
prayerless ones, that think Gods grace will save you; How basely do you
account it, that seek not for it?

SECT. 2.
THey may argue their gross abuse of Gods grace,

2. Who fromally, and carelessly pray for it; look not after 2 They abuse Grace
who formally and carelessly pray for it.
their requests, no^ in a ridiculous, sporting devotion are solicitous that the
desire of grace should be obtained in heart and life. It is as if jeering
companions should in a Market cheapen commodities, which they care not for,
nor are resolved to buy; such scoffi^g Christians in their seeming drawings
nigh to God, seem to bid fair and high to obtain heavenly commodities; If God
will enrich them with such and such grace, they will part with their carnal
Lusts and Loves, and so they ever turn their backs upon the grace they ask;
have no estimate, see no need of it, make no inquiry about it, and live
without it. This is in effect, as if in plain terms abominable petitioners
should thus say to God, Lord I ask thy grace, but I care not for it, yea
should thou give it me I would not have it: Thou have honor enough, and I
salvation enough, though I barely ask it, and never receive it. The enemies of
Christ bowed the knee to Christ on the Cross in mockery. Prayer for grace
without a real sense of the want of it, and longings after it, deep sorrow for
its absence, wrastlings to get it, restlesnesse to attain it, is a bowing the
knee to Christ in mockery. Princes do not use to send their Ambassadors, but
they desire a return of the Embassage from Foreign Potentates: Israelites
Princes in Prayer, Genesis 32. 28. do not use to send their Ambassages to Heaven,
but they earnestly desire their return. How grossly do most abuse Prayer for
grace, praying with no grace, no spiritual understanding in their cold formal
words. Lord give me grace, when they know not, lay not to heart, what they ask
in saying so. Did they understand what they ask, and were willing to receive
it, the grace of God would do the things which their corrupt nature abhorres;
nor cannot heartily say Amen unto. It would mortify dearest lusts which they
nourish, pull down the pride they live in, break their hard hearts, which are
now stoney, forgive the wrongs they cannot forget, turn the spirit of the world
out of their hearts, cause them to deny self they seek, new mold the inward and
the outward man. Common petitioners are false-hearted to the saving interest of
their own souls, and the honor of God in his grace: The grace they pray for
amiss they miss; for as in the Poetic Fiction, Ixion had but a cloud for Juno;
so these in their Devout Fiction have what they sought for, but a shadow for
grace. The Picture, not the Life of grace will serve their turn; and this is
ever the just plague of these fantastic Christians, their Religion, and their
Felicity are both a fancy, in the black dismal shadow of Death: God will put
off them, as they put off themselves, with a shadowy grace, and a shadowy
heaven: And as a painted fire gives not a spark of warmth to a freezing body,
so painted Devotion, that had the color, not the fervor of grace, will not
give a spark of comfort to a cold departing soul. If thy conscience tells thee,
Reader, thou art such a one, who have palpably abused the grace of God, and
have as often mocked the God of grace, as thou have unconscionably and
impudently prayed unto him: Know assuredly God will teach the in the other
world to distinguish between prayer for thee semblance and the life of grace.
This would make thee a glorious convert, a Samuel asked of God; that will
neither dispossess Satan, out the world, nor crucify the old man. Grace where
ever received, has kingly dominion. It Is sad to think how vulgar sottish
people who pretend to prayer; when they say they would have grace Reign in
them, it is but a King of clouts, not a living Authoritative Monarch, furnished
with the mighty Militia of Heaven, able to throw down stoutest enemies in the
soul.

SECT. 3.
THey may undoubtedly conclude, they are open and evident 3 They abuse Gods
grace who shroud unrighteous courses under the grace of God.
abusers of Gods grace

3. Who shroud unrighteous and oppressive courses under the grace of God. Paul
taxed the Corinthians, called to be Saints, and sanctified in Jesus Christ, at
least in Church Judgment such, with the abuse of their gracious calling, in
that they were so far from suffering, that they defrauded, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Nay
you would wrong and defraud, and that your brethren, ver. 8. So under the color of
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the figure of Gods grace in
Christ, Theft, Murder, and Adultery had quiet Patronage. Jer. 7. 4, 9. If the
grace of God that brings salvation, teaches to deny worldly lusts, and to live
righteously. Ordinary injustice cannot be the spot of Gods children. A pious
man may unawares be surprised by a temptation to unrighteousness, but to live
by, and in the gain of secret fraud, or open violence, the bread of wickedness,
Prove. 4. 17. the penury, the tears, the blood of Orphans and Widows, the
ruins of the unjustly desolate and oppressed, is an high inconsistencie with
the grace of God. It never made Rapine sacred, Robbery for Burnt-offering is
abominable. The most reitterated, sweet presumptions of interest in grace, will
ever lastingly be confuted by an unjust conversation. Injurious dealing is so
far from being alleviated, that it is aggravated by a profession of ^eligion.
It Is double, threefold, ten-fold, hundredfold guilt to make God justify
Satan, the straight rule of his Nature, Law, ^ospel, to call the crooked and
unequal designs and practices of men. Darkness it self stays not but
vanishes before the light, and the unequal dealings of men before the grace of
God. Jezabel was too unjust, cruel, bloody, to counsel to the Robbery and
Murder of Nabaoth; but to make a Fast the Prologue to, and Sanctuary of a false
possession, and effusion of blood, was accumulated wickedness: The turning of
long Prayers into strong Snares, to devour widows houses, was the Pharisees
sin of deeper dye, of greater damnation, Mat. 23. 14. ^s on the one hand the
righteous Moralist will perish, who does not influence his second Table
obedience by first Table piety; so on the other hand, the unjust worshipper of
God will be condemned, for confuting first Table Religion by second Table
unrightcousness. God has not opposed godlyness to righteousness, nor
righteousness to godlyness, no good man must, nor dares to do. He that here
impenitently separates what God has joined together will be undone for ever.
Unjust possessors will with cold comfort look upon their fair and rich estates,
when by undue artifices, unequal methods, the breaches of divine and just
humane Laws, they are guilty possessors. The cries of wrongs, decry and outcry
the cries of Prayers. O let every one among us that lay claim to the Mediator,
Spirit, Gospel, Ordinances, Comforts of Grace, seriously examine the efficacy
and glory of grace, as well downwards, in exercise of a just conscience void of
offense toward men, as upwards in a pious conscience void of offense toward
^od. O let every one try the obloquy and infamy of grace, whether dishonest
dealing have not opened the mouths of malicious observers, to asperse the
strictness of the first Table, and break out thus reproachfully against
gracious profession. Are there not every where such sharp taunts in England;
These are your Sermon-hunters, these are your Devout ones; these are your
Sabbatarians; against Recreations on the Lords day, very precise, arrant
Hypocrites; why they will not Swear, but they will Lie; they are dishonest in
their dealings and bargains; they will not pay their debts; they will over
reach, they are not square in their walkings; better deal with other men that
are not so strict in religion as they seem to be that now and then say by faith
and troth, are good merry neighbors,, keep not such ado about Reading,
Hearing, Praying, whining Talking, as they do, as if looseness in the first
Table helped to strictness in the second, or the strict duties of Gods worship
did give men liberty to deny men their dues. This is the sad consequence of the
open abuse of gods grace by oppression and unrighteousness. O unjust Reader! if
in this Section thou read thy character, fear, tremble, repent, thy
wickedness is great, thine iniquity is infinite, and thine indictment is plain
against thee; thou have openly, and fear fully abused the grace of God.

SECT. 4.
THey may clearly be convinced, they are evident prophaners 4 They are abusers
of Gods grace who content themselves with faint desires.
of Gods grace.

4. Who account these faint desires, Lord have mercy upon me, God give me his
grace, satisfactions for daily sins. How many thus at once wrong themselves and
the grace of God, thinking such words enough to pacify the conscience, and
make God amends for all the wrongs done to him. When there is added Drunkenness
to Thirst, one act of uncleanness to another, oath to oath, wilful sins stand
thick to one another. It Is not the bare, vocal, natural force of these words,
Grace and Mercy, that can allay the Devil, and appease God, but their
supernatural efficacy. Satan can laugh at words, trembles only at power. O
the sad and vast numbers of profane professed Christians among us, who no
sooner utter from profane spirits those sweet gospel-words, Grace and Mercy,
but all is presently at peace within them, and as they think above too; and
now filthy drunken Swine, unclean Goats, and cheating Foxes, the visible
contemners of both Tables, sleep as securely under the favor and protection of
these sweet words, Gods Grace and Mercy, as if they were innocents: Such as
these ignorant, profane persons that never considered what is the worth,
power, what should be the renown of Gods Grace and Mercy, evidently abuse
their precious names to vile things.

SECT. 5.
THey may know they openly injure the grace of God,

5. Who by restraints sometimes laid upon sin, are licenciously 5 They abuse
Gods grace, who by restraint at one time take liberty to sin more freely at
another time.
bold to sin the more freely at other times. It Is the sad experience of
multitudes who abstain from sin not still to abstain, but to give after the
freer reins to lust; as gluttons fast for a while that they may devour the
creatures more liberally and largely; thus many for a time fast, that in the
feeding the old man in the next meals they may be gluttons; while Sermon-sick
they forbear acting over the old sins, but when the fits are over, they are
at the usual trade again, like intemperate Seamen, while Sea-sick abstain from
disorders, but when at shore are at the old drinking and excess, while the
terrors of God have been on many spirits, and have wrested humble confessions,
and holy resolutions, one would think some men not only Agrippa-like, Almost
Christians, Act. 26. 28. but Paul-like, Altogether Saints; but when the pangs
are over, the abstinence from sin is over too: They are like the water,
colder after it is heared, colder after Hel-heats have been upon their
consciences: Seven wo^se Devils enter into Formal Spirits. They are not a few,
who before the Lords Supper, have unbent their bo^es, slackned their
intentions, and vigorous prosecutions of their sinful courses, and put stands
to their careere Hel-wards; the gaming, drunken, wanton company is left, the
oaths and worldlyness are for a while suppressed; the Communicants with bended
knees, eyes lifted up, sad composed countenances, reverend gestures, personate
an Angelical respect; for a season the Devils Terms are adjourned, and there is
a Vacation for God, and a seeming austere Discipline of Repentance; but as a
Traveller leaving his beast at the door to speak with his Friend, comes to him
again, and is on his old rode, so these travelers in the broad way to
destruction, seem to leave their sin when at the Communion Table, and in
their Sabbath worship, but come to them again, yea with more confidence gallop
on in the Road to everlasting misery, because they have made some seeming
profession wherein they boast. Thus because the religiously ^icked Harlot began
with God, and paid her homage in Peace Offerings, might, as she pretended, cum
privilegio, with heavens leave ^oe the work of Hell. Grace that holds the
bridle of restraint at one time, would hold it at all times; gives dispensation
to sin at no time. Accursed be that abstinence from sin, that does not dispose
still to abstain, but is an allowance to more excessive ryots: If this be not
gross abuse of Grace, what is?

SECT. 6.
THey may be assured they do undeniable evident wrong to 6 They abuse Gods
grace who turn it into a sanctuary for unnatural sins.
Gods grace

6. Who turn it into a Sanctuary for unnatural sins. Such there are, who are so
far from an obediential compliance ^ith the reign of grace, that they grossly
deny the demands of nature, and put a clo^k of spiritual grace on unnatural
sins. If there be but a confident fancy of, and bold challenge to the grace
of God, though in the Court of Nature there be a sufficient ^ury to cry guilty,
guilty, the grace of the gospel is pleaded as sufficient security and
indemnity. These Anomala, errata naturae, Monsters in nature are pictured out
in the word of truth. What they know naturally as brute beasts, void of reason
(yea worse) in Sordes Ecclesiae. Tertull.
those things they corrupt themselves. Jude Ep. v 10. The stains and blots of
the Church, and Reproach of grace are dishonorably peccant against the Light
and Laws of Nature.

Against that great Law of Nature, Summary of Duty commanded by Christ,
commended by the Imperor Severus, urged in Pagan Writings; Whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, even so do ye to them, Matthew. 7. 12. What sad
contradiction is there every where, not only among looser, but stricter
Christians? Were there nothing else to judge the world but this rule, what
infinite numbers of unnatural persons, arraigned before this ^ribunal, would
soon be speechless, self-^ondemned, and justly perish for ever: Pretenders to
grace would not be wronged in their es^^tes, but they will rong; they would not
be defamed, but they will def^me; they would in poverty have relief, but they
will not relieve. In many other particulars is this equitable Lex talionis,
requiting rule trampled under feet.

Further, it is not more true then sad, this black brand of a reprobate sense is
to be found not in a few, that secure themselves in the Sanctuary of grace,
viz. the want of natural affections, Romans 1. 36. Have we not instances of
Parents unnatural to children, cruel to their bodies and souls, matter not
what become of either; Ostrich Progenitors, forget their natural issue, as if
they were not theirs, Job 39. 19. nor feed, nor cloth inside, nor outside;
hardened against them, provoke them to wrath, tempt them to undoing courses,
Murderers before the Lord. Are not loose children Monsters of ingratitude? who
should endeavor to requite their dear Parents, a debt can never be paid, a
degenerate offspring, forget their Mothers traveling pangs, their yearing
bowels, their sollicitous thoughts, their bitter tears, their wakeful spirits,
their expense of time, their willing slavery to be confined to attendance on,
and labors for, a proud, fancy, and stubborn brood: Do they not slight their
dear, poor, afflicted Fathers, whose sleep has been broken, purses emptied,
hearts leaping within them to provide for such who are better fed than taught?
forgetful Rebels! Will the natural piety of the young Storks to the old ones,
shame and doom the unnatural seed of unreturning, yea positively defaming,
robbing, cursed children, who either without, or under color of Law, undeo
their Parents? Thus also, even under Christian profession, and propriety to
Gospel grace, Brethren are unnatural to Brethren, Sisters to Sisters, Husbands
to Wives, and Wives to Husbands. Moreover, God the Author, Lover, Teacher, and
Maintainer of Humane Society, has implanted noble principles in the minds of
men, to sodder together the children of men, help one another, be among men
Gods to men, and not Wolves to men, and Devils to men, as too many are. Amongst
these sweet civilities and humanities are engraven natural clemency and
kindness. Hence Heathens have shined in works of Mercy: The Batbarians at
Melita were kind to Paul, Act. 28. 2. But, O Prodigies of Christianity! as far
different from Jesus Christ in Mercy and Loving kindness, as Darkness is is
from Light. There are many thousand ungracious gospellers (for they are no
better) who as if they were not born of women, nor ever beholding to God, their
Parents, nor others for sweet mercies, show none, yea show cruelty for mercy,
as if they had sucked the Milk of Tigers, no more moved at the bitter miseries
of others, then if they were stones, so far from giving Alms to relieve them,
that they have not a sigh to pity them. These feed on the pleasing dreams of
interest in divine, saving mercy, and are unmercifull. If the merciful are
blessed, and they shall have mercy; the merciless are cursed, they shall have
none. He that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall read his sin in
his Punishment, to his smart and shame, and shall cry to God and not be heard.

Add hereunto another sort of loose Christians, are deb^uched in Drunkenness,
a deed of darkness, prohibited by the light of Nature; who riot also in the day
time of Gospel-profession, yea though this unmanly excess, evil at all times,
is fitter to be covered by the black Mantle of the night, than to appear before
Sun, yet filthy beasts will reel at noonday, yea are morning, early sots; They
that be drunken are drunken in the night, 1 These. 5. 7. The Policy, not the
Innocence of Nature. But now men owning the grace of God are not ashamed to
declare their shame, betray their nakedness, spend the precious hours of the
day, the creature, their money, as if God made his Sun, his Earth, his
Barley, his Vines, to use them all in the service of an Intemperate Lust. O all
you English Drunkards! goodly Christians forsooth in your own conceits, that
think to have a share in Gospel salvation, as well as others, that are strong
to drink, like strongly hoop'd Barrels, can hold much drink; yea like the
Brewers horse, can carry your burden from morning till night, do you think to
indemnifie your surfeits in cool blood by the grace of God? You need no
condemnation from the Tribunal of Grace, from that of Nature you will have a
sufficient avenging sentence, Heathens, Moral Philosophy, and Sober
Conversation will cry out upon you. If Providence guide your eyes to read your
own character, I beseech you the next meeting you carouse it, and health it in
Flaggons off rong drink, and bottles of wine, ask your selves the question,
Does this fordid l^vishing the goodness of God suit with B^^tis^^l grace. The
style we give God, he is gracious to us, our Prayer for grace (unless as
Atheists you have laid by prayer) our time of grace, our Ordinances of grace,
our Hopes to be saved by grace? You have too long veiled your unnatural
drunkenness under grace.

Lastly; another sort of False Christians that want not confidence, such as it
is, in the grace of God, sin against the dictare of nature, chastity of body
and mind. Some make nothing of Fornication, a trick of youth, defended by some
Libertines, though not to be named among Saints, decried from Reasons school.
Others sin against Natures dictate, the Marriage Bed undefiled, are as Horses
that neigh after their neighbors wives, Jer. 5. 8. Abimelech would not defile
himself with Abraham's Wife, Genesis 20. 5, 6. nor Alexander himself with the
beautiful Wife of Darius: And for shame let not Christians to the dishonor of
the Gospel attempt such wickedness. If the Reader be such an unclean wretch,
to forsake the wife of his youth, and forget the Covenant of his God, let him
with fear and trembling among other Scriptures read these two; Adulterers God
will judge. This Reverend Latimer presented with a Poesy in a Bible to Henry 8.
Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. And to these
add a third, which though it intend not the impossibility, yet it does the
rarity, and exceeding great difficulty for Adulterers (and Adulteresses too) to
repent; All that go unto her return not again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life, Prove. 3. 19. Others, worse then Fornicators and Adulterers, are
Sodomites. Degenerate Christians are Sodomites and Quis hodle non animadvertit
passim Sodomaeos and Gomorrhaeos mores? Otho Casm. Vtinam ab horrendo Sodo onae
flagitio immunes essent, inter Christiae nos ecclesiae proceres, and jummi
religi^nis antist^zes ha^eri vojunt. Ex. cod.
Gomorrheans. Pride, Luxury, Abuse of the creatures, Contempt of God, Sodoms
sins, Christians sins; yea ('it is sad to mention) Sodomy, that abominable,
unn^tural sin, is sometimes among pretenders to Jesus Christ. It were well
(said one) if those that would be accounted among Christians, Church-guides,
the greatest props and pillars of Faith and Religion, were free from Sodoms
horrid burning in unnatural lust. How well at Rome, the great pretended
Churchmen will quit themselves from burning in lust to men, yea to boys, they
shall be judged in the other world. How sad is thy guilt, O England! if to the
huge mountain heaps of thine other sins, thy wanton children should write
after Sodoms copy. If God and his Angels are witnesses of such unnatural,
secret villainies, O then the infinite patience of God, that Sodoms sins pull not
down Sodoms plagues. To conclude, whatever are the kinds of impure flames of
deeper or shallower malignity, whosoever pretends to the grace of Christ, whose
bodies O ignis infernalu, cujus materia gula, cujus flamma superhia, cujus
scintilla prava colloquia, cujus odor immunditia, cujus finis Gehenna Aug.
should be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and let these Hellish fires burn
within and without, they are to know, and be ashamed, they are most notorious
abusers of Gods grace, which would teach them to live soberly, not
incontinently: Let them hearken to that of Augustine, wondering at the
pernicious wickedness of burning lust, in these words, O infernal fire! whose
fuel is gluttony, whose flame is pride, whose spark is filthy communication,
whose stink is actual uncleanness, whose end is hell.

SECT. 7.
THey may conclude themselves manifest depravers of the 7 They abuse the grace
of God, who think it will afford an indulgent protection to vile affections.
grace of God,

7. Who think it will afford an indulgent protection to their vile affections.
What communion between these and the grace of God. The carnal Gentiles abused
nature to vile affections, Romans 1. and carnal Christians so abuse grace:
mortifying inordinate affections is the work of grace, Col. 3. keeping it
alive, and feeding it, speaks wanton indulgence. To particularize in some vile
affections, wherein loose Christians dishonor the grace of God.

1. Vile love, vile self-love that should be swallowed up in self-abhorrence,
and ever is so where grace has dominion. The love of what the Devils love, of
what God abhorrs; the love of dis-ingenuous, degenerous, base courses, like
dogs and swine, to wallow in filthiness, the love of oaths, lies, Rev. 22.
15. filthy lucre, Hos. 4. 18. strange women, Prove. 5. 20. intemperate flagons
of wine, Hos. 3. 1. wandering from the infinite fountain of goodness, Jer. 2.
13. Such things as with infinite abhorrence God turns his pure eyes from, and
for which he will punish the abominable affectionists of vile love with
everlasting contempt, and most justly because their noble affection of love,
which should be bestowed on the highest beauty, should cleave to carrion,
dunghill lusts, and have the Image of the Devil on it.

2. Vise hate. Vise indeed, hating the chiefest good, the blessed God. Haters
of God are put in the black Roll of gross sinners, Romans 1. Hating him as hell,
as the word bears it. Vile (...) abhorrere significat. Vnde styx, palus.
inferni ita dicta est ab horrore.
hate of knowledge, Prove. 1. 29. Instruction, Psalm. 50. 17. Reproof, Prove. 15.
10. The beautiful Image of Christ, Genesis 4. 6. Joh. 15. 23. the sinners own
soul, Prove. 29. 24. the spiritual presence of God which is heaven upon earth.
He that hates his brother is a Murderer. O what swarms of Murderous Christians
are among us, that carry killing hatred, dispositively killing in their bosoms!
Are we not (O the sad reproach of grace) hateful, and hating one another? Is
not hatred breaking forth (as one complains) by evil tongues, in biting
calumny to be found now adays among Protestants. We may be ashamed that there
should Pudeat esse apud nos in Coristi nomen baptizatos, qui odi is inflammati,
inimi citias exercent perpetuas.
be among us such as stain the splendor of the Christian name by malice
against one another. The baptized into the love of Christ, and one another,
inflamed by mutual hatred, immortalize their enmities, write injuries and
revenge as with a pen of a Diamond. Yea, which is sad, the fellow heirs of
glory, the brethren and sisters of the same heavenly Family, called to, and by
the same grace, have sometimes too much of this cursed leaven, the hating of
one another, who should in an Orthodox, and good Practical sense be a Family of
Love, and have lost much of the character of Christ's Disciples, the loving of
one another.

3. Vile Joy, void of purity and charity, vilely rejoices in iniquity, sports
in sin, Prove. 10. 23. Takes pleasure in unrighteousness. These delight in
abomination, Isa. 66. 3. Is glad at heart when another corruption breaks
forth: O, said one, I am glad that such a ones sin is discovered. This
gladness is madness. O wicked mirth, to be glad of that which is the Devils
triumph, the Spirits grief, Gods dishonor, the Gospels Reproach, the Laws
breach, the Sinners guilt, the Souls defilement, and Hels danger. To turn one
another weakness and wickedness into merriments, is too common a sin; a most
unbecoming Vt scarabaei alieno stercore nutriuntur.
sin to them that have the grace of God, who should use it in holy mourning,
not carnal mirth, when others sin. We feast not our selves like men, like
Saints, who like ^oads, like worms, feen on Dunhill corruption. We read not
that Scripture Saints were guilty of such vile joy, as to sport either in their
own, or others sins. It Is one piece of the looseness of the times, there is too
much complacencie, profane comical triumph in one another nakedness.

4. Vile Anger. Unmortifyed, raging, frequent defended wrath reigns among us,
is by most professed believers hurried up and down with wildfire, thought no
sin, by many a less sin than it is. How many Bedlam Furiosos, set on fire by
the fire of Hell, are in such fearful flames, that standers by have just cause
to say, Fire, Fire, Quench, Quench, with the waters of Patience and Meekness
those dreadful heats. Yea it is the shame and blame of persons in the state of
grace, they neither use their reason, nor their grace, to quench those hasty
impure flames, which their own, and others corruptions have kindled: That in
their fiery, peevish, rash moods, and hellish feavourish fits, they have grossly
abused the grace of God. The departing Spirit of grace from them is a sad
testimony, the Dove-like Spirit dwells not in a filthy house. The calm,
delicate, tender Spirit abides not in a Whirlwind, but in a sedate, quiet,
composed soul. Wrath before, or in Prayer, and the Spirit of Prayer meet not
together. Tempestuous minds make sad work in Prayer. It Is pitiful stuff when
they are in an uproar. Ungoverned passion grieves and chaseth away the Spirit
of God, that has sealed meek, orderly, regenerate souls to the day of
Redemption.

SECT. 8.
THey cannot shift the charge of open abuse of Gods grace 8 They abuse Gods
grace who oppose it to necessary civilities.
8. Who oppose Gods grace to necessary civilities. As Christ came not to
destroy, but establish the Law, so Grace comes not to destroy, but establish
civilitie; it teaches no man to be Cynick, morose, crabbed, austere, to humane
order, calling, relation, but it siveetens those bosoms wherein it dwells; it
has such sweet, and pure Communion with God, that it knows not how to be sour
and rugged with men. The gracious person may be uncivil; grace never is. It is
a great fault and dishonor to grace, in persons of grace, that they do not
study and practice the Scriptures civil, as well as religious Precepts and
Presidents. For wan^ hereof in some persons religious strictness is loathed,
Gods imprudent, discourteous servants are called Cynicks, Clowns, ^lo^k-heads,
Proud ones, Pharisees, unfit for society; their holy profession is too strait
laced, and shrivel'd up, that it is so dainty of giving men and women, be they
what they will be, their just external respects. I confess it is a strong
temptation to contemn them that contemn God, not to honor them who dishonor
God, to lay their honor in the dust, who cast Gods commands behind their
backs. However, God will vindicate his name, and make it glorious, though the
ungrateful persons of civil precedence have made it by their loose lives
odious. Yet sin in one is no excuse for sin in another. He sins that abuses
his civil honor and en^oyments to slight loyal subjection to God; and he
sins too that denies him his lawful honor. Satan has in the postolical
times, in after Ages of the Church, and in our present times too, spoted the
beauty and weakened the power of strict Practical Religion, made this a case of
conscience, whether Believers should be under Civil ties to wicked men. He has
tempred some, when they see their high preferments, as heirs of glory
contemplate their high born natu^es, that they are born of God, partakers of a
divine resemblance, to think themselves too great and too good to be under the
observance of humane civilities, an un-scriptural, unchristian irrational,
seditious, and clownish temptation. Whoever they are, really gracious, or in
pretense that oppose the grace of God to civilities among men, in three things
they are gross abusers of Grace.

1. In civil possessions. It Is not grace, but spiritual Pride, Erro^,
Confusion, Self-love teaches that Lesson, that a wicked man has no right to
the Creature; Dominion is not founded on grace, but humane consitutions and
providence, which shines on it, and approves it if just, decrees its
permission, futuritie, and orders it only if evil, for good and wise ends.
However be Masters of Estates and Domination never so wicked, yet if they have
a rightful title and possession of either, it is a graceless principle not to
own them Masters. Though wicked Libertines Jus Evange. lieum, Jas Civil. Dav.
in Colos.
that possess and devour the creatures have no Gospel-right, they have a civil
right, though not by the Covenant of grace, yet by the compacts of men; though
not in capi^e, in special Tenure, in Christ the ^ead, yet in the Common hol^ of
Providence. When gracious persons, especially poorer Christians, see Rich
Gluttons and Drunkards, know they lay on beds of Down, and fare deliciously
every day, and question themselves as to their heavenly estate, how they can be
the great heirs of God, who have neither money in the purse, nor bread in the
Cupboard, look on them with invidious eyes, and fretting hearts, and think
themselves have only right to the sweet comforts of dissolute Masters; let
them know this persuasion is not from grace but sin. Freat not poor, yet rich
Christian, above what the Gold of Ophir, the Indian Mines, Cartloads of Jewels
and most Precious Stones can make thee, thou art more like Christ in Poverty
than Riches. What though thou art an hungry sheep, feeding on bare Commons, and
feast fat Goats in rich Pastures, prosperous wicked worldlings, fatted Oxen, it
is for an eternal slaughter. Wait a while, thou shall be removed to the rich
heavenly food above. When the rich at once in sin and wealth shall be outed
of their deliciousdemeans, and be exposed to eternal hunger.

2. In (...) subjection. It Is vanity to think Mastership and Grace are
equipollent. None but the good must be obeyed; Uspers and Right Owners, Godly,
and Ungodly Rulers, in Lawful things must be obeyed. Herein the National and
Domestical Tyrant binds the conscience, Roman Caesar's in the judgment of
Christ and the Apostle Paul, Mat. 22. 21. Romans 13. and froward Masters by the
counsel of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 18. are to have subjection from their
inferiors. It Is pleasant to obey the good, it is necessary to obey the bad,
it is commendable to obey all. If bare grace be the ground of subjection, the
world should not stand. It would run to Anarchy and Confusion. For besides that
very few have grace, every fanatic spirit can pretend it, Saint only a party,
ungrace the rest, vote them as wicked, pull them from the Seats of their
Principalities, cut throats, rob estates, and all under the favor of this
unquiet and turbulent Principle. There is no subjection to be given to wicked
persons. The Apostle taught a better Lesson that converted Christian servants
should abide with their idolatrous heathenish Masters, 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21. We
read of Saints in Caesar's house, Phil. 4. 22. Good Joseph dwelt with bad
Potiphar, Genesis 39. 2. and Jacob with Laban, en. 31. 30. Indeed none should be,
none may be so good servants as the good. This loose humor was stirring and
condemned in Calvin's time: He wrote against this wanton Principle. The same
Error has infected our times; insomuch as some servants when once turn
Quakers, think themselves free from subjection to their Masters, pleading that
they ought not to yield honor to men.

3. In Civil Compellation. We live not among Angels, nor all Saints, but good
and bad. The Kingdom of Christ is in the Kingdoms of the world. Civil respects
are due to men as well as religious honors to God. The whole Scripture is
Canonical. It Is a part of divine inspiration, we are commanded as well to be
courteous, as to be gracious; civil treatment are not unbeseeming the strictest
Saints. Men may, yea must have their titles according to their different
orders, stations, conditions in the world. The Appellations of Worship, Honor,
Lordship, Excellency, Highness, Majesty, are no sin in themselves; indeed when
they come from the vain mouth, naughty heart, and tend to a bad end, of a loose
sinner they are sin to him; and thus as the ploughing of the wicked is sin, so
is his c^^^^^ment. Because with some persons civil ^itles are so abominable,
though they are not like to read this Page, yet the holy Scriptures will assure
the sober Reader, their folly is manifest, and noto^ious. Put case persons of
honor are wicked, as too many are, who are like to smart for it to all
Eternity, for staining their o^n honor and Gods too: Yet Paul, a vessel of
honor, without courtship, but by the teachings of the Holy Ghost, had learned
this good manners, to give great, though bad persons, their civil respects:
Noble Felix, Act. 24. 3. King Agrippa, Act. 25. 26. I appeal to Caesar, Act.
25. 11. Paul's persecutors at. Antioch were yet styled Honorable Women, and
chief Men of the city, Act. 13. 50. No unmannerly, railing Quakers in ^po^o.
lical times. But because in civil, courteous Appellations, it is not more easy
than common to err, there is an huge generation of vain complementists, whose
immoderate compellations are the froth of language, the vanity of mind, the
waste of time, the impertinencie of Christian society, I would willingly
caution the gracious person, convinced of his duty, he must be courteous, and
give honor to whom honor is due, to observe these Rules. Christian, when you
give civil honor to others, according to their worldly Quality and
Precedencie,

1. Do it with Reverence of the Majesty of God: Persons of Honor are the
Image, the bright Beams of God, the infinite ^^ount^in of Honor. It Is he has
set the children of men in their Titles, Seats, Estates of Honor. Neither
Affliction nor Promotion comes from the ground. God is the Judge, sets up whom
he pleases, Ps. 75. 7. As in Wisdoms left hand are riches and glory, Pro. 3.
16. so he distributes worldly honors mo^ly to vile men. However they are,
civil honor is not vile, though the persons that have it, be vile, come vilely
by it, and use it vilely.

2. Give civil honor for conscience sake, the sense of duty, God has
commanded it, not so much to please them, as to please God.

3. When the lip honors, let the heart reverence. We may neither give men
civil worship, nor God religious, hypocritically.

4. Lavish not out too many words nor time in civil courtesies.

5. From a prudent observation of Persons, Time, and Place, mix religious and
spiritual with civil discourse. To spend whole hours, mornings, afternoons, as
very many vain, frothy persons do, in air-beating, soul-unbettering, windy
courtesies, and merry discourse, without a thought, a word of the Majesty of
God, who as he has a Book of remembrance to note down the pious words of them
that fear him, so he registers too the numerous superfluous words of them that
fear him not, will have a sad account in the great day.

6. If among your civil treatments, as the Spouse, let your lips drop like the
Honeycomb: when you speak of by a secret ejaculation beg a blessing on your
gracious words, for your own, and the companies advantage.

7. Labor to affect your heart with the good things, that in gravity and
wisdom you deliver.

8. If you see civil courtesy swalloweth up piety, your self and heavenly
language be a burden to the company, savouring not the things of God,
preferring a Romance before a Sermon, vain chassie Tales before the precious
Truths of God, they had rather be foolishly, carnally, constantly merry, than
really wise, go home, and mourn in secret, you have given vain spirits their
due honors, who denied God his, they have been all for courtesy, nothing for
piety, visited only one another bodies, not souls, spent their time and
strength in outward, while strangers to inward mirth.

SECT. 9.
THey, without breach of Charity, do grossly wrong the grace 9 They abuse grace
who are eminent worldlings.
of God,

9. Who under glorious pretensions to Saving-grace, are eminent worldings. When
Heaven and Earth meet together, then will Heavenly and Earthly minds. Grace, as
it is heaven-born, so it does make heavenly. The Mediator of Grace has taught
us, We cannot serve God and Mammon. How many go among us in their own thoughts,
and in others opinion, for persons in the state of grace, and yet dexterously,
deeply, with all the powers of their understanding and carnal reason, design,
project for the world, affect it vehemently, pursue it fervently, keep it
basely, part with it sorrowfully, heap it up covetously, desire it endlesly,
admire it, adore it idolatrously, are afraid to put too much in Christ's
coffers, the bellyes of the poor. Is this the fruit of grace? Did ever grace
come with power, but it did unglue the heart from the world? Is not this
Scripture, The love of the world, and the things of the world, and the love of
the Father dwell not together? 1 John 2. 15. Will this pass for good Divinity?
Will either the Scriptures, a Deathbed, or the Last Judgment own it? viz. A
gracious Mammonist, a gracious Worldling, a gracious Hold-fast, a gracious
Hard-heart, a gracious Rebel against the Laws of Christ, that commands labor
for Heaven more than Earth, laying up Treasure in Heaven more than in Earth,
more to be rich in good works, than in wealth, to settle the affections on
things above, and not on earth: will cordial and practical contradiction to
these and many such Laws of Christ, speak a gracious person, the honor of
grace, the power of grace, O no, the nullitie of grace, the infamy of grace.
Else the Apostle would not with tears speak of earthly minds as enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose end is (a sad word, a very sad one) destruction. Let the
Masters of great Estates consider it, that had such before the Wars among us,
or since the Civil, bloody commotions, by providence shining on gracious
profession, in Court, City, Country, the Bench, the Pulpit, the Army, who have
not walked, but suddenly leapt to huge riches, some to hundreds, others
thousands by the year. Whoever they are, be they assured of it, they grossly
abuse the grace of God, who give sad proof they are eminent worldlings; I
beseech you all, who are so, and shall cast your eyes on these lines, seriously
ask your own souls, Do you not set your hearts on the Mammon of iniquity? Are
not your stupendous, sweet possessions your Idols? Are they not your treasure?
do not your thoughts, esteems, affections, run out in full stream to them? Do
not your poor neighbors, in the Countries, places where you live, see and
bewail it, your bowels move no more to them than rocks? Do you know when to
say we have enough, to give largely to Jesus Christ as well as to your
families? In these years of Judgment when Lo^ships, Farms, great Riches have
changed Masters, are there none that say, Poor creatures, that think on it with
tears? Ah woeful change, our old Masters fed and clothed us, but we may starve
under our new Possessors. I dare not charge you all for graceless worldlings,
God will, your consciences one day will charge those that are guilty. I hope
there are a few of you, the successors as well of others religious Liberality,
as Patrimony. As for you that are not, you may be ashamed, by what name soever
you are called, Presbyterians, Independents, or Anabaptists, that are
covetously scraping, sordidly tenacious, linked, yea chained to your money,
fear and tremble in your perilous Prosperities; Dominion and Riches are
slippery places; you that stand in Englands high ground, take heed lest you
fall: Let not your wanton dissoluteness give you the denomination of Kine;
Amos, the plain country Prophet called the great wantons of Israel, Kine of
Bashan, Amos 4. 1. for lusty, fat, feeding ^^ine, for rich Pastures, Kine of
Bashan, a very fertile mountain. Is this your all to graze, and fill, and
luxuriate in the plentiful pastures of rich estates? Are you, Jesurun-like,
waxen fat, better fed than taught, kicking against your sovereign maintainer,
lightly esteeming and forgetful of the God of your salvation, be sure of it,
the jealous God can soon pull you down from your Principalities, and cause your
abused Riches to take wings and fly to other owners. God is no respecter of
persons, what is sin in one he counts not innocence in another. As the
Wisdom, so the Justice that is from above is without partiality. God has made
many persons of sublime Honors, and great Estates his angry rods to chastize
others sins. Successors in sins have reason to fear, they shall be fellows in
punishments. White providence has lifted you up, O tremble, lest black
providence pull you down. Do you abuse divine Protections, Exaltations, vast
provisions for your selves and families to Pride, Luxury, Coverousnesse,
Impiety, Vnrighteousnesie? Are you wanton Libertines in opinion and Practice,
do you fear black reckoning days are coming upon you, lest you that have
abused Providence, and the grace of God, drink the dregs of the cup of
Trembling? So I leave you, and pass to another Generation of men, persons of
Honor and huge Estates, that look upon themselves as the suffering party,
egregious abusers also of the grace of God in eminent worldlyness. We have in
this Nation a vast number of great ones, who have, and ought to have the civil
titles of Worship and Honor, that own Baptismal grace, enjoy and use time and
means of grace, and hope to be saved by grace as well as others, that give
tokens of eminent earthlymindednesse. They keep not houses in their respective
Country-Lordships, get into Cities, and Towns Corporate, and either there they
liberally riot in their Families, Game, Feast, Drink away that Estate, their
poor, naked, hungry neighbors want; or else, if Parsimonious, lay up every
year vast sums, for greedy Purchases, and spend little or nothing in works of
Mercy. Though I kno^v not the dimensions of your yearly layings up, yet it is
twenty to one I may speak that which your consciences know to be true as to the
secret methods and ways of your worldly increase. One, it may be, at the years
end has laid up an hundred pound, another two, another five, another a
thousand pound, another two, another more. And wherefore this Bank, I beseech
you? has the Lord Jesus for Religious uses, acts of Piety, and Mercy, the
Tenth part, the Twentieth part, the Fortieth part, the Hundredth part? Have you
honored God with your substance, your annual increase? has he had in nothing,
or next to nothing, a thin inconsiderable charity, a real-gratitude from you,
and will you appear good Stewards in the Accounting day? When you shall be
asked what you have done with Gods Money and Land, and all the Items you will
bring in, will be Items of Pride, Luxury, costly fancies, Coverousness, etc.
Will he be put off with such returns? Learn Wisdom, and holy Policy against
the great day, O all you thriving old and new Gentry, rich thriving Merchants
and Tradesmen, wealthy Lawyers and Pulpit men; and for the time to come abhor
the baseness of self-hatred, which it may be you count self-love: To greaten
your Families, and undo your selves, to make rich heirs and dis-inherit your
selves, to expose your selves to ete^nal penury, that your successors may live
in luxury. It Is without peradventure, The grace of God that brings salvation
teaches to deny worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11. You have been bad Scholars in
Christ's School, that fulfill them. O do no more in an hot, greedy chase hunt
after the Profits and Pleasures of this world. Hearken to the words of one, who
has spoken the true experience of present worldlings. Is it not a crime, that
many now adays who profess the name of Christ, glue their hearts to the
Mammon of Iniqurtie, and the Treasures of Wickedness? It Is a very base thing
that Christians should enslave bodies and souls to the getting, keeping,
increasing of treacherous, perilous, and uncertain riches, and are so
captivated by them, that they cannot serve the living God. Take Augustines
judgment of this vain Saeculi hujus fallax suavit^^, perpetuus timor,
infructuosus labor, periculosa sublimitas. August.
world; The sweetness of this world is deceitful, fear perpetual, labor
unprofitable, height perilous. Why do you set your hearts on vanity and
vexations, Eccles. 1. 14. Broken Cisterns, Jer. 2. Lying vanities? Jonah 2. 8.
Shadows, Psalm. 102. 11. Non-entitres, that which is not. Be ashamed, O
Christian Gospellers! that stand on the worlds higher ground, have best wages,
and yet do your great Master least service, to give up the strength of your
souls, your time, your estates, in the brutish service of worldly and carnal
pleasures, contemning in mean time the sweet peace and joy of the Holy Ghost.
Such of you as serve pleasures, Tit. 2. 3. Live in them, 1 Timothy 5. 6. are
voluptuous wantons, as if you came into the world to be as the Leviathan to
take your Pastime only to sport and feast your souls in your sensualities.
Seneca had a far braver spirit than you have; He thought it was true
pleasure to contemn pleasures, and is it your heaven to enjoy them? you live
not like men: The delights of reason far excels those of sense: You live not
like Saints: The delights of Grace transcend them both. O come and see, come
and taste, feed on the Marrow and Fatness, the luscious, sweet soul provisions
of Gods House, and the Heavenly dainties of grace, will soon make you
dis-rellish the perilous unsatisfying delights of this life.

SECT. 10.
THey may, with little study, run and read their gross abuse 10. They abuse
grace who are senseless, stupid, lethargick Libertines.
of Gods grace.

10. Who are senseless, stupid, Lethargick Libertines: Are these the Darlings
of Grace, the Favorites of Heaven, who in a dead, cursed insensibility, blunt
the goads of Conscience, are strangers to the fear of God, are deaf to the
Canon shot, the dreadful volleys of the Laws curses, who startle not when they
hear Boanerges Pulpit Sons of Thunder, but slight pious admonitions, and
grievous comminations, as if they were vain Bugbears to fright children,
Fantastical, Poetic Hyperbolies, that Pro inanibus terriculamentis and
hyperbolis habent.
have taken the Devils Opium, and are cast in a dead sleep? National
Judgments, Personal Afflictions do not awaken them: Satan rocks them asleep
with his sweet Lullabies, of promising life, interest in Christ, and the hopes
of Heaven: And are you indeed the persons of Grace? It Is strange you should be,
it is impossible: Grace is a living Creature, a new C^eature, a delicate
Creature, a tender Creature, quick and sens^ble, feels the least grievance, the
least sin. Alas for you, stupid Libertines! The Devil may lay upon you sin upon
sin, mountain upon mountain, and yet you feel not, you complain not, you mourn
not, you weep not, you weep not, you cry not with strong cries and tears to
Heaven to be dis-burthened: I have this sad tidings to bring you, your Lethargy
will, in spite of your hearts, be cured: But when? I fear, O I fear, never
till you are in Hell flames, there will be no sleeping fits there: O you
senseless ones of the love or fear of God! Blessings or Cursings, Promises or
Threatenings, you cannot sleep in an uneasy, tormenting, eternal Bed of
Tribulation; you will have none to make your Bed easy, no Julips, no Cordials,
to succor your fainting hearts in your hot scorching fits. Will you not
believe? O that you would believe! your fellow graceless, senseless, wantons in
Hell, would tell you, could they speak with you, after scores of years sleep in
sin, they are now with a vengeance awakned out of their dead sleep: ^happy were
that voice of the Son of God, that would do the kindness to thee, slumbring
drousie Reader, as to bid thee, and make thee to awake! O awake, awake to
repentance, and gracious Gospel indulgency, lest thou awake to eternal
vengeance! O shake off that cursed unbelief that makes thee an Atheist, a
mock-god, a dissolute debauched wanton! Hell is no Fable, Scripture threatenings
are no vain ^ancies: God has sworn in his wrath, a graceless, impenitent
contemner of his angry words, shall never enter into his res^: If thou be
such a one, he has said it, and his Almighty avenging Arm will make good his
word, such a wicked Wretch as thou art, that forgettest God and thine own duty,
shall be cast into hell, Psalm. 9. 17. O folly! O madness! O sadness!
Presumption of Gospel Grace is made a pillow for loose sinners to sleep quietly
on: It will not always be thus, God will change thy soft, downy, Gospel-pillow,
for an hard, thorny, legal one. Visions of wrath, as well as mercy, are for an
appointed time; they will speak, and not tarry. O Devil-ridden secure ones!
hearken to that of Chrysostom; he calls secure sinners, The Devils Horses: He
is a fierce, cruel Rider, he spares Diaboli equos Chrysostom.
no flesh, he spares no souls he backs: He has ridden thousands off their
legs, off their spirits, off their strength, off their lives, off their
pleasures, off their ease, off their hopes: The rider and the horses, both will
be for ever cast into the fiery Lake, and never come out again. O wretched,
wanton, secure Libertines! you would be secure, and you shall be secure; you
would not have your cursed peace disturbed, and it shall not be disturbed; you
would be persuaded you are under the wing of saving grace, though in the broad
road to destruction, and you shall be persuaded: God chooses your delusions,
Isa. 66. 4. your own election will prove your destruction. O Judgment of
Judgments! Carnal security, thou do pave the way to eternal Judgments:
See, O see your sad resemblance! Sisera slept in Jaels Tent, she wooed him,
Turn in my Lord, turn in to me, and fear not,; she went softly to him, and her
nail and hammer smote his soul into the other world, Judge. 4. 18, 21. so loose
Libertines sleep in the Tent of presumption: Carnal security woes them, Turn in
soul, turn in, fear not, the issue is, it softly and cruelly smites sleeping
souls into the other world. Sampson slept on Delilahs lap, and lost his locks
and his strength: Libertines sleep in the lap of security, and loose their
hopes of Heaven. Eutychus slept, while Paul was Preaching, and fell down dead,
Acts 20. 9. Carnal Gospellers sleep, while they enjoy the means of grace, and
fall dead into the bottomless Pit. Crafty Ulysses gave Polyphemus a sleeping
draught, and when he was asleep, he run an hot Iron into his eye. The Devil,
the crafty Ulysles of Hell, he gives secure sinners a sleeping Potion, and when
they are fast, he blindes them, and shoots his deadly, fiery shot at them.
Carnal security, under presumptions of Grace, is both a sin and plague, Gods
Judgment, the Devils Triumph, Souls ruin.

SECT. 11.
THey are apparently gross Prophaners of the Grace of 11. They abuse Gods
grace, who are guilty of wrong to the creatures.
God.

11. And lastly, Who are guilty of a wrong use of the Creatures; God made them,
that his grace, by the professors of, and pretenders to it, should be exalted
in the use of it.

Four things demonstrate that it is not so.

1. When they are used ungraciously: This is a perverting of the intention of
Creation: Every Creature of God is good, which God has created to be received,
with Thanksgiving of them that believe, and to be sanctified with Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5. A strong Implication, that every one that uses the Creature
aright, must first be gracious, and then use it graciously. Three graces are
here set down; The grace of Prayer in Invocation, for Gods not only natural,
but spiritual blessing on the Creature. The grace of thanksgiving, in returning
to God the praise of Lip, Heart, and Life, for his good Creatures: And the
grace of Faith, in using them in and for Christ, in the strength Reveren^ia
hospitis qui praesens est, and nos alit perpetuo, retinet in officio and
disciplina sancta. Marlorat.
of Christ, to his praise.

Add to these the grace of holy Fear, not to offend the Author of
Creature-goodness: For as the Feastmakers eye is on his guests, to see their
behavior; so the great Housekeeper of the World, that feeds and clothes
millions every day, is strictly observant who uses his goodness, according to
the rules of holy Temperance, contributes to right Creature-use, in guarding
the sensitive appetite, that it does not clog the immortal spirit with
burdensome surfeits of any kind: When the Creatures are not thus graciously
used, it is a wrong to grace, whose office, honor and power, is to regulate
their use.

2. When they are used to a sinful end, either to the satisfaction of Lusts, or
hinderance of Gods service.

1. To the satisfaction of Lust, the Israelites abuse, They asked
Petulantissimis homin^um concupiscenti is satisfacit aliquando Deus ex ira.
Ames. in Psalm.
meat for their lust, Psalm. 78. 18. not for their convenient use, but for the
satisfaction of their corrupt lust, which God granted in wrath, as they desired
in sin, Psalm. 78. 29. Much of the Creatures is desired to consume upon Lusts,
Jam. 4. 3. Drunkenness, Gluttony, Pride, Voluptuousness, Ambition, Do^ination:
Sad will be the account of vast expenses of the Creatures, sacrificed in and
upon the service of Lust, against which usurpation, the voices of Reason,
Grace, and the Creatures, will give severe testimony.

2. To the sinful end of hindering Gods service: we should use the Creatures
only to fit and whet our attendances on God; but when they prove Obstructions
(as mostly they do) take off our leisure and pleasure to do his will, we
wrong God and our own souls: Christ told the busy man, who excused his
following of Christ (one would think a tolerable excuse) by going home to bid
his friends farewell, that his civil courtesy, at that time, did unfit him for
the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 61. yea, concluded that the civil burial of the
dead, in opposition to religious service, argued a soul dead in sin. And so the
Field, the yoke of Oxen, the married Wife, are set down as Remora's and
Impediments to come and feed upon Christ's Gospel-feasts, Matt. 22. 4. and those
that flow in Creature Comforts, say, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 14. Why does Christ say, Woe to you that are
full, Luke 6. 25. but to threaten at once rest in Creature-fulness is a
temptation to forget God and duty? The poor in the world, rich in faith, Jam.
2. 5. receive the Gospel, Luke 7. 22. Have any of the Rulers believed on him,
Joh. 7. 48. It Is true, there is not an absolute inconsistency of grace with
Riches and Greatness: Rich Abraham, as well as poor Lazarus, are in Heaven. But
ordinarily the Creatures are used to a sinful end, to estrange and arm the
heart with weapons of Rebellion against God, which should be inducements of
obedience.

3. When they are used only to a perishing end, a Belly that shall be
destroyed, a fine back that shall be uncloathed, and lay in the chamber of
death, rottenness and silence, a mortal body, Belluinus vescendimos. Mar lorat.
a posterity that must die. When rational Creatures, use the creatures
unreasonably, only like bruit Beasts to satisfy sensualities, that must give
up the ghost with the Sensualists expiring breath; when they have not an
eternal end in their eye, to use money, meat, drink, health, strength, life, to
fit for eternity; when men do not make them friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, Luke 16. 9. and though they cannot at once serve God and
Mammon, yet do not so manage Creature use, as to make Mammon serve God, they
are exceedingly unserviceable, and injurious to the grace of God.

4. When they are not used to Gods ends: They are four.

1. Stronger engagement unto God: The pious intention of Jacob, if he might
have the mercy of Divine protection, convenient His verbis se obstrinxit Jacob,
Calv.
food and raiment, he promised, The Lord should be his God: These were the holy
Patriarchs binding words, Genesis 28. 30, 31. As courtesies bind to men, so
creature-mercies bind pious men to God: When the sweet silken cords of mercies
do not bind the heart to God, grace is dishonored; when it is common
dis-ingenuity to break the bonds of kindness, to despise the riches of
creature-goodness, this is a signal, evident ingratitude to the God of grace.

2. End of Gods Creature-mercies is faithful and cheerful service, Deuteronomy. 28.
47. But when it is usual, and sad practice, as Israel served not God in a good
and fat Land, Neh. 9. 35. so the unworthy Professors of Gospel Grace, and the
Christian name, do not conclude a necessary, joyous, and rational service, from
the free and plentiful allowances of sweet Creatures, do not seriously ponder
with themselves; Why have I hundreds, and thousands by the year? Why have I
food convenient, and competent allowance between envy and pity? Why have I any
House to dwell in, any food and raiment? Why have I had sweet repose this
night, when others in waking tortures count the tedious hours? Why have I
health? Am I strong? Do I live? Have I so good a Master? Is it that I should
be a loose, wanton servant, and do him no work? What blushing will sit on the
face, trembling on the limbs, horror on the hearts of pretenders to Gods grace,
in the accounting day, when large Creature-allowances, shall in all their sad
inventories, be proved to be wrested from the employments of Gods reasonable
service.

3. End of Gods Creature-mercies, is the exaltation and commendation of his
loving kindness. David's gracious spirit, versed in the high praises of God, did
ordinarily take the elevation of Gods goodness and kindness from
Creature-mercies, and spent Psalms in Doxologies, seeing the glory of God in
the glass of the Creatures shining before his spirit, and in and in high
strains of praise, exalted the great and glorious name of God, made the
Creatures Trumpets to sound his praise, and an occasion of high thoughts of
God. Indeed he that is thankful to God for his unspeakable gift of Jesus
Christ, cannot, but having the best Gospel-tenure of common mercies, holding
them in capite, praise God for every perishing mercy, as a token of special
everlasting love, and an earnest penny of eternal mercies. His bread to him is
Covenant-bread, his Apparel Covenant-apparel, his Money Covenant-money, yea,
his Afflictions Covenantafflictions; whether he have much or little, its all to
him the dispensation of choice kindness, and the allotted sufficiency of
infinite Wisdom and Love, to bear his charges in the narrow road to life, until
he come to his Fathers House and eternal Inberitance: But now to rob God of
this glorious end, the exaltation of his love, or to resent no love but of
Creature-mercies, and to prostitute that to self-love and carnal sensualities;
How below is this to the honor of man, the glory of God, and the power of Grace?

4. End of Gods Creature-mercies, in spiritualizing the Creatures: Turning
Earth into Heaven, making visible created Excellencies, Ladders to climb up to
the invisible God: The pious practice of our Lord Jesus, in his holy, heavenly
travels, to lead the understandings of men, by the light and hand of Creatures,
to the apprehensions of heavenly and immaterial things, by a Well of water
still springing up, signifying the eternal Spring of the Spirit of grace in
regenerate souls; what by fleshly relations, leading us to believe the high
account he has of spiritual kindred; by seed lost in evil ground, fruitful in
good, instructing us in the word, lost to most hearers, succesful in a few good
and honest hearts; by all his Parables, elegantly picturing out the Orient
Beauties and Glories of his Kingdom of grace and glory, and the ugly face of
sin. Holy Bradford was happy this way, who made Creature-mercies his advantage
ground to see into Gospel-glories: When putting on Apparel, his thoughts were,
O Christ cloth me with thine own self, that I catch not the cold of this
World! When the clothes were put off, he thought of death, he should be
uncloathed of Flesh, and of the Resurrection to put it on again, as his
clothes were put on in the morning: When the daylight appeared, he minded
Christ the light, that knows no Night nor Evening, but is always as bright
Midday: His Journying taught him to think this life a Pilgrimage, the way is
dangerous, that there is need of Christ the Guide in the high way to glory. How
injurious are we to Gods end of his Creatures, unto our own rational faculties,
and to the ingenuities that grace would put upon us, if we gain not affective
and active Meditations, by what daily comes into the doors of our senses? If so
great be the sweetness and glory of Gods out-house, the visible World, what
transcendencies of delight and honor are the happy reserves, in the invisible
state and place of heavenly glory in the next life? It is an ungracious frame
of spirit that is confined to the things below: They are strangers and enemies
to their own happiness, that could take up with a visible Eternity of poor
sublunary things, and cannot abide the thoughts of death, the destruction of
their earthly Gods.

Thus Reader, in the forementioned eleven Sections, may thou try and take a
measure of thy loose heart and life, if in impartial Judgment thou can, and
wilt be so faithful to the Truth and thine own soul, as to believe thy guilt of
manifest and gross abuses of Gods grace, confess it to God, deeply lay it to
heart, repent of it, lest it prove thy ruin.

CHAP. XI. Containing a second Branch of Examination, how we may know the
secret, close, and more refined Abuses of Gods Grace.
HAving enquired into the more visible and notorious affronts of Gods grace: My
next labor shall be rifling bosom-work, to go into the inward Rooms of the
heart, and there to find out the inward Libertine, that dares impurely and
immodestly to licentiate before the Lord: This searching, inward, filthy cells
of darkness, by the bright Candle of the word of Truth, as it is always
unpleasant to a close Hypocrite, all whose Religion is a constant juggling with
God and men, so to soundest upright hearts it is very desirable. If the secret,
rotten, double-hearted Professor, shall read the following Conceptions, without
a blush, fear and trembling, laying a better foundation for his propriety to
Christ, assurance of Grace, and the hope of Heaven, then cheating appearances;
If he have scarce patience and heart, to try himself by ensuing discoveries,
yea though he read them, will wickedly deny the signs of close dishonors to
Gods grace are not in him, he may shift of Paper Arraignments, he shall not the
unbosoming Judgment of the great day, when his Sheeps skin shall be plucked
off, the inside shall be turned outward, and the close Hypocrite shall appear
a wicked, impenitent abuser of Gods grace. Indeed, I have little hope to do
good to the habitual Jugle^ in the things of God, who has made a play of his
Religion, a^^ never been in good earnest: My hope is a Blessing from Heaven may
second Convictions in the sound heart searching Reader, who is ever most
charitable to others, but most jealous off, and servere against his own heart:
for thy sake, O self-basing, abhorring mourner in Zion! I have endeavored to
lay down the Transcript, the Counterpane of thy wretched heart: I know thou
^ilt say the next Pages are thine own experience, look over, weep over, pray,
strive against the ungrateful, unkind wrongs to thy gracious God, thy dear
Redeemer, the Spirit of Grace gracious motions, thy principle of grace: I know,
by the help of grace, thou will lay to heart and repent of the secret Injuries
of grace, where the profane hypocritical world scarce see any sin, or if so,
very slightly think of it, and have no care and conscience to reform: Weigh and
ponder then the evidences of close and less discerned abuse of Gods grace, as
laid down in the subsequent method.

SECT. 1.
1. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace, is a sinful close of spiritual
Enjoyments: By these I mean, all the Ordinances of grace, whose ends and fruits
are spiritual, where succesful; also the gifts of Grace, Knowledge, Judgment,
Invention, Memory, Utterance in Divine things. Add hereunto the sanctifying
graces of the Spirit, the s^eet motions of the Holy Ghost, the joys of the
Spirit in the light of Gods countenance, in the Faith of Atonement by Christ's
blood, in the sight of sincerity, victory over Lusts, etc. These are all
spiritual enjoyments: Now when the close of these is sinful, there is a secret
abuse of grace.

It is sinful in five things.

1. In self-advancement: Gods free grace is either wronged by his Servants, as
a Benefactor, by a boasting Beggar, he is well fed, fat and fine, and while he
should lift up the bounty of the giver, he is glorying in himself as a
receiver: So when the giver of grace in his heavenly Alms should be magnified,
how often do the best of men advance themselves? The richest Saints in Earth
and Heaven are but vessels of mercy, Romans 9. 22. Utensils, Instruments God is
pleased to use: No thank to the tool, but to the hand if it work: No house
builds it self. When we see a comely building, we praise the Art of the
Builder. The action of the Instrument is reduced to the essicient: Ashur forgot
himself and God, when he looked not on God, but himself. Boasting in an
Instrument, is as if the Saw should magnify it self, it cut well; and the Ax
should magnify it self, it hewed well, Isa. 10. 15. If the Workman holds his
hands, the Tools do nothing. Believers are the spirits Instruments, God works
in and by them, and they dishonor the grace of God, by transferring the work to
themselves, saying, I prayed, I preached, I wept, I gave alms, I rejoiced in
God, I did this and that good. As lofty Nebuchadnezzar looked only on his great
boasting, This I did, this was my doing: Is not this Babel that I have built
for the glory of my Majesty? So I have done this and that, is the Poison that
mars all; the breathing of Satan turned angel of light, the high abuse of Gods
grace. ^h Christian, be humbled for it, Diabolus laudat, qua se perspicit
superari virtutem, injicit cordi jactantiam, etc. Fulgent. ad Probam ep. 3.
and correct it, by the Glass of Paul's self-abasing, Grace and
Christ-advancing: I labored more than the other Apostles, yet not I, but the
Grace of God, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.
20.

2. In dulling the edge of holy zeal: This is the sad and frequent lacquey of
spiritual enjoyments: We converse with them to a blunting and dulling of our
spirits: They should be as whetstones to set a keener sharpness on our hearts,
but they are as stones to the Sithes, that gap and blunt them. It is rare to
meet with the fellows of a precious Minister, of whom it was said, That he got,
but lost no heavenly heat and vigor by holy duties, the more in it, the more
furnished with heavenly power, love, delight, and warmth in renewed exercise.
There was renewed influence of the spirit of grace, the picture of the
spiritual enjoyments of the next life: The Apostles rule is, It is good to be
always zealous in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. Not in fits, and pangs of holiness,
but always: ^he Ceremonial Fire was always to burn on the altar: They are the
choicest happy Christians, in whose hearts the heavenly fire of zeal is still
burning. It is our wantonness we keep not close with God, but after heats, we
cool our hearts in the worlds cold Air, and are so benumbed in our earthly
affections and employments, as if we had never been by Heavens fire: The
counsel to wanton Sardis, is good to us, Be watchful, and strengthen the things
that remain that are ready to die, Rev. 3. 2.

3. In slacking diligence: How are we too often in Heavens way, like Jading
Steeds, who though well, yea high fed in the Inn, yet go lazily, and worse
than before: God has given Heavenly Travelers sweet and full Baits, how is
his goodness dishonored, when after Tastes how gracious he is, we yield rather
to spiritual slumbers, then hold on our way? How Nou vis proficere? vis ergo
deficere. Ibi proficere, ubi and curreredesinis. Bernard.
do those wanton Laborers disparage a good meal, that slack their diligence,
play, but work not? When our industry in the Lords work abates, it is good to
put these spurs in our dull spirits. O thou wicked and slothful servant! the
sad charge of the last Judgment, Matthew. 25. 26. The diligent hand makes rich:
Be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.
11. Show the same diligence unto the full assurance of hope, unto Not (...),
but (...). Chrysostom.
the end, Heb. 6. 11. Abounding in the work of the Lord, as knowing pious
labors shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Work out your own
salvation, Phil. 2. 12. make tho^ow work of it.

4. In carnal security: Even sound hearts, after they apprehend the sweet
tastes of Gods love, and the bitterness of death is past, are too apt to think
their mountain strong, sing a false Requiem to their spirits, as if they were
out of the dangers of Desinunt esse perditi, cum destiterint esse s^curi, Salv.
ruin, committing from their loose unregenerate part in them, the sins,
against which God threatens Hell, upon the assurance they are heirs of Heaven,
thinking themselves secure, are not safe: Whereas the way of life, is the way
of holy Jealousy, not security: It is not the least of Satan's wiles to suffer
himself to be overcome, that he may overcome. As conquering Soldiers, yet
unsuspicious of dangers, are taken Prisoners by a routed Cum certamini
manifesto cedit, ad hoc se vi^tum demonstrat, ut vincat, ad hoc fugam simulat,
ut persequentem occidat, Full. gent. ad Prob. Ep. 3.
Army; so unjealous Christian Victors, by laying by their Watch and Alarms of
holy fear, are suddenly surprised: It Is an imprudent conclusion, because the
Bird has escaped the Fo^vler, therefore he shall ever be out of the danger of
the Net and Gunshot. The heart is deceitful: We are still in the Enemies
Co^ntrey: Christ's Garrisons have false friends in them, will open the Gates to
the destroyer, and while every soul has Judas's in it, to kiss, and kill, and
betray the grace of God into the hands of enemies, there is urgent need of a
constant watch. Fear was the Apostles watchword to the privileged Gentiles,
lest they that stand by Grace, should fall by security, Romans 11. 20. Happy is
he that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. We abuse spiritual enjoyments, when we
suspect no loss: Greatest Beauties, Riches and Honors, call for most waking
eyes, and strictest guard: When Christ had sweet tidings from Heaven, he was
Gods beloved Son, Matthew, 3. ver. last: he was forthwith set upon by the Devil,
Matthew. 4. 1. If the envious, vigilant Tempter, sees our private Prayers and
tears of Joys, hears our joyous triumphs of Gods kindness in Christ; malicing
such hated glory, he will presently lay traps to damp our joys, defile our
spirits, wound our consciences, and bring us to the very Suburbs of Hell: Ye
are partakers of Christ, said Paul of the Christian Hebrews, if you hold fast
the beginning of your confidence, steadfast unto the end, Heb. 3. 14. It Is not
enough, in first conversion, to hold the precious Jewel Jesus Christ in the
hand of Faith, but there must be a constant hold-fast. Is he who is among
Thieves careful to hold fast the Pearl in his hand, and fearful to let it go?
So it should be with every prudent Christian, he should fear his own laziness,
cowardice and weakness, should loose his riches: It Is the Apostles counsel to
his Hebrews, useful to all that think they stand, and a sovereign preservative
against security: Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it, Heb. 4. 1.

5. By dallying with Temptations, we pray we may not enter into temptation:
Gods grace is our deliverance: Corruption casts us into the fire, the hand of
mercy plucks us out. But how often do Gods foolish, fearless children, like
ours, after we have been burnt and cured, we adventurously play with the same
fire that scorched us, and renew our pains and cries. It Is not an
experimentally true spiritual Proverb, That all Gods burnt children always
hate the fire: Even after David had sweet visits and walks with God, and the
refreshing joys of his salvation, he wantonly dallyed with temptations fire in
the roof of his house, defiled his soul with forbidden lust of strange beauty,
and Body too, and lost spiritual, for carnal delight; the joy of his salvation,
for the pleasure of sin: Grace does not perfectly crucify the old Man; while
Lust is an in-dweller, it will be an inticer: We may as well play with fire
near Gunpowder, as play with Temptations near Lust: It Is no safe dancing near
Pits brinks, taking fire into our bosoms, welcoming temptations into our
hearts: The old man is too willing and too pressing to tempt us out of heavens
way; we need no world nor devil to drive us: It Is good counsel, and singular
indemnity to our souls, if practiced; Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1
Thef. 5. 22. Hate the garment spotted by the flesh.

SECT. 2.
2. EVidence of close abuse of Gods grace is Irreverence of 2 An Evidence of
abuse of abuse of grace is irreverence of Gods Majesty.
Gods Majesty. The best are too apt to wrong their nearness to God, by
forgetting their distance. God is so his childrens Father, as that he is their
King. Though the name Father speaks boldness, yet the name King speaks greater
reverence. Irreverent are saucy children, more bold than welcome. I am a great
King, says God, Mal. 1. 14. His name is great: Mal. 1. 11. and reverend, Psalm.
111. 9. We need grace to serve God with reverence and godly fear, because he is
a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. It is a wrong to grace when we do it not. Is
it the state of earthly gods to keep their distance with them on whom they
shine the brightest beams of their royal favors? and shall we think the
infinite, great, and blessed God, before whom the Kings of the Earth are as
Grasshoppers, Worms, Nothing, less than Nothing, will not have the rails and
vails of holy reverence, the humble tokens of distance? The Apostate Angels at
once lost their good manners, and their happiness, they kept not within their
limited station. Should the standing Angels loose their Reverence, they should
lose their Glory. It is the ^^lae volantes, celeritatem and promptitudine^
significant. Faciem tegentes, indicant Angeli Majestatem Dei far nequeunt.
Pedes tegentts, quod tenues divini splendoris radiolos in Angelis perspicere
non possumus. Calv. in Isa. 6.
Gospel Prophets Hieroglyphick. The holy, heavenly, Angelical Host are Birds
of Paradise, and have six Wings; two to cover their faces, two their feet, two
to fly with, are said to have flying wings, to resemble their quick and nimble
obedience; facecovering wings, to shadow out their reverence, as not daring to
pry into, nor bear Gods infinite glory; are said to have feetcovering wings, to
teach our distance from the Angels, who are too weak to behold their finite
little rays of glory, much less that infinite bright Sun of the divine
Essence. This Lesson the Prophet teaches us, those spotless Spirits that see
the blessed face of God to their everlasting happiness, are ever full of a
Reverential awe of Gods Majesty. But how unsuitable are the heirs of salvation
to their heavenly guard? Angels are reverent, Saints are unmannerly: These are
wanton, those dare not be so. Believers, study your hearts, gestures, words,
conversations, that they all may be Holiness to the Lord? Is he sanctified in
you when you draw nigh him? Levit. 10. 3. When you are before him, as in no
minute, no place, no darkness, no solitariness, you are out of his flaming
eyes, piercing views; your insides and external deportments are laid in his
unerring balance. He tryes you every moment, Job 7. 18. What mean your
uncomely spirits, your external indecencies? your slight services? Would your
governor like such carriages you present to, and abuse your gracious God with?
As Ahasuerus said to Haman, Will he force the Queen before me? Esth. 7. 8. So
lay it to heart, will you abuse grace before God? It was a God-wearing sin,
evil men did evil^, and yet thought they were good in Gods sight, Mal. 2. 17.
What a God-affronting sin is it, to think because Free Grace has made you
good and accepted in Gods sight, therefore you may abuse it to irreverence in
his presence. I know your hearts, if sound, abhor this doctrinal inference,
from so glorious a principle; but does not the frame of your spirits, words of
your mouths, loose carriage prove, you dare be irreverently and abusively bold
with your Fathers kindness? Who that sees a grown Son come to years of
understanding, knowing his duty to walk mannerly, yet standing with his Hat on,
playing ill feats before, yea with his Fathers face, slighting his commands,
but will say there is a wanton unmannerly boy? It is no calumny to say so of
many of Gods unmannerly children, their unbecoming Irreverencies are their
heavenly Fathers reproach. A Reverent Christian that has the mighty awe of God
upon his spirit, in all times, places, companies, providence, temptations, is
a Phoenix, an Angel among Professors. Happy, holy, harmless, preserved are they
that maintain the reverent awe of God upon their spirits.

SECT. 3.
3. EVidence of close abuse of Gods grace is Forgetfulness of God. The House of
Israel perverted their way and forgot 3 Forgetfulness is an evidence of abuse
of grace.
the Lord their God, Jer. 3. 22. Jesurun waxed fat and kicked Of the rock that
begat thee, thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God that formed thee, Deuteronomy.
32. 15, 18. Too often the answers of Gods kindness are like the chief Butlers
of Joseph^ The holy man gave a comfortable interpretation of the Butlers Drem,
Pharaohs restorement of him to his office, with this rational caution, but
think of me when it shall be well with thee: Yet did not the chief Butler
remember Joseph but forgot him, Genesis 40. 13, 14, 23. Thus the Holy God speaks
comfort to many a gracious soul in the deeps of trouble, with those equal
motions upon their spirits, that they would think upon this name and not return
again to folly, yet in sundry duties they do not remember God, but forget him.
They know not their own hearts that in the trust and boast of their own
sufficiencies, promise God if he will reveal his love in his Son to them, they
will be exact walle^s; but many of his loose children, after they have seen his
face, have opposed his will and answered the Kisses of his love by unkind
Rebellions. Gods Israel of the spirit have need of the same cautions the Israel
of the flesh had. When the Lord thy God shall give thee for his promise sake,
Cities, Houses, Wells, Vineyards, and Olive Trees, when thou shall have eaten
and be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11,
12. So Believer when the Lord thy God for his covenant sake shall privilege
thee in the heavenly blessings of Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, the
Joy of Atonement, and the sweet sight of thy name written in heaven, when thou
shall eat, and be full of the heavenly feast of fat things, beware lest thou
forget the Lord thy God. It Is no seldom indignity put upon the grace of God,
to forget him in Temptations, Vocations, Relations, Conditions in the world. We
charge upon our servants such and such duties, call them to account; our
pleasure is neglected: The excuse is, we were forgotten, does not this speak a
loose careless Spirit? Surely the Lords servants forgetfulness of their charge
argues their wantonness. A serious, faithful, considering spirit would remember
-- Christian, charge home the baseness and unfaithfulness of thy spirit with
sharp reproof. Ah foolish heart and unwise, How have I requited the Lords
grace? I forget not vanity, but how have I forgotten the great concernments of
Eternity? A Bride will not forget her Ornaments, the Worldling his Market, and
Teeming sums. Pleasure-hunters forget not their delights, nor the children of
Revenge their opportunities of doing mischief. How have thou forgotten the
Lord, his blessings on thee, his cautions to thee, his motions in thee, his
hoped glory laid up for thee, his everlasting love, designing distinguishing
mercies unto thee? How have thou forgotten the Lord in numberless sins? Should
he cast thee out of his mind thou had been cast into Hell long before this. O
let the thoughts of thy dear Lord be precious to thee. Love quickens memory;
let him be the dearly beloved of thy soul, as thou art of his, and thy memory
will be the faithful treasury of his glory and thy duty.

SECT. 4.
4. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace is secret acting of Heart-sinnes.
Close pollutions in the best hearts deny and 4 Secret acting of heartsins is an
evidence of abuse of grace.
oppose the savoury power of grace. Scripture Records are sad experiences of a
world of filth, gathered together in the heart, like an heap of dust, a load of
dung. There is heart iniquity that marrs Prayer, Psalm. 66. 18. There are close
heart Idols, Ezekiel. 14. 3. which have too much account and adoration. The heart
in the time and place of solemn, divine service goes after covetousness,
Ezekiel. 33. 31. is the workhouse where the practices of it are daily exercised,
2 Pet. 2. 14. The heart is of a gross brawny constitution, Matthew. 13. 15.
insensible of fleshly or spiritual motions. It is whorish corporally
sometimes; often spiritually, had rather lie in an earthy, yea sometimes an
hellish than heavenly bed of Loves. It Is often the complaint of serious,
gracious spirits, when their lips are pure, their hearts are unclean; when
their language is heavenly, their spirits are earthly. Aliud cord prementes,
aliud ore promentes.
O the sighs, the tears, that are the issues of spiritual observing eyes, when
they turn inwards, and behold defiling Pride, Passions, Dumb sins, Abominable
impurities; yea, which aggravates inward wickedness in pious souls, even in
cleansing times and means, Hearing, Praying, Humbling hours; so that were
hearts transparent, and their hideous filthiness exposed to Fenestrata p^ctora.
common view, the Readers of bosom wickedness would say, Religious minds were
not Gods Temples, but the Devils Synagogues, not the sweet Repositaries of the
Holy Spirit, but the Augaean Stables of the unclean. How filthy is the scent of
holy men's impure souls, to their heavenly acute smell. They are weary of their
lives, in their right sense, when they see such close wickedness to wrong the
Grace of God, but that there is ^ discerning eye, and loathing spirit of this
filthy sink of sin, all were naught, and all profession a delusion. O
Christian! would thou load thine heart with the sight and sense of those ugly
hellish characters, thy spiritual Lyncaean eyes behold? see the vileness of
it in a parable. A King entirely affectionate to his Subjects, his favorites
especially, would be honored every where, but especially in his Court: what
affronts do his ennobled and promocreatures put upon him, who although they do
not make him vile in the streets, yet before his face pollute his chamber with
mire and dirt, yea spit in his face? The King of Glory loving to all, deserves
every ones highest respects, his favorites especially, though the world
wallowing in wickedness abuse him, he should not be wronged where he keeps
his Court, what affronts do his ennobled new creatures do to him, who though
they do not make him vile in the open streets of public scandal, yet they
pollute the heart his chamber, with the mire and Tri^linium Dei.
dirt of filthy sins, yea spit on the fair face of his Grace, by secret
presumptions. O infinite mercy, compassion, and condescension, that the great
God jealous of the State and Glory of his Majesty, seeing his Mansion house so
abused, will yet vouchsafe to call it his, and to dwell in it.

SECT. V.
5. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods Grace, is adventuring 5 Adventuring on
lesser sins is an abuse of Grace.
on lesser sins, Grace is that Wisdom that is from above without partiality,
in its Heavenly Executions, will spare no sins, fat and lean must all be a
Sacrifice to its sword; great and small like all the Egyptians in the Sea must
perish: it has no rese^ves of cruel pity, says of all sins as Jehu of all
the Worshippers of Baal, Let none of them live, 2 King. 10. 20. Hypocrisy
speaks like that hypocrite Saul, spare some, O Christian! it is thy wanton
indulgence when thou sparest any: little it may be do thou think, when the
flattering old man says spare this and this sin, it is as if he should say,
damn thou soul, little sins like little poison, being of a killing nature as
well as greater: that of Chrysostom, is true experience, He that a little is
carried away by his carnal Lust, will be a greater Revolter: his Qui parum
cupiditate abreptus discesserit multum etiam procedens abscedit: Quamobrem
cave, parum hoc non est parum, sed fere totum, Chrysostom.
Counsel is safe, wherefore, says he, take heed, this little is not little,
it is almost all. Sins motion is down hill motion, like the stone when it
begins a little to fall, it still falls, he that goes one mile with his Lust
and the Devil, will go two, ten, twenty, knows not when to stop, a little
allowed weakness soon grows to allowed wickedness, what enemies are we to
Grace and our own Souls, when in the just day of its vengeance we will secure
little sins? say we not as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one, and my Soul
shall live? Genesis 19. 20. This sin is a little one a Saints infirmity, my Soul
shall live, how do we practically indent with God, that his gracious Pattents
should be securities for little sins? Well, were it if these had not too
liberal allowances, protections, and Respect, When I bow, said Naaman, in the
Carnis nostra securitas, infirmitatem, primam ad pecca: tum via^ sacit, postea
obdurat animam prava voluntate.
house of Rimmon, in this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant, 2 King. 5. 18. So
when we yield subjection to little sins, in these things there is scarce doubt,
the Lord will pardon his servants, when we protect the least sins, how do we
forget that command Cast away all your transgressions, Ezeck. 18. 31. And what
in us lays cast our selves out of mercies Protection? Repentance must be as
universal as Remission, that Grace that pardons, purges all sin, though all
sins are not equal, yet all are mortal in their nature, a little sin as well
as a little needle sticking in the heatt, is deadly vain thoughts, idle words,
deadness of heart, formality in duties, foolish jesting, petty oaths, with
many such sins of course, though little sins in common repute by many Minima
vocat ex sensu hominim: nihil minutum de quo praecipere dignatus est, coelestis
Legislator. Marl, in loc.
thought no sins, yet like little Toads and serpents spit poison on the Soul,
we read indeed of least Commandments, Matthew. 5. 19. But it is in men's
opinions, not their own nature: No command is little, that has the stamp of
the great Lawgivers authority, what sacrilidge is it to slight the precepts of
the great God as little? The spiritual wisdom from above, looks upon every
command and sin as great, doing no little mischief against the sovereignty and
purity of no little God, deserving no little Hell, the loss of no little
Heaven. Servants are not their own, may not presume in little offenses, like
and dislike, pick, and choose, obey, and rebel as they please, but obey in all
things Col. 3. 22. Else they do not their Masters will but their own:
Insolentissimus abusus, quod placet assumere, quod displicet repudiare. Salv.
de Gub. Dei, lib. 2.
What we account a most insolent abuse and badge of pride in our servants, is
in Gods, they wrong his Sovereignty, when they are fast and loose, will do and
not do, and are not through paced in ^epentance and Obedience: It speaks our
soundness in the cause of God, in our faithfulness to the crown of Christ, if
we dash in pieces the Babylonish brats, the little Thieves of Latrunculos,
primorum motuum. Paris.
sins first motions, the petty traitors of Insurrection, as ^ell as the signal
Rebels: happy are they that in the high improvements of, and honorable
respects to Gods grace, dare not adventure on the lest sins, A little Leaven
will leaven the whole lump, a little sin without great mercy, will ruin the
whole man.

SECT. 6.
EVidence of close Abuse of Gods Grace, is discontent at 6. Abuse of Gods grace
appears in discontent at Gods gracious corrections.
Gods gracious corrections: his frowns on his children are his favors, his
rods love tokens, Heb. 12. 6. His family discipline, has not only good
instructions, and liberal maintenance, but wholesome chastisements, he is his
childrens Father and Physician, as wise to know, so able and willing to cure
their diseases, their sins are ill humors, affliction Physic, themselves
patients. But alas, ho^ under the discipline of correction are the Lords people
like delicate wantons, that will not take from, but give their Physician
directions, this Physic is not right, that were better; any Affliction, any
Potion rather than this, as if God knew not better our disease, the way of
cure, and our strength better then our selves, we are no sit choosers of our
rods, the cross we would exchange for might be ten times heavier: when we
repine at the wise allotments of our heavenly physician, make faces, and spit
at his ways of healing, we discover our folly and wantonness: that Looseness
that contracts Diseases, will not bear the method and smart of cure: this is
the holy and humble submission of Grace, Lord give power to bear, and blessing
to sanctify the Cross, and keep me under it while thou please. Shall good
children pay ^everence to their chastising parents, and not Gods children to
him correcting? Heb. 12. 9. choosing our trouble, fretting under Gods present
hand, as imprudent or injurious, despising his corrections, declares us have
wanton kicking spirits, we never sweetly, humbly, and quietly bear the
healthful indignation of the Almighty, till we by Faith give him the glory of
the gracious wisdom and sovereignty of his corrections, then be the trial never
so fiery, the soul will say, I shall come forth as tried Gold.

SECT. 7.
7. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace, is daring to do 7 The daring to do
that when the rod is off, which one would not when the rod is on, is a sign of
the abuse of grace.
that when the Rod of God is off, which would not be done when it is on. In
affliction there is pouring out of prayers, Isa. 26. 16. Hanging down the head,
and heavyness of heart for sin, sense of civil reverence of God, a stop to
carnal delights, good words of Holiness, promises of better Obedience,
reforming appearances, Saint-like deportments: But it is frequent injury to the
gracious chastisements of God, that their Physic has rather been a skinning
over, than a cure of diseases. As unsound Recoveries break forth into old
sores, and worse relapses, so the universal work of Correction betraies it
self either into a neglect of Prayer, or a Praying formalitie, carnal
Merriments, Remorslesnesse of Spirit, impudent Irreverence, Breach of Vows,
loose Conversation, these are great enemies to strictness. There are not a few
that have exceedingly shamed Gods School of Correction, like some unbettered
children under the Rod, who acknowledge their sin, kneel down and cry pardon,
and mingle the sense of their folly and smart with tears, promise they will
never do so again, fear and tremble at the next blows, are very humble and
show much good manners; but when the smart is off, the old sauciness,
stubborness, and disorders return. How has that righteousness that has light
impression in the mind by affliction, like the print of the Rod in the flesh,
soon worn out? This Insinceritie is deservedly deplorable of all them that know
their own hearts, and find these true charges flying in their faces. Such as
these that in and out of Affliction are so unlike themselves, betray they are
not sound in heart by their unsteadiness in Gods Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. Has
God in mercy not chastned us sore, nor delivered us up to death and hell to
cure, not to kill us? How dishonorable is it to the sparing, chastising grace
of God, and perilous to our own souls, when the holy manners we seemed to
learn, under the Rod are lost, when it is taken off?

SECT. 8.
8. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace is shamelesness before 8 Shamelesness
before the Lord for acknowledged sins is an evidence of the abuse of grace.
the Lord for acknowledged sinners. If grace be not so strong as to resist
sin, it is so sound and ingenuous as to blush at it. The Moral blush at
uncivil, and unvirtuous baseness, speak a good moral heart. And the spiritual
blush at ungospel, unchristian vileness, speaks a good, gracious heart: O my
God I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee my God, Ezra 9. 6. Ye
gracious Romans are now ashamed of your fruitless sins, Romans 6. 21. Mary
Magdalen an infamous sinner, but famous Saint, looked on her sins with tears
and shame, and in token of her blushing conscience, stood behind Christ as
ashamed, her once impure eyes should behold his sacred face, Luke 7. 38. Were
they ashamed, said God of the impudent Jews? Jer. 6. 15. They could not blush,
they wanted the color of grace. What disgrace is it to the grace of God, that
persons in grace, weak ones, God knows, are convinced of their sinful,
foolish, frothy, idle, yea sometimes eminently wicked language, of venomous
Serpents, lurking under the hidden leaves of filthy consciences, of ugly
monsters harbored in their bosoms, proud, vainglorious, envious, malicious,
adulterous, unrighteous, oppressive, Atheistical, profane, abominable
thoughts, every day flying up and down in their souls, like birds in the air,
and that this filthy, hellish vermin crawling up and down the precious soul,
should possess it with little or no shame in Gods presence. Here is an affront
indeed to Gods grace; no wonder if the sense hereof beget this terrible
Question in careless, and too too shameless Professors, Can I possibly have
grace with such an heart? Ah miserable wretch, I fear I have none; I see my
soul like a vessel wherein there is no pleasure, a stinking sepulcher, like a
miry sink, and though I know it, I cannot be ashamed before the Lord. Ah, to be
sinful and shameless too, that is double misery. Ah Christian, labor with
thine heart to power out thy sins with the sense of holy shame before the
Lord. The Sacrament of Circumcission taught the Lesson of holy shame. It cut
off the foreskin of the flesh, uncovered Pars illa corporis quae
circumcinditur, habet quendem similitudinem cordis, and est pudenda ob hanc
causam Deus nuderi eam jussit, ut nos admoneret, ne involutum ^ pectus
haberemus, id est ne quod pudendum facinus, intra conscientiae secreta velemus.
Lactant. lib. 4. c. 17.
the shameful part, to teach, as Lactantius thought, That the foreskin of the
flesh, the inward shame of corruption should be uncovered before the Lord. Ah
Christians, never leave upbraiding and rubbing your shameless hearts till you
made them blush: Reason away the whoores forehead from your consciences thus;
What I think, I should blush to say and do, before a child, before a godly,
before a wicked man: What do I make of God, the great God, the blessed God, the
infinitely pure, and holy God, the observing God, the remembering God, the
avenging God, the judging God? Shall I set up a child above God, a Saint above
God, a Son of Belial above God? Shall I run the hazard to hear of all my
closet, soul-wickednesse again before Angels and men? Can I endure the blush of
the great day, and the everlasting contempt of unrepented impudence? Will not
mine ears tingle to hear this dreadful charge? ^oe this is the man that
sometimes had a golden tongue, and a dirty one at other times, that blessed
God, and cursed with the same mouth: Lo this is the man that had an heavenly
tongue, and an hellish heart, no Temple for my Holiness, but a stable of filthy
lusts; that spa^ on my face while he sought my face; that came for mercy for
his sins, not against his sins; that either thought me a senseless stock, I
discerned not his shamelessness, or thought me a spirit, a living, eternal
spirit, but an impure one like himself, or a weak one that could not revenge my
dishonours, or an unjust one, that would not make my threatenings good. Such
thoughts as these, if we have any sense of a Divinity, any love to our own
souls, may make us ashamed for secret sins. As the Lord said to Moses of
Miriam, if her Father had spit on her face should she not be ashamed? Numb. 12.
14. So Christian I say to thee, if thine impure Lusts do spit on the face of
Gods grace, and his gospel, and vent their poison upon thine own soul, should
thou not be ashamed? Set the Apostles words home: It is a shame to speak of
those things which are done in secret, Ephesians. 5. 12. When thou reflectest on the
horrid wickedness that lies covered under the black Mantle of thy souls
secrecy, O then think it is a shame to think of them, and yet thou must think
of them and be ashamed. Never leave shaming thy soul, till holy shame for
secret sin committed, prevent and fortify the soul against commission. Shame
keeps us from doing many things in the street, in the Market; let shame keep
thee from thousands of inward sins, that shamelessness has brought forth and
nourished.

SECT. 9.
9. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace is insensiblenesse of 9
Insensibleness of others miseries is an evidence of abuse of grace.
others misery. Grace is life, and life is sensible, and sense apprehends its
dolorous objects. Grace has bowels of compassion: The gracious must put them
on, Col. 3. 12. It is a wonder to consider how boldly, that is called grace
that has no tender bowels. It Is selfish wantonness that feels no miseries but
at home. They were Zions wantons that lived at ease, and wallowed in sensual
pleasures, that were not grieved at the afflictions of Joseph. When men either
do, or may, and will not acquaint themselves with the miseries of others sins
and sorrows, and feel them no more than a stone does the wounds cries and pangs
of a dying man, care not though others sink or swim, may evils keep distance
from themselves; Call ye this grace? Does the God of grace, the God of pity
and compassions cast off his miserable people with such senslessness? Is not he
(to speak after Onera proximi levemus, ac portemus, ne gravemus.
the manner of men) afflicted in their affliction? Isa. 63. 9. Is it his
command, weep with them that weep? Romans 15. 15. Is it not the Law of Christ,
Bear ye one another burdens? Galat. 6. 2. increase not one another load? Was
it the practice of Christ, who when he saw Many and her kindred weeping for
dead Lazarus, wept also, not only to show his Humanity, but a President of his
holy Sympathy? Joh. 11. 33, Was it Paul's practice, Who is weak, and I am not
weak? who offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 29. What mean ye to weep, and
break my heart? Acts 21. 13. Implying his Converts tears would draw his. Does
the life of Nature abhor senslessnesse of misery? Is one living members pain
another torture? If the foot be pricked, the tongue cries out. Did you ever
hear such a stupidity and monstrous carriage in the body Natural? When the feet
are tormented with the Gout, the brains for pain are exceedingly afflictive,
does the tongue usually rejoice and sport, and the countenance laugh? This
monster of uncompassionatenesse and strangeness to bowels of Mercy is too
common among Christians. How little do professed Christians mourn and weep
under the burden of others sins, Wants of grace, absence of Christ, the fiery
darts of Satan, the wounds of corruption, the penury of creature comforts, the
sicknesses and diseases, vexations, imprisonments, crosses in relations, loads
of afflictions they labor under? Little or no feeling of others evils, is a
sad sign of little or no grace. It has grieved my heart, at what mine eyes
have seen, what mine ears have heard, that my wretched heart has no more
grieved. The God of pity make us more pitiful: Want of compassion is a great
blemish to Christian profession, and Disparagement to Gods grace.

SECT. 10.
10. EVidence of close abuse of Gods grace, is un-improvement 10 Un improvement
of grace received is an evidence of abuse of grace.
of grace received. Grace is a living new creature, and life has growth. A
painted child grows not, but a living does. A painted christian grows not,
a living does. The Imaginary Birth of the Spirit is like the Still-born in
nature. There are the delineaments and proportions of a child in face, hands,
etc. but no life of a child, and so no growth. Where there are the professions
and convictions of a Saint only, not the life of a Saint, there is no growth.
How do thou wrong the stock God has put into thine hand, when not improved?
Thy little increase, I will not say speaks thee no Christian, it does a Dwarf
in Christianity. There is some great fault in nature, that living Dwarfs grow
not: Surely there is some great fault in profession, that Christian Dwarfs grow
not as others do; Gods Talents are not to be hidden in a Napkin: He looks to
Dominus suae pecuniae quaerit usuram, ut intelligamus, dominum donrra^ suorum
exercitationem postulare, and bonarum actionum tributum ex iis exigere. Ambr.
receive his own with Usury, Luke 19. 20. It was the fault God charged upon
Sardis, The practice and profession of godliness in sundry of her members was
ready to die, Rev. 3. 2. A Christian is a Tradesman, his dealing lies in
heavenly commodities. God intrusts some with a large stock of Knowledge, and
Memory, heavenly Instructions of the Word, and Motions of the Spirit, Visions
of his Love. Where he gives, he expects much, and takes it ill, his rich
Merchants in a fair estate should trifle an^ peddle, and bring him in a smaller
Revenue of glory, than meanly gifted, but more faithful Trustees of his
Goodness. Cum augentur dona, rations etiam crescunt donorum. Greg. Mag.
Will not Merchants blame their Factors, if neglecting their gaining
opportunities, their Estate increase not? How may the Lord blame the professed
Factors for his name in the world, if they prove negligent in heavenly
proficiencies?

SECT. 11.
11. 11 Pride and desire of pre-eminence is an evidence of the abuse of grace.
EVidence of close abuse of Gods grace, is Pride, and desire of Pre-eminence.
Outward and inward Riches both puff up. Charge the rich of the world they be
not high minded, 1 Timothy 6. 19. Be not high minded, Romans 11. 20. It is the
Apostles Dehortation and Caution of the Gentiles excelling the Jews in means of
grace. It was the Corinthians carnal wantonness, their parts were abused to
puffing up and vainglory, 1 Cor. 4. 6. 7. The Apostle reproved their windy
puffing humor, 1 Cor. 5. 2. Precedencie in gifts puffed up one against
another. Gravissima ironia. Dicks.
This vanity of swelling pre-eminence the Apostle derided: Ye are full and
reign as Kings, 1 Cor. 4. 8. Your common Indowments have made you happy. How
poisonous is our nature, that envenoms the best things? How does it turn
shining Excellencies in gifts and graces into prevailing Temptations, to scisme
and contempt of inferior endowments, yea to darken the glory of God in a
lesser Star, because a greater out-shines it? It is the mischief of spiritual
Pride, it either over-magnifies, or vilifies Gods gifts. It idolizeth one, and
debaseth another, is an unjust Judge of Gods gifts. It says one Christian has
more than he has, another less than he has. Yea this evil comes of it, that
the bestower of different gifts and graces is abused; Whosoever mocketh the poor
reproacheth his Maker, Prove. 17. 5. He that reproacheth the poor Christian in
gifts and graces, reproacheth his maker, such a one he is a poor Preacher,
(though an holy sound one) will you hear him? such a one prays poorly, has
poor lean brains, a silly soul (though a precious Saint) and so is slighted, a
no body, a common Abuse of God and grace, and gracious spirits, discovered by
high-flown Christians, whose fancy runs before their judgment. The abasing of
some of lo^er stature than others, is an Interpretative abuse of God. The Lord
rejoices in all his works, Psalm. 104. 31. They are all in wisdom, Psalm. 9. 1.
He sees they are very good, as they come out of his pure creating hands, Genesis
1. 31. And he has a sweet delightful complacencie in them all. But cursed
spiritual Pride is all for superlatives and singularities, rejoices and
triumphs in the Arrogantia honoris pedissequa. Salvian.
chiefest works of the Spirit. Take heed, if when God honors thee above
others, Pride turn not his glory into shame. Arrogance, says one, is the
Lacquey of Honor, but Humility the Preservative. Have thou Eminence, suspect
and tremble at Self-conceit. In opere misericordiae facit cordis superbiam
pullulare. Fulgent. ad Probam. Ep. 3.
Satan knows how to make Pride of heart grow out of works of Mercy, words of
Piety, tears of Humility. This stinking weed grows out of the best soil. It Is
good to prick this bladder, by these thoughts, God resists the proud, Jam. 4.
6. Sets himself against them, like a fierce mighty enemy in battle array. He
scatters the proud in the imagination of their hearts, Luke 1. 51. Wherein they
deal proudly he is above them, Exodus 14. 11, They are an abomination to him,
Prove. 16. 5. Are in the high road to destruction, Prove. 16. 18. I have heard it
was the confession of a proud Professor (yet to seeming a peereless meek one)
of a very haughty spirit, that the Lord suffered him to fall into woeful
scandal, to the reproach of his name, and the Gospel to punish his Pride. God
gives grace to the Humble. In Christ there was a Fullness of Grace, and
Eminence of Humility. This rare shining grace, is the Ornament, and will be
the Improvement of Grace.

SECT. 12.
12. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace, is declining Hardship 12. Declining
hardship in the practice of Religion is an abuse of grace. (...), to make it
black and blew.
in the practice of Religion. Christianity is a Warfare, Christ the Captain of
Salvation. Every true Christian is a Soldier by profession, 2 Timothy 2. 3. The
spiritual as well as the civil Soldier must endure Hardship. Paul a great
Leader in this heavenly War, was a man of sufferings, *beat down his body, 1
Cor. 9. 27. did bear in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. 17. Grace
inables to endure hardship. It Is the effeminate wantonness of corrupt nature,
if in Christian profession it can have beds of Down, full Tables, glorious
Apparel, sweet Pleasures, to swim in securities from pain and losses, Christ is
allowed; but when the Doctrine of the Cross, and owning the hated truths of the
Gospel, brings persecution, affliction, call for Mortification, the subtle
self-preserving Old man, can make a politic retreat out of dirty Lanes into
the flowery Meadows, and leave the hardship of flesh-curbing, self-denying, and
pleasure-renouncing, holy discipline for worldly gain and delights. We can
think and talk of the grace of ^^, but where is its stout masculine virtue to
be found among us? It is with much ado and great regreat, to suffer the
exercises of Religion to injure us, to Master the sensitive appetite, in
Fasting, Watching, Cold, Hunger. The Reason and Practice of Philosophy has
more kept under the senses delights and demands, and governed Ad fugiendas
molestias in geniosa caro Marlorat.
passions, than the grace of Christianity in many delicate Gospellers. How
highly dishonorable is this to Gods grace, that it should do less than Moral
reason? The sad difference lies not in the eminence of Reason, and impotence of
Grace, but the wantonness of those persons, that weakens its power; oppose its
counsels and commands, and disgrace its glory. The wisdom of the flesh is
over-ingenuous to decline trouble, and at every trial of enduring hardness, in
the ways of godlyness, says, spare thy self, consult thine ease: This severe
rigor is more than needs.

SECT. 13.
13. EVidence of close Abuse of Gods grace, is neglect of daily Neglect of
daily repentance is an evidence of abuse of grace.
Repentance. The best of men renew sin every day, and sin renewed, guilt
renews, and the daily renewing of guilt should necessitate a sense of daily
pardon and repentance. But as Jezabel repented not when she had space of
repentance, so too many careless Christians that daily sin, omit their daily
serious repentance. When sensualities have had too much indulgence, unmortified
lusts their provisions, headstrong, blind passions their reins and violent
careers, when the Spirit in rellishing creature sweetnesses, has been out of
taste of heavenly things, when close wickedness has been acted, when sad
estrangements from God, cold barren formalities, have been the bane of holy
duties, many indecencies, impieties, and ingratitudes, call for rent hearts,
broken spirits, sorrowful confessions, loathing detestatious^ and weeping eyes,
how has the daily discipline of repentance even by them that have the seed of
repentance sown in Habeto codicem conscietiam suam, and scribe quotidiana
peccata, antequam veniat somnus, reminiscere peccata tua. Siquid boni fecisti,
gratias age; siquid mali, de caetero ne facias, judicium facito tibimetipsi,
terribile. Chrysostom.
their hearts, been carelessly neglected? This sadly comes to pass through the
want of daily registring our sin in the book of conscience, and reading them
over before we sleep; a sorrowful sense of them, suing out a pardon,
self-displasens^e and abhorrence, and earnest begging power to repent. It Is
good counsel Chrysostom gives. Say, O soul, we have spent the day, what good
is done, what evil is committed: what good soever thou have done, give God the
praise: whatsoever evil, do so no more. Pass a terrible judgment on thy self.
Too many days have passed over Christians of strict profession, without
observing, bewailing, repenting of their sins. The Sun has often gone down
upon much wrath, worldlyness, hypocrisy: the body has had its rest before the
soul its cure of daily sins. It was Paul's holy jealous^e of his over-loose
Corinthians, I fear, said he, lest when I come, my God will humble me among
you, and shall bewall many that have not repented of their lasciviousness, 2
Cor. 12. 21. This godly suspicion is very needful for the best of men, lest
those daily sins, carnal Libertinism betrays them to, should lie upon them
unpardoned, and unrepented of. Happy are they whose tender, enlightened,
watchful spirits, are a constant day-book to note down and read the disorders
of the heart, tongue, and life, in Parum est semel putasse, saepe putandu^ est,
imo semper quod putari o-^ porteat, si non dissimulas. invenis, Bern.
sad convincing characters, and by the hand of Faith take the blood of
sprinkling, as a sponge to blot them out, and resent them with daily hatred,
confession, and godly sorrow, working repentance. It is otherwise with wanton
lusts in the best hearts than with rank luxuriant Vines. These need not
always to be pruned, those need not only frequent, but constant prunings of
Mortifying grace. Often reckoning we say makes long friends. Repentance the
more frequent, the more easy and effectual, will at once be the peace and
comfort of the Spirit, prevent much carnal wantonness, show the power of
grace, and fit us to live and dye.

CHAP. XII. Containing an use of Caution.
THE Symptoms of this too common spiritual disease for caution.
depraving the Grace of God being laid down, both in the gross and close
(...) discerning indications thereof, it will next be needful to lay down some
cautions, touching the gross Abuse of Gods Grace, concerning the close
wronging of it, and touching the differences between the injuring of Gods
Grace, in a Regenerate and Unregenerate person, though this sin be in all, it
is not alike in every one: This sin is in the present fruits of it more
heinous, and in the event more perilous to some then others. The next use then
will be the fourth in order, Caution, 1. To them who grossly. 2. To them who
clofely Abuse Gods Grace.

1. To them who are gross abusers of Gods Grace, let them hearken to four
things.

SECT. 1.
BEware that you put not off the trial of turning the Grace of, Beware thou
put not off the trial of turning the grace of God into wantonness.
God into Wantonness, too many are hardened in their apparent indignities to
the Grace of God, by delaying the trial, as diseased persons put off inquiry
into their mortal diseases, and careless Stewards their loose carriages,
their unfaithful squandring away their Lords goods, spend-thrift Tradesmen the
cracle Estates, yet though the open, loose, doctrinall, and practical enemies
of Gods Grace never try themselves whether they have evidently turned the
Gospel Antidotes into poison, and in open hostility opposed that Grace they
seemed to own, yet God tryes them every moment: possibly, Reader, thou art the
gross profaner of Gods Grace, if thou can hardly be persuaded, thou art such
a notorious Libertine as indeed thou art, I beseech thee take some pains with
thine own precious soul, that this dreadful stain and guilt may be purged and
pardoned. O that I could on my knees, passionately beg it at the Throne of
Grace, that thou would see the foul ugly countenance of thy notorious loose
heart and life, in the large glass set before thee. I beseech thee in the name
of the Lord Jesus, for Gods sake, whose Grace thou have depraved, for Christ's
sake, who so dearly bought Grace thou have despised, for the Spirits sake,
whose gracious motions thou have resisted, for the Gospel sake, whose gracious
Call thou have refused, for thy Souls sake, which will infallibly be damned,
if thou do not repent of thy most evident Abuse of Grace. Study the eleven
Sections of the tenth Chapter of this Treatise, read them not over slightly,
mingle them, fortify them with Faith, that they are real Truths, never leave
questioning thy Soul, Thus, Soul! Art not thou guilty? is not this charge
drawn up against thee? O thou art guilty, thou art guilty, Art thou cast in the
Court of Conscience for a wicked wanton Libertine? Then further I entreat thee,
never leave the sad thoughts of thy woeful estate, till they work on thee fear
and trembling, and then further awaken thy secure heart with these sad, what
iff's? What if thou should die suddenly? What if thou should shortly be
forced into the presence of thine angry Judge, whose Grace thou have many
thousand times desperately abused? What if now I resist the movings of the
Spirit of Grace, and he never stir up a thought of Repentance in me more? What
if in the other World the avenging remembrance of my wanton sportings in sin
and mocking my plain dealing instructers, more torment my wounded conscience,
than all the Tortures of Tyrants have tender bodies? What if God laugh at my
destruction who have laughed at the Counsels of Reformation? Then go further,
and thus upbraid thy self, saying, O monster of men and Women! O wonder the
Earth has not swallowed me up quick, as weary of such a burden! O marvel
that I am not in Hell! O fool! O wretch! O beast! O mad one! worse then a
Devil! He never had the time nor offer of Grace, The grace of God teaches to
deny ungodliness: I have an Atheistical heart, and have led an ungoldly life;
the grace of God teaches to deny worldly lus^s, and I have made provisions for
them and pampered them; the Grace of God teaches to live godly, but I have
been so far from leading a godly life, that I have not only hated the power,
but the form of godliness in my family, The grace of God teaches to live
righteously, but I am guilty of unrighteous dealings, with my neighbors name
and estate, The grace of God teaches to live soberly, but I have been a wanton
intemperate Glutton and Drunkard, and an unclean incontinent person, if these
thoughts, and such as these O loose Reader, shall put in thee resolves in the
strength of Christ to repent of the worst of pardonable sins, the g^osse Abuse
of Grace, if they shall bring thee on thy knees, if thou shall cry mightily to
God, to repent to give thee a better heart, to honor that Grace of God and
Jesus Christ which alone must save thee, if ever thou be saved, when thou shall
lie on thy Death Bed, thou will never repent of following this Counsel, delay
not to search, try and amend thy loose heart and life, lest thy Libertinisme
prove thine everlasting ruin.

SECT. 2.
2. TAke heed of denying the proof of gross afronts to Gods Take heed of
denying the proof of gross affronts to Gods grace.
grace, such as have been named, herein the guilty plead innocent, though they
oppose Gospel merits and mercies, to calling upon God, they will say they
though they do not, though the Grace they pray for be never received into their
hearts, nor is seen in their lives, yet think they, yea they affirm the
contrary, though they shroud unrighteous and oppressive courses, under the
Grace of God, they will not own the charge, though Lord have mercy on me, and
God give me his Grace, be thought daily satisfaction for daily reigning sins
in their account, yet this will not be be believed, and so other symptoms of
palpable wrong to Gods grace, are rarely credited. This wickedness was among
the Jews, though the manifest tokens of impiety and cruelty were upon them
they denied it, the Prophet was put to it to convince their injuries to Gods
grace, in abusing the Prophets their soul Physicians, by ocular
demonstrations, Si fur deprehensus fuerit, non poterit negare neque occultare
sce. lus suum. Calv. Judaei respersi sanguine usque ad extremas parts vestium,
crimen vestrum plus quam notum est, non E. tantum rebels fuistis doctrinae
meae, sed crudeliter prophetas meos occidistis, Calv. in loc.
the Thief is ashamed when he is found, so the Jews were taken in the open
acts of wickedness, Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the
poor Innocents, Jer. 2. 26. As innocent Blood on the outside of the Murderers
garments, demonstrates cruelty; so their open butchering of the Prophets, and
yet thou say, I am innocent, v. 35. Again, How can thou say, I am not
polluted, I have not gone after Baalim, Jer. 2. 23. Thus the open enemies of
Gods grace, that will not be persuaded, though they be persuaded they are
guilty, are impudent denyers of their wickedness, as Thieves and Murderers
deprehended in the Fact, like Frantic men in a Feavor, that talk idly, rage,
have sk^lding flesh, spirits inflamed, cannot sleep, and yet say they are well;
like men that have the Plague sores in their faces and hands too, very visible,
yet deny the infection: Take heed of denying the palpable symptoms of wronging
Gods grace: This mischief comes on it. As the mortally diseased, that denies
his danger, will not seek out for, nor welcome the Physician, so nor these be
capable of healing grace.

SECT. 3.
3. SEe to it that you slight not the conviction: It is a small 3. Slight not
the conviction.
matter to offer open injury to Gods grace? Is it a light matter to have the
fearful marks of the spiritual and eternal death, without sound repentance? Is
it the manner of condemned persons slight the convictions of death? Wantons
before it, are serious spirit-smitten, and wounded after it. When Physicians
tell their Patients they are dead in their disease, if such and such means be
not used and blessed; Are not men usually deeply affected with such sad news? O
sinner, thou have the gross Characters of abusing grace upon thee! Thou have
the visible marks of death upon thee! The Lord affect thine heart with thy
condition, that thou may see it, be converted, and repent.

SECT. 4.
4. REfuse not to put sad and serious questions to thy soul, 4. Refuse not to
put sad and serious Questions to thy soul.
these eight especially.

1. Question. Shall I make a mock of God and Christ? This I do, If I profess
my self a friend of Grace, and kick against it, and say, Hail Master, to Christ
the Author of Grace, and betray the honor and power of Grace. I am one of
those mockers the Apostle Peter and Jude prophesied of, May not God mock at my
destruction, surely he scorns the scorner, Prove. 3. 24.

2. Question. Shall I be the worst of enemies? David charged his pretended
friends, with higher guilt then his open enemies, Psalm 55. 14. Christ will not
bear it, that his name should be wounded in the House of his friends. The Duke
of Florence said, he read, He was to forgive his enemies, not his friends.
Turks, Infidels, are not such deeply guilty enemies against Jesus Christ, as
profane Christians, that openly abuse his Gospel Grace, and Baptismal-mercy.
Such friends, without deep Humiliation and Repentance, Christ will not forgive.
When Judas profanely ushered in his open Treason against his professed Lord,
with an Hail Master, and a kiss, Matthew. 26. 49. Christ's immediate word was
(Friend) And Jesus said unto him, Friend, Wherefore art thou come? v. 5 c. As
if he had said, I am betrayed by a professed Friend; A term of Exprobration
and just Condemnation. Christ forgave not this false Friend: He dyed
impenitently in the abuse of his grace, and had not Faith to believe his
betrayed innocent blood should heal the Traitor.

3. Question. Shall I have the heaviest wrath in Hell? Capernaum, Bethsaida's
high abuse of Grace, should have more intolerable vengeance, then Sodoms
wantonness against nature, Mat. 10. 15. The least of Hell will be intolerable.
If I perish under gross abuse of Grace, the Oven of Eternal fiery Wrath will
be heated seven times hotter for me, then for Heathens: Ah soul-hater, and
self-destroyer! Shall I cast my self into hottest eternal flames?

4. Question. Shall my mouth be stopped in the accounting-day? Can these thoughts
be born without Spirit-woundings, when enlightened conscience shall say, I
wanted not offered convincing means, of the necessity, beauty, advantage of
Grace: I hated the life of garce, and consumed the time of grace, in playing
the wanton, not working by the light of grace: All under means of grace, are
invited to the Gospel Wedding-feast of the Son of God, and to come in fitting
Wedding-cloaths, that the Feast-maker and the Feast be not disparaged. Every
guest pretends to come handsome, in sitting Ornaments; but the abusive guest
that is found without his Wedding Garment, will be speechless, Ista vestis
nuptialis quasi Bicolor, rubra sanguine, Alba sanctitate.
Matthew. 22. 12, 15. This Wedding Garment is party-colored, red, and white;
Red, in the Blood of the Lamb; White, in the sanctifying grace of the Spirit.

5. Question. Shall I be kicking against the Bowels of mercy? (...), At ille
Capistratus, Piscator.
It was a sad charge, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me, Isa. 1. 2. Is there nothing for wanton feet to spurn at,
but a Fathers Bowels? Do you say, Our Father which art in Heaven? and when ever
you say so, profess God your Father, and spit in his loving face, (...). What
thou my Son, Caesar's Son, st^b him in the Senate? Shall Gods Sons, in large
profession, stab his name, and cause him to be reproached in the world, by
gross abuse of his grace?

6. Question. Shall I make sport and triumph for Devils? It was David's grief,
by Saul and Jonathans death, the uncircumcised Philistines would rejoice and
triumph, 2 Samuel 1. 20. The uncircumcised, infernal Philistines, rejoice and
triumph at the wrongs of grace. David's enemies watched for, and were glad at
heart, at his halting, Psalm. 38. 16, 17. His welfare was their grief, his
falls their Songs: These invisible enemies of Mankind, triumph, when any that
own the Christian name, and the grace of the Gospel, grossly profane both.

7. Question. Shall I tread under foot the Son of God? Heb. 10. 29. Strong,
thriving, wanton lusts, are the impure feet, that tread under foot the Son of
God, in his humbling Incarnation, who came into the world, to destroy the works
of the Devil, in his bitter Passion; who died as a Ransom, to redeem from the
reign of his Sin, in his Sovereign Dominion; who is a ruling Lord over all he
saves: The gross abuse of his Grace, plainly, what in it lies, declares that
he was Man in vain, died in vain, and that he is but a Precarious titular Lord
and King.

8. Question. How shall I look the Judge in the face? The time is coming, when
he shall appear in terrible flames of Wrath: How dreadfully will he judge, when
the precious ends wherefore in his Fathers Counsel, and his own Covenant, he
was judged to death, are not obtained, but abused? If David commenced a War
against Hanun, the King of the Ammonites, because he abused the Message and
Messengers of kindness, sent in Embassage to comfort him; who instead of
loving entertainment, were shaved, had their Garments cut off in the midst,
shamefully and ungratefully dismissed, 1 Chronicles. 19. 4. What a dreadful and
eternal War will the Lord Jesus commence against those Hanunites, unworthy the
name Christian, who abuse the Messages and Messengers of Gospel-kindnesse and
grace, to open, profane licentiousness?

Lay all these Queries to heart, and let them stick on, O grossly loose Reader!
till they have produced Fears, Astonishments, Prayers for Amendment, and
Resolutions, by the help of Gods grace, not to live a notorious Libertine for
the future, against the call and honor of Grace.

SECT. 5.
2. Use of Caution, is concerning the close wronging of Gods 5. Second part of
the use against close wronging of grace.
grace.

1. Take heed of wresting Gospel Grace, to the allowance of the least sin: Holy
Paul durst not do it in his own person. The grace of God was abundant in him
through Faith and Love, 1 Timothy 1. 14. and though through the power of this
grace, he was no absolute Perfectist, yet an universal Enemy of sin, the root
and branches of it, least and greatest had his disallowance and abhorrence,
Romans 7. 15. David too, that had a large share in Gods grace, his sweet
experience, Thou art my Portion, O Lord, Psalm. 119. 57. Thou have dealt well
with thy servant, according to thy word, 65. was so devoted to the fear of God,
38. as this produced an hatred of vain thoughts, 113. and every false way, 128.
and therefore hid Gods Word in his heart, that he might not in the least
willingly sin against him: The choice subject of saving grace may not continue
in the least sin, because grace abounds: When Believers find inward persuasion
in their spirits, to adventure on little sins, on vain thoughts, small
inordination in Creature-desires and affections, yielding to dullness and
deadness in Holy Duties, pride of Apparel, self-lifting thoughts of spiritual
Precedence: This persuasion comes not of him that calls them, Gal. 5. 8. The
grace of God does neither father nor nurse the least sin, but commands and
inables to be holy in all manner of conversation.

SECT. 6.
2. BEware of judging wantonness against Grace, by a false 6. Beware of judging
wantonness against grace, by afalse rule.
rule: The example of the best, Others good Opinion, The judgment of thine own
heart, are not true Rules to judge abuse of Gods grace by.

1. Not the example of the best: Though the Apostle bad the Philipians be
followers of him and them that traced the Apostles steps, Phil. 3. 17. yet
elsewhere he limits his counsel, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, 1
Cor. 11. 1. They are both joined, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Ye became followers of us, and
of the Lord; of us, as we followed the Lord: The Lord is sub-joyned to correct
the easy and common error of following the best of men; sometimes in
Doctrinal, sometimes in practical Error. Even Paul, the brightest Star in the
Churches Firmament, had his Eclipse: He is not to be followed in all things;
though the wariest goer, he stepped awry: He that wrote in his Epistles against
bitterness of spirit, yet in the difference between him and Barnabas,
discovered therein some distemper: Barnabas would have had Mark go with Paul to
visit the Brethren in every City, where they had Preached the Word, but Paul
refused his Company, and the contention was sharp between them, Acts 15. 39.
there was a Paroxism, a bitter fit between them. These golden Cisterns, Paul
and Barnabas, that were wont to send out sweet Waters, now sent out bitter:
Barnabas, a Son of Consolation, was in too hot contention; Paul, a man of
meekness, sweetness, gentleness, whose tongue usually dropped as the
Honeycomb, now breathed gall. Follow the eminentest of Saints in some things,
you will wrong the grace of God: It Is one of Satan's persuasive wiles: Do you
not see such choice servants of God speak and do such things, use such Fashions
and worldly delights? No danger in this and that Dish, they are your Tasters:
If the Gestures, words and actions of the best, be well weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary, they will sometimes be found too light, too wanton: So the
Thessalonians were examples to all the Believers in Macedonia and Achaia, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. not in everything, but in their successful sound of the
Gospel-Trumpet, ver. 8. and in their eminent reforming-faith, turning them from
Idols unto God; but examine some of these Converts in other things, and they
were to be declined, not followed: We hear there are some, that walk among you
disorderly, working not (...). Desid^^^ pro sactitate venditant. Marlo.
Verisimile est hoc fucorum genus quodda^ fuisse otios^ monachatus, semen, Marl.
Vt hin c consolemar, non ut vitiis nostris patrocinemur.
at all, but are busybodies, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. Workers round about (as the word
imports) the round of whose life was to carry tales, discontented at their
condition, living on others Purses, casting off industry in their particular
Calling, accounting their idleness holiness; and under pretense of the
Gospel, (like the late upstart Sect) and obedience to the spirit, living
lazily: Now did Satan lay the seed of idle Monasteries, under color of
heavenly conversation, laying by earthly Callings and Relations: The best of
men are no Adaequate rule of life: Their fairest Copies have some blurs: Their
face of conversation, like the Moons, has some sports: Their infirmities are
to comfort the disconsolate in their falls, not to Patronize the least
presumption.

2. Not others good opinion: The most acute Christian cannot look into thy
heart, and see all the wanton pranks there, that prove hidden Libertinism: Thou
may have a serious, accurate outside, and a loose inside; be like some
Houses, fair without, but sluttish within: After they that see thee, judge thee
exact, thou have no reason to rest in their charity, when thy conscience either
does, or may tell thee, thou have a filthy heart: Besides, beholders of thee
may be unfaithful, and to please thee, displease God; see wantonness in thee,
and either bury it in silence, or cover it with flattery, and belly their
opinion of thee; praise thee strict, when they know thee loose, and be a false
glass to represent thine outward ill behavior, either through cowardice or
advantage: Others good opinion, is no true rule to judge of wantonness in the
matters of grace.

3. Not the judgment of thine own heart: It is deceitful, and not more
dangerous then foolish, to rest in it: What wise man will trust in a common
infamous Knave? The old man, in the best of men, is a Wanton and Impostor: It
will call wickedness, Saint-ship; loosnesse, strictness; deformity, beauty;
confusion, order; distemper, health; the flesh, the spirit; delusions of Satan,
the impulses of the holy Spirit: It Is easy and frequent, to misconster loose
passion, zeal, and self-glory, for Gods glory: In judging the abuses of Gods
grace, lean not to thine own understanding, measure all by the golden line of
the Sanctuary.

SECT. 7.
3. AFter the sweetest taste of Gods grace, fear the danger of 7. Beware of
security.
wantonness: Beware of security, after inward Tranquillity. After Aaron and the
Israelites had pleased and filled themselves, at their Idolatrous Feast, they
played the Wantons, They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exodus
12. 6. It is too sad experience, after the Israel of God have pleased and
refreshed themselves in Gospel-feasts, they play the Wantons, betray their
nakedness, intemperately frolic about the Creatures, leap over Gospel-hedges,
are irregular in lawful things, yea sometimes adventure on unlawful, and all
Cum Privilegio, under the favorable allowance of sweet grace: Thus the
Corinthians promoted in Temporals and Spirituals, rich in goods, gifts, and
conceited graces; when full, and reigning as Kings, played the Wantons in
haughty puffings, in vainglorious boastings, in crying up some, in decrying
others, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, Are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 4. v. 6, 7,
18, 19. 1 Cor. 3, 3, 4. I shall not cast such dirt on the fair face of grace,
nor so asperse the Generation of the Righteous, as to say, or stain my soul
with such a thought, that the abuse of grace, is the lesson Grace teaches:
It Is denying, not fulfilling worldly Lusts which grace teaches: Libertinism is
a Bastard Issue, laid at the door of Grace, which it neither can, nor will
father. The Generation of the righteous, as such, shut the doors unto, but open
not to wanton enticements: Loosnesse from Gospel-Principles, and against them,
is the fruit of the flesh, nor the spirit.

SECT. 8.
4. BE not content with a slight humiliation, for close abuse 8. Be not content
with a slight humiliation for close abuse of Gods grace.
When Moses told the Israelites of their murmuring against God, despising
Canaans pleasant Land, and wanton whoredoms, Numb. 14. 27, 31, 33. They
mourned greatly, 39. In the sense of Gods wrath, so christian, when thou
read over the forementioned symptoms, of less discerned, though abominable
wrongs of Gods grace, mourn greatly for them. If the Apostle Paul, that could
not openly be charged with common abusing grace, that felt the inward ordinary
power of it in his soul, that found in sweet experience the grace of God was
not in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 10. that exercised a conscience void of offense to God
and man, yet in passionate exclamation, cried out, O wretched man, for the
remains of sin, which the glorious Non leviter and frigide fed ^nagno cum
sensu, Peter
grace of God kept under, and still abated, what cause, O believers, have you
not in light transient touches of grief, but abiding sorrows, to bewail the
close indignities you have put upon the grace of god.

CHAP. XIII. Showing the Difference between wronging the Grace of God in the
regenerate and unregenerate.
CAution is touching the difference between the Cant. 3. Touching the
difference between the wronging of Gods Grace in the Regenerate and unregenerate
wronging of Gods grace in the regenerate and unregenerate think not that the
spot of Godschildren and the Devils is alike, as the same disease is in
several persons, b^^ not in the same manner, degree, and event, so the same
sin, Abuse of Grace, is exceedingly divertified in gracious and ungodly
persons: the difference lies in five things.

SECT. 1.
1. DIfference, The Abuse of Gods Grace in a child of God 1. Sect. The abuse of
Gods grace in a child of God is from the regenerate part.
is only from the unregenerate part, that is kept under by the prevailing
dominion of grace, so that though the corrupt part make sudden, frequent, and
sad captivating, spoiling invasions, as a Tyrant, yet it reigns not as a King.
Indeed carnal Lust in a gracious Soul, with vehement hostility and fury does
set upon the law of God and the pious will, in which respect the (...)
Apostle gives it two titles, calling its Tyranicall Government a Rebelling
and captivating Law, Romans 7. 23. Whereby its fierce rage and hot assaults are
expressed, yet in the same soul dwells as well a King as a Tyrant; and as a
Puissant King, often beats down, and at length quite ruins the forces of a
Tyrant, so does the sweet and mighty government of grace, keep under, weaken,
and in conclusion quite destroy the Tyranny of Corruption. The Denomination
follows the better part, Ye are under Grace, Romans 6. 14. It Is spoken of the
holy Romans, who yet had the onsets and relics of sin, because the Abuse of
grace is not the offspring of grace but sin, the humble christian injurious to
Gods grace, may say with the Apostle, Not I, but sin that dwells in me, Asserit
se non id facere quod non totus id saciat. Pius quantu^vis labitur tamen ex
animo legem Dei non violat. Pet. Mart. Securitas in gradibusexcellentibus est
impiorum: In gradibus remistis timoris dei quaedam remissio cadit in fillios
Dei. Sancti concupiscentur, vim experiuntur, carnates vero pe^ illam tot^
rotantur. Sub Satana principatu totum naturam occupat coruptio. Calv.
Romans 7. 17. Paul said, not he, because not wholly he, said one, we may say not
chief he, as he was gracious, and grace was commander in chief, he sinned not
so against God, but as corruption was in him like a lurking secret, traitor in
a garrison. But the Abuse of grace in a child of the Devil, is from total
unregeneracy, the full Reign of corruption grace, has no part in him to enter
a Protest, and to oppose the wrongs of grace, the whole man freely and fully
resignes up the keys to loose wanton lusts, the agreement is full like a
Kingdoms, where the King and Subjects are all of a mind, the wholly carnal
yield their Members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, Romans 6. 19. Yea
their hearts, They set their heart on their iniquity, Hos. 4. 8. Their heart is
fully set to do evil, Eccles. 8. 12. Full of evil, Eccl. 9. 7. Why has Satan
filled thy heart? Act. 5. 3. The whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19.
It is in spiritual as in corporal diseases: One man's sickness is from the
blood in part corrupt, when the main mass is pure, another sickness is from
the blood wholly corrupt, when the whole Mass is infected. A child of God has
this disease of wronging grace from a corrupt part, when the main is sound,
achild of the Devil wrongs grace, wholly corrupt heart, when the whole Mass is
defiled.

SECT. 2.
2. DIfference. A gracious man abuses grace, and is deeply 2 Though a gracious
man abuse grace, yet he is deeply humbled for it.
humbled for it. David, Hezekiah, Peter abused it, and it cost them bitter
mourning and tears. A graceless person wrongs grace, and is hardened in it,
grieves not for it, Jer. 5. 3. It troubles him not, though he sin freely and
fully upon the score of grace. It is in this case as it is with two children;
one is a towardly melting child, that has wronged his dear Parents, and being
convinced of it, thus cries out; O wretch that I was, what have I done? I have
abused my dear Father, that has cared for me, maintained me, brought me me up,
instructed me with tears. Ah vile creature! I wronged my Mother, my dear Mother
that bare me, that traveled in pains for me, that mourned over me, that had
bowels yearning on me, that thought nothing too much for me. Another child,
cross, stubborn, careless, wrongs his Parents, knowsit, but without a sigh, a
tear, never lays it to heart. So it is with a soft-hearted, melting spirited
child of God, he looks over all the Indignities and Indecencies against his
dear Lord, with a laden heart and weeping eyes: But a rocky, Adamantine child
of the Devil loads the Lord with daily abuses, and mournes not under it.

SECT. 3.
3. DIfference. A servant of God that wrongs grace, watches 3 A child of God
watches over his heart.
his heart, Luke 11. 37. is the happy one that is found watching, he has his
eyes in his head to see the like dangers, Eccles. 2. 14. and prevent them. But
a servant of sin abuses grace, and his reigning lusts may do it as often as
they please, he notes it not, nor cares to do it. Sleep not as do others, but
watch and be sober, 1 These. 5. 6. Strongly implying the servants Inebriantur
omnis generis concupiscenti is and in peceatis suis absoporantur. Muscul.
of sin are wantons, but like men in a deep sleep watch it not. The
difference is here as in two servants; The one over saucy, and loose has
abused his loving Master, sees his error, watches over his heart, lest he do
so again; the other disrespectfull, and stubbornly wilful, has once and again
wronged his goodness, and watches not his heart and temptations, but carelessly
perseveres in abuses. Such is the disagreement between a servant of God and
sin, in the injury of grace.

SECT. 4.
4. DIfference. A Regenerate man abuses the grace of God, and does it less
and less. He finds power from grace to 4 A Regenerate man abuses grace less
and less. Manton on James
honor grace, more than formerly. The spirit lusts to envy, but he gives
more grace, Jam. 4. 6. So that the renewed Christian is not carried by the old
envious spirit that dwells in him, but by a more gracious spirit given unto him.
The old affronts to grace pass away, and new respects and subjections to it
are afforded, 2 Cor. 5.

When a real convert by, and to the grace of God, has seen what dishonours he
has put upon grace, then he says it is sufficient (yea too much) that I have
walked in wantonness, lusts, excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. I dare do so no
more. Take this as a sure evidence of the truth of grace. He that is convinced
of abusing it, will get power over it, and be less in it. But now an
unregenerate man abuses the grace of God, and does it more and more. He that
is unjust and filthy will be so still, Rev. 22. 11. ye will revolt more and
more, Isa. 1. 5. Evil men under the Abuse of grace will wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. and under the form of godlyness increase the power of wickedness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. continue in sin because grace abounds, Romans 6. 1. It is here also
as it is with two men that abuse their friends. One does it, and sees the
ungrateful disingenuitie of it, and mends the fault; another does it, and loads
his dear friend with more disgraceful insolences. So a gracious man wrongs his
best friend Jesus Christ, and says of his abuses, as Ephraim of his Idols,
what have I to do any more with them? A graceless Professor wrongs the Lord
Jesus, his owned friend, and multiplyes still ungrateful injuries.

SECT. 5.
5. DIfference. A real Christian wrongs Gods grace, and as 5 A Regenerate
repents, and is pardoned.
it is repented of, so it is pardoned. This iniquity proves not his ruin. There
is pardoning grace for the abuses of pardoning grace. The blood of Christ
washes away believers wanton abuses of the blood of Christ. Gospel grace, like
the Sun, blots out the thin and thick clouds of sin. A pretended Christian
wrongs Gods grace, and as he has no repentance, so no pardon. He is not
cleansed by the blood of sprinkling, that has been without ceasing and
remorse, abused by a profane wanton heart and loose life. The contrary events
of Abusing Gods grace, are like the different issue of two Subjects abusing
their King: The one does it, is humbled for it, accepted, and pardoned; the
other does it, is hardened, rejected and hanged. Be veiled, pardoned Abuses of
grace, hinders not heirs of glory from their eternal Inheritance. Unreformed
wrongs of grace in vessels of wrath, not blotted out by the blood of Christ
will cast them into hell.

CHAP. XIV. Containing an Use of Exhortation.
5. Use is Exhortation in these things. Observe the for Exhortation
helps to escape this great sin, the Abuse of Gods grace. Bless God for
Perservation. Be always jealous of the sin, long for a riddance from it, and
joy in the hope of it.

SECT. 1.
1. LEarn of the gracious and precious heart and life of Jesus Christ. 1.
Learn of the gracious and precious heart and life of Jesus Chr.
Fullness of grace dwelt personally in him. He never in the least played the
wanton with his Fathers grace; sought not himself in pleasing his own will nor
glory, had nothing of the loose spirit of the world in him, was not taken with
its empty pomps, ever went about doing good, Acts 10. 38. was his Father and
his Churches faithful servant, Isa. 42. 1. busy in saving work, while in the
flesh, Luke 2. 49. wrought by, did not idle and play away his light, Joh. 9. 4.
was solid, weighty, serious, in all his affairs with God and men. To be still
writing after his fair copy, would mend the loose Errata of Christains lives.
It Is the Apostles counsel, Let us walk decently, as in the day, not in rioting
and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, Romans 13. 13. If it be said
how? the next words show, But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof, v. 14. Christ is
two ways put on: By Justification, when the chief Robe of his imputed
Righteousness is put on; and by Imitation, when the Garments of his
communicable graces are put on; Put on as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy,
kindness, etc. Col. 3. 12. Did we learn the truth as it is in Jesus, and trace
the steps of his Faithfulness, Zeal, Meekness, Humility, Heavenly mindedness,
Divine communion, Self-denial, Spiritualitie, we neither should, nor could be
such wantons with the Gospel, as our loose spirits tempt us to do. Christian
set before thee the heavenly purity, gravitie, soliditie of the Lord Jesus, it
will awe thy daring, insolent spirit. What is Christianity but a transcript
from the original copy Jesus Christ? Should not servants that go in their
Masters Livery, do his work? Really put on the clothes of Heaven, and thou will not do the work of Hell. What an horrid incongruitie is it to pretend to
be like Christ, and act like the Devil? The lazy Philosopher talked of virtue,
but did it not; and the lazy Christian can discourse of the grace of Christ,
and Quid inter se simile habeat Philosophus and Christianus, Graeciae
discipulus and caeli. Tertul. in Apolog. c. 46.
act it not. As the Greeks professed Philosophy, so do Libertines
Christianity. The real imitation of Jesus Christ would be a prevention of
looseness. These daily thoughts would do well; I am a professed Disciple of
Christ, Did he think as I think? Reason as I do? Were his affections like
mine? Did such words come from his mouth? Were such designs driven by him?

SECT. 2.
2. HElp is a cleansed purged heart. Legal pollutions, the 2 A cleansed purged
hear is a special help to avoid abusing of the grace of God
Types of Moral, debarred from serving the holy God. An impure heart serves not
God, but abuses him. The purging of the conscience from dead works, and
serving the living God, are put together. As well may a dead man ferve a living
Prince, as a polluted heart with dead works, serve the living God. To the pure
all things are pure, to the impure all things are in their use impure, Tit. 1.
15. An impure heart makes an impure use of the holy God, his Prayers,
Confessions, Confidences, Hopes are impure, whose heart is so. Cleanse your
hearts, said James, then draw nigh to God, Jam. 4. 8. It is with a pure heart
as with a pure fountain, it will work out mire and dirt. It is with a clean
heart as with a clean stomach, it turns good meat into nourishment, not ill
huniour. Christian, purge thy heart by the wholesome working Phys^ck of Gods
grace, of self-love, worldly lusts, voluptuousness, covetous, proud, filthy
desires, vainglory, vanity of mind, folly, ca^nal security, and then wholesome
meat, the food of blessed Angels, will not accidentally prove as hurtful to
thee as the carrion food of Devils. It Is a sweet truth, Beleeve^s draw nigh
Absque cruore domini, nemo appropinquat Deo. Hier.
to God by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13. Without a bloody skreen God would
be a consuming fire to every sinner for the least sin. But what does the impure
unwashen heart co^nt of the blood of the Covenant, but as an unholy thing, Heb.
10. 29. when not used in a way of gracious cleansing, but emboldning allowance
of sin? A cleansed heart will neither profane the blood, spirit, nor word of
Christ.

SECT. 3.
3. HElp is the fear of God. It is a Sovereign remedy against all 3 The fear of
God is a help against abuse of Grace. Religio esse non potest ubi ^imor nullus,
Lact.
filth^nesse of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. It beats off satan's
insinuations, to wanton Thoughts, Reasonings, Glances, ^ffections. Joseph would
not hearken to his wanton Mistress, Shall I commit this great wickedness, and
sin against God? overcame the loose temptation, Genesis 39. 9. When the flesh
grows wanton, as it is ever apt to do, it is good to look upon the sad
monuments of Gods wrath, his judgments, and so to hedge up sins way with
thorns. David made this holy use of them, My flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments, Ps. 119. 120. Judicia Dei ^ncutiunt
salutarem pavotem, Amesius.
They cast a saving fear on pious minds, that teach to decline rainous sins.
Gods fear is like a stout, faithful Porter, that will not suffer the Kings
Enemies to come within his Court-Like a resolute Steward that suppresseth loose
misrule within his House: These wanton Professors in the Text, wanted the fear
of God, They feasted without fear, v. 12, and they ungraciously abused the
grace of God: Till men that have banished the fear of God out of their hearts,
entertain it, they will never mend their loose hearts and lives. Christian,
when thou art tempted to abuse Gods grace, or either in a gross or close way,
Timor emendaotor Acerrimus. Plinius secundus.
set the fear of God before thee, and say with thy self, The Lord sees me now
wronging his grace, by praying for that grace I care not for, I cannot abide to
see in another, by sheltering injustice under his grace, by shamelessness in
the sense of acknowledged sins, by insensiblenesse of others sufferings, by
unimproving the talents of his gifts and graces; Shall I not be afraid to wrong
the grace of God in his presence? Are not Kings Favorites afraid to abuse his
goodness in his presence, and good children afraid to be saucy in their
Parents eyes? wantonness, and the holy fear of God, are inconsistent: We never
are boldly irreverent, but loosnesse ensues it: The fear of God in the heart,
will not allow departure from him.

SECT. 4.
4. HElp is the Christian watch: It is a great advantage to holy 4. Christian
watchfulness is a help against abuse of Grace. Admodum pertinenter conjungit
vigilantiam and sobrietatem, Musc. Miles in exenbiis. Saluti insidiosissime
adversatur. Muse. Contine lingua meam intra cancellos, ne effetiat verba
indigna. Pelican.
sobriety that it keeps from wantonness, both in worldly and Spiritual things:
Watch, and be sober, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Vigilance and Sobriety, Drunkenness and
Sleeping, are fitly joined: Tenebrarum Cives, The dark Citizens of Satan's
Kingdom, sleep in stupidity of Spirit, incogitancy, madness, and security, and
then they are drunk with carnal Lusts, Affections, Delights, Covetousness,
Pride and Passion; whereas a perpetual watchful mind, like a Soldier in duty,
would prevent that loosnesse, that exposes to the enemy. The watchful
adversary, soon surprizeth the riotous, drouzy Soldier in his Quarters, and
observing Satan the loose sleepy Professor: The wanton Tongue needs a watch,
lest it vent indecent Impieties and Impurities; Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth, keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3. The wanton ear needs a watch,
lest from a diseased itch, not enduring sound Doctrine, it turn from the truth
to fables; watch against this, it is Paul's counsel to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.
Delicate itching ears, must have scratching Doctrine, Prurientes aures
delectantur ^benigna sca patione. Matl. Significat non modo fastidium sanae
doctrinae, sedodium. Ma^lorat.
to please carnal Lusts, and hereby sound truth is loathed and contemned. It is
the common bane of Sermons, Humor, not Health, carries away the credit: And
loose Appetites are more for delicate sauce, then wholesome food: Not the
goodness, but the newness and finenesse of the Diet and Cook is regarded: The
wanton eye needs watching, lest it be a Casement to let in Vanity: I made a
Covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid, Job 31. 1. much
less on another Wife, to tempt to wanton lust; I bridled mine eyes, that it
should neither Oculos froena vit, ne aspicerit, vel quod peccalum foret, vel ad
peccandum illiceret. Mercerus.
there behold sin, nor the baits of sin. The wanton heart needs watching;
without this inward guard, the outward watch of the senses is in vain. A loose
heart is so ingenuous, it can shape the Idaea's of wickedness. The profane
heart of a blind man may burn in lust; while the outward doors are locked and
barred, the unguarded Chambers of the heart may be lascivious: Sound
Christianity is severe and difficult, it allows no sleeping minds in secure
sinning in worldly ensnarements, in injuries to the Gospel. That sleep that
chains up the senses, must not close Debent omnes etiam pii cum dormiant oculis
cord vigilare. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
up the eyes of the mind. The heart may be carnally and spiritually wanton,
when the Body sleeps: '^ is good to pray, that spiritual wickedness may not act
in natures sleep: Noisome dreams, secret impurities, are the issues of Original
sin, and Satan's injections. Keep a strict watch against the filthiness of the
flesh and spirit. The resolved vigilant Steward, prevents much loose disorder
in the Family, and the resolved watchful Christian in his soul.

SECT. 5.
5. HElp is Prayer in the Holy Chost: Praying always was 5 Prayer in the Holy
Ghost is a special help against the abuse of grace. Oration flagellum Diaboli.
Christ's remedy against the wanton excesses of the world, Luke 21. 36. It is
good against Libertinism in the Church; It casts out the unclean Spirit, Matthew.
17. 21. It will cast out unclean temptation: Pray that you enter not into it,
that neither you tempt temptation, nor temptation tempt you: To pray wantonly,
or through wantonness not to pray at all, is the ready way to open the door to
all lasciviousness of flesh and spirit. Fit it is that he perish under loose
temptation, that either slightly, or not at all, seeks for a defense, our
continual help in Grace. No wonder we have it not, when we ask it not, or
amiss. The Apostle Jude propounded it as safe, sovereign counsel, to avoid the
wantons in the Text, But you beloved, praying in the Holy Ghost, etc. Set Grace
awork in Divine, Holy Prayer: Run to your strong hold: Gods grace is able to
keep you from the abuses of it. It was David's practice, uphold me according to
thy Word, Psalm 119. 116. Hold me up, and I shall be safe, 117. I fly unto
thee, Psalm 143. 9. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm 119. 37.
Incline not mine heart to covetousness, v. 36.

SECT. 6.
6. HElp is walking in the Spirit, a safe Direction: Walk 6 Walking in the
spirit is an help against the abusing of grace.
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. To
be spiritually minded is life, Romans 8. ye purified your heart by the spirit, 1
Pet. 1. 22. The spirit mortifieth the deeds of the body, Romans 8. 13. Let us
walk in the spirit, not desirous of vain glory; provoking, envying one another,
Gal. 5. 25, 26. Quantumvis se Christianum vel millies glorietur.
He that has not the spirit of Christ, (says one) belongs not to him,
although he should a thousand times over glory he is a Christian: Where Christ
with his Spirit dwells, there is a proof of his inhabitation, the guidance of
his Spirit is followed, the body of sin is gradually destroyed: The spirits
walks are clean principles, are holy motions, are pure: Much wantonness in
Religion is entertained from the spirits allowance, and is guilty of this real
blasphemy, as if the holy Spirit were an unclean one: It is not because men
live in the Spirit, but because they live not, that they live and speak so
loosly, in filthy Ranterism, in odious Libertinism. When the Apostle prayed
that the Colossians might be filled with all spiritual Wisdom and
Understanding, have enlightened minds, and renewed wills and affections, Col.
1. 9. his meaning was, that they might walk holily and strictly, not uncleanly
and loosly, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all well-pleasing, ver.
10. not by a Popish worthiness of Merit, but by a Gospel-worthinesse of
fitness, decency, and non-repugnance to Gospel Grace, walking worthy a
Christians call, Ephesians. 4. 1. Worthy of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Worthy (...).
of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. All which is done by following the guidance of the
spirit, and not serving the lusts of the flesh, which is the fruit of spiritual
Wisdom and Understanding: Sensual, not having the spirit, Jude Ep. ver. 19.
Will be a condemning evidence, that wanton Sensualists were but pretended
Spiritualists, and real Carnalists: The Spirits way, is a way of holiness, a
clean way: Impure Libertines never walked in it: Get in it, and the dirty miry
paths of the worlds pollutions will be avoided.

SECT. 7.
7. HElp is serious thoughts, what it is to crucify lusts: The 7. Serious
thoughts what it is to crucify lusts, is an help to prevent the abuse of grace
not understanding of, nor submitting to the crucifying work of grace, is an
experienced grand omission in all loose delicate Christians: They choose and
like only that Religion, that gives most liberty, ease and life to the flesh:
Crucifying grace has three irksome, terrible, and unpleasing severities, which
carnal wisdom and wantonness abhors, Restraint, Pain, and Death.

1. Restraint: The Roman Malefactors that were fastened to the Cross, had not
the free use of their members: So when the Body of sin is Crucified, its
earthly Members are as it were nailed and fastened to the Wood, that they cannot
have liberty to move as formely: The Spirit never crucifieth, but the flesh is
nailed Carnem nostra^ clavis in crucem agamus, ut etiam invita s^iritui
subjecta essecogatur.
to the Cross, and is compelled to be subject to its dominion.

2. Pain: Piercing with nails, Hanging, bleeding on the Cross, was a tormenting
penalty; when the Grace of God crucifieth, it torments the flesh: Its spiritual
arms puts corruption to pain: When it is vexed and afflicted, it is as it
should be: No crucifying without pain.

3. Death: The kind of death Christ died, was Crucifixion: He gave up the
Ghost on the Cross. Crucifying grace, is killing grace, it at length utterly
destroys this grand Malefactor, the old man. The same spirit of grace that is
said to crucify, is also said to mortify, Romans 8. As the Apostle
Characterizeth true Christians by this, They have crucified the flesh, with its
affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. so he exhorts, Mortify your earthly members,
Coloss. 3. 5. For want of serious and solid pondering, what the hard and
rigorous work of Christian ^eligion is, it gives no liberty to the flesh, but
nails it to the Cross of grace, puts it to pain, and at length to^tures it to
death; it comes to pass, that effeminate, pleasant, carnally jo^und,
flesh-pampeing, professed Christians, in their indulgent wantonnesses, are as
far off from the severities of repentance, as if they had never read, nor
believed Christ was crucified, and that on pain of damnation, the old man must
be crucified also. Take this wholesome counsel, O loose Reader! If thou would
repent of thy wantonness; Be informed in, and submit to the power of
Crucifying grace; when thou art loath to pinion and imprison thy lusts, this is
not to crucify: C^nst not endure to torment thy covetous, vainglorious,
malicious, unclean, intemperate lusts? this is not to crucify: When thou do
reprieve them, and deliver them, as they that did Barrabas, this is not to
crucify: But when corruption would have a large room, restrain it rather; this
is crucifying: When thy heart is vexed and grieved to part with a dear lust, it
is great inward pain and smart to thee, the rather smite and asslict, deeply
wound thy corrupt nature; this is to Crucify: When it is death to thee to deny
thy wisdom, will, and part with thy money, delights, carnal ease, and
interests, yet to deny these things, this is to Crucify. As Papists deal with
their Crucifixes, they please themselves with a painted Crucifix, that have not
the virtue of Christ crucified in their hearts and lives: So loose Pro^estants
have a fancy Crucifix, imagine their old man is crucified, not a real Crucifix:
Their flesh is not at all crucified in their spirits and conversations.

SECT. 8.
8. HElp is a thankful spirit: It becomes the upright to be 8 A thankful
spirit is a special help to prevent the abuse of grace.
thankful. Sincerity is the luster and glory of every grace. Hypocrisy keeps
mercy, returns it not; uprightness will: Can that heart be upright in it self,
that returns sin for grace, nay, makes grace to serve and lacquey to sin? Do ye
thus requite the Lord, O^^e foolish people and unnise? De^^. 32. 6. Do you give
him Straw for Pearls, Dirt for Gold? ^re ^^^bellions good thanks for p^^dons?
Are sparing no ^llowan^es to Justs, good ans^ers of sparing ^^ace? Is long
(...) an high hand, without remorse, a good requital to long-suffering grace?
Deal you ingenuously with the despised and rejected offers of grace, when at
the same time you close with the offers of sin? Deal you kindly with the
gifting, purifying, sealing spirit of Grace, when you turn you turn your back
upon him, and be^^ay a spirit of pride, worldliness, and security? Well does
the Apostle join together, Unthankful and Unholy: The Libertine is unthankful
and unholy: The ^entiles were unthankful, and wantons against nature: Pretended
Christians are unthankful, and wantons against Grace: That thanks for the
infinite goodness of God in Christ, that would give up body and soul a
reasonable sacrifice unto God, would not dishonor the dominion of Christ, and
Temples of the spirit, by loose wantonness: Study and practice that of the
Apostle, What soever you do, in Word and deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the father by him, Col. 3. 17. And this will
secure against loosnesse in the duties of our Relations, worldly enjoyments,
Ordinances of Grace, Talents committed to us.

SECT. 9.
9. HElp is godly sorrow: Those ill humors that are contracted 9 Godly sorrow
is an help against abuse of grace Indicium re fipiscentiae sollicitudo,
securitatis excussio, metus ne nevo peccato implicarentur. Dickson.
by carnal mirth, godly sorrow will help to cure; as in Nature, so in grace
contraries cure: Fasting is one remedy of distempering feasts: Godly sorrow is
the spirits sackcloth and fast for sin: When it wrought in the Corinthians
repentance, it wrought carfulness, which shook off security, and fear of
relapse into the old sin by fresh temptation: By the sad^ess of the
countenance, the heart is made better, Eccles. 7. 3. True sorrows eat out the
love and liking of sin: Men lay not to heart the abuses of grace, and then
adventure them: The three principal things that God requires, are Justice,
Mercy, Mourning: The last is a singular help to the two first: Could we walk
mournfully before the Lord, we should love Mercy, and do justly, Mic. 6. 8. The
Jews were wanton in their marrying Idolatrous Wives, and their mourning ushered
in their reformation, Ezra 10. 1, 3. Good natured childrens ingenuous sorrows
for their soose pranks, are Preservatives against like disorders: In Malachy,
the pr^^^ical Atheists did look upon Religion as vain serving God, keeping his
Ordin^nces, and walking mournfully before the Lord of Host, Mal, 3. 14. Those
mock-Gods and loose Libertines, that laugh at mournful walking with God, and
are ever irreligious, they keep not his Ordinances, nor serve him at all. The
tears of repentance do sweetly water the seed of grace. Zions mourners are the
most th^^ving Christians. None are further off from the dangerous snares of
soul-ruining wantonness, then humble souls that so^e in tears: They reap in
Grace and Joy, while others that so^ in carnal security and delights, reap in
sin and wrath. It is told in Gath, and published in Askelon, that many that
seemed to set their faces Heavenwards, are loose ^ibe^tines. They d^re to
think, speak, and act, what once to think on would make them tremble: They dare
sin without ^emo^se, and count it their perfection: And whence this sad
^postacy? Surely, as in part, from an ungrateful glut of, and formality in the
^rdinances of Grace? partly from the spiritual pride of high seize, and
partly from exchanging the house of mourning for the house of mirth, walking
mournfully before the Lord with them, is Apochrypha, sorrow for sin is legal
and antiquated: The holy Spirit exhorts rich Wantons to change their mirth into
mourning, Jam. 4. 9. But what Spirit it is that moves them, to change their
mourning into mirth, you may easily guess. It is just with God, that when
dissolute ones in sinful hardness have laid by sorrow for sin, in judicial
hardness, they should be not more merry, then mad jocund Wantons. The Pulpit
is no place. The Sabbath no time to speak vainly. I hope I speak the words of
Truth and Soberness, of all the holy frames of the Spirit, I would desire of
God in my sinful Pilgrimage of imperfection, this choice g^^cious indowment,
That the top-power of the Spirit in me, might be in the Gospel-humblings of
brokennesse of heart and contrition of spirit. Pelievers are called, should be
little ones, Matthew. 18. 6. are ever best and safest, yea nearest God, when
lowest.

SECT. 10.
10. Help is close union to God. The whorish woman at distance 10 Close union
with God is a special help against abuse of grace Pe. didisti fornicantem abs
te, aliquid supra te amantem. Pelican
from her husband played the wanton, Prove. 7, 19. and impure souls fornicate,
when they thrust themselves out of Gods presence: wanton spirits distance from
God, their choice and delight, Job. 21. 14. Is their damnation, Lo they that
are afar from thee shall perish, Thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring
from thee, Psalm. 73. 27. They that love any thing above God, leave Heavens bed
of Loves, for Earthly delights, and shall pay dear for their wantonness. The
remedy against it was close union to God, But it is good for me to draw nigh to
God, 28. As if he had said, Unchaste Fornicators, that leave God the Fountain of
living waters for lying vanities, to their eternal loss, shall be indicted for
whoredom: but my soul enter not into their secret: though they are Wantons
behind Gods back, I see it is s^fe, it is happiness to me to get near his
F^ce, in his presence is A^e, Purity, and Joy: I dare not be loose, while I see
him besore mine Eyes: will a promoted favorite abuse his Prince, wrong his
grace before his Face? the close union of Gods Reverence, Love, Purity, Joy^,
Contentment, Admiration, will not be abusive. Appropinquatio ad Deum, elongatio
ab omni corruptione. Parisiensis.
The nearer to the Holy God, the further from corruption, as the nearer the
fire, the further from cold, the nearer the sun, the further from darkness: it
is sinners turning their backs upon God which makes them wantons, the true
vision, fruition of, and delectation in Gods face is grave, serious, holy, and
heavenly. What Christian that ever had sweet tastes and close viewes of the
blessed God, but his experience is sweet testimony, he feared to think,
desire, do, say, that evil in close addresses to God, which at other tims of
distance has had too sinful allowance. The happiness of the next life will be
divine, sweet vision, and union, without darkness and separation, eternal
closures between God and souls, will shut out wantoness: so much as there is of
spiritual conjunction now, there is provision against sin.

SECT. 11.
11. HElp is a constant subduing the first depraved motions 11 A constant
subduing the first depraved motions is a special help to prevent abuse of grace
to carnal desires and affections, he that denies the first parley, and specious
offers of a treacherous enemy, prevents consent: when we give the subtle motions
of sin audience, and listen to their pleasing arguments, it is a thousand to
one, but we grant them wanton indulgence, and ready obedience: turning the deaf
side to the whorish flatteries of sweet corruption, is a sovereign Antidote
against Libertinisme. Are we sure an enemy knocks at the door, we lo^k and bar
against him, but open not unto him? spiritual Judgment says, the loose
motions of sin knocks at the door, says open not; O my soul! open not, they
are Thieves and Robbers, My Son (says Solomon) If sinners entice, consent thou
not, Prove, 1. 10. So say, O my Soul! if that great Pandor to all the Wantons of
flesh and spirit, corrupt nature entice, consent thou not: when lust has
conceived in consent, it is ready to bring forth in Execution, Jam. 1. 15. Let
not the feminall wickedness of Lust in its first motions conceive, and its
loose births will be hindered production: while evil inordinate Semper quod
putari oporteat invenis, erras si vitia putas emortua and non magis suppressa.
Observare diligenter, and mex ut renascentium capita apparebunt, prompta
severitate succidere, Bernard.
affections begin to kindle and smoke, it is safty and prudence to quench them. A
few blown sparks may fire an house, yea an whole street: The flesh is rank,
puts forth luxuriant branches of evil desires, by both a sin and punishment,
our hereditary vice, corrupt nature, and therefore they are constantly to be
cut off by the pruning ^nife of mortifying Grace: daily putting forth of loose
motions, calls for every days pruning: while life lasts, the body of sin is
kept under, and consumes, is not quite dead. Bernard gives sweet and safe
counsel, diligently to observe, and by a prompt severity, speedily to cut off,
the rene^ing Hydra's heads of sins motions, so soon as they arise.

SECT. 12
12. Help is planting and filling the soul with holy spiriritual 12. Planting
the soul with heavenly desiresis an help to prevent abuse of grace.
desires and affections: the field that stands thick with corn, has no room
for rank overgrowing Weeds, the clean vessel that is full of good Liquor, is
secured from Mustiness. Souls filled with the Spirit are armed against the
temptations and intrusions of the flesh. Carnal desires cannot be suppressed,
unless in the room of dangerous affections saving ones be Si carnales
concupiscentics ^ ^ordious nost^is desideramus eaetrudere spirituales ea rum
locis plantemus voluntates, ut his noster animus semper innixus habeat quibus
illicebras carnalium respuat gaudiorum. Cassianus.
introduced. Cassian says well, If we desire to thrust evil desires out of our
hearts, let us plant spiritual ones in their stead, that the mind being fixed
upon them, may always dwell on them, and refuse the s^ares of present and
carnal delights. The more the soul ongs and pants after God and Christ, and the
Joys of Eternity, the less leisure and pleasure it has to play the wanton in
the pleasures of the creature and sin.

SECT. 13.
13. HElp is, Beating down that grand Idol, Carnal Self-love. 13 Beating down
that grand Idol, carnal selflove, is a help against abusing the grace of God
As the Apostle in setting down the black and sad character, of loose
Libertines, that make the last days perilous, begins his prophecy with
self-love; Men shall be lovers of themselves; and then sets down a following
black Train of carnal Dissoluteness. They shall be (wanton) Lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3, 1, 2, 4. Make outside Religion
their play, not work, form not power, v. 5. Politic engine, not real design.
So that power of grace, that destroys this esteemed, adored, sweetest Idol,
Self-love, makes excellent provision, against the darling, frolicks, impudent
attempts, carnal Est amor carnalis qua ante omnia diligit hemo seipsum propter
seipsum, nondum quippe sapit nisi seipsum. Bern. Facere civitates duas, amores
duo. Terrenam scilicet amor sui, usque ad contemptum Dei, coelestem vero amor
Dei, usque ad contemptum sui. August.
delights of the old man. Spiritual self-loathing is strict and severe, can lay
by self in will, wisdom, pleasig, seeking, carnal, self-love, is loose,
indulgent, sensual, brutish prostitutes Religion, creatures soul-body, in the
service and sacrifice of sweet flesh-pleasing. O the sad, and frequent, carnal
love of carnal Gospellers, who above all things love themselves, estimate,
relish, and seek nothing but themselves; make themselves their ultimate end,
themselves their God? Two Loves (says Augustine) have made two Cities:
Self-love joined with the contempt of God makes the City of the world: The
love of God in conjunction with self-loathing, makes the City of God. Dry up
the impure vast fountain of carnal self-love, and the filthy streams of
dissolute hearts and lives will soon be dried up. It Is hard to learn this
Paradox in Practical Divinity, to find a man's self by losing himself, Si perit
h^mo amando se invenitur negando se. Aug.
to love ones self by loathing himself. If self-love be self-losing, then
self-denying is self-finding. Voluptuous wo^ldlings must have great estates to
riot and fe^^^ their lusts; lay by selflove, religious liberality would have
larger portions in sensualists estates; less riches would serve their turn.
The game of Pleasures, Profits, and Honors, would not with intemperate hot
chases be so hunted after. The crucified to self-love would be compassionate
forgiving, bear others burdens, and not wantonly rejoice in the miseries of
others sins and sufferings.

SECT. 14.
14. HElp is the lively Faith and sense of the heavenly country. The spiritual
and heavenly expectation of glory, 14 The lively faith, and sense of the
heavenly country is a special help to prevent abuse of grace
would purge out the rank, corrupt humors of Libertinism, Faith would teach
holy Reason thus to argue; Are there such loose Designs, Desires, Affections,
Expressions, Actions in Heaven? Will this cockering indulgence to my Lusts fit
me for the pure active, reverent delights of heavenly Communion? Am I fit to
Honor, Glory, who thus abuse grace? Let the mindful sense (says one of the
heavenly country) stand as doorkeeper at the Ad portam voluntatis, in qu^
solent manner carnalia deside^ia Statuatur os^iarius qui vo^tur recordatio
coelestis patriae. Hie enim potess pravum desiderlum quasi cune^^ cuneum pelle.
e. Bern.
gate of the will, in which carnal desires are wont to dwell; and as one wedge
drives out another, so this will drive out loose desire.

SECT. 15.
15. HElp is a fervent keeping up of Grace in Exercise. The busy services of
Christianity, allow no time to wantonize. 15 Keeping up of grace in exercise
prevents abusing of grace.
The labor of the spiritual man is the Vacation and rest of the carnal part.
When the gracious heart is not with the spirit of burning, the flesh freezeth.
The standing water putrifies, the running crystal stream is clean and sweet.
The active currency of grace, contracts not, or soon purges out the muddiness
of loose corruption. It Is constant experience, the most lively exercised
Christian in the power of godlyness, is ever the strictest observer, and
severest mortifier of the dissolute motions o^ carnal lust. When we read the
grace of God was exceeding abundant in the Apostle Paul, in Faith and Love, 1 Timothy 1. 14. That to finish his Christian and Ministerial course, he counted not
his life dear to him, Act. 20. 24. That he exercised a conscience void of
offense toward God and men, Act. 24. 16. That the care of all the Churches laid
on him, 2 Cor. 11. 28. That he labored more abundantly than all the Apostles,
1 Cor. 15. 10. That he was willing to spend and be spent, 2 Cor. 12. 15. Like a
burning, consuming candle to light others: That he kept a strict guard over his
heart, and was jealous lest abundance of heavenly revelations should be
temptations to spiritual pride, 2 Cor. 12. 7. It is no wonder we read this
choice language of holy austeritie, I keep under my body, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Not
only the body of flesh, lest like an over-fed beast it grow wanton, but the
body of sin; The word will bear it, I beat it, I wound it, I make it black and
blew. When Lust and the Devil find the active Christian occupied in heavenly
Traffic, and Negotiation, they want that audience, indulgence, and allowance,
which are ever wont to be granted out to them from either quite dead and
graceless Christians, or gracious, slothful, sleeping ones.

SECT. 16.
16. HElp is the hope of Glory. It purifies the heart from the 10 The hope of
glory is a special means to prevent the Abuse of grace. Spes est ante thesanrum
thesaurus, absentium imago
worlds pollutions, 1 John 3. 3. It by the large perspective of Faith, looks
into celestial Canaan, the supernatural Paradise, and takes such a satisfying
view of eternal delights, that it is weaned from temporal. It neglects gain for
the hope of gain, is as one says, Treasure before treasure, the present image
of absent profit. When the flesh tempts to wanton lazynesse, the hope of
eternal riches cures sloth. Have we not seen the hope of gain has stolen away
the tediousness of travel and pain, shortened hours, and lightened labors? Get,
O Christian! the hope of Glory into thy soul, it will steal away the
tediousness of Spes commodi furatur labores. Ambrosius.
thy heavenly travel. We little look for glory when holy hours are too long,
and our patience in well-doing, too short. The wanton flesh in the ways of
godliness is scared by a Lion in the way, and flies dangerous piety, declines
the exercise of grace as afflictive, and the way to heaven as strewed with
thorns. The hope of glory will quel this cowardice. Hope makes the Spes commodi
metum abscondit periculi. Ambr.
booty expecting Soldier fear no showers of Bullets, Swords, nor Pistols. Hope
makes the glory expecting Christian to run through Armies of Temptations, the
Vollyes of Hell, fire and water, to come to a wealthy place. It Is the cure the
Apostle laid down against wanton sensuality. But you beloved, looking for the
mercy of God to eternal life. Jude ep. v. 21. The Grace of God teaches to deny
wanton lusts, to live soberly and righteously by the hope of glory, Tit. 2. 11,
12, 13.

CHAP. XV. Shevving what great cause of Thankfulness we owe to God for
preserving from this sin.
2. EXhortation. Bless God for Preservation from this great sin. Have ye been
kept within 2 Bless God for preservation from this sin.
the hedge and confinements of Gods fear in an holy awe of his Goodness, and
improvement of his Grace^, know, and praise the spring of your sufficiency,
the God of grace. Mygrace is sufficient for thee to keep thee, was Gods
Sufficit ei a^ cuflodiam. Parisienfis.
Encouragement, Paul's experience, and ground of doxology, when under Nero's
Persecution he was rescued from fleshly wantonness, that fears affliction, and
declines duty, and though left alone, like a stout champion among his enemies,
he stood to suffering because God stood by him, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. The sense
whereof made him to believe he should break through all the dangers of sins,
persecutions, and devils, and safely arrive in glory, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. and
made him to resent it with praise, to whom be glory forever and ever. So for
his Romans preserved by grace, he said, Thanks be to God, ye that were sins
servants, are Gods, Romans 6. 7. ye have paid hearty service to him, as ye did to
your lusts. Surely when so many go to Hell with Armaturam virtutum. Pa^isiensis.
the abused notions and professions of Gospel grace: what rare mercy is it to
be the preserved in Jesus Christ, from the ruining snares Satan lays in
heavenly things. Upon a double account bless God.

1. That his grace within has kept you. Inherent graces are the souls Armor.
It is mercy to be girt with them, it is another to have the skill to use them:
It is further grace to make them Armor of proof, succesful defense against the
worlds taking, destructive temptations.

2. That his power without has kept this grace. It Is mutable, finite, a
creature, and may change to loss. If God leaves it, it dies. Foolish man may,
and will leave it too, if God leave it and him. As the child by the faithless,
careless Nurse may starve, so through carnal neglects, disuse, pride, should
God stand off it would perish: Besides, Lust and Satan would still stab it at
the heart. Behold a spiritual wonder, a wonder, in heaven, the heaven of the
kingdom of grace, that grace by the mighty power of God stands invincible,
immortal, in the midst of all the shot, it is enemies make against it. To
spiritual understanding divine power is glorious, that upholds brittle grace,
as to natural reason, it is illustrious in upholding frail nature.

CHAP. XVI. Containing an Exhortation. that fowls should alvvaies be jealous
of this sin.
3. BE always suspicious of this sin. 3 Be always suspicious of this sin.
Lenociniae carnis satanae Lenones. Calr.
It is with wanton corruption as with a loose servant, they both call for a
jealous eye. What temptations have been, may be, yea will be as occasions renew
to take liberty. The allurements of the flesh are numerous and prevalent. The
Devil wants not his Pandors and Factors to solicit and ripen filthy
conversation, and secret impuritie with the Gospels leave. As he is happy that
fears sin always, Prove. 28. 14. so as for this scarlet sin, the blasphemy of
Grace, and infamy to the Gospel, heart, and life wantonness. He is more ways
happy than one, that fears it always: He is happy in a constant, filial
reverence, that does nothing unbeseeming his Fathers name. Happy in the
glorious testimony of sincerity: happy in an innocent indemnity, and security
from others hypocrisies and apostas^es: happy in the lively exercise of Grace:
happy in sweet daily communion with God. Paul, that blessed man, full of piety,
and jealousy of sin, that was afraid lest his Corinthians espoused to Christ
should have corrupt, wanton glances to loose errors, 1 Cor. 11. 2, 3. and
leave the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, for impure principles and
practices, was very jealous of his own heart. As he could, and did approve his
blameless walking to, and before others, so to and before God. He preached and
lived as in the sight of God: Knew the true Christian is he whose praise is of
God, a rare president. Carnal interest is jealous, and so is spiritual. Learn
daily godly jealousy over thy loose heart. When thy severe eye is off from it,
it will dare to be licentious. Oh the sad liberty the impudent old man boldly
takes! Where the inward discipline of a strict eye is neglected, and the
judgings, checks, and lashings of the conscience are suspended, be jealous to
God of the bosom traitor to thy self, lest God be offended, the Gospel be
abused, and the soul be damnified.

CHAP. XVII. Containing an Exhortation to long for a riddance from this sin.
BE much in longing, O Christian! for a perpetual deliverance from this sin;
some of this leaven 4 Be much in longing for a deliverance from this sin.
will infect the purest mass. The strictest Christian off his watch is in some
things loose. The pure eyes of God see every impure secret glance. The inward
and outward eyes are sometimes carnally or spiritually adulterous, or both. The
purest garments in the worlds dirty Lanes are spotted. When divine Light shows
Gospel abusing pollutions in gracious spirits, how vile, how loathsome are
they? Then woe is me, I am a man of unclean lips, the loose messengers of a
filthy heart. O that I were rid of this filthy body of sin. The captive exile
longs for his enlargement: the weary traveller for his Inn; the storm-scar'd,
seasick Passenger for his Harbor, and the afflicted Christian under his
unkindnesses to Grace for a deliverance. It Is good when the wanton flesh wrongs
covenant mercies, to say of a deliverance from it, as Jeremiah of the Jews
repentance, when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. When shall it once be, that
impure lusts shall never wrong the kisses of Love? They that have the first
fruits of the Spirit, should be still longing and groaning for their eternal,
holy, happy harvest. Pure heart-longings should be like the Hearts pantings. The
hunting, trembling creature has an enflamed appetite after refreshing water;
tempted souls are, or should be longing after pure communion with the blessed
God. Ingenuous afflicting sense of corrupting the best things, the smiles, the
compassions, the love tokens, the promises of God, by the loose flesh, should
beger doleful complaints of present pollutions and imperfections. I know,
believer, it troubles thy precious tender spirit, when thou see thy
unkindnesses to thy dearest Friend, the Lord Jesus. Be longing and breathing
after a purer heart As Sisera's Mother said, Why tarry the wheels of his
chariot? Judge. 5. 28. So in thy devout re^itements say, why tarry the wholly
prevailing motions to heavenly perfection? Oh that they were like the Chariots
of Aminadab! When shall I see and never asperse again the face of my dear Lord
with carnal indignities? Love longs for its beloved. There is much grace in
much, and sorrowful longing for more.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing an Exhortation to Joy in the Hope of Glory.
5. OE much upright, Christian! in the hope of glory. 5 Be much upright in the
hope of glory.
The Gospel eternal rewards of the next life, will be eternal security against
the wrongs of grace. Glory will not admit throughout eternity the least
imaginable minute of under-prizing, of idle contemplating, of dis-affecting
precious grace, it and its Author, it and its Mediator, it and its Messenger,
it and its golden Cisterns that conveyed it, shall have their high account.
It shall have no obstructive creatures, whorish lusts, wily devils to wrong it.
It shall have no glut in its glorious exercise. Its use shall be the Whetssone
of use. Its delight shall set a keen edge upon the Spirit still to delight in
it. It shall never be made an Advocate to speak for the least sin. You
spiritual sons and daughters of Zion, did the hope of Babylons Captives in
the civil graves of their bondage rejoice them, that they should arise and come
with singing to Zion? be you ever sipping through Gospel faith and hope out of
the cup of everlasting consolation, that though at the present you are captives
of your loose flesh, yet you shall with everlasting joy come to your heavenly
Zion.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing persuasive Motives to take heed that the Grace of God
be not abused.
To stir us up to the holy practice of the forementioned Directions and
Exhortations, it will not, I hope, be impertinent to lay down some pressing
Considerations, that may spur our dull, lazy spirits to the vigorous promoting
of this great duty, Exalting the Grace of God, and shunning this eminent, and
frequent sin, The wrong of his Grace. These following things, well digested,
pondered, and fixed on, our spirits may urge us profitably. As,

SECT. 1.
1. COnsideration. The Titles given to Holy Professors in sacred Consider. 1.
The titles given to holy professors should excite us not to abuse Gods grace.
Writ, should excite to use all means not to abuse Gods grace. They are styled,
Gods peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135. 4. His Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Shall their
worthless hearts, drossie lives speak them barren commons, wildernesses,
pebbles, dunghils, They are Gods Tabernacle, Temple where he places his name?
Lev. 26. 11, 12. and shall they that should bear it up to shine gloriously in
the world, darken it, blaspheme it, proph^ne it? Amos 2. 7. They are the dearly
beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7. and shall their loose Apostasies provoke him,
that his soul should have no pleasure in them? Heb. 10. 38. They are the
children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8. 12. and shall they carry themselves like such
^ebellious children and subjects, as to provoke their angry, ^^ofessed King,
the Lord Jesus to cast them out? They are Gods vineyard, planted to bring forth
sweet, and ripe grapes, Is. 5. shall they answer Gods care and cost by the
sour grapes of ungodliness and unrighteousness? They are a royal Priesthood,
and shall they live base, abject lives? 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are styled the
kingdom of Heaven, Mal. 13. 47. whose conversation should be in heaven, Phil.
3. 20. and shall they be worldlings in heart and life? They are Christ's garden,
Can. 8. 13. and shall they be overrun with rank weeds? They are The Spouse of
Christ, Can. 4. 11. and after Espousals to him shall they run a whoring from
him, Ps. 73. 27. and cleave to strange loves? They are Laborers, Mat. 20. 1.
And shall they stand idle all the day of grace? Mat. 20: 6. They are Christians,
Act. 11. 26. And shall they dishonor Christ, And the Christian Name by
unchristian principles and practices.

S^CT. 2.
2. COnsideration, The honor of Christian Liberty, civil freemen 2. The
Consideration of Christian Liberty should prevent the Abuse of grace.
are chary of their Liberties, spiritual ones must be, and make their dear
bought Liberty a plea to duty, not a cloak of maliciousness, being f^ee from
the guilt and reign of sin, they are De Ju^e, the servants of Righteousness,
Romans 6. 18. and as the p^ofessed servants of Righteousness, they are free from
the dominion of sin. They are Christ's freemen to do Gods work, and se^ve him,
not their Lusts under Christ's Livery: what honor has liberty from the curse,
rigor, damnation of the Law, as a covenant of works? If Freemen by profession
are as willing and industious flaves by dispo^tion and practice, as if they had
heard of the author of Liberty, the infinite price of Libe^ty, the bounds of
Liberty, the peace of Liberty, the purity of Liberty, the design of Liberty,
which was to imprison, chain up, and chastise felonyous Traitors, Rebels,
evil thoughts, carnal re^sonings, perverse desires, inordinate ^ffections,
dissolute courses, not to give them the least allowance, latitude, and
affection? What honor can this be to Christian liberty, when as huge
multitudes of Libertines manage it, Hell is broken loose under the favor of
it, whose intendment was to open heaven in a free practice of piety, and pardon
of be veiled failings, in a free assi^an^e by the spirit of Libertine, to
endeavor to do every part of ^ods will, and a free acceptance of imperfect,
yet sincere service? Carnal worldly Liberty says, indulge your ^enius, feast
your senses, deny your sensitive appetite in nothing, the pleasures of this
life, are the chiefest good, be not a slave to straight laced, mopish,
melancholy rules, exercises, and society; but true Christian Liberty says,
use no unlawful delights, you deny your self in lawful, be not under the power
of Creature sweetest allowances, it counts that part of life most sweet
freedom, that in the zeal, pursuit, and affection of spiritual delights, can
be contented without, and mortified to ^eih^y unnecessary delights. he words of
Tertul. are weighty, Delicatus es, O Christian, si in saeculo voluptatem
concu^iscis, etc. Quid jucundius quam De^ Patris reconciliatis, quam veritatis
revelatio, quam errorum recognitio? etc. Quae majorvoluptas, quam fast idium
voluptatis? etc. Hae voluptates, haec spec tacula Christianorum, Tertull. De
spectaculis, page 592.
Thou art delicate, O Christian, if thou seek worldly pleasure^, yea a fool,
if thou accountest this pleasure: what is more pleasant then Reconciliation
with God, then acknowledgment of errors, then pardon of sin past? What is
greater pleasure, then the loathing of pleasure, the contempt of the whole
world, then true liberty, then an upright conscience, then a life of
contentment, then living above the fear of death? these are the pleasures,
these are the spectacles, the rare sights of Christians, Indeed an holy
authority over sensual delights, a vacation and attendance to, and pursuance
of spiritual pleasures, do speak the only Freeman in the World: It Is rare to
find that mighty Apostolical spirit, among professed Christians, not to be
under the power of any thing: they use not specular delights with Liberty, but
slavery, not being possessors of them so much, as possessed by them; not to
help, but hinder the spiritual Race, not to sharpen, but dull the edge of holy
Devotion, Meditation, and delight in God; not as Ladders of scension to him,
but as Leaden Plummers to pull down the soul from him.

SECT. 3.
3. COnsideration, The credit of the Gospel, how does the 3. The credit of the
Gospel should engage us to beware of abusing the grace of God
School boy honor his Master, when he is a thriving Grammarian, the Pupil
his Tutor, when he is a rare proficient in the Liberal arts, and the Believer
his great Teacher Christ, when in the Gospel School he is come to high
seize in the deep and holy practical mysteries of Faith? It Is said of
Demetrius, He had a good report of the truth, 3 Epist. Joh. v. 12. The gospel
of Salvation the highest word of truth, gives a good Report of its strict
Professors, when it is so powerful over them, as to make them stand in awe of
its Lust-curbing-requiries; when its spiritual weapons are mighty through God,
to bring every thought to the obedience of Christ, to hush the peevish
insurrections of discontented imaginations, to curb loose, inward, filthy
motions, to purge out their defilements, to bewail inward pollutions, to watch
them and beat them down, in holy indignation and chastity of Spirit, as they
rise up and importune with their flattering insinuations to Rebellion, and
dra^ing aside from God: When the Gospel is thus the power of God to holy
strictness, it speaks well of itsreligious observers, (so taking is its
Majesty) in the minds and mouths of loose wicked men, ^ho commend strict
Gospellers, yea wish sometimes they were in their case. It speaks well of
fellow conscientious Christians, who are glad to see their fellow Travelers in
the Road of Christianity, making have to their eternal inheritance, their
fathers house: It speaks well in the joyous observance of the holy Angels who
rejoice in the Tears, Prayers, Strict services of the penitent, it will speak
well in the Lord Christ, who will be admired in careful and conscionable
Bellevers at the great day, 2 Thessal. 1. 10. Who have not put off themselves
and others with the words, but shined forth the power of the Gospel, in holy,
humble, heavenly, close walking with God, and living up according to the
measure of Grace, to its injunctions.

SECT. 4.
4. COnsideration, The strict, and heavenly call of Christians: they are called
from the Creature to Christ; from The strict, high and heavenly call of
Christians should keep us from abusing the grace of God.
dissoluteness to regular life; from lying vanities to the blessed realities
of Eternity; from the delights of sense to those of faith; from a portion in
this life, to an inestimable one in God; from the filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, to the clean paths of holiness; from the cursed impure life of Devils,
to the holy Angels conversation. Great spirits called to Court dignities and
delights, have ordinarily an answerablenesse of spirit to their secular
greatness, Christians are called to be the high Courtiers of the Heavenly
Court, their very call, if seriously weighed, is a mighty motive to
strictness, God has not called us unto uncleaness, but unto holiness, 1
These. 4. 7. When God called us, we were unclean, lived in uncleanness, but no^
(says Musculus) He has called us, that of profane and unclean, we might be
holy: As if Perinde ac siquis vocetur ad halneum. Et puer qui mittitur ad ludum
literariu^ Et qui vocat ad se medicu^, etc. Musculus.
one be called to a Bath, he is not called to abide in his impure distempers,
but to purge them out; As if a boy be called to school, he is not sent thither
for barbarous rudeness, b^t to get learning; Or as he that sends for the
Physician, does not call for him for si^kness, but health, to remove, not to
retain his disease: Such is the condition of our calling in Jesus Christ, to
accommodate our selves to the will of God, and not to wander from the scope of
our calling: hence the Apostle mentions Christians call as argumentative of a
strict life, and regular conformity to the Gospels precepts.

SECT. 5.
5. COnsideration, A lively sense of the Excellency of grace. 5. A lively sense
of the excellency of grace, is a means to prevent abuse of grace. Homines
secundum gratiam ipsam creantur, i. e. constituuntur in novo esse ex nihilo,
Aquin. 12 ae. q. 110. 2 Gratia auxilium Dei, Aqu. 1, 2 ae q. 113. 9. Arg. 2.
Arg. 2. Gratia habituale donum, excedens ordine^ naturae, bonum gratiae unius
est magis b^num naturae totius universi Ib.
Grace is the new Creature, By it the sinner (says Aquinas) is created in a
new being; now how unworthy is it of the new Creature to look again like the
old man. It must be with the supernatural as it is with common Creatures, they
show according to their properties, forms, and inclinations, what is put into
them by the benefit of their creation.

Grace is the glory of God, Let me see thy glory, says Moses, God showed it in
his grace. I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, Exodus 33. 18, 19. God
in his Grace is a King in his Throne, The Throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16. Abuse
grace and you spit upon the King in his Throne: this is to deal with God, as
David's, enemies did with him, to Turn his glory into shame.

Grace is the arm of God, his strong arm, by which he aids and defends his
people, and casts down Satan, to wrong grace, is to weaken the arm of God.

Grace is a matchless goodness, of finite excellencies the chiefest, exceeds
all the good of nature: All the Creatures, Riches, Honors, Pleasures of this
world, are inconsiderable to Grace: the least filing of its precious gold, the
least dram of its sovereign worth, the lowest degree of it excells the
Abstract, the Quintessence, the Composition, the Spirits, the united Glory of
the whole worlds desirables. The poorest Saint does outwealth the richest
sinners, rich Libertines that swim in pleasures, have reason to wish they could
change states with poor Believers, the rich heirs of glory; but it was never
yet known, that a real needy Saint would change conditions with graceless
prosperous worldlings, and mighty Cedars. Look not upon the wicked of the world
with envy, but with pity: they that see in the Sancturary of God what will be
their dreadful end, fret not to see brutish christians fatted in their wealthy
pastures, like Oxen for the slaughter: they know their delicate and superfluous
meat is sweet, til the reckoning come, weigh things by their ends, not present
enjoyments, the references they bear to eternity, not this life.

Grace is a christians holy water, a crystal spring, the well of water
springing up to eternal life is the spirit of Grace, Joh. 4. Gratia caelestis
rivus, Justin Prot. Patriar. venetiae.
14. To debase the grace of God to sin, is to throw dirt into a pure spring, to
muddy a pure stream, that the christians face cannot be seen in it.

Grace is spiritual light, a saving beam of the Sun of righteousness, Gratia
spirituale lumen, Aq. 1, 2 ae. q. 211. 5. Arg. 3.
that makes day in the soul where it is, and speaks its enlightened subjects
children of light. Now loose wanton works of darkness, what in them lies, turn
the day into night, make the beautiful Sons of Zion to look like uncomly
Negroes, black Ethiopians; turns Heaven into Hell, the christians fairness
into foulness, his glory into shame.

Grace is the choice love token of God, Hos. 14. 2, 4. Ephesians. 2, 4, 7. To Abuse
Grace is as if a Spouse should blot and blur her Bridegroomes Love Letters, and
cast his kind tokens under feet.

Grace is a christians ornament, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, 1
Pet. 3, 4. the ornament of grace unto the head, and chains about the neck,
Pro. 1. 9. a ravishing comeliness to Jesus Christ, Can. 4. 9. A gracious
christian, though his outward appearance be never so mean, is a more comely
piece to spiritual Dignitasin indigno, est ornamentum in luto, Salvian.
eyes, then the fairest face of the Limners art; yea then the most beautiful
face of flesh and blood that ever God made, the filth cast upon grace, is like
dirt cast upon a brides ornaments, or dung on scarlet.

Grace is a christians distinguishing character, by it said Paul, I am what I
am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. It makes the great difference in the world: it differs the
spiritual from the carnal, as the reasonable soul does a man from a bruit: to
sin by grace, is to make the sun darkness, to turn a man into a beast, to be
filthy by a clean spring, is a great contradiction to the nature and
distinguishing formality of Gratia est similitu do Dei, Aq. 3. ^. 2. 10. Arg.
primum.
Grace.

Grace is Gods image, to wrest grace to sin, is to make Gods picture look like
the Devils.

Grace is a christians heaven begun, eternal life, to mingle sinwith grace, is
to mingle hell with heaven, and death with eternal life. Gratia sanitas mentis,
Aq. 1, 2 ae. q. 11 3. c. Quasi mur^ gratiae civinae circum quaque communiti
fideles. Chrysostom.


Grace is the souls health, to abuse grace, is to turn health into sickness,
the sweet temper of the mind, into a diseased distemper.

Grace is a christians walled city, his safety lies in this, that he is walled
round with grace: to shelte^ sin under grace, is to throw down a securing wall,
and to make it useless: grace in its vigor, liberty, and exercise will shelter
the soul against all its assaults.

Grace is a christians store house, gives out supply for Life and Vnico hoc
gratiae vocabulo continetur ingens ille beneficiorum acervus. Dav^nant in Colos.
godliness, My grace is sufficient for thee: this one word grace is an
Abridgment of gospel blessings, all are in grace. Paul was wont to begin and
end his Epistles with grace, as the foundation and top-stone of eternal
happiness. Sin against grace by the leave of grace, is the pick-lock thief
that comes into the christians storehouse, and robs him of all his blessings.

Grace is the earnest for glory, to make grace give liberty to sin, is to turn
the earnest of Heaven into an earnest for hell; it is like a wanton servant, to
cast his masters earnest into the gutter. Thus, O christian! get a lively
dwelling sense upon thy spirit of the fair face of grace, and thou will not
dare by thy filthy thoughts, words and works, to bemire it: consider the high
honor of grace, and thou will not disgrace it.

FINIS.

