A CLOVD OF VVITNESSES: With whom I also appear to bear Testimony, That Christ
Jesus is the Word of God, and not the Bible which is called the Scriptures.

For which Word the Prophets, Apostles, and Servants of the Lord, obeying, and
bearing their Testimony thereunto, have suffered by all Generations of men,
cruel Mockings, Stripes, Bonds and Imprisonments, by the Egytians, Philistians,
Babylonians, Caldeans, Idolaters, Back-sliders, Roman Papists, and in general,
the Heathen, that know not Christ Jesus to be the Word of the Lord.

For we are as Strangers before thee, and Sojourners, as were all our Fathers,
our days of the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding on the earth;
they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, they wandered in deserts,
and upon mountains, and being destitute, lay in dens and caves of the earth,
and obtained a good report through faith, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Heb. 11.37, 38, 39.

Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before Judgment-seats? Iam. 2.6. and
the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over you, and they that are great
exercise authority upon you, Mat. 20.25

He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles and Kings,
and the Children of Israel, and I will show him how great things he must suffer
for my Names sake: Be of good courage Paul, for thou have testified of me in
Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome: and certain of the Jews
banded together, more then forty men, and bound themselves with an oath, and
lay in wait for him, saying, that they would neither eat nor drink, till they
had killed Paul, Acts 9.15, 16, and 23.11, 12. and 21.

Written by him, who is known by the Name of Henry Clark.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Black spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1656.

A CLOVD OF VVITNESSES, With whom I also appear to bear Tistimony, That Christ
Jesus is the Word of God, and not the Bible, which is called the Scriptures,
etc.
WHen Christ said to the Jews, Search the Scripture, John 5. and 39.46, 47.
he did not say, that they are the Word of the Lord, as it is written in a
Chapter, and a Verse: but told them, That they think in them, that testify of
him, to have Eternal life: but life was not in them to be had, but in the Son,
1 John 5.12. John 12.36.
for he that has the Son, has lift: and unto him they would not come that
they might have eternal life, who is the light and life of men, which light
they would not own nor believe in: Nor did they believe Moses Writings, which
Christ called the Scriptures, and bad them search, for said he, Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; but said Christ, If ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? Now here it is plainly
seen, that, that part of the Scripture which Christ bad the Jews to search, he
called them, Moses Writings; Acts 7.42. Mat. 22.35.40
and the other part (as Stephen was bearing his Testimony of Jesus Christ, and
against the Temple made with hands) he called it the Book of the Prophets: he
did not say, hearken unto the Word of the Lord, as the Priests of England do,
that preach for hire, as it is written in a Chapter and a Verse, but said, As
it is written in the Book of the Prophets: And when the Lawyer asked Christ
which was the greatest Commandment in the Law, when Christ had told him, he
said, On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. And likewise
after his resurrection, and being present with his Apostles, he said unto them,
These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which were written (he did not say, Luke 24.44.
in the Word of God) in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms concerning me. So it is said likewise of Paul, that to the Jews which
came to his lodging, he expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, and
persuaded them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets: so that it does plainly appear, that those Scriptures which were then
written, were called by Christ and his Apostles, Moses VVritings, Moses Law,
and the Book of the Prophets, the Prophets, and the Psalms, (and not the Word
of the Lord) all which testify of Christ. So likewise those that are written
since them are called a Declaration; Luke 1.1. etc.
as Luke said, Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order d
Declaration of those things which are most surely believed amongst us, which
from the beginning were eye witnesses and Ministers of the Word: it seemed
good to me also, having a perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus: And Luke he
writes in order his Declaration of John, his birth and parentage, and of his
going out to preach and baptize; and likewise of the birth and descent of
Christ, and of his Parents, and of the manner of his going out to preach, and
the calling of his dlsciples, and sending them out to preach likewise; and of
his works and miracles, travells, doctrine, sufferings, death and resurrection.
And Matthew, and Mark, they wrote their Declaration of what they were eye
witnesses of. And John he writ his Testimony of Jesus, John 20.30. and chap.
21.24, 25.
what he was, and said, and did, and also of his death and resurrection, which
Testimony was but a part of what he saw and knew; for said he, Many other
signs Jesus did in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in
this Book; and there were many other things which Jesus did, which if they
should be be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
contain the Books that should be written: and this Disciple which testifies of
these things, Acts 1.8.9, i0. Acts 2. chap. Acts 9. chap.
and wrote these things, we know that his testimony is true. And so likewise
the Acts, they are a declaration of Christ's giving power after his Ascension to
the Apostles, and sending them to bear witness of him in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth; and of their
preaching and turning many to the righteousness of the faith in Christ Jesus:
And the Acts likewise declares of Paul's conversion, and his going out to preach
the Gospel among the Gentiles, and to turn them from darkness to light, Acts
26.18. Acts 12. chap. Acts 17. chap. 2 Pet. 3.1. ver.
and from the power of Satan unto God, who is Light, and in him is no darkness
at all: And so likewise they declare of his, and the Apostles travells, and
their sufferings, by the Romans and unbeleeving Jews, and the baser sort of
people: and so Paul and the other Apostles writ several Epistles to the
Churches, as they saw them in their several conditions, and some to particular
persons, as to Timothy, Titus, and Philemon, and to the twelve Tribes scattered
abroad.

And Peter in his second Epistle speaks of the Scripture, and said, 2 Pet.
1.20, 21. 1 Cor. 2.4.14. Heb. 3.5. and 8.5 Exodus 17.4. and 34.27. and 40.33.
Isa. 8.1. Jer. 30.1, 2. and 36.1, 2, 3, 4.
That no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, but the
holy men of God spoke them forth as they were moved by the holy Ghost; so that
the prophecies written came not of old, by man's own will, nor by the will of
man, but by the Holy Ghost in the holy men of God, who were moved by the same
to speak them forth; so that all speaking and writing, and all interpretations
of the things of God, that comes not from the movings and power of the Holy
Ghost, comes from man's own will, and not from the will and power of God: Moses,
who was faithful in the house of God, did all things according to the pattern
showed him, and writ not in his own will, but in the will of God. And so Isaiah
wrote at the Commands of the Lord: And Jeremiah wrote not, but at the Command
of the Lord, who said unto him, Write all the words in a Roll of a Book that I
have spoken unto thee (against Israel, and against Juda, and against all the
nations) from the days of Josia, even unto this day. And Jeremiah called
Baruch, and Baruch wrote all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Jeremiah,
from the mouth of Jeremiah, Baruch wrote them. Here it is plainly seen, that
the Scriptures at the first was not given forth by man's will, or by private
interpretation, but they were given forth by in the will of God, by the holy
men of God, as they were moved to speak them forth by the Spirit of God; but
since the first giving of them forth, they have been translated by private
interpretors, into the many Languages, and the many Languages have several
Copies of their private interpretations, with some words added to, and some
words left out: But the same Spirit of God that gave them forth, knows its own
that it gave forth by the holy men of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.12. 2 Pet. 3.1 Mic. 3.11.
and disowns the other words that are not of, and from it self, for no man
knows the things of God, save the Spirit of God; so that it plainly appears,
that the Scriptures was never called the Word of God, neither by Christ, nor
his Apostles, but they were called by them, Moses VVritings, Moses Law, The
Book of the Prophets, The Prophets, and, The Psalms; A Declaration, Testimony,
and Epistles: But the blind Guides, the priests of England, that preach for
tithes, hire, gifts and rewards, they do teach the people, and say, Hearken to
the Word of the Lord; as it is written in a Chapter and a Verse.

The Word of the Lord was before all time; but the Bible, which men call the
Scriptures, was not before all time; for Moses, after the Creation many
generations, did begin to write the first part of it, who was the first Writer,
John 1.1, 2.3, 4. and 10.14. John 4.24. John 10.28. 2 Cor. 3.6.
which was in time, and the rest were written in order of time, as the holy men
of God were moved by the Spirit of God to write, and give them forth to be
written; therefore the Bible, which is called the Scriptures, is not the Word
of God, but is that which testifies of the Word of God, Christ Jesus: God is a
spirit, is the Bible, which is called the Scripture, God? a spirit? Nay, for
the Word is God: The letter kills, is that Christ? the spirit that gives life?
Nay, then the Letter is not the Word of God, for Christ is the Word, and this
Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and he is the Light and Life of men,
and by him the world was made.

First, Before the Bible, which is called the Scripture, was writ, the Word
was; John 1. i. Heb. 13.8. Rev. 22.13. 1 John 1.1, 2. Isa. 41.4. Rev. 19. i3.
Isa. 7.14. Matt. 1.23. Heb. 2.16. John 8 56.58. Genesis 15.1, 2. Prove. 18.10, 1 Samuel 3.21. Matt. 11.27. John ^0.30. and 14.6.9, 10. Dute. 8.15. Genesis 49.10.
Psalm. 119.160, 162. verses. Isa. 42. Jer. 23. Ezekiel. 34. Dan. 2.45. Mic. 4, 5,
chap.
for in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, Christ Jesus,
the same yesterday, to day and for ever; said he, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, the first and the last: It is he that calls the
generations from the beginning, who said, I the Lord am the first, and with the
last I am the same, and John said, His Name is called the Word of God: And
they shall call his Name Emanuel, (which is, by interpretation) God with us;
who took upon him the Seed of Abraham, and was before Abraham was; Abraham,
said Christ, rejoiced to see my day; he saw it, and was glad: The Word of the
Lord came to Abraham in a Vision, saying, Fear not, Abraham, I am thy Shield,
and thy exceeding great Reward: The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the
Righteous run unto it, and are safe: And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh, for
the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by his Word: Christ said, No man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: and said
Christ, I am the Way, the Truth and the life; No man comes to the Father but
by me; he that has seen me, has seen the Father; I and my Father am one; I am
in the Father, and the Father in me: And Moses said, The Lord thy God will
raise up a Prophet in the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, unto
him shall you hearken: And Jacob said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall
the gathering of the people be: and David said, Thy Word, O Lord, is true from
the beginning; I rejoice, said he, at thy Word, as one that finds great
spoil: and the same Word of the Lord did all the prophets see, and hear, and
bear witness to, and no other, and the Scriptures were written to bear
Testimony of this Word to after Generations that should come, and likewise of
the righteous judgments of God which came upon them that opposed the same;
which Examples were written for our learning, upon whom the ends of the world
is come, unto whom the Scripture is given by inspiration of the Spirit, that
the Man of God may be perfect thoroughly, furnished unto every good work, which
is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for correction, and for instruction
in Righteousness.

Secondly, As Christ is the Word of God, John 8. i2. John 1.5.9.12. John 3.19,
20. Ephesians. 5. i3. John 16.9, 10, 11.12. 2 Pet. i.19.
so he is the Light of the World, yea, the true Light, that inlightneth every
one that comes into the world: Whosoever follows him shall not walk in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of life; and to as many as receive him, and
believe on his Name, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God; but
these whose Understanding is darkened, even such as sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death; the Light shines in the darkness, but the darkness
comprehends it not; but al things that are reproved, are made manifest by the
Light; the Light makes sin manifest in the understanding, and convinces of
sin, and condemns sin in the conscience: but those that walk in darkness hate
the Light, and will not bring their deeds to it, because they are evil, and
the Light reproves them, and to such the Light is their condemnation.

Therefore take heed to this Light, which shines in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts; while you have the Light,
believe in the Light, John 12.36. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
that ye may become the children of the Light, and the children of the Day, who
bear witness to the Light. John, a man sent of God to bear witness of the
Light, who said, that was the true Light that lights every man that comes
into the world: And David, he bare witness, and said, The Lord is my light and
my lamp, he will inlighten my darkness, he is my salvation and the strength of
my life: and again said he, Psalm. 72. i. 2 Samuel 22.39. John 1.1.5. Isa. 49.6.
and 60.19, 20. Luke 2.31, 32. John 1.10, 11, and 17 verses.
Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. And John said,
God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. And Isaiah said, The Lord shall
be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy glory. Christ is given for a
Light to the Gentiles, and for salvation to the ends of the earth; to which
Simeon bore witness, and said, Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou
have prepared before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the glory of thy people Israel: which Light was in the beginning, and is
come to his own, and his own received him not: he is in the world, and the
world was made by him, and the world knows him not, by whom Grace and Truth is
come, CHRIT JESUS.

Thirdly: Seeing that Christ is the Light of the world, Isa. 55.3. John 5.25.
and the Word of God, which is to be hearkened unto and obeyed: therefore unto
him hearken and hear, that your souls may live, For they that hear the voice of
the Son of God, they shall live: the word is nigh thee, in thy heart and in thy
mouth, Dute. 13.14. Eccles. 2.14. Prove. 4.23. Coll. 1.27. Romans 12.5. 1 Cor.
8.6. John 17.23. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Coll. 1.26, 27. 1 Timothy 3.16. John 15.18.25. 1
Pet. 2.7. Matt. 21.42. Jer. 20.9. 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.4. Matt. 17.5. Heb.
3.15. Matt. 11.29. Isa. 40.31. Matt. 24.23, 24 26. Mark 13.2i, 22, 23. Luke
17.21, 22, 23.
that thou may do it: therefore keep thy mind in from wandering abroad, for
the wise man's eye is in his head; Christ is the head of every man, hearken and
attend to his word, keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life; he that has the Son has life, Christ in you the hope of
glory; he is one in all; except ye be Reprobates you may know this: For we
being many, are all one in Christ Jesus, who said, I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one; and Paul said, the righteousness which is
of faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in thy heart who shall ascend into
heaven, that is to bring Christ down from a love; or who shall descend into the
deep, that is to bring up Christ again from the dead: but says it, The word is
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of Faith which we
preach; without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, which has
been hid from ages aad generations, but is now made manifest unto his Saints,
which is, God manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, rejected by the world, but received into glory. And
Jeremiah said, His word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones,
and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. And David said, The
spirit of the Lord speak by me, and his word was in my tongue; the Rock of
Israel speak to me; and that Rock is Christ; he that has an ear to hear, let
him hear what the spirit says, (God is a spirit) who says, this is my beloved
Son, hear ye him in all things, Cease from man, whose breath is in his
Nostrils, and hearken to the Word of the Lord, which is nigh thee, in thy
heart and in thy mouth: Christ Jesus says, Come learn of me, hear, that your
souls may live: to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, but
be swift to hear, and slow to speak: stand still and see the salvation of the
Lord, for they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: and do not
hearken any longer to the blind guides, the priests, which cries, Lo here,
hearken to the Word of the Lord says one, as it is written in the chapter and
the verse: Lo here, says another, hearken to the Word of the Lord, as it is
written in this chapter and this verse: See here says one, it is written, this
chapter and this verse: See there, says another, as it is written in this
chapter and this verse. But they are false prophets, rise up to seduce, if it
were possible, the very Elect: but says Christ, go not forth, believe them
not, the kingdom of heaven is within you, the Law is written in the heart,
according to the Covenant of God, Moses, David, Jeremiah, and Paul, and said,
the Word of the Lord is in the heart and in the mouth, Jude 11 verse. Numb.
22.38. and 24.17, 18, 19. Mic. 3.11.
and yet the priests of the Nations are not ashamed to say, It is written in a
chapter and a verse: and although the priests of this Nation run greedily after
the error of Balaam, for honor and rewards, yet they are more blind than
Balaam, and have not got by all their study and learning, so much of the
knowledge of the Word, as he, who said to Balaak (after the Lord had turned him
from going to curse Israel) the word that God puts into my mouth, that shall
I speak: O ye priests that preach for hire, and divine for money, and are by
men called, and say your selves, you are ministers and preachers of the Word of
God. Are you not ashamed to see that Balaam had more knowledge of the Word then
you have be ashamed, and blush, and stop your mouths, and be silent before the
Lord God, and utter no more of your own words before him, and repent of your
lying and blasphemy, for Christ, who is the Word of God, is but one, and is not
divided into chapters and verses, which are many, therefore do not deceive the
people any longer, by the divination of your own brains, for the Lord God will
make the diviners mad, and confound the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
naught the understanding of the prudent.

Fourthly, The Scriptures, which is visible, is a visible writing; but the Word
of the Lord is invisibly written in the heart, Jer. 23.29. Heb. 13.29.
and is like a Fire, yea, Our God is a consuming Fire; and who amongst us shall
dwell with the devouring Fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting
Burnings? Who may abide the day of his coming? For behold, the day comes, that
shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall
be as the stuble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, Isa. 33.14. Mal.
3 and 4. chap. Nahum. 1.5.6.
so that it shall leave them neither root nor branch: The mountains quake at
him, the hills melt, the earth is burnt at his presence, yea, the world, and
all that dwell therein; who can stand before his indignation, and who can abide
the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, says the Lord
of Hosts; who shall stand when he appears, for he is like a Refiners fire,
and like Fullers Soap; and he shall sit as a Refiner, and a Purifier of silver,
and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in righteousness, [but do not think
that I take the priests of England to be the Sons of Levi] for the Lord God,
who is coming to judgment, will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and
against the adulterers, and against the false swearers, and against those that
defraud the servant of his wages, and oppress the widow and the fatherless, and
those that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the
Lord of hosts. Christ is come to set fire on the earth, Luke 12.49. Mic. 1.3,
4. v^^.
and its already kindled, and the Mountains shall be moulton under him, and the
Valleys shall be cleft as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are
poured down a steep place; and what will become of you enemies of God, that
walk in darkness and hate the Light, and will not hearken to, and obey the Word
of the Lord: Our Lord Jesus Christ is revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9 Romans 2.16.
in flames of fire, to render vengeance upon them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the secrets of all
men's hearts by Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel; for we are sure that the
judgments of God are according to Truth, Christ is Truth.

Prove. 23.21. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Heb: 13.4.
Woe unto the bloody City, that is full of Lies and Robbery, from which the prey
departs not. Woe unto you Drunkards of England, awake, weep and howl, for the
Drunkard shall come to poverty, and never inherit the Kingdom of God. Woe unto
you Whoremongers and Adulterers, for the Lord God will you judge.

Woe unto you that swear and steal, for the Curse of God is entered into the
house of the thief, Zach. 5.3, 4. Isa. 33.14. Matt. 24.51. Mat. 19.23, 24.
Prove. 16.18.
and into the house of the swearer, and every one that swears shall be cut
off, and every one that Steals shall be cut off, and never inherit the
Kingdom of God. Woe unto you hypocrites, for fearfulness has surprised you, and
hell is your portion, where is weeping and gnashing. Woe unto you rich men, weep
and howl, for the misery that is coming upon you; It is hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Woe unto you proud and wicked ones, God
resists the proud, and beholds them afar off: Pride goes before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall; you wicked ones shall be as
stuble before the fire. Woe unto you murderers, Habb. 1.13. 1 John 3.12.
that have murdered the innocent and slain the just, because their works are
good and acceptable with God, and yours evil, the voice of the blood of the
righteous cries, and the cry thereof is heard from under the earth unto the
Lord against you, and all the blood that has been shed from the day of
righteous Abel unto this day, shall be required of this generation.

O ye Priests of England, who are called Ministers, but are the Idol-shepherds
thereof, for as Israel brake off their Earrings from their wives, their Sons,
and their daughters, and made them a Calfe, Read the 17 and 18. chapter of
Judges.
and worshipped it, so have the people of England with their Gold, Silver,
Tithes, Gifts and Rewards, made you, who they call Ministers, their Idols, and
have set you up in the highest seats in their high places, which they call
their Church, which is like Micah, the man of Mount Ephraims house of gods,
which was made by the Founders and the Gravers: so in the Steeplehouses in
England are set up (by the Gravers, the Founders and the Painters) Pictures and
Images of men, women and children, and several sorts of other creatures; and
upon them the people look sometimes, and up to the Priests other times, and to
the priests they hearken, and not to God, for he is not in all their thoughts;
and they say of the priests, these are our Teachers, these are our leaders
which will lead us to heaven; just as the children of Israel said of their
golden Calf, These are thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
Land of Egypt: So Micah, the Idolater, when he had got a Levite to be his
priest, which he hired for ten shekles of silver by the year, and a suit of
Apparel, and his Victuals, for which the Levite became his priest; then said
Micah, Now know I that the Lord will do me good. So the people of England
think, while they have priests that preaches for hire, they think it will go
well with them; but the time came that Micah's Gods and his priests was carried
away from him. Ah sottish people! why have you forsaken Christ, the true
shepherd and Bishop of your souls, who is the way to the Father, and no man
comes to the Father but by him? wherefore do you spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55.2.
to follow those blind guides who lead the blind, and both will fall into the
ditch, for of them you are ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. Woe unto the Idol-shepherds that leaves the Flock, the
sword shall be upon his Arm, and upon his right Eye; his Arm shall be clean
dried up, Zach. ^^.17
and his right Eye shall be utterly darkened: Read your portion you
Idol-shepherds of England, who say the Scripture is the Word of the Lord, John
1.1.1^.
which testifies contrary to your saying, that Christ Jesus is the Word, and
the Word is God, which is as a fire.

Fifthly, The Word of the Lord is like a Hammer, that breaks the Rocks in
pieces, and the Rocks are thrown down by it. Jer. 23.29 Nah. 1.6. Jer. 10.10.1^
Hearken all you who have made your faces harder then a Rock, and refuse to
return to the Lord that made you, and have made your hearts as an
Adamant-stone, lest ye should hear the Law from the pure Lawgiver, Christ
Jesus, by him shall ye be broken to pieces, as with a Rod of Iron, and dashed
in pieces like a potters vessel: The Lord, the true God, the living God, and an
everlasting King, at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall
not abide his indignation; he has made the earth by his power, he established
the world by his wisdom, and stretched out the heaven by his understanding; he
says of the portion of Jacob, thou art my battle Ax, and the weapons of war:
Lament. 3.24. Psalm. 16.5. and 119.57. Matt. 22.43, 44 45. Jer. 51.15 19, 20,
21, 22, 23.
And David said, The Lord is my portion, and the lot of mine inheritance; and
again he said, Thou art my portion, O Lord. Christ is Lord, and David called
him so; The Lord said unto my Lord; and this Lord is Jacobs portion, whom the
Lord said, By thee will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee will I
destroy Kingdoms; and with thee will I break in pieces the Horse and his Rider,
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his Rider; with thee also
will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces young
man and old; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid.
Hearken you priests of England, who are called Ministers, and say the Scripture
is the Word of God, but the Word of the Lord is invisible, and cannot be seen
with your carnal eyes, and by it will the Lord break in pieces the Shepherd and
his Flock, Ezekiel. 34.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and he will gather his Flock from your mouths, and it shall become no longer
a prey unto you, and he will feed his sheep upon the mountains of Israel, and
lead them to the still waters; and he will likewise break in pieces the
husbandman, and his yoke of Oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces, says
the Lord, the Captains and Rulers: Matt. 10 34. Luke 12.51, 52, 53.
and said Christ, Think not that I am come to send peace on the earth, I am not
come to send peace, but a sword, to make division, for from henceforth there
shall be five in one house, divided, three against two, and two against three;
the Father shall be divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father;
the Daughter against the Mother, and the Mother against the Daughter: the
Mother-in-Law against the Daughter-in-Law, and where the Word of the Lord
comes, Heb. 4.13. Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4.
it seperates and divides asunder. Paul said, that the Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two-edged-sword, piercing, even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow; and it is a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and this David witnessed, and said, O
Lord, thou have searched me, and known me, thou understandest my thoughts afar
off, and art acquainted with all my ways.

Sixthly, The Word of the Lord is very pure, said David, therefore thy servant
loves it: Psalm. 119.140. Isa. 40.8, etc. 1 Pet. 1.23. John 15.3. and 17, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Isa. 9.6. 1 John 1.7. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Christ Jesus is the same yesterday, to day and for ever: And Isaiah said, The
Word of our God shall stand for ever. And Peter said, Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and
abides for ever: the word of the Lord, which is pure, makes clean: said
Christ, Ye are clean through the word. And Paul said, the very God of peace
sanctifice you wholly: Christ Jesus is the mighty God, the prince of peace, who
said, Father, sanctify them through thy Word, thy Word is Truth: Christ is
Truth, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin: He loved the Church,
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy, and without blemish; holy as he is holy* in all manner of conversation;
and so the Saints of Christ are, by the sprinckling of the blood of Jesus
Christ, made clean from al filthiness, and from all Idols, says the Lord, will
I cleanse you; by the which Will we are sanctified, Ezekiel. 36.25. Heb. 10.14.
Heb. 2.11. 1 Cor. 6.11.
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, for he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren, which brethren do believe that they need not
go into Purgatory to be cleansed from their sins after death, for they know
that they are already translated from death to life, Romans 6.18.
and have the witness in themselves, that although they were filthy, John 15.3.
yet now they know that they are washed, sanctified, and justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God; and being made free
from sin, by the Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, are become the
servants of Righteousness: Seeing, said Peter, ye have purified your souls in
obeying the Truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, 1
Pet. 1.22. Mat 5.8.
see that ye love one another fervently with a pure heart; the pure in heart
they are blessed, and shall see God, but no unclean thing shall inherit the
kingdom of God; for without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie; and out of the
kingdom you are, 1 Cor. 6.9, i0. Rev. 22.15.
and such are you who say you shall never be free from sin in this life; For as
the tree falls, so it shall lie, whether it fall to the North, or to the South:
Therefore cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double
minded, and come to Christ, that you may be made clean through the Word, and
have life.

Seventhly: The Scripture, which is visible, John 1.2, 3. Exodus 20.11. Heb.
1.2.3. Coll. 16.17. Jer. 10.12. Psalm. 33.6.
made not the world, but by the Word of God the Heavens, and the Earth, and all
things therein were made; For said John, In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God; all things were made by him, and nothing was made
without him that was made; for it was the Spirit of God that moved upon the
face of the waters; and Jeremiah said, That God has made the earth by his
power, he established the world by his wisdom; Christ is the Power of God, and
the Wisdom of God: And David said, By the Word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his Mouth: And Paul said, Heb.
11.3.
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God,
so that the things which are seen, were not made of the things which do appear;
For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions; or
principallities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him.

Eighthly: And as all things were made by the Word of God, which Word was before
any Letter of the Scripture was written; so by the same Word of his Power are
all things upheld; For in him we live and move and have our being, Acts 17.24,
26, 28. Heb. 1.3. 2 Pet. 3.5, 6, 7.
said Peter* For of this thing they are willingly ignorant of that by the Word
of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in
the water; whe^eby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished; but the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same Word are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition
of ungodly men; under which ungodly men, the Prophets and Apostles, and
Servants of the Lord, ever in all generations, suffered cruel mockings, bonds,
and imprisonments, and death for obeying the Commands of the Lord, and bearing
their Testimony of Christ Jesus the Son of God, and the Word of God, and
likewise for crying out against the sins and abominations which was committed
in those days, both by Kings, Rule^s, Judges, Priests, Prophets and people and
as the sins and abominations was then, so it is now in these days acted by the
like generation of Heathens that rage, Psalm. 2.2. John 16.2. Rev. 2.10.
and people that imagine vain things; the Kings and the Rulers fit and take
counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed, and in so doing
they think they do God good service, and for their so doing are accounted good
Christians by their own generation, both of Priests and people; but they are no
christians that do such things, for if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, and the old man with his deeds is put off, and the New man put on,
Christ Jesus, and of him they learn who is meek and lowly, and to be holy in
all manner of conversation, and to love the brethren, and to entertain
strangers, and those Rulers that so learn, are a terror to the evil doers, and
a protection to them that do well, for he that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God, for those that were ordained of God, and ruled in
the fear of God, did not imprison the Servants of God, and his prophets, but
received them, and protected them: But those Rulers and people, who without the
fear of God were, and ruled in their own wills, they whipped and stockt, Luke
23.10, 11.
and put in prisons and dungeons, and chains, and murdered, despised, and
mocked the messengers of the Lord, until the wrath of God arose against them,
and there was no remedy; as you may see hereafter appear.

Abraham he put none of the Servants of the Lord in Prison; for as he said in
his Tent door in the heat of the day, in the plains of Mamro, where the Lord
appeared unto him, and he lift up his eyes, and looked, and do t^^e men stood
by him; and when he saw them he ran from the Tent-doore and met them, and said,
My Lord, if I have found favor in thy sight, pass not, I pray thee from thy
servant; and Abraham said, Let a little water I pray you be fetched, and wash
your feet, and rest your selves under the Tree, and I will fetch a morsel of
bread, and comfort your hearts, Read Genesis 18. chap.
and after that you shall pass on, for therefore are you come to your Servant;
and Abraham hastened into the Tent, and said, Make ready quickly three measures
of fine meal, kneed it, and make Cakes upon the hearth; and Abraham ran unto
the herd, and fetch a Calfe, tender and good; and gave it to a young man, and
be hasted to dress it; and Abraham took butter and milk, and the Calfe which
was dressed, and set it before them, and he stood by them under the Tree, and
they did eat, and the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom, and
Abraham went with them to bring them in their way.

And just Lot he put none in prison: Genesis 19. chap.
For there came to Sodom at even two Angels, and Lot sat in the Gate of
Sodom, and Lot seeing them rose up and met them; and he said, Behold, now my
Lords turn in I pray you into your Servants house, and tarry all night and wash
your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways; and he pressed upon
them greatly, and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house, and he
made them a feast, and did break unleavened bread, and they did eat.

Moses put none of the Servants nor prophets of the Lord in prison, Numb.
ii.24. to the 30.
for when the young man ran and told him that Eldad and Medad do prophecy in
the camp, and would have had Moses to forbid them, and Moses said unto him,
Enviest thou for my sake? would to God that all the Lords people were Prophets,
and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them; and Moses and the Elders of
Israel went into the Camp, but did not forbid them.

David he put none of the Lords prophets in prison; 2 Samuel 12. chap.
for Nathan the prophet came, and declared unto him the parable of the
Ewe-lamb, he straightway confessed his sin, and owned his condemnation upon
himself, by his own words, out of his own mouth; neither do I find that
Solomon put any in prison.

Joshua he put none of the Lords servants in prison; nor Gideon, Josh. 5.13,
i4, i5. Judge. 6.8. i1, 12, 13.25, etc.
he neither put the Angel, nor the prophet of the Lord in prison, but he threw
down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove that was by it.

Neither did Hezekiah, nor Iehosaphat, 2 Kings 19. 2 Chronicles. 19.
nor Josiah put any of the prophets of the Lord in prison, neither did any of
these Kings and Rulers before mentioned, make any law, statute, or ordinance, or
send forth any Proclamation to their Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, or other
Officers, to take the Prophets and Servants of the Lord, as they wandered up
and down in sheepskins and goat skins from place to place, in the work and
service of the Lord, and to put them in prison, or to whip them, and to send
them away with Passes like Vagabonds; And Abraham, Lot, Moses, Joshua, Gideon,
David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Iehosaphat, and Josiah were all Rulers that feared
God, and were not of them that misused the Prophets, nor despised the Word, nor
mocked the Messengers of the Lord.

But those that do in these days imprison, mock, and misuse the Prophets and
Ministers of God, (and despise his word which they declare and obey) are no
Christians; neither were they Christians that did so in former Generations; for
the first King or Ruler that I read of, Genesis 39 and 40. chap.
who had got an invented Prison, was Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Joseph being
falsely accused by his filthy unclean Mistress, was put into the Egyptian Kings
Prison, among the Kings Prisoners by his Master Pottiphar, the Captain of
Pharoahs Guard, and Pharaoh being offended with his Butler and Baker, in his
wrath put them in Prison; and he that was offended and did this in his rage,
was no Christian, but a dark Egyptian King without the fear of God.

And the uncircumcised Philistines had not the fear of God, that plowed with
Sampsons Heifer, and caught Sampson, and put him in prison, Judge. 26.21.
and bound him with Fetters of Brass, these Philistines that did this, were no
Christians.

And Ahab, as King Pharaoh and the Philistines had got Prisons, 1 King. 22.27.
Coll. 3.5.
so had he got a Prison, and said of Micaiah the Prophet of the Lord, Take this
fellow into the Prison, and feed him with bread of affliction, and with water
of affliction, until I come in peace: And Ahab was an Idolater, and no
Christian.

And Asa fell off from the Lord, and relied on the King of Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 16.
chap Psalm. 3.1. I^a. 31.1.
for the which he was reproved by Hanani the Seer; then was Asa wrath with the
Seer, and put him in the prisonhouse, for he was in a rage with him because of
this thing: and Asa oppressed some of the people the same time. Was Asa, that
oppressed the people, and that fell off from the Lord, and went down to Egypt
and Assyria for help, a Christian, yea, or nay?

And Zedekiah did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord God, 2 Chronicles.
36.12. etc. Ier. 37. and 38. chap.
and when Jeremiah came to him, and speak to him from the mouth of the Lord, he
humbled not himself, but consulted with his Princes, and at their request
Jeremiah was by them put in a Dungeon, where they let him down with cords, and
he stuck fast in the m^re, and Zedekiah and his Princes that did this to the
Lords Prophet, and despised his word, and transgressed very much after all the
Abominations of the Heathen, were no Christians.

And Herod the Tetrarch, that Fox and Murderer, he put John Baptist in prison;
and Herod the King stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, Matt.
i4.3. Acts 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 21, 22, 23.
and he killed James the Brother of John, and when he saw it pleased the Jews,
he caught Peter the Apostle of Christ, likewise, and put him in prison; and
these two Herod's was neither of them Christians that did this, I am sure.

And the Romans, when they saw that Paul had in the Name of Jesus commanded
the Spirit of Divination to go out of the Damsel, which did likewise the same
hour, Read Acts. ^^6 chap.
and that thereby the hope of their gains was gone, then they caught Paul and
Silas, and drew them into the Marketplace to the Magistrates, and brought them
to the Governors, saying, These men, being Jews do exceedingly trouble our
City, and teach Ordinances which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to
observe, being Romans; and all the people rose up against them, and the
Governors rent off their clothes, and commanded that they should be beaten
with Rods, and when they had beaten them sore, they cast them in Prison, and
commanded the Jailer to keep them safely, who having received such a
commandment, cast them into the inner-prison, and made their feet fast in the
Stocks. These Romans, Magistrates, Governors, and People were no Christians,
that used the Apostles and Servants of Christ so.

And all these Heathen Rulers, Kings, Magistrates, and People, who without the
fear of God were, and bore their Swords in vain, were no Christians, were not
contented with putting the Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, and Servants of the
Most High God in Prison, Dan. 3. i, 2.8.13 14, 15.
but they invented in their rage and cruelty further punishments, and death
unto them: For Joseph, he was not only put in Prison, but he was bound in
Prison, and he was brought before Pharaoh hastily out of the Dungeon. Read Dan.
the 6. chap.
And they were Philistines that put Sampsons eyes out, and bound him with
Fetters of Brass; and they were Idolaters, and such as transgressed very much,
after all the abominations of the Heathen, and mocked the Messengers of God,
and misused his Prophets, and despised his Word, that fed Micajah with bread
and water of affliction, and let Jeremiah with cords down into the Dungeon to
stick fast in the mire. And they were Babylonians and Caldeans, that invented
the Fiery Furnace, and put Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah into it, for refusing
to fall down and worship the Golden Image that Nebuchadnezar had set up; Then
Nebuchadnezar, the Princes, the Governors, and the Captains, the Judges, the
Counselors, the Treasurers, the Sheriffs, and all the Rulers of the Provinces,
were all at making the Proclamation, and the Caldeans they accused the three
Jews, Shadrack, Meshek, and Abednigo, and the King in his rage and fury
commanded them to be brought before him, and he was full of fiery, the form of
his Visage was changed, and he commanded the most mighty men of his Army to
bind them, and cast them into the fiery burning Furnace: and by the same
generation of men was Daniel cast into the Lions Den, for praying and giving
thanks unto God: And these Babylonians and Caldeans were no Christians.

And they were Libertines, Syrenians, and Alexandreans, and men of Cylitia, and
of Asia, that suborned men, and stirred up the people, Acts 6, 7. chap.
the Elders, and the Scribes, and caught Stephen, and brought him before the
Council, and when they heard the things which he speak, they gnashed on him
with their teeth, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the
City, and stoned him to death: And they were Jews, and Gentiles together, which
stoned Paul, and drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead. Acts 14.
chap.
And they were Herod's and Romans that cut off John Baptists head, and killed
James the brother of John with the Sword, and put Paul and Silas in the Stocks,
and whipped them before they were put in, and such, with the Jews, chief Priests,
and Scribes, crucified Christ the Son of God. And they were the bloody Papists
that set up stakes in Queen Mary's days, and tied the Martyrs to them, and set
Faggots and sire to them, and burnt them.

And as the Servants of the Lord (in whom was the righteous Seed) suffered
death, Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29. 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude 18. Prove. 17.5. Heb. 11.36. Mark
15.29, 30, 31. Luke 23. ii.
bonds, stripes, stoning and imprisonment, with other tortures, in all ages, by
wicked and ungodly men, so likewise did they who were born after the spirit,
suffer cruel mockings, and scoffiings, by thole who are born after the flesh,
who walk after their own ungodly lusts, and such are persecutors, following the
example of Ishmael, the Son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom Sarah, the Freewoman,
saw mocking Isaac, in whom was the Righteous Seed; and they are Sons of Hagar
who walk after their own ungodly lusts now, that are seen mocking the Servants
of the Lord in these days, them in whom the Righteous Seed is in, begotten by
the immortal Word, and born of the Freewoman, but whosoever mocketh the poor,
despises his Maker, who blesses the poor in Spirit; you scoffers and mockers,
you may Read your Portion in the first of the Proverbs, from the twenty second
verse to the latter end.

All these, who thus suffered, were no Vagabonds, but were faithful diligent
messengers, and painful Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, which was large, and
his Harvest great, in which they wandered about, laboring and reaping down his
harvest, and gathering the Wheat into the Garners, wandering about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, from city to city, and from one country into
another. Elijah he wandered about where ever the Lord commanded him, and did
the Lords messages; see how he traveled about, who was an inhabitant at
Gilead, and at the command of the Lord he went to Samaria to Ahab, to tell him
there should be neither dew nor rain, and then at the command of the Lord he
turned Eastward, to hide himself by the River Cherith over against Jordan, and
from thence to Zarephath, which is in Zidon, where the Widow sustained him for
a certain time; and after many days, he in the third year went to Samaria to
Ahab, and from thence to Beersheba, which is in Judah, 1 Kings 18, and 19. chap.
and from thence he went a days journey into the Wilderness, and lay undet the
Juniper Tree, and from thence he rose up, and traveled forty days and forty
nights unto Horeb, the mount of God, and there he entered into a Cave, and
lodged there, and the Lord went by, and a mighty strong wind rent the
mountains, and break the rocks, and afterwatd came an Earthquake, and after the
Earthquake came fire, and after the fire, came a still soft Voice, and Elijah
heard it, and the Lord said to him, Go, return by the Wilderness to Damascus,
and when thou come there, Anoint Hazell King over Assyria, And Iehu, Son of
Nimshi shall thou Anoint King over Israel, 1 King. 19. chap
and Elisha, the Son of Shaphat shall thou Anoint to be Prophet in thy room. So
he departed thence, and found Elisha Plowing wirh twelve yoke of Oxen before
him; and Elijah went toward him and cast his Mantle upon him, and he left the
Oxen, and ran after him. And the Lord sent Elijah again to meet Ahah King of
Israel, which is in Samaria, for the Lord said, Lo, he is in the Vineyard of
Naboth; and Elijah went and did his Message to Ahab, 1 King. 21.20 21.
as the Lord commanded; and after the Lord sent him to meet the Messengers of
Ahazia, King of Samaria, as they were going to Baal Zebub the God of Ebron, and
to them he delivered his message that the Lord commanded, and he went to the
top of a mountain and sat there; and the messengers returned to the King and
told him all that Elijah said of him; and the King said, What manner of man was
he that met you and told you these words? and they said, He was an hairy man,
girded about his loins with a leathern girdle; then said the King, It is Elijah
the Tishbite: and the King sent a Captain and fifty men to fetch him, but the
Captain and his fifty men were devoured by fire, and the King sent a Captain
and other fifty men, who were devoured by fire also: And he sent a third
Captain and fifty men, and the third Captain fell on his knees before Elijah,
and entreated him that the life of him and his fifty men might be precious in
his sight, 2 King. i chap. and 2 chap.
and then the Lord said unto Elijah, Go down with him to the King, and be not
afraid of his presence; and Elijah went down with him and delivered his
Message. And Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal to Bethel, and from Bethel to
Jericho, and from thence to Jordan, and they two stood there, and Elijah took
his cloak and wrapped it together, and smote the Waters, and they were divided
hither and thither, and they two went over on dry dry land; and when they were
passed over, as they went walking and talking, behold there appeared a Chariot
of fire, and Horses of fire, and did separate them two, and Elijah went up with
a Whirlwinde into Heaven. And Elijah that traveled thus up and down, to and
fro, was no Vagabond, nor Idle, Disorderly person. And Elisha took up the cloak
of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the Waters of Jordan, and went over,
and went to Jericho, and tarried there; and the men of the city told him the
Waters were naught, and he cast Salt into the Spring of Waters, and said, Thus
says the Lord, I have healed these Waters, death shall no more come thereof,
nor barrenness to the ground; and he went from thence to Bethel, and from
thence to Mount Carmel, and from thence he returned to Samaria: And on a time
Elisha came to Shunem, and there was a woman of great estimation, constrained
him to eat bread, and she said to her husband, behold, now I know that this is
an holy man of God, (that passes by us continually) and he went to Mount
Carmel, and the woman's child being dead, she went to him and told him, and he
came into the house where the child lay dead, and by him, through faith, the
child was raised to life: And afterward Elisha returned to Gigal, and Elisha
was in Samaria, when Naaman came to him to be cured of his leprosy, and he
sent him word, to go wash seven times in Jordan and thy flesh shall come again,
and thou shall be clean. And after that Elisha went with the children of the
Prophets to Jordan: And after he went into Dothan, where the King of Assyria
sent Horses and Chariots, and a mighty Host, and compassed the City, but the
Lord smote them with blindness, and Elisha led them to Samaria, where they were
taken. And Elisha that traveled thus continually in the work of the Lord, was
no Vagabond, nor Idle, Disorderly person. And Isaiah that walked three years
naked and barefoot, for a sign of what should come upon Egypt and Ethiopia,
Isa. 20. chap.
was no Vagabond, nor Idle, Disorderly person. And Jeremiah, who was stayed in
the Gate of Benjamin, as he was going from Jerusalem into the Land of Benjamin,
yet he was no Vagabond nor Fugitive, Jer. 37. chap.
nor idle, disorderly person. Nor Jonah the Hebrew, who at the Command of the
Lord, went out of his own country to Nineveh, to preach yet forty days, and
Nineveh shall be overthrown. Neither was Ezekiel, nor any other of the Prophets
(who obeyed the command of the Lord, in declaring his Messages, and crying out
against the filthy Abominations that was committed, both by Kings, Princes,
Rulers, Judges, Priests, and People) any vagabonds, or idle, disorderly
persons. Neither was John the Baptist, Mat. 3.1. Luke 3.2.
who went into the wilderness of Judea, into all the country about Jordan,
Preaching the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins, he was no
vagabond, nor idle, disorderly person. And Christ Jesus the Son of God, who
went from Galilee to Jordan, to be baptized of John, and was afterward led by
the Spirit into the wilderness; and leaving Nazareth he came to Capernaum,
which is upon the Sea coasts, to dwell there, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet Isajah: From that time Jesus began to preach and he
walked by the Sea of Galilee, and he went all about Galilee teaching in their
Synagogues, and great multitudes of people followed him from Galilee, and from
Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan, and he
went up into a Mountain and taught them, and when he was come down from the
Mount, he entered into Capernaum, and went into Peter's house: and afterward he
went into a ship, and over the sea, into the Country of the Gadarenes, and
when the whole city that went out to meet him, Matt. 8.34.
and when they saw him they besought him to depart out of their coasts, and he
entered into a ship, and passed over into his own country, and he went about
all the cities and villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching, and
healing every sickness and every disease, and he called the twelve disciples,
and sent them forth with power against unclean spirits; and they went forth by
two and two; and when he had made an end of commanding the twelve, he departed
thence to teach and preach in their Cities; and he went to Samaria, and when
there was a Feast of the Jews, he went up to Jerusalem, and he went unto the
Mount of Olives, and into the desert, and into many other places, not a few,
and when he had finished his travells, at last he went with his disciples over
the Brook Chedron, where was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered,
John 18 chap:
where he and his disciples had often resorted, and there it was that Judas
betrayed him. And the Son of God, that traveled thus from city to city, and
from country to country, and from one village to another, and had no where to
lay his head; for he had left his natural parents with whom he might have had
an outward habitation, and a certain Dwelling place; but said Christ, Lo it is
written in the volume of thy Book, I come to do thy will O God; therefore he
left his natural Parents, to do the will of his heavenly Father: who had
anointed him to preach good tidings to the meek, Isa. 61 chap.
to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captive, and the
opening the prison doors to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, and to comfort all that
mourn, and to open the eyes of the blind, to unstop the deaf ears, to make the
lame walk, and to raise the dead, and cast out Devils, and to destroy the works
of the Devil: And the Son of God that went thus about, continually doing good,
at the will of his father, and had no certain dewlling place, nor no where to
lay his head, he was no Vagabond, nor Idol-disorderly person.

And Christ Jesus sent forth Laborers into his Fathers Vineyard, to gather in
the harvest, and his Disciples and Apostles which he sent forth, they denied
themselves, took up the Cross, and forsook Father, Mother, Wife and Children,
Brothers, Sisters, Houses and Lands, and all that they had for their certain
outward beings for their bodies, to follow Christ Jesus, who had no where to
lay his head, and to go whethersoever he sent them, to preach the Kingdom of
heaven, and they went out by two and two, from City to City, preaching the
Kingdom of heaven, and healing the sick, and after his ascension he gave them
power to bear witness of him in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria,
and unto the utmost part of the earth, Acts 1.8.
and they went abroad, see their travels therein, and the witness that they
bore at Jerusalem and other places; and Paul after his conversion, went into
Arabia, and returned again into Damascus, and after three years he went to
Jerusalem, where he stayed fifteen days, and afterward went into the Regions
of Assyria, and Cylicia, then had the Churches peace throughout all Judea,
Galilee and Samaria, and were edefied, and walked in the fear of God, and in
the comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied; and Peter passed thorowout all
quarters, and went to Lydda and Joppa, by the Seaside, and from thence to
Cesaria; and at the stoning of Stephen there arose persecution, so that they
that were scattered abroad, traveled as far as Phenice and Antioch, and
Cyprus, preaching to none but the Jews; and Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem to
Antioch, and he went to Tarsus to seek Saul, and he found him, and brought him
to Antioch, (where the Disciples were first called Christians, none are
Christians but Christ's Disciples) where they were separated for the work
whereunto the Holy Ghost had called them; so they being sent forth by the Holy
Ghost, departed unto Selencia, and from thence they sailed to Cyprus, and when
they were at Salamis, they preached the Word of God to the Jews in the
Synagogues, and they went through the I Will unto Paphos, and from thence they came
to Perga in Pamphilia, and John departed from them to Jerusalem, but when they
departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, Acts 13. i5.
and entered into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and sat down, and after
the reading of the Law, and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent to
them, saying, Ye men and Brethren, if ye have any Word of Exhortation for the
People, say on; Then Paul stood up and beckned with his hand, and spoke: And
the next Sabbath day, the whole City almost came together to hear the word of
God; but the Jews were filled with envy, and speak against those things which
were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming; then Paul and Barnabas
waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should have been
first spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; and the Word of the
Lord was published thorowout all the Region: But the Jews stirred up the
honorable and devout women, and the chief men of the city, and raised
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts,
but they shook off the dust off their feet against them, and came to Iconium,
and by reason of the persecution that rose against them after their long
staying there, and speaking boldly in the Lord, and testifying unto the Word of
his Grace, they fled unto Listra, and Derbe, Cities of Lycaonia, and unto the
Region that lies round about, and went down to Attalia, and thence to Antioch,
and passed through Phenice, and Samaria, to Jerusalem, and then were sent back
again to Antioch, where Paul and Barnabas continued teaching and preaching the
Word of the Lord; and after Paul and Barnabas parted, and Paul took Silas, and
departed, and went through Syria and Cylicia confirming the Churches, and
afterward they went through Phrygia, and the Region of Galatia, and after to
Mysia, and passing from Mysta, came down to Troas, and loosing from Troas, they
went a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis, and from
thence to Philippi, which is the chief City of that part of Macedonia, where
they abode certain days, and there they were whipped and put in prison, and
their feet made fast in the stocks, and the Keeper of the Prison was convinced,
and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and when they were let
out of Prison, they went into the house of Lydea, and when they had seen the
Brethren, they comforted them, and departed; and when they had passed through
Amphipelis, and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, and Paul, as his manner
was, went into the Synagogue of the Jews three Sabbath-dayes, and reasoned with
them out of the Scriptures, etc. And from thence by night they went to Beria,
where Silas and Timotheus stayed, but Paul went to Athens, and departed from
Athens and came to Corinth, where he found a certain Jew, named Aquila, with
his wife, Priscilla, who were Tent-makers, and Paul abode with them and
wrought, he being of the same Craft, and he reasoned with the Jews in the
Synagogues every Sabbath Day, persuading the Jews and the Greeks; and when
Silas and Timothy were come to him from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in spirit,
and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ: but they opposed and
blasphemed, and then Paul shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be
upon your own heads, I am clean, from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles;
and from Corinth he sailed thence with Aquilla and Priscilla into Syria, and he
came to Ephesus, and he sailed from Ephesus, and landed at Cesaria, and so went
down to Antioch, and after he had spent some time there, he went over all the
country of Galatia, and Phrygia, and so through the country to visit the
Churches, and strengthen the Brethren, till he came to Jerusalem, where of the
Brethren he was received gladly, and having purified himself, he entered into
the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification; and
when the Jews of Asia saw him there, they stirred up all the people, and laid
hands on him, and set all Jerusalem in an uproar, and so he was sent to prison
into the Castle, and brought before the chief captain, and after brought before
a council of the High Priest Annanias, with Pharisees and Sadduces, and after
he was brought before Festus, and after that before King Agrippa and then was
shipped away and sent to Rome, to appear before Caesar, and at Rome he dwelt two
years in his own hired house, Acts 28.30, 31.
and received all that came to him, preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding of him, and he was injournying often in perils of waters, in perils
of robbers, in perils by his own contrymen, in perils by the heathen, in
perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, 2 Cor. 11.24, 25 26, 27.
in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren, in weariness and
painfulness in watching often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold
and nakedness; and all these who had forsaken all, and traveled thus from city
to city, and from country to country, laboring in the Vineyard and Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, were brethren, and fellow laborers, and city-sons of
the new Jerusalem, and were no Vagabonds, nor Idle; Disorderly persons; but bad
the same persons of the Prophets and Apostles, or any of them been here on
earth at this day, and should have wandered about here in England, from city to
city, through towns and villages, they would have been counted vagabonds, and
idle, disorderly persons, by this generation that is now living, who would have
laid hold on them, and hailed them before magistrates, which would have sent
them to prisons, stocks, Bridewel, and whipped them, as some of the magistrates
in England have done unto those people which are in scorn called quakers, by
the sons of Hagar the Egyptian; but those people that are called quakers, and
travel about from city to city, and thus persecuted, Matt. 10.5. etc. Matthew.
28.19. Mark 6.7.10. and 12. Luke 10.3. etc. Luke 24.19.
are such as have denied themselves, and forsaken all, as the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ did, and have taken up the same Cross, and have received of
the same power, and are called and sent forth by the same Jesus Christ to
Declare the message of God, that he is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all;
and Declare the same Gospel, and bear testimony of the same Jesus Christ that
the Prophets and Apostles did, and labor in the same Vineyard, and gather in
of the same Wheat into the Garners, and by the same power do they cry out
against the Priests and false Prophets, and false Worshippers, and the
Abominations that are committed now, as ever was; and for this, and for no
other, have they suffered, and do suffer all things by unreasonable men, for
following the Captain of their salvation, and running the Race that he has set
before them, looking at Christ Jesus the Author and Finisher of their faith,
and do rejoice that they are counted worthy to suffer for his Names sake; and
were not that the Truth and Power of the Holy Ghost which they have received,
by which they are carried forth with boldness to declare the truth, through
much sufferings, travels and labors in the Lords Vineyard, they should not be
thus persecuted as they are; for as it was in the days of Christ and his
Apostles, (then the chief Priests and Pharisees came to the Officers, whom they
had sent to take Christ, John ^.45. etc. Acts 28.22.
and said, why have you not brought him? the Officers answered, Never man speak
like this man; then said the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? have any of the
Rulers or the Pharisees believed on him, but this people that are accursed, who
knows not the Law? And likewise the chief of the Jews said to Paul, We know
that this Sect is every where spoken against) so it is now here in England, all
Sects and sorts speak against this one poor, low, despised thing, which is the
Truth, which is owned, and received, and obeyed by those People, which are in
scorn called quakers, which is without controversy that great mystery of
godliness that is hid from the wise and prudent of the World from all
Generations, and is now at the Fathers pleasure revealed unto Babes and
Sucklings; For both Aepiscopal, the Presbyters, the Independants, the Baptists,
Seekers, Ranters, Papish, Professor and profane Priests, and People (and
Rulers some) Gog and Magog, all join together hand in hand against the Lord,
and against his Anointed, unto whom he has committed the Word of
Reconciliation, and sent abroad into the Ministry, who are by this generation
imprisoned, whipped, stocked, stoned, beaten, mocked, scoffed, scorned,
derided, envied, and hated by all Sorts and Sects here in England, which sits
a^ ease, and are in Peace, eating and drinking, and making themselves merry,
sporting themselves in the day time, heaping up Riches, clothing themselves in
costly Apparel and soft Raiment, living wantonly upon the earth, forgetting the
rock from whence they are hewn, and so treasuring up unto themselves wrath
against the Day of Wrath and Revelation of the Judgment of God, which is to be
revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness.

These people that are called Quakers, and that are thus used by this
generation, have not been found begging at men's doors, neither have they been
chargeable, or eaten any man's bread for naught, neither transgressed any Law of
Equity, which is holy, righteous, just and good, therefore they are no
Vagabonds, Fugitives, nor Disorderly, Idle persons.

But they are the Vagabonds who are gone out from the presence of God, (who is
Light, and in him is no darkness at all) and are fallen into the Transgression,
and are in envy and murder; these are in Cains nature, who are wrath, and
their countenances fallen, their Offering is not of God accepted, but their sin
lies at their door; these are drove into the earth, and have their habitation
in the earth, and hide themselves from the face of God, whom they see not, nor
his voice hear, for in the earth they live, and have no habitation with God,
for out from his presence they are gone; such are the Vagabonds and the
Fugitives in the earth, from which they are accursed, and it shall not
henceforth yield unto them its strength; Esau was profane, and hunting abroad
and was a Reprobate, whose mind is turned from the Light, Christ Jesus, is
reprobated from God, and in him has no dwelling: Esau was a cunning Hunter, and
lived in the fields, and despised his birthright; and all those whose minds
are abroad seeking after honor, and following after pleasures, living idly
upon the earth, are cunning Hunters, whose minds are reprobated from Christ
Jesus, dwelling in the fields, despising their birthright, these are Goats
(and not Sheep) clothed with rough garments, the first born, friends of the
world, enemies to God, profane, fierce, envious, rash, haters of good,
persecutors of the righteous seed, fornicators, as Esau was, and hated of God,
and could find no place for repentance, these who are gone from the presence
of God, and turned from the Light, which they hate, because their deeds are
evil, and it reproves them; and although they have great habitations in the
earth, and have compassed much of the earth into themselves, and dwell therein,
(and have no habitation with God) yet they are the Vagabonds, the Fugitives,
the Reprobates, and the disorderly, idle persons, which the sword is to be laid
upon, and the Law is for, for they serve not the Lord but their own bellies;
these are seen and known by the children of Light, which Light is the
condemnation of all those who walk contrary to it, and hate it. So likewise you
may see here as follows, who the unruly and disorderly persons be. There came
to the city of Sodom two Angels at the even, and Lot sat in the Gate of
Sodom, and seeing them, he rose up to meet them, and he pressed upon them
greatly, and they entered into his house, and he said, Tarry all night and wash
your feet, and he did bake unleavened bread, and made them a Feast, and they
did eat, and he said, Genesis 19. cha^.
Ye shall rise early and go on your ways: but before they lay down, the men of
the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and
young, all the people from every quarter, and they called unto Lot, and said
unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out
unto us; and they said unto Lot, We will deal worse with thee then with them;
and they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the Door.
Now unto you all, Judges, Mayors of Cities, Justices, Sheriffs, and Constables,
I appeal to that of God in all your consciences, which bears me witness, who
was the unruly and disorderly persons, who was the cause of this rising and
tumult making in the city of Sodom? was just Lot and the two Angels, or the
Sodomites? (Isay the Sodomites) But would not you have done unto the two
Angels, as many of you have done unto those people called quakers, that when
two of them have been come to a city, and have been entertained into a friends
house, and there have peaceably set together in the worship of God, and when
the people of the city have known of it, have (just like the Sodomites) both
old and young, have gathered together and beset the house round and pressed
upon the door, and broke the Windows, and made a great tumult, and have abased
the people that have been as peaceable as Lot and the two Angels, but they have
been charged with making the Tumult, and counted Disorderly, and sent to
Prison, and there kept, and the Disorderly and the Unruly set free.

And again, when Paul and Silas were come to Thessalonica, and preached that
Christ had suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus, said
Paul, whom I preach unto you, is Christ; and the devout Greeks, a great
multitude, and of the chief Woman, not a few, believed and consorted with Paul
and Silas; but the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all
the city in an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring
them out to the people, Read Acts 17. chap. to the 10. verse.
and when they found them not, they drew Jason, and certain of the brethren,
whom Jason had received into his house, unto the Rulers of the City, crying,
These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also, and these
all do contrary to the Decree of Caesar, saying there is another King, one
Jesus. Now seeing the thing is so plain here before you, that it was the
unbeleeving Jews, and the certain lewd fellows of the baser sort that set all
the City in an uproar, I will ask this question, Whether the unbelieving Jews,
with the certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, ought not to have given
security to the Magistrates, and to have answered for setting the City in an
uproar, yea, or nay? And whether Jason and his brethren, who were peaceable in
hi^ house together, ought not to have been set at liberty without giving
security, yea, or nay? Secondly, VVhetheer that were not a piece of injustice
done by the Rulers, who took security of Jason, and the others with him, and
let the others, that made the uproare, go unpunished, yea, or nay.

And again, When Paul was come to Jerusalem, and had purified himself, he went
into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification,
and when the Jews which were of Asia, saw Paul in the Temple, they stirred up
all the people, and laid hands on Paul, crying out, Men of Israel help, this is
the man that teaches all men every where, against the People, and against the
Law, and this place, etc. And all the City was moved, and the people ran
together, and they took Paul and drew him out of the Temple, and shut the
doors, and as they went about to kill him, tyding was brought to the chief
Captain of the Band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproare. I now appeal to all
men every where, who was it that set Jerusalem in an uproare? was it Paul, that
stood in the Temple, or was it the Jews of Asia, who stirred up the people? I
say it was the Jews of Asia that stirred up the people and made the uproare,
and not Paul: Then ought not the Jews of Asia to have been bound with Chains
for making the uproare, and to have been examined by scourging, and sent to
Prison for going about to kill Paul, yea or nay? and ought not Paul the Apostle
of Jesus Christ to have been protected and set at liberty, that he might have
gone on in the work of the Ministry, yea or nay?

So likewise the people called quakers, who at the Command of the Lord have
gone, one or two at the most, into some high place which is commonly called the
Church, without multitude or tumult, and there have stood peaceably, and as
they have been moved of the Lord so have spoke to the people, more or less, as
utte^ance had been given them, some has not spoken before all has been done,
but straightway the people of the City or the Town, who have been gathered
together in the high place that day, have by the priests means, rise all up in
a tumultuous manner, and have set the city or town in an uproar, just like the
Jews of Asia, beating and hawling the man or woman that has come in and spoke,
and straightway had them before the Mayor or Justice, who have sent the
innocent to Prison, Bridewel, Stocks, or whipped and sent them away with Passes,
and they that have been the evil doers by making the Tumult, have been set
free; and just as Paul was commanded to be bound with chains, and to be
examined by scourging, and kept in prison, and sent from place to place till he
came to Rome: So have the people called quakers been sent to prison by some of
the Mayors and Justices in England, and there they have had Fetters of Iron
hung upon their Legs, and kept close Prisoners, their friends not suffered to
come at them, and have lain there from Sizes to Sizes, and from Sessions to
Sessions, before they have been set at liberty.

AND now to you Judges, Mayors, Justices, Sheriffs and Constables, who have
done all these things to those innocent harmless people and Servants of the
most High God, that are scornfully called quakers, it is in love to your souls
that I write thus unto you: And to that of God in every one of your consciences
do I appeal, which bears me witness, Whose example have you followed in doing
that to them which you have done? have you followed the example of Christ, who
came to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison doors
to them that are bound? or did you follow the example of Pharaoh King of
Egypt, who kept Israel in bonds, and laid heavy burdens upon them? Have you
followed the example of meek Moses, who said, I would to God all the Lords
people were Prophets? Or did you not follow the example of Annas the high
Priest, Caiaphas, John and Alexander, and as many as were of the Kindred of the
High Priests, Ru ers, Elders and Scribes, Read Acts 7. chap.
who commanded Peter and John to preach no more in the Name of Jesus? Do you
follow the example of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, who received the
Messengers of God and gave them meat, and when they rose up he went with them
to bring them on their way? Or do you not follow the example of Ahab, who said
(of M^cah the Prophet of the Lord) Take this fellow and put him in prison, and
seed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction? Do you follow
the example of just Lot, who entreated the angels to go into his house, and
made them a feast, and baked for them unleavened bread? Or do you not follow
the example of Asa, who was wrath with Hanani the Seer, and in his rage sent
him to Prison? Have you followed the example of the widow Woman of Zarepheth, i
King. i3. and i7. chap.
who had but a handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oil in a Cruse for
her self and her son in the time of draught, yet at the Word of the Lord,
spoken to her by Elijah, she did make for Elijah a Cake first, and afterward
for her son and her self, and took the Prophet into her house, and they did eat
many days, and he did dwell there, and the woman said, I know that thou art a
man of God, and that the Word of the Lord is in thy mouth? Or have you followed
the example of Jeroboam, who put forth his hand from the altar, and said, Lay
hold on him, meaning the prophet of God, that came out of Judah, by the Word of
the Lord, to Bethel, and cried out against the altar in Bethel, at the same
time that the King stood by the altar, and was offering sacrifice upon it? Or
will you follow the example of a Woman that was of great estimation in Shunem,
2 King. 6. chap. 1 King. 18.4. and 13 verses.
that on a time when Elisha came to Shunem, she constrained him to turn into
her house to eat bread, and she said unto her husband, behold I know that this
is an holy man of God, (that passes by us continually) let us make him a
little Chamber I pray thee, and let us set him there a bed, and a table, and a
stool, and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither when he comes to us:
and it fell on a day that when he came thither; he lay there? Or will you
follow the example of Iezebel, who said of Elijah, So let the gods do to me,
and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them, by to morrow
about this time: and Iezebel slew the prophets of the Lord? Have you followed
the example of Joshua? Or do you follow the example of the uncircumcised
Philistines who put Sampson in prison, and bound him with fetters of brass?
Have you followed the example of Gideon? Or do you follow the example of
Zedekiah, who at the request of his princes Jeremiah the prophet of God was put
in the dungeon? Have you followed the example of David, a man after Gods own
heart, who received the message of God by the prophet Nathan, who said to the
King, Thou art the man? Or do you not follow the example of Herod the Tetrarch,
who John Baptist told, it is not lawful for thee to have thy Brother Philips
wife, he sent him to prison. Have you followed the example of Hezekiah, who
said to the Prophet Isajah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou have
spoken? Or do you not follow the example of Herod the King, who when he had
killed James with the Sword, and saw it pleased the Jews, he put Peter the
Apostle of Christ in prison? and have not some of you put the quakers in prison
because you saw it pleased the priests that take tithes, and preach for hire,
and divine for money, gifts, and rewards? Do you follow the example of
Jehoshaphat? Or have you not followed the example of the Roman Governors and
Magistrates, who caused Paul and Silas to be whipped, and put in the Prison, and
to be kept safe, with their feet made fast in the Stocks? Is the same mind in
you which was in Christ Jesus, who went always about doing good? Or are you
not in the same nature that the Babylonians and the Chaldeans were in, who cast
Shadrach, Meshek, and Abednigo into the fiery Furnace, and Daniel into the
Lions Den? And seeing that ye have done so much as you have, Is there not the
same mind in some of you as was in the bloody Papists in Queen Mary's days,
to do as they did, if you had but a Law to put that in execution upon those
people that are called quakers, as they did by the Martyrs? And seeing that the
Philistines put out Sampsons eyes, could not you and the Priests wish that the
eyes of those people, called quakers, were put out, that they might neither see
to write more, nor to go about the land from City to City, and from one place
to another, to cry out against the Priests and false Prophets, and the
abominations of the Heathen, for the which they rage against the Truth, and
them that do declare it.

AND now unto all you both Magistrates and people, who have acted such things
as is before written, upon those people which are called quakers, To that of
God in every one of your Consciences, that bears me witness, do appeal; Are you
all Christians, as you call your selves, or have you acted like Christians? The
Disciples of Christ were called Christians: and they were Christians indeed,
who did no such things as ye have done: Acts 11.26. 2 Cor. 5.17. Phil 2.5. 2
Pet. 1.4.
For I know, that if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: and the same
mind is in him as was in Christ Jesus, and (in his measure) he is like Christ,
holy, as he is holy, meek and lowly, dwelling in love and peace, doing to all
men as he would be done unto himself: but I know the blasphemy of them, that
say they are Jews, and are not; and the blasphemy of those, that say they are
Christians, and are not, but are in the same nature that the Sodomites,
Egyptians, Philistines, Babylonians, Idolaters, and Heathens were in, and are
doing the same works, and committing the same abominations that they committed,
and yet you would be accounted Christians, and think with your selves that you
are good Christians. But ye are all made manifest and seen (with the Light,
Ephesians. 5.13. Romans 6.16.
and by the Children of the Light) what you are, and what you all have done,
and whom you also serve, for his Servants you are whom you obey. Whosoever
commits sin, transgresses also the Law, i John 3.4.8. verses.
for sin is the transgression of the Law, which is holy, just, and good, and
written in the heart; and he that commits sin is of the devil, for the
Devil sins from the beginning; For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Therefore while you
have time prize it, and repent of the evil of your doings, and turn to the
Lord God, who is gracious, merciful, and longsuffering, and patient in
forbearing, and hearken to the Word which is nigh you, in your heart and in
your mouth, and obey his Commandments, Loving the Lord God with all your
hearts, with all your souls, and your neighbor as your self, doing to all men
as you would be done unto: Christ Jesus is the Light of the World, learn of
him, who is meek and lowly; He is the way, the truth and the life, and no man
comes to the Father but by him; and whosoever follows him shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; therefore if you will be his
Disciples, (and Christians) deny your selves, take up the Cross, and follow
him, that you may have life, for to as many as receive him, and believe on his
Name, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God, and the Sons of God are
led by the Spirit of God, into all Truth and Righteousness. Therefore let the
Spirit of God guide you, to run with cheerfulness the Race that Christ has set
before you, despising the shame, counting it greater Riches to suffer
afflictions with the children of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. Therefore let every one that names the Name of JESUS, depart
from iniquity, and take not the Name of God in vain, For the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of VVisdome.

Psalm. 2. i0, ii, i2. Exodus 22.21, 22 and chap. 23.6, 7, 8. Dulc. 24.17. 2 Samuel
23.3. Mic. 6.8. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.
Therefore you Judges, Justices, and Rulers all, be ye warned of doing any
injustice, and take heed of vexing, oppressing, or perverting the Judgment of
the Stranger, or Widow, or Fatherless, or perverting the words of the
Righteous, For he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God:
And ye that judge, take heed what you do, for ye are not to judge for man, but
for the Lord, who is with you in judgment, therefore take heed and do it, for
he has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord does require of
thee, even to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God:
Wherefore, now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, For
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts, 2 Timothy 1.^, 1^^
the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, the unruly, and
disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for the unholy and profane, for
murderers, whoremongers, adulterers, drunkards, cursers, swearers, liars,
perjured persons, or any other thing that is contrary to the Law, Romans 12.^.11.
which is h^ly, just, pure and good. Therefore let him that rules rule with
diligence, and be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord; for Rulers ought to be a terror to the evil doers, and a protection to
them that do well, Romans 13.3, 4, 5.
and in so doing he is the Minister of God to them that do good, and to them
that do evil shall him fear, and in so doing, he that rules, bears not the
Sword in vain, but he that does contrary hereunto, bears the Sword in vain,
and to an account will the Lord God call him, (for his so ruling and doing
unjustly, and for bearing the Sword in vain) who is coming to judge the secrets
of all men's hearts, who shall give an account in that day before the Judgment
seat of Christ, where all men must appear, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil; For the same measure that ye have mete to others, will the Lord mete to
you again with justice, for not one sin shall go unpunished. Knowing therefore
the terrors of the Lord, I persuade you, and he that has an eye to see, let
him see, and an ear to hear, let him hear, and an heart to understand, let him
consider, here is set before you the good works, and the evil doers, that
Rulers ought to be a terror to, and a protection to them that do well.

But it maybe you will object, and say, That those men and women that are
called quakers (which goes about preaching, are evil doers, viz. sowers of
sedition, and preachers of new Doctrine, and such as creep into houses, and
lead silly women captive, and that they are a people of uncivil behavior
toward their superiors and bette^s, and therefore they are not to be
protected, but punished as evil doers.

Answ. That those who have been always persecutors of the righteous, and
enemies to the Truth, have in all ages in their rage, counted the Servants of
God to be evil doers, sowers of Sedition, and preachers of new Doctrine; for so
Haman he was wrath and full of indignation with Mordecai, because Mordecai did
not reverence him, and Haman said likewise; Esth. ^^^ 5 chap
All this (meaning his honor) avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai
the Jew, sitting in the Kings gate, who would not rise up and bow to him,
although it was the Kings Command so to do: And Haman said of the rest of the
Jews, that their laws were diverse from all people, neither, said he, do they
keep the Kings Laws, therefore said Haman to the King, It is not for the Kings
profit to suffer them, but if it please the King, said Haman, let it be written
that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents into the hands
of those that shall have the charge of the business, to bring it into the Kings
Treasuries. And so likewise the unbelieving Jews which were of Asia, said of
Paul, in his time, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit
that he should live. Acts 22.22.
And the Jews of Thessalonica, who were moved with envy, said unto the Rulers
of the City, of Paul and Si^as, The^e have turned the world upside-down; and
said of Jason, and the Brethren, and Paul, and Silas, that these all do
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another King, one JESUS.
And when Paul was at Athens, disputing in the Synagogue with the Jews, and in
the Market place daily with them that met with him: he was counted by the
Philosohers, the Epicuranes, and Soicks, that encountered him, a Babbler; a
speaker of new Doctrines, and one that seemed to be a setter up of strange
Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection: Read Acts 17.
chap. Acts 24.1, 2, 3, 4.
and likewise Annanias the High Priest, with the Elders, and Turtulus, the
Orater said of Paul to Foelex, we have found this man a pestilent Fellow, and a
mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a Ringleader of
the Sect of the Nazarenes. And Mordicai, Paul, Silas, and Jason, with the
Brethren, were no evil doers, although they were counted so.

ANd as for those people which are called Quakers, that travel throughout
England, Ireland, and in Scotland, and other places, and go through Towns and
Villages, from City to City, they are faithful, painful laborers in the Lords
Vineyard, and are not of that sort which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women, laden with sin, and led aside with diverse lusts, but it is the
Priests of the nations, that preach for Tithes, Hire, Gifts and Rewards, (and
others) that have got not only, (a form) but many forms of godliness, but the
Power of Godliness they have not, for those that have the true Power of
Godliness they deny and persecute: I say, that (the Steeplehouses which are
builded up with Stone, Lime, Brick, Wood, Iron, Lead, and Glass, which are
commonly called Churches, and into other houses) the Priests (and others) creep
into, and it is they that lead those people captive, who are silly men and
women that there meet together, who are laden with sin, viz. Cursing, Swearing,
Lying, Envy, Wrath, Malice, Fighting, quarrelling, Mocking, Scoffing,
Covetousness, which is Idolatry, Oppressed, Cheating, Cozening, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Chambering, and Wantonness, Whoredom, Adultery, Pride and
Fornication; and they are led away with diverse Lusts, viz. The Lusts of the
Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, 1 John. 2.16, 17. mes 1.15.
and all the Fashions and Customs in the World, which Lusts, when it
conceives, brings forth Sin, and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth
Death. And these are the people that are ever learning of the Priests (and
others) but are never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.
chap. Tit. 1.10, 11.16.
by such Teachers who are discribed by Paul (a Minister of the Word) to be such
as are lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud boasters, blasphemers,
(saying they are Ministers of Christ, but are not) teaching such things, which
they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, subverting whole houses, disobedient to
Parents, unthankful, unholy, unruly, vain-talkers, deceivers, truce breakers,
false-accusers, incontinent, without natural affections, fierce despisers of
those that are good, traitorous, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof:
All people from such turn away, for they resist the Truth, and are men of
corrupt minds, Reprobate concerning the faith, of which you have been long
hearing, and ever learning, and yet you are not come to the knowledge of the
truth: Therefore while you have time prize it, for those that are turned from
such Teachers, and are turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Light of the World,
they are come to the Way, John 8.11. John 14 6. John 17.3. Psalm. 73.4. Romans 8
14. 1 John 2.20.27. Tit. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.3, 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
to know God, and Jesus Christ, which is life eternal, For Christ is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, and no man comes to the Father but by him, it is he
that guides them continually and brings them to glory: the children of the Lord
are not taught of man, but of the Lord, as many as are the Sons of God, are led
by the spirit of God, and the spirit of God leads them into all truth, and the
Unction wherewith they are anointed, teaches them all things, so that they need
not to be taught of men, for the Grace of God teaches them to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly righteously, and holy, in
all manner of conversation; and these that are thus taught, are Members of the
true Church, which is built up of living Stones, Christ Jesus being the chief
corner Stone; and this is the house of God, not made with hands, but is a
Spiritual House, the House of God, where God does dwell and in it walk: Ephesians.
2.21, 22. Coll. 1.18.24. 1 Cor. 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18, i9. 1 Timothy 2.15.
Heb. 12.22, 23, 24, 25.
This Church is not without, but in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and the Body of Christ is the Church, and is the Ground and Pillar of Truth,
and the Members thereof are one Body, and Christ he is the Head of the Body;
and they who are Members of this Church, are come to Mount Sion, and to the
City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels, to the general Assembly, and to the Church of the Firstborn, which
are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the
blood of sprinckling, which speaks better things then that of Abel. Therefore
all people, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, hearken unto Christ
Jesus, hear ye him that your souls may live; he that hears the voice of the Son
of God shall live; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
see that ye refuse not him that speaks, and hearken to the Word of the Lord,
that is nigh you, in your hearts and in your mouths, to it incline your ear; Oh
hear that your souls may live: and to day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, for this is the will of God, even your sanctification. Exodus
34.6, 7. Mic. 7. chap. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
Therefore why will ye die, O people of England. Return, return unto the Lord
God who is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; for who is a God like our
God, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, he will subdue iniquity, and will
cast sin into the depth of the sea, and he will perform the Truth unto Jacob, 2 Timothy 2, 13. 2 Cor. 1.20. Rev. 22.11.
and the Mercy to Abraham, which he has sworn unto our Fathers from the days
of old: He is a faithful God, and all his Promises are; Yea, and Amen. He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says; and he that will be
filthy, let him be filthy still.

Here follows some QUERIES to be answered by any of those who are called by
men Ministers, that preach in the High Places, or any other, that plead for,
and uphold them.
Quaery 1. WHether those be Ministers of Christ that makes Bargains with the
People of a Parish to have 100 l. a Year (more or less) for their preaching,
and take Bond of the People for the payment of the same, seeing that Christ
said to his Ministers, Freely ye have received, freely give; and Peter said,
The Flock of Christ is to be fed willingly, and not for filthy lucre sake, yea
or nay? Mat. 8.10. 1 Pet. 5.2.

2. Whether those be Ministers of Christ, that Preach for Hire, and Divine for
Money, yea or nay? Mic. 3.11.

3. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that seek for gain from their quarter,
like greedy dogs, which think they can never have enough, yea or nay? Isa.
56.11. Ezekiel. 22.25.

4. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that feed themselves with the Fat, and
clothe themselves with the Wool, and care not for the Flock, but let it become
a prey? Read Ezekiel. 34. chap.

5. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that take Tithes for their preaching,
seeing that the Apostle Paul witnessed the Priesthood changed, and the Law
disanulled by which Tithes was paid, yea or nay? Read Heb. 7. chap.

6 Whether those be ministers of Christ that sue men at Law for Tithes, seeing
that the Prophet of God cried out against them that prepared war against those
that put not into their mouths, yea or nay? Mic. 3.5.

7 What that Hire is that Christ said the Labourer is worthy of, Luke 10.7, 8.
and whether that be not an unrighteous thing of a man, that demands wages of
men, and compels them to pay him wages who never set him to work, nor he never
wrought for them, yea or nay. Read Luke 10. chap. to the 15 verse.

8 Whether it is the work of the Ministers of Christ, to stay at home to bury
the dead, or to go into all nations and preach the Gospel, according to Christ's
command, yea or nay. Matt. 28.19, Mark 16.15. Luke 9.59, 60.

9. Whether the Prophets or Apostles of Christ used to observe the Statutes of
Omri, or to take delight in the works of Ahab, or to walk in their Councels,
yea or nay. Mic. 6.16. 1 King. 16. chap.

10. Whether those be ministers of Christ whose god is their belly, whose glory
is their shame, who mind earthly things, yea or nay. Phil. 3.19.

11. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that go in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam, for Honor and Rewards, and follow their
own pernicious ways, and through covetousness, with feigned words, make
merchandise of souls, yea or nay. Jude 11. 2. Pet. 2. chap. Rev. 18. chap.

12 Whether those be Ministers that puts money to usury, seeing that the
Prophet Jeremiah said, he neither lent on Usury, nor men lent me on Usury, yea
or nay. Read Ier. 15.10. Prove. 28.8. Psalm. 15.5.

13. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that will sit and eat and drink with
the Drunkards, and smite his fellow servants, yea or nay. Matt. 24.49.

14. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that are called of men Master, and
desire to walk in long Robes, and love the uppermost Rooms at feasts, and
greetings in the Market place, and have the highest seats in those places which
are called churches, and there stand praying, and for a pretense make long
prayers, and devour widows houses, yea or nay. Read Matt. 23. chap. Luke 20.46.
and 18.10, 11.

15. Whether those be Ministers of Christ which the Lord says he is against,
who steal his Word from their Neighbor, and use their tongues, and say, The
Lord says, when he spoke not to them, and run when he sent them not, and come
when he called them not, yea or nay. Read Ier. 23. chap.

16. Whether those be Ministers of Christ that preach up outward Temples made
with hands, and in them uphold an outward bodily worship, which profits
little, seeing that Paul witnessed against the same, and Stephen was stoned to
death for witnessing against them likewise; and Jesus Christ said, that God is
a spirit, and they true worshippers that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth, yea or nay. John 4.21, 22, 23, 24. Acts 7. chap. 1 Timothy
4.8. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.

17. That when a company are gathered together (of Drunkards, Swearers, Liars,
Whores, and Whoremongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Thieves, Murderers,
Scoffers, Scorners, Covetous, Proud Heady, High minded people, Lovers of
Pleasures more then lovers of God, Profane, carnal, earthly minded people,
dead in Trespasses and Sins, having their understandings darkened, such as are
aliens and strangers from the life and Covenant of Grace) and all these sit
together in the High Place, commonly called the church, and sing, ^^ Psalm. 6.
ver. 2, And heal me Lord, for why, thou know my bones do quake for fear. I
say, is any of those persons, above mentioned, in that condition that David was
in, when he said, I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed; or in that
condition that Moses was in, when he said, I exceedingly fear and quake, yea or
nay. Heb. 12.21.

18. Whether such persons above mentioned, that sing, All the night long I wash
my bed with tears of my complaints, and yet never witnessed that condition that
David was in, when he said, All the night I make my bed to swim, I water my
couch with tears: I say, do not such persons lie, and turn the Scriptures into
a lie, and so blaspheme the Name of God, yea or nay.

19. Whether such persons above mentioned, that makes Songs of the Saints
conditions declared of in the Scripture, which was never none of their own, do
not they lie, and tu^n the Scripture into a lie, and so blaspheme the Name of
God, yea or nay.

20. Did Christ Jesus or his Apostles at any time teach such persons above
mentioned to turn David's Prayers, the confession of his Sins, his Sorrows, his
Afflictons, his ^ad complaints he made thereof, and the Enemies of the Church,
his Exhortations his Prophecies, and other Scriptures, into Rhyme and Meeter,
and to sing them as Songs, yea or nay.

2i. Whether those men who are called Ministers, that teach the people so to
sing, and those people that do so sing, do not make David to become the Song of
Drunkards now in these days, as he was in those days that he was King, yea or
nay.

22. Whether such singing by such persons as is here above expressed, be a
Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
yea or nay.

23. Whether such persons above mentioned that so sing, sing with the Spirit,
and sing with understanding, and sing with grace in their hearts unto the Lord,
yea or nay.

24. Whether the praises of the wicked be not as abominable to the Lord as
their prayers, yea or nay.

25. Whether those that thus walk in darkness, and lead the blind thus out of
their way, be not blind guides, and lie under the curse of God for their so
doing, yea or nay. Mat. 23.16. Deuteronomy. 28.18.

26. Whether those persons that are called of men Ministers, and Teachers, and
profess themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and yet do such things as is
before expressed, be not scandalous to Christ and his Ministers, and so fit to
be cast out, yea or nay. Ezekiel 34.10.

27. Whether the two Poets Sternhold and Hopkins, with others, who turned the
Psalms and other Scriptures into Rhyme and Meter, did do it by the Spirit of
God, or by the wisdom of fallen man, seeing that no prophecy of the Scriptures
are of any private interpretation, yea or nay.

These queries are written and sent forth by me, who am known by the name of
Henry Clark.

The End.
This is entered according to Order.


