HERE IS THE SWEARERS, AND They who swear falsely, and likewise they who compel
men to swear, all tried by the Law of the Spirit of life WHICH IS IN CHRIST
JESUS.

Which LAW is holy, just, pure, and good; and all of them found guilty of sin
and transgression against the true and living God; and also Sentence pronounced
against them all, that so transgress the Law of God, who with the wicked, and
all they who forget God, must be turned into Hell, except they repent speedily;
for with God there is no respect of persons in Judgment.

By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood; Therefore shall the Land mourn, and
every one that dwells therein shall languish, with the Beasts of the field,
and with the fowls of the Heaven; yea, the Fishes of the Sea also shall be
taken away, Hosea 4.23. Written the 21. day of the third Month, 1661. by me
HENRY CLARK.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the year 1661.

Here is the Swearers, and they who Swear falsely, and likewise they who Compel
men to Swear, all tried by the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ
Jesus; which Law is holy, just, pure and good, etc.
IN the time of Ignorance and Darkness God winked at, and passed by many things
whereby mankind did transgress the pure and righteous Law of God, which is
holy, just, and good; but now Light is come into the world, even that Light
which has been hid from the wise and prudent of ages and generations past: the
which Light God who (is rich in mercy and love through the abundance thereof)
commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined into the hearts of Babes
and Sucklings, and they who (...) in the region and the shadow of Death saw
this great Light, which has given unto them the knowledge of the glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the Light, the true Light by which all
things that are reproved are made manifest. Therefore now God commands all men
every where to repent, and to turn from Darkness unto the Light, and from the
power of Satan unto God who is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. Now
the Light shines, all men every where will be left without excuse: Therefore
turn ye, turn ye every one from the evil of your ways, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth, as God would have you, that your souls may be saved:
For to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the whole duty of man: and the
fear of the Lord is to depart from iniquity. Therefore let every one that
names the Name of JESUS depart from iniquity: For because of Swearing and
Forswearing, and Swearing falsely; Lying, Killing, Stealing, and committing of
Adultery, the Land mourns: and as for the Rulers their violence is evil, and
their force is not right toward the People: But the true and living God he
hears the Cry of the Oppressed, and sees and beholds their Oppressors; yea he
does hear the Cry of his Elect, that cries unto him day and night, and he will
avenge them of their Oppressors speedily. And know ye this ye Kings and Rulers
of the Earth, that with God there is no respect of persons in judgment; and to
judgment ye must all come, to give an account to the King of Kings, the great
Judge of all the Earth, of all your works and deeds that have been done in and
by your bodies: And seeing it is thus written, that surely men of low degree
are vanity, Psalm. 62.9.
and men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the balance they are
altogether lighter then vanity. Then how will ye be able to stand before the
true and living God, who is a consuming fire, or what answer can ye make him
unto this one question when he comes to plead with you: What do ye cause and
compel the people to Swear and transgress my Law, and do ye not punish such as
fear my Name, and refuse to Swear, in obedience to my Command, says the Lord
God, etc. who has required this thing at your hands: to what will you flee for
excuse.

1. The Law of the land it cannot excuse you: Why? Because that Acts of
Parliaments, are acts of men's wills, and not the Oracles of God: and
Parliaments as well as Councils may be led by wrong principles, [being not
guided by the Spirit of God] and so err, and make Laws of vanity; or Acts of
Errors, and Statutes that are unjust and not good, because they contradict the
Law of God, Therefore they cannot justify your actions. 2. Neither will the
Antiquity of your Law for swearing, excuse nor justify you any more, then the
Temple at Jerusalem which was standing many Generations before Ieremiahs days,
could justify the Jews in their Murder, Adultery, and false swearing, etc.
neither will it free you from the guiltiness of sin in the sight of God, any
more then Abraham could free the Jews from the bondage of sin: for although
they pleaded, saying, They had Abraham for their Father, yet Christ told them,
Whosoever commits sin, is servant to sin, and so not free but in bondage, as
ye are to your wills and lusts, for which ye plead a Law. But it is a Maxim in
your own Law, That what soever in its Original is altogether illegal and
unjust, can never by tract or length of time, or by any Act or Acts subsequent,
be they what they will, in any kind or construction of Law, be made just or
legal, etc. And the Judges of this land know this Maxim to be true: Therefore
the more inexcusable are the Rulers and Judges of this Kingdom of England,
because they set at naught, and reject the Counsel and Spirit of the true and
living God, which should be their Rule and guide to make all their Laws by: and
if Laws, Acts, and Statutes, be not made according to that Rule, they can never
be legal, just, nor good. 3. Neither can the example of other Nations herein
excuse, or justify you: Why? because that the Customs, Statutes, and
Ordinances of the Nations, are vanity, and the works of Error, and not of God:
for the ways of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, Therefore ye should
not follow a multitude to do evil, nor learn the ways of the Heathen, who are
Idolaters, but refrain your feet from their paths, and follow the true and
living God fully: and as for those who go under the denomination of Christian
Princes and Kings, or Emperors, I do not hear of any one of them that fears
God, and works righteousness: and I do believe there is not scarce one of
them that does, and my reason is, Because they use such acts of violence, and
cruelty toward those that fear God and keep his Commandments: for if they
themselves feared God, they would depart from iniquity, and leave off their
acts of violence, cruelty and oppression to such as fear God and keep his
Commandments, or if they loved God, then they would keep his Commandments, and
be a terror to all evil doers, and love them that are begotten to the Truth of
God, the which they do not: But as John said, I know the blasphemy of them that
say they are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: So I say, I know
the blasphemy of them that lie, and say they are Christians, but are not; but
are members of the great whore of Babylon; for I know what the tree is by its
fruits; Therefore O King and Rulers of England, leave the paths of the wicked,
and go not in the way of evili men: avoid it: pass by it: turn from it, and
pass away; for they sleep not except they have done mischief: and their sleep
is taken away, unless they cause some to fall: for they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of violence; Therefore their ways and customs
are evil and vain, and not to be followed. Therefore take warning, and while ye
have time, prise it, except ye intend to go on in wickedness, and so to partake
of all the plagues that is a coming upon all the Kings, Rulers, and Judges of
the earth, who are drunk with the blood of the Saints, and holy Martyrs of
Jesus Christ.
Come now all you who command and compel men to swear By forms of Oaths; and
likewise all you who swear by forms of Oaths, or otherwise; for the end of my
writing is for the convincing of you all, that swearing, and compelling to
swear, is a sin against the true and living God: and that you may all see
that by the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, you are all evil doers,
and transgressors of a pure, holy, and a just law; For God so loved the world,
That he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: he was in the beginning before Abraham, and
a greater then Abraham was, is he: of whom Moses, a servant of God wrote,
saying, The Lord God said, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee; and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak whatsoever I command him, and whosoever will not hearken unto my words,
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him: and said Peter,
Every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall he destroyed from among the
people. And Jesus Christ being come, he taught his Disciples, saying, But I say
unto you swear not at all; for God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son, [who is the end of the Law and the Prophets, to
every one that believes in him: and he spoke and said, Swear not at all.] He
whom God has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world, who
being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and is
sat down on the right hand of his Majesty on high, being made much better then
the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they;
for all the Angels must worship him, and to the Name of Jesus every knee shall
bow, and every tongue shall confess (by the Spirit of God) that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father: and Matthew further said, That at that
time when Jesus took Peter, James, and John his Brother, up into a high
Mountain apart, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them, and a voice was heard
out of the cloud, and this voice which came from heaven, we heard, said Peter,
when we were with him in the Mount; which voice said, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. He is the end of the Law and the Prophets
to every one that believes in him. And Jesus Christ taught his Disciples,
saying, But I say unto you swear not at all, etc. And which of you all is it,
that will forsake to go with a Kings Son, that is far more excellent then the
servant of that King, to follow that servant, the which if you should, would
not the King be much displeased with you: Consider of it: Moses was a servant
of God, and faithful in the house of God, and did all things according to the
pattern showed of God in the Mount: but when Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God, who had the more excellent name was come from his Father, then all that
received him and believed on his Name, forsook Moses and the Law, and followed
him, and obeyed him who was the end of the Law and the Prophets, to every one
that believes in him, Christ Jesus the Son of God, who said unto them, Swear
not at all, etc.

1 Now I say there is a Law that came by Moses, which was given unto him in
Mount Sinai, for the children of Israel only (and not to any other people or
Nation) to observe and keep [but grace and Truth, which was, and is preached to
all Nations, came by Jesus Christ] For God had chosen them, viz the children of
Israel above all other people that were upon the face of the earth, to be a
peculiar people unto himself; and unto them were committed the Oracles or
Counsels of God: For he showed his word unto Jacob, and his Statutes, and his
Judgments unto Israel: and said David, He has not dealt so with any Nation,
for his judgments they have not known: and it is written in Moses Law, Hear, O
Israel, thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his
name, and not by the false gods that other nations swear by: and an Oath of
confirmation, was to them an end of all strife: and that was thus, if any man
deliver unto his neighbor an Ass, or an Ox, or a Sheep, or any beast to keep,
and it dye, or be hurt, or driven away no man seeing it, then shall an Oath of
the Lord (and not Oaths of men's making up into a form) be between them both,
that he who received the cattle to keep, has not put his hand unto his
neighbors goods, to hurt, kill or drive them away, and the owner of the goods
was to accept of the Oath of God, that the receiver had sworn, and the receiver
of the goods to keep, was not to make them good: and this oath of God taken
before a Judge, was to them an end of all strife: but other Nations were not
required to sweat by that Oath of God, for as Paul said, That God in times past
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways etc.

2. But when Christ Jesus the Son of the living God came in the flesh, he came
to condemn sin in the flesh, Acts 14, 15, 16.
and to destroy the works of the Devil, which was the cause of strife, that so
the effect, viz. Oaths, might cease; for he is the end of the Law and the
Prophets to all that believe in his Name; and to as many as received him, and
believed on his Name, he gave them power to become the sons of God, and as many
as are the sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God into all truth, out of
strife, sin and iniquity, which was the Occasion of an Oath of Confirmation,
which was to put an end to all strife between man and man, according to the Law
that came by Moses the servant of God, for the children of Israel only to
observe and keep: But the Word which God put into the mouth of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ, to speak and declare, was to be preached to all
Nations every where, that men might turn from vanity, and leave off sin and
iniquity that caused strife between man and man, to serve the: true and living
God: For when Christ Jesus sent forth his Apostles, he commanded them to go and
teach all Nations, saying, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel in
every creature, and teach all Nations to observe all things whatsoever that I
have commanded you: Now Christ Jesus taught them, his Apostles and Disciples,
saying, But I say unto you, Swear not at all: here is the command of Christ,
the words which God put in his mouth, according to Moses writing, I will put my
words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them in my Name all that I shall
command him, who said unto them, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is
God's throne: And said Christ to the Scribes and Pharisees, Woe unto you, ye
blind Guides: He that swears by Heaven, swears by the throne of God, and him
that sits thereon; Heaven is Gods throne, and God sits on his throne, and
he that swears by the Heaven, swears by God that sits thereon; the which
swearing Christ does forbid, although according to the Law of Moses it was
lawful for them to swear by his Name, [ Jehovah is his Name] before Christ
came, who is the end of the Law and the Prophets to all that believe in his
Name, who is the Son of God, who said, Neither swear by the Earth, for it is
his footstool: Is the Earth God's Footstool? then he that swears by the
Earth, swears by God that sets his foot thereon, according to what Christ
said, He that swears by the Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by God
who sits thereon; and said Christ, Neither swear by Jerusalem, for it is the
City of the great King: Who is he? the true and living God, the King of Kings:
He that swears by the City of the great King, swears by the King himself:
For says Christ, Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, swears by it, and him that
dwells therein: And does not God dwell in his temple? then he that swears
by the temple where God dwells, swears by God that dwells therein,
according to Christ's words, who spoke the truth, and as he meant. So then my
Argument is still, that he that swears by the Bible, swears not by it
alone, but likewise by all things that is written in every part of it at once.
And again Christ said, Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can
not make one hair white or black: Now I say, it is God that made every man's
head, and the hairs thereof, white or black; therefore he that swears by his
Head, swears by God who made his Head, and the Hairs thereof, 1 Cor. 11.3
white or black: And furthermore it is written, that the Head of every man is
Christ, and ought not man to be subject to his Head, Lawgiver and Judge,
Christ Jesus the good Shepherd, Bishop, and Savior of his soul? Now all ye
that swear, and compel men to swear, judge ye by the Law and Testimony of the
spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, whether it be good and lawful for ye
thus to do, yea or nay; read it, and try whether the Law of the Spirit of Life
which is in Christ Jesus, will justisie you in swearing, or compelling men to
swear, or condemn you eternally for your so doing: For this ye shall all know,
that he that believes not in the only begotten Son of God, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God, who is come a light to enlighten the Gentiles, Ioh. 3.18.
and the glory of the people Israel. Therefore

3. Consider all you that forget God: for although the Jews swore by the name
of the true and living God, according to Moses Law: and the Heathens, Pagans,
Infidels, or Idolaters, who God in time past and now suffers to walk in their
own ways, did, and do swear by their dead Idols, or false gods, which was and
is the workmanship of their own hands: yet this must not be a precedent, or an
example for Christians to Swear at all, by any Oath, or form of Oath
whatsoever: for God has called all the true Christians who believe on the Name
of his only begoten Son, from amongst the Jews, Heathens, Pagans, Infidels,
etc. and has separated them from them and their Laws and Customs to follow his
Son Jesus Christ the Captain of their Salvation, and to worship God in Spirit
and in Truth, and to walk before him in fear, and in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their lives: Therefore it is not lawful for Christians to swear
by their head and Captain of their Salvation, who teaches them not to Swear at
all: And as it is not lawful for Christians to Swear, neither is it becoming,
nor does become any true Christian to Swear by any form of Oath that is of any
man's making whatsoever: For he that swears by any Oath whatsoever that is of
man's or men's inventing, contriving and drawing up into a form, it is all one
as if he swore by an Idol, which proceeds from the invention of men's brains,
the imagination of their hearts, and the workmanship of their own hands: For
the one is as much out of, and contrary to the Truth as it is in Jesus Christ,
as the other is: and therefore fore they are to be denied of all the true
Christians: Why? Because that as the Idols or false gods are only the
invention of men's brains, the imagination of their hearts, and also the
workmanship of their hands. Therefore they are lies, vanity, and the work of
Error: So likewise all forms of Oaths which are set forth to public view in
these days for men to swear by, are only inventions of men's brains, the
imaginations of their wicked and deceitful hearts, and the workmanship of their
own hands, and not the Oath of God: therefore they are lies, vanity, and the
works of error, and not the work of God; for the works of God are true; but it
is written, Surely (said David) Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie; therefore whatsoever it is that such men act or contrive by
the invention of their own brains, Psalm 62.9.
and the imaginations of their own hearts in imitation of the works of God, or
the ways of his worship, is not true, but are mere lies, vanities, falsehood,
and the work of errors; which acts, works, and forms of Oaths are not to be
subjected to, but are to be rejected by all true Christians: Why?

4. Because it is neither lawful nor comely for Christians to swear an Oath,
nor by any form of Oath or thing whatsoever; for Christians, the Disciples of
Christ were taught, and have learned of their Lord and Master Christ Jesus, not
to swear at all: and what they were taught, and what they received of Christ,
that they declared and taught to others in obedience to Christ's command, who
said unto them, Go and teach all Nations, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, who commanded them not to swear at all: and it
is upon record to be seen, that James an Apostle, a Disciple of Jesus Christ,
and a true Christian likewise, wrote to the Brethren (Christians) of the twelve
tribes, which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose upon the
Church which was at Jerusalem, saying My brethren, but above all things swear
not at all, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath,
least ye fall into condemnation etc. Which words both James and the other
Disciples had learned of Christ Jesus the good Shepherd and Bishop of their
souls, who went up into a Mountain, and when he was sat, his Disciples came
unto him, and he opened his mouth, and taught them thus, with other Doctrine
not to swear at all, which they obeyed and kept: And so likewise all others who
believed on his Name through their preaching, did observe the same commands of
Christ, and do them. For in the days of Nero and Domitian, both Heathen
Emperors, and cruel tyrants, was very great and sore persecution of the
Christians, and they had a form of an oath for men to swear by; and the
Inquisitors of their Inquisition put the Christians whom they persecuted, to
swear by their form of Oath, whether that they were Christians, or no: but the
Christians resused to swear, confessing and saying that they were Christians,
and could not deny Christ not his Doctrine: And then according to the Heathens
Law, sentence of death was pronounced against the Christians by the Proconsul,
and forthwith the sentence was put in execution by wicked, blood-thirsty men,
who put the Christians to death, some after one manner, and some after another,
according to the wills of those cruel tyrants the Emperors; and so I find that
the like Oath was required of Polycarpus by the Proconsul at Smyrna, which was
in these words following thus: Polycarpus, thou shall swear by the Emperors
good fortune, and by the prosperity of Caesar, and declare the truth, whether in
very deed thou art a Christian or no. But Polycarpus refused to swear, or to
deny Christ and his Doctrine, and confessed himself to be a Christian: So he
was led away to be burned, being about the age of fourscore and six years, or
more. So likewise it is recorded, that the Christian Martyrs in King Richard
the second's days, and in Henry the fourth's days, and in Queen Mary's days
here in England, did bear a good testimony against Swearing, and likewise did
refuse to swear, according to the command of Christ, who said, Swear not at
all: Therefore I say, it is neither lawful nor comely for Christians to swear,
for if they should, it may be said to them as Paul said to the Jews in another
case, Who art thou that teach another should not swear, and do thou thy
self swear, etc?

But all those who had, and have but the Name of Christians only, but lived
not, nor do live in the life and power that the true Christians lived, and do
live in; or all they who had, and have got into a form of godliness, and
denied, and do deny the power thereof, which all they that were, and are truly
godly lived, and do live in: I say, that even such there were, and are, who
sought, and seek to the Powers of the Earth, viz. to the Kings and Rulers
thereof for protection in their mere form of godliness only, the which the
true Christians neither did, nor do such things; for they knowing that the true
and living God whom they serve is all-sufficient by his power to keep and
preserve them out of the hands of all their Enemies, if he will, and none can
touch them; but if not, then they submit to his will in whatsoever he requires
of them, although it be to the loss of all things, or the laying down of their
bodies: But they who have got into, and live in a form of godliness only, they
cannot trust God, without they have the help and assistance of the Kings and
Rulers of the Earth to protect them by a Law of their making: And therefore the
Kings and Rulers of the earth (for the more better security of those seeming
Formalists assistance to themselves in a conformity to their wills and laws)
they contrive and frame an Image, or an Oath or Oaths, for those seeming
Formalists to swear fealty to them by, just like the Heathens that swore by
their false gods that were made with hands, fealty to their Emperors and Kings,
even so do they, and all they that will not swear by those Oaths of their
making, shall have no protection by them.

But Elizabeth, formerly Queen of England, was (according to that knowledge she
had in those days) more merciful then her predecessors were, for that there is
a Law that was made in the ^th. year of her reign, that it should not be lawful
for any person or persons to slay or kill any person or persons, in any manner
attainted, or hereafter to be attainted of, in, or upon any praemunire, etc.
read the Law, cap. 1. And so they make good the words of Christ who said, The
world loves its own. And thus the wicked Heathens, Pagans, Infidels, outward
Formalists, Hypocritical professors of Christianity; for like as their Leadders
are, so are the people; for they all combine together against the Lord and his
anointed, the true Christians; for said David, The wicked plotteth against the
just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth; the Heathen rage, Psa. 37.12
and the people imagine a vain thing; the Kings of the Earth set themselves,
and Rulers take counsel together, saying, Come, let us break their Bonds
assunder, let us cast away their Cords from us: nay, they swear that they will
punish and destroy them all, viz. the true Christians, as Heretics,
Schismatics, Phanaticks, and Non-conformists to our Laws, etc. and all the
rude multitude of profane Drunkards and Swearers, at every occasion or word,
murderers, sighters, quarrellers, whores, whoremongers, adulterers,
fornicators, thieves, robbers, idolators, image-makers, hypocrites, and outward
formalists, will all run and go, and lay their hands upon a Bible, and swear by
it, and the forms of oaths that they have made, and kiss the Bible when they
have done, that they will stand by, aid and assist the Kings, Rulers, Judges,
Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constable, and others, in the doing of
any act of violence, cruelty, oppression, yea even to death it self, against
the true Christians who sear the true and living God, and dare not run with
them into the same excess of riot, revellings, banquettings, chambering,
wantonness, drunkenness, lasciviousness, and swearing, as the Kings, Rulers
Ptiests and people do run into; therefore they hate the true Christians, 1 Ioh.
3.13 1 Pet. 4.4.
and speak all manner of evil of them, and seek to destroy them from off the
face of the earth, that God may not have a temple to dwell in, nor the Son of
God a place to lay his head in upon the earth, with such as believe in his
Name, who says, Swear not at all, etc. So that here is no injunction laid
upon, nor liberty allowed to the true Christians to swear by any form of Oath,
Allegiance to the Kings or Rulers of the Earth, or otherwise, in whatsoever
nature, manner, or thing be it to be sworn unto, etc.

Therefore if he who shall break one of the least of Gods commandments, and
shall teach men so to do, said Christ Jesus, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven; then what shall all they be called or counted worthy of,
that not only break and transgress Gods commandments themselves, but likewise
compel others so to do? I say; certainly they are worthy to have the like
punishment, plagues and torment, that Pharaoh and the Egyptians had, and in
the end to be drowned in the sea; or there reward like as had that wicked
Iehoram, who wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord himself, and caused the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring like to the whoredoms of the house of
Ahab, and compel Judah thereunto, for the which wickedness, God smote the King
Iehoram himself with a sore and an incurable disease in his bowels, Read 2 Chronicles. 21. chap.
so that his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: and moreover God
stirred up the spirit of the Philistines, and the Arabians, and they came up
into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was in
the Kings house, and his Sons also: and read and see what came upon Judah in
the days of Ioash, King of Judah, [after the death of Iehoiada] and of Ioash
himself for hearkening unto the Princes of Judah that made obeisance unto him,
who then left the house of the Lord God, and served Groves and Idols, and at
the Kings commandment stoned to death Zechariah, the Son of Iehoiada between
the Temple and the Altar, for the which the Syrians came with a small company
of men, and the Lord delivered a very great host into their hands, and they
destroyed all the Princes of the people, and sent all the spoil of them to the
King of Damascus, Read 2 Chronicles. 24. chap. Ier. 52. chapter 2 Chronicles. 36. chap.
etc. and read what became upon Zedekiah, and all the people of Judah and
Jerusalem: and upon Herod the King, who stretched out his hand against the true
Christians, that is the Church of Christ. Read Acts the 12. Chapter.

And further I say, that such Kings, Rulers, and Judges, or others who
transgress the Laws of God themselves, and compel others so to do, are even
worthy of, and fit for the fire that burns, and is never quenched; and likewise
for the worm that continually gnaws, and never dies, and for the pit and the
snare; for Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the Kings it is prepared: he has
made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath
of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone, does kindle it, Isaiah 30 33. And so
worthy to be called fit companions for the Devil and his Angels, and not
Christians: and thus ye may see what a fearful thing it is for to fall into
the hands of the true and living God, who is a consuming fire to all the
wicked, who with all they that forget God, must be turned into hell.

O consider this, and learn to be wise ye Kings, Princes, Judges, and Rulers of
the earth, and be instructed to serve the Lord with fear, and let your
rejoicing be with trembling before the living God: come and bow down at the
feet of Jesus, and kiss the Son lest he be angry with you, and ye perish from
the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: Therefore while you have time,
prise it; for why will ye dye? why will ye perish from off the face of the
earth, and be no more seen nor heard of. O ye Kings, Judges, and Rulers of the
earth, to day, to day, if ye expect mercy from the Lord, cease from evil, and
learn to do well, and believe on the Name of Jesus Christ, that your souls may
be saved, or else ye perish eternally; for with God there is no respect of
persons in judgment, etc.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but tell him plainly of his
faults: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, that thou bear not sin for
him: He that has an ear, let him hear, and he that will be filthy, let him be
filthy still.

About the time of Pope Pelagius the second, [and before the year 590. for in
that year the Pope Pelagius dyed according to former writers] there was a
decree made, called the Canon of Matiscon, for honoring of Priests; in Latin
it runs thus, Consilium Matisconense secundum, and thus it was decreed, Cap.
15. by the said Council.

1. That if a layman shall meet in the way some better man of the Clergy, the
layman shall in the lowest manner of courtesy stoop reverently, and bow down
to him. 2. If the layman be on horse back, and the Priest also, then the
layman to put off his hood off his head, and do his duty of salutation. 3. But
if the Priest be on foot, and the layman on horse back, incontinently he shall
light from his horse, and perform his due honor to the said Clerk. 4.
Whatsoever he be that shall transgress these Canons, which be decreed by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, let him be suspended out of the Church, which he
will not honor in her Ministers, even so long as shall please the Bishop of
that See, etc. and for proof of this, read in a Book called, The defense of
Priests marriages, Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer then to the
Queen Mary of England, and dedicated to Philip and Mary, who were the chief
Rulers of the land.
But I find in the Book of Martyrs, pages 496. and 500. and it was in Queen
Mary's days, Anno 1555, that Doctor Nicholas Ridley refused to move or put off
his Cap before the Court in honor of the Pope, or to the Cardinal the Popes
Legate: For said Brooks, then Bishop of Gloucester, Put off your cap Mr. Ridley,
and put you on this Surplice.

Ridley said, Not I truly.

Said Brooks, But you must.

But Ridley said, I will not.

And seeing it is thus written, that Christ Jesus the Son of God said to the
Jews, John 5.44
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only: so I say accordingly as James said, That
the faith of Jesus Christ stands not in the respect of persons: Therefore let
all people judge according to the Law and the Testimony, that is bound up among
the Disciples, Whether that Decree, Canon, or Constitution made in the Council
of Matiscon for the honoring of Priests, Clerks, etc. was made by the
inspiration of the Spirit of God, as they said it was, yea, or nay? Or whether
it came not from that proud spirit of Lucifer, that was once in the King of
Assyria, and which afterward got into the proud Pope, and the proud Prelate,
and sat in Counsel among them, inspiring of them to make a Decree or Canon for
the honoring of them and their adherents with Cap and Knee? Seeing that they
had not the honor which comes from God only: judge ye, etc.

THE END.

