A VOICE From the Temple TO THE Higher Powers.

Wherein is showed, that it is the work and duty of Saints, to search the
Prophesies and Visions of holy Scripture, which concern the Later Times: And
that Jesus Christ will reveal the understanding of them, near the end of their
accomplishment. And so much, is here clearly proved, and the Objections to the
contrary answered.

ALSO Several Prophesies are here opened, concerning the Time of the End; As
what is the present work of the Lord in the world: And wherein the Saints
(whether the Higher Powers or others) are now to move and follow him. Likewise
what will be the work of the Lord forward, and all along from year to year,
till the Mystery of God be finished, both among the Christian Gentiles, and
Jews.

By John Can.

2 Pet. 3.3, 4. There shall come in the last days mockers, saying, where is
the promise of his coming.

Job 21.3. Suffer me that I may speak, and after that I have spoken, mock on.

Dan. 22.10. But the wicked shall do wickedly and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, next door to the gilded Lion in Aldersgate
street, 1653.

TO His Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL.
My Lord,
IT was most unhappily done of Caesar, to put the letter into his bosom, which
he should have read before he went unto the Consul. I shall humbly desire your
Excellency (in the midst of your great Affairs) to read over this short
Treatise, which was intended in publishing, specially for you, as being
thereunto encouraged by your Honor. Had those, whose Crowns are now fallen,
and their places have cast them out, not laid aside Daniel, and other
Prophesies of the later Times, but day and night meditated therein, and so
known the signs of the Son of man, their glory would not so soon have
departed from them. But trusting to lying vanities, they forsook their own
mercies.

As for other Books of humane wisdom and State-policies, they are almost now
like an old Almanac, out of date, most improper and useless to the great
work of this age. And therefore such as desire to stand, and not to be lost in
the night of Error and shame, must search the great Book of Gods Counsel:
for there they shall know (and no where else) what the work is of their own
generation. It is not enough that a man means well, and resolves to do honest
and just things, but he is to consider whether the thing which he proposes
next to do, be his work, and proper to the time in which he lives.

It was in David's heart to build God an house, and the work seemed to Nathan
to be so pious and good, as he gave him encouragement to go forward with it.
Nevertheless David here was mistaken, and the Prophet too: For David was not
the man, but Solomon, appointed for that business. As Gods thoughts are not
our thoughts, nor his ways our ways, so it oft-times falls out: what our
thoughts are busied most about, and stick fastest too, that is not the thing
which the Lord intends we shall do, but he has some other employment and
service for us.

My Lord, it is for this end, I write thus to you, howsoever I hope you intend
a great deal of good to the Nation, and think of nothing but what is honest,
just, pure, and of good report: yet one thing is needful, namely, that you
search the Prophesies of the later times, to find out what is your work, as
now proper to you: That so you may do that good, that acceptable, and perfect
will of God in your generation. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he
comes, shall find SO DOING: Not only doing, but doing so and so.

That it was your work (and appointed to you of God) to be a happy instrument
for the dissolving the last Parliament. It is not only clear to me, but
something is here said in the justification of it.

But now (my Lord) the great Question is, what is next? I have purposely
published this Book, to answer this great Question, to wit, that your
Excellency and others in place, may see what my opinion is, (and how grounded
upon the word) concerning the Lords works, and working at this time, and
wherein you and others are to move, and follow the Lamb. I shall not speak any
thing concerning the chose of the new Governors which lies before you: Only
this; by knowing what is the Lords work which he is now doing amongst us, and
carrying forth in the world, it may be somewhat useful to your Excellency in
your choice, as to call out such men, as are best principled and qualified for
THAT.

My Lord, Those great Statesmen who are laid aside, and lie in dust, under the
guilt and shame of their actions, wanted not deep policy, strong reason,
worldly wisdom, politic Councillors, and large advantages of the time: but
this they wanted (which was their ruin) they were not like the children of
Issachar, men that had the understanding of the Times, to know what Israel
ought to do.

Hence it is, that not only my self, but many more who love you truly and
dearly, earnestly desire (and beg it daily of God for you) that those
Prophesies which speak out the work of God to be done now in the world, may be
searched by you, and clearly opened to you. Methinks I should find you in that
voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people: and to be one of the
Angels pouring out the fifth Vial. About the time of Christ's Incarnation,
there was a great expectation amongst the Jews of the coming of the Messiah:
For they knew by former Prophesies that he was then to come.

This voice from Heaven, and the fifth Angel is already come: but there is now
an expectation to have that Prophecy perfected. And if the Lord shall be
pleased to perfect by you, the good work which he has made you isntrumental
in, that is, to be his, and our General still, for the execution of the last
vengeance upon the two persecuting powers of the world, viz. Kingly and
Antichristian, it will be such an honor as few of the sons of men ever had.

My Lord, I shall close with this; there is no work for you in the grave, it
must be done on this side: It might have been a Motto set upon David's
Sepulcher; After he had served his own Generation by the will of God, he fell
asleep; he fell not asleep till he had served his Generation. This shall be my
prayer, that in life and death it may be so with you. Even do the work of him
that sent you whilst it is today; and when you are gathered to your Fathers,
that the memory of your name may be precious among the Saints, as David's was
in Israel. And thus prays he who is

Your Excellencies most humble Servant, John Can.

TO The Right Honorable, Colonel Robert Overton, Governor of Hull, and his
Religious Lady, with all my other dear Christian friends in, and about Hull.
Dear Friends,
IT has been the great desire of some of you, that I would publish to the
world My Notes upon Daniel. I had no intent when I preached them, that they
should have been further known, or more common then amongst you. These Changes
and Revolutions in our Nation, have changed my Resolution, and something I have
begun: As not being ashamed to bear witness before the world, to what more
privately I delivered to you: For the several Censures of men otherwise
minded, I can well bear them; for I did sit down first, and count the cost;
Besides for men to speak evil of those things which they know not, it is
usual. But wisdom is justified of her children.

Sirs, I cannot without much thankfulness to God, and comfort to my self but
remember you, specially your most earnest and constant seeking of God, to have
the Book opened, and the Seals loosed, that you might see your work, and know
how to Act for Christ in your Generation. I make mention of this, that your
zeal may provoke others, and stir them up to ask wisdom of God, and for
Zions sake not to hold their peace, and for Jerusalems sake not to give him
rest, till he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. For my part,
I can speak it to Gods glory, I have found all along in opening the Prophesies
of Daniel and the Revelation to you, the answer of your prayers, and the fruit
of your faith abundantly upon my soul.

I know these things when they were delivered, offended the Priests in that
Country, and in likelihood, being made now more public, will increase their
rage and blasphemy against the God of Heaven, because of their pains and
sores. It is not destruction I wish them, but that the Lord will give them
Repentance from dead works, and that they would forsake their unsanctified
places and standings, and not deceive the people any longer, by their lies and
beastly vanities, I say before the fierce anger of the Lord, and the wrath of
the Lamb come upon them.

I hope there will be shortly some effectual means used, to remove from the
people the heaviest burden, and sorest plague that lies upon them, which is a
generation of Priests, that fatten the people for the day of slaughter: For my
part, what Interest I have either with God or men, I shall endeavor to improve
it to the utmost, That the Foxes, both the old and the young Cubs, which spoil
the Vines and the tender Grapes, may be taken. I know people generally, though
they complain of other Oppressions and burdens, and would willingly be eased of
them: yet here they have no feeling, and therefore they are the more to be
pitied, and the sooner helped, in not apprehending what is the greatest misery
they lie under. Those who have lately showed so much good affection to have the
Gospel advanced in New England, I hope they will be far more enlarged in
their bowels, for the conversion of poor Heathens in our own Land, that the
people which sit here in darkness, may see a great light, and to them which
sit in the region and shadow of death, light may spring up.

Dear friends, I shall not write much, though I could say much in your
behalf, as being lights among a crooked and froward generation, walking in the
life and power of Religion, where others are mere Formalists. Besides, you have
not been ashamed to own the truths of God, when they have been rendered in
Pulpits, scandalous, blasphemous, heretical, etc. Sirs, it is your prayers
that I still desire with me, and for me. I know no people under heaven that
have more encouragement then you, to go boldly to the Throne of grace,
considering what real and full answers you have had of former seeking the
Lord. Now the Lord more and more pour the spirit of grace and of supplication
into your hearts, and fill you with wisdom and spiritual understanding, and
keep you sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ; and thus prays
he who is

Your Christian Brother to serve you in the Gospel JOHN CAN.

A Voice from the Temple, to the higher POWERS; Wherein is showed, that it is,
the Work and Duty of Saints, to search the Prophesies and Visions of holy
Scriptures, which concern the latter times: And that Jesus Christ will reveal
the knowledge of them, near the end of their accomplishment. And so much is
here clearly proved, and the Objections to the contrary answered.
THings must be removed, and taken off, from the place where they are, before
they can be laid, and settled else where: That I may win others to the same
opinion I am of, in the subject or matter I here plead for; I shall first begin
to answer such Objections, which I conceive are most considerable against it.

Object. 1: When Acts 1.6.7.
they were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, will thou at this
time restore again the kingdom of Israel; And he said unto them, it is not for
you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own
power. If not for the Apostles to know, then not for others, who in gifts,
place, and parts, are far short and inferior to them.

Answer 1. Because it was neither convenient nor necessary for the Disciples,
(no, nor for any in that age) to know the Times; yet it does not follow, that
it was inexpedient or unnecessary for others in ages after; Christ does not
say, It is not for any, or, it is not for others, but it is not for you to
know; he means no way useful, or fit for them, as tending either to Gods
glory, or the Churches good.

2. In saying, which the father has put in his own power; he plainly
intimates, that it should be revealed and made known in due time; and unto such
as he thought good. It was Goliah's lot, to have his head cut off with his own
sword: this very scripture, if rightly weighed, is a most effectual proof, to
confute the very thing they bring it for.

3 As Christ told them, It was not for them to know the times: so he might have
given them a reason for it; for the knowledge of the Time, concerning the
restoration of the Kingdom to Israel, was then shut up, and sealed, according
to Dan. 12.4.
Daniel, and not to be revealed, till toward or near the accomplishment.

Object. 2. But Mat. 24.37, 38, 39.
as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be, for
as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
and knew not, until the flood came and took them all away, so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be.

Answer, I shall answer this scripture two ways.

1 For the wicked and ungodly sinners, the knowledge of the time was hid from
them: and indeed, this is the thing which Christ in that place chiefly intends,
in comparing the time of Noah with the latter times: for howsoever the profane
wretches then, neither knew, nor foresaw the coming of the flood; yet Noah Genesis
6, 7. and 7.4.
did: he (I say) both foresaw and foretold the time of the old worlds
destruction. It was indeed concealed from the wicked, because it was to come
upon them as a snare in the night, but revealed unto Noah for Heb. 11.7.
his own, and the Churches preservation. Even thus (says Luke 17 30.
Christ) shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be revealed: that is,
some shall know nothing of the times, but go on in their ignorance, and
unbelief, as become 2 Pet. 3.34.
scoffers, and walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise
of his coming? and so perish in the coming destruction; others on the other
hand, by faith (like Noah) shall prepare an Ark, to the saving of their own
souls.

2 As concerning the Saints, Christ does not simply and absolutely deny unto
them the knowledge of the time, for he knew that the time was to be revealed
unto them, Dan. 12.4, 9, 10
near the end; but he denies it, only to the Saints present, and far distant
from the end, to whom it was not to be Dan. 12.4.10.
made known, as being unseasonable and not expedient, and would have occasioned
rather hurt then good, Christ says, in a certain John 7, 6, 10.
place, My time is not yet come; nevertheless within a little while after he
goes up to the feast: so concerning the godly (whether we respect the days of
Daniel or Christ) the time then was not come that the prophesies of the End
should be opened to them; yet they shall be opened and made known to Saints
near the finishing, and before their accomplishment.

Object. 3. Mark 13.32.
But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels which are in
heaven, neither the Son but the Father.

I know there are several answers given; some, not as mere man: Others, though
not the day and hour, yet the year might be known, both to Christ, angels and
men. But to let these things pass, my answer is, Christ as the Son of man,
knew it not, till he was ascended and glorified; hence it is, that he is
acknowledged Rev. 4, 5, 9
worthy to take the book, and to open the Seals thereof; mark the reason, For
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood: so then as Rev. 1.1
God gave unto Jesus Christ the Revelation, to show unto his servants things
which must shortly come to pass: so this is as a fruit of his sufferings,
rising again, and fitting at the right hand of his father.

And this is a point of mavelous consequence (though little minded) for it is
matter of encouragement to ask wisdom of God, that we may understand Daniel,
and the book of the Revelation, what is meant by Dan. 7.25.
Time, times, and dividing of time, what by the Rev. 11.2.
42 Months, the 1260 days, what by the Rev. 13.18.
number of the Beast, which is 666. and Dan. 6.12, 6.
how long it shall be to the end of these wonders. Because Christ by his death
became worthy to open the Seals, that is, (with other things) purchased by his
blood for us this great privilege, to know the time and seasons, and to make
them known unto his Church and people. If it be a thing which a man owns, and
has a lawful interest and right in it, he can ask it with the more boldness
and confidence, and doubts not but to have it. So here, etc.

Object. 4. Many learned and godly men, diving and searching into these
mysteries and hidden things, have been greatly mistaken, and by their
extravagances have lost themselves, which makes others wary and cautious how
to meddle with them.

Answ. 1. By the same reason, other Scriptures are not to be searched, for
learned men have most corruptly and falsely interpreted them.

2 Though it be asserted by us, that it is possible, needful, yea, required to
search out the accommodation of the years, yet we do not say, every man
(howbeit learned and godly) shall understand: for the Lord may do what he will
with his own.

3 That many formerly have been mistaken, it is not strange, because the time
was uncertain in which they lived: the Revelation being reserved (as I said
before) for the Saints of the last age. Besides, that many, (I do not speak of
all) even in these our days, miss the mark, no marvel.

For 1. Some of them Prove. 3.5, 6.
lean unto their own wisdom, humane learning, arts, sciences, authority of
men: and seek not the Lord by faith and prayer, to have direction, light and
counsel from him; and hence, (and justly too) is that verefied on them, Romans
1.2.
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.

2 It is an usual thing with Scholars to follow one another right or wrong.
The old Fathers (as they are called) applied many things to their times, which
as then had no relation, others coming after, say the very same, and look no
further, and so one leads another out of the way:

3 Another cause of many men's mistake in the accommodation of years, is
confounding one thing with another, and disorderly setting down that first
which should be last, and last first: thus they appply promiscuously to Jews
and Gentiles, what should be distinguished, as proper but to one. Again,
distinguish not between the Ecclesiastical and Civil State, as to the rise
and fall of both: cry up a present glorious condition of the Church, far before
her warfare is accomplished.

Lastly, for such as are wary and cautious, how to meddle with the times. I
shall say no more but thus. If a man toward the beginning of Harvest, should
travel through the Country, from London to York, possibly then he would see
very few Harvest laborers in the fields but let him pass the same way a few
weeks after, he shall see people every where at work, and every one his hands
full. At present we are but at the beginning of the Harvest, but I believe (and
note it well) before one year is expired, the Lord will send forth such a
multitude of laborers into his Harvest, as not a man that is come out of
Babylon, and has separated himself from all the abominations thereof: but will
make it his special work to search Daniel, and the Revelaion, and diligently
seek after the knowledge of the Times.

Objection 5. This pretending to Inspirations, Revelations, and the spirit of
prophecy, is no other then what John of Leiden, Herman, Rotman and
Chipperdoling did, and so the Munster business, whereby multitudes were
betrayed, and driven to Rebellion, and great mischief and misery followed.

Answer 1. This is no other aspersion and scandalons reproach, then has been
cast by the enemies of the truth, upon all good men ever since, who have been
zealously earnest for reformation.

But 2. Such as are godly, wise, or able to put a difference between lying
prophesies, and foolish visions, and a grace given unto Saints, to understand
the mind of Jesus Christ in holy Scriptures, 2 John 2.20.
John says, Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye shall know all
things. To you (says Mat. 11.
Christ) it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom: Psalm. 25 14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Again, Prove. 3.32.
His secret is with the righteous. Are not these Gospel promises, and Saints
Privileges, and attainable by the exercise and acts of faith. Pet. 2.6.
He that believes on him, shall not be confounded. Because the Spider turns
many things into poison, is the honey, wormwood and gall, which the Be makes?

3 I could show in several particulars, how contrary (as light is to
darkness) the carriages and practices of the Munster Impostors, (first and
last) were, to what is either said or done by the godly of this age, who are of
my opinion, namely, that the prophesies of the last times shall be revealed
unto Saints near the end. Let Sleidan (or any other) who has written the
History of Munster, be perused by any impartial Reader, and he shall not find
any ground to frame a parralell, neither in reference to matter, manner, men. I
have some thoughts, (seeing there is such a noise of Munster) shortly to
discover the absurdity, ignorance and malice of such people, who seek to
disgrace good men, and through their sides to pierce the glorious work of God
now begun amongst us, by raking into the business of Munster.

4. It is worth the observing, how sutably Satan has carried on his Design to
keep men in ignorance, supestition, and bondage, and to hinder them from
embracing the things belonging to their peace. Though he could never certainly
and perfectly reach the knowledge of prophesies, as to the very time of their
accomplishment: yet knowing that such and such things should come to pass, and
having some conjecture near the time, his manner has been beforehand, to
corrupt the minds of the people (some way or other) with a prejudice against
them, that so, when the thing it self should come to pass, men might neither
believe nor receive the same.

Thus he raised up many false Christ's, and why? that the true Christ might not
be received when he came. So for this Munster Business. The Devil knew in the
latter days, Tyrants and oppressors would be throw down, the Antichristian
kingdom destroyed; good men and good things advanced: Now mark the craft of
this wicked one; when the appointed time should come, in which these things
were to be fulfilled, to the end that men might not then believe: He stirred up
before hand a company of Seducers to beguile the ignorant and simple people:
merely, (I say) upon this account, that when the time should come, that Tyranny
and Oppression should be suppressed, Babylon cast down, righteousness exalted;
this work might not find acceptance among the people, he having (as I said)
poisoned before hand the minds of the people, Note.
by suggesting Munster and the effects of that business: So then in short, the
sum is this, The Devil in causing that work at Munster, intended that it
should be a snare to the people of this Age.

Having spoken to the Objections; I come now to Arguments, to prove that the
knowledge of the times is needful, possible, yea required and ought to be
searched; And so to justify Gods people, (ministers and others) who (by Faith,
Prayer, Conference, meditation, reading) are now upon the work.

1. Because this is a part of the written word of God. Dan. 7.25. and 9.25, 26.
and 12.7.11.12. Rev. 11.2, 3. and 12.6.14. and 13.18. Now John 5.39.
Christ commands us to search the scriptures, the whole, and all, and not
some part as we think good to pick and choose: Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our ledrning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. Dan. 29 29
Those things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our children for ever.
A servant being commanded to do several things, if he do only a part of
them, what he thinks fit and best, (as easiest) and not the rest; the master
will not be pleased: so here,

2. Because the knowledge of the Times, is part of that Prophecy, and those
good things to come, which the Rev. 1.1
father gave unto his son, to send and show unto his servants. Christ did not
send the letter without the sense: But intended, that it should be known and
understood; therefore the sense and understanding is to be searched.

3. It is said of the whole Prophecy, and consequently of the Times therein
contained: Rev. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy; I
think no man takes it of an ignorant and fruitless reading and hearing,
without understanding: for surely, such a hearing or reading Acts 8.30.
makes no man happy. Besides it is such a reading and hearing, as may be the
rule and ground of practice: Hence it is added, and keep those things which are
written therein: Consequently then, it must be a reading with understanding and
knowledge. Observe hence the rashness of some Teachers, who seek to discourage
Saints, from that work, unto which alone, is pronounced the promise of
blessedness. They will allow men to read the years and times in the text, but
they must not seek for the understanding. Just for all the world, as to bid a
man to catch at the shadow, but with all charge him not to touched or take the
fruit.

4. Let Christ's words be well observed, When Mat. 29 15
ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, stand in the holy place; who so reads, let him understand: he has
reference, no doubt to Dan. 9.27. and 11.31. and 12, 11. where the times of the
end are declared and Characterized: Christ here calls upon us, not for reading,
but for understanding Daniels weeks, days, times. Now does Christ bid us
understand Daniel; yea, in his numbers, how dares any mortal creature,
reproach any for searching his Prophesies. Acts 4.2
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more then unto
God, judge ye? A servant in not doing his duty, cannot be excused, but yet is
more in excusable, when with all he shall smite his fellow servants for doing
their duties. I leave the application to the Reader.

5. It must be granted, that the holy scripture, either holds forth a certain,
and set time, and period of years; in respect of the breaking of the fourth
Monarchy, the destruction of the Antichristian kingdom, the end of the Turkish
Empire, the slaying of the Witnesses, Christ taking the possession of the
kingdom, and reigning, etc. or not: If there be no time set, and appointed
time; for what use then are these Texts, Dan. 7.25. and 9.25, 26, 27. and
12.11, 12. Hab. 2.3. Revel. 11.2, 3. and 12.6.14. If there be a time certain
and fixed, then I would know; if nothing of the time is to be known, till after
the accomplishment; how these and such other scriptures, can be said to be
written for our learning and comfort? or, what benefit the Church and People of
God have by having them written! Caesar's letter though he carried it with him
in his bosom into the Council, yet not knowing the contents, it profited him
nothing. In the knowledge of the times, there lies our comfort and safety; to
have the words in our book, and no more, that helps not, though we have them
with us still in our bosom.

6. Daniel being commanded, to Dan. 12.4.
shut up the words, and seal the Book, even to the time of the end;
afterward, sees v. 5
two, the one standing on this side of the banck, and the other on that side of
the banck of the river. These two, I take to be Types, the one a Type of the
Christian Gentiles, the other of the Jews; unto whom Jesus Christ (the man
clothed in linen) will open the mysteries of the times, a little before the
end.

Three reasons I have for this,

1. They both make enquiry, How o long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
Our Bibles read, and one said to the man clothed. But the word (one) is not in
the text; nor is there to be understood, for they spoke both.

2. The man clothed in linen (which was Christ) v. 7.
holds up his right hand, and his left hand to heaven; wherefore both, and not
one hand alone? 10.5.
Because here are two, one on his right hand, another on his left, and both to
be informed

3. They are both answered, as to their question, concerning the times. The
Gentile type, has his answer, v. 7. It shall be for a time, times, and an
half: And the Jew type has his answer, v. 11. From the time that the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up;
there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. From this I gather,
some little time before the end, the Lord will unseale the prophesies of Daniel,
and reveal the times included, to some, both Jews and Gentiles. Those great
mysteries of the times, which have been hid, and looked up from former ages,
shall be clearly opened to them, and they shall know how long it will be before
the Fourth Monarch be destroyed, the witnesses slain, Euphrates dried up, and
Michael stand up for his people. And this they shall speak out to the world,
and not one jot of their words shall fail. You will ask it may be, what will
men say to this? It will be with these men, as it was with Hezekiah's
messengers, some laughed them to scorn, 2 Chronicles. 30.11.
and mocked them: Nevertheless diverse of Asher, and Manasseh, and of Zebulun,
humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

7. As the time of the end is nearer at hand, so the Prophesies, and
consequently the times included, are to be unsealed, Dan. 12.9. Rev. 22.10. and
1.3.
opened, revealed. In Daniel 12.7. when a time, times, and an half, was
proposed, and the Prophet professing he understood it not, v. 8. an answer was
given v. 9. that the words were sealed up till the end; that is, until the
last time immediately before the end; as the phrase is used, Revelat. 11.7.
Therefore in the time immediately before the accomplishment, these words are to
be unsealed; that is, the meaning of them shall be known to Saints. Again this
is further manifested by v. 10. Many shall be purified and made white and
tried; and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand.
So ver. 11. what they should understand at the time of the end, in particular,
is there more fully expressed. And from the time (says the Angel) that the
daily sacrifices shall be taken away; and the abomination that makes desolate
set up, there shall be 1290. days.

Quest. But wherefore has the Lord denied the knowledge of the times to his
people in former ages; and will reveal it to Saints near unto the end.

I might here say, Mat. 11.26.
in the words of our Lord, Even so father, for so it seems good in thy sight:
But I Answer,

1. Gods administrations in the later Times, concerning a nation and Kingdom,
Note.
to pluck up, and pull down, and to destroy it, will be such as the instruments
of the work, probably shall want former examples, and ordinary rules to walk
by. Men at Sea having not the marks and directions, which travelers have on
Land, need some other help to steer and order their course by: Gods way near
the end will be in the Sea, Psalm. 77.19
and his path in the great waters: So that as the actions of some men shall be
rare, unexemplary without president; so God will give them clear light in away
suitable, that is, make them understand the times, and that it is now their
proper work to act, so and so: in order to the fulfilling of the will and
commandment of God, though the same (as the world judges) seem irrational,
illegal, absurd, destructive to Religion, Law, Liberty, etc.

2. These latter times will be accompanied, with such great destractions,
confusions, divisions, as people will be at a loss, and so in darkness, that
they will not know what to do, which way to take, nor how to dispose of
themselves. Reader, note it; Gods marvelous work now in the world, will move so
contrary to men's expectations and self interest; as multitudes shall fall off
daily; Isa. 60.2.
yea, some good men shall be offended, and left behind; Darkness shall, cover
the earth, and gross darkness the people: Nevertheless, for the comfort and
encouragement of the wise, the Lord shall arise upon them, and his glory shall
be seen upon them; and by the understanding of the times, which they shall
have, God will make them isntrumental, for the perfecting of the good work
which he has begun. Thus not by might, Zech. 4.6.
nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts.

3. As the knowledge of the end, has been concealed from former Ages, to
prevent security, and to stir men up unto watchfulness; Mat. 24.42. Mar. 13.35
Luke 12.40
as our Savior expressly shows; so it is to be revealed to this last Age, to
move men to repentance and amendment of life; that they should forsake all
unrighteousness, guile, dissimulation, self-seeking; Do justice, love mercy,
lose the bonds of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed
go free, and break every yoke. If a man fall into a pit, or snare, whereof he
was before told and warned, he vexes and grieves the more. When corrupt and
deceitful men shall see the very thing come to pass upon them, which before
in the word of the Lord, was told them: namely within such a time, if they turn
not from their evil ways, and make their ways and their doings good, the
Lord will pluck them out of their dwelling places, lay them aside, break their
power to pieces: Lord, what a torment and vexation this will be to them: that
notwithstanding warned and admonished as from God, they should yet harden and
hearten themselves to their own destruction. Prove. 5.12.
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me.

4 For this cause likewise will the Lord have the book now opened, viz. to
advance the honor and holiness of his blessed word: we are in an age wherein
most things are questioned: not only water-Baptisme, and whether there be a
true Church: but whether there be a true God, a true Christ, a true Word, etc.
Now as this is atime, wherein Satan appears against the holy Scriptures, and
the truths therein contained, more violently and blasphemously then ever
heretofore: so I confidently affirm, and will abide by it, that the Lord will
now arise and appear for the vindication of the holy Scriptures, more
gloriously and eminently then ever: And wherein can the excellency of them be
more advanced? the truths in them more manifested? the contemners of them more
ashamed and silenced, then that the wise should understand. For what Athiest
will not blush, and be confounded, when he shall most evidently see such things
come to pass this year and the next, and so forward, till the year, 1770. as
was foretold: And that in order to the fulfilling of prophesies and visions,
recorded, some fifteen hundred years, others, two thousand years before, and
more:

Having proved by several Arguments, that the knowledge of the times, is
possible, and ought to be searched, and wherefore the same (though concealed
from former ages) is to be revealed to the last age. I come now to the
Prophesies themselves. In Daniel I find five special prophesies, in reference
to the time of the end, Chap. 7.25. Chap. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. Chap. 12.7, 11, 12.

The three first concern the Christian Gentiles, the two latter the Jews; and
in them are comprehended all the works of both: that is, when those years are
expired, then their whole warfare shall be accomplished, and they shall be no
more two, but one; and one shepherd shall be set over them. Howsoever I intend
to set forth these things, more at large in another Treatise; yet something I
will speak now, as to the times, both of the Gentiles, and of the Jews. And
first to that place in Daniel, Dan. 7.25.
Until a time, and times, and dividing of times.

In Scripture we find time, to be taken for days, as Dan 4. comparing v. 16.
with 34. By days, years are to be understood. Your children shall wander in
the wilderness forty days, Numb. 14.33, 34. Ezekiel. 4.6
each day for a year. Again, Thou shall bear their iniquity forty days, and I
have appointed thee each day for a year. In prophetical use, a day, that is, a
year, contains 360 days, or years. This Daniel calls a time. The word times,
signifies so much more, that is, 720 years. The dividing of time is, 180 days,
or years, the whole put together, makes 1260 years: and so much, the spirit of
God expressly declares in Rev 12. where a thousand two hundred and threescore
days, v. 6. is said to be, a time, and times, and half a time v. 14.

Before we come to the accommodation of these years, we are to speak of the ten
horns, and the little horn: first of their rise, then their fall; that is,
their beginning and ending: For their rise or beginning, it is to be
understood, either as hid and secret or more plain and open. These ten horns, I
understand to be the Roman Empire, dissolved into ten parts or Kingdoms. In
the enumeration of them, some produce them thus. Brittany, France, Germany,
Spain, Italy, Africa, Asia, Graecia, Syria, and Egypt. I shall set down what to
me, is most probable. 1. The kingdom of the Britains, 2 of the Saxons both in
Brittany, 3 of the kingdom of the Franks, 4 of the Burgundians, both in France,
5 The kingdom of the West Goths, in the Southern part of France, and part of
Spain, 6. the Sueves and Alanes in part of Spain, 7 the Kingdom of the Vandals
in Africa, a little before in Spain, 8. The Alemanes in Rhaetia, and Noricum,
Provinces of Germany. 9 the Kingdom of the East Goths in Ponnonia, a little
before in Italy, Lastly the Kingdom of the Greeks, in the remnant of the
Empire. Though this Decharchicall division does not continue, yet that it was
so at first, is apparent by History.

For their Rise, which was obscure and dark, Dan. 7.8.
which gave Daniel occasion to consider the horns, (as being so low and short
that he could scarce perceive them) this was about the year of our Lord, 388.
It is true, the fall of the Empire was by degrees, and it was 40 years after,
or more, before the same was effectually dissolved. Nevertheless about this
time, to wit the year 388. those horns did appear, though obscure, and little,
(as I said before) in Rev. 17.12. The horns which thou saw, are ten Kings,
which have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power at Kings one hour
with the Beast, that is, they had not at first a Sovereignty, Majesty, Power,
Privileges, which afterward they possessed, and were confirmed in. Now add
unto 388. (which was the time of the rise of the ten horns, and the Roman
Empire its beginning to dissolve) Daniels number, namely, 1260. and it
extends to the year of Christ, 1648.

This year, to wit the year 1648. do I affirm with much assurance, was the
time, when the Thrones were set, and the ancient of days did sit, as is
expressed in Dan. 7.9, 10. Here began the Lord God Almighty, to call Kings and
Kingdoms to an account, to cast down the mighty from their seats, to cut off
the spirit of Princes, and to be terrible unto the Kings of the earth. And this
work goes forward still, and shall prevail and prosper, to the utter breaking
and destroying of the fourth Monarch, or Roman Empire, dissolved into ten
Kingdoms: And the little horn, that is, the Antichristian State, and Kingdom
likewise.

I know it will be expected, that I give some reasons for what is here
asserted, especially, it being delivered with so much confidence: This I shall
willingly do.

1 Howsoever our Chronicles give the Roman Empire some kind of interest and
title to the Britains, till the year 440. yet it was rather in name then in
thing; For after the year 388. the Romans never exercised that power here
which they did before, only now and then (and that upon earnest entreaty) they
sent hither some relief against the Scots and Picts, and having) done their
work, immediately returned back again, leaving the Brittons to themselves. Thus
their Histories serve to give some light unto Daniels visions concerning the
Times. Howsoever their thoughts were not at all carried out on such a thing.

2. Who ever was the last, certain it is, that England was the first of the ten
horns, and therefore here first were the throns set up, and judgment given
upon the King and Kingdom. True and righteous are his judgments. Rev. 19.2.


3. The high Court of Justice, which was erected in the Year 1648. before
which, the last of our kings had his trial and sentence, was no other, then
that throne of God, mentioned in Dan. 7.9, 10. I do not confine the thrones in
Daniel, and the sitting of the ancient of days, unto England. For I know the
Lord will have his thrones speedily set up in other kingdoms; as France,
Spain, Denmark, etc. and as he proceeded here, so he will do there, JVDICATORY
against Kings and Kingdoms. But to the point in hand, What was done by the
Parliament and High court of Justice, in taking away the king, and changing (in
part) the form of Government, was no other then a fulfilling of that prophecy
in Daniel. Not that our Statesmen thought so, or so intended; but God did put
it in their hearts to fulfill his will, that it should be so. And whereas this
thing, not being before heard of, possibly will be slighted; therefore for
prevention, I shall let the Reader know my reasons for it.

1. It was given by the Angel unto Daniel, that the continuance of the ten
horns or kingdoms, after their rise and appearing, should be only 1260 years,
until the thrones were set. In the year 1648. that term expired, for against
the English horn, the Ancient of days came, and gave judgment. So that it
must necessary follow, in the year 388. the Brittons became one of the horns.
We need not be beholding to humane histories, where the Scripture is clear,
notwithstanding in this point, our Chronocles (as I said even now) agree with
Daniel, as to the rise of the British horn.

2. From accommodating the years, let us consider the work and thrones: For the
work first, It is true, in all ages before this, Kings have been deposed,
imprisoned, put to death; but it was rather man's siting on the throne, then the
Ancient of days; for what they did, was only cutting off one horn or Tyrant,
and setting another up: whereas root and branch was here taken away. And this
is the proper work of Thrones, to change the times and seasons: dissolve
foundations, and remove former Pillars, I say absolutely, and utterly to break
in pieces and consume the ten horns or kingdoms; their places must not be
found any more upon earth: But a new form of government, is to be constituted
and set up.

3. That the Ancient of days has set up his throne in England, I am further
confirmed, by the happy dissolution of the late Parliament; really, I have
wondered, that the Lord should suffer such men, so long to profane his throne;
Psalm. 89.14.
Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: Psalm. 9.4.
Thou satest in the throne doing right, says David, Psalm. 9.4.

I know many are in darkness concerning this great change, and not able to
apprehend the true ground and cause thereof, they run, some into mistakes, some
into discontents, some into rage and fury. For the satisfying therefore of such
people, who desire to eye God, and his hand which is lifted up; I shall show
what is the true cause, that the Parliament was dissolved.

The Ancient of days, having set up his throne amongst us (from which he will
speak to, and plead with the Nations round about) was pleased to honor those
men formerly in place, as to admit them, to sit upon his Throne: And because
(like Jehu) they did well in executing that which was right in the eyes of the
Lord, and did unto the house of Charles Stuart, all that was in his heart; the
Lord suffered them many years to sit on the throne of England: but taking no
heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel, but flying upon the spoil,
and giving countenance and encouragement to the sins of Jeroboam: God at last
rejected them, as he did Saul. And for this cause, raised up the General; I
say, for the Thrones sake, that they might be no longer polluted and profaned
by such a generation of corrupt men. And had not the General done what he did,
to have the Thrones purged from that dross and filth, which cleaved thereto. I
know not how he could have answered God, for that power, and trust which he
has put into his hands.

And here (by the way) let me speak a word unto such as shall sit next upon
this Throne; I would have men consider well beforehand what they do. Its Gods
own throne, and to speak comparatively, it is the only Civil Throne, he has
now in the world; By it he will do mighty and terrible things: And therefore
such as are not for Christ, and for the carrying on of his design in the
world, he will lay them aside, one after another. And set such up, as shall
pour out the last Vials quickly upon Monarchs, and the Antichristian Kingdom.

One thing more, I shall add, in Rev. 16.10. It is said, And the fifth Angel
poured out his vial upon the throne of the Beast (so the Greek has it, throne,
not seat) and his kingdom was full of darkness: By the throne of the Beast, I
understand the ten horns, that is, the States and Kingdoms of the World, which
gave authority and power to the Beast. By darkness, I do not understand, (at
least not chiefly) that which is spiritual, as in reference to their Errors,
Superstitions, Idolatries, etc. for so that kingdom was full of darkness
before: but it is meant of amazement and distraction: not knowing what to do,
nor seeing any way how to come out. For application to the thing in hand; after
the death of the late king, his throne and kingdom perishing under the fifth
Vial: how were people then generally at their wits end? in such darkness, as
they fell one upon another. So upon the dissolving of this Parliament (which
was so degenerate, as it looked more like the throne of the beast, then Gods
throne) what a thick darkness is now gone over men, as if an Angel had smitten
them with blindness, as were the Sodomites. And this you must expect still
along, that as Thrones, States, Powers, are broken to pieces: so confusion,
destraction, and darkness will ever follow; especially among hypocrites,
time-servers, and the Antichristians. None of the wicked shall understand, but
the wise shall understand, Dan. 10.12.

And therefore, for the General, and such with him, whom the Lord used as
seasonable and good instruments to dissolve the late Parliament; here may they
see a divine stamp and character upon their work, even Gods owning both it and
them; namely by this darkness, which is fallen upon the children of this
world. Had the Antichristians approved it: had those which have enriched
themselves (Ministers and others) under the late Parliament, appeared in it,
and for it, had our Judges and Lawyers cried it up, Law, Law; had the Clergy
given thanks for it. In a word, had the people through the whole Nation sent in
their approbation and consent to it, a man might very well have questioned the
work, whether it were of God, or no. But considering upon the breaking of this
Throne, what darkness followed in Priest, in People: It is most evident and
clear, that it was not Gods Throne, but man's rather, and for this end thrown
down, that the ancient of days may have his throne set up, and he sit again
most gloriously amongst us.

From the ten horns, I come now to the Little horn, who is said to wear out
the Saints of the most high, and think to change times and laws. I know it is
the common received opinion, that Antiochus Epiphanes is here meant. Why I take
it otherwise, not Antiochus, but Antichrist, or the Antichristian Kingdom to
be here understood, my Reasons are these.

1. Such as affirm Antiochus to be the little horn, Dan 7.8.20.
do reckon him as one of the ten: But it is expressly said, that he came up
after them, and is besides them, and another.

2. In Dan. 8.9. it is said, that this little horn waxed great, grew statelier
then the rest, and over-topt the former Beasts and horns: Now all know, that
know any thing of the History of Antiochus Epiphanes, that this is neither so,
nor so; for Antiochus Magnus was greater, and more powerful by far then he.

3. Dan. 7.8.
For the three horns which the little horn is said to pluck up by the roots:
as Writers cannot agree who they were, so it is apparent that this Antiochus
never did the things which they do ascribe unto him.

4. For the words, Until a time, times, and dividing of time, they cannot be
applied to the rage of Antiochus against the Saints, nor with his actions and
proceedings against the Jews, as is most apparent, by comparing the phrase,
with other Texts, Rev. 11.2. and 12.6.14.

5. If Antiochus had been the little horn, then after his death should the
kingdom of the Seleucidae immediately have been given up to the Jews. For it
is as clear as the sun at noonday, upon the destruction of the little horn,
Dan 7.21, 22.
the Saints immediately possess his Kingdom. But it is well known, that the
Jews by the destruction of Antiochus, had no restoration, but continued still
after that in bondage, and subject to the Roman power.

To apply this (as many do) to the coming of Christ in the flesh, and so of a
spiritual Kingdom, and liberty, is most absurd and groundless. For not only
was Christ born two or three hundred years after, but it is quite beside the
scope and purpose of the place, as follows.

6. In verse. 27. it is said, And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness
of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the most
high. Observe here, whatsoever Kingdom, Dominion, Greatness, etc. the Beast
and the little horn had, upon their destruction, the Saints shall have the
same. Now this cannot be understood of a spiritual Kingdom: For, 1. the
Saints had ever that, and Christ spiritually always reigned over them.

2. Note.
The Beast and the little horn never had a spiritual Kingdom, which should be
given up to the Saints after their destruction: And therefore the Kingdom, and
dominion, and greatness, possessed first by the Beast and little horn, and
after their ruin to be given to the Saints, must needs be civil and temporal.

Why I take the little horn to be Antichrist, my reason for it is this: It is
generally held, that the holy Scripture is best interpreted by comparing
pararall Texts. Now this is clear, whatsoever in Daniel is spoken of the
little horn, the same in other Scripture is applied to Antichrist. For example,

1. As the little horn is conjoined with the ten horns, Dan. 7.7, 8.20.24. so
is Antichrist with the ten horns, Revel. 17.12, 13.

2. Such practices and proceedings, as in Daniel are attributed to the little
horn, the very same are applied to Antichrist, in other Texts.

1. That he shall speak great swelling words against God, Dan. 7.25. The same
is said of Antichrist, Rev. 13.5, 6.

2. That he shall advance himself against the Civil Magistrate, Dan. 7.20.
and 8.25. So Antichrist, 2 These. 2.4.

3. It is said of the little horn, that he shall change times and laws, Dan.
7.25. So Antichrist is called the lawless one, 2 These. 2.8.

4. The little horn is said to make war against the Saints, Dan. 7.21.25. So
Antichrist, Revel. 13.7.

Again, for the time allotted to the little horn, and the space of his
tyranny, Dan. 7.25. it is the same expressly with Antichrist, Rev. 12.6.14 and
13.5.

Lastly, for the end and destruction of them both, compare Dan. 7.9, 10.11.
with Rev. 19.21. and Dan. 7.13, 14. with 2 These. 2.8.

Thus having proved the little horn to be Antichrist, I come now to some
particulars concerning his rise and fall. Dan. 7.20.
According to Daniel, he seems to be af er the ten horns: Re^ ^^.
Yet John says, the ten horns receive power as Kings one hour with the
beast. The places are easily reconciled, as thus: Their rise was together, no
difference or distance in point of Time: but Antichrist is said to be after the
ten horns, as receiving from them his power, dominion, jurisdiction.

Again, for the Readers better understanding, as to the rise and fall of the
little horn, there are two things I would have him observe.

1. The little horn is to be considered as the Kingdom of the Beast, and as
the members, or worshippers of the Beast: By the Kingdom of the Beast, I
understand him, as changing times and laws: By the members, as making war
against the Saints.

2. (...) speak of the little horn, or Antichrist, I do not mean (...) of
the Pope, or any succession that way, but I mean (...), or Kingdom. It is
true, the Pope is a member of that body, but he is not the body.

Again, I do not here intend alone the Church, Ministry, worship, and
government of Rome. But I include all false Churches, Ministries, Forms,
Ordinances, Institutions, brought in by men: whatsoever in the worship of God
is besides, or contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. All this, whether in
England, or Scotland, make up this Antichristian Kingdom, as that in Rome.

Now for the rise or beginning of this Antichristian Kingdom; First, as it was
obscure and dark, so it had its beginning in the year of our Lord, 400. to
this add 1260. and it goes to the year 1660. And here is the time of the end,
concerning the whole Antichristian kingdom; for further, and beyond this time,
I believe it shall not extend. I do not say, that the Antichristians, or
members of the Beast, shall perish now, or before; for I hold the contrary,
that after their Kingdom is destroyed, many of them shall remain, and attempt
most horrible and cruel actions: Rev. 18.21. Rev. 17.1.
but for the State it self, that shall be found no more at all after the year
1660. This the Angel calls the Judgment of the great whore. Why Judgment?
because Thrones shall be set, and the ancient of days shall sit: And look, as
by a law, Kings and Kingly power shall be cast out from the Nations, so will
the Lord raise up men zealous of his glory, who shall publicly give Judgment
against Babylon, that it remain for ever in the dust.

Before I come to show my reasons for the time which I have asserted, I shall
commend these three things to the Reader.

1. How I understand that place, Rev. 10.2. where the mighty Angel, sets his
right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the earth. As by the Angel
Christ is meant, so as he stands, it is upon the two persecuting powers in the
world, the spiritual and the temporal: His right foot is upon the Note how
they call it the Sea of Rome, the Bishops Sea, etc.
sea; you know the spiritual power went ever before the temporal: Hence they
used to say, the Lords spiritual, and the Lords temporal. And his left foot
on the earth; that is, on the Kings and Kingdoms of the earth. So then my
opinion is, that these (...) ^owers Christ will crush under his feet together,
an^ (...) time. There was a truth in that saying, no Bishop, no Kin^^^^e event
made it true: and welfare a good token. So now, as the relics of Monarchy
which remain yet with us shall bemoved, so will the remainers of the
Antichristian Kingdom be removed with them. As Monarchy falls, so falls
Antichristime: When no footsteps of Monarchy remain, nothing then will stand
of the Antichristian kingdom, which came in with it, and has ever since been
upheld and supported by it.

And for this cause a long time, I never expected any good from the late
Parliament: For I plainly saw, they had no desire to glorify God (in the
fulfilling of his will) to the rooting up of the remnants either of Monarchy or
Antichistime: but rather sought to oppress the bodies and souls of the people
under the heavy burdens of them both.

2. Thou art to take notice (Reader) that as the the thrones were first set up
in England to arreign Monarchy, and to pluck up by the root that tyrannical
power which stood in opposition to Jesus Christ, and to avenge the blood of his
Saints upon it: Even so (as suitable to it) here with us will begin his great
work (by the Thorns) against the kingdom of Antichrist, for the total
extirpation thereof. For howsoever I said before, that the Antichristian State
(as Church, Ministry, Worship, Government) shall be wholly destroyed before
the year 1660. Yet I am of opinion, in respect of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, before one half of that time is expired, the Supreme Authority of
this Nation will effectually finish that work. Zech. 8.6.
If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days:
should it be mavelous in my eyes, says the Lord of Hosts?

What progress in this work they will make, who shall come next in place, I
cannot tell: but this I must tell them; the great business which the Lord has
for the higher Powers of this Commonwealth now to do, it is in order to the
fulfilling of those Prophesies which relate to the present time: and if they do
not look now after this, and honor God in a conscientious and faithful
discharge thereof; the Lord will not look after them, nor honor them, but lay
them aside, and let their names rot, as others before: And therefore if my
counsel may be acceptable unto them; when any shall make adresses to them for
Peace with Babylon, let them make answer in his words, What peace, so long as
the whoredoms of Jezabel and her witch-crafts are so many? What Peace, so long
as the 4th Monarch is not broken to pieces, and consumed? I would willingly
know how men can enter into a league, as to sit still, and suffer such things
to stand, against which the Lord calls them forth to war, and to destroy from
the face of the earth. I have commanded my sanctified ones; Isa. 13.2.
I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my
highness.

3. As Christ will crush both powers at once, and thus by the Thrones: so there
will be a special opening of his mind unto ^om^, whereby to know both their
work and time. As men formerly have observed Providence, so in the later age,
Ier. 50.2.
they shall understand Prophesies, and act in order to them, and to the
accomplishment of them. Declare ye among the Nations, and publish and set up a
standard, publish and conceal not, say Babylon is taken. The knowledge of the
time of the end will be so clear and certain to some men now shortly in power
and place, as they will publicly declare upon what account they act, namely as
being chosen and called of God to execute the vengeance of the Lord upon
Babylon. Moreover the difference shall not be (as heretofore) about meum and
tuum; for honor, greatness, enlargement of Dominion, and such worldly
respects, but better bottomed: it shall be for Christ, his Crown and dignity,
and that righteousness and truth may be exalted in the earth.

For the Reasons now, why I say the Antichristian Kingdom (as it is the little
horn) had its rise about the year 400.

1. About this time they began to open a passage to their pretended Supremacy,
as giving to the Church of Rome the title of the Firmament of all Bishops, and
top of all Churches, and that without the privacie of the Sea Apostolic, that
is, of the Primate, none might presume to ordain a Bishop, and that the
Censures of Bishops in all causes of moment, was to be referred to the audience
of the Bishop of Rome.

2. About this time the little horn began to give check to Emperors and
Kings, and to exalt himself above the Civil Magistrate, in several
particulars.

3. About this time they brought in many beastly lies, and superstitious
vanities, confirming them by Councels, whereby Gods commandments were made of
none effect.

4. It is clear to me by other Scriptures (which I have not now time to open)
that the time allotted to the Antichristian Kingdom shall not pass the year
1660. Now being to continue from first to last, 1260. years, it must needs be,
that his beginning was in the year 400. as I said before.

Here I must again put the Reader in mind, that howsoever the vile person
mentioned, Dan. 11.21. be the same here with the little horn, that is, the
Antichristian Kingdom. Yet they are to be differenced in point of time, as not
having their beginning and rise together.

In this place the Antichristian Kingdom is the little horn, but not the vile
person, because the baseness and abominable iniquity of that State, was not
so high and full as afterward it was, and appeared to the world: and therefore
then rightly called the vile person, and not the little horn.

But to proceed, from the State-plague, I come to what is personal. After the
Ecclesiastical Kingdom shall be destroyed; Every plant which the heavenly
father has not planted, Mat. 1.^.13.
rooted up, the Antichristians, and worshippers of the Beast will remain, and
in as much blindness, and hardness of heart as before. And so much appears,
Revel. 18.9.11, 12, etc. where the Kings of the Earth and the Merchants are
brought in weeping and wailing, when they see the smoke of the burning. Now to
find out the time of the end, concerning these men's destruction, we must
enquire after the first war which the worshiprers of the Beast made against
the Saints.

Twice the woman is said to fly into the wilderness: Rev. 12.6.14.
And two wars the Antichristians made against her: the former, when that
State was the little horn: the later, when it was the vile person. Of the
first now I intend only to speak: Although the later, which was against the
Waldenses, be more memorable, both for the cruelty and continuance of it, and
will give much light to the matter I have in hand: and therefore I purpuse (by
the good hand of God assisting me) shortly to set it forth.

The first war (I find) made against the people of God by the
Antichristians, was in the year 406. About that time we read of a people
called Donatists, who by the Antichristian Clergy and others, were held
Schismatics, Heretics, Blasphemers, etc. and no otherwise proceeded against,
and persecuted, then if they had been indeed most wicked people. Others after
them (specially the Priests) even to this day (as Carriers horses) follow the
steps of their forefathers, not taking notice who were their accusers, nor the
particulars whereof they were accused.

These Donatists (by what does appear in the writings of their adversaries)
were honest men, sound in the faith, and suffered very much for the Truth sake.
Concerning their opinions, howsoever we have them not, but as reported, and set
down by their Enemies (who no doubt made things as bad as they could) yet we
shall take them as from them.

1. They denied the public Assemblies; that is, the Parish Churches of the
Papists, as not being the Churches of Christ rightly constituted, and separated
from them, because of the leaven and abominations therein.

2. They refused to submit to that power and form of Government, which the
little horn had devised and set up.

3. They held that the Sacraments were no otherwise holy, then as they were
given and taken by holy men.

4. It was their opinion that the Magistrate should not compel men's
consciences, not force unto acts of Religion.

5. They are accused, as being Millenaries, that is, did believe and teach that
Jesus Christ in his humane nature, should personally reign upon Earth.

I know other things are laid to their charge, but so improbable; yea
impossible (if such particulars as these were their Tenets) as their Enemies
might have been ashamed to put them gether; and others since more ashamed of
their ignorance and simplicity, as not to see how ridiculous, absurd, and
contradictory the old Popish Fathers are ( Augustine himself) in the Story
which they have left behind them, concerning the Donat ^sts. But to proceed.

Against these good men (in whom began the witnesses that should prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, Note.
clothed in sackcloth) warred the little horn (in his worshippers) by
Canons, Rev. 11.3.
Councels, Imperial Edicts, etc. to the shedding of much innocent and precious
blood: And this was (as I said before) in the year 406. to which 1260. years
being added, it comes to the year 1666. and to the number of the Beast 666. So
then in brief, my opinion is this: As the Antichristian State shall be
destroyed before or by the year 1660. and all that fulfilled which is set down,
Rev. 18. so, not beyond the year 1666. shall the Antichristians themselves,
and worshippers of the Beast, escape the vengeance of the Lord, and of his
Temple. But either by repentance from dead works, come in, and put themselves
under the glorious Scepter of Jesus Christ; or cast into the great Wine Press
of the wrath of God, and so that fulfilled, Rev. 19. And here the Lord will put
an end, and period to all the troubles of the Gentile Churches, not to go
beyond, or further then the year 1666. After that time they shall be called to
the marriage supper of the Lamb, and sing Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power unto the Lord God: Allelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns.

I have done for this time with the first Prophecy. For the second which
concerns the 70. weeks, I know it is generally applied to the coming of Christ
in the flesh, and to his death and sufferings: but I understand it otherwise,
as being one of the choicest and clearest Prophesies in all the Scripture,
concerning the later times, chiefly the two Witnesses; a matter at this time
much spoken of, and about which godly men are diversely minded.

I am not willing to enter upon it now, but promise the Reader, he shall
suddenly have it in an entyre Tract, for it lies ready by me for the Press.
From the Gentiles therefore, I come to the time of the end belonging to the
Jews, set down in Dan. 12.11, 12. And from the time that the daily sacrifice
shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate, set up, there
shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waits,
and comes to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

It is most certain, that Jesus Christ by his death, did put away all Jewish
sacrifices; he did (I say) Iure, and in right destroy them vertually by his
own sacrifice, the fullness and end of all their shadows: Notwithstanding
facto, and actually after his death many years, and by diverse steps and
degrees. For after the taking and sacking of Jerusalem by Titus, the City not
destroyed, the Jews still there inhabited, and continued their vain worship
with more ignorant zeal then before.

For 1. In the Reign of Adrian the Roman Emperor, who built and dedicated a
Temple in Jerusalem to Jupiter Olympius, at which the Jews being offended,
rebelled and made head, and in the end were overcome and dispersed, and the
City named Aelia, and given into the possession of the Gentiles; whereas
before until that time, they had not ceased there, from sacrifice.

2. Being expelled the City, yet they continued their superstitions in the
Country, and built an Altar under the Oak Mamre (where the Angels appeared to
Abraham) and forced the Merchants which came to the Faires to sacrifice
thereon, otherwise they should not traffic. Constantine the Great demolished
the Altar, and built there a Church for the Christians.

3. In the days of Julian the Apostate, and professed Enemy of Christians, in
despite of the Christian faith, he recalled the Jews which were dispersed to
and fro, to return into their own land, gave them license to build the Temple,
and to re-establish the Leviticall service, and furnished them with workmen,
money, materials, and other necessaries out of the public stock. The Jews
embracing so large a grant, attempted the building of the Temple, laid the
foundation not wholly razed down before, wherein they were met by a special
hand of God: For a fearful Earthquake, with thunder, lightning, and
fireballs from Heaven, in one night destroyed all their work and tools, and
totally overthrew the foundation of the Temple: so that they were constrained
to forbear their work, and all further proceeding; and after that time the
Jewish sacrifices did for ever cease.

It is also memorable, how Cyril then Bishop of Jerusalem, told the Jews of
this Prophecy; and seeing no admonition or persuasion would prevail, he
openly professed, that now the time was come of which Christ spoke unto his
Disciples, Mat. 24.2.
concerning the Temple, There shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down. This total desolation of the Temple, under the
reign of Julian (in which the Jewish sacrifices were wholly taken away) fell
out in the year 365. to which 1290. being added, do make up 1655. The time
designed for the rising and beginning of the Jews, after their long dispersion.

And here for the Readers better understanding, three things I shall propound
to him.

1. I do not understand (though many do) any general conversion of the Jews
at this time unto the faith, by the preaching of the Gospel, but only arising
amongst them, upon a civil account, to recover their own Country.

About this time (namely the year 1655.) if not before; my opinion is (and
grounded I conceive on the holy word) that the Turk with great Forces will come
into Italy. Dan. 11.40.
At the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him; that is, come
out against the Pope, yet so, as he shall effect little or nothing, but
suddenly depart: For tidings out of the East, Dan 11.44.
and out of the North shall trouble him; that is, news shall be brought unto
him of an insurrection of the Jews through all parts of his Empire, making
head, forming themselves into a Body, and entering into the land of Judea. The
first-shall say to Sion, behold, Isa. 41.27.
behold them, and I will give to Jerusalem one that brings good tidings. It
seems to hold forth the Messengers of the Jews, which shall pass from place,
to place with tidings of their design, and to bring others in, for the sooner
and better effecting of it.

Hereupon the Grand Signeor is said to be troubled: and no marvail: For

1. He knows well, that the Jews are a great people, and for wealth, and
warlike abilities, able to cope with the greatest Monarch in the world.

2. They are domestic Enemies, besetting him before and behind, eating out the
bowels and revenues of his State.

3. Their rising is sudden, from all parts of Arabia, and Syria, and their
faction grows exceeding strong before he hears of it: So that the suddenness of
it did presage some evil event; as is ever observed amongst Politicians, 2 Samuel
20.2.6.

4. He is the more troubled, as being with his Forces at such a distance from
them.

And lastly, who knows, but he shall be troubled now, in remembering an old
tradition which the Turks have; that at last they shall be subdued and
destroyed by the children of Isaak.

Here by the way, take notice, that the Turk having brought his Forces out of
Asia and Africa into Italy, against the Christians, Revel. 15.12. Isa. 11.25.
and 51.10, 11.
or rather Antichristians: This I take to be the drying up of the river
Eupbrates, and the waters thereof, that the way of the Kings of the East might
be prepared. The meaning seems to be thus; the power and strength of the Turks
being in Christendom, the Jews (improving the advantage and opportunity of the
time) will rise, and repair to their own land, and by a strong hand re-enter and
take the possession of it. And this they shall do (as I said before) only upon
a Hence it is said they shall take the Kingdom, Dan. 7.18. and after the
Kingdom shall be given them, verse. 27. Dan. 11.44. Dan. 12.1. Dan. 11.45. Ezekiel
38.8, 9, 10, 11.
Civil account, taking example from other Nations, to shake off the yoke of
Tyrants, and to be a free people.

2. The Jews being entered into their own Country: The Turk shall go forth
with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many. And here begins the
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same
time. Most cruel and bloody wars between the Jews and Turks. This conflict
shall be (for the most part) in Judea: And he shall plant the tabernacles of
his Palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain: that is, the
borders, or continent betwixt Euphrates, and the Mediterranean. Of this war,
and place speaks Ezekiel. In the later days thou shall come into the land
that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people,
against the mountains of Israel, which have been always wast: But it is
brought forth of the Nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them. Thou
shall ascend, and come like a storm, thou shall be like a cloud to cover the
land, Zech. 14.2, 3.
thou and all thy hands with thee, etc. So Zechariah, I will gather all Nations
against Jerusalem, and the City shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the
women ravished, and half of the City shall go forth into captivity, and the
residue of the people shall not be cut off from the City. Then shall the Lord
go forth and fight against those Nations, etc.

Moreover as this War is expressed in holy Scripture, and the place, so the
continuance of it, how long it shall be. Blessed is he that waits, Dan. 12.12.
and comes to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days. This later
number is more then the former by 45. years. And so long shall this war
continue between the Jews and the Turks, namely from the year 1655. to 1700.
Sometimes the one getting the better, sometimes the other.

3. These years being expired, about the year 1700. Dan. 12.7. Rev. 1.7.
Michael the great Prince will stand up for his people. Behold he comes with
the clouds, and every eye shall see him, etc. This is the SET TIME in which the
Lord will arise and have mercy upon Sion. Psalm. 102.13.
His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
Jerusalem on the East: and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst
thereof toward the East, and toward the West, and there shall be a very great
valley, and half of the mountain shall remove toward the North, and half of
it toward the south. Joel 3.2.
And he will plead with them there for his people, and for his heritage Israel.
The Turk now totally and finally shall be destroyed. His army probably, beside
the Sea of Gennezaret, Ezekiel. 39.11. Joel 3.2. Isa. 60.8. Am. 9.14, 15. Ezekiel.
37.21, 22. Isa. 60.18. Ezekiel. 34.31. Isa. 49.19, 20. Ezekiel. 37.22.24. Hos. 1.11.
Rev. 21.24. Isa. 49.23. Zeph. 3.19, 20.
otherwise called the lake of Tiberias, and the Turk himself at, or near
Jerusalem. Upon this shall follow a speedy and sudden conversion of the Jews:
In one day, and at once, as the Prophet speaks. And after this, they shall
dwell in their own Land in safety, inhabit all the parts of it as before;
their Country shall be more fertile and populous then ever it was, a most
flourishing State of Church and Commonwealth. There shall be, after this
victory once obtained, no separation any more of the ten Tribes from the
other two, but both shall make one entire Kingdom. All Nations shall come in to
them, and honor them, and willingly, or perforce submit unto the Government of
Jesus Christ.

But to return to the year 1655. It is the opinion of many, (and I am of the
same mind) that six thousand years from the Creation, do meet with the
ending of this year 1655. which is near at hand, and great Revolutions are
looked for at that time: For the particulars I find them not expressed, but to
me, these fearful and terrible changes seem to be these five.

1. The Turk, his coming against Italy with such multitudes, will fill all
Europe with terror, and amazement; and howsoever his stay here shall be short
(as was said before) yet it will be the occasion, and rise of mavelous
changes to follow afterward.

2. In this year will the Lord most eminently appear, shaking the Earth, Hag
2.22.
and overthrowing the Thrones of Kingdoms every where in Europe: By this time
(I verily think) the Thrones will be set, Isa. 26.11.
and the Ancient of days sitting thereon. The Prophet says, Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed.
Hitherto what God has done in overturning, overturning, overturning (the
Bishops first, the King next, the Parliament last) it is not observed, as the
righteous hand of God. 2 Pet. 3.4.
All things continue (says the Scoffer) as they were from the beginning of the
Creation. But know this, in the year 1655. the Vial shall be so full, poured
out so fast, and lie so close and hot upon the persecuting powers of the world,
as they shall then see, and be ashamed, begin to take notice that it is the
wrath of the Lamb which follows after them. It is reported of Moles, that a
short time before they die, they see a little, but never before. So the blind
Pope, and his creatures: and the Kings of the earth, as blind as he, a little
before the final extirpation of their State, something they will see, as of
God fighting from Heaven against them, though they repent not to give him glory.

3. At this time, great changes and revolutions will be, in respect both of
persons and things: For howsoeve I am assured, that every change amongst us
shall be for good unto the Nation, as this present Government, and what
follows, a great deal better then the former; yet I question, whether the
Lord will thoroughly purge his floor, in sweeping out all corrupt and selfish
men, until that time: But some will still creep in unawares, not serving the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly. Nevertheless this I would have the
Reader observe, that about the year 1655. Psalm. 149.8.7.
the righteous alone shall flourish, and be exalted. A two-edged sword is in
their hand, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the
people: to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of
iron. To execute upon them the judgment written. And this Supreme Power shall
abide with them four or five years without interruption, until they have
broken in pieces the fourth Monarch.

4. Another terrible and fearful change, in likelihood will fall out in the
year 1655. or the year after, that is the There are some Prophesies which
mention the burning of Rome in the year 6000. from the Creation.
sacking and burning of the City of Rome. After which it shall never be
inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation; but
wild Beasts of the Desert shall lie there, and their houses shall be full of
doleful Creatures. And Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance there.
Isa. 13.2.21, 22.
And the wild beasts of the Islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and
Dragons in their pleasant palaces, and her time is near come, and her days
shall not be prolonged. And this instrumentally shall be done by the Saints of
the most high, whose hearts and hands the Lord will raise up for that work. It
is possible that the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. may escape,
as being reserved to perish afterward with the worshippers of the Beast; Number.
31.8.
as Balaam perished amongst the Midianites.

5. The last is the rising of the Jews, of which I have spoken, and shall make
no repetition.

Having opened some Prophesies, and applied them, according to the grace
received, I come now to the other particular, which is to show the time in
which we are, and our present work: And this is a special Voice from the
Temple unto the higher Powers.

In the general I have expressed my opinion already: Christ has his right
foot on the Sea, and his left foot on the Earth. So then to follow the Lamb, it
is to break in pieces those two Powers, Kingly, and Antichristian. Who is on my
side (says the Lord) Who? Throw her down. Come against her from the utmost
border, Ier. 50.26.
open her storehouses, cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly, let
nothing of her be left. There is now a price put into your hands, a fair
opportunity, and a door opened before you. He that let is taken out of the
way. If a Mariner should be asked in winter why he is at home, and not at Sea;
to speak of the unseasonablenesse of the time, might be a reason sufficient:
but if the Winter be past, and the season good, here he has not the like
excuse to make for himself. When Kingly power stood, and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, which was worse, and the last Parliament little better; that
some in Authority did little good, much might be said for their excuse: But now
seeing all these things are removed, what will our next Governors have to say
for themselves, if they do not appear and act earnestly for just and righteous
things. If a man did certainly know the day of his death: what appetite or
desire could he have to meat, an hour before he was to dye? It may be those
things which I here write, some will not receive: but howsoever I shall
discharge mine own conscience: and therefore this I do declare with confidence
to the world, that corrupt men, and selfe-seekers, their trade is coming down,
and two years shall not be expired (mark it) but they shall vomit up what they
have gotten by injustice, falsehood, bribery, etc. and God shall cast it out of
their belly.

But more particularly to the present work: Such as will act well hereafter,
and serve their generation, they must in most things do otherwise, and contrary
to what others have done before them. I shall only instance some particulars
briefly.

1. They must be active, and quickly dispatch the business which they take in
hand; and not to tell people as others usually did, of the Thanks of the
House, and that it was under Debate, referred to a Committee, etc. and here was
all. But let Petitioners be speedily relieved in their just applications. I
have seen at the foot of great houses, Images set out in such a posture, as if
the building lay on their backs: Such pictures we had, as made show to have the
Church and Commonwealth on their shoulders, whereas in truth (for most of them)
neither the one, nor the other had any real help or supportance from them.

2. They must not seek nor desire to grow rich and great in the world, by being
in Authority, but advance the Public Interest, and not their own. A thing
formerly not practiced by many, but left the care of public concernment to
enrich themselves.

Hence it is, that many of them, who before the Parliament began, were not
worth two or three hundred pounds a year, have now made it up, some to a
thousand, some to fifteen hundred, some to two thousand pounds a year, and
more. These must be served, as Esop did his fellow servants, he gave him warm
water to drink, by which means he vomited up the stolen figs.

3. It is a work now proper to the higher Powers, to be careful what men they
appoint, as Justices and Magistrates in the Commonwealth; hitherto in Town
and Country such have been in many places, as have most grossly abused the
people, exercised even an arbritary power where they lived, and done what they
list; as knowing if their insolences and exorbitances should be complained of,
they had a Of this thing, we had a memorable example in Hull, where one Master
Shaw, a notable Turn-coate, and Time-server as lives, has committed such
scandalous actions as seldom are heard of, yet no Justice could pass against
him, by reason of the corrupt Mayor. The things are so foul against them both,
as honest men wonder they should be suffered: But so long as the last
Parliament stood, Mr. Shaw was supported in all the mischief he plotted,
either against the Town, or honest men. The last Speaker, Baron Thorp, and Sir
Henry Vane, know who I mean, and who did help Shaw, to make three or four
unworthy Aldermen at a clap, all Brothers, and to have what Mayor and Sheriffs,
Shaw would, to carry on his Design, which was to disquiet the peace of the
place, and affront the honest party. I hear he studieth to get favor amongst
those who are now in place: But that no honest man may be deceived by him, this
I testify publicly, and of knowledge, he is a most corrupt man, and hitherto
countenanced by men, as corrupt and rotten as himself.
friend in the House, would bear them out in spite of all accusers.

Hence a man every where, might have seen that in Solomon fulfilled: When the
wicked bears rule, the people mourn.

4. How many years has it been under Debate in the House concerning the
propagation of the Gospel. Now I desire every one that fears God, to observe,
what progress they have made herein. This I affirm to be true, they have left
standing in the Nation, a Clergy, or generation of Priests, more scandalous,
profane, wicked, insufficient, etc. then was in the Bishops time, and before
they began to sit: Notwithstanding they would send their Acts, to these
wretches, that they should pray and give Thanks for them. Whereas Hezekiah sent
to Isaiah the Prophet, to lift up his prayer for the remnant.

That these unworthy men, are to be removed from their unsanctified places and
standing, the word of God is clear for it; but whether he will so far honor
our next Governors, in putting them upon so glorious a work, a little time
will show.

5. Be sure that ye be real, and faithful to such men, whom you know, to be
real and faithful to that Cause, and Work you are upon. Of late, Turn coats,
Time-servers, Apostates, and such like, have been most favored, soonest heard,
and preferred: The which was one special cause of their ruin, and will destroy
others if they do the like. As fire taken off from the hearth, and put to the
Thatch, will burn down the house; Even so, if men in place, withdraw their
affection from honest and good men, to act for unworthy ones, they cannot
stand. Let them associate themselves, and they shall be broken, take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught.

6. Psalm. 4.3. Ps. 101.6.
As the Lord will set apart him that is godly: And David says mine eyes shall
be upon the faithful of the land: So in choosing men to public employment,
carnal relations must be laid aside, and men fearing God pitched upon. It
would be worth the while to consider, how many are in place, who hate to be
reformed, count it their grace that they are graceless: yea, despite the
spirit of grace in Saints. If a man should sow Tares in his Field, or plant
thorns and thistles in his Garden, would it be a wonder afterward, to see
fruit according to the kind he has sown and planted? Those that do set and
plant in the Commonwealth, crafty men, covetous and deceitful fellows, I
mean as to have places of great trust, and concernment, if they deceive the
State; no marvail, Who will expect grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

7. There is another abuse which honest men desire speedily to have reformed,
namely a multitude of unnecessary and useless Officers, publicly employed in
civil affairs, whereby the Revenues of the Commonwealth are extremely wasted:
which men, if removed, not only many thousand pounds a year would be saved,
but the work speedier, and much better done. Besides, it is well known, that
some of the late Parliament, have devised new Offices where there was none
before, Note.
and whereof there is no use in the world, purposely to set in some of their
own kindred for sallarie.

8. Whereas many have gotten great estates, by falsehood, deceit,
unfaithfulness, done many unjust actions, and do fraudulently detain much of
the public treasure in their hands, and some are ready to manifest and prove
so much. It is desired, not only that some men may be appointed, to hear and
receive the Informations, and Charges, which shall be brought forth against
such Delinquents: but special care be taken about the choice of them, as that
they be able men, Exodus 18.21.
such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness.

As those last men in power were for the most part men most corrupt, so
ordinarily they set none in places under them, but men corrupt and rotten as
themselves: And therefore no marvail though some much desired to have their
old Masters in again, for they knew, they were NONE SUCH to serve their turn.
The glasse-window lets in light, but keeps out wind and rain: I hope to see
such in place, as will hear and receive the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, and keep back partiality, respect of persons, relations,
private Interests.

9. For the Regulating of the Laws, and other corruptions amongst us, here it
is expected, that things be now done speedily and effectually. The turning of
the Law into English, no way eased or lessened the grievances of the people:
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Remember the TWO
PLAGUES of this Nation, PRIESTS and LAWYERS. Because thou have let go out of
thy hand, 1 Kin. 20.42.
a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for
his life, and thy people for his people.

10. Take heed of making Parties, and running into factions, as the former ever
did, to carry on, particular and private designs.

The work before you is public, and general, and therefore be not divided
in Schisms and Factions, but unanimously accord together in the present work
of the Lord. In raising up a material house, when the workmen sweetly agree
together, the building goes forward apace: so here. How far the Lord will
carry on his work instrumentally by such as shall be next in power, as to
consider of these, and other things I know not, neither what the Lord intends
to do by them, concerning the breaking in pieces the fourth Monarch, and
Antichristian Kingdom: But this I know, if these come not up to the work,
others shortly will: For it shall not be left undone beyond the year 1655. A
people then shall be created, to fulfill the will of God (and he will put it
into their hearts) in order to the Prophesies of the later time: Hab. 23.
For the vision is yet for an appointed time: but in the end it shall speak,
and not lie.

A Postscript.
Reader,
I Have considered that there are two things, wherein thou may be much
unsatisfied concerning this subject.

1. How to destroy the little horn, or Antichristian Kingdom, can stand with
Tolleration of Religion, and liberty of Conscience, allowed by the present
Government, and upon just and good grounds.

2. To break the fourth Monarchy, tends not to make this Commonwealth happy
and flourishing, which the higher Powers are to seek after: but to preserve
Peace, and so Trade with other Nations, is much better for our prosperity,
welfare, and happiness. I shall answer both.

1. The Antichristian Kingdom, is a State guilty of blood, and accordingly to
be arreigned and executed. In Rev. 18. after Babylon is said to be destroyed,
the reason of it is showed in the last verse. In her was found the blood of the
Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth: So that
hence it does appear, that no wilful murderer, more justly can be put to
death, then the power of the Beast destroyed, for shedding innocent blood.

2. As the times may be, some acts of Justice may be forborne, which afterward
ought, and must be done. David complains, 2 Samuel 3.29.
that the sons of Zerviah were too hard for him: yet Solomon following (being
in a better capacity) put one of them to death, and justly too. For a more
clear illustration: Though murder be discovered, and the person known, yet no
execution can be done upon him, till he fall into the hands of Justice. Indeed
then, if the Magistrate neglect his duty, and suffer him to escape, he wraps
himself in the blood and guilt of the Malefactor. That blood-guiltinesse, lies
on the Antichristian Kingdom, this has been known to Saints in former ages,
but the sons of Zerviah were always too hard for them: but now, when the
power shall be in their hands, not to execute judgment upon the murderer, is
(as I conceive) to be no otherwise then accessory to the blood of the Prophets,
and of the Saints, in the great City Babylon.

3. To give liberty and tolleration I am clearly for; yet so, as the known will
of God be fulfilled concerning the work of this present time: And therefore we
must distingush between persons and things. Persons are to be tolerated,
though diversely minded in point of Religion; but where the vengeance of the
Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple, Rev. 18.6.
is expressly called for, and to be executed thus, and thus: What tolleration is
to be granted here in such a case, I desire those to consider of, who are
specially concerned in it.

Lastly, seeing I have mentioned so often the Antichristian Kingdom, to be
destroyed by the Ancient of days, sitting upon his Throne, etc. It will not be
amiss, that I give the Reader my meaning more fully.

This Antichristian Kingdom, or State, was first erected against Jesus Christ,
that is, to corrupt his word, and worship, and to destroy his people, under a
pretense of blasphemy, heresy, schism, etc. The which in Popery, Prelacy, and
Presbytery, has been both professed and prosecuted; whereby much innocent blood
has been shed, and would be still, if the Magistrate would give his power to
them. Besides, by this Antichristian State, against the Lord Jesus Christ, a
Church, Ministry, Worship, and Government has been devised, and set up: All
which the Saints near the end, will call to an account; and finding the same to
be guilty of innocent blood, and a main let to the present exaltation of
Christ's Kingdom, will judicially give sentence, that it be thrown down, and
be no more at all.

Reward her, even as she has rewarded you: Rev. 18.6.
and double unto her double according to her works: In the cup which she has
filled, fill her double. As if he should say; whereas this bloody Kingdom,
most falsely judged you in the Saints which were before, to be Heretics,
Blasphemers, Schismatics, and persecuted you by imprisonment, banishment,
confiscation of goods, yea death it self: And would not suffer you to walk in
the faith and order of the Gospel, Reward her, even as she rewarded you; that
is, as God has put the power of Nations into your hand, and the day and
judgment of Babylon being now come. Wheresoever the Lord carries you forth,
execute the vengeance of the Lord, and of his temple upon the Antichristian
Kingdom. Here still I speak of things, and not of persons.

To the other Objection I answer thus.

1. The glory of God in fulfilling his word, is to be preferred before all
outward prosperity. A Heathen could say, Let Justice be done, and the world
perish: Shall Saints then, hold back their hands, from executing the righteous
Judgments of the Lord, only through a base fear of worldly inconveniences.

2. Prove. 21.30.
There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. If he
be breaking now (as certainly he is) the fourth Monarch, we and they may take
counsel together, but it shall come to naught. What man, seeing his neighbors
house on fire, would willingly set his own by it, for so they would both burn
and fall together. The Lords fire is already kindled in Thrones and Kingdoms:
And therefore the further off we keep, from associating our selves with them,
from coming near them in Leagues and Covenants, the more likely it is, that our
Commonwealth will be happy, and flourish.

But 3. I would not have the people of this Nation to imagine, that these
Changings and Turnings in the world, are in order to their better trading; God
intends it otherwise: It Is for trading indeed, but for his own: To break the
Kings, Merchants, and great men of the Earth, that the Kingdoms of this world
may be his, and his Christ's. Worldly men have had their time for Trade, and
they have had a long time of it. The Lord now is putting an end to that, and
setting up a better.

I write this for my Countrey-mens sake, to let them know, howsoever I hope,
Those which shall be next in place, will do just and good things, take off
what burdens they can, and make the Nation as happy and prosperous as they are
able: Yet I have no hope, that the Times will be any better for civil Trade,
but more troublesome, and wars daily increase: And therefore they should now
begin to look up to God, and after his work, and the Great Trade which he is
carrying on: and withdraw their minds from this old world, which is perishing,
and going out, and prepare for the world to come whereof we speak, wherein
dwells righteousness, Heb. 2.5.
and which will be much better for them, if they be of that number, who look
for the blessed hope, Tit. 2.13.
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

For Conclusion, there is one word more from the Temple to the higher Powers,
and so I have done. And it concerns a main thing, in order to our late great
victory at Sea, which the Lord gave us over the Dutch. It was some trouble unto
many, when they heard that the Holland Merchant Ships were returned safely
home, and not met with by our Fleet: It is true, the Lord could have given them
into our hands, but he would not. And why not the one, as well as the other?
The reason is (as the Lord has put it strongly on my heart to have it known)
In this he tells us, what our proper work is, namely not to look after
Merchants, as to grow great and rich by the wealth of other Nations, but to
break their power and strength in pieces. The Lord gave their men of War into
our hands, not their Merchant Ships. Speaking here I say, as it were from
heaven, that it is not prizes, or the Enemies goods, our hearts or hands should
desirously be upon: But to destroy Babylon, stain the glory of Kings and
Kingdoms, and lay low the high and great mountains of the earth.

Rev. 22.10. Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for the time
is at hand. Hos. 14.9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
prudent, and he shall know them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them; but the transgressors shall fall therein. FINIS.

