The Discoverer.

Being an Answer to a Book entitled, ENGLANDS NEW CHAIN, The Second Part,
Discovered.

SHOWING In what part the said Book is false, scandalous, and reproachful; in
what destructive to the present Government; in what particulars it tends to
division and mutiny in the Army, and the raising of a new War; and wherein it
hinders the releife of Ireland, and continuing of Free Quarter; according to
the Parliaments censure upon the said Book.

Also the General Officers of the Army are here cleared from sundry Falsehoods,
and Slanders charged upon them: With a further Discovery of many dangerous and
destruct^ve D^signes still carried on by ^he Levelling Party, against the
peace, safety, and freedom of the people.

The Second Part.

PRO. 18.6, 7. and 19.19. A Fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth
calls for stripes,
A Fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and be that speaks lies shall
perish.
LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1649.

TO The Right Honorable, the Commons of England, assembled IN PARLIAMENT.
SIRS,
SINCE the Imprisonment of Mr. Lilburne, and the other three; There is
published a Book under Mr. Walwins Name, wherein he manifests a great desire,
that the Parliament had been pleased for the satisfaction of all those their
faithful Friends who are concerned in it, and of the whole Nation in general,
to have expressly applied each part of the Book to each censure upon it, as to
have showed in what part it was false, scandalous, and reproachful, in what
destructive to the present Government, also to have showed what part, sentence,
or matter therein rended to division and mutiny in the Army, and the raising of
a new War in the Common wealth; or wherein to hinder the relief of Ireland,
and continuing of Free Quarter.

For what end he writes thus, it may easily be conjectured: And therefore to
wipe of the aspersion and reproach from your Honorable House, we have
undertaken the Justification of your Censure upon that Book and according to
the severest crimes and guilt Expressed in your Act, have here manifested the
said Book to deserve no less in every particular.

Now from this answer, we are occasioned to put you in mind, how dangerous and
destructive to all forms and kinds of Government, are Traiterous, Mutinous,
and Reproachful Libels, and Pasquils, In truth the wisest of the Gentiles
understood so much, and accordingly prescribed and provided remedies against it
in their republics. We have also observed the wisdom and singular care of
Magistrates in foreign parts: For howsoever there are persons amongst them, as
ill affected to their State as any herewith us, yet they know how, and do,
stop the passage and prevent the danger of such things by the due execution of
good laws.

It is true, in our Laws there are helps provided: notwithstanding the
mischief and misery remains. And why? As foolish Birds frighted a little at
first with the Husbandmans Scarerow, and after a while observing that it stir
not, are bold to sit it upon it and defile it. So when Authority either revives
some former statute or makes a new act against the aspersers of the present
Government, at first the Libellers and Raylers are a little frighted: But
seeing there is not that mooving, acting, prosecuting as they fear^ at first,
they take so much boldness as to come near you, even to your very faces, set
upon you, and defile you, and not only in your reputation and name, but your
power and Government and in the vilest and basest manner as ever was known in
any Commonwealth, (Sirs) we speak this out of a tender respect unto you, and
to show how much we desire that the Fac^s of our Elders may be honored, and
their Authority not blasted by such a base Generation of men. Neither truly
know we any cause why such Pests and Plagues in a commonwealth may not as well
be suppressed in England as in other parts, If the like strict and exact course
be taken here as (...) elsewhere. Now the Lord give you that wisdom, both in
this and other things, as may be for the Nations prosperity, peace, liberty:
and your own comfort Crown and honor.

TO His EXCELLENCY the Lord FAIRFAX, etc. AND To the Right Honorable, LEIVT:
GENERAL CROMWELL, etc.
My Lords,
THE reason why we have here mentioned Your Honorable Names, is in regard the
matter contained in Our DISCOVERER, is your deserved Vindication, from many
vile aspersions raised up against you by some malicious and seditious tongues.
You hnow in War, the General and chief Commanders are sought after by every
one, more then the common Soldiers. Envy is like certain Flies called
Cantharides, who light specially upon the fairest Wheat, and most blown roses.
That you are singled out by some men, and made now the subject of their
falsehood and slander, it is no marvel; for it has been so from the
beginning; men evermore of best deserving, and greatest worth, have most felt
the scourge of tongues. M. Cato Major a Pop. Romans prudens vppellatus maximis
Roma^^rum odijs exercitus est. Quadragies enim series reus causam dixit,
semperque absol^tus est. Sabel l. 1. c. 6.

Elias laid this down as a reason, why he was willing to die, I am no better
then my Fathers. The like reason may move you to be patient, contented,
comforted: you are not worse used then David was, yea Christ himself, your
Lord and Master was served so. When an Artificer has before his eyes a famous
pattern of his work, on which he looks, he perfecteth his own much the
better. Tak^ the Prophets which were before you for an example of suffering,
men eminent for grace, gifts and Office. Quis emim paulo majori anime non mal^t
in bello cum peric^lo cum his proficisci, qui in precio sunt, quam domi cum i^s
in ocio desidere qui contempti habentur; maxim si rex ipse ad Pralium eat?
Cartwright: historia Christi. Lib. 1. p 375.

Besides it must needs be a matter of singular joy unto you, to consider, how
the godly every where love you, honor you, carry you in their Bosom, and on
their hearts, as the Jewels, and Treasure of the people. So that as light is
loved (and men will love it) though Batts and Owls reject it: so are you under
God, esteemed as two great lights of the Nation; neither does the splendor and
brightness of your persons appear the less lovely, sweet and beautiful to
them, for that some Night-birds cannot without vexation and envy look thereon:

And to say the truth, the godly every where have the more cause to love and
honor you, considering it is for their sake, and the truths sake, and for the
advancement thereof, that you are aspersed; and so much we have in this
Treatise manifested.

And howsoever for your own particulars, there needed not this Vindication:
for inward peace and a good conscience is enough for a man's own satisfaction.
superat conscientia, quicquid ma^^ finxerit lingua as Seneca says, Epist: lib:
de mor: and as Tiberius said to Rh^scuporis; si frans abesses, poss^ eam
innocentiae fider^. T^^ Annal: 2. Nevertheless finding their accusation to be
false, scandalous, and seditious, we thought it our duty to step in and so to
manifest as much respect and love unto your persons, in maintaining the honor
and inocencie of your names, and justness of your cause; as others show their
malignitie and hatred, in seeking by calumniation and slander, to blast you,
and your righteous proceedings.

Charles the fifth had for his devise a Ball with two Balloones, with this
motto, percussus clevor, the harder I am stricken the higher I mount. Hitherto
you have made this true, and we hope it shall still be so, as that in after
Generations it shall be said, the enemies raysd you and by their strokes you
won honor and fame. The searcher of all hearts knows, how desirously we
desire; that as the Lord has wonderfully blessed your undertakings and Crowned
you with many glorious victories; so you, even you (we say) may be THE MEN and
the Instruments in Gods hand to make England and Ireland fully happy, and of
you that may be said, and fulfilled in you, (...). And likewise that, Nec tarda
senectus
Debilitet vires animi, mutetque virorem.


Neither have we taken this work in hand, without sitting down first and
counting the cost: we have indeed considered the charge, and do expect Bitter
words, but we are not thereby discouraged at all: you have often been in the
midst of Swords, Spears, and other Instruments of death, for us, and
therefore it is the least we can do, to suffer the Spears, Swords and Arrows
of evil Tongues for so just and Honorable a cause as this is. Therefore
according to our engagement, so we shall (God willing) go forward to stop the
mouth of absurd and unreasonable men.

The Discoverer. Being an Answer to a BOOK, ENTITLED, ENGLANDS New Chains,
The Second Part. Wherein is showed in what part the said BOOK is False,
Scandalous, and Reproachful; in what, Destructive to the present Government;
in what particulars it tends to Division and Mutiny in the Army, and the
raising of a new War in the Common wealth; and wherein, to hinder the Relief
of Ireland, and continuing of Free Quarter. THE SECOND PART.
WE see men are more curious what they put into a new Vessel, then into a
Vessel well seasoned; and what mould they lay about a young plant, then about
a plant corroborate: If some men were not (...), without understanding, without
natural affection, unmercifull; they would not manifest such outrage and
violent opposition against our present State, considering the same as yet, is
new, tender, not thoroughly and fast set and settled.

But where the Building is green and not dry, things are the sooner put out of
order, so many people do purposly wait for the opportunity; that is, while
things are settling in the Common wealth, take the advantage of the time to
obstruct the work. And as former Ages yield us Pessimus quisque in occasionem
praeduram, Vulgus, ut mos est cujusque motus novi cupidum. Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
p. 370.
many examples this way, so we have at this time sad and sensible experience
among our selves, by the daily practice of sundry restless people, whose
continual study and endeavor is to hinder our Builders, to the general
prejudice and hurt of the whole Nation: Something we have already We much
desire, whosoever has not seen the First part, that he inquire after it,
because by reading it, he shall the better understand many things in this
Second part.
published to undeceive the people, touching the real plots and stratagems of
these men, and the several seditious ways and miles a long time practiced by
them, to accomplish and effect the same: And at this time we shall (by the
good hand of God assisting us) make a further Discovery, that so we may
perform our former promise, and satisfy the Readers expectation.

For the method, we are here beholding to Mr. VValwin in writing thus, The
Fountain of slander discovered. p. 18.
I wished with all my heart, the Parliament had been pleased for the
satisfaction of all those their (...). Arist. apud Laert. Amicus non subito est
public objurgandus, donec ex turbatione recenti adbuc est inquietior, aeger.
Pet. Blesen. in libello de amacnis.
faithful Friends who are concerned in it, and of the whole Nation in
general, to have expressly applied each part of the Book to each censure upon
it, as to have showed in what part it was f^ls^, scandalous, and reproachful,
in what destructive to the present Government; also to have showed what part,
sentence, or matter, therein, tended to Division and Mutiny in the Army, and
the raising of a new War in the Common wealth, or wherein to hinder the
relief of Ireland, and continuing of Free Quarter.

Now howsoever we know it is their work to prove the Charge, neither should
they have set down any accusation (especially not Simler. on Exodus 22.2^. has
these words. There is here no punishment set down for him that should rail on
the Magistrate; but seeing he that rayled on his Father and Mother w^^ to dye
for it, Exodus 21.17. Much more worthy of death was he which should curse the
Fathers of the Country.
reviled the Rulers of the people) without producing at the same time most
pregnant and clear testimony for it; Nevertheless seeing it is not their use
to prove any thing they say, but to say any thing they please (besides having
wrapped themselves together in the guilt of falsehood and slander, their testimony
(as the Participes criminis (...) s^^^ id^^^^i (...) in preh^^d^ crimin^ C. ^.
de testibus. l. 6. and C. 1. de Confess.
Law says) is invalid) we shall speak to each particular, and so help Mr.
Walwin to his wish and hearts desire: And first of the things which are false,
scandalous, and reproachful in the Book.

First, It is there said, that E^^^^^ds (...) Chain, Second part. p. 8.
All who have manifested any sense of Common right, have been styled Levellers.

Answ. But what c^^ be spoken more untrue: For first, there are many thousands
in the Land, who have not only manifested a sense of Common right, but have
cordially acted these many years for the public good, and clearly showed
themselves selfdenying men, never received any thing for their service from the
Sta^e, but have cheerfully contributed beyond their abilities, as occasion has
been, and yet never styled L^vellers. Secondly, What a Leveller is, we have
described in our The Discoverer, page 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
former Book; neither is the Name ordinarily given unto any, except they are
such as hold dangerous and destructive Principles, tending to the ruin of
Church and Commonwealth. Thirdly, No man has been styled a Leveller, for any
sense of Common right, but because under this color and cloak, they have
carried on pernicious Plots and Designs, to the great detriment and damage of
the Nation. Plato seeing Diogenes with a Coat of holes, said, he could see his
Pride through the holes of his Coat. Howsoever Treason and Sedition do use to
cloth themselves with the habits of Common right, Auctor tumultus, T.
Curtifius quondam Pretoriae cohortis Miles. Primo caetibus clandestinis, apud
Brundisium and circumjecta opida; moae, positis propalam libellis, and
libertatem vocabat agrestia per longinquos saltus and ferocia servitia. Et erat
ijsdem regionibus, Curtius Lupus Questor, cui provincia vetere ex more Cales
evenerat. Is disposita clussiariorum copia, captantem tum maxim conjurationem
disjecit. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. p. 125.
Liberty, Safety, that under those Liveries they may get countenance, and find
the more access in the World; yet the movings thereof are not so covert and
hid, but judicious and discerning men can easily observe the same.

Secondly, It is no less false, in charging the Council of War with
Englands new Chain, p. 7.
as much arbitrarinesse as ever was in the world, sentencing some to death,
others to disgraceful punishments, restraining and releasing at pleasure. etc.

Answ. 1. What, as ever was in the World? Never worse done by Jew nor Gentile
before? Reader, it is worth thy observation, how their accusations are always
framed thus, either our Magistrates are matched with the vilest Tyrants that
ever The Discoverer, p. 5.
were, or the greatest Oppressors on Earth are not half as bad as they.

But secondly, How tender the Ruling part of the Army has been in taking away
life by Martial Law, is evident by that true Report which The Justice of the
Army, p. 1.
one has lately given thereof, there having been not above seven or eight
executed, since the General had bis Commission: Qui vult amari, languida
regnet manu. Senec. Tragic. Non quidquid Nocens. reus pati mereretur id egregio
sub principe. Tac. l. 14. Annal. p. 275.
an unparalled example. Phillip King of Macedon was wont to say, That the
reproaches and injuries of the Athenian Orators caused him to order his words
and deeds so, that themselves should be proved Liars: The moderation and
clemency of his Excellency and Council of War, has been such, as their
Enemies have been found false accusers in all their seditious Papers and
Pamphlets against them.

Thirdly, For the persons there mentioned, and the cause wherefore censured, we
shall speak thereof in another place; here we shall only acquaint the Reader,
how it has been ordinarily the practice of Conspirators, when they have sought
to destroy the present Government, and thereby to advance themselves, to
asperse the Officers and Commanders of the Army, with pride, tyranny, dominion,
lust, etc. as a weapon of mere advantage, the better to effect their
selfe-seeking ends.

3. The Book tells us, that England new Ch^^^^ p. 3.
their General Councels according to their engagements, ought to consist only
of two select Commission Officers, and two private Soldiers chosen by every
Regiment with such General Officers as assented to the Engagement, and no
other.

Answ. The dissolution of the Agitators is much complained of, and made one
main ground of great division and mutiny in the Army, but the truth in, that
See Mr. H^^^ D^^ Book called, The Levellers Design, p. 4, 5. where th^^ thing
a l^^gly hand^^d.
same power by which they had their constitution, made a dissolution and null
thereof: And this was done by a Petition to the General, from most of the
Regiments of Horse and Foot, wherein they humbly desired that their Agitators
might be sent back to their respective Regiments, and that they would have the
Council of War to be in the same manner it was before, professing their
subjection and obedience thereunto; and according to their Petition (by a
mutual and joint consent of all parties publicly declared) the Council of
Agitators was dissolved: So that it is false, that the General Council should
consist of any Commission Ofcers, or private Soldiers, chosen by every
Regiment: Neither can the Ruling part of the Army be charged with Violation of
that Engagement, nor does there remain any obligation on them to have revived,
or continued any such Council, much less is it warrantable in the Soldiery
of the Army, to assume any such power, as to act thereby.

4. It is an accusation grounded upon a lie, to say that those Englands new
Chain, p. 3.
Officers and Soldiers were slighted and discountenanced, who first engaged
against the destructive Votes of Parliament, and stood firm to their
engagement at New Market, and Triploe-heath: For first, such men are not only
still in place, and matters of the greatest trust reposed in them, but also
have ever showed their dislike against the Levelling Faction: Secondly, if any
Officers or Soldiers have been checked and controuled, it was If a Servant run
away from his Master, will not he speak evil of the Family? Who will admire
when men are punished for sedition, to hear them complain afterward against
their Judges?
for some apparent miscarriages, and not for well-doing.

And here we shall Discover unto the Reader, a pretty devise of these men;
which is, to relate how some of their Party have been slighted,
discountenanced, sentenced, etc. and withal report what good services they
have done; concealing in the mean time the just Note, Thou shall never find
in any of their Papers, the reason truly set down wherefore any of their
Faction have suffered, only their manner is to name the sufferers, and what
they suffered, and where; but the cause they durst never speak of: Judge
therefore the Tree by the fruits.
cause, wherefore they suffered, to the end ignorant and simple people may
think, they were punished unjustly: To omit many examples, there is one
William Thomson, often mentioned in their Books, now who in reading their fad
Representation of him, would imagine? that a man so cried up, and styled by Mr.
Lilburne, The peoples Prerogative. p. 42.
the honest Nounsubstantive Soldier, was first questioned at a Court-Marshall,
for his profane and scandalous life: Namely, for drunkenness, gameing, The
Justice of the Army, p. 7, 8, 9.
quarrelling, for breaking up a man's House in the dead of the night, where he
wounded three or four persons, laid felony to the charge of the Mistress of
the house, for robbing him of twenty pound of Gold and Silver, and afterward
confessed, he had lost none; much more of the like wicked and base doings were
proved against him; whereupon he was Mr. Lilburne says, he was a Corporal in
Colonel Wh^leys Regiment, and was cashiered at the head thereof, but he is
very careful not to show wherefore it was, for that would have spoiled the
Levelling Faction The peoples Prerogative, p. 44.
justly Cashiered by the Council of war, and afterward to revenge himself,
sought to make division in the Army, and by his This Treason and Sedition Mr.
Lilburne calls, the honesty of the Man, ibid.
seditious and traiterous practices, became a chief man, and a Ringleader
among the Levellers.

5. They say, Englands new Chain, p. 13.
They blast us with all the scandals and false reports, their wit or malice
could invent against us; and so monstrously wicked have they been in this
particular, that they have pried into all our actions, made use of all our
acquaintances and friendly intimacie, and in conclusion have only produced
such scandals, when stand and examined, contain both contrariety in
themselves, and have not the least ground of truths concerning us.

Answ. But is there any truth here? For first, have their acquaintances and
friendly intimacies ever told them so? What all? Not one exempted? Again, it is
much that the Gentlemen at Westminster should know all their acquaintances,
and had such leisure, and so little to do as to pry into all their actions:
Thirdly, we had not thought the Authors and Promoters of this Book had been
such considerable men, as that the Parliament, Council of State, or the Chief
Commanders of the Army, would have fallen so far below themselves, as to have
acted any thing in such a way: Fourthly, if all their actions have been pried
into, it is much that no more is published; for there are things concerning
some of them, which are most base and scandalous, and we know them to be true,
but being personal, do purposely conceal them: But fifthly, that their names
are blasted, and that they have lo^t the hearts of good men every where, we
believe it: For the Lord usually punishes men in the same kind and way
wherein they have offended: It has been their study and practice a long time,
to blast some precious men with all the scandals and false reports, that their
wit or malice could invent against them; and behold here It is indeed very
remarkable, as they would have done, so God has requited them; For to what
other purpose is their Englands New Chain, both parts, but to blast some
precious men, a mere thirsting after their blood: Thus like some subtle Fish,
whiles they are laying Gins and snares for other Fish, themselves are taken.
Gods righteous administration: Pro. 11.8.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead: As he that moves the weik of a burning Candle with his finger, blacks
it, and burns it, and causes the light to burn more clear; so the Pro.
21.18.
wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the
upright: Pro. 26.27.
Who so diggeth a pit shall fall therein. Like the Witch that had the disease
pass into her, that had bewitched another: Thus the Lies and false reports
which Daniels enemies raised against him, and so the calumniations and slanders
maliciously devised by Haman against the Jews, fell like sharp Arrows upon
their own head, and by such wicked doings, they had their faces covered with
shame: Whereas Daniel and the Jews came to greater honor and advancement, the
Lord doing them good for the others cursing.

Sixthly, For the If the Reader desire to inform himself touching those
scandals let him inquire for a Book entitled Walwins Wyles.
scandals which they speak of, containing contrarieties, and have not the least
ground of truth; As we know not what they mean, so we shall not inquire after
it: our Discoverer tends only to what is public and general, and here we
can certainly say, without contrarieties, and upon a ground of truth, that in
their Book, are few passages, but what are either false, scandalous, or
seditious.

6. A little after they say, They have already lost the affections of all
people, and are only supported by their present strength, but when once those
good men that hold them up shall perceive how isntrumental they are made,
contrary to their intentions, in advancing a few lofty and imperious men's
designs, etc. they will lament that they have been so long out of the way, etc.

Answ. Here are as many lies as lines, and thus we prove it: First, how soever
it were Pejor est detractio in ma^ni nominis viris quam in plebeii^ Aug. lib.
3. Cont. Peril.
no wonder if a good man's Name and Honor should be much Pro. 16.28. Ziba by
his falsehood caused David to have an ill opinion of honest Mephibosheth, 2.
Sam. 16.34. Nulli aque mores Deo exocrabiles sunt, ac sannigerratoris qui ex
obscuro vulnus insligit, ignavissimus enim quum sit maxima infert mala. Synes.
Epist. 44.
empaired by such false and slanderous tongues, yet the truth is, as Nazianzen
speaks of a Plant being cut it flourishes, lives by dying; so the Lord in the
way of his providence disposes, that by their calumniations and vile
aspersions, the others are the better thought of, and the more precious in the
eyes of the godly: And thus, as a man that casts an empty hand having neither
stick nor stone to sting, or like an Arrow which being wrong levelled, falls
wydest, when shot in the strongest Bow; so their lying lips and deceitful
tongues effect nothing, but whatsoever they say or do, the same presently
vanishes away like smoke: But secondly, wherefore is this word Difficile est
peccati ^nsuetudin^m vin^ere; p^avus usus vi^ aboletur: assidua ^^nsuetudo
vitium in natu^a^ conver^^ Animus s^^eribus a^t^^ctus, vix ab eis ^i^^ll^
pote^st. Isid. lib. 1. S^^^^uio^^m.
ALL so often used? does it not always argue an impudent lying? For what
knowledge have they of the affections of all People? They think such There is
nothing but empty words in what they say, as for reason and proof, it is not
the manner to mention such things.
big words will serve to further their seditious designs; but judicious and
knowing men meeting with such palpable and notorious false expressions, will
soon perceive that there is neither Honesty nor Conscience in the speakers.

3. Was there ever heard before so gross a contradiction, that with one breath
it should be said, They have lost the affections of all people, and yet
presently, Good men hold them up; if they are held up by good men, then they
have not lost the affections of all people, and so much in the words following
is plainly expressed. Walwyn says, The Fountain of slander discovered, page
25.
As their Father is said not to be able to hide his cloven foot, so neither can
these hide their double dealing, do but never so little watch them, and you
shall find they are made up of contradiction: The Law says, Confessio
supera^omne probationis genus, Bar. in L. si Confessus de C^st. reorum.
Confession is beyond all other kind of proof: Now of whom he speaks we know
not, but this we know (and have in our former Book largely showed) that to say
and unsay, is their usual practice, neither needs there much watching to find
them out this way.

4. For the advice which they give here, to those good men, not to be
instruments to advance a few lofty and imperious men's designs, but to convert
their abilityes and power, to better and more Common ends: As no man better
knows their meaning then themselves, so they have since told us what their
meaning is, namely, Picture of the Council of State, p. 14. A Declaration of
the Free Commoners of England.
Soldiers as well as others to rise up against the Parliament, as so many
professed Traitors, Thieves, Robbers, and high way men, and to apprehend,
secure, and bring them to justice in a new Representative; this they call, A
coming into the way, and setting themselves with the utmost courage and
resolution to fr^^ their distressed Country from the fears and captivity it
now groans under. And that the way may be clear for this work, they have
already declared, that the Parliament is no Parliament; but a dead stinking
Carcass; a factious company of men treacherously combined together, to subdue
the Laws, Liberty, and Freedom of England. So that all their votes, orders,
ordinances, and acts, or that hereafter they shall pass, are not binding to
the People. And the like they say, of the Council of State, and the Council
of War, both unlawful, illegal, and they know them not: So that there is
nothing now to do but that those good men will act the Treason which these
Conspirators have plotted against the Commonwealth.

But we hope all good men hereafter, will take heed how they make any tumult or
mutiny, having seen an example so late of Gods revenging hand upon Observe
what the sad and heavy hearted Prisoners say in their Petition to his
Excellency, subscribed by 340.

Your Petitioners are very sensible of the odiousness of their fact, how
liable it renders them to the wrath and displeasure of God, how destructive the
same might have been to the Being of the Nation, and the good and welfare of
the other two, and therefore cannot but acknowledge the sentence of death pas'd
upon by your Excellency and the Council of War, very just and equal.

And a little after, It will very much magnify your Excellencies, Christian
temper, in receiving such detestable Offenders to mercy.


Incendiaries.

-- Raro antecendentem scel^stum
deseruit pede paena Claudo.
Seldom Revenge, though slow of pace,
Leaves ill foregoing men to trace.
7. It is also false, when they say, These known truths which yet ring in
every man's ears through the Land. For first, their accusations and charges are
to many people of the Land as yet unknown. Secondly, many men of their own
knowledge, know their whole relation to be false, and upon all occasions
declare so much. Thirdly, unless they are men of their own faction, the
judicious and peaceable every where do observe them, because they see they are
things maliciously devised, and tending only to division and further
bloodshed. Fourthly, They ring indeed, and not only through the Land, but
also in other Kingdoms; for the In France the Cavileirs speak great things of
the Levellers, and take them for their chief Friends, and the considerablest
party they have in this Land: When they heard the Soldiers revolted, there was
great triumph amongst them, but when news was brought them, that they were
suppressed, it made them all to hang down the head.
Malignants abroad, rejoice at their doings, and have great hope to effect
their designs by the traiterous actings of these men; so that the boasting and
triumph in Foreign parts, is now beyond measure, that they have such notable
instruments here at home to blow up the Coals of sedition and Rebellion
amongst our selves. Fifthly, howsoever it be true, some are Ad accipienda
credendaque omnia ^^va cum tristia sunt. Tacit. Hist. l. 1. p. 342.
ready to admit and believe all news, when they are evil: Nevertheless as
the same Author says, Veritos visu and mora, falsa, festinatione and incertis
valescunt. Tacit. Annal. l. 2. p. 57.
Time and the eye tried out truth, and falsehood wins credit on a sudden and
by uncertainties: So that we are confident, the Reader shall find here in our
Discoverer so much clearenesse of truth, force of reason, and fullness of
proof, as he will easily see their lies and falsehoods, unless he purposely
shut his eyes, and choose rather to be deceived: and thus much for the first
particular, now we come to what is scandalous in the Book.

And first of the matter in relation to Englands new Chain, p. 10. 11.
Colonel Rains borough; here we may say in their own words, So monstrously
wicked have they been in this particular, as they have heaped up many scandals
together: For first, he was not withdrawn from the Army, for opposing the
proceedings of any, but partly for his fitnes for Sea service; and partly
through his own desire, the Office being more honorable and The place was
better then two Colonel ships on Land.
profitable then the place wherein he was before: Secondly, The straitness of
his Commission, was not occasioned by any Officer in the Army, but it is a base
and scandalous aspersion of their own framing: Neither thirdly, was he put
upon that dangerous and unhappy service before Pomfret, because the Ruling
Officers found him inflexible to their ends, but this is another most vile and
malicious slander: Fourthly, that he went thither with reluctance and
discontent, we can What we here affirm we have good proof for, and they are
ready to testify it whenever there is a just occasion
manifest to the contrary: For being met on the way by another Colonel, who
persuaded him not to go, and gave him some reasons for it, he would not by any
means alter his resolution, but manifested a great desire, willingness, and
cheerfulness unto that service.

5. It is no less scandalously and traitorously spoken, that his We could
speak much more to this particular, if it were needful, to show that they
care not what they say, so they may scandalize other men.
brother should receive no furtherance, but rather discouragement, in searching
after, and prosecuting the causers of that so bloody and inhumane a butchery,
for he had all the assistance that he ever desired, and of himself without
any discouragement from the Ruling Officers, gave the thing over. Lastly,
whereas they speak of giving cause of grief and suspect to his friends; here
lies the maine of the scandal, namely, It is reported of one Perinnis, that he
sought by false report to have many wealthy and Noble Citizens put to death,
that he might have their goods.
a close and home accusation against the Ruling Officers, as to be accessory to
that horrid and cruel murder: And indeed, the whole relation tends only to
this, that for opposing their unjust proceedings, they secretly made him away.

Now the Law of God, speaking of a false witness, says, Deuteronomy. 19.1^.
You shall do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother. The
Hebrews explain it thus, Maim^ny, Treat^ of witness. Chap. 18. Sect. 1. 2. 5
If they have testified falsely of a transgresion, for which men are guilty of
stoning to death, they are all to be stoned: If of burning, they are to be
burnt; and so for Note, They who are false witnesses in other things beside
murder; as they thought to have done to others, so it must be done to them, if
they have falsely accused others of Treason, they must suffer then as Traitors,
if of tyranny, opp^ession, etc. suffer accordingly.
other deaths. And if they testify of crimes worthy beating, every one of them
is to be beaten.

2. In their Relation about the Lilburns, there are sundry scandalous things:
First, Leivetenant Colonel Henry Lilburn was never solicited, by the great men
in the the Army, to asperse his brother John, but whatsoever he spoke
concerning an intent to murd^^ the Ling, it was without being wrought by any
one of them so to do, neither knew they the carriages and passages between
them two, but what was abroad and commonly reported: Secondly, It is also a
slander to say, that the Officers would never suffer the asperser to be brought
forth to the proof, for they never did any thing in way of opposition, but
left the thing wholly to themselves, and their Friends, to do therein what they
would: Thirdly, That he should be advanced to the Government of Tinmouth Castle
for that perfidious service, it is as false a thing as ever mouth uttered: We
could declare if need were the reason and cause wherefore he was appointed to
that place, but it is sufficient, the Reader take notice that what they report
is not true, such a thing was never thought nor spoken, neither have they any
proof or Author for it, but maliciously forged it out of their own heads.

4. What forehead would not blush to say, the As they charged the Ruling
Officers before, with murder so here with Treason.
General Officers inclined him to this revolt themselves, as well by their
example as by countenancing him in the beginning thereof: Here Caute ^si non
cast: Afranij simulans. Cic. pro Sextio.
Machiavel, or a Jesuit would smile at so uncovert and naked a Lie; for any
thing rather, and with more probability and likelihood might be charged upon
the General Officers, then that they should give an example or countenance to
Treason against the Common wealth: Never have they to this day betrayed their
trust, or given up any Fort or Castle to the Enemy: As Blaesus said, Mea
potius caede imbuite manus; leviore flagitio legatum interficietis quam a
Reipub. desciscitis, Tacit. Annal. lib. 1 page 11.
In my blood rather imbrue your hands, for it is a lesser offense to slay the
Le^vtenant, then fall from the obedience of the State: So much fidelity, truth,
and constancy have they always showed to the Nation, that they have all along
preferred the welfare and safety thereof, before their own lives: Fifthly
whereas they say, His Father and kindred have been aspersed with the fact, by
the Officers and their Associats; this also is a slander, according to the best
intelligence we have, howsoever the thing is of no public concernment: Here
(...) a fit place to remember Mr. Walwins The fountain of slander discovered,
p. 3.
words, If all stories (says he) be scarcht into, it will be found, that
unjust, cruel, covetous, or ambitious men, such as were engaged in corrupt
interest, or in some wicked design, were ever the aspersers, and honest, just,
and public spirited men aspersed. Is this witness true? One of themselves,
even a If Walwyn be here a true Prophet, the Authors and Promoters of that
Book, are unjust, cruel, etc. the aspersers, honest, just, etc. for if all
stories be search into it will, be found that in two sheets of paper are more
false, scandalous, and seditions aspersions, then most I^^lip volumes do
contain, let them choose what one Book they will.
Prophet of their own: Job. 15.6.
Then thine own mouth condemns thee and not I; yea, thine own lips testify
against thee.

3. Now what next; Englands new Chain, p. 5.
Then they fall to work again about the King, and send the Propositions of
Newcastle to him, which they knew, and were agreed he should not sign.

Answ. When the Spider has emptied even her very bowels to make one slender
Web, one puff of wind blows all away; so it is here with these men, having
vented all the rancour and poison of their hearts, one word is sufficient to
refute whatsoever they have said: But that we purposly forbear a large
discourse, otherwise we could in many particulars show their monstrous
baseness here, that the senders of those Propositions knew before they sent,
and had agreed among themselves, that the King should not sign them, it is
another devise of their own head, and they might fasten the scandal and
slander as well, and with as much reason and truth, upon any other men, as upon
the Ruling Officers; for they neither knew what the King would do, nor moved
him to any refusal, neither agreed before hand that he should not sign what
they sent him, neither to speak directly to the thing, did the Army Officers
send the Propositions to him. Pro. 12 19.
The lip of truth shall he established for ever; but a lying tongue is but for
According to the common saying among the Je^ (...) Menda^^^ dibut ^^^a sunt,
Lies have their feet cut off, so that they cannot stand.
a moment.

4. Now to that which they speak concerning Englands new Chain, page 9.10.
a serious repentance, the whole matter as they have set it down is a scandal
and a lie: For first, It was never acknowledged with the greatest expressions
of sorrow (nor yet expressed at all) that they had walked by corrupt politic
Principles: No such words were then spoken by the Reader, take notice, we have
relation here to what was done publicly by the General Officers, so that if
any thing has been privately whispered by any particular man it nothing
concerns this matter.
Ruling Officers, but they have devised them of their own head: Secondly,
Neither was it said, If ever the Nation be happy, it must be by a conjunction
in the Levellers Principles. For is it probable or possible, that they should
so speak, who know the Levellers Principles (properly so called) are most
destructive and dangerous, as tending to the subversion of Church and State; as
for other Principles bottomed upon Religion, Law, Reason, they never took them
for Levellers Principles, much less ever styled them by that name: Thirdly, It
is also false, that it should be acknowledged, that they had discountenanced
honest men, and set up a party; What was acknowledged then, it was only in
relation to the King, as some oversight or miscarriage that way; so that the
truth is, what was said at the same time It was not without some cr^ft, that
they forbore to relate what was confessed for had they done so, they could not
so handsomely have reported many things which they have done concerning the
King, howbeit not as ^^ely in any one, as we shall show in its place.
they have left out, and brought in other things, which were never spoken nor
thought of.

5. They say, Englands new Chain, page 15.
It has been by their procurement that the Judges, their creatures, have a
thousand pound a year allowed to every one of them, above the ordinary Fees,
which were ever esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves.

Answ. Senex tardus est ad audiendum, vel^x ad loquendum, vituperat modernos,
commendat praeterita, quia omnia membra in seen deficiunt, excepta lingua, qua
nunquam in ipso quiescit. Wolfang. Franzius. hist. Animal. tract. 4. Cap. 2. p.
726. 727.
The Aspe in her old age has all her members to decay, only her tongue is as
bad as ever: We shall find in those men no abatement of scandal and reproach,
their tongues are still their own, although Reason and Proof for what they
say, they never produce any. But to answer, First, To call the reverend Judges
of the Land, their creatures, is not only a disgraceful aspersion put upon
them, but a dishonor and blot on the Parliament: Secondly, whatsoever has
been done this way, the Army Officers procured it not, neither have they spoken
any thing therein, but as their place and calling gave occasion to deliver
their own opinion: Thirdly, there is nothing procured for them but what has
been allowed unto Judges formerlie, and well known to be fit and necessary, and
therefore the scandal is the greater, to publish to the World as if the
Parliament brought in some new burden and charge upon the Land: Fourthly, That
their ordinary Fees are esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves, it may be so
to some, for such as would have Discoverer, p. 12.14.
no Terms or Laws, no Judge or Justice of Peace, no Mayors, Bailiffs,
Aldermen, Common Council men, no Corporations, Patents, Charters, Records, no
buying nor selling, nor any civil trading at all; no man to call any thing
his, nor any man to be put to death for murder, or any unrighteous crime
whatsoever; (as the It is not likely, the Ruling Officers should say, That if
ever the Nation be happy, it must be by a conjunction in the Levellers
Principles.
Levellers Principles are:) No marvel if they complain against such Fees,
and esteem them a heavy oppression. But for others who hold the Principles of
Reason and Justice, never thought them so; for they know their ordinary Fees
amount not to so much, as they got by their practice, before they were Judges;
Even a Fool when he holds his peace is counted wise.

6. They complain against the Council of War for Englands new Chain, p. 8.
sentencing Master William Thomson to death at Whitehall.

Of this man we have spoken something already, but because he was a None such
among that party, we shall give the Reader some further account of him, and so
wipe off their reproach and scandal from the Army: After he had received
several Orders to depart the Quarters for his lewd and vicious life; he in a
peremptory manner refused to submit; whereupon there was a new charge exhibited
against him, for mutinous words, and delivering seditious Papers to the
Soldiers, some in writing, others Printe^, unto which he pressed them to
subscribe, and labored what he could to make division between the Officers and
the Soldiers; this and much more being proved against him, he was apprehended,
and brought Prisoner to Windsor, from whence (contrary to his promise) he made
an escape, and being afterward apprehended at Westminster, and sent Prisoner to
White Hall, he there made an escape the Note, that before this second escape,
he had the sentence of death pronounced against him, and that according to Law:
But the General was pleased to show him mercy, and reprieved him from the
present execution, yet so as to continue in Prison ce^: Sd Book entitled, The
Justice of the Army, p. 8, 9.
second time; and within a while after Without any Order, or Commission.
gathered a company of men in arms, whom he Quartered upon the Country,
calling them his Troop, and they him Captain; with these he marched to a
Gentleman's house in Essex, who had a Suit depending in Law with another about a
Title of Land, whom he by force and violence dispossessed, taking his Tenants and
Servants prisoners, driving them before him in the night, through mire and
dirt, and pricking them forward with his Swords point in a most inhumane and
barbarous He was for this brought Prisoner to White Hall, and by the Court
Marshall sent to the Civil Magistrate, who for his appearance at the Assizes,
took bayl.
manner.

After this he stabbed one Master Heyden with his Dagger, without any cause or
provocation, of which wound he is since dead; and within a few days after
this, was again He was at this time likewise brought Prisoner to White Hall,
and from thence sent again to the Civil Magistrate, but bayled by Leivtenant
Colonel John Lilburne.
taken on the Road, with other men whom he had drawn to his wicked courses,
and there was found about him, a great black Periwig, and a false Beard; for
the rest of his actions, and his As a Traitor he dyed in his blood; Thus the
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, Prove. 11.5.
end, the same are so notorious, as the memory of him is hateful, and his name
rots: As for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity: Lo this i^ the man that made not God
his strength.

7. To go on: Englands new Chain, p. 8.
Their next work was to new mould the City, and make it theirs, for which
purpose they brought, etc.

Answ. As the grating of a Saw sets the teeth an edge, so their calumniations
are irksome and distasteful to us; here are heaps upon heaps: But first, It
is not true, that the Ruling Officers brought Soldiers to white hall and the
Mews, to the and they might make the City theirs: for they had no such
purpose nor thought; but what they did was by the appointment and order of the
Parliament; and there was great reason and cause it should be so; both for the
preservation of the House, When the Prentises rose and expected the Watermen to
join with them, honest men then would have suffered not a little, had not the
Soldiers seasonably come into the City and suppressed them.
and to Witness the coming of many to the house from Essex, Surrey, etc. with
Petitions, had not the Soldiers been there, it is probable the Parliament
would have been abused.
prevent several inconveniences: Secondly, To the extreme discontent of the
City, say they; the which also is false: unless by City they mean
Malignants and Incendiaries, for to our knowledge, the well-affected every where
were exceedingly glad thereof, and indeed well they might, for they were a wall
unto them both by day and night, and under God, a means of their safety and
preservation. Thirdly, Would not the Commanders of the Army admit the Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen to a legal trial so they say; but to use their own
words, what notorious dissimulation is this? for they know otherwise, that they
moved often that the things charged against them might be prosecuted to the
full: Fourthly, Was there ever any thing spoken more falsely, then to impute
their releasment without any trial to the Officers It is storied of Cardinal
Wolsies Fool, that whosoever did the fault, he would always beat Will:
Summers for it; just so do these men use the Army.
who never consented to it, but always manifested a great dislike thereof.

5. That their end was not the terror of the City, is manifest by the
carriage and behavior of the Soldiers which was so inoffensive and harmless
as they were loved and not feared.

6. Whereas they speak of changing the Magistrates, thereby to flatter the
Malignants and to creep into their favor: it is to be observed that none were
more violent this way then they: Note it well, to have the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen displaced, the busiest and forwardst men that acted for it were that
party, hear what Mr Lilburne says The Juglers discovered, page 11.
Therefore say I, immediately press vigorously for the total purging the
House of all that sat with Mr Pellam, that so there may be way made for the
exemplarie punishing of the Lord Maier of London, and all the chief
ringleaders, actors in the late desperate and traitorous engagement, this he
speaks to the private Soldiers, and calls it his If the Lord Mayor and the
rest have acted so desperately and traitorously, why was not this thing
expressed in their Sad Representation, and Justice required, is this to be
Semper idem.
Advice; But see how they wheel about, to scandalize the Army and to comply
with Cavaleirs, they complain against the changing of the Magistrates, saying
it was to serve there designs: as if they would say, there was no just cause
of their Imprisonment, but done only for some base and by end, not regarding
in the mean time what they themselves have spoken against the same persons, as
to be chief ringleaders actors in the late desperate and traiterous
engagement, and to have exemplary punishment for it, if they should find but
half such flattery, dissimulation, contradiction, apostacy, in other men,
they would make Books of it, and set over head, THE JUGLERS DISCOVERED: HOCUS
POCUS: but some People are like Lamia in the Poet, who put on her eyes when she
went abroad, but laid them aside when she came home, or like a foolish man
that runs to quench another man's house whiles his own flames about his ears.

7. Pliny says of the Si quis alest audu^ lus^iniae pius animus quam cantus
deficiet, l. 10. c. 29.
Nightingale if any will give her the hearing, she will sooner sing her self
out of breath then out of tune, we are resolved to hear them out, yet so, as
taking no delight at all either in their tune or song^ many reproachful and
scandalous passages they have of some powerful and ^ver ruling influences in
the Army. Englands new Chain, page 4.
As First, That they labor by all possible means to convert the honest
endeavors of good men in the Army and elsewhere and the happy success God had
blessed them withal to the advantage of their lusts, pride and domination.

Ans. Mr Walwin tells us The Fountain of slander discovered, page 2.
when Art and sophistry will not seem to vanish truth and reason, aspertion
generally will do the deed; howsoever in some cases there is nothing like to
this speaking by experience, yet here it will not do the deed: for both
Calumniatores fratrum and detractores infaines censentur: Cause. 6. Qu. 1. C.
Infames.
the Law, Pro. 25.23. Psalm. 101.5, 7.
and commandment of God forbid us to receive the testimony of slanderous
tongues. As for that which they speak, they have quite mistook the thing, for
they should have said they have converted the honest endeavors of good men,
etc. (leaving out ^^sts pride domination) to the suppressing of Incencidiaries,
and thereby preserved the nation from ruin and destruction, and speaking so,
they had said the truth, as is well known, and we bless God for it.

Again, for such as are Ambitiosi aliquot homines qui privatim degeneres, in
publicum exitiosi, per discordias habent. Lips. Polit. l. 6. c. 4 p. 266.
ambitious and would be great (being otherwise obscure and of no worth) to
asperce well deserving men, and such as have served the State best, and are in
authority, thinking by false reports to work themselves into the affection and
favor of the people; is an Machiavels discourses, l. 1. c. 8.
old stratagem and so well known now to us, as it will never Detractor and
libens auditor, uterque diabolu^ in portat lingua: Si pauper es, vilem and
abjectum te reputat: Si dives ambitiosum, avarum and cupidum: Si affabilis,
dissolutum: si praedicator vel doctor, honoris and humani favoris quasitorem:
si tacens inutilem: si Jejunus hypocritam, si comedens voratorem, Ber. in Ser.
do the deed.

8. But what follows; As time came on, it more and more appeared, that they
intended merely the establishment of themselves in power and greatness, without
any regard to the performance of their promises and engagements, or any respect
to the faith and credit of the Army, or to the peace or prosperity of the
commonwealth, and that they walked by no rules or principles either of honesty
or conscience.

Answ. There is a kind of Serpent, the nature of whose venom is such, that if
it enter into the body, it provokes to vomit, and causes the person to bring
up whatsoever is in the stomach, in thick and filthy fleame; The Serpents sting
being entered into these men's toungs no marvel they vomit; but First, we find
not any where in their papers of any just and lawful promise from which they
are departed but stand to it, and do endeavor to perform the same so far
as it is in their power. But if there have been any promises or engagements
formerly made, which in themselves were Vota inconsiderate suscepta, non modo
nihil obligant, sed necessario sunt rescindenda. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 13. Sect.
20.
unlawful, or not in the engagere Tyrannicum est ad res improssibiles alior
adstringere. Pareus Comment. in Genesis 24. ver. 8. Si factum sit juramentum de
Rebus quae non sunt nostrae potestatis nullam prisus habet vim obligandi.
Asted. Theolog. Cas. Cap. 15. page 288.
power to perform, or which cannot afterward be performed but to the Non est
servandum juramentum cujus executio cum salute publica, etc. Pugnafet. Rivet.
Ex. licat. Decalog. 3. Prae. page 90.
public damage and prejudice of the Nation, in this cause such promises and
engagements are not binding, neither may they be kept, but broken. And the
consideration of this thing, would be useful many times, when promises and
engagements (without distinction) are hotly pressed: to examine then whether they
were justly made, whether in the promis^s power to perform them: and whether
the prosecuting of such engagements would not be against the welfare, safety
and peace of the common wealth.

2. For the credit of the Army: here we cannot speak without grief: how
honorable they have ever been in the eyes of other Viros naios militiae,
factis magnos, ad verboru^ linguaeque ^^rtamina, Live. 9.
Nations, beloved of friends, admired of enemies, not only for the good
success God has blessed them withal, but for there justness, piety,
obedience, patience, etc. till of late through the conspiraces and sedition of
some bad Instruments, a part was occasioned to make an unhappy and scandalous
revoult. As for the General Officers the Fountain of slander can not blast
their Virtutes imperatoris praecip^ae, labor in negorijs, fortitudo in
periculis, industria in agendo, celeritos in conficiendo, concilium in
providendo, Cic. proleg. Manil.
reputation and name, the Lord has made them so eminent for worth, parts, and
excellency as they are the Crown and Ornament of the souldirie.

3. To let pass that expression without Their accusations are like the ruins
of Babel which a far off seem high and great, but near by appear otherwise,
so theirs upon examination will be found only rude and vanity.
ANY regard at all, what regard they have had to the peace and prosperity of
the commonwealth their own works praise them in the gates: And at this time
their love and watchfulness is largely showed in taking care to prevent the
destructive and dangerous designs of those men: It is true, they cannot effect
that good they would, and desire to do for the Nation, because this party
(with others joining with them) has been and still is, a bar and let in
their way.

4. Whereas they say, They walked by no Rules or Principles, either of honesty
or conscience; here is a defect, or want of words, and to be supplied thus,
They walked by no levelling Principles; that is, the one (to wit the General
Officers of the Army) will have Order and Government in the Land, the other an
Anarchy and confusion; the one are for a settling of Religion, and to advance
the glory of God in the practice of Gospell-worship, the other for letting in
all blasphemy, heresy, atheism; the one will have Law, Courts, Freedom,
peace, propriety, the other not; walking by no such Rules or Principles of
honesty or conscience.

3. It follows, But Mere Potitians, and waiting upon Providence are
inconsistent.
as mere Politicians were governed altogether by occasion, and as they saw a
possibility of making progress to their designs, which course of theirs they
Be sure to make good measure, pressed down, and running away.
ever termed, a waiting upon Providence, that with color of Religion they
might deceive the more securely.

Answ. First, if we take notice of their accusations all along, we shall find,
that the designs here spoken against, are such, as have tended to public
good, and whereby their seditious designs have been broken, to the great
safety of the Common wealth: Secondly, howsoever waiting upon Providence be not
their Principle, and therefore the practice is here jeered at: nevertheless
good men will observe it, as knowing it is the way to have their actions (...).
Niceph. Greg. lib. 7.
blessed, when the other shall find them As hasty and forward Children get many
knocks and falls, so rash and heady men attempting things before a fit
opportunity is offered, bring shame and dishonor on their own heads.
Temeritas, praterquam quod stulta est, etiam infelix, hostibus iquidem
opportum, n^^ia vero maxinne amicis, Live. 22.
cursed under their hands: Thirdly, for deceiving with color of Religion, it is
a fault (we confess) which they are not guilty of, and therefore they may the
more freely apply it home to others, as knowing the like cannot be returned
back upon their heads, or laid to their charge: And thus much of the second
particular, from what is false and scandalous; we come now to things
reproachful.

First, We shall take notice how they say, Englands new Chain, p. 1.
What was more incredible then that a Parliament trusted by the people, to
deliver them from all kinds of oppression, and who made so liberal effusion of
their blood, and waste of their estates (upon pretense of doing thereof) which
yet as soon as they were in power, oppress with the same kind of oppressions.

Answ. First, howsoever in their Pamphlet they usually asperse a Faction of
Officers, and hope that the Parliament will conscionably perform that supreme
trust, which is really and essentially residing in them, and free the betrayed
and enslaved Commonwealth, etc. Yet here, not the Officers, but the Parliament
it self is charged with the Crimes and Abuses; the which is not only a
Reproach, but gross dissimulation, as one while to insinuate, as if some few,
and only a party, were the Tyrants, Traitors, Oppressors, etc. and at another
time to take off the aspersion from those few and H^^^ ever (...); would ^^ke
division between the Parliament and A^^^y, by ^aising false rep^^^^, against
the General Officers, yet i^ it be well obs^^ved, they do as much asperse the
Parliament as the others, and seek alike, ^o ruin both.
lay it upon the whole Parliament.

2. That the Parliament has been so liberal in shedding blood, it is a most
reproachful expression: a practice indeed more beseeming Canibals then
Christians, yea beasts rather then men: and to say the truth, there is no In
all Histories where Tyrants are described, this is set down as a special
Character of one, namely, Liberal effus^^n of b^^^^: See S Walter Hal^ighs of
Hen. 8. in his ^ill. p. ^1.
fairer mark of a Tyranous, unrighteous and cruel State, then to make liberal
effusion of blood: but the falsehood of this reproach and slander is well
known; to wit, that the Parliament has not been liberal but sparing this
way, and we challenge all nations, and histories, to show the like care,
tenderness compassion, wisdom, patience, prevention, etc. as our Magistrates
and General Officers have done, and to this end, that there might That
Colchester was not sooner taken, it was to spare blood.
not be made a liberal effusion of blood. False witnesses did rise up, they
laid to my charge things that I know not.

3. It will not satisfy these men, to reproach the Parliament with a liberal
effusion of blood, but to give good measure, they say, this so liberal
effusion of blood has been upon pretense of doing good. Thus the matter is
blood, the manner blood, and so blood touches blood. To be liberal is great
cruelty, a crying sin, but to be liberal in effussion of blood upon pretense
of doing good and no otherwise, (as these affirm) is the very quintessence of
the greatest Tyrants and oppressors: No marvel they say the Parliament are
Dij odere viros omne nefas animo moventes, Hor. l. 3. Od. 4. God hates with
just displeasure such as strive, in cankred hearts black mischief to contrive.
the greatest traitors that ever were in this nation, greater Tyrants then ever
the King was, or that cruel Tyrant Duke D. Alva; and that bloody Queen Marie
was a Saint in comparison to them: For if these things were true which they
report, they are as bad if not worse: But their actions have showed the
contrary, for they have already delivered the People from many kinds of
oppressions, and we question not their care and faithfulness, but they will
effect^ally do the rest Many things which remain and are burdens, cannot yet
be taken away, as our present condition is; there may be no fault in the
Physic, nor Physician, and yet the Patient longer sick, then he desires to be.
for the Nation, with what speed they can.

4. What oppressions soever at present lie on the people, they are not the same
kinds of oppressions which were in the time of Hollis, Stapleton, the King, and
Bishops: But this is another reproach and calumniation; for there are none now
persecuted for the truths sake, as cast into Prison, forced into Foreign
Countries, hindered from the free exercise of Religion; the which thing
heretofore, has been thought the greatest, sorest, and deepest oppression, as
for Purse suffering, the godly have ever held it nothing (comparatively) to
that of the conscience.

2. If follows some few lines after, But it is now evident, that it is
possible for our Physicians to bring us into a more dangerous condition then
they found us.

Answ. The blind Bayard rusheth into the Battle, which way he should go he
sees not, he c^tes not, save only his Rider spurreth him: So it is with those
men, they regard not what they speak, not how, nor of whom, but as their
malice and passion deads them.

Observe, ^. This again is spoken of the Parliament, and howsoever not in
words, yet in effect, is the some which they speak, Picture of the Council ^f
State, sec^^^ ^dition, p^g 1^. 1^.
else where; as to be Traitors, Tyrants, Oppressors, etc. Physicians of no
value: But secondly, What worse then before? Worse then when Jug^^ (...) ^^^^red
Those grand Traiterous fellows and Tyrants were at Westminster, whom Mr.
Lilburne without fear or dread, or any scruple of conscience, could have
destroyed with his own hand, as so many VVeasels and Poulcats: What worse then
we were then? So they The Maligna^^ say to (...)
say. But 3. suppose it were Not that it i^ so, for (...) thing d^^^y (...) was
(...). It is r^^^^^^ ^f the M^^n^, that at ^^st it w^^ sweet and very
delight^^^^e, b^t aft^^ward, through the unthankfulnes and murmuring of the
people, it either had no sa^our, or it was bitter in taste: Even so if our
present public mercies be ^ot sweet to some men's taste, it is just upon them
in regard of their ingratitude and discontent.
so, that our condition is worse, how does it appear, that this Parliament
has brought us into a more dangerous condition then they found us? Here again
is one thing set down for another, Ille for Ego; For whereas our condition is
no better, we may thank them, in seeking to make division between the
Parliament and the people, the Officers and the Soldiers, the General and the
Officers, the Parliament and the Army, between Soldier and Soldier, applying
themselves (as we have Discover. from p. 16. to 25.
elsewhere proved) to all parties in attempting to raise sedition, and fill all
places with uproar and commotion.

After Nero had occasioned much mischief and misery to the Commonwealth, he
wrote to the Ad Senatum literas misit, de caede Syllae Plautique hand
confessus: verum utriusque turbidum ingenium esse, and sibi incolumitatem Reip.
magna cura haberi: Imo canctas sibi curas amore patriae leviores dictitans,
^adisse Civium maestos vultus. audire secretas querimonias. T. cit. Annal. l.
14. p. 280. l. 15. 298.
Senate (as these men did to the Parliament) accusing some persons whom he had
murdered, to be turbulent and factious men, and that he had a mavelous care
for the peoples safety; yea, all the cares were nothing in regard of his love
to the Country, and that he had seen the sad countenances of the Citizens,
heard their secret complaints, etc. The like is the practice of these men,
having with their false tongues slain some persons of worth, they write to our
Senate what ambitious and dangerous men they are, making a sad Representation
of their love and care to their Country, how deeply affected they are with the
sad countenances of the people, and their secret complaints, concealing in the
mean time (as he did) the murder of Sylla and Plautus, and that by their
means the Nation suffers extremely.

3. Neither can there be a more reproachful speech, Englands new Chain, page
14.
and indeed no less seditious, then when they say Englands new Chain, page
16.
As for the prosperity of the Nation, what one thing has been done that
tends to it? Nay, has any thing been done since they were in power? But what
increases the rancor, hatred, and malice which our late unhappy differences
have begotten amongst us, as if they had placed their happiness and security
in the total division of the people, nothing being offered by them that has
any face of reconcilement in it, nothing of cheerfulness or general
satisfaction, the mother of Trade and Plenty, that might take away the private
remembrances and distinction of parties; nothing indeed but what tende^^ to
implacable bitterness of spirit, the mother of confusion, penury, and beggary:
So much we have from them at once.

Answ. Those who are accustomed to take poison in small quantities, do enable
their stomachs to digest more, till by long custom and increasing the
quantity by degrees, it becomes so familiar to their stomachs that instead of
poisoning them, they are So Galen writes of a Maid called Napella, that poison
did her no harm, but turned to her nourishment.
nourished thereby. The poison of Asps under those men's tongus: it weakens them
not, but through customing themselves to it; they are strenghthened in the
course of slander.

1. Besides liberty of conscience, freedom of the Gospel, a general peace
through the Land, with We are not like Children, who being denied of some
things they would have, cast away in rage whatsoever is in their hands; though
we have not, every thing we wish for, yet we desire to make a comfortable use
of what we have.
many other public and private blessings which the Lord by them as And for
those very men whom they most accuse has the Lord made special instruments for
the good of this Nation. Quidam quo plus debent magis oderunt, Sen. Epist. 48.
Instruments and means has brought over to us: this is one, tending to the
prosperity of the Nation, namely, that they have often suppressed several
conspiracies, plotted by the Levelling party against the welfare and safety
of the Commonwealth. Secondly, That evil men wax worse and worse, and that
their rancor, hatred and malice should increase, it is no marvel, it has
always been so, even when the best, wisest and ablest men have governed; and
yet were not the Governors then in fault, nor any way the causer^ thereof.
Thirdly, It is no new thing to hear men, ( Tac. Hist. lib. 12. page 395.
suum quisque flagitium aliis objectantes) to lay their own faults So Ahab
charged Elias to be the Trouble of Israel, whereas the Prophet was innocent,
and it was he and his Fathers house had done that thing.
upon others: to cry stop the theife stop the theife, being in the mean time
the only robbers. There is not any thing which with less color or show of
truth, can be charged upon the Officers of the Army, then the division of the
People; no such thing this way has ever been noted or suspected of them:
whereas the practice of the other, is notorious, and as easy may the Blackmore
wash himself white as they wipe of the stain and spot thereof.

4. For the matter of reconcilement, here they are like 1 Samuel 11.1, 2.
Nahash the Ammonite, who would not make a covenant with Jabesh Giliad, but on
this condition, that he might thrust out all their right eyes: Even so, unless
we will agree that they shall pluck out the right eyes of our Nation, as By
moving Soldiers as well as others to rise up against the Parliament men, and
to apprehend, secure, and bring them, as so many professed Traitors, Thieves,
Robbers, etc. to Justice in a new Representative. Picture of the Council of
State, page 14.
break the Parliament, Englands new Chain, first part, page 12.
dissolve this present Council of State, Ibid.
take away the law Marshall from the Army, and The same Book, page 11.
persons in the highest Command of Military power, there is nothing offered (as
they say) that has any face of reconcilement in it, nothing of cheerfulness,
etc. But as (we use to say) A man may buy Gold too ^ear, even so, howsoever we
should desire peace with all men, notwithstanding (provided always) as it may
stand with the Pax ea fit, non pax servitutis Cic. Phil. 12. Pax vera est,
concordiam habere cum moribus probis and litigare cum vitijs C^ss. super Psalm.
prosperity and safety of the Common wealth; and so far a reconcilement has
been offered still, to all parties without distinction.

5. That any thing is offered, tending to implacable bitterness of spirit, it
is the Fountain of slander that speaks it; for it is neither so nor so: But
we perceive well enough where they are, and the work they are doing; it is to
provoke the people to more discontent against the Parliament; here they would
persuade men to think that our Governors are Pharoahs, keep them forceably in
bondage, and lay burdens upon them purposely to make their live^ bitter; and is
there not so much in their very word^, for if there be nothing offered the
people, but what tends to bitterness of spirit, to confusion, penury, beggary,
What worse could Pharaoh do? Nay by their aggravating it, nothing indeed; they
make them worse then he: And it is worth the observing, how this (Nothing) is
over and over repeated: Nothing that has any face of reconcilement, etc.
Nothing of cheerfulness, etc. Nothing but what tends to bitterness of
spirit, etc. An accusation of the highest Tyranny and oppression that was ever
charged upon Magistrates; the We desire the Reader to observe, that there are
burdens and grievances upon the people, it is not denied, but whether they may
(specially many of them) be taken off as yet, that is to be considered; and
indeed, if things were duly considered, at the present it is not possible; and
therefore we should beware that we make not the remedies worse then the disease.
falsehood whereof is such, as the expression is conviction sufficient; Thou
love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

4. Now what else? Against all those delusions and perfidious stratagems laid
by those men to betray and enslave the Common wealth to their own Pride.
Ambition, Lusts, Coveteousnesse, and Dominion, if not Dukeship, or Kingship;
their Creatures discoursing of late that the power must be reduced to one, what
their meaning is, time (if not hindered) will manifest.

Amongst the Virginians, they use to dye themselves with the juice of diverse
Herbs, and he is held the gallantest man, that is most monstrous to behold: No
doubt these men do take themselves (and so others of that party) to be gallant
men in using their tongues to such false, scandalous, and reproachful
speeches; howsoever in the eyes of all sober, judicial, and rational people,
the practice makes them most monstrous and hateful.

For answer, First, what they call delusions and perfidious stratagems are
accusations without proof; And the Reader shall observe many of this kind:
things wherein they never acted nor had any relation unto.
some things wherein these men are not concerned, others, in themselves So
here, they usually condemn that for a crime, which was in it self very good;
only it was not according to their Principle.
lawful and just, and so We dare avouch it, and shall make it good, that there
is not in the Book, one thing true as they have set it down.
none true as they report them: Secondly. So far have they been from
enslaving or betraying the Commonwealth, etc. as by the blessing of God upon
their endeavors, they have been the men whereby the Common wealth is freed
from the bondage and slavery they speak of; which shows their malice,
unthankfulness, and blindness, to be the greater. Because Agesilau, was
beloved of the Citizens for his good life, and the great service he had done
them, the Ephori would fine him for it; So these men would have some to be
fined and worse too, because they have won the hearts and love of the people by
their valor and sufferings for them; Pro. 17.13.
Who so rewards evil for good, Respurt datorem, qui datum deserit, negat
ben^^^cium qui beneficium non honorat. Tertull. Paeuleen. c. 5.
evil shall not depart from his house.

3. To let pass the term (Creature) being the usual language of men
disaffected to the State; that there should be any such discourse they speak
of, we are confident it is false, a mere devise of their own head: But
howsoever, as they here have brought it in, most reproachful: to insinuate a
thing of such a high nature against any man in authority, from other men's
discourse.

4. For that Parenthesis (if they be not hindered) there is something in it
though nothing for what it is brought. Treason indeed should be hindered; there
is all the reason in the World for it, yea and Initio sedicionum, quamprimu^
apparueri^ compr^mantur, Clem. Templ. Polit. lib. 4. c. 7. p 424.
timely to, whiles it is in the Cradle hatching like the Cockatrice Eggs, that
it may not break forth. And it is the wisdom of all States to be careful
herein, for as one well says, Indulgentia and lenitas Magistratus nimia,
seditionis ansam praebet; quia dum quiescere Magistratus officia plebs videt,
millisque legum se coercere repagulis animadvertit, ipsa sibi rapere
gubernacula and quidvis andere incipit, contempto Magistratu vel impunitatis
concepta, Frid. Wendellin. Instit. Polit. l. 3. c. 2. p. 492.
The too much indulgence and lenity of the Magistrate gives occasion many times
of sedition: for whiles the common s^rt see him Therefore one says well, A
Magistrate who has discovered a Conspiracy, and seems fearful to remedy it
is an faulty as the Conspirator himself.
quiet and not to suppress it at first, they take boldness thereupon and so
out of contempt of the Magistrate, and hope of impunity seek at last to wring
the Government and sword out of his hand.

5. From the same poisoned Fountain issues this bitter water. Englands new
Chain, page 9.
Thus the most hopeful opportunity that ever England had for recovery of our
Freedom was spent and consumed in such their uncertain staggering motions,
and arbitrary irrational proceedings; whereby all parties become extremely
exasperated, as people that had been merely mocked and cheated by fair promises
and under the most religious pretenses etc.

For answer to this and the rest following first, A bold affirmation is no The
Law says, Probationes debent esse hace clariores, L. Sciant. c.
proof, and with the more reason to be rejected when it comes (as this does)
from a malicious enemy. Alexander of Hales a Schoolman, is called
Irrefragabilis, that is the Doctor ungain-saying. it seems these men had some
such opinion of themselves, that if they should let it down thus, their
uncertain, staggering, arbitrary, irrational, etc. whosoever reading it,
would believe it, and so It was the Principle of a certain Atheist, that if a
man had an (...) he should asperse him; for though all would not believe it,
yet some would.
no matter, what they said whether true or false. Secondly, It is a reproach
and a lie to say that It is much, men should be so audacious as to affirm that
which they know they cannot prove.
all parties were exasperated in reference to the proceedings of the General
Officers; for the honest and well affected party, who still close with them,
did ever take them to be real and sincere, and knew they would have done more
for the Nation had not many things unhappily fallen out in their way. Neither
to say the truth were there any parties exasperated against them, saving such
men as would not have the present Government established.

3. To say the people were 1. mocked and cheated and 2. by fair promises 3.
under most religious pr^tences, these are chips of the old block all falsehoods
and slanders: for They have not any where showed wherein the Commanders are
departed from any lawful promise, or wherein they do not perform a just
promise formerly made, being now in their power to perform it.
whatsoever was promised they have continually endeavored to perform, neither
have they given us any cause to doubt but what further they can do for the
good of the Nation, the same likewise they will effect, by improving all the
interests and relations they have: As in a house of smoke, a man shall sooner
be stifled and blinded, then warmed: so their reports tend meerelie to abuse
and deceive the Reader, and not at all to give him any true or right
informations of things.

4. That the Army should be made a byword, a hissing and reproach to the No^e
still how they cannot avoid to spe^^e that which they know is false.
whole Nation, and ready to be stoned in Mark their words.
all places where they come, and by those who loved them before, etc. This is
another known untruth and slander: Neither have those (if there be any such)
who thought nothing too precious for them in hope of their large good promises
and protests in their Declarations, declined in their affections for any
unfaithfulness, or unjust actings of the Commanders. Siba by his false and
scandalous tongue, may occasion honest David to fall off in his affection from
harmless Mephibosheth, but it is an offense taken, and not given: so it is
possible through the calumniation of such men, that wel-meaning people may I
have read somewhere of an Appari^or, h^ving given out a false accusation
against two honest persons, and others reporting it after him, came within a
little while and summoned them to their Court, for a Fame, the which he himself
had only raised. Much like to this is their practice, first, they devise
things, and then others speak them after them; then afterward they come about
again (like the Summoner) and asperse the Commanders and Army for lying under
such Reproaches, which they before had invented.
not think so honorably of the Officers as they have done, and yet not for
any just cause which they have given them; but because Whisperers have
separated chief Friends.

5. The general Rising and Revolt is imputed to these men, to their unjust,
partial, and perfidious dealings, as the proper issue of such horrid
delusions. As for big words we are not Children to be frighted with
scare-crowes: If they should tell us that Zedekiah rebelled against
Nebuchadnezzar, as moved thereto by Jeremiah, howsoever the Prophet admonished
him to the contrary, would we receive it for a truth? As little reason or
ground have they for the other. That some might be provoked to Rise by the
distemper which that faction had made in the Army, it is possible; but that the
Commanders should give any occasion, or encouragement that way, it shows that
their malice is risen from the heart into their eyes, and blinds them: to raise
a Reproach so clearly against all reason, and the most certain knowledge and
experience which generally men have of the contrary: And this shall suffice for
what is False, Scandalous, and Reproachful.

Now we come, In what destructive to the present Government: First they say,
Englands new Chain, page 13.
Their only Seditious men are always rather seated then loved: Caesar more
feared Brutus Treason, then Pompeys Valor. Non virtute sed proditione victum
fremebat. Tac. Hist. lib. 2. page 325.
fears remain upon our discoveries, to prevent which, they use means that
either we might not have opportunities to lay open their Treacheries and
Hypocrisies, or Easy credulity is plain simplicity: we live not now in such
an age, of which it is said, A Deo sanctae erat illis temporibus fides, ut
fallere aliquos posse non crederetur. Ambros. de offic. l. 3. c. 10. For now,
Plures saepe magnum no^en falsis vulgi opinionibus abstulerunt. Boet. 3. de
Consolatione.
not believed if we did it: In order to the first, they strictly stop the
Press.

Answ. 1. The Camelion having taken in the air, afterward his belly swells; if
these men were not full of wind and vanity, such selfe-boasting would not be
expressed.

But secondly, see their craft; they have the State at such an advantage, as
they think now it must be broken one way or other; for if they are suffered to
speak and write what they please, they make no question, but under the color,
of discovering Treacheries, and Hypocrisies, the Magistrates by their Tongues
and Pens shall be made so odious, as the people no where will obey them.
Again, if hindered by stopping the Press, as much danger then this way,
because the discontents of their patty will be such as they will not bear it;
thus we are ma^e fast, and no door open to escape.

3. Neither do these step aside from the way of former Incenaiaries; but as
they carry on the same design, so in practice are alike: Mortimer a Kentish
Rebel (falsely naming himself Jack Cade) William Martin his H story of
England, Henr. 6. page 197.
by Messengers informed the King, that he intended not any hurt against his
Royal Person, but would displace, and punish some of his evil Counselors,
who were his Flatterers, and partial to their own Friends, bitter to their
enemies, enrichers of themselves, oppressors of the Common people, greedy of
too much Honor, and who for rewards corruptly ordered (or rather disordered)
all things as they pleased: So these men (speaking the same, even word for
word) pretend they intend not any hurt against the Common wealth: but because a
Faction of Officers have betrayed and ^^slaved the Nation, therefore they seek
to raise up the Soldiers and people in all places, to an insurrection and
revolt: and the same pretext had the Nec destituerint de Magistratibus
tyrannide paratragaeliare, and inculcare plebi, omnia natura libera esse and
Communia: ex^^tiendum esse principum aque ac Pontificis Romani Ju^um; and quia
illi blandis monitis haud quaquam cedent sed bona and capita subditorum
libidini suae vectigalia esse velint, justissimis armis id omnibus vindi^andum
esse, quod omnium esse Deus volucrit.
Munst^^ Revellers, neither indeed have any former Conspirators (for the most
part) gone to wor^e any other way.

4. How destructive to the present government their words here are, may appear
in this, in calling such things Treacheries and hypocrysies which in a special
manner tend to the safety and welfare of the People. Is not the errecting of
the Council of State, the late proceedings against the King and Lords, the
peace of the Army, the suppressing of mutin^^ among the Soldiers, the
continuing of Excese, marshall Law, and persons in the highest command of a
military power, the prohibiting of false and scandalous Books, taking away
sedition in all places etc. for the upholding of the present Government? or can
it posiblie stand, if such things were not so? nevertheless (and note it well
good Reader) against all these in particular do they object, aspersing them,
as the Treacheries and Hypocrisies of some men.

2. They say, Englands new Chain, page 5.
which advice proceeded as well from our respect; to the City and
neighb^ur-places, as upon fears of what we know to be the practice of Haud
ignarus summa scelera incipi cum periculo, perigi cum praemio. Tac. Annal. l.
12. p. 224.
other Tyrants, (and therefore doubted would be exercised by those) namely the
garrisoning of great Towns, thereby to keep the People as well in poverty as
in continual aw and subjection.

Answ, 1. Can any thing be spoken more destructive to the present Government,
then to call such men By the Statute Law, if any have conspired to destroy any
Lord, Counselor, or great Officer, and be found guilty by confession, or
otherwise, that the said offense be judged Felony; and they to have judgment
and execution as Felons attainted ought to have by the Common Law. 3. Henr.
7.14. C^oke li. pl. fol. 482. Qu. If certain persons accu^e a man falsely of
Tr^^son, whether it be not a conspiring to kill him.
Tyrants as are in authority, and for no other r^^son but because they yield
special aid and assistance to the state. Secondly, Here were enough (if
believed) to raise up the people in all places against the Army, and not to
suffer them in the least to come among them; for if their intent be (as these
men insinuate) to enslave them and make them poor, by Garrisons: who would not
oppose and resist their entrance in such a case? Thirdly, The treachery of
these men is the more seen and intolerable, in that the whole Army (specially
the General Officers) have given from time to time such real proof and large
experience to the Nation of their fidelity, love, care; so that there was not
any cause at all of such a suspicion or doubt; but clearlie the contrary: and
therefore the fear which they mention in relation to the practice of other
Tyrant^, was only brought in as a stratagem of purpose to beget a Jealousy in
the People, whereas they knew there was no reason for it.

4. The ground or matter from whence they take occasion to match the
Commanders, with former Tyrants, and to set the People against the Soldiers
ads much to the evil of it. It was (proposed (say they) by the Agitators
friends of London, Southwarke, and the places adjacent, that the Tower, City
and Burough might be secured by the well-affected inhabitants and not by
Soldiers. It is true some thing to this purpose was spoken at Kingstons; and
upon debate, it was found no way fit, and many reasons were given to show how
unsafe dangerous and inconvenient it was to have it so, whereupon some of the
proposers yielded, and were satisfied in the thing: we could set down the
reasons here what they were, if it were useful and no doubt every rational
man (if he heard them) would say they were forceable and strong and necessary
to be followed.

Now let the Reader judge, if these men had not just cause, to call the
Commanders Tyrants, and to publish to the World such horrid and perfidious
things: For thus it was in regard of many desperate plots and designs known
then to be working against the State, and the unfitness of the Inhabitants,
having there Trades and other things to look after, and the capacity the
Soldiers were in, to manage the thing better, it was ordered for the present
that the keeping of some places should be by Soldiers, for the more safety
and security thereof: And this is all the No^e, that it is false which they
speak of dismissing the Proposers with Reproaches; some were blamed for
meddling too much in things, which as it little concerned them, so they
understood them less; and withal for being intemperate in their speeches.
matter, for which so much faction and treachery is expressed. The law of
Retaliation is well known, both the Exodus 21.24. Levit. 24.20. Deu^. 29 11.
Scriptures, and Cic. Pro. Caec. Justin. Instit. l. 4. Tit. 4 page 364.
Humane Writers mention it, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth; but to take away a
man's good Here is more then taking a good Name away; it is to take the life
away, that they conspire about.
name and reputation, is more then the loss of an eye, or tooth, and therefore
such wrongful doers deserve the greater punishment.

3. We come now to a more large discourse, and thus it begins, And as before,
upon their first great success against the City, when now again it justly was
expected they should have made use of so notable and unexpected blessings, to
the benefit and advantage of the Common wealth (as their late repentances,
promises and pretenses gave men cause to hope) the event proved they intended
another use thereof, for (having now subdued all their enemies) they proceed
with greater confidence to their former purposes of making themselves absolute
Masters of the Common wealth.

It is the wisdom of Soldiers, to learn with what weapon and strength their
enemies will come against them, and accordingly to provide themselves we are by
this time well acquainted with these men's Weapons: reasons and proof they bring
none, neither is the same to be expected from them, they having none: so that
if we provide our selves against their spears and arrows of a falls tongue it is
Note, that there is one who styles himself Lapis a State, or rather a Black.
the simplician undertakes to discover the Discoverer; but speaks never a word
to the matter, nor understands it: For whereas the Levelling faction has
aspersed the Parliament, Council of State, and Council of War: the
Discoverer denies the things laid to their change. Now (...) st^^d of proving
them, which he should have done, undert^^ing the justification of them, the
^^ck speaks a parcel of nons^^^ce, but for their a^^ussations he meddles not
withal, although, had he not been as senseless as a Stone, he might have
soon it was the ^^^e thing he had (...) do.
suffi^^ent; and we shall do well enough.

It was not without cause that the Parliament voted their Book seditious and
destructive to the present Government; for what can be more? For first, So
far are our Governors from being absolute Masters as that the Commonwealth
never enjoyed the like W^^n had Gods people, in this Land the like freedom to
serve God, as now they have? Had our Forefathers lived (...) ^^ch Magistrates,
they would not have thought them Tyrants, absolute Masters, etc. But as he
says, (...), Hom. Odyss s^.
liberty these many hundred Years: As for taxes and rates, they are not with
as any point of bondage, but rather as a preservative and means to keep us
from it, and to uphold the just freedom and rights of the Nation. Secondly,
For the late repentances and promises they speak of: what they report we know
is untrue, but what is true, we know the accomplishment of them, by them to be
daily made good: neither can it be justly imputed unto them, that other things
are not likewise performed.

3. Concerning the agreement of the People, a short answer will serve to their
many words: first, It is false that they employed their Agents to get me^tings
and Treaties, thereby to keep quiet the busy watchful party, whilst they
went on with other pieces of their work: For herein they can appeal to God
who is the searcher of all hearts, as they spoke of Union and reconciliation:
so they would gladly have seen it, and do still desirouslie desire an Pax
optima rerum Quas homini novisse, datum est: pax una triumphis innumeris potior
pax custodite salutem, and cives aequare potens, Silius Italic. lib. 11. Be^
Pun.
Agreement, not only with this busy party, but with all other parties:
provided it may not be prejudicial and hurtful to the Nation: Secondly, we
take notice of their words (busy watchful party) now in truth, as fitly
spoken, and well applied as a thing could be; some write of a stone called
Siderites, if it be brought amongst a people already at variance, it will
occasion a continuance and increase of contention, and strife between them: so
did this busy party, by their unseasonable, prepostorous, rash and heady
proceedings (as Or, the fire Fly that leaps and skips in the fire.
flys in the sore) they made the wound worse, and the difference wider and
greater then before: How does it appear that the thing before they left it,
was so obscurd and perplexed in the sense, so short of what was intended, and so
corrupted etc. that It would be inquired, who are meant by Those we suppose
none but the Busy party.
those most loathed it that most desired it. It seems this must be true because
they say it, but others of better judgment say otherwise; and we could easily
make it See a Book entitled, The Agreement of the people, not that subscribed
by the four Prisoners, but another.
so appear: but not being proper to this place, we let it pass; only, whereas
they turn again to their former vomit of false accusing, saying, whilst they
had fixed good men's eyes and thoughts upon that work, they secretly and swiftly
prosecute their other designs: We answer, As we know of no design prosecuted
since by them either swiftly or slowly, but what has been honorable, just,
lawful; so, for the particular things which themselves set down a little
after, as to be their The Ictericks, who have the Jaundesse in their eyes, see
nothing which seems not to carry the same color; so these men, such things
which others do (though in themselves very good) are designs and plots
against the Land, because their eyes and hearts are filled therewith.
design, we are sure tended to the welfare and good of the Nation.

4. Their next is, Of those extraordinary sudden, and violent courses lately
taken: And here to show how well affected they are to the present Government, or
rather how At Sampson meant when he took hold of the two middle pillars that
the house should fall, and the Lords and people thereon be destroyed: So what
less can they intend by their seeking to pull down the Parliament and
Council of State, but to destroy this present Government, and such as are
upheld by it.
trcacherously they conspire to destroy it: They complain for Englands new
Chain, page 12.13.17.
bringing the Army to the City, breaking the House in Pieces, removing the King
by such an extra-judiciall proceedings and Court of Justice, as done for no
other end but to make way for their own absolute domination: And further, The
taking away the House of Lords, the erecting the Council of State, the voting
of the people the Supreme power, and this House the Supreme Authority; all
these particulars, etc. as they have managed them, are of sole conducement to
their ends and intents, either by removing such as stand in the way between
them and the power, wealth, or command of the Common wealth, or by actually
possessing and investing them in the same.

A man shooting at a If by Statute Laws, such as did kill the Kings Dear,
were grievously to be punished, 9. Hen. 3.10. 1 Edw. 3.8. Stat. 1. Hen. 7.7.
what punishment do they deserve who shoot the arrows of Treason against the
State, thereby to destroy it.
Dear to kill her out of hand, will not aim at the legs or feet, but at the
heart, knowing if he hit her there, she falls, and is his own; hitherto for the
most part, they have shot their Arrows of bitter words, at the legs and feet
of the State; but seeing there followed no success that way, now they Level
(as right Levellers indeed) at the Heart, where if they hitt home, there is no
doubt but Pundamento deficiente omnia ruunt.
down comes the present Government as a prey (or Venison) for their teeth.

For answer, First, whatsoever has been done in those particulars; as in
bringing the Army to the City, purging the House, removing the King, the same
has been ^ee M. J^^n (...) B^^ks, Right and might well (...), and his Answer
to M. Gea^ce. Also, Justice advanced: The Tenure of Kings. The Case of King
Charles.
proved Lawful, and therefore it shows their greater presumption, that knowing
the things which they speak against, are justified by Scripture, Law, and
Reason, without either answering others, or proving any thing themselves, they
should dare so speak; for do they think the English Nation to be such
Simplicians, as to prefer what they barely say, before what is In dubijs sunt
attendenda ea quae convenient naturae negotij and verijutilia. C. licet causam,
de proba: and L. Ob. Carnem. fi. A. Test. facit.
proved and made as clear as the Sun at the Noon day by others?

2. To shoot through the heart of the State, our present Governors, are not
only accused in those particulars; but also (and mark it well) as done for no
other end but to make way for their absolute damination. What? But howsoever it
be thus said, yet the persons accused may in the words of their Accusers say,
We shall take no h^^me at all by their malice, but make them lick up the poison
they have vomited; and that all men shall see their snare broken, and the
harmless birds escaped. The silken Independents Snare broken, page 2.
FOR NO OTHER END? And FOR THEIR OWN ABSOLUTE DOMINATION? Not half and half
a parting of stakes? some think for the public good, and some think for
private ends: at least a little for their Country, and a great deal for
themselves: Not so, but all respect of common good is cast aside: and this is,
for Absolute Domination: not only to be Lords and Masters, but La^^ le^ like
thinks us so contem^tible and mean bred, or such senseless stones (as
himself) that we cannot decline Treason: yes, and could have found out sense
too in his Book, if there had been any: It will be the best wit the Block has,
if he have the wit to conceal his Name.
ABSOLUTE: None to Reign and bear Rule but themselves only, as for all the
rest, of what name or title soever, to be subordinate and under their power and
command.

It is no marvel they say, We shall not doubt (though the Parliament Qui
peccantur coram omnibus, cora^ omnibus corripienda s^^s, ut ^mnes tim^^ni
August. de verbis Domini.
sail us) but that what we have here presented and published, will open the
eyes and raise the hearts of so considerable a number of the Soldiery and
People in all places, and make them so sensible of the bondage and danger
threatened, as that these men, this faction of Officers shall never be able to
go through with their wicked intentions: For how could they think less,
having possessed the people that they had broken the Parliament, unjustly
proceeded against the King and others, illegally erected high Courts of
Justice; and withal done all this for no other end, but to become Tyrants, and
the people made slaves; but the Soldiery and people in all places would rise
up against them.

It is reported of Timotheus, Alexanders Harper, when his Master was at a
Banquet, he played an Alarm or Assault, so to the life, as the King was
occasioned, to rise from the Table and take his Armor, so that his spirits
remaining vanquished and overcome, was constrained to obey the harmony that
proceeded from the Instrument: What ear ever heard an Hear what L^^is says,
The Syc^^ho^^ has invented wicked thoughts which never entered their guiltless
souls. Poor hears, Lai qu^^^^^ to la v^^^^, el Diablo e^ Capill^.
Alarm^ more moving to Rebellion, it is no wonder that some people have their
spirits overcome, and are in a manner up, and taking their Weapons; alas! what
cannot such Har^^ and Instruments do in this case, specially where ^^^re is
Such is one Lapis appear to be: Ne^^ boni intellectus, neque moli cura sed
increede alu^tur, ministri s^eleribus, Tac. An. l. 16. page 171. Pronus ad
^^vas res, scelere in super Nymphidij Sahani, praefecti imperium sibi in
lientis agituntur, Tac. H st. l. 1. p 335.
a weak spirit and a busy head to work on: But Hor. Opod. 7.
Quo, quo Scelosti ruit i^? aut cur dexteris
Aptantur enses condita?
Parumne Campis, atque Neptono super,
Fusum est Britanni sanguinis?
Ah wretches! Whither have you, to what end,
Do your right hands to sheathed Swords descend?
Is there so little, yet of English blood,
Powered on the Champian fields, or Ocean flood?


Never was there an accusation of higher injustice and greater Tyranny charged
upon any State. Geese, if they chance to catch hold of any root with their
bill, they will bite and pull so hard, to have it, that many times they break
their own necks withal, before they leave their hold.
3. Neither is it less destructive to the present Government to say that the
Erecting their Council of State, the voting the People the supreme power, and
this House the supreme Authority, all these particulars are SOLE Conducements
to their ends and intents etc. Can the heart devise, or mouth speak more
Traitorously against the present Government? A thing in it self unlawful, may
be done with a good intention, and to a well meaning end, and so in part
excusable: but to do a thing in it self evil, and to an evil end, it is the
fullness of evil, and further in wickedness men cannot go. Again howsoever
they would seem sometimes, to spare the Parliament and let the scourge of their
tongue fall only upon a faction of Officers, yet herein their Custom and use
make those fashions which at first seemed very ugly, and abominable, to to be
in account very good and commendable
hypocrisy often breaks out: so here, for who have erected the Council of
state, voted the people etc. not the General Officers, but the Parliament,
nevertheless these things are said to be done, to as evil an end and bad
intent as can be imagined. Pro. 18.6. Sermones universi vecordis non nisi
verbis contentiosis and jurgiis constant. Rab. Salom. in hunc Verse.
A Fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes.

5. Neither have they yet done, but as destructive to the present Government
are these words, Englands new Chain, page 18.
and for the (...). Theophr.
truth of our Judgments herein: we should with gladness submit to the
determination of this Honorable House, were not their Yet their tongue is
higher, Vt n^ctua aves ina^sp^cata noctu gementes (nam hac illis vox est)
mortalium invident quieti: ita virulentia lingua semper aliquid spargit, quo
concordiam hominum disturbet. Plin. l. 11. c. 25.
high hand as yet held over you. And therefore we are enforced to appeal to a
new representative, equally chosen as is expressed in our serious apprehensions
lately presented unto you.

Answ. The stream and violence of Rivers is much more swift and violent near
the Ocean then hard by the Fountain: every natural motion is swifter in the
end, then in the beginning, because the nearer it comes to its proper place
where it must rest the more it desires the place in which it may rest: that
those men are here so firce and high in terms it shows that they are come now
nere the (...). Euripid.
end, and therefore no wonder if somewhat violenter then before. But first, Are
not these men ingenuous that after so much falsehood, scandal, reprocah
conspiracy etc. uttered: will not submitt unto the determination of the
Parliament: for who would suffer for his fault Publicam utilitatem privatoru^
commodis praeferendam, Authent. resquae C. Commu. de Legate. l. Paria delicta
mutuo Compensari.
if he could escape it? But Secondly, There has been a late example of one
more considerable then they all: he likewise refused to submit etc. and
appealed elsewhere; but yet was Viro in fi. Solut. Matr.
proceeded against, according to the crimes and evidence they had against him.
Thirdly, we know no such high hand as they speak of, but have a When the King
and Lords were part of the Parliament, the House of Commons had not the liberty
and freedom to Act as now they have.
freer Parliament then ever, and in a capacity to do more good for the Land
then heretofore: But we know their meaning, the Parliament not being now for
their This High hand they would well like if it were a helping hand for them.
turn, they would have it broken, and to bring this to pass, asperse it, as
unfree, under the power of the Sword, etc. A stratagem cunningly devised, for
they know the Malignants these many years have said as much, and therefore
taking ^p their Principle, the others cannot do less in po^a^ of civility
then to take them into their, Qua^^^, and so to be no more two, but Thieves
have private differences yet all agree together to rob and steal.
one party.

4. To Appeal, what is that? It is as much to say, there is no O that I were
made Judge in the Land.
expectation of justice or right (...) this present Government; the Parliament
is as if ^o Parliament, the Supreme Authority, has no Authority, and so
rather a cross, a curse to the N^^ion, then a blessing; hence they cry out,
Harken to the Harpat. Mo^e^e and quatere qu^^quid usquam egrum foret
aggreditur. A Declaration of the F^ee Commoners of England.
Ob wretched England, that sees and yet suffers such intolerable Masters:
as if they should say, wherefore take thou not an example from us to appeal
from tha^ and to make no more addresses to them? Why do^^ thou not declare and
protest (as If Lapis have spit out that sinck of filth, which lies in his
mouth, p. 9. and wiped it, he will be able to speak something here about We.
we have done) that all their Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations, and
Acts, and that hereafter they shall pass, are not binding to the people? For
doing thus, and following our steps, this present Government would be broken.
Howsoever Absalom by disgracing his Fathers Government, sought to draw away the
hearts of the people from the King, yet he had not this (...) teach them to
Appeal, for howsoever the design he Aut Caesar, aut nullus.
desperate, yet if it If not (...). Incidit extremam in noxam vox improba
tandem.
take, there is nothing like it for to ruin and destroy the State.

5. Neither do they Appeal to a new Representative, but such a one, as is u
expressed in their ser^^^ apprehensions, lately presented to the House: Now is
not this to betray and enslave the Commonwealth to their own Pride, Ambition,
Lusts, Covetousness, Domination: For wherefore to be chosen in such like
manner as they prescribe it, who put them in authority to demand any such
thing; much less to lay it down as a Rule for the Nation: Are not we English
men, coming forth about their M^del and Pali^^^ of Government, and what a
^^bel they would make, but indeed a Bab^ of clo^^ is enough to please Children.
and so in a legal capacity to claim the utmost P^^^titie, benefit, and
privilege, that the Laws and liberties of England will allow to any man in
the whole Nation. Why thou must it be as a few factions inconsiderable, and
busy headed men do express? But the truth is, here we see their inside, they
would be the Man vale ser cabeca de R^ton, (...) ^^la, de La^^.
Lords and Masters, lay down Models, platforme^, and agreements for the
People, and because their way and course is justly In A^^^^phels hanging of
himself, a man may see what a vexation (...) Conspirator when his sedition
Counsel is rejected.
rejected, they make all the disturbance and trouble they can in the
Commonwealth: And this has been the constant practice of former Conspirators
(as Historic^ are full of examples) when they could not attain their ambitious
ends, out of hatred then to the present Government, and envying the Mac^r^^
invidia, (...) illum esse p^tentem, illum aspectari, cl^r^ qui incedit honor;
Ipsi intenebris volus c^no^ue ^^^^^^tur Lucre^.
Governors, by disturbing the one, and aspersing the other, to seek the
overthrow and ruin of both: And this shall serve in what destructive to the
present Government.

Now we come to the particulars tending to Mutiny and division in the Army:
Whiles the River rune entire withal his wa^er in one bed, his o^^^ent is the
swifter, and his force the greater, and dau^teth the most hardy to adventure
passage; but being divided into several streams, it proves so slow and
shallow as it may with safety and ease be waded over: This party is not
ignorant how much the agreement of the Souldiary, and their fastness together,
is for the safety of the Land; neither have they any hope to see their designs
effected, unless there be a disjuncture and breach among them; the which thing
(besides several other seditious ways Here L^^is mores like himself; in p.
6. he repeats some words of the Discoverer, Viz. How they have been busy to
raise Sedition and Mutiny amongst the Soldiers, and speaks not a wise word to
it: But that the young man might not be discouraged, other wise, we would ask
him, whether he were not entised to step in between us and the Levellers,
through reading the Story, how the Ass took upon him to judge between the
Cuckoo and the Nightingale, now of all others the Ass might worse do it.
showed elsewhere) they have strangely attempted by raising many false and
scandalous reports against the General, Officers, and Council of War.

As 1. Englands new Chain. page 8.
Upon pretense of easing the charge of the commonwealth the lifeguard must be
disbanded; because consisting of discerning men, faithful to their Country,
and former promises, and many others of like principles were (...). Philemon.
picked out of every Regiment, the design being by weeding the choicest and
best resolved men to make the Ar^y In the words of Lapis; Now Reader, recollect
thy thoughts, and seriously consider, whether they who are so vain, so false
in their tongue, and so notorious make bates may be heard, and not answered,
reproved, page 20. But he will say, if he keep his Logic, We have not proved
this.
wholly mercinary and slavish and the Executioners of a few men's lusts and
lawless pleasures.

Answ. 1, It was no pretense, but a thing truly meant and done; wherein the
General showed the largeness of his love and affection to the Land, and how
far he could deny himself in point of honor and other respects for the
peoples We could give the Reader many other reasons wherefore the Lifeguard
was Disbanded.
ease and accommodation. Secondly, It is not true that either they, or any
others were disbanded because faithful to their Country etc. For it is well
known it has been their care and practice from the beginning to this day, to
promote such upon all occasions, and commit matters of greatest trust to them.

3. It is likewise false, that there were any picked out of every Regiment, for
either they were dismis'd upon their own desire, or what else was don, it was
in such an impartial way; as there was no cause given at any time for such a
base aspersion. Fourthly, No less is it a falsehood and slander to say, it was
done, to make the Army wholly mercinary, etc. the condition Quae tanta insonia
cives? creditis avectos hosteis? aut ulla putatis dona carere doli^ Danaum? sic
notus Ulysses? Virg. Aeneld. l. 12.
and behavior of the Army ever since, is sufficient to prove their accusation
to be most falls. But Fifthly, we know their meaning well enough, disceraing
men, faithful to their Country, and many others of like Principles: that is,
Pellicalam veterem retinens, and fron^ politus, estutam v^^id^ servans su^
pectore vulpem. Per^us. Satyr. 5.
busy seditious, and mutinous as they are t^emselves. The Turks call their
converts from Christianity, There is more of Christ and righteousness in the
Turks Alcoran then in the Levellers Creed.
musul manem servati, as if they were fav'd then and not before even ^o,
unless the Soldiers turn Levellers, resist authority, raise mutine in the
Army, reproach the Officers: they are wholly mercinary, slavish, and the
executioners of a few men's lusts and lawless pleasures. Gregarius miles,
procan lingua, like Thomson.
But let them T^rne Turks, Musulmanim, then they are deserving men, honest and
worthy Soldiers, the good men in the Army, Nam etiam tum Legato a
centurionibus, and optimo q^oque manipularium parebatur. Tac. Annal. l. 1. p.
12.
men most conscientious and cordially acting for common good etc. But as one
says of the rebellion caused by Percennius amongst the Soldiers in Pannony,
even then the Centurions, and the better sort of the Soldiers, were obedient
to the Lieutenant. Ducis in concilio, posita est virtus mi^itum, Valor. Max.
lib. 4.
So it has ever been with us.

2. To make division in the Army, they say; At the first Randezvous near Ware,
they shot a Soldier to death, for London Printed in the grand year of
hypocritical and abominable dissimulation. It very well fits as to that Book
where the words are, so, with their Englands New Chain.
pursuing the ends of the engagement at New Market, and for insisting upon the
agreement of the People: unworthily abused Mayor Skott a Member of this House,
sent him up a Prisoner, and accused him and Col. Rainsborough for appearing in
behalf of the agreement, and therewithal sent Col. Airs, Major Cobbat,
Captain Bray and many others after Prisoners, to Windsor.

Mr, Lilburne in a Book lately published speaking of The Legal fundamental
Liberties of the people of England, page 74.
the first and second part of Englands New Chains discovered, says; the truth
of every line of which (for all its declared treasonable) I will seal with my
heart blood. But (good Sir) do you not know, it is not the suffering but the 1
Pet. 2.20. and 4.15.
cause of the suffering that makes The Jesuits doctrine is, that he dies a
Martyr that dies for his Conspiracy and Treason against the State.
a Martyr: now as in the rest, so here what is reported is most ^ntrue. We find
in their writings the shooting of the Soldier to death as Ware, is much spoken
of, as an act of great Thus did one Vibulenus cause a mutiny among the
Souldi^^s, by accusing falsely the Lieutenant that he had murdered his Brother,
and sought to murder him. Nulhem ob scelus, sed quia utilitati legi^num
confidebamus. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1. p. 13.
cruelty and injustice, but have never mentioned the cause truly why he
suffered: and therefore to wipe of their falsehood and slander from the Army,
we shall give the Reader here a true account how it was.

The Soldier who was shot to death at the R^ndevouze near Hartford was named
Arnold, of whose miscariages and outrages (with some others at the same time)
Captain Bray in a writing delivered to the General and Council of War
(subscribed by him) has thus reported.

The Regiment being ordered to march to New Castle, when they came at St
Albanes, had there read unto them, the paper called, It is no marvel that in
all Commonwealths great care has been taken to suppress seditious Books,
considering how dangerous they are.
The case of the Army stated: whereupon they resolved unanimously not to march;
and howsoever according to the orders he had received, the next day caused the
Drums to beat, yet few or none appeared, but Dictator signiferum cunctantem
signum ut jussus erat infer, occidit. Live. 4.
seized upon the Colors and set them in the wagons, placeing a strong guard
about them: and this they did allthough he had used all the arguments of
persuasion he could to the contrary.

So at a Council of war held at Hockley, having given his vote for their
marching as a thing fit and We might show that as it was, reasonable, they
should obey the ^^^^^^ll; so there was at that time great cause wherefore the
General gave them order to march thither.
reasonable, and being returned from the Council to them, used again many
persuasive arguments, but all in vain, for their combination and murmuring
much increased insomuch that they ca^^ into his quarters the same night after,
and demanded the Colors of him, the which he refusing and giving many reasons
for it, they went into his Chamber and carried them away, telling him they
could not believe any of their Officers, nay that they could not believe any of
their own fathers.

Being come to Olney he again commanded the Drums to beat, and intended to go
forward according to his orders, but they came together and resolved not to
march, and when he had propounded unto them all the arguments of obedience and
reason he could, professing withal to be an enemy to Cannot Lapis see this to
be Regular?
irregularity, howsoever a friend to all just desires, resolutions, and mutual
engagements, they began to be suspicious of him. About the same time there
being come more Colors from Northamptonshire, they grew higher, and more
refractorie, and as he was pressing them to their duty, a It was no doubt, a
malignant design to distemper the Army, thereby to put the Kingdom into a new
fl^me.
Cavalier affronted him, and swore by God, they must not believe any of their
Officers, but should fight now against the Independents.

Upon this they marched back according to their determinations to Dunstable,
with many of the Horse, full of the like distemper: and their received a
Letter, the substance whereof was, that they should stand to their Decipios
ali^^ verbis vultuqu^ benig^^: Nam mihi jam no^^^ dissim^lator eris, Martial. ^
4. Epigram.
honest engagements etc. and the Party that brought the Letter told them, that
the General and Le^^^tenant General An usual practice amongst them to raise
up false reports of what encouragements they have, thereby to more the
credulous and s mple the sooner to rebel^ion. See a Declaration of his
Excellency, concerning the revolted Soldiers, page 16,
would not oppose them, the which report made the Soldiers more and more
Exorable.

Much more in that Narration is showed of their insolences, and high
disobedience; notwithstanding he mentions Being very much suspected to be an
a better, or at least a favourer of the Mutiny.
not their barbarous and most inhumane carriage to their Officers and the
Country, which was so vile and horribly wicked, that all the Felons which have
suffered at Tyburne these twelve months, were not, we are confident, guilty of
so many For this they are called, Honest and worthy Soldiers, the go^d men in
the Army, men most conscientious and cordially acting for common good.
horrid outrages as they committed: Not any of their Officers, except Captain
Bray, the Quartermaster, and one more, durst co^le near them; some they
Following Walwyns Doctrine, To fre themselves out of the hands of Tyrants: The
bloody Project. p. 14.
pursued many miles, and swore as they followed them, they would be revenged on
them; and in this pursuit of their Officers, Here the Craftsmans craft will
hardly find so much craft, as to clear them of theft.
theevishly took away many Horses in the Country, pretending their Officers
were run away with their money, whereas they were forced to fly, or otherwise
had been cruelly murdered by their own Soldiers: Neither were their Officers
thus basely abused, but their rage and cruelty was as much exercised on others;
and not against Malignants, but their manner was, where ever they came in their
march, to inquire if there were any Honest and w^rthy Soldiers, cordially
acting for common good Lapis has one stone left yet to fling at the
Discoverer, for finding fault with them for this.
Round heads in the Town, and where they found such, they would be sure to
abuse them the more. Insomuch that many honest men have since complained that
the Cavaliers never dealt so cruelly with them, and had not Bray and the
Quartermaster been with them, they had been certainly Plundered o^^^ all, If
not Have they not sufficiently proved the Parliament m^n to be Trayt^^s and
England in Chains; in regard when the five cordial Citizens required Justice
for the (...) of the Soldier that was sh^t at Ware, they could not be heard. O
Cromwell, O Fairfax, O Iret^^, O Hasletig, etc. But peace John, a new
Representative will do the deed.
murdered.

In this insolent distemper they come to the Ra^dezvouz, where the General, and
Officers, inquiring who had been the principal Leaders and Actors of this
mutiny, eight or nine were singled out, and being all found at a Court Marshall
guilty of many notorious facts in this business, were adjudged by the Laws
and Ordinances of War to dye: Nevertheless afterward all pardoned but He
that knows what belongs to the Government and discipline of all Army, and
considers their miscarriages and outrages, would rather wonder that every tenth
man of them had not suffered then asperse the Council with cruelty and
unjustice.
one, and this referred to a Lot, which fell upon Arnold; one who had been (as
some Officers of that Regiment report) more notoriously guilty then any other
in that wicked Conspiracy.

We have spoken the more largely of this particular, to show the dissimulation
and treachery of those men: For who would think to hear them say, We do in
the behalf of our selves, and all well minded people, here before this
honorable House, as in the presence of Almighty God, protest against the
shooting of the Soldier to death at Ware; and bow five cordial Citizens We
have seen their Petition, but there was not one word in it, of pursuing their
Officers, stealing Horses, plundering etc. It was cordially done, and so not
Libellus famosus, as Lapis, no contemptible mean bred decayed Parson, learnedly
Latins it.
required justice for his blood: that he suffered for such horrible and vile
misdemeanors: Could any Machiavillian or Jesuit hide Mutiny, Theft, Murder,
Cruelty, and the very height of Rebellion (like a dunghill under Snow) so
handsomely? The Romans in War had an Engine which they named Musculus, the
nature of it was to hide their Soldiers, so that they could (unseene) come to
the Walls of a City and undermine it; this Here we sh^l leave Lapis a while,
and take notice of H. B. who seems to have some sense: Now if he will show his
Craft let him not spend so much time about that which is not in question; but
if he can show us, that rebellion, theft, murder oppression. etc Is
justifiable, if m^n say it is for ^^mmon good, he shall be reputed to have the
Crafts man's Craft.
Engine they use often, under a color of pursuing the ends of engagements, and
acting for common good, approach the walls of our State, and unseen sat least
as they th^^^ there work the ruin and overthrow thereof.

2. For others whom they name, what the Co^^cell of War did to them, there
was reason a^^ cause for it, the distemper among the Soldiers ^^ing so great,
and many ill-affected people now wa^^ing an opportunity, through a breach and
division (...) the Army, to destroy both Army and Kingdom, it was necessary,
that such as appeared to countenance so dangerous a design (though happily
intending no evil) should be prevented, the which could not be, without
removing them as they did, and securing their persons.

Hor. l. 2. Od. 13.
Quid quisque vitet nunquam homine satis Cautum est.
What daily by us should avoided be,
We cannot with sufficient heed foresee.
3. They ask, Englands new Chain, page 14.
what freedom is their left where Quid verba au^^^m, cum facta videam. Cic. 3.
Tus.
honest and worthy Soldiers are sentenced and enforced to ride the Horse with
their faces reverst, and their swords broken over their heads, for but
Petitioning and presenting a letter in justification of their liberty therein;
if this be not a new way of breaking the spirits of the english which Strafford
and Canterbury never dream of; (...) know no difference of things.

Answ. 1. It is a false conclusion and seditiously applied, to insinuate, that
there is no freedom left (...) when honest and worthy etc. as if all our
liberty and safety consisted in the actings of four or five mean Soldiers,
and because they rode the Horse, it is now quite lost and we in Chains.

But 2. That which they call Justification of their Liberty, was a thing most
scandalous to the Parliament, Council of State, Court of Justice and tending
to breed mutiny in the Army, and so much was then showed and proved to them:
In some fe^ny Countries where People are troubled with Gnats, they use to hang
up dung in the midst of the room, as a bait for the Gnats to fly to, and so
catch them, as being a net or snare provided for the purpose; there is no snare
(and this party John Lilburne knows, the Malignants would ^ot give a farthing
for his Book, nor read it, if it were not for his raising at the present
Government; it is not his nonsense about the laws, nor his vaporings, that
they regard, but the dung of his foul mouth they fly at.
knows it well) like the dung of Sedition: hang up a Pamphlet or Libel stuffed
with falsehoods and raylings against Magestrates and Government, let it be said,
The legal fundamental Liberties, etc. page 74.
O perfidious Cruel Tyrants O Apostatized Tyrants, a company of bloody and
inhumane butcherers of man, The most perjurd, perfidious, false faith and
trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the World. Ibid. ^5.
a pack of dissembling juggling knaves: Ibid. 38.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram were never The Bird Taurus is very little, yet has a
voice like a Bull: John has a roaring Bulls voice, its well his horns are
little.
such Rebels against Authority as the General and his Council are, nor the
Anabaptists at Munster with You might have forborne your Namesake.
John of Leyden and N^per Dullion, were never more contemners of Authority;
nor Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Jack Straw, nor W^t Tiler, nor all those famous men mentioned with a black pen
in our histories, and called Rebels and Traitors can never be put in any scale
of equal balance, for all manner of rebellions and Treasons against all sorts
and kinds of Magistracy, with the General and his Council: Let this be the
Dung for the Trapp and John, may a man (and not he rayl'd at) whisper a word in
your ear: You speak much agai st so^^ men of carrying on designs, and their
own Interest: Now in this thing many take notice of you, how by slandering the
Government, and railing at good men, you cunningly drive on your own Interest;
that is, gull the simple people out of their mea^e, for had you followed your
first trade which was honest, you had not gotten so mu^^, as by this latter,
which is base; namely, Railing.
Lilburne can speak by experience, there shall not be Quilibet natura fertur
ad s^i s^^ile^. Astnus Asino pulcherimus, sus vero sui, Equi equis similes,
boves vero bobus.
a Gnat, not a secret conspirator, a false hearted traitor, a close mutineer,
and one that seeks to Level Church and State but he will stick at it. And to
the end the stinck may not choke them, they shall see it written in great
Capital-letters the Mr. Lilbu^nes Title of his last Book.
legal fundamental LIBERTIES of the People of England Revived asserted and
vindicated, or as here, in justification of their liberty.

3. There may be some truth here picked out a new way which Strafford and
Canterbury never dreampt of, it was so indeed, they never went this way to
work, for their manner was to break the spirits of the peaceable, and people
bent affected to the commonwealth: whereas the Council of War on the
contrary has still endeavored to suppress the unquiet, restless,
seditious, as all know and will acknowledge; except men of the same distemper
and faction.

4. They have another story, as thus: Englands new Chain, page 10.
No sooner had they (through Gods blessing and the assistance of their
reconciled friends) finished their work at Colchester, but presently they called
to Question certain persons that bad, appeared at St. Albans in the behalf of
Captain Reynalds, choosing rather to forsake the service then to be commanded
by Captains that had been violent against them, that had drunk the Kings
health upon their knees, and professed they could rather fight against the
Levellers then Cavaliers, and these (according to their old wont) they
sentenced to death and soon after releast them, as finding or supposeing this
kind of discipline most essential to the breaking and debasing the spirits of
the English.

Answ. A man that has false ware to put off, cares not how bad the light is:
the matter which they here so darkely and covertlie report, was indeed a work
of darkness. As for the cause of that sentence it is not at all Here Reader
thou are desired to take notice of their falsehoods in relation of things, and
to give thee a further instance, whereas Lilburne reports of large proffers he
had from Mr. Hunt; the man has professed since to us, that what he spoke to
him was of himself, not procured thereunto by any one, and it was upon his
Complaints, whereupon he as a friend advised him to moderation, and a peaceable
carriage, which he told him would gain the love of men, which he would never
do by bitter and invective speeches, and no doubt the advice of Mr. Holland,
and Mr. Rigby was the like, though he basely abuse them for their good Counsel.
related, but some other things which before were never heard of. For 1. That
there should be Captains which drank the Kings health, or any such words
spoken as they report, they are things as yet not only to prove, but
pretenses which themselves in their own defense used not. But 2. Had such a
thing been done, or the words spoken, yet would not this excuse their horrid
and vile disobedience: for they made no complaint thereof before they mutined,
where they might have had redress if any fault had been committed. 3. But that
these Libels are Printed in the grand Year of hypocritical and abominable
dissimulation, otherwise it were impossible that they should thus still
conceal the truth: The matter here is in effect the same with Arnolds: they
having order to march Northward with many reproachful speeches refused so to
do, and thereby caused a great division in the company, yea their insolences
and outrages were such that unless the same had been seasonably prevented,
much danger to the Kingdom would certainly have followed: for it did evidently
appear, that their plot was to make a General disturbance and hurliburlie
through the Land, as making full account that others, in other parts, by their
seditious example would do the like, and so the Malignants taking the
opportunity (as a door opened by them) might destroy the honest party, and the
easier effect their designs.

4. For the distinction between Leveller and Cavaleer it is now by Like
Cornelius Fuscus, having by his sed^cious carriage made himself incapable of
the Princes favor and pardon Is inclementer in Vitellium invehi solitus, nihil
spei sibi inter adversa reliquerat. Tac. Hist. lib. 3. page 423.
Lilburne taken off, and Jack has ventured his neck to make LEVELLING CAVALEER
one person; but it would vex his foul heart to hear, what Malignants say,
that he is a Howsoever he calls other men Apostates, nevertheless a greater
then h^mselfe is not known, as his own Writings manifest.
Turn-Coat knave and howsoever they are content to make use of Incendiaries and
Traitors, yet they think hanging is a reward too good for him, that holds
sometime with one party, otherwhile with another, and all to destroy and ruin
the Nation. Pro. 14.14.
The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and Job 8.13.
the hypocrites hope shall perish.

5. That they were afterward released, and soon too, it showed the great
clemency and favor of the General; which Testimoney from their own mouth, is
sufficient to prove the greatest part of their Book to be most false. But
observe the Saepe summa ingenia in occulio latent. Plautus in Captivis.
wit of these men, Qui en malen ^^^na, sacalos pane^ tuerios.
who can from an act of large mercy conclude Tyrany and oppression against the
doer.

6. They make a large narration of some proceedings in the North, the reading
whereof gives us an occasion to mind Sollomons words Eccl. 10 13. He that
would take p^ines and have the patience to read over Lilburnes last Book,
should find this saying fulfilled.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his
talk mischeivous madness. But 1. That the Levellers were taken into the
bosom, and the necessities being over, fell into greater odium and contempt
then ever, it is denied: for honest and deserving men have always been
countenanced, and still are, and if any have fallen into disgrace, it has been
through their own miscariages, or otherwise if they have suffered any thing it
has not been any way occasioned by the That many honest men, Soldiers and
others, have been sufferers In the Country, we believe, but that this thing is
of the Army Officers, through their Tyranny, and oppression (as these asperse
them) that we deny.
General Officers. Is it not possible for the son or servant to do amiss,
and yet the Father or Master to be blamlesse?

2. It is also false, that diverse Soldiers were rated and threatened to have
their skuls broken, etc. for Petitioning in the behalf of Major Reinolds: For
whatsoever was spoken or done herein, it was not for There is a Story of one
who having killed his neighbor, and being presently apprehended, to excuse,
himself, showed them a little spright had in his hand, which could not do any
hurt; but spoke not a word of the bloody knife that was in his sleeve: Observe
it well, and you shall find the carriage of these men always so; they tell us
of Petitioning, but never she^ the bloody Knife, speak not one word of the
treachery and sedi^ion contained in their Petitions; neither of the mutiny and
division which they sought to make in the Army under the color of Petitioning.
Petitioning, but for their incivilities and high miscarriages, as no way
becoming Soldiers. Such among the Turks are in high veneration, as have lost
their wits, and are become Idiots; there is little reason why these men should
expect admiration from others, unless it be for their sottishness and
absurdity, for every understanding Reader must needs perceive the froth and
emptiness of their talk; but you shall seldom see malice and matter
together.

3. For Major Cobit and Major White, that the General was pleased to confer
such places upon others which some desired they might have had, we know nothing
unjust that he did therein, but this we know to be a slander and reproach that
Major White was refused the Leivtenant Col^onelship, because a constant man to
his promises. The Law says, C l. 3. Com. de pr^. and L. ob Car. F. de Test.
Testibus deponentibus veris^^ailiora magis creditur: And there is reason for
it, for who knows a man's thoughts, words, and actions, better then himself,
and therefore his Excellency denying it, is rather to be believed then they. He
that drinks much of the juice of Coriander seed, they say is either dumb
afterward, or if he speak it will be naughtily; these men have taken in some
such liquor; for there is hardly o^e thing which they speak, but is Nihil est
Antiph^, Quin in the na^^^^ ^^^sit deprav^^^^. Tu quod (...) est exce^pis (...)
^u^d ma^^ est. Terent. in Phorm
false, and tending to sedition.

5. They say further, And this was the usage not only to these Gentlemen, but
to all others, whether Officers or soldiers in North, or South (for their
Counsels were one in both) that did retain a sense and resolution to prosecute
those good things intimated in their former ingagemen^.

Tame Foxes if they break loose, and turn wild, will do ten times more
mischief then those which were wild from the beginning: Experience shows it
in these men, when Independents turn Malignants, Parliamenteers, Cavaliers,
Royalists, and of friends, become foes to the Gospel, they prove the The Jew^
w^^te that Rabshek^h was an Aposta^e from their Church, and by his railing it
seems it was so: Now let any prudentiall man read Lilbur^ last Book, and he
cannot but conclude (though ignoran^ of his Ap^stacy) that it was an Ap^^tates
w^^k for the tone and dia^ect is proper to one that is Aposta^^^ed from Church
and State.
sorest and greatest enemies that the Church and State ever had. To this
slander we have given already a full answer, In conclusion therefore of this
particular, we shall desire the Reader from the premises to obs^rve, the
several ways and wyles which they have used to make division and mutiny in
the A^my.

1. As they know the Army cannot be without some distemper, so they are
diligent whether in the North or South, to make They have had their sp^^ and E^
y^^at^es in severa^l parts, to take knowledge of distempers, and accordingly
applied themselves to highten and blow them up.
inquiry after it, that they may by casting Oil into the fire increase and
continue the same. 2. That the Officers may be unserviceable, and the Soldiers
thereby occasioned to revolt, they seek by Witness this Book.
falsehood and slander, to make them odious. 3. Whenever any mutiny or
division is raised in the Army, their manner always is to Mr. Lilburne says,
that Rich. Arnold, was wilfully and of set malice murdered. But John, when you
write next, be more sober, and let us ^ave more reason and less railing from
you.
justify the Conspirators, thereby to harden them in their wickedness, and
provoke others to the like sedition. 4. Such things as are good in themselves,
and done upon just ground, they will scandalously The Law says, In re dubia
benigniorem semper fieri interpretationem, L. Prox. 4. C. de his quae intest
de^.
interpret, as done to a bad intention. 5. They asperse the Soldiers as to be
mercinary and slavish, and why? but because they should either leave the
service, or refuse duty. 6. That no private Soldier may yield assistance to
his Commander, in punishing his fellow Soldier (be the cause never so just)
they are told if they do so, that they are the But the Soldier better knows
h^s duty: Mancipii unius audacia, immature subventum f^ret, discordiis,
armisque civilibus Remp. perculisset. Tac. An. l. 2. p. 57.
Executioners of a few men's lusts, and lawless pleasures. 7. They possess the
Soldiers, that it is of their Officers that many Taxes and burdens are not
taken away, and things better settled; although they are not in fault, neither
can they help it. 8. To enrage the Soldiers, they cry out against their
Commanders, for breaking their Covenants, Protestations, Engagements, howsoever
in the mean time, there is no promise which formerly they have We could wish
that there might be some thing considered about the justness of promises, as
pressing the keeping, howsoever made.
justly made, and can perform, but they are willing and careful to keep the
same. 9. Their Officers are such They who are hungry, seeing others eat, are
thereby provoked to the greater appetite: Men that hunger and thirst after
greatness, seeing others possess it, are the more greedy of it, and by
calling them Tyrants (as Lilburne uses to do) make account to have them outed,
and come the sooner into ^he^^ places.
Tyrants, as that the better the Soldiers are, and the more faithful, the
worse they will use them. 10. The use which the General Commanders make of the
Soldiers, is ( Innocent esse nemo poterit si accusasse sufficient.
they say) only this, namely to betray and enslave the Common wealth, and
enrich themselves: and so much of this point.

It follows next in that particulars it tends to the raising of a new war in
^^e Commonwealth. say they for peace, whilst the supreme Officers of the Army
are supreme in your House, in the Council of State, and all in all, in the
general council of the Army, when the martial power is indee^ supreme to the
civil authority, what peace can be expected? we profess we Blind men are
mutinous and choleric.
see no counsels tending to it, but hereof mighty and vast sums of money to be
taxed upon the People per mensem; as if W^^ were become the only Trade, or as
if People were bound to maintain Armies, whether they have Trade or no, yea
whether they have bread or no.

Answ, The Wolf by tickling the Ass and rubbing him softly about the Neck
and under the belly, brings the Ass asleep and then presently devours him,
Such Asses they would make the People, by For there is no faithfulness in
their mouth, their inward part is very wickedness, the^^ throat is an open
Sepulcher, there flatter with their tongues. Psalm. 9.5.
flattery and fair pretenses persuade them they desire peace, and seek to have
greviances and burdens remooved, whereas the truth is (and so much we shall
here further demonstrate) like the Wolf this tickling and soft rubbing, is but
a Levelling design, of mere advantage to destroy them.

We know not of any superiority that one person takes above another either in
Parliament or Council of State, but as equals in respect of place, so are
their actings all alike in point of power. 2. For Marshall power it never took
any thing from the Civil, nor h^th it at any time been exercised, but in
matters proper and peculiar thereunto. 3. That they do not see any counsels
tending to peace, it may well be so: for a man that is blind or shuts his
eyes: sees not the brightness and beauty of the sun shining at noone day.
Nicomachus in Plutarch very fitly answered an Jdeot that could see no beauty
in the famous Helena Painted by Zeuxis: take my eyes said Nichomachus and you
shall think her to be a Goddess. If this party had the eyes of sober,
discreet, peaceable, honest and well affected people, they would see in our
high Court and great Council, somet^ing don every day tending to peace, but
being Protinus invidia nigra s^^alentia tabo tecta perit, domus est imis in
vallibus antri abdita, sole carens non ulli pervia vento, tristis and ignavi
plenissima frigoris, and quae igne vacet semper, caligine semper abundet. Ovid.
lib. 2. Metamorph.
blinded through malice, pride, prejudice selfe-seeking etc. no wonder like
Batts or Owls they see nothing in the light. 4. to insinuate as if the
supreme Officers of the Army would make War their trade, is a base aspersion,
their former actions have ever testified the contrary. But observe the craft
of these men, they would make the people believe that the Officers continue the
War, whereas themselves, by traiterous designs and Many have thought, long
agone, that Lilburn would at last show himself a professed Malignant; which is
now come to pass: so that how his pretenses of freedom and liberty will
deceive honest people no more; and truly we must acknowledge it as a singular
mercy of God, that so dangerous a Person to the Common wealth should with his
own mouth discover himself as he has done.
closing with the greatest enymies that the Nation has, are still seeking to
Of such persons the Law says, Reus est laesae majestatis, qui seditionem in
Rep. concitat, eam hostibus patriave Religionem aut Resp. hostibus nomen dat,
aut aliud quidvis ad Reip. statum evertendum molitur, L. 1. 10. 11. Hic L. 5.
eod. vult Althus. D. locis Vid. Damhoud. C. 63. diss aliqui per. l. 25.. 1. de
Cap. and Postl. And how Conspirators against the public p^ace, ought to be
punished, the Law likewise sets it down. Frequentius vivi sectione in parts
eminentioribus locis suspendendus. Glar. d. Number 8. Damhoud C. 62. Again,
Transfugas etiam and proditores, perduellium instar a quovis impune occidi
posse. Argum. l. 234. de V. 5. l. 3.. ult. ad L. Corn. de siccar. Gothost ad l.
7. hic Clar. d. loc. in fin. Cujar. Observe. 33.
raise commotions, and so necessarily constrain the State to keep up their
forces, for to suppress their conspiracies.

2. We find them propounding many Questions to which we shall briefly answer.
1. Touching their charge against the excluded Members, there has something
already been done herein, and what is further to do, as there shall be
opportunity and a fit occasion for it, so they will proceed. 2. For Offices
conferred upon their creatures and relations, whatsoever has been done this
way, there was just cause for it, and no more but according to the merits of
the receivers. 3. It will be time enough to discountenance those who have
betrayed the trust of feofees for Bishops and delinquents lands; or have
unjustly purchased it themselves when the offense is known and proved. 4. That
the Lord chief Justice and Lord chief Barron should keep their places,
conferd upon them, it was fit and requisite, being men of great worth and well
deserving, and continually faithful to the commonwealth. 5. When those
perfidious persons that have made no conscience of breaking the selfe-denying
Ordinance, are found out, and known to be such, there will be that done no
doubt, which shall be just and satisfactorie: But to what end are those
demands? you shall know in the words following.

Oh wretched England, that sees and yet suffers such intolerable Masters?
what can be expected from such Officers who frequently manifest a thirst after
the blood of the People and Soldiers, as are most active for the common
freedom peace and prosperity of the commonwealth, and against whom they have
nothing else to object? or what can be expected from such a council in the
Army as shall Lilburne reports that he had gotten diverse thousands of hands to
this Pamphlet. Legal fundamental, etc. page 74. If this be true (but we much
question it for we know his vapouring) observe what a generation of men those
were, to set their hands to such things, as they know not what they were, was
it not a sin and a shame to them, to own that under their hands, of which they
were altogether ignorant. These were like his Tenants who would say, What is it
Master? Say, and we will swear it.
agree that the supreme authority should be moved to make a law that the
council of Officers may have power to put to death all such persons though not
of the Army as they should judge were disturbers of the Army.

There are certain Idolators in India when they sacrifice to their Zemes, or
Idol, that their Offering may be the more acceptable, thrust a stick into their
throat, even to their weasel, and so bring up whatsoever lies in their
stomach: These men have taken some pains here and streined hard to bring all
this up at once, if Satan therefore like it not, what will he have? as for
sedition, treason, falsehood, what more can be uttered, vomitted?

But 1. Are ye in earnest, would ye not have the people remain any longer
under the present Government, but raise a new war? we believe you: you mean as
you speak, those Masters ye would willingly have out, and be your selves the
Nec decrant qui crederent, utramque seditionem fraud Antonii captum ut solus
bello frueretur. Tac. Hist. l. 3. p. 4^7
tyrants which so often you speak of: and then we should have cause enough to
say Oh wretched England.

Hor. Epod. 16.
Barbarus beu cineres insistit victor et urbem
Eques sonante verberabit ungula.
The victor rude upon our Grave does tread,
Our City is with trampling Horse over laid
2. In speaking so often that the As true as that, 1 Samuel 22.8.
Officers thirst after such people and Soldiers blood as are most active for
common good etc. Herein you show your selves to be like the Serpent called
Porphirius, which is full of poison, but being toothlesse, hurts none but
himself: your malice and venom is so gross and notoriously false, as it
kills only your selves, whiles That Lapis may not take exception at this No
body, it looking so like himself, we do therefore here ex^mpt him.
no body will receive it from you. As for the peace freedom and prosperity you
mention, Lilburne has now declard what it is, And howsoever some have thought
heretofore better of you, then ye deserved, yet finding him now to plead for
the His words are these, Prin^e Charles heir apparent to his Fathers Crown and
Throne. The most he speaks in this page are words put into his mouth, and he
speaks them as did the Ass, not understanding what he speaks. But J^hn, let
us tell you this, To be a free people there can be no heir to Crowns and
Thrones; pure reason which you sometimes talk of, admits of no heir to a
Crown: A Crown title is contrary to the principles of reason and nature. But
indeed we never took you or a man to ^ave the Principles of reason; only a
smattering in some old dusty Statutes, the Cob^ebs whereof are so gotten into
your eyes, as what is pure reason you see not.
Princes Title, and condemning the Parliaments proceeding against the King, and
Lords, with much other base malignitie, they are satisfied, and hope the
Parliament will be careful to prevent the mischeife which he manifests
against the Common good, peace, and prosperity of the common wealth.

3. Where shall we find a lie told with less color of truth then here: The
council in the Army moved to have power to put to death al such persons though
not of the Army as they should judge were disturbers of the Army. We appeal to
any man that has sense, whether such a thing be probable, or possible? what no
other course but death? and all to death? and for every desturbance of the
Army? here we may (changing the names) say O Lilburne, O Wal^yn, O Prince, O
Overton, will ye Seal the truth of every Line with your hearts blood? truly
that which you speak in this place is not only false in it self, but so The
^w says, Absurdum intellectum ab omni dispositione rejiciendum: L. Nam
absurdum Debon. ^ertor l. 1.. unde quaritur de publica.
absurd and groundless, as no rational man can possibly believe it.

But further, it is also an How needful therefore is that Counsel, Nihil
edendoque omnia cavendo. Cic. Orat. Post. redit. in Sen.
untruth that the Council of the Army did move the supreme authority in any
such thing at all. For whatsoever was spoken, it was only an occasional
speech of one particular person (or two at most) not moved by the Council, nor
any agreement made by them in the least, Yea more, for putting to death, Quum
quisque pessime fecit, ^n maxim tutus est. Salust.
it was not insisted upon, but what was said in effect was only thus, that
Provisa minus la^^^t: And the Law says, Contra vim atque injuriam licitam esse
defensionem. l. ut vim de just. and jur l. scientiam. qui cum ad l. Aquil.
seeing there were sundry seditious people, who sought to make division and
mutinee in the Army, there might be some course taken with the Parliament, to
empower the Council of War, whereby to preserve both Officers and Soldiers
from their dangerous and destructive designs.

3. They say, certainly these things cannot but manifest unto you their very
hearts, their inward purposes and intentions representing visibly before you
and all the World the most dangerous condition that ever yet this Nation has
been in.

Answ, 1. So much you have manifested here and in other papers and actings, of
your inward purposes and intentions to the Parliament, Council of State,
Council of War, the Army and whole Nation, as by this time they Ex ungue
Leonem. And as a corrupt Tree is known by corrupt fruit.
know you well; that is, know you to be the But being now known to be such,
there is hope they will do the less hurt.
most dangerous and traiterous enemies the Land has, being indeed the special
Instruments and Agents of our Enemies, both at home and abroad, to carry forth
the black and bloody work for them, they being not able nor so fit to appear
themselves in such a way, nor can so notably dissemble, and so artificially
deceive the people, under a cloak of Liberty, Peace, Freedom, as Quicquid
hostis facit, jure belli agit ac suscipit, and liceb turpiter saepe facit quod
sit hostis, tamen cum hostis sit turpiter non bellum gerit. Arg. l. 4. S. sed
quod D de Con. obrump. Cause. These men till of late, have acknowledged our
present Government, and so no professed enemies to the State; yet the worst
enemies that the State has, because under a pretense of Friends, have sought
the overthrow of it.
you can do.

And to the end the Nation may clearly understand what for persons you are, we
shall here truly relate some passages in a Letter sent from one William Bennet,
and found with Needam, who has a long time styled himself Pragmaticus, the
Libeller, dated at Antwerpe, June 1. After some Salutation and account given of
their affairs beyond the Seas, he expresses his great sorrow to hear that
the Iavellers were subdued, and desires kindly to be unmembred unto Mr.
Lilburne, Mr. Overton, and the rest, being his ancient Friends, and great
acquaintance, and what help he and others are willing to afford them,
expecting the like from them, according to their power, and as occasion shall
be offered.

Here we shall desire the Reader to observe, first, that this Benet is not
only a professed enemy to our State, but as by the Letter appears, a notable
Spy, and one that gives intelligence of things unto such persons as are
employed in special designs against the safety of this Common wealth; and
this man has been one of their Intimacies and familiar Friends. Secondly, The
rising lately of the Soldiers was an action well liked of, and in regard it
prospered not, the Cavaliers every where, are much grieved for it. Thirdly,
That Pragg: must be the man, and the messenger of the salutations and
kindness, what should this mean? unless there be an accord between them, and
an intercourse of writing each to other. Fourthly, Howsoever we cannot directly
say what assistance it is, that Royallists would willingly afford them, yet
what they expect from the other is well known, even a prosecuting of the work
begun; that is, to asperse the present Government, make division in the Army,
hinder the releife of Ireland, etc.

2. Will not people move for a new War, to hear them say, The most dangerous
condition that ever yet this Nation has been in: And in another place, The
vilest and basest bondage that ever English men groaned under: Does not this
Trumpet of Rebellion sound loud enough? Thou see Reader, the people are not
closly or tacitiy stirred up to mutiny, but Viva voce, boldly, openly, and
because they do not But let people in all places take heed lest they be served
as an Impostor of Creet did the Jews in the Reign of Theodosius the Emperor,
who persuaded them he was Moses sent to lead them into their own Country
through the Sea, whereupon he brought them unto a rock, commanded themselves to
leap into the Sea, warranting them safety against all danger, and such as did
so were drowned immediately: So those Impostors, in moving men to an
insurrection, pretending it is for their deliverance from bondage, will
certainly occasion the rui^^ of as many as shall follow their pernicious
Counsel.
so, it is, Oh wretched England, that sees and yet suffers such intolerable
Masters.

And howsoever their good Friends which set them at work, make full account
(by their treachery, and the peoples credulity) to establish Monarchy and
Tyranny again; erect Altars, Courts, Canons, Mass, Mattens, etc.
Nevertheless here the Leveller must be silent, and play the cunning Pirates
part, having changes of colors to bring in the honest man and his goods, hang
out a false one, namely, the Color of LIBERTY, a thing easily done by those
men, it being their Genius, and proper to their Trade.

3. As we have in other places noted their impudence and horrid boldness, so
here the same again appears, If there be any conscience toward God or man to
be found amongst you, etc. it is impossible but it must work upon all amongst
you that are not Co partners with them in their designs.

Answ. 1. You measure it seems, other men's consciences by your own, and
therefore think, because your selves make no conscience of lying, sedition,
treason, railing, etc. that others will countenance such things, and so make as
little conscience of their ways, as you of yours. But secondly, you might well
say, It is impossible but it must work upon all amongst you: For poison is
operative and working; and you knew, more deadly poison could not be devised,
then what you had presented, and for the quantity, enough to poison three
Nations. Thirdly, Sane lentus in suo dolor e^set: Reip injurias ne largiretur.
Tacit. An^al. l. 3. p. 1^9.
For this working amongst the Parliament men, it is fit and necessary that
your sad representation should be minded: far as one well says, Howsoever the
Magistrate may be as sloe as he pleases in punishing injuries committed
against his own person, yet he ought not to pardon such as are done against
the common wealth.

The Children of Allexandria in the days of Ptolemeus Philopater, when the
huge and great Ancor of the Ship Thalmegos was laid out upon the shore, the
Children did ride upon the stalk, and crept through the ring of the Ancor, as
if it had been made for the pastime of Children: but wise Ship-men knew it was
appointed for a better use, namely to stable and make sure that great Vessel in
great and tempestuous storms. Just so, do some men serve the Law, if the
execution thereof lies still, they are ready to ride upon it, and run through
it, as if it were made only for sport: But wise Statesmen know it was
appointed for better use, namely, when incendiaries and conspirators raise
commotions and hurliburlies in the commonwealth to preserve then in such a
storm, the great Vessel, by a due and careful proceeding against them. Se the
Foolish birds frighted a little at first with the husbandmans Scar-crow, and
after a while observing that it stirs not, are bold to fit upon it, and defile
it: So Libellers and Raylers at the State, seeing nothing put in execution are
bold to write any thing.
note in the margin.

Our next particular is to show wherein it hinders the releife of Ireland; now
thus we prove it.

1. They say, we did forbear to interpose our Judgments, or to oppose those
men's designs until they had made a large progress toward our bondage and
endeavored to grasp the power of the Army into their hands thereby to enforce
their tyranny upon us.

Answ. 1. What their forbearance has been is well known, and we have showed
it in our former Discovery, they have forborne indeed, but what? to walk
according to Rules, of Charity, Truth, Peace, Justice, but not practice the
contrary; such a forbearance is against their Genius and spirit. 2. What they
mean by a large progress, may be plainly gathered by their several falsehoods
and scandals already spoken unto: The prosperity of the Army over the common
enemies, and breaking still the snares which they have laid in the way to
hinder the work is a progress toward our bondage. But what is their drift
here? it is thus, they would not have either Parliament or People, yield any
aid and assistance to the General Officers, for the They have in some Books
counseled the Soldiers not to engage for Ireland.
releife of Ireland or any other necessary service whatsoever. 3. What
seditious head can raise a more pernicious design then to asperse such men,
who under God are employed in the greatest trust and service for the State,
that they grasp the power of the Army into their hands thereby to enforce their
tyrany upon us. It is worth the Readers observing, that the persons whom they
oppose are such, as under God, are our special protectors; so that they know,
if they could remove them; not only Ireland were quite lost, but a passage and
way open for their Friend Be^^^t and his company to come hither.
should this be received, (as their traiterous hands have published) not only
would Ireland be lost but this commonwealth likewise be endangered, if not
undone.

2. For the matter which they mention in relation to the King, howsoever it be
like a dead body, subject to putrefaction, though it should be touched of none,
yet of it self would come to nothing; nevertheless that it was their intent
in the publishing of it, to disable the Army from all further service, and
thereby to carry on the enemies design, it is apparent and thus to prove it.

1. Seeing they We have not seen a piece of slander more artificially
contrived; for as they know not any person guilty of the things here set down
so they do not name any particular person; and therefore who can bring an
action of slander against them.
know not the persons upon whom to fasten their accusations, therefore their
aspersions are still general: and so to bring a dishonor and blot upon all
the Officers, a notable trick, for thereby at once, they think to make the
whole Army unserviceable. Besides no particular person being mentioned, it is
the more difficult to detect their Treachery and Falsehood, and so making use
and advantage of time, they can the easier effect their wicked intentions.
Secondly, In their whole discourse you shall not find one word of the The Army
in some of their Remonstrances, and Declarations, had spoken so much about the
King, as if considered, would justify their compliance with him.
reasons and grounds which moved the Officers to act as they did; neither the
causes of their changeable proceedings, and herein they were wise in their
Generation: for they knew well enough, if this had been done, and a true
relation given, the Commanders had been quitted, at least there had been no
pretense or color for them, to reproach them as they have done. Thirdly, In
the business about the King, this in short may be gathered from their
proceedings first and last compared together, that when the Officers seemd to
be any way for him they were against him, and when they did otherwise, therein
they opposed them likewise: so that it is clear, their desire has not been
for peace and Risus abest, nisi quem visi movere dolores. Successus hominum,
carpitque and carpitur una: Suppliciumque suum est. Ovid. Metam. lib. 2.
settlement, but to have all sides wearied and wasted, thereby at last to come
to their own designs. Fourthly, It is very remarkable, that were the things
true as they relate (which are not) yet would they not prove their aspersions;
which shows though they wanted matter, yet not malice, from their accusations
they thus conclude.

And so vanished away all their glorious flattery of the King and his party,
and their notorious dissimulation appeared, abusing thereby the faith of the
Army, and making it clear to all discerning men, that such as could break
with one sort of men will make no conscience of keeping faith with another, And
a little after, by all which it is evident that according to the Maxims of
politians they Judge themselves loose where other men are bound: and all
obligations are to them transitory and ceremonial, and that indeed every
thing is good and just only as it is conducing to their corrupt and ambitious
interests

For their proof, we shall presently examine it, only by the way take notice
that it is not possible for men to be worse or viler then the Officers are here
set forth: for if they make no conscience of keeping faith with any, they are
not fit for Church or commonwealth: much less to be They serve the Officers,
as the Priests did the Hugono^s in France, who reported they were Monsters, had
Lions heads, Bears feet, etc. The vulgar people hearing them to say so, would
cry out Oh for the Love of God, kill them, kill them, so says this party, the
Commanders make no conscience, etc. they are Lions, Bears, Tyrants, etc. Now
such people as hear this, and know them not, will surely (they think) cry
out, kill them, kill them.
trusted, either with civil or military things. Again they do not say they
may break their promise with others but WILL MAKE NO CONSCIENCE; etc.
possitively concluding, that there must be no confiding in them either for
Ireland or any other place, but presently removed and no further use and trial
made of them. But what have they done?

The first is for some civilities toward the King, as to Court him, kiss his
Hand, visiting him themselves, and permitting thousands of the people daily to
visit etc.

Answ. We read of one. Aglataidus, that he was never better pleased then when
he displeased others nor ever relished any dish better, then what was distasted
by others: In this there is nothing but an There is a people near China, whose
manner is, to Salute by taking off their Shoes, because others do it with the
Hat; there be some men take delight in crosnesse; and will be against the
things which others do (be they never so honest and commendab^e) because they
do them.
Ishmaels crosnesse, which shows they delight in War and to be wronging and
contending, whether there be any cause or matter or no. Prove. 20.3.
It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but every Fool will be
meddling.

2. Were it true which they say (but cannot prove it) that their Proposals were
not only received but corrected and amended by the King, before they were sent
to the House: Nevertheless this will not conclude any glorious flattery, It is
their constant practice to conclude thus; If there be a fault committed as they
imagine: to infer (without considering the nature and quality of the fact) that
it is notorious, no conscience, etc.
notorious dissimulation, making no conscience of keeping faith with any: For a
man doing a thing conscientiously, and according to his present apprehension,
lawful; if afterward seeing himself mistaken in it, leave it and do
otherwise, there is no dishonor or blot will be imputed to him, by such as are
wise and fearing God, knowing how common a thing it is for the best men so to
do.

3. If likewise that were true (which is not, and we desire the reader to note
it as another falsehood) that they were moved to impatience toward any that
spoke a word against their traffic and intercourse with him, and concluded an
agreement with the opposing Citizens of London, without so much as calling the
Agitators to advise thereupon: Here is nothing in all this but what they might
well do. For first, being persuaded, the matter which they had in hand was
just and good, they had reason (as being true, to their principle) to prevent
all obstructions. 2. If the Agitators were not called, no marvel, for they were
not concerned in the thing, and therefore whatsoever was done, it was duly
done by such as had a full Authority and power to do it.

4. When the House complied not with their purposes in all have it was to be
purged, etc.

Answ, 1. Whatsoever the Army has either desired or done this way, it has
been upon necessary and just grounds, and proved still to be No men have more
justified the Army in purging the House then these, nor any more urged and
pre^t for it.
lawful in point of law and conscience. 2. Whereas they say but the House
complying etc. They make nothing of their former resolution what is this for a
thing? should not the Army rest being satisfied? It seems this course is
against their Principle, though they should be complied with, yet not rest, but
prosecute their former Howsoever Lilburn makes a large discourse about the
Agreement, yet so far were they complied with, that had not their Resolution
been to continue troubles amongst us, they would have rested.
Resolutions, let come on the commonwealth what mischeife and ruin soever. 3.
That the House was no whit changed in respect of its corruption and yet
complied with the Army, it seems to be We had almost forgotten Lapis, here is
a work fits his Genius its to find out a Contradiction.
a contradiction. But 4. To let that pass, note here their glorious flattery
and notorious dissimulation, because the Officers went not forward with their
resolution to purge the House, they are reproached for that: and when they do
purge the House from its corruptions, they shall be likewise rayld on for that:
so that whether they do the thing, or not, all is one, the scourge of their
tongue cannot be avoided.

5. They so wrought the King by deep promises and hopes of restoration, as
that he inclined much to countenance the Army, etc. In lieu thereof the great
ones of the Army endeavored the revivall of a Treaty, etc.

Answ 1. But is this brought in, as a reproach? Wherefore then have they
persuaded the chief Officers in the Army to do this very thing: Lilburne in a
Letter to Whom he styles in that paper The man whom God has honored, and will
honor, etc. Neither will the Lord the less honor him now, because he
asperseth him.
Leivtenant General Cromwell, writes thus, Jonahs cry out of the Whales belly,
page 8.
If I were with you, upon my life I durst dispute against you all, that as
things stand, both in point of policy, honesty, and conscience, you must apply
to the King, without which, the peace of the Kingdom can never be settled:
Would any man be so impudent as to write thus? and afterward The Emperor of
Russia provoked his ch of Officers to pill and ransack the the Common sort of
people but to no other end, but that he himself might afterward, when he saw
good, call them into question for it: So they serve the Commanders, counsel
them to apply unto the King, but it seems for no other end, but that afterward
when they should have an occasion, they might reproach and slander them for it.
revile the persons, because they had done according to his own counsel and
advise. But as we said just now, the reproach of their mouth is not to be
avoided.

2. For the Personal Treaty and addresses, etc. that some have had variable
thoughts therein, it is no marvel, neither did the alteration of their minds,
denote any ill affection to the Common wealth. And therefore to asperfe men,
because they were for the Treaty, and afterward upon better consideration
changed their opinion, it shows by what spirit such people are led; for rather
then they will forbear calumniation, they will cast off the rule of love,
wisdom, justice, yea, humanity, and reason it self.

But thirdly, here they make account their Charge is proud, The far greater
number of Officers would not by any means endure to hear of the Armies
compliance with the King, etc. An Agreement of the people is produced, etc. The
great Officers very much oppose it a while, etc. But seeing the same takes with
the Army, profess though at the present their judgments could not so far
close with it, as to act for it, yet they would never oppose it.

Answ. Ecc. 10.8, 9.
His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come upon his ow^e pate. First, they here The Hulke which the Flemins filled
with sagots, pitch, rosin, saltpeter, brimstone, and oil, having set it on
fire, let it floate with the tide, that it might fall among the French and
Hollanders ships, but the wind turning, was carried back in midst of their
own; So the thing which they have h^ve fr^med against the Offi ers hurts them
not, but falls upon their own head.
acquit the Officers, both of flattery and dissimulation; for if they opposed
it (as it is confessed) they did as much as lay in their power, and more they
could not do.. 2. It showed an excellent temper and great moderation in the
Commanders, that howbeit they could not act In alio positum non alia sapere,
di^^^cile est. Bern. in Epist.
yet they would not make any disturbance. It was some addition to David's
victory over the Philistim that he cut off his head with his own Sword. If
their words here be well observed they are clearlie against themselves: for to
this effect they say. The Officers having given the King hopes of restoration,
would willingly had it so, and did what they could that it might be so: but
meeting with too strong a party it could not be: nevertheless they signified
their dislike, and gave their reasons for it, and having thus discharged their
own duty and conscience, concerning all promises and engagements in behalf
of the King, they rested, as being unwilling to make disturbance in the Army or
elsewhere. Now where is this All that they can make of it, is this, they
complied with the King and promised him their assistance, the which they made
good so far as they were able, and tended to the safety of the Nation.
glorious flattery and notorious dissimulation, even our enemies themselves
being Judges. We come now to the last General head, namely, continuing of
free Quarter.

They say, Englands new Chain, page 17.
it being an infinite shame that they should be Such firebrands were Alorns and
Sacrovir, and to move the people to rebellion, spoke to the same purpose.
Igitur per conciliabula and caetus seditiosa disserebant, de continuatione
tributorum, gravitate fenoris, saevitia ac superbia praesidentium and egregium
resu mendae libertati tempus. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. page 97.
suffered to proceed so far therein as they have done there having been no
party hitherto so inexcusable, etc. So that the intentions and ind^avours of
these men to enslave the commonwealth or their continuing of burdens without
any remorse at the dearness of food and the utter loss of trade exceeds in
the nature and measure of it all the wickedness of both other parties p^t
together.

Answ. 1. This is spoken (as may be gathered from the foregoing matter) in
special to the people of the Land, as being to blame that they contribute
toward the maintenance of the Army, but rather rise and resist to increase
and continue their burdens and taxes: and 2. That they may set forward the
sooner in rebellion, they are told that the King and Hollis were not so bad,
nor exercised the oppression and tyranny put both together that these men do.
3. They will make bold with Gods prerogative, La coz de la yegua no haze mal al
potro
search the heart affirming their Though Lapis writes nonsense, and Lilburne
Treason, yet it may be a question whether their intentions were to do so.
intentions are to enslave the Commonwealth: And lastly so far are our
Governors from compassion or fellow-feeling, as they regard not what misery,
hardness, or hardship others suffer. The Country People at Charons Cave near
Naples, for sports sake, pu^ their Dogs into a hole, where they are choke,
with the sulpherous vapors coming forth. Into such a hole these men would
gladly bring the People, choke them with treason: But we hope they will be
better advised and bear some things which for the present cannot be remedied,
rather then become the sport and merriment of a few Incendiari^^ by undo^ing
themselves.

Thus we have done with our Second Part: Other things the Reader may expect
from us speedily, as in Answer to their Agreement of the people, Mr. Mr.
Lilburne promises to show the falsenesse and malignity of our former
Discoverer, in fathering upon him the errors of the Diggers; now we believe he
can better shift that off then the treason and sedition contained in his
Englands new Chain, though he says he will Seal the truth of every line with
his heart blood.
Lilburnes last Book, etc.

FINIS.

