AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IMMODERATE MOVRNING For the DEAD.

Being a Funeral SERMON Preached at the Burial of Mr. THOMAS BEWLEY junior,
December 17th. 1658.

By SA. CLARKE, Pastor in Bennet Fink, LONDON.

Quid interest utrum Febris, an ferrum de corpore solverit: Non qua occasion,
sed quales ad se exeant, Dominus attendit in servis suis. August.

Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days like the
days of an hireling? Job 7. 1.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for George Calvert, at the Half Moon in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1659.

TO HIS Honored and much esteemed Friends Mr. Thomas Bewley, Merchant; AND
Mrs. Mary Bewley, his wife.
Dearly beloved in the Lord:
IT was at your request that I first preached this Sermon; and it is more to
satisfy your desires than mine own, that I now print it. They that know me,
cannot but withal know how backward I have ever been (being conscious to my
own weakness) to publish any of my labors in this kind; and your selves can
bear me witness, that it was my earnest request, that you would have laid this
burden upon abler shoulders, especially having so great choice of godly and
learned Ministers whom you invited to the Funeral: But when you persevered in
your desires and requests to me to undertake it, my chiefest care was to make
choice of such a subject, as (through Gods blessing) might come home to your
hearts, and direct your behavior under so great a burden, as is the loss of
a dear and and only Son. I knew that your affections were strong, and that you
had need of a great deal of heavenly wisdom to enable you to moderate them; and
whence is this wisdom to be learned, but from the sacred Scriptures, which are
richly stored with precious promises, as with so many cordials to revive and
strengthen us in our greatest necessities. Unless thy Law (faith David, meaning
principally the promises contained in it) had been my delights, I should have
perished in mine affliction, Psalm. 119. 92. But as those which are fallen into a
swoon, may be fetched again with hot waters poured down their throats: so they
that are troubled and pressed down under the heavy burden of sorrow and grief,
may by patience and comfort of the Scriptures recover hope and joy.

The Text which God directed me to treat of was both seasonable and suitable to
your present condition; as not only teaching you how to behave your selves
under such an affliction, but holding forth to you sound and sufficient
arguments to persuade and induce you to the practice of the same: I beseech you
therefore to read it over and over again, and remember what the Father said;
these are Verba vivenda, and non legenda solum, words to be lived and
practiced, and not to be read only: Such a sentence it is as a man would fetch
from China upon his bare feet, rather than be without it. Take, I pray you,
your correction as from Gods hand, and humble your selves under the smart of
it: yet withal look to Christ, and entreat him that your Faith, Hope, and
meekness may not be overturned by it, but rather that the affliction may bring
forth Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope. Consider who it
is that has done it: Is he not your heavenly Father? Now if your natural
Father had done some shrewd turn at unawares, by breaking a thing wherein you
much delighted, when you heard that he did it, you would be quiet, though
before you were much moved: Should you not say with Christ? Shall I not drink
of that cup, that my Father will have me to drink of? Remember, I pray you,
what the Apostle suggesteth, Hebr. 12. 9. We have had Fathers of our flesh that
have corrected us, and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of our Spirits, and live? v. 10. For they verily for a
few days chastned us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness.

Consider, I pray you, if God when you were first married should have told you,
I will give you two children, and you shall bring them up so many years, and
then I will take them away again; would you not have accepted gladly of this
offer, and taken it thankfully too? why? the event does tell you no less than
if he had spoken so aforehand, and will you now murmur or repine at his
dispensation? Is not God the chief Father of all the Families in Heaven and
Earth, and we but Foster-parents to our own children under him? Is it not a
mercy that God has made you isntrumental for the enlarging of his Kingdom,
though he has taken both your children from you? Say therefore with Job, The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
At least say with David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord
did it. Oh! labor for good old Eli's temper, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his eyes, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Consider that God who has done it, is
Love, and if you look upon it as an effect of his anger toward you, yet be of
good comfort, that God that would not have sinful man to let the Sun go down
upon his anger, he will not retain his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy, Micha. 7. 18.

But I presume that one thing adds a great sting to your affliction, which is,
that hereby you want an Heir to enjoy your Estate, and to preserve your name:
for all men naturally affect immortality, and because they cannot enjoy it in
themselves, they desire it in their posterity that survives them: But for a
medicine to this malady, remember what the Lord speaks, Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5 Let
not the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. For thus says the Lord to the
Eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, and choose the things that please me, and take
hold of my Covenant; even unto them will I give in my house, and within my
walls, a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters, I will give
tbem an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.

Let me but add one word more, and I have done; Consider what a mercy it is,
that God has given you so many Christian friends that sympathize with you, and
help to bear your burden; so many godly and able comforters to speak a word in
season to your afflicted souls, so many faithful Ministers and Christians that
daily pray for you, and beg of God that he will support you under this heavy
loss, and make it up in some better blessing. Remember, I beseech you, what
our Lord and Savior Christ says, Luke 14. 26. If any one come unto me, and
hates not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.

Now the God of comfort be your comforter, and give you a large measure of
prudence, patience, self-denial, with a full and free resignation of your*self,
to the absolute disposal of the All-wise and All-merciful God, that you may as
well in heart, as in words say, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven,
which is the servent prayer of

From my Study in Thred-needle-street Jan. 14. 1658/9. Your affectionate friend
to love and serve you, S. CLARKE.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Immoderate Mourning for the DEAD.
1 These. 4. 13, 14. But I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with Him.
THe Apostle Paul, by Gods blessing upon his Ministry, had gathered a large
Church in Thessalonica, the chiefest City of Macedonia: For besides that some
of the Jews believed, there were also multitudes of the Greeks, and of the
chief women not a few, that readily entertained the Gospel, and conforted with
Paul and Silas, Act. 17. 4. whereupon the Devil, moved with envy, raised a
great persecution against them by the Jews that dwelt there, and other lewd
fellows of the baser sort that they adjoined to them; upon which occasion Paul
and Silas were forced to fly to Berea, and from thence Paul went to Athens: And
after a while Silas and Timotheus coming to him thither; he, not being
unmindful of his flock that he had left at Thessalonica, sent Timothy to
confirm them in the faith that he before had preached, and they had received.

At Timothy's return to him at Corinth, being informed by him of their estate,
he thought fit and expedient to write to them this Epistle, as appears, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. wherein after the Apostolical salutations, c. 1. v. 1. the
Epistle consists of two principal parts.

In the first, the Apostle endeavors to confirm and strengthen them in the
faith received, to the end of the third Chapter.

From thence to the end of the Epistle, he exhorts them by a Christian
conversation to beautify and adorn their profession; and this he does: First,
in general, chapter 4. v. 1, 2. Secondly, in particular, by persuading them to the
practice of sundry Christian Virtues, and Duties; as,

1. To chastity, v. 3, 4, 5. 2. To justice and equity in all their dealings, v.
6. 3. To brotherly love, v. 9, 10. 4. To a quiet life, and attending their own
businesses, v. 11, 12. 5. To be moderate in their sorrow for their deceased
friends, seeing they shall be raised up again by Christ, v. 13, 14. and
thereupon he takes occasion largely to describe the glory of Christ's coming to
Judgment, and the order of the resurrection of the dead, declaring the
certainty of it, though the time was uncertain, and this he does to the fourth
verse of the fifth Chapter.
In these two verses of my text, the chiefest scope of the Apostle is to
persuade them to keep a mean in their mourning for the dead; wherein are
considerable,

First, the friendly compellation that he uses, Brethren.

Secondly, An information concerning the state of the dead, set down
negatively, I would not have you ignorant, as if he should say, I would have
you well informed of this Doctrine, the knowledge whereof will conduce much to
your comfort.

Thirdly, the end why he was so careful to inform them of it, that they might
not sorrow, as did others which had no hope, viz. as the Heathen did: For
although they believed the immortality of the soul, yet they were never able to
comprehend or believe the resurrection of the bodies, and re-uniting them with
the souls, whereof he speaks in the subsequent verse, as appears, Acts 17. 32.
and 26. 23, etc.

Fourthly, a strong argument to enforce his exhortation for their moderate
mourning for the dead, ver. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, etc.

Thus having heard the occasion and scope of these words, and the principal
parts of the Text, I will make no other curious division of it, but proceed to
show you how many useful observations may be gathered out of these verses: and
First, from the friendly compellation used by the Apostle, Brethren. Whence
note first, that,

All Gods children are brethren; so says Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13. 8. Let there
be no strife, I pray-thee, between Doct.
me and thee, etc. for we are brethren: so Col. 1. 2. 1 These. 5. 26, 27. 1 Timothy
6 2. For

First, they are the adopted children of the same Father, Ephesians. 4. 6.

Secondly, they are born of the same mother, the Church, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Thirdly, They are brought up in the same Family, Ephesians. 3. 15.

Fourthly, They are nourished with the same food, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Fifthly, They have all the same inheritance, Romans 8. 17.

Secondly, Again, consider who it is that calls them brethren, the Apostle
Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and a man endowed with more then
ordinary gifts and graces: and who they were that he calls Brethren; the lately
converted Thessalonians: most of them of mean rank, and mean gifts, in
comparison of him: whence note,

They which have the greatest gifts and graces bestowed upon them by God, must
not superciliously overlook Doct.
those which are meaner and weaker then themselves, but must own them for, and
acknowledge them to be Brethren Hence, 1 Cor. 4. 7. who makes thee to differ
from another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it?

Thirdly, in that the Apostle was so careful to inform them of this comfortable
truth; Observe,

Gods Ministers must be careful to inform their people of all such saving
truths as may conduce to their edification Doct.
and comfort: that when they come to leave their people, they may be able to
say with the Apostle, Act. 20. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God.

Fourthly, It seems that till now the Thessalonians were ignorant of these
things which made them to over-sorrow for their dead. Hence observe:

Ignorance of the blessed estate of the Saints departed Doct.
is the cause of excessive mourning for them.

Fifthly, Paul speaking of the dead, says, They were asleep, Hence observe:

The death of the righteous is but a sweet sleep: so it Doct.
is often called in Scripture. Christ speaking of dead Lazarus, says, Our
friend Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11. 11. with 14. and when Stephen was stoned to
death, its said, that he fell asleep, Act. 7. 60. and in these two verses of my
Text, Paul twice calls it a sleep: and hence the grave is called a Bed, Isa.
572. and the Greeks called it (...) a Dormitory, or sleeping place.

Sixthly. I would not have you sorrow as do others, etc. He does not say, I
would not have sorrow at all: For, its a duty to mourn for the dead: For as a
reverend and learned Doctor says, sorrow and lamentation is the Dr, Tuck
dues of the dead. It is fit that the body, when its sown in corruption, should
be watered with the tears of them that plant it in the earth, and to be without
natural affections is an Heathenish sin, Romans 1. 31. and one of those that make
these later times perilous, 2 Timothy 3. 3. From whence we may observe:

Its lawful to mourn and sorrow upon the death of our Doct.
friends and relations. Our Lord Christ himself wept at the death of Lazarus,
Joh. 11. 35. And the Church made great lamentation for Stephen, Act. 8. 2. And
the widows wept for Dorcas, Act. 9. 39. And Paul sorrowed when Epaphroditus
was deadly sick, Phil. 2. 27.

Seventhly, As do others that have no hope, i. e. as the Heathen do, which are
ignorant of these things* Hence,

The Heathen use to be immoderate in their mourning for the dead; becaue they
want a hope of the present Doct.
blessedness of their souls, and the future resurrection of their bodies.
Forbidden Gods people, Lev. 19. 27, 28.

Eighthly, But I would not have you do so, says the Apostle. Hence,

Christians which know these things must be moderate Doct.
in their mourning.

Ninthly, Verse. 14. For if we believe, that Jesus died and rose again, etc.
Hence observe, first;

The resurrection of Christ's body from the dead is a sure and certain pledge
and evidence of the resurrection Doct.
of out bodies: So the holy Apostle Paul makes it, 1 Cor. 15. 12, etc. If
Christ be preached, that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that
there is no resurrection of the dead: But if there be no resurrection of the
dead, then Christ is not risen: and verse 20. But now is Christ risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept, etc.

Tenthly, Even so them also which sleep in Jesus. Hence observe.

That the bodies of the Saints departed sleep in the arms of Jesus: He takes
care of all the bones, yea, of Doct.
the very dust of his Saints, that none of it shall be wanting when he comes to
raise their bodies again at the last day. Our bodies, even whilst they lie in
the grave, are members of Christ; and therefore its no marvel, though he takes
such care of them.

Eleventhly, Will God bring with him. Whence I gather.

That when Christ shall come to judgment, then shall the resurrection of our
bodies be: This is an Article of Doct.
our faith. It was typified by the budding and blossoming of Aarons dry rod: By
Jonas deliverance out of the belly of the Fish, where he had been three days
and three nights. It was believed by the Patriarchs of old, Heb. 11. 13. And
its an infallible truth, that these bodies of ours that are sown in corruption,
shall be raised in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 42. And for our further security,
Enoch before the flood, and Elijah after the flood, were taken into heaven in
their bodies.

Neither indeed is this contrary to reason, though it be above the reach of
reason: For why cannot Christ as well raise a body out of the dust, as at first
he made it out of the dust? especially considering that the soul is preserved
in heaven for this very end, to be joined to the body again. This Job was
confident of, Job 19. 26, 27. Though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh I shall see God, etc. Nay, its not contrary to the course of
nature: For we yearly see that the resurrection of the Spring succeeds the dead
Winter, the day the night: and thou fool, the corn that thou sowest, is not
quickened, except it die, says Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 36. and the same Apostle tells
us, Romans 8. 11. That if the Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
us, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall quicken our mortal bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in us. Besides, Christ is the second Adam, and as we did
bear the image of the first Adam in corruption, so we must bear the Image of
the second Adam in glory, 1 Cor. 15 22. 45, 49.

Twelfthly, But that which is the principal thing that I intend to insist on is
a Doctrine held forth to us in the latter end of the fourteenth verse, That ye
sorrow not as do others that have no hope: Whence,

A well-grounded hope of the happiness of our friends deceased should moderate
our mourning for Doct.
them. This (without question) moderated Abraham's mourning for Sarah. Mourn
indeed he did, for the text says, Genesis 23. 2. that Sarah died -- and Abraham
came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her; but that he kept a mean in his
mourning, appears by the next words, v. 3, 4. And Abraham stood up from before
his dead, and bespake a burying place to bury his dead out of his sight; and
this he did, that the object being removed, his sorrow might be mitigated. This
also moderated Joseph's and the Israelites mourning for Jacob, Genesis 50. 1. where
it is said, that Joseph fell upon his fathers face, (when he died) and wept
upon him, and kissed him: and verse. 10. its said, that Joseph and the
Israelites made a mourning for him seven days: but v. 3. Its said, that the
Egyptians (who mourned as men without hope) mourned for him threescore and ten
days. This also moderated David's mourning for his child, 2 Samuel 12. 23. Now he
is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me: And this was Martha's comfort, when her
dear Brother Lazarus was dead, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day, Joh. 11. 24.

In the prosecution of this Point, I shall show you, First, what is meant by a
well-grounded hope. Secondly, Wherein the happiness of our friends departed in
the Lord, consists. Thirdly, why the consideration of these things should put a
mean to our mourning for them. Fourthly; I will answer some objections that may
be made against it. And fifthly, make application of it.

For the first:

What do you call a well-grounded hope? Quest.


I use this Epithet, to distinguish it from that ill-grounded Answ.
hope wherewith so many do delude themselves. as

First, because their friends were born of Christian Parents, Baptized, and
brought up in the Church.

Secondly, Because they had gotten some knowledge, and made an outward
profession of Religion.

Thirdly, because they used to attend upon the public ordinances, and that
with some seeming devotion.

Fourthly, Because they were free from gross sins, and dealt justly with every
man.

Fifthly, Because they enjoyed outward peace and prosperity, the Sun of God
shining upon their Tabernacles.

Sixthly, Because they died quietly like lambs, and it may be, went out of the
world with some good words in their mouths, Psalm. 73. 4, 5. There are no bands
in their death, but their strength is firm; they are not in trouble as other
men. From these and such like weak grounds, they presume that their friends
after death must needs go to heaven, and therefore they comfort themselves, and
one another with these words: whereas the truth is, they may go to Hell after
all these things. Our Savior Christ tells us, Matt. 5. 20. that except our
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And these men are so far
from exceeding, that they come short of the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who were frequent in Alms-deeds, in prayer, in fasting, Mat. 6. 2.
5. 16. and yet Christ calls them hypocrites. Yea, they made long prayers,
Matthew. 23. 14. they compassed Sea and land to make one Proselyte, v. 15. they
paid even their smallest tithes, v. 23. They outwardly appeared righteous unto
men: v. 28. they blamed their fathers for murdering the Prophets, and by way
of compensation to free themselves from the guilt, they built Tombs for those
Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the righteous, v. 29. 30.
notwithstanding all which, Christ pronounces many woes against them.

Thus we see what are ill-grounded hopes, which prove but like a spiders web to
those that trust in them. I shall therefore in the next place show you what is
a well-grounded hope of the happiness of our friends departed, which consists
in this:

When our deceased friends have in their lifetime given us some good evidence
of the work of grace and sanctification wrought in their hearts, whereby we
could discern that, by Gods blessing upon the means, their eyes were opened,
that they were turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God: For then we may conclude, that they have received forgiveness of their
sins and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith that is in
Christ, Act. 26. 18.

But this work of grace being inward and secret, how shall we be able to judge
of it? Object.


Our Savior Christ gives us a rule for our direction in judging of others,
Mat. 7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Ye shall know Ans.
them (says he) by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? even so every good tree brings forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can
a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit: wherefore by their fruits ye shall know
them. From whence we may gather, that as wicked men, for the most part, may be
known by their wicked lives; so gracious persons may be known by their gracious
lives. For its as easy to carry fire in our bosom, or oil in our hands
without discovery, as grace in our hearts without the manifestation of it.

Now many signs might be given, whereby we may judge of the work of grace in
others, but I shall content my self for the present with these three.

First, if living with them, we observe that they make conscience of, and
practice private and secret duties as well as public. Hypocrites when they do
duties, do all to be seen of men, that they may have glory of men, Matthew. 6. 2.
5. 16. and therefore in their very private prayers they love to make them in
the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, v. 5. they have Jacobs
voice, but Esaus hands: the Lord indeed is much in their mouths, but far from
their reins, Jer. 12. 2. they lay claim to Christ, but yet have no share in
him: they deeply affirm of him, but have no manner of right to him: their faith
is but fancy, their confidence but presumption; they are like the mad man at
Athens that laid claim to every ship that came into the Harbor, when he had no
part in any; Like Haman, that hearing the King would honor a man, concluded
(but falsely) that himself was the man: or like Sisera that dreamed of a
Kingdom, whereas Jaels nail was nearer his temples then a crown: and thus they
deceive themselves with their shows, and think to deceive others; but Gods
children can usually discern them, and discover them to be like Harpyes that
are said to have Virgins faces, but Vulturs talons: but on the contrary, a
sound-hearted Christian, though he dare not neglect, yea, though he prefer the
public, yet he also makes conscience of private duties, and prays to his
Father in secret; so that if we observe this in them, its one good ground that
they have the work of regeneration wrought in their hearts.

Secondly, if we observe them, that they labor to keep a conscience void of
offense both toward God, and toward men, as Saint Paul professes that he
did, Act. 24. 16. If they have had respect to all Gods commandments, as David,
Psalm. 119. 6. If they have made conscience of the duties of both Tables,
serving God in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives, Luke
1. 75. hiring themselves unto him for term of life, not desiring to change
their Master, knowing that they cannot mend themselves neither for fairness of
work, nor fullness of wages, whereas an Hypocrite is versutulus and versatilis,
he casts about how to deceive God and man with mere shows of devotion, being
not afraid to be damned, so he may seem to be saved, and seeking so long to
deceive others, that in fine he deceives his own soul. Imposturam faciunt and
patiuntur, as that Emperor said of them that sold glass beads for pearl. They
deceive, and are deceived.

Thirdly, when we have heard them groaning and mourning under the remainders of
corruption, and the relicts of sin, crying out with the holy Apostle, Rom 7.
24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
When they have manifested their hatred against all sin, and shunned every evil
way, saying with the wisest of men, Prove. 8. 13. the fear of the Lord is to
hate evil; pride, and arrogance, and every evil way do I hate: whereas a
dispensatory conscience is a naughty conscience: Neither does he Gods will, but
his own, that does no more nor no other then himself pleases, as hypocrites
use; such holiday servants God cares not for. Every one can swim in a warm
Bath, and every bird will sing in a Summers-day. Judas will bear the Cross, so
he may bear the bag: and the carnal Capernaits will follow Christ for the
loaves, though not for love, Joh. 6. 26. But Abraham will forsake all to follow
God, though he know not whither yea though God seems to go a cross way, as when
he promised him a land flowing with milk and honey; and yet so soon as he came
there, he met with a famine, Genesis 12. 10.

If then you have observed these three things in your Christian friends whilst
they lived, you may have a well-grounded hope of their blessedness after
death, which, sure, cannot but moderate your mourning for them.

But wherein consists the happiness of our friends who are departed in the
Lord? Quest.


I shall show this in two particulars:

First, in the evils that they are freed from by death Answ.


Secondly, In the good things that they are put into the present possession of:
so that their happiness is both privative and positive.

What are the evils that they are freed from by death? Quest.


They may be reduced to these seven heads.

First, They are freed from worldly cares, businesses, Answ.
and troubles. For its Gods institution since the fall, that every one shall
live, either by the sweat of his brain, or by the sweat of his brow. And
Eliphaz tells us, that man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Job 5.
7. and the Apostle tells us, that he that cares not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. So then whilst we live here, we cannot be free
from multiplicity of cares, businesses, and troubles. The world is like a
tempestuous Sea, where troubles succeed one another, as one wave follows
another.

-- Dolor and voluptas
Invicem cedunt, brevior voluptas.
Joy and sorrow (as one wittily says) make chequered work in our lives: Sorrow
bedews our cheeks with Dr. S^ought
tears, and joy wipes them off again. Our condition in this life is not unlike
to that of the Israelites in the wilderness, where they met with many
troubles, dangers, and occasions of sorrow. Are we hurt then, if by a tempest
of sickness we are driven out of the Sea of this world into the safe harbor
of the grave, the only place where the weary are at rest, Job 3. 17. where
they enter into peace, and rest in their beds, Isa. 57. 2. For which cause
amongst others, they are pronounced blessed by God himself, Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord -- for they rest from their labors.
Indeed the messenger of death is to most men and women very terrible; but to a
dying believer, then acting faith, its nothing so, but its entertained by him
as a welcome messenger sent from the Father to a child at nurse, to bring it
home, where it shall be better provided for, whilst it transmits him from all
his cares and sorrows into that place and state of bliss where all tears
shall be wiped from his eyes, and he shall never forrow more, Revel. 21. 4.

Secondly, they are freed from the company and society of the wicked, which
(whilst they lived) was a cause of much sorrow to them, and that

First, because of their sins, which were a continual grief to their godly
hearts. Hence David professes, that Rivers of waters ran down his eyes,
because men kept not Gods Law, Psalm, 119. 136. and the Apostle Peter tells us
that just Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. For (says
he) that righteous man dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8 Gods
children are so tender of their Fathers honor, that they cannot see, or hear
his Name blasphemed, his truths adulterated, his Sabbaths profaned, his
Ministers, and Ordinances despised, etc. but it goes like so many daggers to
their hearts, neither can they be free from such occasions of sorrow whilst
they continue in this wicked world, death only removes such objects of grief
from them.

Secondly, Because of the wrongs, injuries, and persecutions which they meet
with from them These Goats will be pushing at Christ's Sheep: sometimes wounding
them in their good names: sometimes wronging them in their estates: and
othersometimes raising greater persecutions against them. For the Apostle tells
us, that this is the portion of all Gods children in this life; All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. and our
Savior Christ tells his Disciples, that the time should come, that whosoever
killed them should think that he did God service, Joh. 16. 2. Thus Cain
persecuted Abel: Ismael, Isaac: yea, which of the Prophets or Apostles did not
the wicked of their times persecute? This made David to cry out, Woe is me that
I fojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. My soul has long
dwelt with him that hates peace, Psalm. 120. 5, 6. But now in the grave the
wicked cease from troubling. There the prisoners rest together, and hear not
the voice of the oppressor, Job 3. 17, 18.

Thirdly, Death frees them from evils to come, God herein dealing as Parents
use, who have children forth at nurse or at school, when troubles or dangerous
diseases come into those places where their children are, they send for them
home, that they may be in safety. So God many times takes his children out of
this world, that he may secure them from imminent dangers: Or as when our
houses are in danger of firing, we remove our treasure and jewels in the first
place into places of more security: So where God wrath, s like fire, is
breaking in upon a place, he removes his children to heaven, as to a place of
greater safety. Its the fathers love and care (says one) then hastily to
snatch away his child, when the wild Bull is now broken loose, and running Dr.
Tuckney
upon him. The wise Husbandman hastens to get in his corn before the storm
comes, or the swine be turned out into the field to root up all. This is that
which the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah long since assured us of, Isa. 57. 1. The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
As it was a sign that Sampson meant to pull down the house upon the heads of
the Philistines when he pulled down the Pillars that bare up the roof: So its a
shrewd sign that God intends to ruin a State, when he takes away those that
were the Pillars and props of it. When Methusala died, the flood came upon the
old world: when Josias was gathered to his Fathers, the Babylonish captivity
hastened. When S. Augustine died, Hippo was taken and sacked by the Vandals, and
Heidleburg by the Spaniards, shortly after the death of Pareus.

Fourthly, Death frees them from all sicknesses, Diseases, pains, and all other
bodily distempers. It cures the blind eyes, the deaf ears, the dumb tongue, the
lame legs, the maimed hands, etc. It eases the tormenting stone, the painful
gout, the aching head, the intolerable twisting of the guts, the loathsome
strangury, etc. Death to the godly is the best Physician, it cures them not of
one disease, but of all, and of all at once, and of all for ever; yea it cures
them of death it self.

Fifthly, it frees them from the fiery darts and temptations of Satan, from
which they cannot be free whilst they live here: For the whole world is the
Devils Diocese: He goes to and fro in the earth, and walks up and down in
it, Job. 1. 7. yea, as a roaring lion he walks about, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. No place can exempt us from his tentations whilst we live
in this world. He assaulted Adam in Paradise, Lot in the Cave, David in his
Palace: Josuah the high Priest, in the presence of the Angel of the Lord;
Christ in the wilderness; Peter in the High Priests hall, etc. But when Death
comes, these Egyptians which you have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever, Exodus 14. 13. Satan shall never more molest Gods children after
this life is ended. Hence, says Saint Ambrose, Diabolus per quod potestatem
habuit, victus est. The Devil, who had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. has by
death his power abrogated and abolished.

Sixthly, Death frees them from Gods frowns, which sin often exposes them to
here, and which to a child of God is more terrible than death it self: For if
in Gods favor is life, as David affirms, Psalm. 30. 5. then in his frowns is
death.: yea, if Gods loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63. 3. then his
frowns are worse than death. There are no outward or corporal afflictions, but
a resolute and Roman spirit will stand under them: the spirit of a man will
sustain his infirmity, Prove. 18. 14. but the frowns of God and tokens of his
displeasure are intolerable: A wounded spirit who can bear? It made David roar,
Psalm. 32. 3. Hezekiah chatter, Isa. 38. 14. yea Christ himself to sweat drops
of congealed blood, and to cry out in the anguish of his soul, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? But after death the light of Gods countenance shines
perpetually upon them, and shall never admit either of a cloud or Eclipse: when
Lazarus died, he who lay grovelling at the rich man's gate, was found in Abraham's
bosom, in a place of warmest love. For seeing by Death Gods children are freed
from corruptions, therefore after death they have no need of Gods frowns, or
corrections.

Seventhly, Death frees them from the very being and existence of sin. At
death, the spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb, 12. 23. The death of
their body delivers them from the body of death. Death and sin do not meet in a
child of God; but so part, that when the one comes, the other is gone for ever:
As when Sampson died, the Philistines died with him: so when a child of God
dies, all his sins die with him. Hence Ambrose says, Quid est mors, nisi
peccatorum sepultura? what is death but the grave of our sins wherein they are
all buried? Thus death does that at once which grace does by degrees. Grace
indeed when it is once wrought in the heart, under the conduct of the spirit,
it resists and fights against sin, and gives it such mortal wounds that it
never fully recovers again: It dejects it from its regency, but cannot eject it
from its inherency. It frees us from the reigning of sin, but cannot free us
from the remaining of sin: After regeneration sin has not dominion over us:
But yet there is a law in our members warring against the law of our minds, and
many times leading us captive unto the law of sin that is in our members, so
that we cannot do the good that we would; but the evil that we hate, that do
we, Romans 7. 19. 23. But when death comes, it wholly extirpates sin, root and
branch; and not one, or some few sins, but all sin; and that not for a time
only, but for ever: when the souls of Gods children are dis-lodged from their
bodies, this troublesome and incroaching inmate shall be dis-lodged and thrust
out of doors for ever. Hence one says, Peccatum peperit mortem, and filia
devoravit matrem. Sin at first begat and brought forth death, and death at last
destroys sin, as the worm kills the tree that bred it. And as Bernard says,
Death which before was porta inferni, the trap-door of Hell, is now introitus
Regni, the porch that lets us into heaven. And Mr. Brightman says, what was
before the Devils Sergeant to drag us to hell, is now the Lords Gentleman Usher
to conduct us to heaven.

Thus I have showed you in these seven particulars what are the evils that Gods
children are freed from by death: Now in the next place I will endeavor to
show you the privileges that at death they are invested in, and the good
things that they are put into the present possession of: But yet this must be
premised, that if I had the tongue and pen of men and Angels, yet should I come
far short of that which I aim at: For whatsoever can be said of heaven, is not
one half (as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's magnificence) of what we shall
find in that City of Pearl. To express it (says a reverend Divine) is as
impossible as to compass heaven with a span, or to contain the Ocean in a
nutshel. And Chrysostom speaking of the happiness of the Saints in heaven,
says, Sermo non valet exprimere, experimento opus est: words cannot express
it; we must have trial of it before we can know it. But yet that which I shall
say of it is contained in these six particulars.

First, Death invests Gods children with perfection of all graces. Here we know
but in part, we prophecy but in part: But when that which is perfect, is come,
then that which is in part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. It Is true,
when God first regenerates and sanctifies us, we have perfection of parts,
there is no grace wanting that is necessary to life and salvation: For God does
none of his works by the halves: But yet we attain not to perfection of degrees
till death comes: whilst we live here we are exhorted to add grace to grace, 2
Pet. 1 5, 6, 7. and one degree of grace to another. We are commanded to grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of eur Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
To make a daily progress, till we come unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. But yet when we have done all that we can,
our faith is mixed with doubtings, our love to God with love of the world: our
tears in repentance need washing in the blood of Christ; our humility is mixed
with pride; our patience with murmurings, and all our other graces have defects
in them: But in death they are all perfected, and thereby we are put into a far
better condition than we were capable of in this life.

Secondly, Death puts the Saints into the present possession of Heaven, a
stately place, into which there never did, or can enter any unclean thing: No
dirty dog ever trampled upon this golden pavement. It Is called Rev. 21. 2^.
Paradise, Luke 23. 43. Indeed Paradise which God made for Adams palace (though
the stateliest place that ever the eye of mortal man beheld, wherein was a
confluence of all earthly felicities) was but a type and shadow of it. Heaven
is a large place. In my fathers house (says our Savior) there are many
mansions, Joh. 14. 2. Its a golden City, having the glory of God in it, and her
light like to a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as
Crystal: and the wall of it is of Jasper: and the City is pure gold, clear as
glass, the foundations of the wall are garnished with all manner of precious
stones, and the City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it; for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof,
Rev. 21. 11, 19, 23. It Is a City whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 1. 10.
and therefore having such an Architect, it must needs infinitely transcend the
stateliest Fabrics that were ever made by man. It has been near these six
thousand years in preparing, Matt. 25. 34. and Christ, ever since his
ascension, has been further preparing of it for us, Joh. 14. 2. I go (says
he) to prepare a place for you. Let us say therefore, as Fulgentius did, when
he saw the Roman Nobility mounted in their pride and bravery. Si talis sit Roma
terrestris, qualis est Roma coelestis? If Rome be such a glorious and
glittering place, what is Heaven? How should these considerations make us to
grow weary of the world, and groan and breath after heaven, where are riches
without rust, pleasure without pain, joy without sorrow, youth without decay,
Ubi totum sit quod velis, and nihil sit quod nolis: where is all that the heart
of man can wish, and his mind desire; where is nothing more that can be
desired, nothing more than can be desired. If an Heathen could say, Fugiendum
est ad clarissimam patriam; ibi pater, ibi omnia: How much more should a
Christian say, Let us flee apace to our own Country that is above, since there
is our Father; yea, there is all that heart can wish, or need require.

Thirdly, a third privilege wherewith all the Saints departed are invested,
is, that they have immediate fellowship with the blessed Angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 22, 23. In heaven they enjoy
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, and all the Prophets,
and Apostles, and the noble army of Martyrs, their godly friends and relations
which went before them, and all other the true members of Jesus Christ, of what
Tongue, or Nation, or Kindred soever they have been. One of the greatest
happinesses which the godly enjoy in this world, is the Communion of Saints.
The Prophet David professes that all his delight was in the Saints, and in
those that were most excellent, Psalm. 16. 3 and though he was a King, yet made
he himself a companion of all them that feared God, and of them that kept his
Precepts, Psalm. 119. 63. He would have such, and none but such, by his good
will, about him. Mine eyes (says he) shall be upon the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve
me, Psalm. 101. 6. And yet, by woeful experience we see how many bones of
contention the Devil casts in amongst them to sour their society, and what
breaches many times are occasioned by small and trifling matters: But in heaven
they are all of one mind, which makes their society the more comfortable. When
Grinaeus lay on his death bed, he told some friends that came to visit him,
that he was going to that place, Ubi Luthero cum Zuinglio optime convenit:
where Luther and Zuinglius (who because they differed in judgment about the
manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, could never agree on earth) agreed
excellent well. In heaven (if there be degreesof glory, as probably there are)
yet shall not those who have their choicest graces crowned with the greatest
weight of glory, despise or overlook the meanest Saint, but they are perfectly
knit together in the bonds of dearest love.

Fourthly, Another privilege which our Christian friends departed enjoy in
heaven, is, that they are neerlier united to their Head Christ than possibly
they could be in this world. It Is true, that even whilst they live here, they
are the members of Christ. For the holy Apostle tells us, that as we have many
members in one body -- so we being many are one body in Christ, Romans 12. 4. 5.
yet are we now at a great distance from him. Our head is in heaven, and we upon
the earth, and therefore Saint Paul tells us, that whilst we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6. and this makes us sigh and
groan, not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality
might be swallowed up of life, verse. 4. And this made the Church to pray so
pathetically, Cant. 8. 14. Make have, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or
to a young Heart upon the mountains of Spices. And Paul himself considering his
distance from his Head, cties out:

Dis cupio solvi, tecumque O Christ, manner.

Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is (...); by
much far the better. And no marvel, though the members do so long to be
conjoined with their Head in heaven. For there (as one says excellently) the
Lord Jesus Christ perpetually and without intermission manifests the most
glorious and visible signs of his presence, and seals of his love: He there
pours forth all the plenteous demonstrations of his goodness to his members,
and gives them eyes to see it, and minds to conceive it, and so fills them with
exceeding fullness of love to him again; so that they even swim in pleasure,
and are overwhelmed with joy. A joy too big to enter into them; and therefore
they are said to enter into it, Matthew. 25. 21. A glory fitter to be believed,
than possibly to be discoursed: An exceeding, excessive, eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Such a weight, that if the body were not upheld by the
mighty power of God, it were impossible but that it should faint under it. Oh
therefore let there be continual ascensions in our hearts thitherward. Let us
lift up our hearts with our hands to our head in heaven. Praying with the
Church, Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and then ere long he will send
his chariots for us Rev. 22. 20.
(as Joseph did for his Father) and will fetch us riding upon the clouds, and
convoy us by his Angels through the air, and put us into that general assembly
of happy and blessed souls; and though death (like Peter's good Angel) smite
thee on thy side, yet it is only that it may Dr. Hall.
lead thee out of thy prison, through the Iron gates into the City of God.

Fifthly, the next privilege which the Saints enjoy in death, is the
beatifical Vision. Here indeed they see God in a measure, as they are able: but
there they shall see him in all fullness, and perfection. Here as in a Glass
obscurely, or as an old man through spectacles, (...); But in Heaven they see
him face to face: now they know him in part: but there they know, even as they
are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Happier herein than Solomon's servants, for a greater
than Solomon is there. God looks upon them with singula complacency, and they
look upon him with infinite comfort. I cannot better express the happiness
which the Saints enjoy in this beatifical Vision than in the words of a
reverend and learned Doctor. The Saints in heaven, (says he) that delight in
the sight of Gods glory, do still desire for ever to be so delighted; their
desire is Dr. Reynold.
without anxiety and trouble, because they are satiated with the thing that
they do desire, and their satiety is without loathing, because they still
desire the thing with which they are satiated. They desire without grief,
because they are replenished; and they are replenished without weariness,
because they desire still: they see God, and still they desire to see him: they
enjoy God, and still they desire for ever to enjoy him: they love and praise
God, and still they make it their immortal business to love and praise him.

Et quem semper habent, sempere haber volunt.
Whom they for ever have, with love yet higher*
To have for ever they do still desire.
Sixthly and lastly, our friends departed in the Lord, enjoy all these and more
than can be spoken; yea such things as neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive of unto all eternity:
hence the Prophet David tells us, Psalm. 16. 11. -- In thy presence is fullness
of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore; where is as
much said in a few words as can be spoken of it. For quality, there is in
heaven joy and pleasure; for quantity, a fullness, Mr. Trapp.
a torrent, whereat the Saints drink without let or loathing: For constancy, it
is at Gods right hand, who is stronger then all, neither can any take us out of
his hand: It Is a constant happiness without intermission: and for perpetuity,
it is for evermore: Heavens joys are without measure, mixture, or end. And the
Apostle Paul tells us, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. -- we shall ever be with the Lord. It is
granted by all, that one of the greatest aggravations of the torments of the
damned in hell, is the thought of the eternity of their torment: and therefore
it follows by the rule of contraries, that it shall much heighthen the felicity
and joy of the Saints in heaven, to think that they shall continue to all
eternity.

But why should these considerations moderate our mourning for them? Quest.


First, because if our friends died in the Lord, they have lost nothing by
death, but what may well be spared, viz. Answ.
sin and sorrow: we use not to mourn for such losses of our friends, which are
but small and inconsiderable, especially if it be of such things as are better
lost than found: but such are the losses of our Christian friends departed. Is
it not better to lose sin and sorrow than to retain them? and upon this account
it is, that the wisest of men, Solomon tells us, Eccles. 7. 1. -- that the day
of death is better than the day of ones birth. The Greeks call the beginning of
man's nativity, the begetting of his misery. Man that is born of a woman, is
born to trouble, Job 14. 1. If he lives to see the light, he comes crying into
the world: A fletu vitam auspicatur, says Seneca; and Saint Augustine speaking
hereof, says, Nondum loquitur, and tamen prophetat: Ere ever a child speaks,
he prophesies by his tears, of his ensuing sorrows: Nec prius natus, quam
damnatus; No sooner is he born, but he is condemned to the Galleys, as it were
of sin and suffering: and therefore in this Text Solomon prefers his Coffin
before his Cradle; whereupon one infers, One would wonder (says he) that our
life here being so grievously afflicted, should yet be so inordinately
affected; and yet so it is, that God is even forced to smoke us out of our
clayie cottages, and to make our life to be unto us no better then a lingering
death, that we may grow weary of it, and breath after a better.

Secondly, Because they are not only not losers, but they are great gainers by
death: they are immediately put into a far better condition than they were
capable of in this life. The day of death is to them the daybreak of eternal
righteousness. It gives them malorum ademptionem, bonorum adeptionem, freedom
from all evil, and the fruition of all good. And as it is not a loss but a
preferment and honor for a married woman to forsake her own kindred and
fathers house to go to her husband; so it is not a loss, but a preferment for
the souls of our friends for a time to relinquish their bodies, that they may
go to Christ, who has married them to himself for ever. Hence our Savior
Christ comforts the dying thief upon the Cross with this: This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. why then should we so mourn for them,
seeing our loss is their gain? they are indeed absent from us, but it is that
they may be present with the Lord: they have put off the old rags of mortality,
that they may be clothed with immortality: they have parted with flesh and
blood, that so they may be in a capacity of inheriting the Kingdom of Heaven,
1 Cor. 15. 50. Justi vivunt (says Saint Augustine) etiam quando corpore
moriuntur. Godly men live even when their bodies die. They are not lost, but
laid up: our grief therefore should not exceed, either for measure or
continuance. I would not have you sorrow even as others that have no hope.

We mourn not for them, but for our own loss: for the loss of their sweet
society, and of all the Object.
comfort that we expected in and by them?

Truly, for this we may mourn: weep not for me, (says Christ to those good
women that followed him to his Answ.
Cross) but weep for your selves: Yet always remember, that though there be
reason for weeping and sorrow, yet there is no reason for excessive and
immoderate mourning: For that is a sin, and there is no reason, because God
has taken away our friends and relations, that therefore we should further
provoke him by sinning against him. Immoderate mourning is a cha^ging of God
foolishly: so did not Job, though he rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and
fell down upon the ground, yet it was not through impatience, but to worship
God; For the text says, In all this Job sinned not, nor changed God foolishly,
Job 1. 20. with 22. It was Jacob fault, that he refused to be comforted, and
said, For I will go down into the grave, unto my son, mourning: Sorrow indeed
and lamentation are the dues of the dead; but it ought not Genesis 37. 35.
to exceed either for measure or duration: neither should we mourn so much for
our friends departed, as for our sins against God.

But our child that is snatched away by death, was young, and might have lived
not only to have been a Object.
great comfort to us, and the staff of our old age, but very instrumental to
Gods glory.

First, we must not take upon us to be wiser than God, or to teach him, as when
to give us children, so how long Answ.
to continue them unto us. It Is his Royal Prerogative, that He may do with his
own what he pleases. They are not so much our children as Gods, Ezekiel. 16. 21.
He does but put them forth to us to nurse, and may send for them home when he
pleases. We who are parents would not take it well if having set forth a child
to nurse, when we send for it home, the nurse should refuse to part with it,
and grow into impatiency when we take it away. Neither can God take it well at
our hands.

Secondly, Was your child young when he died? Yet remember that it was Gods
mercy to spare him so long. For life is not long enough to deserve the title of
time, Eccles. 3. 2. There is a time to be born, and a time to die: He does not
say, There is a time to be born, and a time to live. Death borders upon our
births, and (as one says) Our Cradles stand in our graves.

Multos ostendunt terris bona fata, nec ultra
Esse sinunt -- finisque ab origin pendet.
God deals with some, as a skilful Limner does with his Masterpiece, brings
it, and sets it forth to be gazed at and admired by the multitude; and after a
while draws a curtain over it, and carries it back into his house again: so
God sends some whom he endows with admirable parts to be looked upon, and
wondered at by the world, and then draws the sable curtain of Death over them,
and takes them into his own habitation in heaven. Indeed the longest liver has
but a short cut from the grave of the womb, to the womb of the grave. Orimur,
morimur, we are born, we die. And considering the frailty of our lives, it is no
marvel that we die so soon; it is rather a marvel that we escaped so long. For
Mors ubique nos expectat: Death waits for us at every turn: In the fields, in
the streets, in our houses, in our beds, etc. Mill modis morimur; we come but
one way into the world, but we may go out a thoufand ways.

Thirdly, Did your child die young? yet if he was ripe for heaven, he lived
till he was old enough. Hierom says of a godly young man, that in brevi vitae
spatio tempora virtutum multa replevit, He lived long in a little time. And
indeed some live more in a month or two, then others do in many years. A good
man (says reverend Doctor Preston) prolongs his days, though he dies young,
because he is ripe before he is taken from the tree: He even falls into the
hands of God that gathers him. They that die soon in Gods fear and favor,
though as grapes they be gathered before they be ripe; and as lambs slain
before they be grown up, yet (besides the happiness of heaven) they have this
advantage, that they be freed from the violence of the wine press that others
fall into, and escape many rough storms that others meet with.

Fourthly, Did God take away your dear relation whilst he was young? What then?
Has God any where promised that all shall live till they be old? Is not
mortality the stage of mutability? Does not experience show us, that man is but
the dream of a dream: but an empty vanity, but the curious picture of nothing,
but a poor feeble dying flash? In Golgotha there are skulls of all sizes.
Bernard tells us, Senibus mors in januis, adolescentibus in insidiis: Death
stands at old men's doors, and it lies in wait to surprise young men also. It Is
like lightning, that blasts the green corn as well as the dry: like the
thunderbolt that dasheth in pieces new and strong buildings as well as old. Do
you not know that, as for our lands, so for our lives, we are but Gods tenants
at will? Man's life is his day: and we see by experience that days are not all
of a length; but some longer, some shorter. Death is the Lady and Empress of
all the World; and from her sentence the youngest cannot appeal. As the Rivers
haste to the Sea, and the Stars to the West, so man hastens to the grave. It Is
Domus Conventionis, the House of Parliament, where all estates and ages meet
together.

Hence it is that we are exhorted to gather Manna in the morning of our lives:
To remember our Creator in the days of our youth, Eccles. 12. 1. To present
our first fruits to God, whose soul desires the first ripe fruits, Micah 7. 1.
and who will remember the kindness of our youth, the love of our esponsals,
Jer. 2. 2. He would be served with the Primrose of our years, and therefore he
made choice of the Almond-tree, Jer. 1. 11. because it blossometh first of all
others; and truly we have reason to obey his precepts, and answer his
expectation, if we rightly consider the brevity of our lives.

Must we keep a mean in our mourning for our deceased friends? This then may
exhort and persuade Use.
parents to be careful in training up their children in the faith and fear of
God, in bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.
4. and to labor to promote and see the work of grace in their souls, that so
if they die before them (as oft-times they do) they may have hope in their
death, and so not sorrow as do others that have no hope. Probably this much
aggravated David's sorrow for Absalon, that he had cockered, and not corrected
him in his childhood, and he now saw him taken away in his sin and rebellion,
whereby he could have no hope of the Salvation of his soul.

So should all other relations do; endeavoring to be heirs together of the
grace of life, that so when death 1 Pet. ^. 7.
makes a divorce betwixt them, they may leave a well-grounded hope to their
friends of their blessed estate and condition, which cannot but much moderate
their mourning for them.

It reproves and justly blames such, as upon the loss of their godly friends,
give too much way to Satan's Use.
tentations, and their own corruptions, whereby they become immoderate and
excessive in their sorrow, to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of their
profession, the dis-fitting themselves both for the service of God and man, in
the duties of their general and particular Callings, to the prejudice of the
health of their bodies; (for worldly sorrow causes sickness, and death, 2
Cor. 7. 10.) and to the opening of the mouths of the wicked, who scorn them and
Religion for it, saying, These are your Professors, that make Idols of their
children and friends, and mourn for the loss of them, as if they had lost
their God. They are like Rachel, that wept and lamented for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they were not. Such forget the exhortation
which speaks to them as unto children; My son, despise not thou the chastening
of the Lord, nor faint when then art rebuked of him, Heb. 12. 5. Prove. 3. 11.

Indeed we are sometimes in danger of setting light by Gods corrections, saying
with those sturdy persons, It is my burden, and I must bear it, Jerem. 10. 19.
But more frequently we are impatient, either outwardly fretting at the rod,
like those plunging horses which will not endure their Rider; or inwardly
repining, like those horses which digest their choler, by biting their bridles.
And if we neither despise, nor impatiently murmur against the dispensation of
God, yet our weakness is such, that we are ready to take the affliction too
much to heart, so that our spirits droop and faint: and this is so much the
worse, because it is commonly accompanied with a wilful indisposition, which
will not suffer us to entertain such things whereby we might be truly
comforted: and the hearts of such many times, like Nabals, die within them,
that they are not capable of counsel; so that all consolatory exhortations are
to them like water spilt upon the ground: whereas we should take our
correction, and humble our selves under the smart of it: but withal we should
look to Christ, and beg of him that he would not suffer our Faith, Hope and
Meekness of mind to be overturned.

Again, consider that it is not love to them, when we are persuaded, that they
are with the Lord, which makes us excessively grieve when they are taken from
us: It is indeed self-love and carnal affection. Our Lord Christ told his
Disciples, If ye loved me, you would be glad because I go to the Father. And
what measure Joh 14. 28.
then do we offer to God herein? We can many times send our children far from
us, where it may be we shall Mr. Baines.
never see them again, if we are but well persuaded that it will be for their
good and preferment; and yet we cannot endure to have them taken out of our
sight by the Lord, though we are persuaded that their souls are with him in the
highest glory. We ought to labor for such tractable and obedient hearts, as
may not be content perforce to let him take them, but may willingly resign even
our children (if it were by sacrificing them with our own hands, as Abraham) to
him, who has not thought his only begotten Son, too dear for us, but has
delivered Him to death for our sakes.

Once more remember, that it is a sign that we felt not Gods love in them, nor
received them at his hand as we ought to have done, if we do not thankfully
give them back to him when he calls for them. Hannah having received Samuel as
a gift gotten by prayer from God, did readily part with him to God again, and
she lost nothing by that loan which she so cheerfully lent to the Lord, as you
may see, 1 Samuel 2. 20, 21. and so dealt Abraham with his only Son Isaac,
whom by faith in the promise he had obtained of the Lord, Hebr. 11. 17.

This is true indeed; but yet Parent-like affections Object.
cannot easily part with and yield up children so dearly beloved.

But take heed, lest whilst you plead love to your Answ.
children or friends, you do not bewray and discover unkindnesse unto God. Dare
any of you say, Lord, if I did not so love them, I could be content to give
them to thee: Surely if with a calm spirit you think of this, you would blush
for shame, that your heart should be so cold toward God, as not to be willing
to part with any thing you love when he calls for it: To part with that which
you much care not for, is not at all thanks-worthy. It Is said of Abraham, that
when God commanded him to sacrifice his own and only son, that he arose early
in the morning, Genesis 22. 3. to do it: he consulted not with flesh and blood,
nor with carnal reason, nor with fond affections, but (as David said) He made
have and delayed Psa. 119. 60.
not to keep Gods commandments. How should this shame our backwardness and our
many reluctancies against the will of God, when he has declared it in taking
away a dear child or relation from us? How much better were it for us to do as
David did (that man after Gods own heart) who when he heard that his child was
dead, arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his
apparel, and went into the house of the Lord, and worshipped, and then came
into his own house, and called for bread, and did eat, 2 Samuel 12. 20.

Again, the consideration hereof may minister singular consolation. Use.


First, To every godly person, when he lies upon his sick bed, and sees death
approaching, and his friends standing about his bed weeping and wringing their
hands, and that upon a twofold ground.

First, Because himself has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32. Death is to him
as the valley of Achor: It Is a door of hope to give entrance into Paradise, and
to translate him into a state of blessedness, whereas to the wicked it is a
trap-door, through which they fall into hell. It Is an excellent saying, Improbi
dum spirant, sperant: Justus etiam cum expirat, sperat: wicked men hope whilst
they live; but a godly man, when he breaths forth his last, has hope. He is
like unto that dying Swan, of which Aelian tells us that sang most sweetly and
melodiously at her death, though in her lifetime she had no such pleasant
note. There is some truth in that saying of the Heathen, Optimum est non nasci,
proximum quam celerrime mori. For wicked men, it had been best for them never
to have been born, or being born to die quickly, seeing that by living long
they heap up sin, and thereby treasure up wrath against the day of wrath: but
as for good men, the day of death is best to them, because here to live is but
to lie a dying; and eternal life which they are now taking possession of, is
the only true life, as says Saint Austine.

Secondly, because as they have hope themselves in their death, so they leave a
good hope to their friends, to quiet their hearts in their loss. Oh what a
cutting grief is it to a godly heart, to see a child, or kinsman, or other dear
relation taken away, and cut off in the midst of his sins, so that he can have
no hope of his blessed estate in another life! But on the contrary, (if
self-love be not too prevalent with us) we cannot but moum moderately for those
which die in the Lord, and say with holy Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. How much better cause have
such than Tully to cry out, O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud animorum concilium,
coetumque proficiscar, and cum ex hac turba, and colluvione discedam! O what a
brave and bright day is it to our friends when they go to the
Congregation-house of blessed spirits, and walk no longer in the way of this
world, which is (like the land of Chabul) dirty and dangerous: Like the the
vale of Siddim, slimy and slippery, full of lime-pits and pit-falls, snares and
stumbling blocks laid by Satan to maim and mischief them.

Here is comfort also to the Parents and Relations of this young Gentleman now
with the Lord, in that they have and may have a well-grounded hope of his now
blessed estate in heaven: could he speak to you, you should hear him saying,
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, for I have made a blessed change,
and am gone from night to day, from darkness to light, from sorrow to sollace,
and from a troublesome world to a Heaven of happiness. And this brings me to
the last thing which I intended, which is to speak something of our deceased
brother. But before I begin, I thought fit to make this profession: That I
shall speak nothing of him, but what I either observed in him my self, or have
from the faithful relations of those which were nearer about him, the truth of
whose testimony I dare not call into question: And what I shall speak of him, I
shall reduce to these two heads:

First, to show you what were his privileges. Secondly, what improvement he
made of them. His privileges were these:
First, that he was born of godly parents, Et nasci ex piis parentibus non
minima laus est: To be born of godly parents, as it is no small praise, so it is
no small privilege. The glory of children are their parents, says Solomon,
Prove. 14. 6. It was a great honor to Jacob, that he could swear by the fear of
his Father Isaac: To David, that he could say, I am thy servant, and the son of
thy handmaid, Genesis 31. 53.
Psalm. 116. 16. To Timothy, that the same faith that was in him dwelt first in
his mother and Grandmother, 2 Timothy 1. 5. To those children whose mother Saint
John styles the elect Lady: To Mark, that he was Barnabas's sisters son: To
Alexander and Rufus, that they were children to Simon of Cyrene, Mar. 15. 21.
Now the privilege of such children consists in these two things:

First, that they have the godly example of their parents, as a copy or
continual pattern sor their imitation; and experience tells us, that childrens
manners are much molded by the examples of their parents. Its reported of the
Hearts of Scythia, that they teach their young ones to leap from bank to bank,
from rock to rock, and from one turfe to another, by leaping before them, by
which means when they are hunted, no beast can overtake them: So godly parents,
by giving a good example of piety to their children when they are young,
preserve them from Satan (that mighty hunter) that he shall never have them for
his prey.

Secondly, Children of believing parents are by virtue of their parents copy
and Gods gracious entail, within the compass of the Covenant, as appears Genesis
17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee, and Psalm. 112. 2. David speaking of the blessedness
of that man that fears the Lord, adds, His seed shall be mighty upon earth;
the generation of the upright shall be blessed: and Act. 2. 39. Peter tells us,
the promise is made to you, and to your children: and Paul to the same purpose
adds, If the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root be
holy, so are the branches, Romans 11. 16.

Secondly, a second privilege was, that presently after his coming into the
world, he was by the care of his godly parents presented before and dedicated
unto God, being made a visible member of the Church by Baptism, which is
called a Laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. yea,
Baptism is said to save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. To wit, Sacramentally; because it
seals up salvation to the believer, Mar. 16. 16. and it is of perpetual and
permanent use to him for that purpose throughout his whole life, ut scaturigo
semper ebulliens; as a Fountain bubling up to eternal life. And truly this his
privilege was the greater, if we consider how many poor Infants are deprived
of it, through the default of their parents in these last and worst of times,
who yet pretend much to Religion.

Thirdly, that with Timothy, from a child he was taught to know the Scriptures,
which are able to make one wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and his Christian
parents were the more careful to instruct him therein, because themselves had
found it fit milk for babes, 1 Pet. 2. 2. dainty and delicious food, sweeter
than honey, Psalm. 119. 103. wells of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Breasts of
consolation, Isa. 66. 11. the hony-drops of Christ's mouth, Cant. 4. 11. To be
preferred before gold and silver, Psalm. 19. 11. Before pearls aad rubies, Prove.
3. 15. Before all other learning, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. They knew that the Scriptures are
a lamp to our feet, as says David, Psalm. 119. 105. Gods Epistle to us, as
says Gregory: The souls food, as Athanasius: The souls physic, as
Chrysostom: The invariable rule of truth, as Irenaeus, etc. their care
therefore was so to acquaint him with them from his childhood, that he might
love them as his sister, Prove. 7. 4. that he might be ready in them, and have
them always, as Saul had his spear at his boulster: as David had his stones at
hand in his scrip. And thus (according to the Apostles rule, Ephesians. 6. 4.) he
was brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Fourthly, It was his privilege, and happiness to be brought forth in such a
time, and to be brought up in such a City, wherein he enjoyed more plentiful
means of grace and salvation than he could have done in former times, and (I
dare boldly say) in any other City or place in the Christian world besides. We
read of Plato, that when he drew near unto his death, he rejoiced and gave God
thanks for three things: First, for that he had made him a reasonable man, and
not a bruit beast. Secondly, a Greek, and not a Barbarian. And thirdly, that he
was born in the time of Socrates, from whom be had learned many good
instructions. How much more cause had this Gentleman to praise God for making
him a man, a Christian, and a Londoner at such a time as this?

Fifthly, his parents were not only thus careful betimes to bring him up in
the knowledge and fear of God, but to have him instructed in humane learning
also, that thereby (if the Lord should please to lengthen out the third of his
life) he might be the more useful and serviceable in his Generation: For which
end

First, they took care to have him taught the first grounds of learning, and
that betimes in his childhood, whereby he excelled and out went not only many
of his contemporaries, but diverse that were older than himself.

Secondly, when he was thus fitted at home, they placed him forth at a
Boarding-school, in the family of a godly Minister, that so, whilst he went
forward in humane, he might make a further progress in divine learning also.

Thirdly, when they thought fit to take him back under their own wing (being
exceeding tender of him) and not daring to trust him in a public school, by
reason of those many evil examples that he might meet with there, they provided
a godly and learned Tutor whom they maintained in their own house, to have the
oversight Mr. Pat. Drummond.
and education of him.

These were his Privileges. Now fot his improvement of them.

But before I mention that, I must tell you with what parts God had endowed
him, whereby he was enabled to make a good improvement of these opportunities:
and therein especially these three things were remarkable.

First, that he had a quick Invention. Secondly, A strong and active fancy.
Thirdly, A diligent and industrious spirit.
And by help of these he quickly learned to read and write, and so proceeded to
the grounds of the Latin tongue; and after he had made a good progress
therein, the care of his Tutor was to acquaint him also with the sacred
Languages of the Greek and Hebrew: and then he applied himself to the study of
the Arts: first, of Logic, then of Philosophy, Astronomy, Geography; and
(being denied the opportunity of traveling abroad) he spent some time in
reading History, and the Travels of sundry persons both by Sea and Land. And
lastly, being admitted a member of that Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, he
betook himself to the Study of the Law, and made no inconsiderable progress
therein: by all which (if God had lengthened out his days) he might probably
have been very serviceable to his Country. All which being considered, I may
say with a reverend Divine, That it is a blessed institution of younger years,
when reason and Religion are together fashioned and molded in a tender mind.

But that which gave him the greatest luster, and was (as it were) the Diamond
in the Ring, is yet behind, which I shall reduce to these three Heads.

First, his Piety to God. Secondly, his Dutifulness to his Parents. Thirdly,
his Charity to the poor. His Piety to God manifested it self, both In his Life;
and At his Death. In his Life. by
First, his constant and diligent attending upon the public Ordinances,
wherein he was not an idle and careless hearer, but could in the evening give
a good account of what he had heard in the day.

Secondly, His careful sanctification of the whole Sabbath, insomuch as if
(through inadvertency) any unfitting and unseasonable speeches had proceeded
from him on that day, his heart smote him for it, and it made him more cautious
for the future.

Thirdly, Besides his joining in Family-prayers, and with his Tutor, his manner
was, to retire daily into his Closet, where he first read a portion of
Scripture, and that not cursorily as too many do, but endeavoring to
understand what he read; and when he met with any hard place, he used to
enquire of his Tutor, therein following the advice of a worthy Divine: The
difficulties which we meet with in reading the Word of God (says he) should
not weaken, but waken our more diligent search; not being contented with the
first oar that offers itself to our view; but digging deeper and deeper we
should search till we become owners of the whole treasure, which will
sufficiently pay us for all our pains. After the Scripture read he betook
himself to prayer: in which duties, if he was disturbed, he was displeased with
it, and what at one time he omitted, he used to regain at another; all which he
carried on with such privacy, that scarce any, besides his Tutor, knew of it.

Fourthly, to these also of late he adjoined Meditation, which is an excellent
Character of a godly person: For, as the Philosophers stone (they say) turns
all metal into gold: as the Be sucks honey out of every flower: and as a good
stomak sucks some wholesome nourishment out of the food that it receives into
itself: So does an holy heart, so far as its sanctified, convert and digest all
into spiritual and useful thoughts and meditations: and we shall find by
experience, that when we go to sleep with some holy meditations in our minds,
it will be an excellent preservative against foolish dreams and ^^^^cies, and
we shall find our hearts in the better frame when we awake: As he that rakes
up his fire over night, shall find it again in the morning, Psalm. 119. 15, 16.
Prove. 6. 22. Now of his dexterity in this kind, I shall anon give you an
example, which he has left in writing behind him.

Fifthly, he reverenced and loved godly Ministers and Christians, and liked
that Ministry best that was most plain, powerful, and searching. I remember
that Luther in his me observed two sorts of Divines: one was Theologus Crucis,
the poor Divine, that preached plainly, and told men faithfully how things
stood with them: The other was Theologus gloriae, the Divine that hunted after
praise, glory, and preferment; concerning whom his prayer was, A Theologo
gloriae liberet suam Ecclesiam Dominus; that God would deliver his Church from
vainglorious Divines. Peter so preached; that his hearers were pricked at the
heart, Act. 2. 37, 38. and Steven's hearers were cut at the heart* with his
words, Act. 7. 54. And truly this was the more commendable in this young
Gentleman, seeing there be so many at this time, and in this City, that are
like those Greeks, that counted the plain preaching of the Cross foolishness,
1 Cor. 1. 22. 23. so that neither God, nor his Ministers can please them,
except they speak tinkling and tickling words. But such should get their ears
healed (as Demosthenes advised his Contrymen of Greece to do) before they
can hear Gods Word with profit. They must learn of Bees to pass by Roses and
Violets, and to sit upon Thime, though it be bitter; and to prefer sound
rebukes before smooth flatteries.

Sixthly, he was willing to be admonished, and reproved for what was amiss in
him, being herein of David's mind, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil
which shall not break my head. He was one of those that had an obedient ear to
reproofs, of whom Solomon speaks, Prove. 25. 12. As an ear-ring of gold, and an
ornament of fine gold; so is a wise reprover to an obedient ear. And this is
one good sign of a godly wise man, Prove. 15. 5. He that regards reproof, is
prudent, and verse. 31. the ear that hears the reproof of life, abides amongst
the wise. Hesiod tells us of three sorts of men: First, such as live so well
that they need no reproof; these are best of all. Secondly, such as do not so
well, but can be content to hear of it; and these (says he) are not bad.
Thirdly, such as will neither do as they ought, nor be advised to do better;
these are in a very dangerous condition, such may read their doom, and see
their destiny, Psalm. 50. 21, 22. Truth (says one) is sharp, but bitter though
it be, yet it is better and more savoury to sound senses, then the hony-drops
of a flattering tongue.

Seventhly, He (by Gods grace) resisted tentations from some of his familiars,
who would have drawn him to Taverns, and mildly reproved them for it.
Concerning all these I shall present you with the attestation of his Tutor,
given me in writing, and that in his own words.

He was (says he) when I came to him (which was about four years ago) a
Christian youth, well principled in the grounds of Religion, and I left him a
little before he died (which was about the eighteenth year of his age) knowing
what was in the Assemblies Confession of faith, in Wollebius, and what
Altingius in his Didactica has written: Of late also he delighted much to read
Calvin's Institutions, and B. Halls Meditations, and of his knowledge of the
things of God, yea of the hardest of them, I have found satisfaction after
trial: He not only knew God, but loved him, and in his last sickness, wept to
think that he had, and did love God no more. He was a lover of the children and
Ministers of God; and amongst his acquaintance he valued them most, in whom he
saw most of virtue. He heard the Word, and could retain and judge of what he
heard, and did not so much affect flaunting and quaint preaching, as that which
spoke most home to his heart. In his Closet, before he came out of his chamber,
he read a portion of Scripture, from which he has raised pertinent
observations, when put to the trial; and what he knew not, that he asked. He
read with judgment, and has said, that all other books but the Bible did bring
weariness: and to his reading he joined prayer: I have seen him displeased,
when disturbed, and what at one time he omitted, at another time he would
repair; and this he carried on with so little noise, that I only was privy to
it.

Thus you have heard of his piety manifested in his life: and vita qualis,
finis talis; as was his life, such was his death. For,

In his last sickness (which was the small Pox accompanied with a Fever) he
bore it with great patience. He inquired of his Tutor, how he might know that
he loved God? and being answered, he brake forth into tears: and when his Tutor
asked him, why he wept? he answered, Because he had loved God no more, nor made
a better improvement of his former deliverances. Yet he said, that the word of
God was his meditation, the promises whereof did now comfort him. He was
sensible of his approaching Death, and the night before, told some about him,
that he should not live another night. One of his last words was, I must be
gone.

The next thing that I propounded to speak of was, his dutifulness to his
parents, which can be testified by many: Indeed they were very tender of him,
and indulgent toward him, yet did not he abuse their love to liberty, nor
through familiarity contemn their authority, but was many times content to
refrain from things lawful and suitable to his desires, to give them
satisfaction.

Neirher was his charity to the poor less remarkable then the two former. For
from his childhood he would often go to the servants to fetch relief fot such
poor as came to his Fathers door. And being grown up to more maturity, he
frequently distributed money amongst them, and would many times say, that if
God ever brought him to the enjoyment of his estate, he would as constantly
make provision for such as were in want, as for himself and Family. He knew
that, Temporalia Dei servis impensa, non pereunt, sed parturiunt, Alms given
to the poor, perish not, but multiply: that bounty is the most compendious way
to plenty; and that hereby he might lay up a good foundation for himself
against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6. 18. He knew that rich men's houses should be
Gods Storehouses; and that sowing often of this fruitful seed, we shall be sure
to reap in our greatest need: and God is not unrighteous to forget our labor
of love in this kind, Heb. 6. 10. Oh! how may this shame many rich men that
keep no proportion between their increases for God, and increases from God:
that though they are rich in this world, yet they are poor in good works: they
lay not by for pious and charitable uses, as God has blessed them, 1 Cor. 16.
2. But indeed are, the richer the harder, as children that have their mouths
full, and both hands full, and yet will part with none, but spill it rather.
Men when they grow fat, have so much the less blood: So the fatter men are in
their estates, the less blood, life, and spirits they have for God: Or if they
do give something, yet they do not love mercy, Micha 6. 8. they are not ready
to distribute, willing to communicate. 1 Timothy 6. 18. their mercy does not flow
from them like water from the Fountain, or light from the Sun, naturally and
freely: but it must be wrung from them, like verjuice from the crab, or as
distilled water, that is forced out by the heat of the fire.

Its no marvel therefore that this charitable frame of heart contributed so
much toward the comfortable end of this our deceased brother. I remember what
Hierom says, Non memini me legisse mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera
charitatis exercuit: habet enim multos intercessores. I do not remember (says
he) that I ever read of any one that died an ill death that was frequent in
works of charity; and no marvel, sor he has many intercessors for him; which
agrees with that of David, Psalm. 112. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to
the poor, his rightcousnesse indures for ever, his horn shall be exalted with
honor, and Psalm. 41. 3. the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing: Thou will make all his bed in his sickness.

Having thus dispatched those three things that I proposed to speak to, I might
add much more, by telling you of his humility in concealing himself and his
own parts, as the sweet violet that grows low, near unto the ground, and
withal hides it self under it is own leaves. Of his sweet and affable nature,
and loving and courteous disposition: Of his indefatigable diligence in his
employments, and shunning, yea hating of idleness. I shall only add one word
more of his ingeniousnesse in, and the usefulness of his recreations, which
were diverse: one while he exercised himself in the Art of Dialling; another
while he applied himself to Music: But I shall say no more of these, because
he attained not to any perfection in them; that which he followed with most
diligence and delight was the Art of Drawing, Painting, and Limning, whereof he
has left many very good Pieces for so young a Practitioner; and had he lived
longer, probably he would have attained to a great perfection therein. He had
also a Poetical Vein, whereof I shall give you a taste by and by.

His meditation upon the History of Christ's Transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 1, etc.
Jesus Christ is so willing that we should have communion with him in this life,
that he takes us up into his most secret retirements.

Prayer is a divine ascension, and whosoever would pray spiritually, must have
an holy elevation of spirit to meet God in that duty.

High Turrets of faith and mountains of graces are the real helps in prayer.

In prayer we are sure to enjoy Gods presence. It Is a sure way to see God face
to face; and (if I may so say) in his natural complexion: we may meet with God,
as Moses did in the Mount Sinai of Prayer.

It was in the Mount praying when the fashion of Christ's countenance was
altered: It is in the mountain of prayer that Christ's purity appears more and
more to a believer.

Never more whiteness do believers see in Christ, then in their prayers to him.

In this life the Saints have a taste of the glistering and whiteness of his
outside: But in the life to come it is that they have immediate fruition of
himself: In this life we only see a sudden transfiguration to stay our stomachs
(as I may say) till hereafter at what time we shall see him as he is: and if
this transfiguration appears white (...)

He began to write a Book in Verse, which he calls Spuma Musarum, which he
purposed to dedicate to his Father and Mother; I shall only give you an account
of the first Verses in it, that by them you may judge of the rest.

Rete venatur ventos. To hunt the winds with a net.

Thou that do strive the winds with net to catch,
Unfruitful labors to thy self do hatch:
What! catch the wind? If caught, thou wilt not enjoy
Thy dear times worth to purchase such a toy:
And when y' have done, look in your net, you will find
All that remains is folly, yea, and wind.
Many littles make a mickle.

It Is Unity brings strength; if then you would have
Strong, Noble Virtues, Vices to outbrave,
Unite your weak-limb'd forces, and you will see
Many a little will a mickle be.
T. B.

FINIS.
Upon the death of that pious young Gentleman Mr. Thomas Bewlije.
Thomas Beulije. Anagram, O beati humiles.
If either Fate or Fortune had
Made such a breach among us,
I should have called them blind, or mad,
Or envious, thus to wrong us.
I should have in my showers of tears expressed
A weeping eye with furious anger dressed.
That when in all the garden did
But one choice flower appear,
It should be thus nipt in the bud,
Who can with patience bear?
But most in that in this one flower alone,
The sole hope of the Root is overthrown.
But stay! it was a better hand,
More sacred and more wise,
Then Fate or Fortune can command:
[Those Heathen-Deities.]
The root's not dead, the flower is but transplanted,
With added beauty which before it wanted.
And happy they who humbly can submit
To Him whose Wisdom has transplanted it.
Thomas Beulye. Anagram. Thy Love-beams.
THY LOVE-BEAMS Lord, so strongly shone on me,
That I impatient was of more delays;
But needs must leave the Earth to go, and see
The sacred Fountain of those glorious rays.
Thomas Beulie. Anagram. The Smile above.
The posie of the Ring given at the Funeral.
Set your affections on things above,
Not things of sense*
It was THE SMILE ABOVE, loadstone of love,
That drew me hence.
Ad Parents.
Thomas Beaulie. Anagram. Leave me as I both.
LEAVE ME AS I BOTH you, it is for our gain;
When you know how I do, you will not complain.
Thomas Bewlie. Anagram. I Am well as both.
I AM WELL AS BOTH you can be; nay I am
Better, because triumphing with the Lamb:
Yet I Am not gone for ever, our parting is,
Till Death unlock for you this door of bliss.
J. C. A. M.

On the Death of that Ingenious, industrious, and pious young Gentleman, Mr.
Thomas Bewlie Junior.
OH death! of terrors King! could nothing move
Thee to suspend this stroke! no not the love,
Nor cries of Parents, Tutor, Friends, and all
That knew his worth, and now bemoan his fall!
Nor's age! (but eighteen years!) nor that estate,
To which this only Son was destinate!
Not's active soul! and hand! nor's nimble head!
Nor's skill in Common Law could thee out-plead?
Nor's tongues! nor's Logic! nor's Philosophy!
Nor's drawing! Limning! nor his Poetry!
Not disposition sweet! nor's gracious heart!
Not's love to God! nor that he did impart
To Saints! not's pity great to poor, and such
As age and chance with want afflicted much!
No! Servant like, thou but to pass did bring
The Counsel wise, of God his Sovereign King:
Who at this time, and thus, has cropped this Rose,
With His hand of love; and giv'n't a safe repose,
In heaven above, where he does clearly see,
What in his Mountain thoughts he spied to be.
Then cease you Parents, Tutor, Friends, to wail,
He is with God, your grief cannot avail.
Another.
VIew underneath this stone, a fancy choice;
Invention good, a Sed'lous hand to poise
The greatest things, a mind made wise by grace;
And Tongues with Arts not Scantlingly to embrace.
His Parents joy; now grief: his kindreds loss.
Of The Bewlies Phoenix here remains the dross.
On the Death of his dear Friend and cosen, Mr. Thomas Bewley Junior, Gent.

ARt fled, dear Soul? and is thy purer breath
Become a Victime? ah! too rich for death.
Could not the Riv'lets from thy Parents eyes
Prevail for once to drown the destinies?
Or's death so envious? that the art only shown,
Cropped, like a bud, before thou were well blown.
Envious indeed, in that he does deny
Us the enjoyment of thy company.
Which joined with goodness, and a candid mind,
Must few Aequators, no Ascendent find.
But here, methinks, injustice taints my will,
In that while worth'less I would take my fill
In Traffic sure Divine; (of which each part
Throughout thy Soul might make a several Mart.)
I envy thee that perfect happy shore,
To which on earth 'twas thy desire to soaere.
Injust (perhaps) it seems, yet let me say
That though I could have wished a longer stay:
So great's thy gain in thy friends greatest loss,
That we will conjoyn the harp unto the cross.
To thee thy parents greatest love did run,
A fit Meridian for affections Sun;
And nature will have vent, perhaps immerse
Their eyes in tears attending on thy Hearse.
Yet should but an Impartial Judge stand by,
He Would think your tears from passions contrary
Proceeded, that that seeming dismal sound
Did not through sorrow, but through joy abound.
That Is love indeed, if Parents don't complain
At their own loss, if it be their childrens gain.
'Twixt Joy and Sorrow. T. E.


