A ROD Discovered, found, and set forth to whip the Idolaters till they leave
off their Idolatry (which yet remains in the Rulers of England, their
Ministers, and the people who follow their ways) which does consist in the
Houses of High Places, falsely called Churches; the two Universities, Cambridge
and Oxford, (and their Ministers, which are made by man, and not of God) and
their Ministers maintenance (not the Ministers of Christ's) which is portions of
Lands, Tithes, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions, and great Houses for a certain
dwelling place on the earth, and forms of oaths, all which is the fruit of
Idolaters, and the abomination of the Heathen.

So likewise here is described the true Magistrate and his Work; and the way
(for he who is not) to become such a one; and likewise, the way for all people
to come out of their Idolatry, to worship the true God in spirit and in truth.

Reward her as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double according to
her works, Rev. 18.6, 7, 8, 9. The commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light,
and reproofs of Instruction are the way of life, Pro. 6.23. The Rod and Reproof
gives wisdom: let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness; let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil. When the righteous are in Authority
the people rejoice; but when the wicked bear rule, the people mourn, Psalm.
141.5. Prove. 29.2.15. Written by me HENRY CLARK.

Unto which is prefixed the Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the LAODICEANS.

LONDON, printed for the Author the sixth Month, in the Year 1657.

THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE LAODICEANS.
1 PAUL an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ:

2 To the Brethren which are at LAODICEA, Grace and peace be with you from God
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 I thank my God in all my Prayers, that you remain steadfast in him, and in
all his works; waiting upon his Promises to the day of judgment.

4 And be not seduced by some unprofitable talkers, who go about to cause you
to fall from the Gospel which was preached unto you by me.

5 Oh that they that were inctructed by me, might serve to the profit of the
Gospel of truth, and become diligent in good works of eternal life.

6 And henceforth are my bonds manifest, which I suffer for Christ's sake,

7 Whereof I rejoice in heart, and account it eternal salvation,

8 That such is done through your prayers, by the working of the holy Spirit,
whether by life or death.

9 For I have a will and a joy to dye in Christ, who will through the same
mercy give you to have the same love, and to be of one mind.

10 Therefore beloved brethren, as you have heard in my presence, that keep,
and finish in the fear of God, so shall you have eternal life; for God will
work it, and perfect it in you without delay.

11 My beloved, rejoice in the Lord, and take heed of them that are desirous
after filthy lucre.

12 Let your prayers be manifest unto God, and remain firm in the knowledge of
Christ.

13 And do that which is mete, convenient, just, and reasonable; and what you
have heard and received, that keep in your hearts; so shall you have praise.

14 The Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your spirits, Amen.

Cause this Epistle to be read unto the Colossians, and read you that which is
written unto the Colossians. Read Col. 4.16.

This Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans was found in the oldest Bible that was
Printed at Worms.

IN a translation of the New Testament into both Latin and English, each
correspondent one to another, after the vulgar Text, commonly called St.
Ieroms, faithfully translated by John Hollybush, 1538. and printed in Southwark
by James Nicolson, and set forth by the Kings license, I find in the sixth
Chapter of Luke it is thus in the Margent after the fifth and sixth verses,
after these words, The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath, viz. in one of
the Greek Copies this follows, Jesus seeing a cortain man working on the
Sabbath Day, said unto him, O man, if thou did know indeed what thou do,
thou were happy; but if thou know not, thou art accursed, and a transgressor
of the Law.

A Rod discovered, found, and set forth, etc.
WHen man has forsaken the counsel of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 9.12, 16. Exodus 32.1, 8.
Psalm. 106.13, 21. ver. Numb. 25.4 Judge. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 2.2, 3. 1 Kings
11.38. and 12.28, 29. 2 Chronicles. 12 1. 2 Kings 21. chapter Read of Manassah and Amon.
and turned from the only true God his Maker, then he runs into the
transgression, and takes counsel of man, and sets himself to act against the
Lord and his anointed, and in his imaginations he sets up other Gods for to
worship and serve; and this has been the practice of the Kings and Rulers of
the Earth (and their Priests) who have been the only instruments together, and
the very Ringleaders of the people from the only true God and his worship, to
fall down and worship the gods that they in their imaginations have set up,
which is Idolatry.

So likewise the Kings and Rulers of the Earth have done, and do now in these
days, for the worship and service of their false gods; and in pretense of
worshipping the true God, have those things in imitation which the only true
God did do, and required to be done for his worship and service; but all those
things which they in their imaginations did do in imitation of God, was their
sin, for which the wrath of God was kindled up against them, to cut them off,
and to destroy them. And now I will instance some particular things that the
only true God did do, and required to be done for his worship and service; and
afterward show how the Kings and Rulers of the earth have devised in their
hearts to do the like for the worship of their false gods which was of their
own setting up, and a grievous sin they did commit in so doing.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel that
they bring me an Offering, Exodus 25, 26, 27, 28. chap.
and ye shall take my Offering of every man that gives it willingly with his
heart; they were to take the offering of him that gave it willingly with his
heart, and with that willing offering that came from the heart they were to make
the Lord God a Sanctuary, that he might dwell amongst them; And the Lord said
unto Moses, According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the
Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the Instruments thereof, even so shall ye
make it; and ye shall make the Ark of Shittim Wood; and God showed unto Moses
the pattern of the Tabernacle, how it should be built, and of what it should be
made of, and all things belonging to it: And when Moses went about to make the
Tabernacle, he was admonished of God how to do it; for said the Lord, Heb. 8.5.
Exodus 25.40. Acts 7.44. Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5.
See that thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the
Mount; and verily Moses was faithful in all his House as a servant, and did see
that all things was done as the Lord commanded: And according to all that the
Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work, and Moses
did look upon all the work, and be^old, they had done it as the Lord had
commanded, even so had they done it, and Moses blessed them: And the Lord spoke
unto Moses, saying, And read Exo. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, chap.
On the first day of the first Month thou shall set up the Tabernacle of the
Tent of the Congregation; and Moses reared up the Tabernacle, according to all
that the Lord God commanded him to do, so did he. And it came to pass in the
first month in the second year, on the first day of the Month, that the
Tabernacle was reared up, and all things belonging to the service of the
Tabernacle was brought and put into it, and set up in it: So Moses finished the
work, and God said, Read Exodus 40. ehap.
I mill sanctify the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and there will I meet
with the children of Israel, and the Tabernacle shall be sanctified by my
glory: and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.

And God said unto Moses, Exodus 28.1, 2. and 29.44.
I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons to minister unto me in the
Priests Office: And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee Aaron thy Brother,
and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister
unto me in the Priests Office, even Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, Eliazer and
Ithamor, Aarons sons, and thou shall make holy Garments for Aaron thy Brother,
for glory and for beauty: And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Take Aaron,
and his sons with him, and the Garments, Lev. 8. chap.
and the anointing Oil, and a Bullock for a sin-Offring, and two Rams, and a
Basket of unleavened Bread, and gather thou all the Congregation together unto
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and Moses did as the Lord
commanded, and the Assembly was gathered together unto the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; and Moses said unto the Congregation, This is
the thing which the Lord commanded to be done: and Moses brought Aaron and his
Sons, and washed them with water, and he put upon Aaron the Coat, and girded
him with the Girdle, and clothed him with the Robe, and put the Ephod upon
him, and girded him with the curious Girdle of the Ephod, Exodus 28.30.
and bound it unto him therewith; and he put the Breast Plate upon him; also he
put into the Breast Plate of Judgment the Vrim, and the Thumrim, and he put the
Mytor upon his head, and upon the Mytor he put also the golden Plate, the Holy
Crown, as the Lord commanded Moses; and Moses took the Anointing Oil, and he
poured of the Anointing Oil upon Aarons head, and anointed him to sanctify
him. And Moses brought Aarons sons, and put Coats upon them, and girded them
with Girdles, and put Bonnets upon them, as the Lord commanded; and Moses took
of the Anointing Oil, and of the blood which was upon the Altar, and sprinkled
it upon Aaron and upon his Garments, and upon his Sons, and upon his Sons
Garments with him, and sanctified Aaron, and his Garments, and his Sons, and
his Sons Garments with him: And thus Aaron and his sons were sanctified for to
Minister to the Lord in the Priests Office, Lev. 9. chap.
in the Tabernacle before the Altar, for the accomplishing the service of God,
to offer up unto the Lord sacrifices for himself, Heb. 7.27. and 9.6, 7. Numb.
3. chap.
and then for the errors of the people. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,
Bring the Tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the Priest, that
they may Minister unto him; and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of
the whole Congregation, before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to do the
service of the Tabernable; and they shall keep all the Instruments of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do
the service of the Tabernacle. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Take the
Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them; and thus shall
thou do unto them to cleanse them, Thou shall sprinkle the water of Purifying
upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their
clothes, and so make themselves clean; then let them take a young Bullock for
a Meat-Offring, and another for a Sin-Offring; and thou shall bring the Levites
before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and thou shall gather tho whole
Assembly of the children of Israel together, and thou shall bring the Levites
before the Lord, for an Offering before the Lord; and the children of Israel
shall put their hands upon the Levites, and Aaron shall offer the Levites
before the Lord for an Offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute
the service of the Lord; and the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads
of the Bullocks, and thou shall offer one for a Sin-offring, and the other for
a Burnt-Offring unto the Lord, to make an atonement for the Levites: Thus
shall thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel, and the
Levites shall be mine; and after that shall the Levites go in to do the service
of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: And Moses, and Aaron, and all the
Congregation of the children of Israel did to the Levites according to all that
that the Lord commanded: But take notice a little, That the Levites were not to
go in to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, till that
they were twenty five years of age, and upward; and when they came to be of the
age of fifty years, they were to cease waiting upon the service thereof, and to
serve no more; for the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, This is that belongs
unto the Levites, Lev. 8.23, 24, 25, 26. ver.
From twenty and five years old, and upward, they shall go in to wait upon the
service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: and from the age of fifty years
they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more.

Forasmuch as ye see God did require a Tabernacle, an Ark, and an Altar, and
all things belonging thereto, to be made for himself to dwell in, or amongst
the children of Israel, wherein he would meet them in their worship and service
done unto him; and so likewise you may see how he set apart, consecrated, and
ordained Aaron and his sons, and the Levites to Minister in the Priests Office,
and to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: so likewise God
provided Maintenance for them who waited continually upon this service himself:
therefore said Moses, At that time the Lord separated the Tribe of Levi to bear
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, D^ut. 10.8, 9. and 18.3, 4.
and to stand before the Lord to Minister unto him, and to bless in his Name:
Wherefore Levi has no part nor Inheritance with his Brethren: Therefore this
shall be the Priests due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice,
whether it be Ox or Sheep, they shall give unto the Priests the Shoulder, the
two Cheeks, and the Maw, and the first fruit also of thy Corn, of thy Wine, and
of thy Oil, and the first of the fleece of thy Sheep shall thou give him,
Lev. 27.30, 31, 32.
and also the tithes of Land, whether of the seed of the Land, or the fruit of
the Tree, it is the Lords; And the tithe of the Herd, or of the Flock, even of
whatsoever passes under the Rod, the tenth thereof shall be holy unto the
Lord: for said the Lord unto the children of Israel, viz. the eleven Tribes,
Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy seed that the field brings
forth year by year, and ye shall bring all the tithes into the Storehouse,
Mal. 3.10.
that there may be meat in my House for the Levite, because he has no part nor
Inheritance with thee in the Land whither thou go to possess: And the Lord
God spoke unto Aaron, and said, Behold, Numb. 18.20, 21, 24.
I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an Inheritance
for their service which they serve, even the service of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: And God gave the sons of Levi who received the Office of the
Priesthood, a Commandment to take tithes of their Brethren, because they had no
part nor Inheritance with them: Heb. 7.5.
Now these tithes and first fruits were not required to be paid in the land of
Egypt, nor yet in the Wilderness, as they went toward the Land of Canaan, were
they to pay any tithes or first fruits, nor in any other land, but when ye go
over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord your God gives you to
inherit, and when he gives you rest from all your enemies round about, so that
you dwell in safety, then was tithes to be paid, and then was the first fruits
and tithes to be brought in, and no where else; for said Moses, Read Deuteronomy. 12.
chap. to the 20. ver.
Then shall there be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause his
Name to dwell there, thither shall ye bring all that I command you, your
Burnt-Offrings, and your Sacrifices, and your tithes, and the heave-Offring of
your hand, and all your choice vows which ye have vowed before the Lord, and ye
shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters,
and your man-servants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that is within
your Gates, forasmuch as he has no part nor Inheritance with you. So that it
is very plain, first, That tithes and first fruits were to be paid in no land
but in the land of Canaan, when that the children of Israel had the possession
of it. Secondly, Tithes and first fruits were to be paid by the eleven Tribes
in the Land of Canaan to the sons of Levi, who had a Law to take tithes and
first fruits of their Brethren when they had rest round about from all their
enemies, and dwelt safely in the same land of Canaan. Thirdly, the first fruits
and tithes were to be paid of the fruit or increase that the eleven Tribes had
of the land of Canaan, and of no other land: for it is written, When ye go over
Jordan, and dwell in the Land which the Lord your God gives you to inherit, so
that ye dwell in safety, then there shall be a place which the Lord your God
shall choose for to cause his Name to dwell there, and thither shall you bring
your tithes.

When the children of Israel had got possession of the land of Canaan, it was a
long time before they had rest, by reason of their often rebellion and turning
aside from the Lord, 1 Samuel 4, 5, 6, 7 chap.
so that the Ark of the Covenent of the Lord was often removed, and carried
from place to place, besides it once fell into the Philistines, who carried it
to Ashdod, and they set it up in Dagons House by Dagon their god; and after
that they saw the hand of God against them for keeping it, then they sent it to
Gath, and the Lord smote the men of the City both great and small with a very
great destruction, and they had Emrods in their secret parts; and then they
sent away the Ark to Ekron, and the Ekronites they cried out, and said, They
have brought about the Ark of the God of Israel to slay us and our people, and
then the Ark was carried into the Philistines Country for seven months, and
then it was sent in a new Cart to Bethshemesh, and the men of Bethshemesh sent
Messengers to the Inhabitants of Kiriathiearim to come down and fetch up the
Ark to them; and the men of Kiriathiearim fetched up the Ark of the Lord, and
set it in the House of Abinadab in the Hill, 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7. chap.
and there it abode twenty years; and after that time when David was King over
Israel, and that he had beaten the Philistines from Geba until he came to
Gazer; then David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, and David
said unto all the Congregation of Israel, If it seem good unto you, and that it
be of the Lord our God, let us send abroad unto our Brethren every where that
are left in the Land of Israel, and with them also to the Priests and the
Levites which are in their Cities and Suburbs, that they may gather themselves
unto us: And said he, Let us bring again the Ark of our God to us, for we
inquired not at it in the days of Saul; And all the Congregation said that
they would do so, for the thing was right in all the eyes of che people. 1 Chronicles. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
So David gathered together all Israel from Shihor of Egypt, even unto the
entering of Hamath, to bring the Ark of God from Kiriathiearim: And David and
all Israel went up, and they carried the Ark of God in a new Cart out of tht
House of Abinadab, and Vzzah put forth his hand to take hold of the Ark of God;
and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him there
for his error, and there he dyed by the Ark of God; and David was displeased
because the Lord had made a breach upon Vzzah: And David was afraid of the Lord
that day, and said, How shall the Ark of the Lord cow to me? So David carried
the Ark aside into the House of Obed Edom the Gittite, and there it continued
three Months; and it was told David the King, saying, the Lord has blessed the
House of Obed Edom and all that partain unto him, because of the Ark of God. So
David went and brought up the Ark of God from the House of Obed Edom, into the
City of David ( which is Zion) with gladness, (and David made him Houses in the
City of David, 1 Chronicles. 15.1. and 16.1. 2 Chronicles. 5.2, 5.
which is Zion, and he prepared a place for the Ark of God, and pitched for it
a Tent) so they brought the Ark of God, and set it in the midst of the Tent (or
the Tabernacle) that David had pitched for it. Now it came to pass as David
sat in his house, that David said to Nathan the Prophet, Lo, I dwell in an
House of Cedars, but the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord remains under
Curtains; and the Lord had given David rest round about from all his Enemies;
and Nathan said to the King, Go, and do all that is in thy heart, for the Lord
is with thee; Read 1 Chronicles. 28, 29. chap.
now it was in the heart of David to build an House of Rest for the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord, and David had made ready Stuff for the building of it:
But the word of the Lord came to Nathan the Prophet, saying, Go and tell David
my servant, thus says the Lord, Thou shall not build me an House to dwell in,
for I have not dwelt in an House since the day that I brought up Israel unto
this day, but have gone from Tent to Tent, and from one Tabernacle to another;
and the Lord said unto David, When thy days be fulfilled, 2 Samuel 7. chap
and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom, and he
shall build an house for my Name. Now when David's days and his work was both
near finished, David assembled all the Princes of Israel, and the Princes of
the Tribes, and the Captains of thousands, and the Captains of hundreds, and
the Stewards, and Officers, and the mighty men, and all the valiant men unto
Jerusalem; then David the King stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me my
Brethren and my People, As for me, I had in my heart to build an house of rest
for the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and for the Footstool of our God, and
I had made ready for the building; but God said unto me, Thou shall not build
an House for my Name, Because thou have been a man of War, and have shed much
blood. Now said David to all the people, The Lord has given me many sons, and
out of all my sons the Lord has chosen Solomon my son to sit upon this Throne
of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel; and the Lord (said David) said unto me,
Solomon thy son he shall build me my House, and my Courts; for I have chosen
him to be my son, and I will be his Father, and he shall be my son. And David
called for Solomon his son, and David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it
was in my mind to build an House unto the Name of the Lord my God; but the Word
of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made
great wars, thou shall not build an House unto my Name, because thou have shed
much blood upon the earth in my sight; behold, a son shall be born unto thee,
his Name shall be Solomon, and he shall be a man of rest, and I will give him
rest from all his Enemies round about, and I will give peace and quietness all
his days unto Israel; and Solomon he shall build an House for my Name, and he
shall be my son, and I will be his Father, and I will establish the Throne of
his Kingdom over Israel for ever. And David said, Thou Solomon my son, know
thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind, for the Lord has chosen thee to build an House for the
Sanctuary, be strong, and do it, and the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou,
and build the House of the Lord thy God, as he has said of thee, only the
Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and David gave unto Solomon his son
the pattern of the Porch, and of the Houses thereof, and of the Treasures
thereof, and of the upper-Chambers thereof, and of the inward Parlors, and the
place of the Mercy-Seat, and the pattern of the Courts of the House of the
Lord, and of all the Chambers round about, and of all the Treasuries of the
House, and of the Treasuries for the dedicate things; and also, 2 Chronicles 28. chapter
for the courses of the Priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the
service of the House of the Lord; all that which David had given him by the
Spirit, showed he unto Solomon, for said David to Solomon, the Lord made me
understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of this Pattern:
And when David dyed, Solomon his son reigned in his stead and when Solomon the
son of David was strengthened in his Kingdom, and found that the Lord his God
was with him, and magnified him exceedingly, then Solomon spoke unto all
Israel, to the Captains of thousands, and of hundreds, and to the Judges, and
to every Governor in all Israel, and the chief of the Fathers; so Solomon, and
all the Congregation with him, went up to the High Place that is at Gibeon, for
there was the Tabernacle of the Congregation of God, which Moses the servant of
the Lord had made in the Wilderness; 2 Chronicles 1.
but the Ark of God had David brought up from Kiriathiearim, to the place which
David had prepared for it; for he had pitched a Tent for it at Jerusalem; now
in the night did God appear to Solomon in Gibeon, and the Lord said, Ask what I
shall give thee; and Solomon said, And now O Lord my God, thou have made thy
servant King instead of David my Father, and I am but a child, and I know not
how to go out, or come in, and thy servant is in the midst of thy people which
thou have chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude, give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that I may discover between good and bad: And this speech of Solomon's
pleased the Lord, and tho Lord said unto him, Because thou have asked this
thing, 1 Kings 3. cha. and 5. chap.
and have not asked for thy self neither long life, nor riches, nor the life of
thy Enemies, but have asked for thy self understanding to discern judgment:
Behold, I have done acording to thy word; lo, I have given unto thee a wise and
an understanding heart. Then Solomon came from before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation that was at Gibeon, to Jerusalem, and reigned over Israel, and
Solomon said, Now the Lord my God has given me rest on every side, so that
there is neither adversaries nor evil occurrent. Behold, I purpose to build an
House unto the Name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spoke unto David my Father,
saying, Thy son whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an
House unto my Name; Then Solomon began to build the House of the Lord at
Jerusalem, in Mount Moriah, where the Lord appointed unto David his father,
Deuteronomy. 12.10, 11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 3.1, 2.
and that was the place that God did choose to cause his Name to dwell, and
thither was the people to bring their tithes and first fruits, their
Burnt-offrings and their Sacrifices: And Solomon began to build the House of
the Lord at Jerusalem in the second year of the second Month, in the fourth
year of his reign, and when the House was finished throughout all the parts
thereof, according to all the fashion of it, then Solomon brought in all the
things that David his father had dedicated, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
viz. the Gold, the Slver, and all the Instruments put he among the Treasuries
of the Hduse of God, and then Solomon assembled the Elders of Israel, and all
the Heads of the Tribes, and the chief of the Fathers of the children of
Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of
the City of David, which is Zion: and all the Elders of Israel came, 2 Samuel
5.7, 9. 1 Chronicles. 11.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and the Levites took up the Ark, and they brought up the Ark and the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and all the holy Vessels that were in the
Tabernacle, these did the Priests and the Levites bring up: And the Priests
brought in the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord unto his place, to the Oracle of
the House, into the most Holy Place, even under the Wings of the Cherubins, and
Solomon said unto the Lord, I have huilt an House of habitation for thee, and a
place for thy dwelling for ever: And blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who
has with his hands fulfilled that which he spoke with his mouth to my Father
David, saying, Since that day that I brought my people out of the Land of
Egypt, I chose no City among all the Tribes of Israel to build an House in,
that my Name might be there, neither chose I any man to be a Ruler over my
people Israel, but I have chosen David to be over my people Israel. And said
Solomon, The Lord has performed the word that he has spoken, for I am risen
up in the room of David my Father, and am set on the Throne of Israel, as the
LORD promised to David my Father, and I have built the HOUSE for the Name of
the LORD GOD of ISRAEL; and the Lord God said, I have chosen Jerusalem that my
Name may be there: And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto
him, I have heard thy prayer, and I have chosen this place to my self for an
House of sacrifice, for now have I chosen and sanctified this House, 2 Chronicles.
33.7. Psalm. 132.13. 2 Chronicles. 7.12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
that my Name may be there for ever, and mine eyes and my heart shall be there
perpetually, and my ears shall attend unto the prayers that is made in this
place: and as for thee (said the Lord God to Solomon) if thou will walk before
me as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded
thee, and shall observe my Statutes and my Judgments, then will I establish
the Throne of thy Kingdom, according as I covenanted with David thy Father,
saying. There shall not fail thee a man to be Ruler in Israel, but if ye turn
away and forsake my Statutes and my my Commandments which I have ^et before
you, and shall go and serve other Gods, and worship them, then will I pluck
them up by the roots out of my Land which I have given them, Deuteronomy. 12.10, 11
and this Hou^e which I have sanctified for my Name will I cast ^ut of my
lig^t. Therefore ^ake notice:

First, God told the ^hildre of ^ra^l when ^he^ were in the Wilderness, That
when they came into the ^^n^ which he would ^ive them to possess, and that when
he had given them rest from all their Enemies round about, then there should be
a place which he would choos^ to cause his Name to dwell in. 2 Chronicles. 6.5, 6.


Secondly, That in the Land of Canaan, Jerusalem was the place that God chose
from am^ng all the Tr^bes of Israel, that his Name might be there.

T^ir^ly, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Deuteronomy. 12.5. Joh. 4.20. Exodus 23.14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy.
16.16. 2 Chronicles. 8.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
That at Jerusalem Solomon built in Mount Moriah a House (called a Temple) unto
the Name of the Lord, and for his Worship, according to the Command of God 2 Samuel 7.12, 13, 14. 1 Kings 5.5, 6. chap.

Fourthly, That to Jerusalem was the people of Israel required to bring their
Burnt-Offrings, their Sacrifices, their first Fruits, and their tithes: Then
Solomon offered Burnt-Offerings unto the Lord on the Altar of the Lord, which
he had built before the Porch, even after a certain rate every day, offering
according to the Commandment of Moses; and he appointed according to the order
of David his father, the Courses of the Priests to their Service, and the
Levites to their Charges, the Porters also by their courses at every Gate; so
the House of God was perfected.

Now that which I come to write of further, is, That God required the people of
Israel to pay the Priests and Levites their first fruits and tithes unto them
in the land of Canaan, Deu. 10.8, 9 and 14. cha. ver. 22, to the end. and 18.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and that they were to bring their Offerings and Sacrifices, their first
fruits, and their tithes, unto the place which he should chose, and that to
Jerusalem were the first fruits and the tithes brought into the House of the
Lord to be for food for the Priests, the Levites, the fatherless, and the
widow, and the stranger, that they might eat and be satisfied: And Hezekiah
King of Judah sent to all Israel and Judah to come to Jerusalem to keep the
Passover unto tne Lord God of Israel; 2 Chronicles. 30, 31. chap.
and Hezekiah appointed the courses of the Priests, and the Levires after their
courses, every man according to his service; the Priests and tae Levites for
Burnt-offerings, and for Peace Offerings; he appointed also the Kings portion
of his substance for the Burnt-offering, to wit, For the Morning and the
Evening Burnt-offerings, for the Sabbaths, and for the New Moons, and for the
set Feasts, as it is in the Law of the Lord: Moreover he commanded the people
that dwelt in Jerusalem to give to the Priests and the Levites their portion,
that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord: and as soon as the
commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance, the first
fruits of Corn, Wine, and Oil, and Honey, and of all the increase of the field,
and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly; and the children of
Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the Cities of Judah, they also brought in
tithes of Oxen and Sheep, and the tithe of holy things, which were consecrated
unto the Lord their God, and laid them by heaps; and Azariah the Priest said to
the King and the Princes, Since the people began to bring the Offerings into the
House of the Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty, for the
Lord has blessed his people, and of that which is left is this great store:
Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare Chambers in the House of the Lord, and they
prepared them, and they brought in the Offerings, and the Tithes, and the
dedicated things faithfully into the House of God, over which Azariah was Ruler.

And after the children of Isreal's return out of captivity from Babylon, when
they had builded up the Walls of Jerusalem, and that they were settled again
every one in their places, Nehemiah went the two and thirtieth year to the King
of Babylon, and after certain days, he obtained leave of the King; Neh 10, 12,
13. chap.
and he came again to Jerusalem, and he found the House of God forsaken, and
perceived that the portions was not given to the Levites, because that the
Levites was fled every man to his field, then Nehemiah contended with the
Rulers, and said, Why is the House of G d forsak^n? and he gathered them
together, and set them in their places, and then brought all Judah the tithes
of their Corn, and the New Wine, and the Oil into the treasuries: Now God had
commanded to bring all ^he tithes into the Storehouse, Mal. 3.10.
that there might be meat in his House: And Nehemiah and the Rulers made
Ordinances accordingly, and r^qui^ed the people, the children of Israel, to
bring the first fruits of their ground, and the firrst fruits of all their
trees year by year, unto the House of the Lord, and that they should bring the
firstlings of their Herds, and of their Flocks to the House of God, unto the
Priests that ministered in the House of God, and that they should bring the
first fruits of their Dough, and their Off^^i^gs, ^n^ the fruit of all manner
of trees, of Wine, and of Oil unto the Priests, to the Chambers of the House
of God, and the tithes of their ground they were to bring unto the Levites,
that the same Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of their tillage;
and the Priest the son of Aaron was to be with the levites when the levites
took tithes; and the levites was to bring up the ^ythe of tithes unto the House
of God, into the Chambers of the treasure-House.

And so much I have in part set forth, to show what God did do, and required to
be done in his worship and service, of which the Scripture speaks more at
large. And now I come to show how that the Kings and Rulers of the earth, who
forsake the only true God to serve strange gods, were the only and chief
Ringleaders of the people from the true God and his way of Worship, to worship
the Images that they had set up: And likewise, how they in their imaginations
have in their actions imitated to do the like things for the worship and
service of their false gods that they set up, as was done for the worship and
service of the only true God by his Command.

And now I will lay down the particular things, to show wherein the Kings and
Rulers of the earth have acted in their own wills by their imaginations, to do
those things for the worship of their false gods, which things that by them
done were sin, and what things they are doing for a false worshipping of the
only true God, which is sin, and such as God never required at their hands.

The first is, The building and repairing of the Houses of High Places, 2.
Kings 17.12, 15. Jer. 19.5. Jer. 7.31, 32.
(called Churches) for the worshipping of their false gods in, or otherwise
for a pretense of worshipping the true God, which thing God never required at
their hands to do; For God dwells not in Temples made with hands, nor is he
worshipped in Temples made with hands, but he is to be worshipped in spirit and
in truth, and such worshippers the Father looks for, and dmells with him that
is of an humble and contrite spirit, Ioh. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Acts 7.47, 48,
49. Isa. 57.15.

The second is, Their consecrating and making Priests to offer up Sacrifices,
to preach in those Hgh Places, called Churches, for money and tithes, is a
thing that God never required at their hands to do, and therefore it is a sin
for them so to do, 1 K ngs 13.33, 34. Matthew. 9.37, 38.

The third is, the Laws that the Kings and ^ulers (with the Pope and Bishops)
of the earth, who sat in counsel together, have made, by which they compel the
people of God to pay the Priests or Ministers that they have made, tithes and
Hire by, which are contrary to God and Christ, and such Laws God never required
them to sit together to make against him, and against his anointed: and
therefore I say, that those Laws are unrighteous, unjust unholy, because they
are not of God, but contrary to God, and therefore they are not to be obeyed,
for God is to be obeyed rather then man, Isa. 10.1, 2. Mic. 6.16. Amos 8.4, 5,
6. Isa. 1.12. But of tithes I have something more to w^ite hereafter in its
place.

First, God exal^ed from among the people of Israel Jereboam, the son of Nebat,
one of King Solomon's servants, 1 King. 11. chapter and 14.7, 8, 9.10.
and made him Prince over the people Israel; but Jeroboam turned away from the
Lord God, and followed not the Lord to kee^ his Com^andments with all his
heart, nor stood in his counsel who had exalted him from all the people; but
Jeroboam lightly esteemed of the Lord, and set his counsel at naught; and set
himself to do evil above all that were before him, and rebelled against the
Lord, then the loss of Jeroboams Kingdom was set before him, and the fear of
his life was upon him; and thus being surprised with fear on evevy side, he
said in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom ^eturn to the House of David; for said
he, If this people go up to do sacrifice at Jerusalem, then shall the hearts of
this people return again unto their Lord Rehoboam King of Judah, and they will
kill me, 1 King. 12. chh
and go to Rehoboam King of Judah again: W^ereupon Jeroboam took counsel (but
not of the Lord God who exalted him) and made two Calves of Gold, and the one
he set up in a City called Dan; and Iereboam built up at Bethel a House of High
Places, and he made an Altar at Bethel, and Jeroboam he set up the other golden
Calfe at Bethel; and then Jeroboam said unto the people, It is too much for you
to go up to Jerusalem [to worship,] behold thy Gods O Israel which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt. And thus you see how one of the Kings of the earth
was the Ringleaders of the people from the true God, to worship Idols, for the
people went to worship before one of the golden Calves, even to the City of
Dan, and that thing became a sin unto them; and Jeroboam he built an Altar at
Bethel, and he made Priests of the lowest of the people, (which were not of the
sons of Levi) and he placed the Priests in the Houses of High Places at Bethel:
And Jeroboam he ordained a Feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of
the month (which he had devised of his own heart) like unto the Feast that was
in Judah, [there was his imitation] and Jeroboam offered upon the Altar,
sacrificing unto the Calves that he had made; 1 King. 13. chapter
and he stood by the Altar to burn Incense; and the Priests that he had made of
the lowest of the people for the High Places, burnt Incense upon the Altar, as
it was done in Judah, so the like did he do at Bethel; But I do not find that
the House of High Places was so glorious as the Temple was at Jerusalem. But
behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the Word of the Lord unto
Bethel; and as Jeroboam stood by the Altar to burn incense, the man of God
cried against the Altar in the Word of the Lord, and said, O Altar, Altar, thus
says the Lord, Behold, a child shall be born unto the House of David, Josiah
by Name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the high Places that burn
incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee. Now Jeroboam who
was turned from the Lord God that exalted him, fell to persecute the Prophet of
the Lord, and Jeroboam himself put forth his hand when he heard the saying of
the man of God, and said, lay hold on him; but the Lord God was just in causing
his hand that he put forth to be dried up, Read 2 Chronicles. 11. and 12. chap.
for that he could not pull it again to him; yet the Lord God was merciful to
his Enemy, and at the request of the man of God his hand was restored to him
again; but after this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made
again of the lowest of the people priests for the high places, after the manner
of the Nations likewise of other lands: and for the Devils, and for the Calves
which he had made, he ordained them priests, and whosoever came himself with a
young Bullock, and seven Rams, the same he made a priest to them that were no
Gods, and him who Jeroboam consectated, became one of the priests of the high
places; and this thing became sin unto the House of Jeroboam, even to cut it
off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth: But take notice, that
this House of High Places that Jerobam built at Bethel was called the Kings
Chapel by Amaziah the priest of Bethel, Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13.
who was a persecutor of the prophet of the Lord, as you may read Amos.

2 Chr. 12.13, 14.
And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned over Judah in Jerusalem, the City which
the Lord did choose out of all the tribes of Israel to put his Name there: And
when Rehoboam had established the Kingdom, and made it strong, then he forsook
the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, and Judah did evil in the sight
of the Lord, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they
committed, above all that their Fathers had done, for they also built them high
places and Images, 1 King. 14 21, 22, 23.
and Groves on every high Hill, and under every green tree, and there were
Sodomites in the land, and they did according to all the abominations of the
Nations which the lord had cast out before the children of Israel. And thus you
see now, that if the King turn from the Lord, and forsake his Commandments, the
people generally follow to do wickedly with him; and as these two Kings did, so
other Kings of Israel and Judah did the like, as you may read of Nadab, 2 Kings
15.25, 26. and Baasha, ver. 33, 34. and of Zimri and Omri, 2 Kings 16.19, 25,
26. And Ahab the son of Omri, King of Israel, did evil in the sight of the Lord
above all that were before him; and it came to pass, as if it it had been a
light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, 1 King. 16, 3^ 31, 32, 33.
for he took to wife Jezebel the Daughter of Ethbaeal, the King of the
Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him; and Ahab he built a
House in Samaria for Baal, and he reared up an Altar for Baal in the House of
Baal, which he had built in Samaria; and Ahab had got for Baal four hundred and
fifty prophets, and he had got four hundred prophets for the Groves that fed at
Jezebels Table, 1 King^ 18.19.
and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger then all the
Kings of Israel that were before him: And the Samaritans they made Houses of
high places in all their senced Cities, from the tower of the Watchmen, to the
fenced City, and they set up Images and Groves, and they burnt Incense in the
high places, as did the Heathen, and they served their Idols, Jer. 7.31. and
19.5. 2 Kings 17. chapter ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
wherefore the Lord God said unto them, Ye shall not do this thing: And the
Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the prophets, and by
all the Seers, saying, Turn you from your evil ways, and keep my Commandments
and Statutes according to all the law which I commanded your Fathers, and mhich
I sent to you by my servants the Prophets: But they would not hear, but
hardened their necks like the necks of their Fathers, that did not believe in
the Lord their God, and they rejected his Statutes and Covenant, and his
testimonies which he testified against them, and they followed vanity, and
became vain, and went after the Heathen, and worshipped all the host of Heaven,
and served Baal. And Ahaziah son of Ahab, he reigned over Israel, and he walked
in the way of his Father, and in the way of his Mother, and in the way of
Jeroboam, for he served Baal, and worshipped him. 1 King. 22.51, 52, 53.
And after a reformation that King Hezekiah had made, as you may read 2 Kings
18. chap. Manassah his son reigned in Jerusalem, and he did that which was evil
in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the heathen, for he built
up again the high places which Hezekiah his Father had destroyed, and he reared
up the Altars for Baal, and made a Grove as Ahab King of Israel did, and
worshipped all the host of heaven, and he seduced the people to do more evil
then did the Nations whom the Lord destroyed before all the Nations, and made
Judah also to sin with his Idols, and he used enchantments, Read 2 Kings 21.
chap.
and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards, and observed times. Now was not
Manasseh one that did forsake the Lord and his commandments, and did not he
lead the peoplc on, and seduced them to do wickedly in serving strange gods,
and worshipping Idols in the houses of high places? and thus you may see that
the ground and foundation of the houses of high places (which we in England
call Cathedral Churches, Churshes and Chapels.) was from the heathen and
Idolatrous Kings and Rulers, and popish Kings, and others, built up to worship
their Idols in; and now in these our days are upheld in pretense to worship the
true God in; but I say, that God dwells not in temples made with hands, neither
is he worshipped in them with those that assemble together in them, for God is
a Spirit, and is wor^hipped in spirit and in truth. And now I will compare
those houses of high places which Jeroboam, Ahab, Manasseh, and the heathens
made, with those that we have in England, which are falsely called Churches, and
see how far short they have fallen, and how far they do now fall short of being
the same, or such like as they were.

First, The founders or builders of those houses of high places that the
Scripture speak of, that I have before mentioned were built up by the heathen
and idolatrous people, at the command of the wicked and ungodly Kings and
Rulers of the Earth, such as Jeroboam, Rehoboam, Ahab, and Manasseh were, and
now by hypocritical Kings and Rulers, and idolatrous Kings are upheld and
maintained.

So these that we have here in England, were all of them built up by the popish
Saxon Kings, and other Idolaters; I will only instance some particulars of
them, as I sound them written in our English Histories. About the year 604. by
two of the Saxon Kings, viz. Etholbert King of Kent, and Segebert King of
Essex, was founded the greatest house of high places in London, falsely called
by the name of the Cathedral Church, FOXES Acts and Monumen^s, Vol. 1.
or St. Paul's Church, and through the instigation of Etholbert King of Kent, a
Citizen of London began in the year 614. to build the house of high places at
Westminster, falsely called a Church.

And in the year 636. King Gilsus, King of the Moreians, began and founded the
house of high places, falsely called a Church, at Winchester, but it was
finished by his son Kenwalcus? And about the year 932. by King Athelstone was
founded and by him builded the Cathedral at Exceter, HOLLINS. Chr. page 1009.
as said Hollingshood in his Chronicle, who has said likewise, that it is
recorded in the History of the said Cathedral, thus, as follows.

Atholstone, (the Cornish being subdued) returned to the City which anciently
was called Monbeton, but now Exceter, and the^e sitting down Anno Dom. 932. he
repaired the Walls of the same City, not much torn; also he gave a certain
pension for the sounding a Monestry for the Monks, of the Family of God and St.
Peter, alias, who served God and St. Peter: And Hollingshood says, that in the
year 1198. Pope Innocent the third established the erroneous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and as it appears in the Decratals, made it an Article of
the Symbol: And in the year 1218. his next successor Honorius the third, did
confirm the same, and by a Decree also did establish Reservation, Candlelight,
and praying for the dead, by which means the great number of Sacrificing and
Massing p^iests did not only increase, but Churches (falsely so called) and
Chapels, began in all places everywhere to be builded and erected for to
wor^hip Images in; and the Saxon Kings and others built Monasteries, Abbeys,
Nunneries, Chantry-houses, and Fryer-houses, for their Monks, Nuns, Priests,
Friars, Abbots. And thus the founders or builders of your false Churches were
Idolaters, as those were spoken of in the Scriptures, and it was one and the
same Spirit of Error and Witchcraft that guided them to do them in rebellion
against God, for God never required it at their hands to do, 2 King. 17.12.15.
Jer. 7.31. and 19.5.

Secondly, The Houses of high places that the heathen and the Idolatrous Kings
of Israel built up, were built so large for height, length, and breadth, and so
strange withal, Judges 16. 1 Samuel 5.
that they did contain and hold thousands of people; for the House that Dagon
the god of the Philistine stood in, was so large, that it held about three
thousand men and women upon the Roof, and the House was full of men and women,
and the Lords of the Philistines were there: And Jehu he proclaimed a solemn
assembly for Baal, 2 Kings 10. 1 Kings 18.22.
and Jehu sent through all Israel, and called for all the Prophets of Baal, and
all his servants, and all the Priests of Baal, and all the worshippers of Baal,
and they came all into the House of Baal, and the House of Baal was filled from
one end to another: Now the prophets of Baal was in the days of Ahab four
hundred and fifty men, and sure his priests, and his servants, and his
worshippers were many more; for the House was filled with them from one end to
the other, as says the Scripture.

So likewise the Houses of high places here in England, which are falsely called
Churches, are for height, length, and breadth builded so strong, especially the
Cathedrals, and some of the others, that above in their Galleries and below,
they will hold thousands of men, yea, and the Princes, and the Rulers, and the
Nobles, and the Judges, and the Priests that preach in them for hire, and the
Prophets that study or divine for money, all in a Parish will but scarce fill
them up from one end to the other, and another to help them.

Thirdly, The Houses of high places that Jeroboam and Ahab built, they had
Vestries, and Vestments belonging to them, and likewise they had men that had
the charge over them; take one for a pattern of all the rest; 2 Kings 10.2^
And Jehu said unto him that was over the Vestry, Bring forth Vestments for all
the worshippers of Baal, and he brought them forth Vestments.

So likewise the Houses of high places, falsely called Churches, here in
England, they have men appointed to take the charge of them and their Vestries
too, who are called by the Name of Churchwardens, Vestry-men, Clarks and
Sexstones; and these, with Priests and the Vestry-men, are the Rulers of their
false Church, which is but a house of high places: For first, at the end, or in
the middle of some, there is a high place called the Steeple, where the
formerly christened Bells hang; and that place is a high place for pleasure,
and a place for profit by their ringing of their Bells, for when that one is
dead they mourn, and ring Bells, and get money; and when one is married, they
ring the Bells, and rejoice, and get money in the high place; and formerly the
Bells was wont to be rung to keep evil spirits and tempests from their Towns;
and when that the Pope or Bishop cu^st any for a sin, as they called it, they
used to curse them with Bell, Book, and Candle, then the Bells was rung, that
all might know that a he^etick, or some such like, was cursed at high Altar: So
with the Bells they bless, and with the Bells they curse; with the Bells they
weep, and with the Bells they rejoice; with the Bells they take pleasure, and
with the Bells they got money; and with the Bells they used to call people to
worship Images, and now with the Bells the people are called together to
worship a god a far off that they know not; and at the ringing the bells the
priests make themselves ready to go p^each for their hire, who has the chiefest
place in their Church, so called, viz the Pulpit; and then there is a high
place at the other end, called the Chancel, and high places of each side,
called the Isles; and a high place called the Vestry in some, where formerly the
priests Vestments, and Robes, and other trinckits formerly lay in: and then a
high place in the middle, called the body of the Church. And thus I have showed
wherein and how they are called houses of high places, and I deny them to be
Churches, etc.

Fourthly: In the houses of hlgh places that the heathens and the idolatrous
Kings of Israel and Judah built, there was pictures, images, or the likenesses
of creatures made and set up in them to be worshipped as gods, which were not
God, but Idols, the workmanship of men's hands; for Jeroboam he made in likeness
two Calves of gold, and the one he set up at the City called Dan, and thither
the people went to worship; and the other he set up at Bethel; and Jeroboam
said unto the people, These are thy gods O Israel, that brought thee up out of
Egypt: 1 Samuel 5.2. by Tho. Grashop.
And the Philistines god was Dagon, and he was (as some write) made from the
Navil downwards in the likeness of a Fish, and upwards like a man: and to this
I refer the Reader to the Marginal Notes of the great Bibles. And the god that
Ahab served was Baal, which was set up in the house at Samaria, which Ahab
built for Baal: and Baal is taken for Ashteroth, the Idol of the Zidonians,
which Jezabel caused to be worshipped: 2 King. 10.18. and 1 Kings 16.31, 32.
Judge. 16.
and Baal was made in the likeness of a Ewe, or a Sheep; read I say your
Marginal notes of your great Bibles, upon the second chapter of Judges, verse
13. And Micah the man of Mount Ephraim he had two Images made of Silver, a
graven Image, and a Moulten Image, and they were set up in the House of Micah,
for Micah had a House of gods, and he made an Ephod and a Teraphim. Now all
these gold and silver gods were the workmanship of men's hands, which the
Carpenter, the Founder, the Graver formed and fashioned in the likeness of the
creature, the which doing was forbidden of God, Deuteronomy. 5.8.
who said, Thou shall make thee no graven Image, or any likeness of that that
is in heaven above, or which is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters
under the earth.

And now I come to show what manner of Pictures and Images we had, and now have
in our high places, falsely called Churches, here in England: First, There was a
Picture called the Rood of Grace, that was swayed up in a place called the Rood
Loft, and hung upon shrines, which the people (being seduced) were led aside to
worship; for I will instance two or three particular Roods, that the Reader may
know what they were. The first that I now am going to write of, FOXES Acts and
Monuments: Vol. 2.
is a Rood that a Carpenter had made at a Town called Haddam, in Lancashire, in
the fashion of an old man, gaping and grinning in such a sort, that their
children were so frighted at it, that they durst not look upon it, whereupon
the Inhabitants did not like it, and because it was so ill savoured they would
not have it: But in the days of Queen Mary bloody Bonner commanded that a
wel-favoured Rood should be made, and of a tall stature, which was done
accordingly, and the Rood was dressed in white and green, and anointed with
Oil, and crept to, and kissed, and weighed up, and set in his old accustomed
place, called the Rood Loft in Paul's Cathedral Church, so called by them; and
by Edmund Bonners Order the Bells were rung for joy at the setting up of the
Wooden god, alias, the Rood. Again I have read of another Idol which was called
by the Name of the Rood of Dover Court, unto which the people did much resort,
because a rumor was spread abroad among the people, That the power of the Rood
of Dover Court was so great, that no man had power to shut the Church door (so
called) where he stood, therefore said they, The door is fain to stand open
night and day: Whereupon one Robert King, and Nicholas Marsh of Dodham, and one
Robert Debnam of Estborgholt, being moved by the spirit of the Lord, did (like
Gideon) go in the night ten Miles, and found the door of their Church open, as
was reported, and they took down the Rood from his shrine, and carried him
about a quarter of a mile from his place where he stood, and stroke fire with a
Steel and a Flint, and set fire to the Rood, and burnt him; for the which good
act doing, they all three good honest men did suffer death by hanging in
Chains. They had likewise in their Houses of high places, falsely called
Churches, the Image of the Virgin-Lady Mary, which they worshipped, and called
the Mother of God, their Patroness and Protectress ever more in all adversity,
and therefore Thomas Arundal Archbishop of Canterbury, directed his Mandate to
the then Bishop of London, to warn people to say certain prayers at the toling
of a Bell, or ringing of Corphew; his words were as follows: Thomas by the
permission of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Logate of the Suay Apostolic; to the right Reverend our Brother, the Lord
ROBERT, by the grace of God Bishop of of LONDON, Greeting. At the Request of
the special Devotion of our Lord the King himself, We command your Brotherhood,
straightly enjoining you. That you command the Subjects of your City and Diocese,
and of all other Suffragans, to worship our Lady MARY, the Mother of God, our
Patroness and Protectoress, evermore in all adversity with such like kind of
Prayer and accustomed manner of ringing as the Devotion of Christ's faithful
people is wont to worship her at the ringing of Coure Lesson; and when before
day in the morning ye shall cause them to ring, that with like manner of Prayer
and ringing she may be every where honored devoutly by the aforesaid Our and
Your Suffragans, and other subjects, as well religious as Secular, in your and
their Monasteries and Collegiate Churches: And they had likewise the Image of
St. Petronel, and the Image of St. Christopher, and the Image of the Crucifix;
all which and more were worshipped with Profession, bowing of the Knees,
Oblations, offering of Frankincense, going on Pilgrimage, kissings, and setting
up of Tapers, or Images of Wax lighted and burning before them, according to a
Decree made by Pope Gregory the third, at a Council at Rome, held in the year
732.

Fifthly: In the Houses of high places that the Heathen and the Idolatrous
Kings of Judah and Israel built, they made Altars and reared up in them: Ahab
he reared up an Altar in the House of Baal; 1 King. 16.32. Chron. 33.3.
and Manasseh he reared up Altars for Baal, and a Grove as Ahab King of Israel
did, whereon they burnt Incense: And Jeroboam stood by the Altar, and he
offered upon the Altar, and burnt Incense.

And so likewise there was in those Houses of high places (falsely called
Churches) here in England, Altars, and Super-Altars, Rails, Transubstantiation,
Reservation of the Lords Body, as they called it, and Mass, Mattens, and
Evening-song, holy Bread, and holy Water, Auricular Confession, Absolution, and
Blessing, and Cursing with Bell, Book, and Candle, and singing of Dirges, and
playing on the Organs, and burning of Lamps: Now Now all this stuff and more
was fetched out of the bottomless Pit, and turned into Decres to be observed and
done by both Priest and people, according to the Decrees made by the Popes, viz
Sebevianus, Vitalianus, Pelagius, Martin, and Benidicto the third: And the
ground and the end of all which doing was but to maintain the filthy lusts of
the learned men, who were trained up at Oxford and Cambridge to do all these
things.

Sixthly: The Houses of high places were consecrated; for Pope Felix the third,
made a Decree, That the Churches so called should be made hallowed by none but
by a Bishop. And Pelagius a Pope he devised a Memento to be used at the
consecrating of them. And Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, by the permission
of King Henry the first, and about the sixth year of his reign, assembled a
great Council of the Prelates and Clergy of England together at Westminster, in
which Synod and other Councils, by them it was decreed, That no Churches, as
they called them, should be hallowed before the necessary provision be made for
the priests and for the Church to be maintained: And again the high places that
the Heathens and the idolatrous Kings built up, M^cca. 10.83, 84. Amos 6.13.
were called by these Names following, viz. Dagons House, Dagons Temple, Baals
House; and the House of High places that Jeroboam built up was called the Kings
Chapel; and these Houses of high places are falsely called churches, chapels,
Kings chapels, Queens chapels, Cathedal Churches, and according to a device
of Pope Felix the third, they dedicated their Churches, so called, one to
Christ, and that is falsely called Christ's Church: and one to Peter, and that is
falsely called St. Peter's Church: and one to Paul, and that is falsely called St.
Paul's Church: and others are falsely called by Name, St. Georges Church: St.
James Church: St. Maryes Church: St. Katherns Church: St. Bennits Church: They
might as well a called it Pope St. Benidicts Church; and St. Martins Church; or
alias, Pope Martins Church; and Pope St. Nicholas Church.

Quest. But some it is very like will say, That their Churches are reformed of
all such things as is before written: To this I shall answer.

First: The Names that was given them (at their dedication) by the Popes and
popish bishops stands still, as Christ's Church: St. Paul's Church: St. Peter's
Church. And again, they are not yet reformed of all those PICTVRES and Images,
for still there remains the PICTVRES of men, women, and children in many of
them, and especially, in and about London, of Kings and Queens, Earls, Lords,
Ladies, and their children, and others; and in many places there is made by the
Painters and others the likenesses of Angels, Eagles, Doves, Lions, Wolves,
Hinds, Asses, Snakes, and the likeness of Boughs, or Trees, and the likeness of
Water, and the likness of the Sun, Moon, Stars and Firmament: And their
Churches, so called, are places of vanity, and lightness, and pleasures still;
and likewise they are places of false Worship, Deuteronomy. 4.16, 17, 18, 19.
like the House of Rimmon still; and they are Houses of Pictures, and the
likenesses of creatures is still in them, which is contrary to what God did
forbid the doing of, saying, Take ye therefore g^od heed unto your selves, lest
ye corrupt and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of male or female, the likeness of any Beast that is on the earth; the
likeness of any winged Foul that flies in the Air, the likeness of any thing
that creeps on the ground, the likeness of Fish that is in the waters beneath
the earth, for ye saw no similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb. And so yet the Houses of high places here in England were never
reformed, but in part like those of Israel and Judah that Jeroboam, Rehoboam,
Ahab, Manesseh, and of other of those Kings caused to be set up, were but in
part reformed, until such time that King Josiah came, 1 King. 13.1, 2, 3.
according to the Word of the Lord spoken by the prophet when Jeroboam stood by
the Altar at Bethel to burn Incense; of which reformation I have set down some
particulars, as follows: For although much of the Idolatry that Jeroboam,
Ahab and others had set up, were pulled down and destroyed at several times by
other Kings that succeeded them, yet the complaint was, That the high places
was left standing still, and not pulled down: And so say I, that some Kings and
Rulers that succeeded the Saxons here in England have reformed many things that
the Saxon Kings and others did do; but to this day the houses of high places,
falsely called Churches, the Tithes and the Priests remain standing up still
like the stump of Dagon.

For Asa King of Judah did that which was good and right in the eyes of the
Lord his God, for he took away the Altars of the strange gods, 1 King. 15.14. 2 Chronicles. 14, 15. chap.
and the high places, and he brake down the Images, and cut down the Groves
that his Fathers had made; and Asa removed his Mother from being Queen, because
she had made an Idol in a Grove, and he cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and
burned it at the brook Kedron: and he took away all the high places and the
Images out of the Cities of Judah, but the high places were not taken away out
of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8, 9, 10.
And Asa he commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do
the Law and the Commandments: yet notwithstanding all that Asa had done, he was
wrath with the Seer, and put him in a Prisonhouse, for he was in a rage with
him for what he spoke unto him, and Asa oppressed some of the people the same
time. 2 Kings 11.1, 2.12.18. ver. 12. chap. 2 Chronicles. 24.1, 2, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22.


And Joash, the son of Ahaziah King of Judah, did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord all his days wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed him; for
all the people of the Land went into the House of Baal, and brake it down, his
Altars and his Images brake they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Mattan the Priest
of Baal before the Altar: but after the death of Jehoiada the Priest, they left
the House of the Lord God of their Fathers, and served Groves and Idols, and
they sacrificed and burnt Incense in the high places, for the high places were
not taken away.

And Jehosaphat King of Judah he sought not after Baalim, 2 Chronicles. 17.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. 1 King. 22.43. 2 Chronicles. 20.32, 33.
but sought to the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked in his commandments, and
not after the doings of Israel: Moreover he took away the high places and
Groves out of Judah, but they were not all taken away, for as yet the people
had not prepared their hearts to seek unto the God of their f^thers, but burnt
yet in the high places Incense, so that all the high places were not taken
away; for Iehosaphat he had a love to the Idolaters, and not only in bearing
with them, but he joined himself and his arm to them, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. and 19.1,
2, 3.
and said unto Ahab, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and we will
be with thee in the war, for the which he was reproved by John the Seer, who
said unto Iehosaphat the King, Should thou help the ungodly, and love them
that hate the Lord, therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord: So that
Iehosaphat went not on thoroughly with his reformation, for the people offered
and burnt incense in the high places, because they were not taken away, viz.
their high places were not all taken away.

2 King. 18.3, 4, 5.
And Hezekiah King of Judah he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that David his father had done; and he and all Israel
that were present, went out to the Cities of Judah, and brake the Images to
pieces, 2 Chronicles. 31.1.
and cut down the Groves, and threw down the high places and the Altars out of
all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also, and Manasseh, until they had utterly
dest^oyed them all, and he trusted in the Lord God of Israel.

And Jehu King of Israel, with his Captains and his Guard, he smote with the
edge of the Sword the Prophets and Priests, 2 King. 10.
the servants and the worshippers of Baal, and they brought forth the Images
out of the House of Baal, and burnt them; and they brake down the Image of
Baal, and brake down the House of Baal, and made it a draught House: Thus Iehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel; howbeit, from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Iehu he departed not from them, to wit, the two
golden Calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

But now it came to pass, That God raised up Josiah King of Judah, according
as he had spoken by the Prophet in the days of Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.
saying, Behold, a child shall be born unto the House of David, Josiah by Name,
and he shall (O Altar, Altar) offer upon thee the Priests of the high places
that burn Incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee. And
Josiah commanded that the House of the Lord should be cleansed, and the Keepers
of the door brought forth out of the Temple of the Lord, all the Vessels that
Manasseh had made for Baal, and for the Grove, and for all the Host of Heaven,
and he burnt them without Jerusalem, in the fields of Kedron, and carried the
ashes of them unto Bethel: and he brought out the Grove from the House of the
Lord without Jerusalem, unto the brook Kedron, and stamped it to powder, and
cast the powder thereof on the graves of the children of the people; and he
brake down the Houses of the Sodomites that were by the House of the Lord, and
he defiled the high places wherein the Priests had burnt Incense, from Geba to
Beersheba, and brake down the high places of the Gates, and he defiled Tophet,
which is in the Valley of the children of Hinnom, that so no man might make his
son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Moloch; and he brake down the
Altars that were on the top of the upper-Chamber of Ahaz, which the King of
Judah had made; and the Alta^s which Manasseh had made in the two Courts of the
House of the Lord, did Josiah the King beat down, and break them down from
thence, and cast the dust of them into the Brook Kedron; and the high places
that were before Jerusalem, which Solomon King of Israel had builded for
Ashte^oth, the abomination of the Zidoniaens: and for Chemosh, the abomination
of the Moabites: Read 2 Kings 23. chap.
and for Milchom, the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the King
defile; and he brake in pieces the Images, and cut down the Groves, and filled
their places with the bones of men: and he put down the idolatrous priests whom
the Kings of Judah had ordained to burn Incense in the high places in the
Cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 34. chapter
and in the places round about Jerusalem: and he put down them also that did
burn Incense unto Baal, and to the Sun, and to the Moon, and to the Planets
(for Jupiter had a Priest, as you may read Acts 14.13.) and to all the Host of
Heaven.

Moreover Josiah he broke down the Altar at Bethel, and the high place that the
King of Israel, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made;
yea, both that Altar and the high place which was at Bethel he brake down, and
burnt the high place, and stamped it small to powder, andf burnt the Grove, and
all the Houses of high places that were in the Cities o Samaria, which the
Kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord God to anger, Josiah the King took
away, and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel: And
Josiah he turned himself, and spyed the Sepulchers that were at Bethel in the
Mount, and sent, and took the bones ^ut of the Sepulchers, and burnt them upon
the Altar, and polluted it, according to the Word of the Lord which the man of
God proclaimed by the Altar before the face of Jeroboam, as he stood by the
Altar at Bethel to burn Incense; and he slew all the priests of the high places
that were there upon the Altars, and burnt men's bones upon them: And then he
returned to ^erusalem; and that he might perform the words of the Law which was
written in the Book that Helkiah the Priest found in the House of the Lord,
Josiah he put away all the abominations that were spyed in the Land, viz. the
Images, and the Idols, and the Wizards, and the workers with familiar spirits,
and the times that Manasseh observed too: And thus Josiah he went on, and
prospered in his work, Lev. 26.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 18.9, to the 14.
and made a through reformation both in Israel and in Judah, for he turned to
the Lord with all his might, and with all his soul, and with all his heart,
according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose any like him. Here
ye may see that King Josiah did not do as other Kings did before him, that is,
reform Idolatry in Judah, and let it remain in Israel; and take away Baal, the
Altar, and the Grove, and the House of Baal at Samaria, and leave the two
golden Calves (the high place and the Altar) standing still at Dan and Bethel,
which Jeroboam set up: Nay, he reformed Judah and Jerusalem, Israel, Samaria,
Dan, and Bethel, Lev. 20.27.
and all of the abominations that were spyed in the Land, according to the Law
of Moses.

And now ye shall see what reformation has been made in England since that the
Saxon Kings, the Danes, and other Idolaters built up the high places, falsely
called Churches, Monaste^ies, Nunneries, Fryer-Houses, Chant^y-Houses, and
Colleges: Now the first beginning of any reformation that I find of the
Idolatry that they had set up, was in the days of Henry the eighth, wherein a
Parliament was called, and it was enacted and decreed, That in causes and
matters happening in contention, no person should appeal, provoke, or sue out
of the Kings Dominions, to the Court of Rome. Secondly, It was designed and
concluded, That all exportation of Anuities and first Fruits out of this Realm
to the Sea of Rome for any Bulls, Breefes, or Palles, or expedition of any such
thing, should utterly cease. Thirdly, It was enacted, That the Pope and all his
College of Cardinals, with his Pardons and Indulgences, which had so long
clogged this Realm of England, to the miserable slaughter of so many good men
(and which never could be removed before) was now abolished, eradicate, and
exploded out of this Land, and sent home to their own country from whence they
came; and what reformation was this? none at all: for all this which they took
away from the Pope, in a manner was settled upon King Henry the 8th. For first,
they made him Head of the Church, as they called it, instead of the Pope: Their
words of the Act are as follows: Be it enacted by this present Parliament,
That the King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this
Realm, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed the only supreme Head (in Earth)
of the Church of ENGLAND, so called, Anglicana Ecclesia. Secondly, And shall
have and enjoy, annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well
the Title and Style thereof, all Honors, Dignities, Preheminences,
Jurisdictions, Privileges, See Foxes Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2.
Authorities, Immuniti^s, Profits and Commodities to the said Dignity of
Supreme Head of the same Church belonging and appertaining. Thirdly, And that
our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall
have full Power and Authority from time to time, to visit, repress, redress,
reform, order, correct, restrain and amend all such errors, abuses, offenses,
contempts, and enormities whatsoever they be, which by any manner of spiritual
Authority or Jurisdiction ought, or may lawfully be reformed, repressed,
ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended; any usage, custom,
foreign Laws, foreign Authority, Prescription, or any thing or things to the
contrary hereof notwithstanding.

Now for my part I see that none of the poor common people were ever the more
eased of their burdens, (only the King and the Bishops, with the rest of the
Clergy) except their paying of Peter Pence to the Pope, and that was none at
all, because now the Priests have a Penny for the smoke of every Chimney, as
the Pope had: Now see where the reformation was, first, That a Bible of the
largest Volume, and in English, be provided, and set up in some convenient
place of every Church, as they called it. Secondly, The Paternoster was to be
in English. Thirdly, Sermons was to be made quarterly. Fourthly, Such feigned
Images (but not all) which were abused by Pilgrimage and Offerings, were to be
taken down without delay. Fifthly, Tho. Bockets day was forbidden to be
observed, but no other. And sixthly, The knoling of Aves was forbidden, lest
the people should hereafter trust to have pardon from the Pope for the saying
of Aves between the said knoling, as they have done in times past. Seventhly,
The Abbeys, Monasteries, Fryar-Houses, were many of them pulled down and
destroyed. And eighthly, The Abbots, the Monks, the Friars were suppressed; but
the Popish Bishops, viz. Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests, were upheld still,
and maintained by their goodly Lordships: Glebe-Lands, Rectories, and Tithes,
as well as when the Pope was the Head of the Church, and men and women were
burned for Heretics, as they called them, then, as they were when the Pope was
Head of the Church, so called: And Transubstantiation, and the Communion in
both kinds: and Vows of Chastity: and the forbidding of Priests marriage: and
private Mass: and Auricular Confession: and all Images, which served for no
other use but as Books for unlearned men that can no Letters, to be admonished
by them, as they said: All such stuff was left, with the High Places, falsely
called Churches, standing without any scruple at all.

And again, in the days of King Edward the sixth many, or very near all the
aforesaid stuff was laid aside, only the Houses of High Places, the Bishops,
Archbishops, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, their great Lordships, Rectories,
Parsonages, Glebe-lands, Tithes, first fruits, and all these remained still
unpull'd down: But when Queen Mary came to the Crown, and ruled, then all that
her Father and Brother had reformed, she set up again, [except Abbeys,
Monasteries, etc.] and fell to burning of men and women for declaring against
her and her Bishops, and the Clargies, and the peoples abominations, according
to the measure of light by them received, faster then all the Kings that were
before her. And Queen Elizabeth, she and her Council, and Parliament, reformed
many things, that the others set up in the high places, and otherwise; but
still they left the Archbishops, Bishops, their great Lordships, and the
Glebe-Lands, the Rectories, and the Parsonages. the first Fruits, Tithes, and
the Houses of High Places standing for to be maintained still.

But then in the days of the late King, the bishops and the Clergy by his
Authority had got an increase into their High places of their Organs, their
Rails, their Altars, Organists, and Que^istors, bowing and cringing to the
Altars; their white Surplisses, Tippits, Hoods, and Copes: and likewise Courts,
Canons, and Intergatories, Parrators-prisons, Stocks, Whips, Gags, Pillories
for the honest Puritans to be punished withal; but when the long Parliament
sat, they voted twelve of the bishops to be Traitors, and cut off the head of
one, and put down all the rest, with Danes and Chapters, and all their Courts,
called Ecclesiastical Courts: the Star Chamber, the High Commission Court, and
Counsel Table, Anno 17. Caroli Regis.
and all their Officers and Attendants belonging to them: and caused the
Altars, Rails, Organs, Quirestors, Canons, Singing-men, and Singing-boyes to be
all pulled down and laid aside, and caused the priests to lay aside their
Surplisses, Tippits, Hoods, and took away the great Lordships and Lands from
the Bishops, Danes and Chapters and sold them and their great Houses for the
public use, and cut off the late Kings head, and put down Kingly power or
Government, as oppressing and burthensom to the people, and voted down the
House of Lords as useless; and made sale for the publikes use of the Kings
Houses, Lands and Estates, and broke the Crowns to pieces for the publikes use,
as was repeated. An Act, Dei Vonens: Sept. 1650.
And likewise they repealed those Laws which the Enemies of God made use of to
persecute the godly people by, and so granted some liberty to religious and
peaceable people, as you may see by an Act of Parliament, but notwithstanding
all this, they have left the High places (falsely call e^ Churches) standing
still, with the priests belonging to them, and the Glebe Lands, the Parsonages,
and the Viccarages, and the Laws that the pope and popish Kings made to oppress
the people by, with paying of tithes, and suing men at Law for tithes and
imprisoning men for non-payment of tithes, and made an Ordinance for the taking
trebble damages by distress of men's goods for non-payment of tithes; all this
still remains undone and unreformed still by this present power that now rules;
and all those Judges and Justices in whom the Devil rules, are protected, who
casts some of us (the people called Quakers) into prisons, Rev. 2.10.
and whip and stock us for bearing our testimony of Jesus by the spirit of
prophecy: And likewise our payment of tithes is our testimony that we thereby
do own Christ Jesus come in the flesh, and that for his sake do suffer both
imprisonment and the spoiling of our goods, and so own him to be to us both
King, Lawgiver, Judge, and Priest, and deny all Laws that are made in
opposition to him, who has changed the priesthood and disanulled the Law, even
Christ Jesus, the same yesterday, to day and for ever, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, Amen. But I say, all those that make Laws for to pay tithes,
and all they who by those Laws require or force people to pay tithes; and all
they who do pay tithes, and all they who receive tithes, priests or
improprietors, deny Christ Jesus by their works to be come in the flesh, and
set at naught what he has done upon the cross, and so likewise by their works
own him not to be unto them neither King, Lawgiver, Judge, Priest, nor
Redeemer, and so they all agree together, and set themselves against the Lord
and against his anointed: but of tithes I have more to say against them
hereafter.

Quest. But it is very likely that some may say, What? wilt not thou pay thy
money to the building and repairing of our Churches, or of that Church of the
Parish where thou dwell, for they that live in a Parish must do as the rest
of the parish does, and be subject to the Orders and Customs of the place
where they live.

Prove. 15.9. Exodus 23.2. ver. 24. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3.
Ans. The way of the wicked is abomination to the Lord; and it is written, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor do after their works: but I am to
obey the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, therefore I have nothing to do
with Ieroboams House of High Places, neither go I to worship in the House of
Rimmon; therefore if Baal must have a House built or repaired, let Omri and
Ahab do it, for I deny their works; and therefore refuse to put a hand to it,
Isa. 15.1, 2.
or to pay any money toward it; for I go not with Moab to the high places to
weep nor to howl, neither do I take any delight in the high places that are
decked with many colors upon the Walls, with the likenesses of several
creatures drawn by the painters, and likewise their Scutchins and Streamers,
and carved and graven Images of dead men, and women, and children, and the
pillars of the high places likewise decked with several colors, ^zek. 16.16, 1^,
18, 19.
all are whoredoms and abomination, as you may read in the Scriptures. And now
I come to speak of the priests which now go under the title of Ministers of
parishes, but formerly they had titles given them by men, of Archbishops,
Bishops, Danes, Prebends, Archdeacons, Parsons, Rectors, priests, Clarks, made
after the manner of other Nations, and not of God.

Isa. 29.13. 2 King. 17.32, 33. 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
The people they feared the Lord, but said the Lord, Their fear toward me is
taught by the precepts of men. And they made unto themselves of the lowest of
them Priests for the high places, which sacrificed for them in the Houses of
high places, and after the manner of other Nations: Jeroboam he made priests of
the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi, and he placed
those priests in the high places which he had made at Bethel. Now the lowest of
the people were young men who were made priests of; for Micah the man of Mount
Ephraim he consecrated a young man, Judge. 17. chap.
and he became his priest: and he likewise had before consecrated one of his
own sons, who became his priest: but the young man that Micah consecrated came
out of Bethlehem-Iudah, and he was of the Family of Judah, and a Levite, as
says the Scripture, and he took hire, for Micah he hired him to be to him a
father and a priest for ten sheckles of silver by the year, and a Suit of
Apparel, and his Victual, so Micah hired him, Mich. 3.11.
and consecrated him, and he became his priest: The priests preach for hire,
the prophets divine [or study] for money, and such were never made priests by
the command of the Lord, but by man only; for Jeroboam he returned not from
the evil of his ways, but made again of the lowest of the people priests for
the high places, and whosoever would he consecrated him, and he became one of
the Priests of the high places after the manner of other Nations, viz. the
Heathen; 1 Kings 13.33, 34. 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
and this thing became a sin unto the House of Jeroboam, even to cut it off,
and to destroy it from off the face of the earth: And the Kings of Judah they
set themselves against the Lord, and against his Anointed, as the Kings of the
Heathen did do, so did they; for they ordained priests to burn Incense in the
high places in the Cities of Judah, 2 Kings 23.5. Acts 14.13.
and in the places round about Jerusalem, unto Baal, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Planets, viz. Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and Saturn, and to all the host of
Heaven, after the abomination of the heathen; and the Kings of the earth made
Jupiter a priest, and Pharaoh King of Egypt he had made him priests, and gave
them portions to eat; and the Land the priests of Pharaoh had, Genesis 47.22, 26 2
Kings 17.13.
was not sold with the rest of the Egyptians; and Baal had priests made for
him. Now in the days of these Kings of Israel and Judah, God raised up his own
prophets, and sent them to declare against these priests and false prophets
which the Kings of Judah and Israel had made for the Houses of high places,
like unto other Nations; and likewise against both the Kings, 2 Chronicles. 36.1^
Ier. 25.3, 4.
the people, and the high places too, for all had transgressed very much after
all the abominations of the Heathen: go read and see the testimony that the man
of God bare against Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and of Elijah against Ahab
and the prophets of Baal, 1 King. 18. chap. and the Vision that Isaiah saw in
the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah, Isa. 1.1, 2, 3.
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, Thy princes, said he, are rebellious, and
companions for thieves; every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards:
And of such priests as they had made, he said, His Watchmen are blind, they are
all ignorant, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark; yea, they are greedy
dogs, which can never have enough; they are Shepherds that cannot understand;
they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his Quarters. Isa.
56.10, 11 12. Ier. 1.1, 2, 3. and 2.13. and 7.31. and 8.1, 2. and 19. chap.
And Jeremiah to whom the Word of the Lord came in the days of King Josiah,
and in the days of Iehoiakim King of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year
of Zedekiah, and unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive, saying, My people
have committed two great evils, they have forsaken me the Fountain of living
Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water;
they had forsook the Lord and his Commandments, and his House at Jerusalem
wherein he had placed his Name; They have forsaken me said the Lord, and have
estranged this place, both the Kings of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: They have built also the high places of Baal, and have burnt incense
unto other gods: and they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the
Valley of the son of Hinnom, which I commanded them not: and the prophets
prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit: And said the
Lord, the prophets prophecy lies in my Name, I sent them not [so the Lord by
his true prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 14.14. Read Ier. 23. chap.
whom he sent himself, disowned those that the kings of the earth had made and
sent forth] neither have I, said the Lord, commanded them, neither spoke unto
them; they prophecy unto you, said the Lord, a false vision, and a divination,
and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart. Ye may see that the
prophets, the priests, and the high places that the kings of the earth, 2 Kings
17.1^^ 15. Ier. 7.31. and 19.5.
who sat and took counsel together, and built high places, and made priests
for them, that was such a work, and is such a work now as God never required at
their hands to do, for the Lord disowns all, and said, Who has required this
at your hands? I commanded them not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my
mind: and those priests they preached for hire, and studied, or divined for
money, but such the Lord never sent; for see Ezekiels testimony against them,
Ezekiel. 13. chap. [of Israel.] And in chap. 22. against both the princes,
prophets, priests and people of Jerusalem. And likewise in chap. 34. against
the shepherds of Israel. And Hosea he bate testimony against them, Hos.
4.6:7:8:9. and 5.1. and 8.3:4:5. and 10.8. And Amos he bare testimony against
them, Amos. 7.9.10.11.12.13. ver. And Miaah he bare his testimony against them
also, Mic. 1.5. and 3.1.2.3.5.9.10.11.12. ver. and Zachariah 11.17. And thus
you may here all see how the Lord God by his prophets disowned and abhorred the
works of the Kings, and Rulers of the Earth, and people, for making Images, and
worshipping of them; and for building up of Houses of high places, such as are
now called Churches; and likewise for their consecrating and ordaining of
priests for those high places Well then, was it a sin in those days? And do not
the Kings and Rulers of the earth that do the same things either in whole or in
part now, commit sin as well as they did? And do ye think that the Lord God
does not abhor their works now as he did then? And do ye think, ye Rulers of
England, priests and people, to escape the judgments of the Lord for your
doing of such things more then they? Or do you think that they were greater
sinners then you are? I tell you, nay; for except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. You see that many generations passed before King Josiah came,
and what? do you think that the Lord cannot raise up the like in England, to do
the like work here as Josiah did do, and pro^per in it likewise till it is
finished? I tell you all, That your time is drawing on, and a reward for your
works you shall be sure of; for such as you have sown, such you shall reap; for
in a^l that ye have done, ye have but sown to the flesh, and of the flesh ye
shall reap death and destruction from the Lord God.

Did. 23. ^ist. 3. Can. ADRIANUS. ^. P. FOXES Acts 1 and oMnumentt Vol. 1.
Constitutions and Canons, 32, and 39.
And now I shall show you that read this Treatise what I have read and gathered
out of Histories, how that the Rulers of the Earth have (with the Pope) made
Cardinals, Bishops, Deacons, Suffragans, Priests, etc. but such a work God has
not required any one of them to do; but they have in their own wills, and by
their own imaginations done it; for I have read, That it was thought good that
the Election of the Bishop of Rome should be of no strength without the consent
of the Emperor of Rome, the Emperor did choose the Bishop of Rome: But says my
Author, This is now void; for now the Cardinal they choose the Pope, and the
Pope he makes Cardinals; and Bishops, and the Bishops they ordain the rest with
their Assistants, viz. their Ordinaries, Suffragans, Archdeacons, and by a
carnal commandment did they ordain and consecrate them.

Pope John the thirteenth writ to King Edger in England, and willed him to see
in his Cathedral Churches that none be promoted to be Bishops but such as were
of the Monastical Religion: Anno 747.
And likewise willed the said King Edger, To seclude all the Secular
Prebendaries at Winchester, and to place in Monks: And that no Secular Clark
should be chosen a Bishop. And so in King Edgberts reign, Dunston Bishop of
Canterbury, Oswald Bishop of York, and Ethelwaldus Bi^hop of Winchester, they
discharged the Priests and Cannons out of their Houses, to place Monks in their
Cells and Cathedral Churches, as they called them; but in former times the
black Monks (who went all in black clothes as the priests of England now do)
that followed the order of pope St. Bennit, were called Regulars and Votaries,
and had nothing to do with any Ecclesiastical Ministry, Anno 606.
till the time that Bonifacius the fourth made a Decree that Monks might use
the Office of Preaching, Christening, and of hearing Confessions, and assoyling
them from their sins. And in King Edwins days the black Monks of Bennits Order
began to swarm in England, out of which Habit of black clothes the priests of
England cannot yet get out of to this day. And now seeing that I have mentioned
these black Monks of pope Bennits Order, I will put forth three Queries for the
parish-Ministers so called, of ENGLAND to answer with moderation.

First, Seeing that you now in these days so many of you go in black Apparel,
and in long black clokes especially, Whether the Chemarims, which were certain
idolatrous priests who wear black apparel (as you may read in the Marginal Note
upon the tenth chapter of Hosea, and the fifth verse) be your example so to do,
yea or nay?

Secondly, Or whether do ye in love follow the fashion of the black Monks of
Pope St. Bennits Order in your so doing, year or nay?

Thirdly, Seeing that Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Prelates and
Clargy of England in their Synodal Council decreed, Hen. 1. and about the sixth
year of his reign at Westminst.
That the Garments of the priests should be of one color, and that their
Shoes should be decent, then I say, Whether a black color was thought to be
most decent for the priests ga^ments? and if it was, then Whether you the
priests of England, who are now called Ministers, do out of conscience at this
day observe that Decree, and so wear your garments all of a black color as
m^st decent, yea or nay?

The Kings and Rulers of the earth, with the pope, made for themselves Bishops,
Danes, Danes and Chapters, Parsons, Vicars, Priests, Ministers, and by their
own carnal commandments were they made, and not otherways, as you may see
hereafter.

In the days of king Henry the fourth it was agreed upon by the king, Statu^o
ex Offi^i^ Reg. Hen. 4.
and the bishops, and other lords, That no man within this Realm, er other of
the Kings Majestyes Dominions, presume to take upon him to preach privily or
apertly, without special License firct obtained of the Ordinary of the same
place.

And in the days of the said king, Henry the fourth, Constitutions was made by
Thomas Arundal Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, and he directed his
Mandate, and sent to all and singular [as he said] our Reverend ^rethren,
Fellow-bishops and our Suffragans; and to Abbots, Priors* Danes of Cathedral
Churches, Arch-Danes, P^ovests and Cannons; also to all Parsons, Vicars,
Chaplins and Clarks of parish-churches; [as he called them] and to all Lay
dwelling in his province of Canterbury: Greeting.

That no manner of person, secular or regular, being authorized to preach now
by the Laws prescribed, or licensed by special privilege, shall take upon him
the Office of preaching the Word of God; or by any means preach unto the Clargy
or Laytie either within church or without in English, except he first present
himself, and be examined of the Ordinary of the place w^ere he preaches; and
so being found a fit person, as well in manners and knowledge, he shall be sent
by that said Ordinary to some one church or more, as shall be thought expedient
by the Ordinary, according to the quality of the person.

Now take notice, that all Laws, Decrees, Ordinances and Constitutions were
made and established by the Authority that the kings and bishops had from the
pope; and by the pope and his authority was all the bishops, danes,
archdeacons, suffragans, priors, priests, vicars, chaplains, made and ordained
here in England: An. 25. Hen. 8. chap. 20.
For first, the king he was to nominate who should be appointed to be bishop to
any See or Diocese within this Realm; and that then every person so presented
to the pope, and by him approved of, was to be consecrated here in England by
the Archbishop in whose province the said bishopric shall be: Read the Act at
large. An. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 14.
but when king Henry the eighth had cast off the pope, then it was enacted by
the King and the Lords, spiritual and temporal, and Commons assembled in
parliament, That no person or persons that the King should nominate to be a
bishop or archbishop in this Realm hereafter, should be commended to the pope,
or to the Sea of Rome, to have the dignity or office of archbishop, or bishop
within this Realm. And it was likewise enacted, That King Henry the eighth
should nominate the person to be bishop or archbishop to the bishopprick that
shall hereafter be void; and that he was to send his Letters Missive to the
Prior and Covent, or the Dane and Chapter of the cathedral Churches, where the Sea of such Arch-bishopprick or bishopprick shall happen to be void; and they
was to choose and elect that person whose name was contained in the Letter
Missive, to the Office and Dignity of the arch-bishopprick; and then the party
so chosen was to be presented to the King, and the other bishops was to
consecrate him, and then he was to be invested into his place. And so king
Henry the 8th. was set in the popes place to be Head of the church, An. 26.
Hen. 8. cap. 1.
and the Defender of the Faith and the same thing that the pope did, for the
most part he did, with his bi^hops and others to help him. And so likewise I
find among the Injunctions and Ecclesiastical Orders drawn out by the King and
his Council, FOX. Act. and Mon. Vol. 2. Constitut. and Can. made by K. JAMES
and the Bish. 50, 51
it was agreed upon, and directed to the Parsons, Curates, etc. That they
should not ^dmit any man to preach within their Cures but such as were lawfully
licensed thereunto by the king or the bishop of the Diocese. Now it is to be
observed, That none was to preach but such as was licensed thereto by the king
and his bishops. And so likewise in the days of Queen Mary none was to preach
but such as should be licenced or allowed by her authority, An. 1. MARY 1.
parl. cap. 1.
or by any archbishop or bishop of the Realm; or by a lawful Ordinary: or by
the Universities of Cambridge or Oxford. So that all the preachers was made
either by a woman or by men, that preached; and they whom God ordained and sent
was not suffered to preach, but must be burnt.

And in the days of Queen Elizabeth it was enacted, That every person under
the degree of a bishop, which does or shall pretend to be a priest or minister
of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, shall in the presence of the bishop or
guardian of the Spiritualities subscribe all the Articles of Religion which was
agreed upon by the archbishops and bishops of both provinces, Ann. 13. ELIZ.
cap. 12:
and the whole clargy; but if the party did affirm or maintain any Doctrine
directly contrary to those articles, except he did revoke his error, he was to
be deprived.

And again, Constitut: and Can. 34. made in K. JAMES days.
None was to be made a Minister or admitted to preach or administer the
Sacraments, being under the age of 24. years, unless he bring to that Diocese
from men known to the Bishop, to be of sound Religion, and a testimonial of his
honest life, and of his professing the Doctrine expressed in the said Articles.
So that all the preachers, and ministers, and priests was made, ordained and
allowed on by a Woman and her Bishops; and all that they did was contrary to
what God had done, as you shall see hereafter. And thus the Kings, Queens,
Lords, and Commons set themselves in councils, and took counsel together (but
not of the Lord) how to make to themselves Bishops, Archbishops, Danes,
Priests, Preachers, Ministers, etc. and if they did not like their preaching,
then they did turn them out when they had so don; but who required any of all
this at their hands? did God requre it at their hands? I say, Nay: for although
God did long bear with them, yet you may remember what end they came to by the
Parliament in those years they sat in, from 1641. to 1653.

But in the year 1644. the Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament, The
parish Ministers of Engl. are made by a carnal commandment.
they made an Ordinance to give power to the Presbiter Assembly of Divines (so
called by them, and the Presbyters) for the Ordination of Ministers according
to the Directory for Ordination; and they gave the Assembly of Divines Rules
for examination of them they ordained to be Ministers, as hereafter is
expressed.

1. He that was to be ordained was to address himself to the Ministers
appointed to ordain, and he was to bring with him a testimonial that he had
taken the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, Can. 33, 34, 36.
and how long he had been in the University, and of his diligence in his
studyes, and what Degrees he had taken up there, and of his age, which was to
be twenty four years at least; but especially of his life and conversation.

2. They was to proceed to inquire touching the Grace of God in him, and of his
learning and sufficiency; and they were to make trial what skill he had in the
original tongues by reading the Hebrew and Greek Testaments: and of his other
learning and skill in Logic and Philosophy: and what Authors in Divinity he
had read: and they were to make trial of his knowledge in the chief grounds of
Religion: and of his ability to defend the Orthodox. Doctrine against that
which they called unsound and erroneous Opinions: and of his skill in the sense
and meaning of such places of Scripture as shall be propounded to him in case
of conscience: and likewise, what skill he had in the Chronology of Scripture,
and of the Ecclesiastical History: and he was to expound a place of Scripture
before the ordainers of him, and frame a discourse in Latin: and he was to
preach before the people and the Ministers that were appointed to ordain him:
and then after he was approved of, he was to be sent to the Church where he was
to serve, and a Writing was to be read before all the people, and after it was
to be fixed upon the Church door, so called; and if no just exceptions was
found against the party that was to be ordained, So it was done in the days of
the Bish: s^^^ Constit Con. 31.
then they that were appointed to ordain him, were to proceed to ordination by
fasting and prayer to God for a blessing upon him that was to be set apart to
the office of the Ministry, and seven of them that was appointed to ordain was
to be at the place, and one of them was to preach to the people of the office
and duty of a Minister of Christ, and how the people ought to esteem of him for
his work sake: And after Sermon was ended, he that preached was to demand of
him that was ordained concerning his faith in Christ Jesus, and his persuasion
of the truth of the then reformed Presbyter Religion, and of his resolution to
be diligent in prayer, reading, meditation, preaching, and his zeal against
Error and Schism, and his care that himself and his family walk unblamably. And
when he had declared his willingness, and promised his endeavors (by the help
of God) so to do, then they that were appointed to ordain was solemnly to set
him apart to the office and work of the Ministry by laying their hands upon
him, with a short prayer to this effect.

Thankefully acknowledging the mercy of God in sending Jesus Christ for the
redemption of his people, and for his ascension to the right hand of God the
Father, and the pouring out his spirit, and giving gifts to men, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering and building up
of his Church; and for fitting and inclining this man to this great work; to
beseech him to fill him with his holy sptrit, whom in his Name we Here let them
impose their hands upon his head.
set apart to this holy service, to fulfill the work of his Ministry in all
things, that he may both save himself, and the people committed to his charge.
And then after they was to commend by prayer him and his Flock to the grace of
God: And after they had sung a Psalm, the Assembly was to be dismissed with a
blessing; Canon. 33, 35.
and then they was to give with him a Testimonial of his ordination, for the
which he was to pay ten shilllings to the Register of the Assembly.

March 20. 1653. Ordinance O. P. and his Council. Can. 39. and Can. 51.
And an Ordinance was made by the present Rulers of this Nation for appointing
Commissioners for Approbation of public Preachers, that the places destitute
throughout this Nation may be supplied with able and faithful Preachers: And
for this end Commissioners were authorized to judge and take knowledge of the
ability and fitness of any person that was nominated and presented to them: and
before any person was to be admitted to be settled in any Benefice or public
Lecture, to preach and to take the stipened or profits thereof, he was to be
judged and approved one by the persons hereafter named in the Ordinance (of
whom you may see in the said Ordinance at large.) First, They were to see if
the party nominated and presented be a person for the grace of God in him. Can.
36. and 39.
Secondly, of his holy and unblameable conversation. And thirdly, as also for
his knowldege and utterance, able and fit to preach the Gospel. And fourthlyly,
upon their Approbation of such, his ability and fitness according to the
qualification above mentioned, they are to grant unto such Parson admission to
such Benefice or Lecture by an Instrument in Writing under a common Seal. Can.
41. The Bishops Cannons and Constitutions, and the two Ordinances, are in part
equivolent each with other.
But in the latter end of the Ordinance they conclude and say, It is not
intended, n^r shall be construed to be any solemn or sacred setting apart of a
person to any particular Office in the Ministry; of which I let pass for
others to judge what difference there is betwixt this solemn and sacred setting
apart, and foam others in the foregoing generations; for the Pope he gave power
to the Cardinals who were his Legates, and by them to the kings and the
bishops. And a Parliament they set King Henry the eighth in the seat of the
Pope, and then the bishops received their power from the King and the
Parliament to make Ministers by a carnal commandment, and so it continued so
long almost as Kings and Queens reigned in England. And the Parliament of Lords
and Commons they took that power from the late King and his Bishops, Articles
of Religion, 36.
to themselves, and gave power to an Assembly of Presbyter Divines to make
Ministers by; but that lasted but until the Parliament was dissolved.

And since the dissolution of the short Parliamont, O. P. and his Council have
taken the like Power, and given the like power to their Commissioners for to
judge and approve of, who are fit to be preachers only in those places
destitute throughout this Nation: So that the Kings, Queens, and other Rulers
of this Nation, having got into their hands the same power that the Pope had,
did, and do the same works in effect as the pope did; but say I, Who has
required this at their hands to do, seeing that it is the alone and proper work
of Christ to make and send forth his Messengers and Ministers, as the Scripture
testifies, how that Christ Jesus said unto his Disciples, Luke 10.2. Matt. 9,
37, 38. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28.
The Harvest truly, said he, is great, but the laborers are few, pray ye
therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
Harvest. And Christ when he ascended on high he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts unto men, and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophecs, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. And said Paul, God has set some in
the Church, first, Apostles: secondly, Prophets: thirdly, Teachers, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, and for the
perfecting of the Saints. Now I say, That God nor Christ did not give that
power neither to pope, nor to Cardinals, nor to Bishops, nor to Kings, or any
other Rulers, nor to Councils, or Assemblies, nor to Commissioners, since the
days of the Apostles; neither did he command them, nor any one of them, to go
and ordain men to be preachers for hire, nor to make ministers of the Gospel,
nor to give any man a commission to go to a parish in a city, or to a town, or
to a village, and there of the people take tithes and money for their
preaching, to the value of 100.l. 200.l. more or less by the year; this is a
work that God never required at any one of their hands to do, no more then he
did of Jeroboam, who for making and consecrating of the lowest of the people to
be priests for the high places, which thing doing, became a sin unto the House
of Jeroboam, even to cut it off from the face of the Earth, 1 King. 13.33, 34.
and to dedroy it.

Ye may read in the Scriptures that Moses he had a command from God alone for
to go and take Aaron and his sons, the Levites with him, Exodus 28, and 29 chap.
to 12, 13, 14, 15. etc. Lev. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Numb. 8.5, 6, 19. ver.
from among the children of Israel, that they might minister unto the Lord in
the priests office, and to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: But who gave Jeroboam and other the Kings of Israel and Judah,
any command to make priests for the houses of high places? And who required any
Emperor, King, Queen; or any other Ruler of the Earth, to make, ordain, or
consecrate bishops, priests, ot ministers for to pray, read, or preach in the
houses of high places, falsely called churches.

And Elijah he had a command from the Lord to go and anoint Elisha the son of
Shaphat, of Abel-Meholak, to be a prophet in his room; 1 King. 19.16.19, 20,
21. ver. FOXES Acts and Monuments: Vol. 1.
but by what authority did the pope go and anoint cardinals, bishops? etc. for
did not the Emperor and others choose the pope, or popes? then had not the pope
his command and authority from the Emperor and others (and not from the Lord
God that commanded Elijah) to do what he did?

Matthew. 28.19, 20.
And Je^us Christ said unto his Disciples, All power is given to me in heaven
and in earth; go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you always, unto
the end of the world: But the Bishops of England they had their power in the
days of King Henry the eighth, An. 25. Hen. 8. cap. 20. Luke 24.49. Acts. 1.4.
and 2.4. Ephesians. 4.11.
from him and the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, to make, ordain,
and consecrate Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, Deacons, Priests,
Ministers, etc. and the like power and command they received from other Kings,
Queens, and Parliaments afterward, but not from Jesus Christ; for they whom
Christ sent out to preach, to them he gave power, and to them he gave some
Apostles, some prophets, and some Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers: But those
who were made by the power and command of the pope, the kings and rulers of the
earth, they were called cardinals, archbishops, bishops, suffragans, priors,
covents, deanes and chapters, deacons, archdeacons, prebends, parsons, vicars,
priests, rectors, clarks, ministers, etc. And the Assembly of presbyter
Divines; so called, and the Commissioners for approbation of public preachers,
they received their power, rule, and command to ordain ministers and preachers,
and to set them solemnly and sacredly apart to the office and work of the
Ministry, from the Rulers of the earth, as you may read at large in the two
Ordinances made, one by the parliament of Lords and Commons, and the other by
Oliver protector and his counsel, by them they had their power and command, See
JOHN GOODVVIN's Book of TRIERS, page 5.
and not from Christ, for without their power and command they did not act; and
by that rule, viz. Acts and Ordinances, that the Rulers of the earth set them,
they acted by, and not by the power or spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, as did
the Apostles; and therefore all (both popes, emperors, kings, queens, counsels,
parliaments, or rulers, bishops, assembly of divines, protector, counsels, and
commmissioners) their works that they have done herein are abomination unto the
Lord, because they are not done by his power nor his spirit, but by the
imaginations and devisings of their own hearts, which by the light are seen,
and made manifest to the children of the day, whom Cod has by his spirit
called out from amongst the Babylonians, to dwell in the city of God, and to
worship him in spirit and in truth, for God dwells not in temples made with
hands, nor is he worshipped in these churches that are made with hands.

And now I shall come to show you something of what I have both heard, read,
and seen, and understand by the two Universities of Cambridge and Oxford; and
likewise, of their teaching and bringing up, and their making of young men
Masters, preachers, Doctors, etc. As for the two Universities they were founded
by the popish Saxon Kings, and other popish Kings, Bishops, Knights, etc. men
and women. The first common School in Cambridge was founded by Sigisbert, King
of the East Angles; and the University college in Oxford was founded by
Allured, one of the Saxon Kings: and Baylie college at Oxford was founded by
John Bailiol, King of the Scots: and it is recorded, That Queens College at
Cambridge was founded by Margaret, the Wife of King Henry the sixth, and
finished by Elizabeth, the Wife of King Edward the fourth: and the
Brazen-Nose-Colledge at Oxford was founded by William Smith, bishop of Lincoln;
but St. John's college at Oxford was founded by Sir. Thomas White, Alderman,
and late before Mayor of London: and for the other Colleges, they were founded
in the honor of one Saint or another, and called by their Names, viz. St. John's
College: All Souls College: Magdalene College: and another is called falsely
by the Name of Trinity College, and another by the Name of Jesus College, and
one by the Name of Christ's College: and one by the name of Corpus Christi
College; that is, the Body of Christ's college: and another by the Name of
Christ's College. So by these Names and Titles ye may see what the founders
were, and what their religion was; and now you shall see hereafter by the
practice that is in these colleges, that the great and wise men of the world
so highly esteem of for their works sake, are: But first, you shall see what
the learned themselves have writ of them: Wickliffe terms the Universities to
be the Synagogue of Satan: and John Hus. called them Lievetenants of
Antichrist: And Luther called them the Gates of Hell, the Stews of Antichrist,
Houses of Lies; for said he, TINDALL in his Book of The Revelation of
ANTICHRIST.
They are all Heretical by their School Divinity, and they are Dens of Thieves,
said he: And Tindal said, That whosoever ordained Universities, be it Alexander
at Halis: St. Thomas, or any other, he was a star that fell from Heaven to the
earth, for there are brought in (said he) moral virtues for faith and opinions
for truth; and said he, The Universities are the very confused Cloud and opened
Gate of Hell; and, said he, This Cloak [meaning the Vniversities] is of all
other most noisome, and does most hurt and damage; for said he, All moral
Divines have a wicked conscience, full of scrupulosity. And Will Dell says,
That yet the Universities are the strongest holds that Antichrist has had
amongst us: So that notwithstanding all their reformation in their Religion,
the Universities remain in a manner as bad as they were. Now for their works;
first, When any Scholar comes to any of these colleges, he is examined of his
Latin and Greek, and Hebrew Tongues; and if he be a good scholar, and perfect
in his answers, he is approved of, and when he has got him a Gown and a pair of
Cuffs, he is admitted into the college to be a Student, and if he be a great
man's son, or one that can make great friends to the Vice Chancellor, or the
head-man of an House, then he gets the greater place in the college: but if he
be a poor young man and of mean parentage, then a mean place must serve his
turn: So that in their Fountains of learning to be Ministers is respecting of
persons: for there is saying to the rich, Sit, or be thou here: and to the
poor, Be thou in one of the meanest places: And then they are set to study
Logic [that is, the Art of Reason.] Philosoyhy [that is, studying for Wisdom.]
And there they read Aristotle and Plato's Works, and others, that they may
become able disputants, that they may dispute at Schools, and make Theams and
Verses: And in that time called Lent, one college disputes against another:
Now do but observe a little of their behavior and carriage in that time of
their disputations: Those colleges who are to dispute one against another,
makes choice of one amongst themselves in each college to dispute, that by
their disputations it may be seen which is the greatest scholar: And he that
they have made choice of to dispute, they take him up upon their shoulders, and
carry him out of the school: and in the time of their disputing there is such
hissing and shouting, like a company of Gamesters at play, and when they cannot
get mastery with their tongues by disputing, then they fall together a fighting
for mastery, and tears the Gowns from one another backs; and lose their hats,
and beats one another along the streets, and some of them go away with black
eyes. And at the end of four years, if any Scholar is judged fit in
schollarship, he is to take a Degree, and then he must go about the city from
college to college bare-headed, with a square cap in his hand, and a Hood
upon his shoulders made of Lambs Skins with the Wool on it, which they call
Visiting, to beg a Grace; and if none have any thing against him, then he takes
a Degree of Batcheller of Arts; and when he has taken that Degree, he may
choose whether he will be a Divine, or a Lawyer, or a Physician, or an
Astrologer; that Art which he chooses to be of, he furnishes his study with
Books accordingly; and so to study three years more; so that four years and
three years is seven years, the time of an Apprentiship, unless that any be
favored by the Vice Chancellor, who gives a year and several graces to the
party favored; and then in the time of Lent he is to dispute for his Degree of
Master of Arts; and then at that time he takes his Degree of Master of Arts;
and then he changes his Hood, and wears a silk one, and changes his Gown, and
wears a pair of Colloshooes on his feet, and then he gives money and rich
Gloves to the Vice Chancellor, and to several Doctors, Proctors, and to the
Beadles that goes before them with a silver tipped Staff from place to place,
and then a great Feast is made in the Colledge-Hall, and there they have their
Wine and Music. And then the next Degree he takes is Batcheller of Divinity,
and after Doctor of Divinity; and now take notice, That when any comes to take
his Degree of Doctor of Divinity, that several Doctors kneels down to the
Vice Chancellor to beg a Grace for the Doctor that is to proceed, and when the
Vice Chancellor has granted him to be created a Doctor, then he rises up, and
kisseth the Vice-Chancellors cheek, and this is called the Doctoral kiss, and
then is given a Doctoral Ring, Gloves, and a Doctoral Dinner, and Music; and
at their public commencement or taking of their Degrees, they all meet
together in one of the Houses of high places, falsely called St. Maryes Church,
(or other) and there is great Scaffolds built up, and there all round the high
place sit all sorts of people, men and women, and in the middle stands a place
somewhat like a Pulpit, and in that stands some one notable Varlot, who they
count a brave Scholar, who is chosen out of the University, and he is called a
Prevaricator, or a Terryfilius, and he stands up in the middle and presence of
the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, Heads, Students, Scholars, and all the great
resort of Ministers and people f^r several hours, and jeers, scoffs, derides,
and reproaches all sorts of persons, of all ages, sexes, sorts, and
professions; and the Auditors they laugh, and rejoice, and hollow, and hiss,
and stamp, and make a noise, rejoicing to hear his wickedness, and so take
pleasure in unrighteousness; and in these times the scholars are so rude,
that at night time no women or civil people dare scarce pass out of their
houses for fear of being abused by them.

Now in the time of these seven years they have several titles given, viz.
Servitors, Vndergreagates, Divines, Students, Batcheller of Art, Master of Art;
Batcheller of Divinity, and Master of Divinity, Doctor of Divinity, etc. and in
these Universities they study Philosophy and vain deceit, the works of Flato
and Aristotle, Logic, (the art of Reason) Rhetoric, (the art of well
speaking) and read Books of Moral Philosophy, called Aethicks: and Divinity
they study likewise, and mingle all together; and all this stuff; viz. Logic,
Rhetoric, Philosophy, Divinity, the Languages of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew,
that they have learned and studied for, are called gifts fit for the Ministry,
say the wise men of the world; but I say, That these things makes not the
Vnive^sity Scholars fit for Ministers of the Gospel, but makes them light,
vain, proud, fantastical, bold, impudent, scoffers, and mockers, and
persecutors, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and despisers of
those that are good, and so not fit to be Ministers of Christ, but of
Antichrist, which are but unprofitable talkers.

And likewise in these Universities are brought up young men to be Lawyers,
Doctors of the Law, Masters and Doctors of Music; Batchellors and Doctors of
Physic, Astrologers, Mathematics, etc. and these two Universities are called
the Eyes of the Nation, but they are both dark and blind ones; and they are
called the two Fountains of Learning, but they are both stinking Fountains,
that no sweet water issues; out of them, therefore it is high time to cleanse
them of their filth and abominations. And for their learning, I am sure there
is as much wickedness and ungodliness learned and practiced both by the
Scholars and their Tutors and Governors, as by any other sort of people, as
you see in part before written. And now I say, What is the reason that the
Hospitals are laid down, and that the poor are not relieved as they were wont
to be? And why are the servants wages ab^ted? Covetousness abounds; the hand
is shut from the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. Prove. 22.22. Iam. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Hab 3.14.
and the poor is robbed, and the cry of the poor is heard, and the cry of the
Labourer is heard, and woe be to them that withholds the Labourer of his wages,
and devours up the poor, and that takes gifts and bribes for a thing of naught,
and that take pleasure in unrighteousness, and rejoice in wickedness, and
live in pleasures, and draw iniquity after you as with Carts Ropes. You Heads
and Rulers of Oxford and Cambridge, take notice of what is writ^en against you:
And as for your Scholars, they are as wild as a wild Asses Colts, headdy, high
minded, fighters, quarrellers, scoffers, and many of them will be drunk and
swear, and will cheat and cozen one another by setting one another upon the
score for bread and drink, and rob men's Orchards too, some of them, which I
have heard from their own mouths, and ly up a nights revelling and drinking,
and set great sums of money upon their fathers scores to pay, Prove. 28.24.
more then their fathers allow them; whosoever robs his father or his mother,
and says it is no transgression, the same is a companion for a destroyer; and
the drunkard shall come to poverty, and never inherit the kingdom of God: Here
is sweet bruits to make Ministers of the Gospel of; but of such and such like
do they make Ministers of at Cambridge and Oxford: for said William Dell in his
Book, DELL's Testimony against Divinity Degrees: page 1. 22.
The Universities (whose soul and life does lie in humane learning and
School Divinity) that they may gain the greater profit to themselves, and glory
to their children, have (after the example of the Heathen) given their children
Degrees in Divinity, as they in Art, and the glorious titles of Batchellors,
Masters, and Doctors in Divinity, as so many Crowns of Gold upon their heads,
to win them honor and reputation from all people, who have been under the
delusion of Antichrist; and in the confirming of those Graduations or Degrees
(which is also done f^r a sum of money) they give the Graduates License and
power to preach, and to expound the Scriptures, and that by the sole Authority
of the University; for said he, The Vice Chancellor admitting a Batchellor in
Divinity to his Degree, uses these words, In the Name of the University we
admit you to declare all the Apostolical Epistles in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: And so the Batchellor in Divinity has power in his Degree
only to deal with the Apostolical Epistles, but must go no farther. And
admitting a Doctor to his Degree, the Vice Chancellor says thus: We admit you
to interpret and profess all the holy Scriptures, both of the Old and New
Testament, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc.

So that it is plain, That the Parish Priests of the Nations, called by the
world their Ministers, buy their Power, their Gifts at the Universities, of
men, for a sum of money, Simon Magus-like, that they preach by for hire, and
study or divine for money by: Therefore they who are made Ministers at
Cambridge and Oxford are the worlds Ministers, and not Christ's Ministers, for
Christ Jesus said, All power in Heaven and in Earth is given to me: and he
ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Matthew. 28.18, 19.
and he gave gifts unto men for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, and for the perfecting of the Saints: And to those that he
gave gifts to, he sent them forth to preach the Gospel in all Nations, saying,
Go ye into all Nations, and preach the Gospel in every creature: And he gave
them power, and of him they received power, and were by Christ alone made able
Ministers, Matthew. 10.8. Acts 2.4. Gal. 1.11, 12. 2 Cor. 3.6. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians.
4.11.
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: and for this they gave not any money;
for said Christ, Freely have ye received, freely give: neither did they learn
the Gospel of man, but had it by the revelation of Jesus Christ: And those whom
Christ sent out to preach the Gospel, were called Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc. But those that are made Ministers at the
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, are called Batchellor of Art, Master of
Art: Batchellor of Divinity, Master of Divinity, Doctor of Divinity, etc. and
these receive their power from men, and not from Christ: We (says the
Vice Chancellor) admit you to declare, etc. Now Christ told his Apostles, That
all power in heaven and in earth was given to him of his Fatther: but of whom
received the Vice Chancellor his power? not of Christ, but of man, as appears
by a Statute Law, the words are these, Anno 1. MARY: 1 Parl. cap. 3. a carnal
commandment to make Ministers by. Prove. 15.8, 9, 26. ver.
If any person or persons shall molest, disturb, vex, or misuse any Preacher or
Preachers that at any time hereafter shall be licensed, allowed, or authorized
to preach by the Queens Highness, or by any Archbishop or Bishop of this
Realm, or by any other lawful Ordinary, (or by any of the Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford) etc. Here by man's Laws the Vice-Chancellors receive their
power and Authority to make Preachers, and for money do they admit men to
preach: and for their gifts they pay men for, and for their admittance to
preach they give money for; and for hire they preach, and for money they study
and divine, and all that is done by the means of the two Universities, which is
an abomination to the Lord: for a corrupt fountain, cannot send forth at the
same place both sweet water and bitter: for I say, There is three sorts of men,
or four, that ascends out of these two Fountains, viz. Cambridge and Oxford,
and these four sorts are all learned men, and men that are in high esteem with
the men of the world, and these are, the Lawyers, the Priests, called
Ministers, the Doctors of Physics, and the Astrologers, which the world runs
after a whoring, as after so many Idol-gods: for first, many people if they
have lost any thing, or have any thing stolen from them, then they run to the
Astrologers to know where it is, and there goes one part of their money for
casting of a figure, and telling of a lie. Secondly, If they be sick a little,
then they run to the Doctors for help, and not to God, for he is not in all the
thoughts of the wicked: and so the Doctor he gets another sum of money for his
imaginary directions that profits not, but does hurt to the bodies of men,
women, and children. Thirdly, If any difference or quarrel befall amongst men,
then straightwaies they run to ask counsel of a Lawyer, and ask not counsel of
the Lord: and of the Counselors, Lawyers, etc. they take counsel to arrest,
and sue one another at the Law, and they get another part of the peoples money.
Fourthly, The people run generally after the Priests, who they call Ministers,
that preach to them for hire. and divine for money, thinking that by those
unprofitable talkers they shall be taught the way to heaven, and to them they
pay tithes, and to them they give money, gifts, and rewards, and of them they
are ever learning, but are never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
because they are seduced by such unprofitable talkers; PAUL'S Epistle to the
Laodiceans, ver. 4.
and so the Priests take the peoples money for naught, and the people being
seduced by these unprofitable talkers, give their money for that which is not
bread, whereas if they would come and learn of Christ, who is the true way, and
the way to the Father, and the way to peace and rest for their souls: he would
lead them, and teach them, and feed them freely, without money and without
price.

Therefore I say to all people, So long as you follow the unprofitable talkers,
which you call Ministers, Psalm. 107.19, 20. Mark. 5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Luke
4.38, 39.
you will never come to the knowledge of the tr^th, nor to rest and peace for
your souls: Thefore cease from them, and come to Christ Jesus the light, that
by the light ye may come to the Father, and behold the Lamb of God, Christ
Jesus, that takes away the sins of the world, and behold the glory of God in
the Grace of Christ Jesus.

And again, leave of going to ask counsel of the Lawyers, neither do ye take
counsel of them, for so long as ye take counsel of them, ye will never keep
money in your purse, nor your selves be at peace: Therefore I say people, When
there arises any difference amongst you, go and ask counsel of the Lord, and
take counsel of the Lord what ye shall do therein, and the Lord God will lead
you out of all strife and contention, and teach you how to agree with your
adversaries quickly, and to love your neighbor as your self, and to forgive
your enemies, and to live in peace with all men: Therefore I say to all people,
Cease from the Lawyers, and follow the Lord wholly, who gives to man every
good thing.

And again I say people, Cease from the Doctors, for so long as ye follow them,
ye will never enjoy your healths, and come to God who sent his Word and healed
the people, and delivered them from their destruction: Christ healed the woman
of her Issue who had spent all that she had, and had suffered many things of
many Physicians, and was nothing bettered, but grew rather worse. Therefore I
say, Forsake the Physicians and come to Christ, who rebuked the Fever, and it
left Peter's Wives Mother: God he wounds, and he heals: he kills, and makes
alive: he brings down to the Grave, and raises up again. But some it is very
like may say, Must we not use the means when we are sick, and take something to
do us good? Yea: but I say, Wait with patience upon the Lord; stand in awe, and
sin not: and if the Lord command thee to go and take a Plaster of Figs and lay
to thy sore, or to go and drink water, 2 King. 20.5, 6, 7. 2 King. 5.14. Luke
17.19.
or wash in the water and thou shall be whole, then go in the name and in the
fear of the Lord, and do as he commands; and believing in the Lord, so shall
thou be made whole. Now I say, That these three sorts of men, [for I will put
the Doctors and Astrologers together] the Priests, who are called Ministers,
the Lawyers, and Physicians, are all unto the people like the Locusts, the
Caterpillar, and the Palmor-worm, for all of them will have the peoples money,
and what the one leaves, the other comes after and takes. And again, I say,
That these learned men have been ever a generation of persecutors of the people
and servants of God; and the Scriptures does testify with me, that those
Priests that were made and consecrated by men, end the false Prophets, were in
all generations persecutors of the true Prophets and servants of the Lord,
which he sent forth to declare his Messages; and this I will prove both by
Scripture and History to be true.

For it is thus written in the Scriptures, That Jeroboam the son of Nebat, King
of Israel, 1 King. 12.31. and 13.33, 34.
made at Bethel Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons
of Levi, for the high places: But in the days of Jeroboam the son of Ioath,
King of Israel, God sent Amos an Herdsman of Tekoa, to Bethel; and Amos in the
Name of the Lord declared against the high places, and said, The Land should be
desolate, and the Sanctuaries of Israel should be laid waste, and that the Lord
would rise against the House of Jeroboam with the Sword: But Amaziah the Priest
of Bethel, he sent to Jeroboam King of Israel, Amos 1.1. and 7.10, 11, 12, 13
saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the House of Israel,
and the Land is not able to bear all his words, for thus says Amos, Jeroboam
shall dye by the sword, and all Israel shall be led away captive out of their
own Land: And Amaziah the Priest of Bethel said unto Amos, O thou Seer, go flee
thee away into the Land of Judah, and there cat bread, and prophecy there, but
prophecy not again any more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and the
House of the Kingdom

1 King 22.11, 22, 24. ver. 2 Chronicles. 18.10 11, 23. ver.
And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah, one of Ahabs false prophets, went and smote
Micaiah the true Prophet of the Lord upon the Cheek, etc.

And in the days of Iehoiakim King of Judah, God sent Jeremiah to go and stand
in the Court of the Lords House, and God commanded Jeremiah, saying, All the
words that I command thee to speak unto them, diminish not a word: And Jeremiah
said unto all the people that came to worship in the Lords House, Thus says
the Lord, I will make this House like Shiloh, and I will make this City a curse
to all the Nations of the earth, etc. And when Jeremiah had made an end of
speaking, Ier. 26.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 16. ver. Luke 22.2, 66. ver.
Matthew. 26.3, 4. and 2^.1, 2.
then the priests, and the false prophets, and the people, took Jeremiah,
saying, Thou shall surely dye. And the priests, and the prophets spoke unto the
princes and to the people, saying, This man is worthy to dye; but the Princes
and all the people said unto the priests and to the prophets, This man is not
worthy to dye, for he has spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord our God, etc.
And the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders conspired against Christ
Jesus the Son of God, and held a consultation, and they and the whole Council
took Jesus and bound him, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate,
and would not cease till they had got him crucified and put to death; for said
they, We have a Law, John 19.7. Act. 4.7. chap. and 23. chapter v. 2. and 25. chapter
v. 2, 3
and by our Law he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God, etc.
And so likewise in the days of the Apostles, if any tumult, or imprisonment,
or death fell upon them, the Priests, the Scribes, and the Rulers of the Temple
would often have a hand in in it, first or last.

And as the priests and false prophets were that Jeroboam and other of the
Kings of Israel and Judah had made, such like persons for persecuting were the
Bishops and the Clergy of England, who were bred up at the Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, and such are the priests (who are called Ministers) in
these days, for I say, The same spirit that ruled the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, etc. in the persecution of the servants and saints of God, the same
spirit ruled the Bishops and the Clergy in the days of the Kings and Queens of
England; and the same spirit rules the priests (called Ministers) in England
now in these days as it did them in those days; Pope INNOCENT the third, and
Pope LEO at RATISBONE. See the form of the Spanish Inquisition: FOX Act and
Mon. Vol. 1, 2. See the Table of Germany, Spain, France, Italy, and other
Countries as well as the English Martyrs. JOHN CLARK of Melden in France a
Wool-Carder by Trade. This latter was done upon him at METZ in LOTHERING, 1524.
for the Pope in his Councils made Degrees, and Canons, Institutions for the
correction of Heretics, as they called them; for whosoever did speak against
him, his Laws, Decrees, Canons and Institutions, or the Popish Religion in
general or particular, either by disputing, preaching, writing, printing, or
otherwise, were counted Heretics, and then according to the Popes Canons,
Decrees and Institutions, were the Cardinals, Bishops, and others of his
Clergy, to proceed against them in their Ecclesiastical Courts, by
iniquisition, examination, or proof of Witness, etc. and so to pass
definitive sentence upon them, according to the Popes Canons and Decrees, etc.
and then those they called Heretics were delivered by them to the Secular
Powers, viz. the Magistrates of the Land, who did punish those that they called
Heretics by whipping, stocking, hanging, burning, chopping off of their heads,
or cutting out of their tongues, and put balls of Iron in their mouths, and
boared their tongues through with hot Irons, banishment, and confiscating of
Goods, and many other torments, etc. And now I will instance one particular
man's sufferings; and that which they made his crime, was for setting up a
certain Bill upon one of their falsely called Church doors, against the Popes
pardons, in which Bill he named the Pope to be Antichrist, for the which he was
three several days whipped, and after that he was burned in the forehead (I
would have Parliaments to take notice of this whipping and burning, and not do
as the papists do) and for pulling down the Images, and breaking them to
pieces, he was by the Canons, Priests, and Monks, etc. judged and condemned,
and by the Secular Powers, had his right hand cut off from his arm, and with a
sharp pair of pinsons they violently pulled his Nose off from his face, and his
paps from his breasts, and both his arms from his body, and afterward burned
him in the fire. And so by this example let all judge what spirit these were
of, whether this spirit that led them on to do this, was of God, or of the
Devil: I say, That that spirit that led them on to destroy men's bodies, or
otherwise, Luke 9.54, 55, 56. Matt. 26 51, 52 53.
by burning was not the spirit of Christ Jesus; for Christ answered James and
John, saying, The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save
them: therefore see how contrary that spirit was by which the Pope and his
Clergy was guided by to destroy the lives of men, to the spirit of Christ, as
you may read: And the same spirit that guided the Pope and his Councils to
destroy men's lives, guided them to make Decrees to pay tithes: for in the
Council of Lateren under Pope Gregory the tenth, said they, Let no man give his
tithes where he pleases, as before; but let them be paid to Mother Church,
etc. Now do but observe Tindall, who said, That all moral Divines have a wicked
conscience, TINDAL in his Book of the Revelation of Antichrist.
full of scrupulosity; and said he, All that do pursue are Antichrist, the
Pope, the Cardinals, Bishops and their Adherents. Take notice, and their
Adherents do pursue; therefore the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops and their Adherents
are Antichrist: and I say, If of Antichrist, then not of Christ, but against
Christ and his anointed did they sit in counsel, and plotted against the just
to destroy them.

And now ye shall see it appear that the Popes Adherents, viz. the Bishops and
the Clergy of England, were guided by the same spirit as the Pope was; Statute
ex Officio, Hen. 4.
and also the Magistrates likewise: for in the days of King Henry the 4th. it
was agreed upon by the King, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and by them
enacted, That no man within this Realm, or other of the Kings Dominions, do
presume to preach, teach, inform, maintain openly or in secret, or make or
write any Book contrary to the Catholic faith and determination of holy
Church: and if it happen that any person or persons, of what kind, state or
condition soever he or they be, do attempt any manner of thing contrary to this
Proclamation and Statute, etc. the Ordinary of the same Diocese upon
information had power by the said Statute (so called) to cause the party or
parties so defamed and evidently suspected to be arrested, and to detain the
party or parties in safe custody until he or they had purged themselves
touching the Articles laid to his or their charge in that behalf, or else till
they had denied and recanted, etc. And further, If any person was lawfully
convinced before the Ordinary of the place, or his Commissaries, of the said
preachings, teachings, opinions, writings, etc. and would not abjure and
recant, then sentence was to be pronounced by the Ordinary or his Commissaries
upon the party or parties; and after sentence pronounced he or they were to be
delivered over to the Secular Power, viz. the Mayor, Sheriffs, or Sheriff or
Bailiff of the City, Town, Borrough or Village of the same County, who were to
take unto them the said persons so offending, and cause them to be openly
burned in the sight of all people, etc.

And Thomas Arundal Archbishop of Canterbury, with other of the Popes
Adherents, added to the Statute so called their own Constitutions, whereof one
was: Item; No manner of person shall presume to dispute upon the Articles
determined by the The Pope and his Adherents were meant by them to be the
Church.
Church, as is contained in the Decrees, Decreetals or Constitutions
provincial, or in the general Councils; nor none shall call in doubt the
Authority of the said Decreetals or Constitutions, or the Authority of him that
made them, nor teach any thing contrary to the determination thereof, etc. and
whosoever does preach, teach, or obstinately affirm contrary to this and all
other Constitutions and Decrees (except he recant in manner and form aforesaid)
shall forthwith incur the penalty of Heresy, and shall be pronounced an
Hereti^k in all effect in Law. And no sooner was these Constitutions and their
pretended Laws finished, but Thomas Arundall Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
learned Clergy his Brethren, Suffragans and Assistants, fell to put it in
execution, and past sentence definitive upon William Sautre, alias, Chautre,
for an Heretic, and delivered him over to the Secular Power, viz. the Mayor
and Sheriffs then of London to be put in execution; and for fear (said my
Author) that it should not be speedily enough done, The Spanish Inquisition is
no Law of God; nor the Dominican Friars that were deputed Inquisitors, were no
just Judges of Heresy: Neither was the English Clergy, who were led by the
same spirit. See FOX. Act. and Mon. Vol. 1. Elizabeth Young denied to swear in
the days of Queen MARY. Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. and 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22. Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10, 11. James 5.12. Luke 23. chap. Act. 12.2.
the Bishops called upon the King to make a Decre, who thereupon did, and sent
it to the then Mayor and Sheriffs of London to put it in execution; and the
words of the Decree in the latter end of it are as follows: Provided always
according to the Law of God and man, and the Canonical Institutions in this
behalf accustomed, That such Heretics convict and condemned in form aforesaid,
ought to be burned with fire: We command you as straightly as we may or can,
firmly injoyning you, that you do cause the said William Sautre, being in your
custody, in some public or open place within the Liberties of your City
aforesaid [the cause being aforesaid published to the people] to be put in the
fire, and there in the same fire really to be burned, to the great horror of
his offense, and the manifest example of other Christians. Fail not in the
execution hereof, upon the peril that will fall thereupon: Test Rege apud
Westmonast. 26. Febr. An. Regni sui.

And the like was done upon John Badly a Tailor, and Sir John Oldcastle; alias
Lord Cobham, and William Thorp, for denying swearing by the Book, and saying
the Priests had no title to tithes under the Gospel, was committed to prison,
in which it was thought that he dyed.

Now here I observe that in the Scriptures [and in the heart] it is written
that Christ said, Swear not at all; and likewise that those Ministers that he
sent out to preach the Gospel writ to the Brethren, saying, My Brethren, swear
not, neither by heaven nor by earth, nor by any other oath, etc. Now Christ
that taught men they should not swear at all, he was by the Scribes and
Pharisees and the high Priests (who taught men to swear) counted a perverter of
the Nation, and was vehemently accused, and said that they had a Law, and by
that Law he ought to dye; and they did not cease till that he was put to death.
And James (he was by Herod slain with the sword) who writ to the twelve
scattered Tribes, saying, Above all things my brethren swear not, etc. And
William Thorpe for denying to swear by a Book, at the Pope and his Adherents
command was put in Prison, wherein it was thought that he dyed. And now in
these days some lie in prison because they will not swear at all.

Now I suppose that none will be so impudent as to say that Christ and the
Apostles were not guided by the spirit of truth, but that they will say on the
contrary, viz. That Christ and his Apostles were guided by the spirit of truth:
Then I say thus, That the Scribes, Pharisees and the high Priests and the Pope
and his Adherents, viz. the Rulers of the earth, the Bishops and the Clergy,
were and are all guided by a spirit of error; by which spirit of error the
Scribes, Pharisees, chief Priests, the Pope and his Adherents, viz. the Bishops
and the Clergy, and the Rulers of the earth, taught men to swear, and do teach
and compel men to swear by the same spirit of error. And again; The same spirit
which Christ Jesus and his Apostles taught men that they should not swear at
all, taught many of the Martyrs to deny swearing at the Pope and his Adherents
command: And the same spirit teaches us [the people called Quakers] to deny
swearing at all; for say we, It is better to obey God rather then man; and
therefore we rather choose to suffer for the name of Christ then to obey man by
swearing, contrary to the Law written in our hearts by the spirit; and by the
power of the spirit of truth are we taught, and do deny the paying of tithes to
the priests of this Nation [who are called Ministers] or any other; and by the
power of the same spirit of truth do we (so many of us as are called thereunto)
suffer not only bonds with patience, but likewise the spoiling of our goods
with cheerfulness for the Name of Christ Jesus our Lord, our Lawgiver, our
Judge and our Priest for ever of God, by the power of an endless life, and not
by a carnal commandment, as the priests of this Nation, called Ministers, are
now made by. But of tithes I have more to say hereafter, and the priests
likewise.

Anno 1540. 31. year of H. 8. April. 8.
And now I come to show what an Act was made in the days of King Henry the 8th.
the popes Successor here in England, who by the means of Stephen Gardener was
stirred up to show himself severe and sharp against those new Sectaries,
Anabaptists and Sacramentaries, as they called them, and that some Articles
might be set forth to confirm the ancient Catholic Faith; and for this and
other ends through the device of the popes Adherents, the King summoned a
parliament to be holden at Westminster of all the States and Burgesses of the
Realm; also a Synod or Convocation of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
of the learned Clergy of this Realm, to be in like manner assembled; in which
Parliament and Synod of the Bishops and the Clergy, and by their means, viz.
the Bishops and Clergy, it was decreed in pretense of unity among the Kings
subjects, That the six Articles which they had made should be received among
the people; and withal, a penalty to be inflicted upon them that refused them;
which penalty and the Articles were called the Whip with six strings: And the
six Articles consisted, the first of Transubstantiation. The second of their
Sacraments of both kinds. FOX. Act. and Mon. Vol. 2.
The third about Priests Marriage. The fourth was about the Vows of chastity,
or Widow-hood. The fifth was about private Mass, helping of souls out of
purgatory. And the sixth was about Auricular Confession. And for the bloody
penalty that was annexed unto those six Articles take as follows, and then
judge whether the King and his Bishops and Clergy did not act like the Pope;
and whether they were not led all by the same spirit as the Pope was led by,
yea or nay.

Item; That if any person or persons within this Realm of England, or any other
of the King Dominions after the twelfth day of July next coming, by word,
writing, printing, cyphering, or any other way should publish, preach, teach,
say, affirm, declare, dispute, argue, or hold any opinion that the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar under the form of bread and wine (after the consecration
thereof) there is not present really the natural body and blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ conceived of the Virgin Mary; or that after the consecration there
remains any substance of the bread and wine, or any other substance but the
substance of Christ, God and man, or after the time abovesaid publish, preach,
teach, say, affirm, declare, dispute, argue, or hold opinion that in the flesh
under the form of bread is not the very blood of Christ; or that with the blood
of Christ under the form of Wine, is not the very flesh of Christ, as well
apart as though they were both together; or by any means abovesaid or
otherwise, preach, teach, declare or affirm the said Sacrament to be other
substance then is abovesaid, or by any means contemn, or deprave, or despise
the blessed Sacrament, that then every such person or persons so offending
their aiders, comforters, counselors, consenters, and abettors therein [being
thereof convinced in form underwritten by the Authority abovesaid] shall be
deemed and adjudged Heretics, and every such offense shall be adjudged
manifest Heresy: and that every such offender and offenders shall therefore
have and suffer judgment, execution, pain and pains of death by way of
burning, without any abjuration, Sanctuary or benefit of Clergy to be therefore
permitted, had, allowed, admitted or suffered, and likewise the forfeiture of
all the Estate real or personal to the King, etc.

And by the same Parliament it was likewise enacted, That Parliament confirmed
the Spanish Inquisition. The Oath for the Commissioners of the bloody
Inquisition.
That for the more effectual execution of the Premises, full Authority of
Inquision of all such Heresies, etc. should be committed and directed down into
every Shire to certain persons, provided that the Archbishop, or Bishop, or
his Chancellor, or his Commissary to be one; and that every person that should
be named Commissioner in this Inquisition, should first take a corporal Oath,
the tenor of which Oath here ensues; Ye shall swear that ye to your cunning
wit and power shall truly and indifferently execute the Authority to you given
by the Kings Commission, made for correction of Heretics and other offenders
mentioned in the same Commission, without any favor, affection, corruption,
dread or malice to be born to any person or persons, as God you help, and all
Saints, etc.

All you Rulers and Magistrates of England that swear and take Oaths, what
spirit is it that teaches you to frame Oaths, and leads you to swear Oaths, and
to give Oaths to men or women? Heb. 6.16. Exodus 22.10, 11. 1 Kings 8.31.
were they that forged the Oath above-written, and swear, and required people
to take the said Oath, guided by the spirit of God so to do, yea or nay? And
again, Was that Oath the Oath of the Lord that they had forged to be taken, yea
or any? Did the Pope and his Adherents give or administer the Oath of the Lord
to any, yea or nay? Was the Pope and his Adherents taught by the spirit of God
to frame Oaths to be taken, yea or nay? Or did the spirit of God lead the Pope
and his Adherents to swear and to take Oaths against the Saints and Servants of
God whom they persecuted to death, yea or nay? I say Nay: the spirit of God
neither taught them to make or to forge Oaths; neither did the spirit of God
teach or guide them to swear by their own forged [out of the bottomless pit]
Oaths: Neither are Parliaments nor Councils in these our days taught by the
spirit of God to make Oaths; nor does the spirit of God teach them to swear
neither by the Bible or by their hand, James 5.12. Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36. and
23.16, to 22.
or by any other creature, or part of any creature; nor by any of their framed
Oaths: but the spirit of God did teach, and does teach the contrary now as it
did in the days of Christ and the Apostles, which spirit I own and obey: but
that spirit that frames Oaths which are not the Oath of God, and swears, and
requires people to swear by an Oath forged out of the bottomless pit, FOX.
Act. and Mon. Vol. 2. L. CROMWELL made Earl of Essex, Great Chamberlain of
ENGLAND and Vice-go^^rnor to the King.
I deny that spirit and its practice, for it is not the spirit of God, but the
power of the prince of the Air that rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience.

I have read in the Book of Martyrs of one Thomas Lord Cromwell, that in the
days of King Henry the eigth did this Nation of England a deal of good
service, as the story of his life and death does relate how profitable an
Instrument he was in destroying Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries, etc. and
routing out of the Land the works of the Monks, Friars, Nuns, and other such
like brutish drones; and pulled down the Rood, called the Rood of Grace, and
all his Engines, and showed them openly at Paul's Cross, with the blood of a
Duck; which the papists made the people to believe it was the blood of Hailes,
and other such like pieces of Idolatry and Witchcraft he removed out of the
way, that the people was seduced by with the learned men of Oxford and
Cambridge. So likewise he was an Instrument to discover the treachery of the
Bishops and the Clergy, who had sworn to be true to the King, and afterward
swore also to be so to the pope; and for the proof of the same he produced a
copy of their oath to the pope, which was read in the Convocation-House before
them; and the matter was so plain that they could not deny it. And likewise
Thomas Lord Cromwell presented the Bible to the King, and obtained License that
the same might freely pass to be read amongst all his subjects: This Bible was
of the lesser volume; but a Bible of a large Volume began to he printed at
Paris with an intent of Marginal Notes to it, of which the said Lord Cromwell
was a great helper of it forward: At which the Clergy was offended; and the
cursed Bishops bringing their purpose to pass, brought Thomas Lord Cromwell
out of favor with the King, and after to his death: For after the six Articles
with the penalty annexed to them, and the full Authority of the bloody
Inquisition was confirmed, then the said Thomas Lord Cromwell being in the
Council Chamger was suddenly apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London,
and sundry crimes, surmizes, objections and accusations (as they called them)
were brought against him, etc.

The best of men in their generations have always been counted Heretics by
they who are Heretics indeed.
1. The first and chiefest Article that they had against him to accuse him with,
was above all others Heresy; alias an Heretic.

2. That he was a supporter of them whom they counted for Heretics, as Barns,
Clark, and many others, who he by his Authority and Letters written to the
Sheriffs and Justices in diverse Shires, rescued and discharged out of Prison:
And I say he did well in so doing.

3. That he did disperse among the Kings subjects great numbers of Books,
containing [as they said] manifest matter of much Heresy, Diffidences and
Misbeliefe was their manifest Heresy in the Bible that he dispersed abroad, let
the Heretics themselves answer.

4. That he caused to be translated into our English Tongue books comprizing
matter expressly against their Sacrament of the Altar: and that after the
translation thereof he commended and maintained the same for good and Christian
Doctrine; and good reason he should so do.

5. They charged him with some heinous words spoken against the King in their
falsely called Church of St. Peter the Poor, in the month of March, so called,
in the thirteenth year of the Kings reign, which was about 18. years before;
but if any such words was spoken as tended to Treason, they were Traitors for
concealing it so long.

Read the story of the life and death of THO. L. CROMWELL in FOX. Act. and Mon.
Vol. 2
Here you see what was charged against the man for his good service, and for all
his good service that he had done the King and the Nation, by the means of the
blood-thirsty clergy had his head cut off at the Tower Hill in London. One
thing I observe at the doing or bringing about this thing to be done is, That
before time the two Bishops, viz. Sardiner Bishop of Winchester, and Bonner
bishop of London were made friends, who before were the greatest enemies each
to other that might be, and by their means Barns, Clark, and many others were
burned; all that was contrary to themselves must be burned in the fire: and
they so delighted in burning of people, that they burned some papists of their
own Religion as well as Heretics, as they called them. And thus ye may see
what a bloody generation these learned men have been who were brought up at
Cambridge and Oxford, and other scholars, and by a carnal commandment of man
made Ministers and Preachers: for no sooner did any thing of God appear in a
King or other Magistrate, but these like the red Dragon were ready to devour
that good thing in them: For I find that young King Edward was one of a meek
spirit, Re^. 12.4.
and much inclined to clemency, for he always spared and favored the life of
man, and favored the life of those they called Heretics; for one Ione Butcher
should have been burned, and all his Council could not move him to put his hand
to have her burned, but were fain to get bishop Cranmer to persuade him to do
it: but Cranmer could not with much labor induce the King to do it: do but
take notice of the Kings answer to bishop Cranmer; said the King, What will ye
have me to send her quick to the Devil in her error? And yet although one Cheek
the Kings Schoolmaster could not persuade the King, nor his council could not
persuade him to set his hand to the burning of the woman: Yet the bishop like
the old Dragon overcame him to put his hand to the writing; but Cranmer
confessed that he had never so much to do in all his life as he had to cause
the King to do it; for said the King to Cranmer, I will lay all the charge upon
you before God: So likewise his council sent the said Cranmer then Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Ridley bishop of London, to persuade the King to permit his
Sister the Lady Mary that bloody Queen, to have private Mass in her House
without prejudice of the Law, for the which they alleged their reasons and
persuasions for the accomplishing of the same; but the King replied to them by
answering to them from the Scriptures, so that they confessed what he said was
true: But still they like the Devil did urge him to it politickly, and alleged
what danger it might be to him if he should deny such a thing; but the King
answered them, and willed them to be content, for he would, said he, spend his
life and all he had, rather then agree and grant to that which he knew
certainly to be against the truth: Yet notwithstanding they urged him still to
grant it, and would by no means have his nay; whereat the King seeing their
importunity burst out in bitter weeping and sobbing, and desired them to be
content, etc.

And by these two before writ of, viz. King Edward and Thomas Lord Cromwell, ye
may see how those learned men could turn and wind about to destroy the
appearance of God not only in Kings and Rulers, but likewise in others; and if
they could not destroy it one way, they would destroy it another, and that was
by causing their bodies to be imprisoned, wracked, whipped, hanged, burned,
etc. as witness all the Martyrs in Queen Maryes days, whereof Cranmer himself
was one: and the same spirit that ruled in those bishops and the clergy, ruled
in the bishops and the clergy in the days of the late King, as witness the
cruel sufferings of Henry Burton, John Lilburn, William Prynne, and John
Bastwick, etc. and the same spirit of envy and cruelty reign; now in these
days in the parish-ministers But not in the Ministers of Christ.
of England, for the Tree is known by its fruit; for not only by their deeds,
but by their words do I judge them to be such as for what I have heard from
some of their own mouths; I shall let it pass, and their deeds to me likewise:
But by the way take notice what Mercurius Politicus said, viz. that several
petitions were presented to the House Thursday the 18. day of December. 1657.
containing diverse complaints against the growth and exorbitances of the people
called Quakers [and so did Pharaoh against the children of Israel] was this day
read. Exodus 1. chap.


The first was from the county of Devon and Exceter. The second was from the
Ministers of Northumberland, Durham, and New Castle upon Tine: (but not from
the Ministers of Christ.) And the third was from the Justices of the Peace,
Gentry, Ministers of the Gospel, as he said, and others in the county of
Palatine of Chester; and the attestation of the same petition by the Mayor,
Aldermen and Ministers of the city of Chester: (not the Ministers of Christ.)
The fourth was from the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-counsel of the city of
Bristol, with the Ministers of the Gospel, as he said, and other chief
Inhabitants there. The fifth was the humble petition of diverse well-affected
persons, Gentlemen, Ministers, (he did not say here, Ministers of the Gospel)
and others in the county of Cornwall, which (said Politicus) were all referred
to a Committee to consider of them, and to collect such heads as may be fittest
for a Bill for the suppressing of the mischiefs and inconveniences complained
of therein, etc. And let the prisons in England testify of the sufferings of
those people called Quakers, by the means of the Parish-Ministers of England,
and also the loss and spoil of their goods for non-payment of tithes; and
likewise the whipping stocking and stoning of them by the brutes of this Nation
above all other Nations; for wherever they have yet come, the Rulers has not
dealt the like to them as they of their own Nation have done unto them; which
Nations may be a witness against England in the day of Judgment for the
hypocrisy and cruelty in her Rulers and their Ministers, etc.

Quest But it is very likely that some may say, They be not all such as thou
show them to be, for some of them are better then others, therefore thou
must not condemn all to be alike, etc.

Answ. I do grant that amongst the Rulers and Magistrates of this Nation there
is some that are more sober, moderate, and discreet then others are, and will
not put their hands to do violence and blood as others do; but of this better
sort there is the lesser number. And so I say of those who are called the
Parish-Ministers, [take notice that for all this I do not own them to be
Ministers of Christ] that some of them, and but few, are more wise in their
generation, sober and moderate men, and have not yet put forth their hands to
do wickedly as the other have done, who profess themselves to be Ministers of
Christ, but are not his, as appears by their pride, covetousness, envy, malice,
wrath; for they are fierce despisers of those that are good, heady, Epist. of
Paul to the Laodic. v. 11.
high-minded, and are desirous after filthy lucre, and seek the honor of men,
and not of God, and the ruin and destruction of men's bodies, and so are out of
the faith, patience, gentleness, quietness, and the meek spirit, which is of
great price with the Lord: and could they have the Magistrate in all things to
do their will, they would have had fire and Faggots put to the people called
Quakers to have burned them, or else to have had us banished out of the Land
before this, out of their way; nay, they would not have spared some of their
own Brethren, the Ministers, so called, for they would have done by them as
Stephen Gardener and Edmund Bonner did by Ridley, Latimor, and Philpot in Queen
Maryes days, or as the late Bishops did to Henry Burton; for the same spirit
as was in Gardener, Bonner, and the late Bishops, is ruling in the
Parish-Ministers now, but that they cannot get all the Rulers of the Land to
join with them to accomplish their design; and these are such who are made
Ministers and Teachers by a carnal commandment of men, and the people who will
not endure sound doctrine, but turn away their ears from hearing the truth, and
are turned unto fables, and according to their own lusts, having itching ears,
they heap up to themselves Teachers made of Cambridge and Oxford Scholars,
heaps of teachers made by a carnal commandment to be be Preachers and Ministers
of Parishes [but not Ministers of Christ] Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers,
Rectors, Chaplains, viz. His Highness Chaplain, the Ladys Chaplain, the Earls
Chaplain, and their Lords Chaplain; and these Chaplains feed at their Earls,
and their Lords and Ladies Tables, like the prophets of the Groves that fed at
Iezzabels Table: And thus they creep into Houses, and leadsilly women captive,
who are laden with sin, and lead away with diverse lusts, ever of them learning,
but by their preaching are not yet come to the knowledge of the truth.

And again, by the means of these parish-Ministers who are so made by a carnal
commandment, rule has been born, and is born to persecute the righteous under
the Notion of Heretics, Sedition, Schism, Seducers, Blasphemers, etc. whenas
all discord, debate, strife, erroneous Opinions, and divisions in matters of
Religion, and what points of Religion they will believe, and what they will not
believe, and blasphemy, imitations, deceiving and beguiling unstable souls is
amongst the learned men themselves who are trained up, and have been traind up
at the Universities in Logic, Rhetoric, Philosophy and vain deceit; for are
not some of those who are called Ministers, for the Pope and his Religion in
general? and others for the Episcopal Religion? and others for the Scottish
Presbyters Religion? and are not some of them of the Independents Religion? and
others of the Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, and Fifth Monarchy-Men, so
called? and from whence arise all these Nicknames and ill-favored terms but
from these Cambridge and Oxford Scholars, those unprofitable talkers, Epist.
of Paul to the Laod. v. 4
who are made Ministers by a carnal commandment of man, and not of God? for the
Ministers of Christ were not made Ministers by a carnal commandment, but by the
Spirit; for said Paul, Our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter,
but of the spirit.

It was, and it is the work of the only wise God, Heb. 11.5. Jude 14. Exodus
3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Ier. 35.15. Isa. 6.8, 9 Ier. 1.5. Mat.
9.37, 38. and 10.1, 5, 6, 7. and 28.18, 19, 20. Mark 16.15. Luke 24.47, 48, 49.
Act. 1.4. and 2.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Gal. 1.11,
12, 15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 4.2. Epist. Paul to the Laod. ver. 1.
and our Lord Jesus Christ, to ordain, to call, to elect, to sanctify, to give
power, gifts, and commissions, and to send forth all true and faithful
Messengers, Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel for to declare his
Messages in particular, and likewise to preach the Gospel in all Nations, in
Cities, Towns and Villages; unto the utmost parts of the earth, and to bear
witness of his Name before the Gentiles, Kings and Rulers, and the children of
Israel, in season, and out of season, to divide the word aright.

And with this work God never did trust nor put into the hands of Pharaoh King
of Egypt to do, nor Jeroboam, nor the Turk, nor the Emperors, nor the Kings,
nor Dukes, nor any other sort of Magistrates to do for God, neither did God put
this work into the hands of the Pope, nor his Cardinals, Ier. 7.31. and 19.5.
Isa. 1.12. John Goodwin in his book of Tryers, p. 5. Matthew. 28.18, 19. Mark
16.15. Rev. 1.17, 18. and 21.6. and 22.13.
nor his Bishops, nor the Priests, nor the Universities, nor the Commissioners,
of Tryars to do for him; therefore I say, Who has required this at any of
their hands to do, and by what Authority did any of the aforesaid make
Ministers, seeing that God never required it at their hands to do? for said
John Goodwin in his book, The two Commissions we implead, the one for Tryers,
the other of Ejecters, being neither of them given in charge by Jesus Christ.

For Christ Jesus spoke unto his disciples, saying, All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth; go ye therefore into all the world, and preach the
Gospel, and teach all Nations: Christ Jesus the Son of God, the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever, the first and the last, it is he that lives, and was
dead; but behold, he is alive for evermore; he was before his works of old; he
was set up for an everlasting salvation unto the ends of the earth, Prove. 8.23.
Isa. 49.6.
from the beginning, before ever the earth was made, when there was no depths,
when there was no fountains abounding with water, and before the Mountains and
the Hills was settled was Christ the Light brought forth, and was by his Father,
while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of
the world; Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
for when God prepared the heavens, when he set a compass upon the face of the
depth, when he established the clouds above, when he strengthened the fountains
of the deep, when he gave to the Sea his Decree, that the waters should not
pass his commandment, and when he appointed the foundations of the earth, then
was Christ with God, as one brought up with him; 1 Cor. 1.24. John. 1.1, 2, 3.
and 17.24. Coll. 1.16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 5.23, 25, 26, 27. Ioh. 10.11. 1 Pet. 2.25.
Matt. 9.37, 38. Luke 10.2. Matt. 20. chapter Ier. 15.19. Matthew. 3.12. Ioh. 5.17.
and 10.30, 37, 38. and 15.16. Isa. 6.3. and 48.10. to 15. Ioh. 15.16. Mar.
3.14, 15. Luke 9.1, 2. Acts 1.4. and 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Ps. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8, to 13.
he was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; he was by him when
the Lord by his wisdom founded the earth, and by his understanding established
the heavens, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, by whom all things
were made, and without him was not any thing made that was made; and he was
before all things, and by him all things consist; he rejoices in the habitable
parts of his earth, and his delight is with the sons of men; he is the first
and the last; the beginning and the end; he is the Head of the body the Church,
which he loves, and gave himself for it, and he, Christ Jesus, is the Savior
of the Body, viz. the Church: He is the good Shepherd and Bishops of our souls;
he is the Lord of the Harvest, who is to be prayed unto, that he would send
forth laborers into his Harvest, to reap the wheat of the Vinyard, to separate
the precious from the vile, and to gather the fruit into his Garners: Christ
Jesus said, I and my Father are one; the Father is in me, said Christ, and I in
him; and my Father works hitherto, and I work: It was and is the work of
Christ Jesus to ordain, choose, and to send forth Laborers into his Vinyard,
and not man's work; for the whole earth is full of his glory, and his glory he
will not give to another: And they who labored in the Word and Doctrine, were
chosen and sent forth by Christ Jesus, and not by man; for said Christ Jesus to
his Apostles, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that you should go
and bring forth fruit: All power, said Christ, is given unto me in heaven and
in earth: And Christ he gave them power, and said unto them, Go ye therefore
into all the world, and preach the Gospel, and teach all Nations: and he endued
them with power from on high: and he ascended up on high, and he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the word of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, and for the perfecting of the
Saints. And said Paul, 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set some in the Church, (not of man's setting) first, Apostles:
secondly, Prophets: thirdly, Teachers, etc. Now there is diversity of Gifts,
but they are given by the same spirit; And the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal, etc. And thus much in the general for
proof that it was, and is the work properly of God and Christ to ordain,
choose, give power commission, and to send forth the Ministers of the Word and
Gospel to preach the same, and to teach all Nations every where: And now I
shall prove in particular that God and Christ did do this work without the help
of the Rulers of the earth, or the Pope and his Adherents. As for instance:

For Paul he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God and our
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope: 1 Timothy 1.1.
And God said unto Annanias a Disciple, Acts 9.10. to 15. Gal. 1. chap.
That Paul was a chosen Vessel unto him to bear his Name before the Gentiles
and Kings, and the children of Israel: And Paul said he was an Apostle, not of
man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him
from the dead; but said Paul, When it pleased God, who separated me from my
Mothers Womb, Acts 26.19.
and called me by his Grace to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him
among the heathen immediately, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly Vision,
nor conferred not with flesh and blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem to them
which were Apostles before me, but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto
Damascus, etc. And said Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, But I certify
you Brethren, That the Gospel which was preached of me is not after man; for
said he, I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it; but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, it pleased God to reveal his son in me, that I
might preach him among the Heathen. Hereby it is plain, That Paul was not made
a Minister of the Gospel at the Universities by man, neither had he a
commission given him to go preach the Gospel by Authority from the Rulers of
the earth, neither was he by man taught how to preach the Gospel.

And John the Baptist he was not sent of man, but of God: for it is written in
the first chapter of John, and the sixth verse, Ioh. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
There was a man sent from God, whose Name was John; the same came for a
witness to bear witness of the Light: And John the Disciple and Apostle of
Christ writ, and said, These things we writ unto you that your joy might be
full: This then is the Message which we have heard of him and declare unto you,
That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all: And John the Baptist he
bore witness of the same light that the Apostles were witnesses of, 1 Ioh.
1.4, 5.
and of the said Light was their Message to declare, that the people might be
turned from darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan unto God who is
light: And John said, That was the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world: and that light is Christ, for said Jesus Christ, I am
the light of the world: and John he was sent of God to bear witness of Christ
the light, that all men through him might believe; for the Word of God came
unto John the son of Zacharias in the Wilderness, Luke 3.1, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and John he went into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins, etc. And this was done in the days of
Tiberius Caesar, but John was not (ye may see) sent by Caesar, but he was sent
of God to bear witness of the light.

And the Prophets of the Lord they were all sent of God, and not by man, Amos
1.1. and 7.10. to 15.
as you may read; Amos said that he was an Herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycamore
fruit, and Amos was among the Herdsmen of Tekoa, and said Amos, The Lord took
me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophecy unto my
people Israel. Here you may see that Amos was not tried by Commissioners of
Tryers, nor sent out to prophecy by any such as they are, but he was sent out
of the Lord alone to prophecy; and he said, The Lord will roar from Zion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem, etc.

Ezekiel. 1.1, 2, 3. and 2, 3. chap.
Neither was Ezekiel sent by man to prophecy, nor by man made a Watchman over
Israel: But the Word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel in the Land of the
Caldeans by the River Chebar, and Ezekiel said that he saw the appearance of
the likeness of the glory of the Lord, and when he saw it he fell upon his
face, and he heard the voice of one that spoke; and said Ezekiel, He said unto
me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee: and the
spirit of the Lord entered into me when he spoke unto me, and set me upon my
feet, that I hrard him that spoke unto me: and he said unto me, Son of man, I
send thee to the children of Israel, and thou shall speak my words unto them,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: And Ezekiel said,
Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, Eat that thou find, eat shis Roll, and
go speak unto the House of Israel: So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to
eat that Roll: and he said unto me, Son of man, Cause thy belly to eat, and
fill thy bowels with this Roll that I give thee: Then did I eat it, and it was
in my mouth as honey for sweetness: And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get
thee unto the House of Israel, and speak with my words unto them, etc. So the
spirit of the Lord lift me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness in
the heat of my spirit, but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me: And it came
to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the Lord came unto me,
saying, Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel,
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me, etc.

Neither was Jeremiah ordained by man to be a Prophet, nor was he by any King
of the earth, Ier. 1.4. to 10. and 27 ver. and 2. chap. 1, 2, 5. ver. and chap.
3.6.12. and 4.1.
or other, consecrated, nor by any man sent forth to prophecy; but said
Jeremiah, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying Before I formed thee in the
Belly I knew thee, and before thou came out of the Womb I sanctified thee,
and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations: And the Lord put forth his hand
and touched Jeremiahs mouth, and the Lord said unto him, Behold, I have put my
words into thy mouth; and the Lord said unto Jeremiah, See I have this day set
thee over Nations, and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant: Thou therefore, gird up thy
loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed
at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. And the Word of the Lord came
moreover unto Jeremiah, saying, Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying,
Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me that they are
gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? And again
in the days of Josiah said the Lord unto Jeremiah, Go and proclaim these words
toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord; if
thou will return O Israel, says the Lord, return unto me; and if thou will put
away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not remove, and I will
not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, and I
will not keep mine anger for ever: And the Lord said unto Jeremiah, ^er. 1.18,
19.
Behold, I have made thee this day a defenced City, and an Iron Pillar, and
Brazen Walls against the whole Land, against the Kings of Judah, and against
the Princes thereof, and against the priests thereof, and against the people of
the Land, and they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against
thee; for I am with thee said the Lord, to deliver thee, etc. read the 20.
chap. and the 23. and 26. chap. of Jeremiah, etc.

And Isaiah was made a Prophet, but not by man, neither by any King or Ruler of
the Earth was he sent forth to prophecy, Isa. 6. chap.
but he was consecrated and sent forth of the Lord alone: for said Isaiah, In
the year that King Vzziah dyed, I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high, and
lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple; and above it stood the Seraphims,
and one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory: And the posts of the door moved at him
that cried, and the house was filled with smoke: Then said Isaiah, Woe is me,
for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst
of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts. Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand
which he had taken with the Tongs from off the Altar, and he laid it upon my
mouth, and said, Lo, this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin is purged. And Isaiah heard the voice of the Lord, saying,
Whom shall I send? And who shall go for us? Then said Isaiah, Here am I, send
me: And the Lord said unto Isaioh, Isa. 8.1.11. ver. and 50.4, 5, 6, 7
Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye
indeed, but perceive not; etc. And Isaiah said, the Lord spoke unto him with a
strong hand, and instructed him that he should not walk in the way of the
people: and he said the Lord gave him the tongue of the learned, that he should
know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary; and the Lord opened
his ear: and said Isaiah, I was not rebellious, neither turned away back, etc.
And thus ye may see that the true prophets of the Lord, and the true and
faithful Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel were ordained of the Lord, and
chosen, and called, and sanctified by the Lord alone, and not by the Kings and
Rulers of the earth, nor by the Pope and his Adherents, neither by
Commissioners that were appointed by them or any of them so to do. And again,
Those Prophets, Apostles and Ministers that God and Christ sent forth, were no
raylers, nor scoffers, nor proud, nor wanton, nor given to filthy lucre, to run
in the way of Baalam for gifts and rewards; neither were they any persecutors,
fighters, quarrellers, etc. but were in all generations persecuted, stoned,
whipped, stocked and imprisoned, and put in Dungeons, and hailed out of the
worlds Synagogues, or falsely called churches, and brought before Magistrates,
and by the Devil some were cast into prison, and many slain, which for the most
part was done by the means of the priests and the false prophets; for said
Christ, O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! Matthew. 23.37. 1 Kings 12.4. and 18.4. and 22.
c. 24, 27. v. 2 Chr 24.21. Jer. 20, 1, 2, 3. and 26.7, 8, 11. and 28.1, 4, 6.
Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13. Matthew. 26.34. Acts 5.24, 25, 33. and Acts 7.54, 58. and
12.2, 3, 4. and 14.19. Acts 16, 22, 23, 24. Acts 21.27, 28. 2 Cor. 11.24, 25,
26, 27, 28.
thou that killest the pr^phets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee. And
the chief priests, and all the people transgressed very much after all the
abominations of the heathen, and mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
word, and misused his Prophets, etc. Read the Scriptures quoted, and see how
they were misused, and by whom.

And again, the Prophets of the Lord, and the Apostles and true Ministers of
the Gospel they did not preach for hire, nor did they study or divine for money
as the false ones did, Mich. 3.11. and do still. Neither did they seek for
gain from their quarters as the false ones did, Isa. 56.10, 11. and do still.
Neither did they feed themselves with the fat, and clothe themselves with the
wool as the false ones did, Ezekiel. 34. and do still. Neither did they bite with
their teeth, nor prepare war against them that put not into their mouths, as
the false ones did, Mic. 3.5. and do still. Neither did the true Prophets nor
the Apostles, or the true and faithful Ministers of the Gospel steal the word
from their neighbor, and then cry, and say, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord
had not spoken to them, as the false ones did, Jer. 23.3. and chap. 14. v. 19.
and do still. Neither did the true Prophets, and Apostles, and Ministers of the
Gospel, come before they were called, nor run before they were sent of the
Lord, as the false ones did, Jer. 14.15. and 23.32. and do still, by a carnal
commandment of manl Neither had the true Prophets, nor the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ any Lands and Houses appointed them by the Kings of the
earth for a certain dwelling place upon the earth, as said Paul, 1 Cor. 4.11.
Heb. 11.37, 36. as the false ones had, Genesis 47.22, 26. 1 Kings 18.19. and have
so to this day, Parsonages, Vicarages, Rectories and Glebe-Lands here in
England, which was given to the Pope and his Adherents, viz. the Clergy (who
were called the Church with their high places all together) by popish Saxon
Kings and others, as hereafter shall appear out of their own Records; for see
the Oration of King Edgar (one of the Saxon Kings) to the Clergy, as follows
in part. Fox. Act. and Mon. Vol. 1.


Let (said he) the great devotion of our Ancestors move you whose Alines. the
madness of the Clerks does abuse: My Great-Grandfather (as ye know) gave the
tenth part of all his Lands to the Churches and Abbyes: And my
Great-Great-Grandfather Alferdus of holy memory, thought it not meet to spare
his Treasures, his Goods, nor Costs, nor Rents, that he might enrich the
Church. My Grandfather the elder, Edward, your Father-hood [viz. the Pope) is
not ignorant of how great things he gave to the Churches; it becomes you to
remember with what gifts my Father and his Brothers did enrich Christ's Altars,
etc. But by the way take notice of another piece of service that was done by
another of those Kings: that is,

Oswald King of Northumberland when he went to fight against Cadwalla, set up
at Hevenfield in Northumberland, an altar and a cross, unto which he kneeled
down, and prayed for victory: Anno 635.

The Donations and Privileges granted and given by King Ethelbald to religious
men of the Church, as he called them.

It is wont for the most part to come to pass, that by reason of the uncertain
changing of the times, that those things which have been confirmed by the
testimony and counsel of many faithful persons, without any consideration of
reason may be dang^rously and fraudulently dispersed so as to come to naught,
by the contumacy and dissembling devices of many, unless they be committed to
eternal memory by the Authority of Letters (with the testimony of
Hand-Writers.) Wherefore I Ethelbald, King of the Marshes, for the love of the
heavenly Country, and a remedy for my soul, have foreseen that I must take care
that I make it free for some good work in every bond of the beloved; for
because that Almighty God through the mercy of his clemency; without any desert
of mine, has bestowed upon me the Scepter of Government, therefore I do
willingly retribute unto him out of that which he has given for this cause:
Whilst I live I grant this Donation; That all Monasteries and Churches of my
Kingdom be made free from public charges, and labors, and burdens, excepting
only the building of Towers and Bridges, which are no more profitable for any
thing at any time: Let the servants of God have a peculiar freedom in the
fruits of the Woods and fields, and in taking of fish: Let them not give any
gifts either to Kings or Princes, unless it be of their own accord; but let
them be free to serve God, etc. Now follows the second gift given by the
abovesaid King to the Clergy.

The Privileges and Donations given by Ethelbald to the Clergy, Anno. 844.

Our Lord reigning for ever. Forasmuch as in our days we see dangerous times
are upon us by reason of burning of Wars, and taking away of our Riches, and
the most cruel depredations of barbarous Enemies, and of the Paganish Nations
wasting us; therefore I Ethelbald, King of the East Saxons, with the Council of
my Bishops and Princes, have avouched it as wholesome counsel, and an uniform
remedy, That I grant an Hereditary Portion of Lands to God and St. Peter, and
all the Saints, by a perpetual right to be possessed, to wit, a part of my
Land, that it may be secure and free from all secular services and tributes to
the King both great and small, without taxes, which we call Witterden, and that
it may be free from all things, for the remission of our souls and of our sins,
to the serving of God only, without any expedition or building of a Bridge, or
fortifying of a Tower, that so they may without ceasing pour out prayers to God
for us so much the more diligently, to the end that we lessen their servitude
in some measure, etc.

So now, here you may see by these gifts above written of, what persons they
were that gave and settled the Parsonage-Lands, Glebe-Lands, Vicarage-Lands, and
other Lands, and likewise for what use the parties gave them, and the end
wherefore they gave them; and by this you may see how the Kings of the earth
provided for the Clergy of their own and the Popes making, but for the
Prophets, and Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, they would not provide any
such things for them, but instead thereof, they and their Churches provided for
them Prisons, Dungeons, Whips, Stocks, Bridewells, Saws, Swords, Wracks, Fire
and Faggots: And as for the Messengers and Ministers of Christ that he ordained
and sent, they would not receive them into their Houses, nor their Doctrine
neither: but those who they ordained and consecrated themselves, See Caesar Due
by Tho. Bradley, D.D. and Minister of Nettlebed in Oxfordshire, but not
Minister of Christ.
or such as were made by a carnal commandment by the Pope and his Adherents, or
by a Commission of Tryers, that come in their own names, and not in the Name of
the Lord, such are received and provided for, and called by them Master, and a
House and Land for a certain dwelling place is prorided for them, worth 100. l.
or 200. l. more or less by the year; for the Rectory of Alsford in Hampshire
stands in one of the Kings Books at 29. l. a year, but said Bradley, It was let
at 450. l. communibus annis, viz. one year with another, beside a reserve of
30. l. a year that the Rector lived in himself: And this was not sufficient,
but the Kings of the earth have taken away from the people (and given to their
Ministers as their servants to preach them up) their Fields, their Vinyards,
and their Olive-yards, even the best of them, and given them to their servants,
and the tenth of the peoples sheep, and the tenth of their seed, and of their
vinyards, and given them to their Priests, Ministers, and servants. And thus
the Kings of the earth have done according as God bad Samuel tell the people
the King they asked for would do. 1 Samuel 8.1. to the 18.


But some it is like will say that the Kings gave their own lands to the
Clergy: Read Hollinshead Chron. and Fox. Act. and Mon. Vol. 1.
But I say, How came the Saxon Kings by their Lands here in England that they
gave to the Clergy? Did they not take it from the people by their Swords? And
did not William the Conqueror do the like? And did not the Saxon Kings and
William the Conqueror prove tyrants to the people and treacherous likewise? And
one thing I do grant, that is this, That the Kings or Rulers of the earth may
with the consent of the people assembled in counsel, raise money for the
public good, that is, for the defense of the Nation, and for the preservation
of the Nations peace and welfare at home or abroad, by Land and Sea, and
defense of the nations enemies. But I say again, That the Kings and Rulers of
the earth ought not to take away the peoples Goods, or the Fruits of their
labor, nor the increase of their seed, nor the increase of their Flock or
Herd, or their Vinyard to give unto others, nor to sell unto others, Isa. 1.23.
Hos. 4.6, 7, 8, 9 Lam. 4.13.
as some Kings of this Nation have done, and taken away from the people the
tithes, and sold them to Improprietors, and others, they gave to their own
Ministers, which thing is not good, but evil; and abomination in the sight of
God; and the buyer and the receiver are as bad as the seller and the giver.

But some will say it is like, Must not our Ministers be maintained? how should
they live? for they cannot work, for they were never brought up to work, and
they cannot starve.

Thus I answer: That they are big enough and strong enough to work; therefore
it is now time for them to begin to labor with their hands the thing that is
good, Act. 20.33, 34. 1 Cor. 4 12. 1 These. 2.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and in the sweat of their brows to eat their own bread; for our order is, That
they that will not work, shall not eat, provided that they be strong and able
to work, as your Ministers are; and they that set them to work let them pay
them their wages out of their own Purses, and not out of theirs that own them
not. And again, The true Prophets, and Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel
that Christ sent, they did not take tithes, nor gifts, nor rewards for
preaching nor prophesying, for tithes was not the Gospel that they lived by:
But those Ministers that the Kings and Kulers of the earth, the Pope and his
Adherents make and sent forth, they take gifts, and rewards, and tithes for
their preaching, therefore they commit sin with greediness, and do the thing
that is not right in the sight of God, for God did not require tithes to be
paid to those Ministers that are made and sent out by the Kings and Rulers of
the earth, the Pope and his Adherents; but when God required tithes and first
fruits to be paid, he required that the tithes and first fruits, should be paid
to the Levites, Aaron and his sons, [whom God did ^et apart] to minister in the
Priests office, Exodus 24.12. Lev. 27.30, to 34. Ioh. 1.17.
and for the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Exodus 28.11 Numb.
3.12. Heb. 7.5.

I find in the Scripture that God gave the Law in Mount Sinai unto Moses, for
the children of Israel to observe and keep, even the Law, which was a shadow of
good things then to come; for said John, The Law was given by Moses, but grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ: Now I say, Deuteronomy. 26. chap
That Law by which the children of Israel was commanded to pay tithes, was
given in Mount Sinai to Moses for the children of Israel to observe and keep
when they came into the Land of Canaan: Heb. 10.1. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. and 14.2.
Ps. 147.19, 20.
And this Law which was a shadow of good things to come, was committed unto the
people of Israel to observe and keep, and to no other Nation; for the Lord God
had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto himself above all people that were
upon the face of the earth: and said David, He has showed his word unto Jacob,
his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: he has not (said David) dealt so
with any Nation, for his judgments they have not known. And Paul said, Romans
3.1, 2.
That unto them were committed the Oracles of God. And now I come to write more
largely of tithes then hitherto I have written. Exodus 34 26, 27, 28, 29. Lev.
27.30, to 34. Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and 18.1, 2, 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 12.10,
11, 12. and 26 1, 2. and 19. v. 25. c. Lev. 27.30, 32. Exodus 34.26. Mal. 3.8,
9, 10


First, I find that God did not command or require any people to pay tithes
and first fruits but only by the children of Israel, and unto them he gave his
commandment so to do, and to no other people.

Secondly, God required first fruits and tithes to be paid in no other Land or
Nation but in the Land of Canaan only.

Thirdly; That when the children of Isral had possession of the land of Canaan,
and that when they enjoyed peace round about them, then were they to pay first
fruits and tithes, and not before

Fourthly, That the tithes of the land [of Canaan] whether the seed of the
land, or the fruit of the tree, the wine, the oil, the increase of the seed
that the field brings forth year by year: the tithe of the Corn, and the
tithe of the Flock, or of the Herd, the Lord God said was his: and therefore
said the Lord, The first fruits of thy Land thou shall bring unto the house of
the Lord thy God: And again said the Lord, Bring ye all the tithes into the
Store-hovse, that there may be meat in my house: and they that brought not in
their tithes to that Storehouse were cursed with a curse, for they had robbed
God of their tithes and offerings, even that whole Nation had done it.

Fifthly, That in the land of Canaan, 2 Chronicles. 6.6. and 7.16. Deuteronomy. 12.11. Neh.
10.34, to 39. 2 Chronicles. 31.2. to 11. ver
Jerusalem was the place where God did place his Name, and there was the
Storehouse builded that the first fruits and tithes were to be brought unto,
and to that place were the tithes and first fruits brought, according to the
law of God that came by Moses, and to no other place.

Sixthly, The first fruits and tithes which God said was his, Numb. 18. chapter
Deuteronomy. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 7.5. Numb. 28.25, to 31. Deuteronomy. 17.18. and
14.29. and 26.12 Heb. 7.5. Numb. 18.11, 24. ver. Deuteronomy. 18.3, 4* 5.
he gave unto the children of Levi, even all the tenth of Israel for an
inheritance, because the Levites had no inheritance among their Brethren.

Seventhly, That to the sons of Levi (who received the office of the
Priesthood) for their service which they served, even the service of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, did God give the first fruits and tithes unto
for their maintenance, and likewise the fatherless, the widow and the stranger
that came within the gates was to eat thereof, and be satisfied.

Eighthly, God commanded the eleven tribes of Israel to pay tithes to the sons
of Levi who received the office of the Priesthood, and to no other Priesthood
did he require tithes to be paid unto since the resurrection of Christ Jesus.

Ninthly, That the first fruits and tithes were by a law that came by Moses due
unto Aaron and his sons the Levites (whom God had chosen, and not man, to
minister before him at the Altar, and to do the service of the tabernacle of
the Congregation) and to no other ministers or men whatsoever were (nor are)
tithes since that command was given; Heb 7.12.
and the Priesthood changed, and the Law disanulled.

And now by the way take notice a little what the service was that Aaron the
Levite, Exodus 4.14. and chap. 28. chap. 29. ver. 29, 30. Heb. 9. chap.
and his sons the Levites did, whom God did set apart thereunto: Aaron and his
sons God set apart from the other tribes of I^rael for the service of the
tabernacle of the Congregation, who did minister before the Lord in the Holy
place in the tabernacle of the Congregation unto the Lord, accomplishing the
service of the Lord, which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings
and carnal ceremonies which was imposed upon them and the children of Israel to
do until the time of reformation: For first, Genesis 17.12. Lev. 12.3. John. 1.22.
Luke 22.1.
they were to observe and keep the covenant of Circumcision; every male child
at eight days old was to be circumcised. Secondly, they were to observe and
keep feasts, viz. The Feast of the Passover, or the Feast of unleavened Bread;
the Feast of Penticost, and the Feast of Tabernacle. Now the people were to
bring to the Feast of the Passover a Lamb without blemish, Exodus 12. chap.
Acts 2.1. Exodus 23.16.
a male of a year old: Let every man (said Moses) take unto him a Lamb
according to the house of the fathers, a Lamb for an house, etc. and the flesh
of the Lamb was to be roasted with fire, and to be eaten with sour Herbs and
unleavened Bread, and they were to eat unleavened bread seven days. Again, the
Feast of pentecost, that was the Feast that was of the first fruits of their
Harvest; Lev. 23.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and 33, 34, 35. Numb. 29. chapter
the people they was to bring a sheaf of the first fruits of their Harvest unto
the priest, and the sheaf was to be waved before the Lord, and the priest was
to wave it on the morrow after the Sabbath, etc. and the feast of Tabernacles
was to be kept on the seventh month, at the end of their Harvest, for seven
days unto the Lord, wherein was diverse offerings, viz. Burnt-offering,
Meat Offering, Drink Offering, Sin-offering, etc. Now the people they were to
bring their offerings voluntary to the door of the Congregation of the Lord,
and there to offer it, etc. and if it was an offering of the Cattle of the
Herd, the priests, Aarons sons, were to sprinkle the blood upon the Altar, and
to lay the Wood in order upon the Altar, and put fire to the Altar, and to lay
the parts, the head, and the fat in order upon the Wood that was on the fire
upon the Altar, and the priest he was to burn all upon the Altar. These
offerings were made for sin; viz. for the sin of the Ruler; Lev. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. chapters.
and for the sin of the priest of the Congregation; and for the sin of any of
the people which they have committed wilfully or through ignorance, for which
sins there was to be Burnt-offerings, trespasse-offerings, peace offerings,
etc. offered up by the highpriests; first for himself, and then for the errors
of the people.

Exodus 29.1, 17. Lev. 8. chap.
So likewise there was diverse washings: First, Moses he washed Aaron and his
sons with water when he consecrated them, according to the command of the Lord;
and Moses he washed the inwards and the legs of the Ram that was for a
burnt-sacrifice at that time, and a sweet sacrifice. And Aaron when he offered
up a burnt-offering for his own sin, Lev. 9. chap. Lev. 1. chap. chap. 6.28.
and for the sins of the people, he did wash the inwards and the legs of the
Ram, and the inwards and the legs of the Bullock was to be washed in water,
that any of the people brought to offer for a burnt offering before the Lord;
and the brazen pot that the sin-offering was to be sodden in, was to be both
scoured and ^^^^sed in water.

And again, Lev. 11. chap.
Whosoever touched or did bear ought of the Carcases of any beast or creeping
thing that was counted unclean, he himself was unclean, and was to wash his
clothes: and he that did eat of a Carkase of a dead Beast was to wash his
clothes.

And again, Lev. 14. chap.
If a House that was spread with the plague of a fretting Leprosy, and was by
the commandment of the priest shut up, because it was unclean, then he that
went into the House in that time, and he that lay in the House, and he that eat
in the House were to wash their clothes.

And again, If any man had a running issue out of his flesh he was unclean; and
his bed wherein he lay was unclean; Lev. 15. chap.
and the thing whereon he sat was unclean: therefore whosoever touched his
bed, was to wash his clothes; and he that sat on the thing whereon he sat
that had the issue, was to wash his clothes, and bathe himself with water, etc.
Of which diverse washings, Heb. 9.19, 20, 21.
sprinklings, feasts, burnt-offerings, meat offerings, drink offerings,
sin offerings, trespasse-offerings, the atonement for the sin of ignorance,
the freewill-offerings, the peace offerings, etc. ye may read of more at large
in the Scriptures, which things the Law required to be done, were all by the
Apostle Paul counted but carnal Ordinances; and when the time of Reformation
was come, they were all put to an end; Heb. 9.10.
the handwriting of Ordinances was blotted out, the Law disannulled, and the
Priesthood changed, etc.

Now I say, That the Ministers of England never did this service for their
tithes and first fruits as Aaron and his son did, nor the Improprietors
neither; therefore neither the Improprietor, nor the parish-Ministers have not
any right to the tithes of the land, nor the first fruits neither; for the
first fruits and tithes was Aaron and his sons due, Heb. 9. chap.
who received the office of the priesthood by the Lords appointment or command,
who were to attend continually year by year at the tabernacle of the
congregation, to accomplish the service of the Lord, which was to offer gifts
and sacrifices for themselves, and for the errors of the people; for which
service doing the Lord God gave them for their portion of the most holy things
reserved from the fire: Lev. 2. chapter and 8.31. to 36. Numb. 18. chapter
of every Oblation, Meat Offering, Sin-offering, Trespasse-offering,
Heave Offering, Wave-offering, etc. all the best of the Oil, and the best of
the Wine and the Wheat, viz. the first fruits of them, which the children of
Israel should bring to offer unto the Lord, even to Aaron and his sons, who had
the charge of the tabernacle of the Congregation, and the office of the
priesthood there; to them the Lord God gave likewise of the firstling of a Cow,
or the firstling of a Sheep, or the firstling of a Goat, which was brought for
an offering made by fire, Exodus 29. chap.
for a sweet savor unto the Lord of the flesh thereof: The Wave-brest, and the
right shoulder, and the fat of the Ram, and the Rump, and the fat that covers
the inwards, and the Caul about the Liver, and the two kindneys, and the fat
that is upon them, and the rig it shoulder, and the breast of the Ram; and
whether it be of Ox or Sheep they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, the
two cheeks and the Maw, Deuteronomy. 18.3. Numb. 18.10.
and a loaf of bread, and a Cake of oyled Bread, and a Wafer of unleavened
Bread, and this was by them to be eaten in the most holy place every meal.

And again, Lev. 27.30, 32, 34.
God he required the children of Israel to tithe all the increase of their seed
that their fields brough^ forth year by year; and he said, that all the tithes
of the land, whether the seed of the land, or the fruit of the tree, and the
tithe of the Herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passes under the Rod,
the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord; and all the tithes was brought into the
House of the Lord; for said the Lord unto the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 14.22.
Exodus 23.19. and 34.26. Mal. 3.10. Deuc. 14.28. and 26.12.13. Prove. 3.9, 10.
Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy seed that the field brings
forth year by year, and the first fruits of thy land thou shall bring into the
House of the Lord thy God: Bring ye (said the Lord) all the tithes into the
Storehouse, that there may be meat in my House, and the levite, and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow which are within thy Gates shall
come and eat thereof, and be satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the work of thy hands which thou do. And Solomon said, Honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase, so shall
thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy Presses shall burst out with new Wine.
And God gave to the sons of Levi (who received the office of the priesthood) a
commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, Heb. 7.5.
that is, of their Brethren; and the Lord he spoke unto Aaron, Numb. 18.21, 24.
and said, Behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel
for an inheritance for their service which they serve, even for the service of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation: and the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying thus,
Speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of
Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your Inheritance, etc.
Here you may plainly see, and the Scriptures do testify that God gave the
first fruits and the tithes to the sons of Levi, who received the office of the
priesthood by his own command only; and likewise the sons of Levi they received
tithes of the children of Israel, their brethren only [and of no other people
or Nation] by a law, which law stood in force to be observed and kept, by which
law the eleven tribes of Israel was required to pay first fruits and tithes.
And likewise the sons of Levi who received the office of the priesthood to take
tithes by; and this commandment was given to Moses in Mount Sinai with other
commandments for the children of Israel to observe and do: Lev. 27.34. I^h.
1.17. Heb. 8.5. and 9, 10. chap.
and Paul said, The Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very Image of the things; for the law came by Moses, but grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ. Now those things which the law required was a figure for the
time then present; in which time were offered both gifts and sacrifices by the
priesthood which was ordained thereunto; and the law which was a shadow of good
things to come, did impose upon the people many things to be done which stood
only in meats and drinks and diverse washings and carnal ceremonies until the
time of reformation, which time of reformation was not until that Christ Jesus
came, who is the sum and substance of all shadows and figures, and the end of
the law, for he changed the priesthood, and disanulled the law of ordinances,
and him God raised up to be a King, a Lawgiver, a Judge, and a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec, Isa. 13.22. James 4.12. Luke 23.19. Heb. 7.21,
22, 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19. Act. 3.22, 23. Isa. 9.6, 7.
not by a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life; and by
the same power a prophet was he, mighty in word and in deed, who came according
as the Lord God did speak by Moses and the prophets; for said the lord unto
Moses, I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee,
and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
shall command him, and unto him shall ye hearken in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you; and it shall come to pass, that every foul that will not
hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. And Isaiah said,
Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the Government shall be
upon his shoulder, his Name shall be called The Wonderful Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end; upon the Throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and justice from
henceforth and for ever; the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this: And
when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4.4, 5.
even that time that was for reformation, God sent forth his son made of a
woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, who came to
fulfill every jot and tittle of the Law; Ioh. 19.30. Romans 10.4. Ephesians. 2.15.
and when Christ Jesus the son had fulfilled the Law, he said upon the Cross,
It was finished. And Paul testified and said, That Christ was the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes in him, having abolished in
his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in Ordinances; yea
the carnal Ordinances which was imposed upon them until the time sf
reformation, which time of reformation was when Christ Jesus the King,
Lawgiver, Judge, and High Priest for evermore, came in the fullness of time
and blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us said Paul;
even such a yoke it was upon the neck of the Disciples, that neither we nor our
forefathers were able to bear, said Peter: But Christ the true King and
Conqueror, who has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show them of
them openly, triumphing over them, even he whom God has raised from the dead,
Ephesians 1.20, 21. C^l. 2.14, 15.
and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and power, and might and ^o^inion. I say, He (Christ Jesus)
has blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinance that was against us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross. Thus the
Law was disannulled by Christ Jesus, who having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, even the Law of commandments contained in Ordinances: etc.

This is Jesus who was called of God, and not of man, nor after the law of a
carnal commandment was he made an high Priest, but after the power of an
endless life he was made an High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec, and continues for ever an unchangeable Priesthood; forsech an
High Priest it became us to have, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the heavens: but by the Law by which the
Levitical Priesthood came, were many priests which had infirmities, which
continued not by reason of death, and so it passed from one to another; which
Priesthood being imperfect in it self, perfected not any; for he offered up
Sacrifices daily year by year; first for himself, viz. for his own sins, and
then for the errors of the people: which sacrifices were year by year offered
up continually, but the comers thereunto could never be made perfect: for if
therefore perfection had been by the levitical Priesthood, then what further
need was there that another Priest should arise after the order of Melchisedec,
and not be called after the order of Aaron: but perfection came not by the
Levitical Priesthood; for their sacrifices that they offered up year by year
made not the comers thereunto perfect: therefore there was a necessity that
another should come.

But God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, who gloryfied
not himself to be made an High Priest, but was gloryfied of his Father, who
said unto him, Thou are my Son, to day have I begotten thee; thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec: and he was not only called a Priest
for ever, but he was called of God an high Priest likewise after the order of
Melchisedec: And Christ Jesus the Son of God came having compassion on the
ignorant and on them that are out of the way: and though he were a Son, yet he
learned obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect he
became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, and has
obtained eternal redemption for us by his own blood: for by one offering of the
holy of Jesus once for all, he offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, and by
that one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. So that
now ye may plainly see that the Levitical Priesthood who came by the law to do
the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and to offer up both gifts
and sacrifices for their own sins, and likewise for the errors of the people,
is changed into a more better and perfect then was before, which changes not,
but abides for ever. Therefore seeing that the sons of Levi, who received the
office of the Priesthood according to the Law (had a commandment to take
tithes) were discharged from their office, and their service put to an end by
that one offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; for by that one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: so that where
there is remission for sin, there is no more offering for sin. Now seeing that
it is so plain that by the sons of Levi [the Levitical Priesthood] perfection
came not, therefore that priesthood was changed, and the sons of Levi
discharged of their service by Christ Jesus, who offered himself a sacrifice
once for all, and that by him perfection came for ever to them that are
sanctified by that one offering: Therefore there was a necessity that a change
of the Law should be made also by reason of its servitude that lay upon the
people, and likewise for the unprofitablenesse thereof.

The children of Israel were by the law commanded to pay first fruits and
tithes for the maintenance of the levitical priesthood: And the sons of Levi
who received the office of che Priesthood, had a commandment to take tithes of
their Brethren according to the law, and of no other Nation or people were they
to receive any first fruits or tithes: but verily that commandment is
disanulled, and the law is changed by our King, our Lawgiver, and our Judge
and Prophet, and Priest for ever, viz. Christ Jesus, who having abolished in
his Flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in Ordinances, and
has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and
contrary to us, which was a yoke of bondage upon the neck of the Disciples: he
took it and nailed to his cross, tryumphing over them in himself, and said, It
is finished, for he is the end of the law for righteeusnesse to every one that
believes in him, etc.

But wicked and ungodly men who believe not in him, even Kings, Rulers, Pope,
Matthew. 13.54, 55, 56, 57. Mark. 6.23. Ioh. 7.48, 49.
Bishops, Priests, for out of their own mouths they are judged: Have any of the
Rulers believed in him? And said Paul, Not many wise men after the flesh, nor
many mighty, nor many Nobles are called: even such as believe not in Christ
Jesus, will not that he should reign over them, therefore they have made
unrighteous, unjust and unholy laws for to require people to pay tithes to the
priests and ministers which they themselves have so ordained, consecrated and
sent forth, and not God: And the Priests and Ministers who are not ordained,
nor consecrated, nor sent forth of God, but by man; even they by their
unrighteous, unholy, and the unjust laws of men they take tithes, and sue men
at the unrighteous law for tithes, and cause men to be put in prison by the
unjust law for tithes, and by the unholy law they take trebble damages of men's
goods for non-payment of tithes; thus contradicting what Christ Jesus has
done: for Christ the true King and the just and righteous Lawgiver he
disannulled the law, Ephesians. 2.15. Col. 2.14, 15.
and abolished the law of Commandments; and blotted out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, and changed the priesthood that took the tithes; so that when the
levitical priesthood ceased to be a priesthood, the tithes ceased also, and the
law likewise.

Therefore I say, That the Kings and Rulers of the earth, the Pope and his
Adherents, who have made laws to pay and to take tithes by, they are such as
believe not in Christ Jesus the Son of God; for had they believed on Christ
Jesus the Son of God, they would have owned him to have been a King and a
Lawgiver unto them; and likewise they would that he should have reigned over
them as King; and had they loved him, Isa. 26.12, 13 and 33.22. Ioh. 13.21.
Matthew. 23.23. Luke 18.12.
they would have kept his commandments: but such as own not Christ to be King
and Lawgiver, believe not in him, and so will not that he should rule and
reign over them: These as the Scribes, Pharisees and Hyyocrites did, so do they
pay tithes of Mint, Annis, Cummin, Rue, and all manner of Herbs, yea, and of
all that they possess, and so by their works they deny Christ to be King and
Lawgiver, and Priest too; but said Christ, Those mine enemies which would not
that I should reign over them, bring them hither, Luke 19, 27.
and slay them before me. Now there was a time that the Hypocrites, Scribes and
Pharisees paid tithes, as said Christ, Ye pay tithes, etc. and at that time
that they paid tithes they omitted the weightier matters of the law, Judgment,
Mercy and Faith, which said Christ, ye ought to have done, and not to leave the
other (that is tithes) undone; which tithes was to be paid according to the law
by the people of Israel; which law and carna ordinances imposed upon the
people, continued for them to observe and do until the time of reformation,
which reformation was by Christ Jesus who changed the priesthood and
disannulled the law: and said Paul, He having abolished the law of
commandments, and blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against
us, nailing it to his cross: so that after that time that Christ had fulfilled
the law, and put an end to that law which was a shadow of good things to come,
and changed the Priesthood to which the tithes was paid. I say again, That
there was no more tithes nor first fruits to be paid; and all they that refused
to pay tithes and first fruits after that time of reformation which was made by
Christ Jesus (who offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, and after he had so
done, Heb. 10.12. Romans 4.15.
he sat down at the right hand of God) they transgressed no law in so doing;
for where there is no law, there is no transgression.

But the Heathen at this they raged, and the people imagined a vain thing: the
Kings of the earth they set themselves, and the Rulers, and the Pope, and the
Cardinals, the Bishops, and the Popes Adherents took counsel together against
the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Come, let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast their Cords from us: such would not that Christ should rule
and reign over them; these were and are enemies to God; they have made the Word
of God of non-effect; they have set Christ at naught, and have lightly esteemed
the Rock of their salvation: they have cast his Law behind their backs, and
will have none of his reproof: they have not taken up the Cross of Christ, nor
gone in the strait way that leads unto life, but have gone in the broad way
that leads unto destruction, being led by a spirit of error in their Councils,
whereby they did make Decrees, Canons, Constitutions, Laws, Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances which are unjust, unrighteous, impure, and not good: for said the
men of Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Herefordshire, speaking of the Acts
and Statutes made in former Kings days for the payment of tithes, said they,
The Husband-mans Ploa against tithes, printed in the year 1647.
Because Acts of Parliament are Acts of men and not Oracles from Heaven, a
Parliament, said they, as well as a Council, may be led by wrong Principles,
and so err, and so make Laws or Statutes that are unjust, etc. So acting
against the Lord and against his Anointed in making Laws, Canons, Acts, etc.
to pay tithes by; for after that Christ had disannulled the Law, and put an end
to it, they made Laws to uphold and to pay tithes: therefore those Councils and
Parliaments, etc. who have acted and made such Laws formerly, and those that do
act and make such Laws to pay tithes by now, were, and are led by a spirit of
error to bring again upon the necks of the Disciples (Christ's Anointed) a yoke
of bondage which Christ their King and Lawgiver has freed them from; as
hereafter you may read how the Saxon Kings who governed or ruled this Land.
About the year 604. they began to build the high places called by the Names of
Cathedral Churches, Churches and Chapels: And about the year 635. they began
to build up Crosses and Altars: And about the year 666. they began to build up
Abbiet, Monasteries, Fryar-Houses, See Fox. Act. and Mon Vol. 1.
Chantry, etc

And about the year 720. King Inas, alias, Ina, King of the West Saxons, made a
Law, That the first fruits of all that was sown should be paid at the day of
St. Martin, as he called it.

And in the year 933. King Adlestan made a Law, That tithes should be paid of
all the proper goods, as well of living Cattle as of Corn, and the first fruits
of the ground, etc.

And in the year 940. King Edmond made a Law, That tithes, with the first
fruits of every man's Crop, should he duly paid, etc.

And in the year 959. King Edgar ordained and decreed concerning Liberties and
Freedoms of the Church [as he called it] That tithes and first fruits of Corn,
and Peter Pence, be all duly paid, etc

And about the sixth year of King Henry the first, Anno 1106. Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury, by the permission of the King, assembled a great
Council at Westminster of the Prelates and Clergy of England, and amongst other
Councils and that it was decreed, That no tithes should be given but to the
Church, so called.

And in the year 1215. Pope Innocent the third sent his Decretal Epistle into
England to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, by whose means it was decreed,
That private tithes should be paid at Easter, so called.

And in the year 1274. at a Council at Lateran held under Pope Gregory the
tenth, a Canon was made in this manner, that is, Let no man give his tithes
where he pleases, as before but let them be paid to Mother Church, as he
called it.

And in the days of King Henry the 8th. by his Authority and the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament, an Act was
made for the payinng of tithes, offerings, and other duties of Holy Church: Now
I say, What were these Offerings? Were they Heave-offerings? or Wave-offerings?
or Burnt-offerings? or Sin Offerings? or Trespasse-offerings that were to be
paid to the Parson, Vicar, Curate, etc. I would have all people to take notice
also of the Preamble of the said Act, because that Thomas Bradley tells us,
Tho. Bradleys Book, called Cesars Duc.
That the Lords spiritual sat in one Parliament in the Vpper-House in great
Power: and with them in that Parliament twenty six Abbots, which together with
the Bishops were able to carry a great Vote against the Lords temporal, which
in those days (said he) were not so numerous: and besides, there was full
convocation of the Clergy sitting, and unanimously assenting, etc. I do not
doubt but the Bishops, the Abbots and the Clergy would assent to any thing for
their own profit, right or wrong: But woe be unto them that decree unrighteous
Decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed, Isa. 10.1, 2.
and to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from
the poor of my people, that the Widows may be their prey; and that they may rob
the fatherless, etc. The words of the Preamble of the Act are as follows:
Forasmuch as many evil disposed persons have attempted to withhold their
tithes, as well predial as personal, An. 27. Hen. 8. chapter 20.
due unto Almighty God and holy Church; and also have contemned and disobeyed
the Processes and Decrees of the Ecclesiastical Court of this Realm: Be it
enacted, etc. that every subject of this Realm, according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws of this Church of England, and after the laudable usage and custom of the
Parish where he dwells or occupies, shall pay his tithes, offerings, and
other duties of holy Church, etc. An. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 1. An. 28. Hen. 8. cap.
11.
Now they had made King Henry the eighth the supreme Head of their Holy Church
by an Act of Parliament, instead of the Pope; so that their Churh was as unholy
as the Popes was and is; for one and the same spirit guided them all in making
their unrighteous Decrees for tithes, first fruits and offerings, etc.

So in the days of King Edward the sixth, Personal tithes was the tenth part of
a Tradesmans clear Gaius.
an Act was made for the true payment of all manner of predial Tithes and
personal Tithes, Offerings, Obventions, Profits, Commodities or other Duties,
to the Parsons, Vicars, Proprietories, etc. Be it also enacted, etc. That every
of the Kings Subjects shall from henceforth truly and justly, without fraud or
guile, divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of their predial tithes in
their proper kind as they rise and happen, etc. And the parsonal tithes was to
be paid at Easter, An. Ed. 6. cap. 13.
and the offerings were to be paid at four offering-dayes, or in default
thereof, to pay the said offerings at Easter then next following.

And likewise the Parliament of Lords and Commons they made an Ordinance for
the payment of tithes, etc l take their words as follows: Ordinanee of Lords
and Commons, Die Veneris, 8. November. 1644.
Be it therefore declared and ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That every person and persons within the said Realm and Dominion,
shall fully, truly, and effectually set out, yield and pay respectively all and
singular tithes, offerings, oblations, obventions, rates for tithes, and all
other duties known by the Name of tithes to all and every the respective
Owners, Proprietors, Improprietors, and possessors, Ordinanco of Lords and Com.
Dei Luna, 9. Aug. 1647.
as well Lay as Ecclesiastical persons respectively, viz. Parsons, Vicars,
Rectors, etc. And another Ordinance they made to award trebble damages to the
parties complaining of the non-payment of tithes, whether minister or other
person, which Ordinances of the Lords and Commons was renewed and confirmed to
stand in force by Oliver Protector and his then Council, Ordinance of O.P. and
his Council, Aug. 1654.
by a Clause in an Ordinance made for the ejection of scandalous, ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters: And this last parliament that sat
have confirmed the said Ordinance made by Oliver Protector and his then Council
to continue for three years; for the proof of which, see their Declaration of
Acts and Ordinances made by this last Parliament, and assented unto by Oliver
protector: When thou saw a thief, Psalm. 50.18.
thou thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with the Adulterers.
And now I say, In the presence of the Lord God, and from his power who bears me
witness, and whose testimony I bear against all those abovenamed unrighteous,
unjust, and impure Decrees, Laws, Statutes, Acts, Constitutions, Canons, and
Ordinances that have been made by men for to require the people to pay first
fruits, tithes, offerings, oblations, obventions, rates for tithes, or such
like, that they are not of God, and likewise, That all those men who sat in
councils and parliaments, and have made those laws, whether kings, popes,
earls, lords, lords, and commons, protector, and council, or parliaments: I
say, That they were not guided, nor taught, nor led by the spirit of God so to
do, but by a spirit of error were they ruled by for to bring again a yoke upon
the neck of Christ's Disciples by those unjust, and unholy, and unrighteous
laws, decrees, constitutions, acts and ordinances, and clauses in ordinances,
whereby they require and compel Christ's Anointed to pay first fruits, tithes,
offerings, oblations, obventions, or any other rates in lieu of the same. I
say, That those laws for the payment of tithes, etc. are not good; for
whatsoever law it is that is not good in its original or foundation can never
be made good by any act or acts of man subsequent: Now I say, That the ground
and original of these laws for the payment of first fruits and tithes, etc.
(since the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ) was from the pope and his
adherents, the pope and his adherents are Idolaters, and all the Idolaters are
ungodly and such as hate the Lord; Read 2 Chronicles. 18, and 19. chap.
for Ahab the King and Israel was an Idolater, and he was led by a lying spirit
to go up to Ramath Gilead, Iehosaphat King of Judah joined with him, and said
to Ahab, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people and but Hanani the Seer
said to Iehosaphat, Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? such are the pope and his adherents, ungodly, and such as hate the Lord:
therefore those laws that had their original foundation from the pope and his
councils, were and are altogether illegal and unjust in their original; for can
a corrupt fountain send forth sweet water? neither can the pope and his
adherents, who are led by a spirit of error, send forth pure and just laws:
Therefore say I to all the Rulers of England, Should you help the ungodly to
make laws against the Lord, and against his Anointed, do ye not make your
selves manifest by your actions herein to be such as love them that hate the
Lord? do not ye do the same things in nature, though not in substance, as the
pope and his Adherents do, or worse? for the pope used to excommunicate (or to
curse) out of his Church those that would not pay tithes; and happy they were
that were so excommunicated out of his church by him and his adherents; See the
Petition of Right, and (...) Act for regulating the Privy Council, and taking
away the Star Chamber, Anno 17. Caroli Regis.
but ye make laws to take three times the value of the tithes from them that
cannot in conscience pay tithes, etc. and put men in prison for non-payment of
tithes, to the undoing of them, their wives and small children, which is
contrary to the Common Law of the land.

And again, It is a Maxim in the laws of this land, That whatsoever in its
original is altogether illegal and unjust, can never by tract or length of
time, or by Actor Acts subsequent, be they what they will, in any kinds or
construction of law, be made just or legal: And for the clear proof of which,
read Judge Huttons Argument against Ship Money, page 48, 49. and Vox Plebis,
page 20. and 43. and the fourth part of Cooks Reports, page 125. and Vernons
Case. See also John Lilburns Grand Plea made against the Lords Jurisdiction
over the Commoners, Anno 1647. page 8. 13. And said the men of Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire and Herefordshire; See the Book called, The Husbandmans plea
against tithes. Printed 1647.
Because, said they, Acts of parliament, are Acts of men, and not Oracles from
Heaven, a parliament, as well as a Council, may be led by wrong principles, and
so err, and so make laws, Acts or Statutes that are unjust, etc.

And again I say, That all they who put those unrighteous and unjust laws for
tithes etc. in execution; and all they who receive tithes, firrst fruits,
oblations, obventions, offerings, or any other thing in lieu of the same, and
all those who either through subtilty, or willingly pays the said first
fruits, tithes, oblations, obventions or offerings, or any thing in leu^ of the
same, in obedience to those laws that are made by the ungodly and such as hate
the lord, I do judge them all to be enemies of God, and such as will not that
Christ Jesus should rule and reign over them; neither do they own him to be
unto them a King, Lawgiver and Judge, but by their works do make themselves
manifest to be such as deny Christ Jesus to become in the flesh; for did they
love Christ Jesus, they would suffer the spoiling of their goods for his Names
sake, and keep his Commandments; and did they own Christ to be King and
Lawgiver, then they would obey no laws but his, and submit to him that has
disanulled the law (which was a shadow of good things to come, and blotted out
the handwriting of Ordinances, having abolished in his flesh the law of
commandments contained in Ordinances, and changed the priesthood who by a law
took tithes) and not have revived an old law that was done away by Christ Jesus
at the time of reformation by himself; for who has required that law to be
revived again by them at their hands, but only the Pope and his Adherents
whose work they do? for his servants ye are to whom ye obey: Therefore my son,
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not, neither follow a multitude to do
evil; walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their paths,
for the ways of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: therefore go not in
the way of evil men; as for God his way is perfect, his work is perfect, all
his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without iniquity; just and right
is he, and the way of God is strength to the upright, andt they that walk in
his paths find peace; but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity,
etc.

And now I come to show out of Histories the testimony that others in former
years have born for Christ, and against tithes, Fox. Acts and Mon. Vol. 1.
and them that took tithes. I find written, that about the year 1360. in the
prayer and complaint of a Plowman, wherein he said as follows:

Ah Lord! he that Calls.
cleepeth himself thy Vicar upon earth, viz. the Pope, has ordained an order
of Priests to do thy service, and therefore he charge Laymen.
lewd men in pain of cursings to bring his Priests tythings and offerings to
To maintain.
finden his Priests; but Lord, in the old law the tythings of the lay people
they were not due to such Priests, but to that other children of Levi that
served in the Temple: The Pope used to curse those that paid not tithes.
But Lord! Paul thy servant said that the Order of Priesthood ceased in Christ's
coming, and the Law of that Priesthood: But Lord, What doom is it to curse the
lay people for tithes, and not curse the Parson that robs the people of
tythings, etc.

And I find in the story of Walter Brute in his Examination before the then
Bishob of Hereford, these words following, viz. That no man is bound to g^ve
tithes nor oblations, etc. said he; and if any man will needs give, he may give
his tithes to whom he will, and not to their Curates: And said he, Anno 1407.
Fox. Act. and Men.
Wherefore seeing that neither Christ nor any of his Apostles commanded to pay
tithes, it is manifest and plian, that neither by the law of Moses, nor by
Christ's laws, are Christian bound to pay tithes, etc.

And William Thorp in his Examination before the Archbishop of Canterbury, in
answer to their fourth Article, he affirmed, that in the new law, that neither
Christ nor any of his Apostles took tithes of the people, nor commanded the
people to pay tithes neither to Priests nor to Deacons; but (as Cistersiensis
tells) that in the year 1211. one Pope Gregory the tenth ordained tithes to
be given to priests now in the new law: But said William Thorp, The priests
that challenge tithes now in the new law, say in effect that Christ is not
become man, nor that he has suffered death for man. And said he again, That
those priests that will challenge and take tithes, deny that Christ is come in
the flesh, and do the priests office of the old law for whom tithes were
granted, for else the priests now take tithes wrongfully. And said he, The
parishioners that pay their temporal goods (be they tithes or offerings) to
priests, are partners of every sin of those priests, because they sustain those
priests folly in their sin with their temperal goods, etc. Now do but take
notice of one question that Thomas Arundal Archbishop of Canterbury asked the
said Will. Thorp, that is, said the bishop, Why Lossel, do thou deem that
Holy Church has erred in the Ordinance for tithes? etc.

Now I answer and say, Yea, their Church has erred, and does err in making
Ordinances, Constitutions, Canons and Decrees, both for tithes and all other
things; and all the Rulers of the earth that do the same things are the Popes
Adherents, and do err likewise, etc.

And here follows in part the testimony of diverse others in these late days
that they have born against tithes, A Book called led the Indictment of tithes.
Printed 1646.
and also by their imprisoment and spoiling of their goods.

First, Whereas diverse honest and conscientious persons of the city of London,
of the parish of Brides, and of the parish of All Hallows-Barking, were
convented before the then Mayor of London for their non-payment of tithes to
their parish-parsons, some of the Inhabitants of the parish of
All-Hollows-Barking gave in their grounds and reasons for their so doing, which
were as follows? Said they,

1. We humbly conceive that tithes and circumcision were to cease, and to have
an end at the coming of our Savior Christ Jesus.

2. We do not know of any place in the New-Testement that commands the
payment of tithes, nor that either the Apostles or Disciples required the same,
or pretend a right thereunto, or to any other set-maintenance, but on the
contrary.

3. Tithes, Offerings, etc. being contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
godliness, though the law of the land should require the same, we conceive our
selves and all others bound in conscience and by our covenant to endeavor the
extirpation thereof, and cannot without wilful sinning submit thereunto. And
said they, We hope it will now appear no more strange to abolish tithes, or
any other thing contrary to sound Doctrine, then it has been to abolish
Episcopacy, Prelacy, and the Book of Common Prayer, etc.

1. The paying of tithes is a submission unto the Jewish bondage, the law of
tything being known to be a part of that ceremonial law and yoke of bondage
which was laid upon Israel after the flesh, The Testimony of Nicholas Waterson
against tithes.
to be observed and born by them in the land of Canaan.

2. The requiring and paying of tithes is an implicit denying that Christ is
come in the flesh; for said he, If there be not a change of the law, then the
priesthood of Aaron remains; Heb. 7.12.
and if that priesthood remains, then Christ is not yet come.

3. The Doctrine that tithes ought to be paid to the priests, presbyters, or
clergy, is a popish Doctrine, inasmuch as it has been devised and maintained
by the pope and his prelates, and is contrary to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures: And said he, The payment of tithes, or any thing in the lieu of
tithes, does and will support popish and prelatical iniquity; and those humane
laws that have required such payment of tithes, have been grounded upon popish
Doctrine, and therefore are no more to be observed then those laws that
enjoined the use of the Service Book: And said he, They which have vowed the
extirpation of popery and prelacy, have therefore bound themselves not to pay
tithes, nor any thing in the lieu of tithes, etc.

If tithes (said he) be an Ordinance under the Gospel, The Testimony of Tho.
Bennet against tithes.
then they must be of an Evangelical institution even from the command of
Christ, as well as other Gospel Ordinances; but we find no other Ordinance for
the exaction of tithes now, but a bare Mosaical Ordinance; therefore tithes are
no Gospel-Ordinance: Tithes (said he) were never ordained but for the wages of
typical services: therefore to continue the wages of such a work, cannot in
equity be without the continuance of the work, which is a flat denial of Christ
come in the flesh. And said he, These that had the commandment for tithes, were
only to receive them of their Brethren, that is, of the other eleven Tribes,
therefore not of the Gentiles, or were the Gentiles by that command bound
thereunto; and if not in Moses time, muchlesse now: for said he, They were
imposed upon the land of Canaan, therefore not upon England, or English men,
being no part of Canaan, or the people any of the twelve Tribes; and the Jews
to this day terminate the equity of tithes to their own land, as (said he) Mr.
Seldon a Member of the House of Commons writes in his History of Tithes: and
likewise, That no payment of tithes was ordained in Christian Churches, as Mr.
Seldon observes, till the General Counsel of Lateran: Therefore the Ordinance
for tithes under the Gospel deriving its being and institution from the
injunction of the Pope and his Council, does subject us to the dictates of the Sea of Rome, against which we are all engaged by our former protestations, etc.

And the men of Middlesex in their first Letter to his then called Excellency,
the Lord General Cromwell, said, That tithes is an usurped popish Relic. And
in their petition to the Parliament they said, It is very clear that tithes
have been formerly by the popish Clergy subtly persuaded, or rather extorted
from our Ancesters: Wherefore, said they, we humbly desire that all tithes and
tenths may be speedily removed, as a great oppression and usurpation, etc.

And Aug. Wingfield calls tithes the Nursery of contention and strife; and
that the proud and pompous priests did constrain the poor people of England,
viz. the popish Canons, to pay their tithes unto them: In his Book called,
Tithes totally routed by Magna Charta, printed 1653.
So that tithes were grounded merely upon a popish Canon, contrary to Magna
Charta, which is acknowledged by the learned, viz. Magna Charta, to be the
Common Law of England both before and after the Conquest, etc. And Cook that
learned Oracle in the Laws of England, said in his Chapter of tithes, Eighth
Book of Cooks Reports, and in Dr. and Stud. JENKINS, fol. 139.
That all Canons which are against the common law or custom of the land, are
of no force: And in Bonhams case it is laid down for law, That Acts of
Parliament made against common Right or Reason, are ipso facto, void: And it is
proved by Jenkins, That the Common Law shall control Acts of Parliament made
against Right or Reason, and adjudge them to be void, etc. And such are all the
Acts, Statutes and Ordinances for tithes against both reason, equity and truth.
And at a Parliament holden at Westminster in the two and forty year of Edward
the third, it was assented and accorded, That the Great Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest, 42 Ed. 3. cap. 2.
be holden and kept in all points, and if any St^^nte be made to the contrary,
that shall be holden for none.

And the Freemen of Bucks, Bedfordshire, and Herefordshire, said, That Tithes
ts the mark of the Beast, or Antichrist, spoken of in the Revelations the 13.
chap. ver. 16, 17. for said they, There is no ground in the New Testament as
can be found for them, See their Book called, The Husbandmans Plea: printed
1647.
but only from the Popes laws and canons, and therefore may they be truly
called a mark of the Beast, or Antichrist the Pope of Rome: Neither is there
[said they] any greater tyranny of the Pope exercised over men's persons and
goods, then is by this law of tithes: And said they in their Epistle, That
tithes is the most unequal, the most irregular, and the most unagreeable to the
Word of God: f^r said they in their Plea, If theref^r^ perfection had been by
the Priesthood of the Levite: then what further need was there that another
priest should arise, for under it was the law established unto the people; and
the ceremonial law was but for a time, even until the time of reformation,
which was done by Christ Jesus, who changed the priesthood, Col. 2.14.
and at his death abolished the law, bloting out the handwriting of Ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way,
nailing it to the Cross: And said they, As the payment of tithes is contrary
to the Doctrine of the Gospel, so likewise it is repugnant to the power of
godliness; for said they, Pope Gregory the tenth ordained that tithes should
be given to the priests: So that the customs that we pay tithes by at this day,
were settled upon this Kingdom by the Popes Legates in Provincial and Synodal
Constitutions, about the time of Hen. 3. and Hen. 5. And said they, Tithes is a
popish custom that is imposed by the Popes Authority, and not by the Authority
of God, Seldons History of tithes, chap. 11.
without any warrant for it in the New Testament: So likewise tithes are a
Relic of superstition, because they were at first given out of a
superstitious opinion, viz. for satisfaction for the sins of the giver, his
wife and children, as it appears by some of our old Charters, recorded by
learned Seldom. And said they, Tithes are an oppression to the Husbandman, and
too heavy for him to bear, because that the tenth of the Husbandmans stock and
years labor is yearly taken from him under the name of tithes, which is every
particular Husbandmans proper goods by a civil and natural right, so that
neither Kings nor Parliaments can take them from them, nor any particular man
by their appointment, without giving to every particular man a consideration
for it of equal value when he takes it from him, Romans 8.2. Acts 20.33, 34, 35.
or else he sins against the eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal; and
against the tenth, Thou shall not covet, etc. which Paul a Minister of Christ
said he was free from. etc.

And I find in a Book wherein is contained certain grievances of diverse
persons of this Commonwealth of England, See a Book printed 1653. called, The
afflictions of the afflicted; or, The unjust exaction o^ the Tythemongers
discovered.
who suffered, as the said Book relates, both imprisonment and the spoiling of
their goods for the testimony of Jesus, and against tithes, as appears both
in the Epistle and Schedule of their particular sufferings in the Book.

They said, That Antichristian Teachers, Improprietors, and all others which
afflicts the conscientious people by owning, receiving, and urging of tithes
and forced maintenance, denies the work of the Lord Jesus done at his death,
for in that he has dissolved the levitical law and the priesthood, for he
said, It is finished, as you may see Ioh. 10.30. for said they, Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes: and Christ is
our Lawgiver and High Priest, which came of the Tribe of Judah; and so the
priesthood is changed, and therefore a necessity of a change of the law also:
Luke 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
But said they, Tithes is no law of Christ to us; and it is a great sin to pay
tithes and forced maintenance; the payment of tithes, said they, is against the
Law of Christ and the Apostles Doctrine: Gal. 5.1. Act. 15.1, 2, 10, 19, 20.
ver.
and that if the law of England be contrarary to the law of God, we are not to
obey it, but to obey God; for whether is it better to obey God, or to obey man?
judge ye: But said they, Seeing that tithes is thus unjustly taken from the
free people of this Nation, it is absolutely treason both in the Priest and
Improprietor, for in so doing they destroy the fundamental law, where it is
ordained that no freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disse^sed of his
Freehold, Liberty, or free Custom; neither shall he be outlawed, banished, 9
Hen. 3. cap. 29. 5 Ed. 3. cap. 9. Read the petition of Right.
or by any means brought to destruction; neither shall any pass or sit in
judgment upon him but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, [that is, his
equals] or by the law of the land; and Magna Charta is acknowledged by the
learned to be the Common Law of England both before and after the conquest.

And now I shall refer the Reader to a Book, called, The Cry of the Oppressed
from under their Oppressions, wherein the Reader may see a cloud of Witnesses
that have born, and still do bear their testimony for the Name of Jesus, and
against tithes, who go under the Name of Quakers, who have suffered, and do
suffer bonds and imprisonment, and likewise the spoiling of their goods they
take joyfully, knowing in themselves that they in Heaven have a better and an
enduring substance: And again, besides all this they undergo sore travels out
of the North, and other parts of this land, to appear before the Judges at the
Terms, at Westminster, Term after Term do they continue still more or less,
bearing their testimony, (not as the parish-Ministers and the professors do,
who profess Christ in words, but by their works deny him come in the flesh)
against tithes, and that Christ Jesus is come in the flesh, and their testimony
of him ^s born through suffering the loss of all for his Name sake, which to
them is an evident token of their salvation, and that of God, for they that
suffer with Christ shall reign with him; but unto their adversaries by which
they do suffer, it is to them an evident token of their perdition; for those
mine enemies that would not, said Christ, that I should rule and reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me: I tell you, that God does
hear the cry of the oppressed, and he will avenge his own Elect which cry unto
him day and night, for vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it upon his
adversaries, ye wicked and ungodly ones; because that judgment is not speedily
executed upon you, therefore the hearts of you sons of men are set on to do
wickedly; but know, that for all this you shall come to judgment; for the
innocent have committed their cause unto God, who judges righteously, and you
shall find, that when you appear before the Lord, who sees all your doings, and
knows the thoughts of your hearts that they are evil, that with God there is no
respect of persons, nor taking of bribes.

Ye see here before written, that I have showed how the parish-Ministers that
the Kings and the Rulers, the Pope and his Adherents have ordained and
consecrated, and sent forth to their parishes to preach, have been, and are
maintained; first, their maintenance is in part after the maintenance of the
Levitical priesthood under the Law, viz. first fruits, tithes, offerings,
oblations, obventions, etc. Secondly like unto Pharaoh the King of Aegypts
Priests, by portions of lands, viz. Parsonages, Vicarages, Ex^d. 47.24. 1 King.
18.19.
Rectories and Glebe-lands. Thirdly, like unto the prophets of the Groves that
fed at Jezzabels table, viz. at Kings and Queens tables, Earls, Lords, and
Ladies tables, yea, 1 King. 13.33, 34. Mic. 3.11.
and at Oliver Protectors table too. Fourthly, like the false prophets and the
priests of the high places that Jeroboam and others consecrated, who preached
for hire, and divined or studied for money; so they have some 30.40.50. 100. or
200 l. a year, and some more in the parish where they are settled for their
yearly maintenance and their Lecturers place together; all which has been, and
is provided for those heaps of Teachers (which the world, who having itching
ears, have heaped up to themselves, by which they are seduced, even by those
unprofitable talkers, viz. Cambridge and Oxford Scholars) by the Kings and
Rulers of the earth; the Pope and his Adherents.

And now I come to show you out of Scripture how the Prophets that God sent
forth was maintained: I shall instance how some of them were maintained, and so
by them do ye judge how the rest were maintained: For, Elijah the prophet of
God he was a hairy man, and he was girded about his loins with a leathern
Girdle; and God commanded Elijah to go and hide himself by the Brook Cherith, 2
King. 1.8. Read 1 King. 17. chap.
that is before Jordan, and God told him that he should drink of the Brook, and
that the Ravens should feed him there: So Elijah went, according to the word of
the Lord, and dwelt there, and the Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the
morning, and bread and flesh in the evening? And it came to pass after a while
that the Brook was dried up because there had bin no rain in the land: And then
the word of the Lord came to Elijah, saying, Arise, get thee to Zarephath, and
dwell there, behold, I have, said the Lord, commanded a widow woman there to
sustain thee: So he arose, and went to Zarephath, and when he came to the Gate
of the City, he found the widow woman gathering sticks; and he called unto her,
and said, Fetch me a little water in a vessel that I may drink, and bring me a
morsel of bread in thy hand: And she went, and did according to the saying of
Elijah, and she, and he, and her Household did eat many days; and the Barrel of
Meal wasted not, neither did the Cruse of Oil fail, according to the word of
the Lord which he spoke by Elijah. And it came to pass after many days, that
the word of the Lord came unto Elijah in the third year, saying, Go and show
thy self unto Ahab, and I will send Rain upon the earth: And Elijah went and
showed himself unto Ahab: and after that he had done the work of the Lord (as
you may read in 1 King, 18. ch.) Iezzabel sent a messenger to him, saying, So
let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one
of them, by to morrow about this time: And when he saw that, he arose, and went
for his life, and came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah, 1 King. 19.
and he left his servant there, and he himself went a days journey into the
Wilderness, and sat him down under a Juniper Tree: and as he lay and slept
under a Juniper Tree, behold, then an Angel touched him, and said unto him,
Arise, and eat. And he looked, and behold there was a Cake baken on the coals,
and a Cruse of water at his head, and he did eat and drink, and laid him down
again. And the Angel came again the second time, and touched him, and said,
Arise and eat, because the journey is too great for thee: And he arose, and did
eat and drink and went in the strength of that meat forty days, and forty
nights, unto Horeb the Mount of God: And when Iezzabel cut off the prophets of
the Lord, 1 King. 18.4.
Obadiah hid a hundred of them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water. etc.

And now see after what manner Elisha the prophet of God was maintained: It
fell on a day that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman, and she
constrained him to eat bread; and it was so, 2 King. 4.8, 9, 01.
that as often as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread: And the woman
of Shunem said unto her Husband, Behold, now I perceive that this is an holy
man of God which passes by us continually; let us (said she) make a little
Chamber I pray thee, on the Wall, and let us set for him there a bed, and a
Table, and a Stool, and a Candlestick, and it shall be, when he comes to us,
that he shall turn in thither: And it fell on a day that he came thither, and
he turned into the Chamber, and lay there, etc. By these ye may see now that
the Kings of the earth would not provide first fruits, tithes, offerings,
oblations, obventions, nor set out portions of land and great Houses for the
prophets of God which he sent, to live in, 2 Chronicles. 18 25, 26
as they did for their own that they themselves sent, worth 100. l. a year,
more or less: nay, said Ahab by Micaiah the prophet of God, Go take Micaiah
and carry him back unto Amon the Governor of the City, and to Ioash the Kings
son, and say, Thus says the King, Put this fellow in prison, and feed him with
bread of Affliction, and with water of Affliction, until I return again in
peace. And this is that which the Kings and Rulers of the earth, the Pope and
his Adherents, provide for the prophets that come and go in the Name of the
Lord; but the prophets of the Groves that come and go in their own Name, they
shall feed at Iezzabels table.

And John the Baptist the Messenger of the Lord; Matthew. 3. chap. Luke 1.15.
Luke 3.1, 2, 3, 4 Matthew. 1. chap
who was filled with the holy spirit of God from his Mothers Womb, went
preaching in the Wilderness of Judea, and in all the country about Jordan,
preaching the baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins; and he was great
in the sight of the Lord, but his Raiment was of Camels Hair, and a Leathern
Girdle about his loins, and his meat was Locusts and Wilde-Honey: Here was
nothing provided for him by the Kings of the earth to maintain him the
messenger of the Lord; no; but instead of a great House, Glebe-Land, Tithes and
Offerings, Oblations and Obventions, and 100. l. Matthew. 14 chapter
a year Herod the Tetrach laid hold on him, and bound him, and put him in
prison, and afterward cut off his Head. And such is the provision that the
Kings and Rulers of the earth, the Pope and his Adherents make for the
Messengers of the Lord: But the priest, and preachers, and teachers, and
Ministers that are of their own ordaining, consecrating, or by their
appointment and law so made, are well provided for, so that they eat of the fat
of the land, and the finest of Wheat, and drink Wine and strong Drink, and take
Tobacco, and go clothed in black soft Raiment, Cuffs, and Rings on their
fingers, Ribans, and Boot-hose-tops, and sit at ease like a Queen, and feel no
want in the outward like other men.

Aaron and the sons of Levi who received the office of the priesthood, they
were maintained by first fruits, offerings, tithes, etc. according to the law,
which was a shadow of good things then to come, until the time of reformation:
But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
made under the law, who in the fullness of time came, having compassion on the
ignorant, and of them that were out of the way and being made perfect, he
became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; but Christ
Jesus he glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said
unnto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; the same said unto
him, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec: Now Christ
Jesus he was called of God an High Priest, and made an High Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec, of God, not by a carnal commandment, but by the
power of an endless life, and he offered up his body a sacrifice once for all,
and by that one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified;
and after he had offered that one sacrifice for sins for ever, he sat down at
the right hand of God, and now where remission of these is, there is no more
offering for sin: So that Christ Jesus (who is the Mediator of a better
covenant then that of the old) is the sum and substance of all figures and
shadows held out by the Law which he put an end to; for he changed the
priesthood and disannulled the Law, which was a shadow of good things to come,
by which the tithes was paid. So that it is evident that Christ Jesus was not
maintained by first fruits, offerings, nor tithes: neither did the Kings and
Rulers of the earth provide any House or Lands for him whom God sent; For God
so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, but
they would not bestow hundreds of pounds a year to maintain him with, nor
settle him in a Vicarage, Parsonage, nor in a Rectory of two or three hundred a
year; for said Christ Jesus, The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air
have Nests, Luke 9.58. Luke 8 1, 2, 3. Ioh. 13.29.
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head: For he went throughout
every City and Village, preaching and showing the glad tidings of the Kingdom
of God; and those that received his Doctrine, and believed on him, such
ministered unto him of their substance; and Judas carried the bag, and he
betrayed him into the hands of the chief priests, the Elders, the Rulers, Herod
and his men of War, who delivered him up to Pilate to be condemned, and to be
crucified, and platted a Crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and provided
a Cross, and crucified him upon it, and mocked him, and thrust a spear in his
side, and cast lots for his Garment, and gave him Vinegar to drink, and this
was all that they provided for the Son of God; but they did not serve their own
so, for the world loves their own, and calls them Master, Master, and sets them
at the uppermost room at their feasts, and in the highest seat in their
Assemblies, etc.

Neither was the twelve Apostles nor the seventy Disciples that Christ called,
and gave power to, and sent forth to preach the Gospel, maintained neither with
first fruits, offerings, tithes, oblations, obventions, etc. for Christ said
unto them, Freely ye have received, freely give: Go ye, preach, saying, Matt.
10 5. to 14. Mark 6.7, to 12. Luke 9.1. to 6. Luke 10.1, to 12
The kingdom of Heaven is at hand; provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass
in your purses, nor Scrip for your journey; neither two Coats, neither Shoes,
nor yet Staves, for the workman is worthy of his meat: And into whatsoever city
or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there abide till ye go
thence. And he called the twelve, and sent them forth by two, and by two, and
they went out and preached, that men should repent: Christ said to his Apostles
that the workman is worthy of his meat: Now do but take notice how they were
maintained that Christ sent forth; said he, Into whatsoever City ye enter, and
they receive you, 1 Cor. 9.4.
eat such things as they set before you, for the workman is worthy of his meat:
And said Paul, Have not we power to eat and to drink? Yea, Christ gave them
power to eat and to drink such things as was set before them by them that did
receive them, they were to eat and to drink. And again, said Christ, Into
whatsoever house ye enter, say, Peace be unto this House; and if the Son of
Peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; and in the same House remain,
eating and drinking such things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his
hire, the workman is worthy of his meat: And Jesus said unto the twelve, When I
sent you without Purse, and Scrip, and Shoes, etc. lacked ye any thing? Luke
23.35
and they said, Nothing. And again Christ said unto them, Into whatsoever City
ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the
same, and say, Even the very dust of your City which cleaves on us, we do wipe
off against you; notwithstandithstanding be ye sure of this, That the Kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. Acts 20.33 34, 35. 1 Thessalonians.
2.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8, 9, 10.
And so likewise they was to do by a House where they would not receive them,
nor hear their words; for of such they were not to take any thing of, nor to
abide with them to eat nor to drink, for the world was not worthy of them: for
the world hated them because they were not of the world, but of Christ,
therefore the Kings of the earth, nor the Rulers, nor the people would not
provide for them, neither parsonages, vicarages, rectories, nor glebe-lands,
nor tithes, nor first fruits, nor offerings, nor oblations, nor obventions, nor
hundreds of pounds by the year to maintain them with, but instead thereof they
provided Swords to slay them with, 2 Cor. 11.25, 26, 27. Acts 12.2 3 4. and
16.23 24.
and prisons to put them in, and whips, and stocks, and stones to stone them to
death: Now had they been of the worlds Ministers, the world would have provided
for them, for the world loves its own, and provides well for them, as you may
see in these our days how the Kings and Rulers of the earth, the Pope and his
Adherents have provided for theirs here in England; but as for those that are
now come in the Name of the Lord, there is prisons, dungeons, stocks, whips,
passes, stones, threatenings, and fines provided for them, beside beatings, and
mockings, and reproaches, and spoiling of their goods: But is this the work of
the Magistrate to do, and to suffer to be done? I say nay.

For he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; they must
be able men, men of truth, fearing God, hating covetousness; for said David,
Exodus 28.21.
The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, his word
was in my Tongue: The God of Israel said, He that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God: 2 Samuel 23.2 3 4. ver.
And thus the Magistrates ought to be from the highest to the lowest that
rules over men, and then shall he be as the light of the morning when the Sun
rises, even as a morning without Clouds, and as the tender grass springing
out of the earth, by the clear shining of the Sun after rain, etc.

Now the work of the Magistrate is:

1. He is to be a protection to them that do well, that is, 1 Pet. 2.14. Romans
13.3, 4. Tit. 2.11, 12. Romans 8.14. Gal. 5.22, 23.
to such who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit of God: now they
who walk after the spirit of God, are taught by the grace of God to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and likewise to live soberly, peaceably,
honestly, righteously, and a god-like life and conversation in this present
world; and they who are led by the spirit of God are the sons of God, (and by
them is the fruit of the spirit seen, which is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance) and such
are the well doers that the Magistrate is to be a protection too, for against
such there is no law, etc. 2 Samuel 23.6, 7.
But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away because they
cannot be touched with hands, for the man that shall touch them must be senced
with Iron, and the staff of a Spear, and they shall be utterly burnt in the
same place, etc. Therefore

2. The Magistrate is likewise to be a terror to the evil doers, that is, to
such as are lawless, 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. Levit. 20.15, 16, 27. Gal. 5.19, 20,
21.
disobedient, unruly, ungodly, unholy, and profane, murderers, man-slayers,
fighters, quarrellers, whores, whoremongers, adulterers, fornicators, Buggery,
Thieves, Robbers, men-steeaers, swearers, cursers, drunkards, liars, cheaters,
false-witnesses, and perjured persons, Idolaters, witches, amongst whom is
hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, and these (and
whatsoever things else that is contrary to the law that is holy, just, pure,
and good) are the evil doers that the Magistrate is to be a terror too; and for
such the Law is made, and not for a righteous man; and that Ruler that does
contrary hereunto, bears the sword in vain, etc

2 Chronicles. 19.6. Exodus 18.22. Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17, ande. 16.18, 19 20. Exodus 23.3, 6,
7, 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7. Mic. 3.9, 10, 11, 12.
3. The Magistrate that rules over men, are not to judge for man, but for the
Lord, and they are to judge the people at all seasons, with just judgment: He
is not to wrest the law; for if he wrest the Law, he wrests Judgment, which he
ought not to do, but to judge righteously between every man and his brother,
and the stranger that is with him; he is to hear the cause of the poor, as well
as the cause of the rich; the small as well as the great: he is not to respect
persons in judgment: he is not to countenance a poor man in an evil cause
because he is poor; neither is he to countenance a rich man in an evil cause
because of his riches and high titles of honor: neither is he to pervert the
words of the righteous, whether he be rich or poor. Neither is he to judge for
reward, nor to take bribes or gifts, because they blind the eye, and so they
cannot see to do just judgment, nor to judge righteously for the Lord betwixt
man and man, rich and poor, great and small, etc.

4. The Magistrate that rules over man must not accept the person of the
wicked, Psalm. 82.2, 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20.
but he is to defend the poor and fatherless, and to do justice for the
afflicted and needy, and to deliver the poor and needy and to rid them out of
the wicked speedily: Therefore he is not to be afraid of the fear of man, but
to fear the Lord God, and him alone to serve in doing of true justice, and in
judging righteously; and he is to follow altogether that which is just, that so
he may leve and inherit the land which the Lord God gives him.

Hear O ye Kings, Rulers, and Judges of the earth, the double-minded man is
unstable in all his ways, he wavereth like a wave of the Sea that is driven
with the wind, and tossed to and fro: Therefore let your eye be single, that
your whole body may be full of light, that ye may behold the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, and so ye may see to do true justice and judgment
for the Lord betwixt man and man: but if your eye be evil, your whole body is
full of darkness, confusion, and every evil thing, and so no justice nor true
judgment is then done by you for the Lord. Be wise therefore O ye Rulers and
Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, the fear of the Lord is to
depart from iniquity, and the beginning of wisdom: Therefore kiss the Son
least he be angry with you, and when his wrath is kindled ye perish from the
right way of truth and judgment: And ye that rule, while ye have time prise
it, and rule with diligence, and be not sloathful in your business, but be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and meddle not with things that be too
high for you, nor with those things which ye ought not to have to do with: Read
1 King. 12.31. and 13.33, 34. and 16.30, 31, 32, 33.

In the time of ignorance God winked at many things, but light is now come into
the world, and God calls upon all men every where to repent, and would have
them come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved: Therefore come
out of Babylon my people, come out of Babylon, says the Lord; and return O
Israel, if thou will return, return unto the Lord, the only true God, who is
light, and in him is no darkness at all; Christ Jesus is the light of the
world, he and his Father is one; whosoever follows him shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life: He it the light and life of men,
and to as many as receive him and believe in his Name, to them he gives power
to become the sons of God; and the sons of God are led by the spirit of God,
and the spirit of God it leads into all truth, righteousness and peace: But
they who walk in darkness they hate the light, they hate God who is light they
hate Christ who is the light of the world: and the Law is light, and the
reproofs of instruction are the way of life: Christ Jesus is the way, the
truth, and the life, and light of men, he that believes not is condemned
al^eady, because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God and this is the condemnation, Yhat light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather then light because their deeds be evil. Every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved: Whatsoever is reproved, the light makes it manifest; What?
know ye not that Christ Jesus the light is in you except ye be reprobates: the
reprobates know not that Christ is in them: for light shines in darkness, and
the darkness comprehends it not: and if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that perish: neither is there any communion betwixt light and darkness, nor no
fellowship has Christ with Belial: for he that believes not is condemned
already, because he believes not in the only begotten Son of God, the light,
and the light is the condemnation of all that hate it. The light shines in the
heart; Christ he opened their understandings: For God who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; whatsoever is reproved the light
makes it manifest; that which is reproved is sin, and sin is the transgression
of the law that is holy, just, pure and good: Now the light makes every
transgression of the law manifest; the evil thoughts are made manifest by the
light: the evil deeds are made manifest by the light: the evil words the light
makes manifest; yea, the light makes manifest and brings to remembrance all
things that a man has done in his life time, and sets his sins in order before
him, although they have been done in secret: So that one man cannot reprove
another for the thing done in secret, yet there is that in him that makes it
manifest to him, and reproves him for it, which is the light; God is light,
Christ is the light of the world, and does enlighten evevery man that comes
into the world: The Law it is light, and I had not known sin but by the Law;
and the Law is written in the heart by the spirit of the living God: Now the
same that makes sin manifest, the same reproves for sin; and this that reproves
of sin is the spirit of truth, who reproves the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment: God he is a spirit, and he is light; Christ
is the light of the world, the last man was made a quickening spirit; the second
man is the Lord from Heaven, who was made a quickening spirit: it is the spirit
that reproves the world, or every man in the world, of sin, and the same that
reproves of sin, the same condemns for sin, this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world: God sent his son to condemn sin in the flesh: the
condemnation of God is to them that walk after the flesh: for this purpose was
the son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil; but
there is no condemnation to them that walk after the spirit. Therefore take
heed to the light that makes sin manifest: believe in the light, believe in
God, for he is light: believe in Christ the light of the world: know you not
that Christ Jesus is in you except you be reprobates? but he that dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him: and if we love one another, God dwells
in us, and his love is perfected in us: Hereby know we that we dwell in him and
he in us, because he has given us of his spirit: Believe therefore in the
light, receive the light, love the light, bring your deeds to the light, that
they may be proved whether they be wrought in God, for to as many as receive
Christ Jesus the light, and believe in his Name, to them he gives power to
become the sons of God, and the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, and
the spirit of God leads into all truth: and the spirit it teaches to worship
God in spirit and in truth: and hereby know ye the spirit of God, That spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: and that
spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God: Therefore hearken to the Lord, and hear what he says; incline your ear,
and hearken to his word that is nigh you in your hearts; hear what the spirit
of God says unto you, who speaks expressly: Be obedient to the spirit of God,
for there is no condemnation to them who walk after the spirit: for the Law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus frees from the law of sin and death: and
it is the grace of God that has appeared unto all men that teaches us to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present evil world, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin, for he became the Author of eternal ^alvation unto all that obey him:
Therefore mind the light, for they whose minds are stayed upon the Lord, he
keeps them in perfect peace; but there is no peace to the wicked, for their
minds are out from God, minding earthly things, so that God is not in all their
thoughts, therefore the wicked and all that forget God shall be turned into
Hell. Therefore love not the world, nor the things of the world, for he that is
a friend of the world, is an enemy to God; for the whole world lies in
wickedness, and God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; and he that
delights not in the Law of the Lord, takes pleasure in unrighteousness, and
he that takes pleasure in unrighteousness will do no true justice,
righteousness, nor judgment for the Lord betwixt man and man: Wisdom is
profitable to direct, and it is God that gives wisdom: Solomon asked of the
Lord, and said, Give therefore thy servant wisdom, and an understanding heart
to judge thy peogle, that I may discern between good and bad: Who teaches like
God [that gives wisdom] that teaches the Senators wisdom, and he is a wise
man that will be ruled by the Law of God: the fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom, and he that is without this [and unruled by the Law, does neither
righteousness, justice, nor true judgment for the Lord God: Therefore ye
Rulers and Judges of the earth, let wisdom guide you, and the spirit of God
teach you to serve the Lord, and to judge for him the people at all seasons,
and see that ye respect not persons in judgment, but hear the cause of the
poor as well as the cause of the rich, and rid the afflicted out of the hands
of the wicked speedily, and let justice be done speedily upon the evil doers,
and answer the people of the Land.

Concerning their parish-Ministers, their Houses of High Places, falsely called
Churches, and tithes, oblations, obventions, etc. as Ioash did the Midianites
when his son Gideon had thrown down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove
that was by it, And Ioash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead
for Baal? will ye save him? He that will plead for him let him be put to death
whilst it is yet morning: If he be a God, let him plead for himself, because
one has cast down his Altar, Judge. 6.28, 29, 30, 31.

And so it is concluded.
READER, thou art desired in thy reading to take special notice of the Errata's
in the ensuing pages and lines, which have been committed at the Press, let
them, and all other litteral faults which thou find, be mended with thy pen,
for thy own and others clear understanding, viz.

Page 5. lin. the last, read the hands of the Philistines: p. 8. l. 33. r.
House: p. 9 l. last, r. the Levites: p. 14. l. 23. r. Kine Gilsus, King of the
Mercians: and l. 30. r. Monketon: p 15. l. 3. 1. so strong: p. 16. l. 3. dele.
formerly; p. 17. l. 19. r. Legate of the Sea: and l. 27. r. Courelefu: p. 19.
l. 41. r. his Army: and l. 43. r. Iehu the Seer: p: 23. l. 42. r. our
non-payment of tithes: p. 49. l. 43. r. to bear witness of Christ: p 55. l. 14.
r. but only the children of Israel: p. 56. l. 33. r. the head.


