THE CITIZENS OF LONDON'S Humble Petition TO The Right Honorable the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in PARLIAMENT.

Subscribed with the Names of above twenty thousand, both Aldermen, Aldermens
Deputies, Merchants, Common Counsel men, etc. Presented the 11. of December.
1641. And accepted.

With the manner of their going to the Parliament House.

Printed at London for T.B.

To the right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons
House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, Merchants, Common
Council men, Subsidy men, and Citizens of London, of good rank and quality.
Shows, that they with all humble thankfulness, acknowledge that great
labor and care which this Honorable Assembly has undergone, now for the
space of one whole year, endeavoring the reformation and removal of those
many pressures and grievances in the Church and Commonwealth, and do humbly
present that grateful acceptance and high esteem, which not only the
Petitioners, but also all well affected to the honor of his Majesty, and
prosperity of this Kingdom, have of these your great and unwearied endeavors,
which although by reason of the Popish Lords and Bishops, voting in the house
of Peers, and other impediments (as they humbly conceive) they have not
hitherto produced those happy effects you aimed at, yet to the Petitioners
great comfort, diverse of those pressures are already removed, as Arbitrary
Courts, Ship money, Monopolies, and other illegal Impositions, wherewith they
were burdened, and further hope given by the happy Act of the Parliaments
continuance.

That not withstanding all this, the Papists and their adherents, whose malice
cease not, have by many sundry secret and desperate plots, attempted the
ruin and destruction of this State and kingdom; and however some of them have
hitherto by Gods providence and your prudence, been discovered, and become
abortive, yet the sad effects of others of them, are not only felt, and much
more feared in this Realm of England; but also have of late broken out into
open rebellion in Ireland, where most barbarous, savage, cruel and inhumane
actions are practiced toward our brethren by nation and religion, whose
lamentable and deplorable condition the Petitioners much pity and lament, and
have just cause to fear, that as already there has been much Christian blood
spilt; so in short time, if speedy help be not sent, not only the many great
debts there owing to diverse of the Petitioners, and others of this kingdom,
will be wholly lost, but which is more, the very name of the English, and the
Protestant Religion, will be rooted out by those Rebels, the foundation of
which Religion is written in letters of blood, do only oppose: and for that
diverse of the Petitioners receive daily information from all parts of this
kingdom, of the bold and insolent carriage and threatening speeches of the
Papifts in this Realm, as the Petitioners humbly conceive, not only for the
prevailing of the rebels in Ireland, but also from the want of such secure and
speedy course against Papists here, as the present condition of this kingdom
requires, and the honorable Assembly has earnestly endeavored, from which
ground the Petitioners cannot omit to represent unto you the great terrors,
fears, and distractio^s they lay under of a sudden surprise by their bloody
hands, by means whereof the trading of the City and Kingdom is much more of
late decayed then it has been for many years past, no man following his
trade cheerfully, whiles the lives of himself and family, and the public
safety of the kingdom are in danger, and while he knows not how soon they
may feel the like cruelty and inhumanity from the Papists, and their
adherents, as those in Ireland have done, which if ever it should happen in
their malice and cruelty, against whom they have already by themselves and
their abettors, endeavored to raise a disrespect in the hearts of the people,
to divide between the Kings Majesty and his Parliament, and seditiously to
misconstrue the Citizens dutiful and loyal entertainment of his Majesty, to
be a diserting of this Honorable Assembly, the least thought whereof the
Petitioners do utterly detest and abhor: to the end therefore that the
destructive plots of the Papists and their adherents may be defeated, the
grounds of their hopes and insolences removed, considerable forces with all
expedition sent to subdue those abominable and bloody rebels in Ireland, this
City and Kingdom, for prevention of the like mischief, and fecuring the peace
thereof, put into a posture of defense, the Petitioners freed from their
fears, encouraged in their trades, and in due time receive such just answers
to their former petitions, as shall seem best to your great wisdoms.

It is humbly prayed that you will vouchsafe to be a means to the Kings
Majesty and the house of Peers, that life may be speedily given to your good
endeavors, by their concurrence with you in the punishment of delinquents, and
redressing the pressures and grievances in Church and Commonwealth, amongst
which the abuses crept into the ancient government of this City, they humbly
desire may in due time be taken into consideration: and for the better
effecting hereof, that the Popish Lords and Bishops may be removed out of the
house of Peers, as was defired in the presence of diverse of this Henourable
Assembly, by the representative body of this City, when fifty thousand pounds
was freely lent to raise forces for Ireland, the greatest part whereof was
speedily brought in by the Petitioners.

And the Petitioners, who well know their own safeties are wrapped up in yours,
shall not fail to put up daily prayers to Almighty God for your good success,
and to maintain and defend to the utmost hazard of their lives and estates,
according to their late protestation, the Kings Majesty and high Court of
Parliament, against all wicked Counselors, and malignant opposers, who
endeavor either by fecret plots or open force to prejudice the one or the
other, or to make divisions between his Majesty and the Parliament, whom God
and the laws of this land have united in so near relation.

And we shall, as in duty bound, pray, etc.
A Relation in what manner the Petition was delivered the eleventh of December.
1641.
SUbscribed with the names of above 20000. by Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies,
Merchants, Common Council men, and many others of great rank and fashion, to
the number of 400. who were selected to deliver the petition, all riding out of
the City of London in 50 Coaches, or thereabouts, to the Parliament House. The
House hearing of their coming, gave admittance to about an hundred of them,
and did receive the petition. One of the Citizens did declare some interruption
was given them by ill affected persons in London, about subscribing of hands,
and so withdrew themselves. In the interim, the petition was read in the house:
whereupon the petitioners were called again, the house did accept of it
thankfully; the honorable House gave order, that notice should be taken of
such ill-affected persons, who should hinder, interrupt, discourage, or take
any petition away from any his Majesty's subjects, who should go about to
petition to reform grievances, that strict order should be taken with such
persons, and immediately return their names to the High Court of Parliament.

FINIS.

