City Justice; OR, True Equity Exposed.
Being an Humble Petition to the King, of Eight Grandees of one Party, against
Four of another.
Faithfully turned into Verse dogril, by as Real a Well-wisher to them, as they
are to Monarchy.
To the Tune of Packingtons Pound.
I.
YE Sages of London, of states high and low,
I sing an Exploit late contrived in the City,
And that you its Wit, and its Justice may know,
I now have dispersed it, composed in a Ditty;
Eight Grandees of power
Against three, and one Moor,
Complained to the King of some Fines that lay sore;
And framed a Petition, to heighten the Crime,
Which wanting good Reason, I Have put into Rhyme.
II.
The style began thus, Mighty Sir, you must know,
In the year eighty three, we all guilty were found
Of a damnable Riot, and no one knows how,
Were sawcily Fined above four thousand Pound:
That by the vile power
Of those three, and one Moor,
We were all forced to pay the said Fine, or to scowr,
And only for Acting like true Englishmen,
Our Zeal for the Monarchy being most plain.
III.
But now since our happy and strange Revolution,
Those errors by Parliament all were dispersed,
And at your Petitioners wise prosecution,
That Judgment illegally given, was reversed;
That the Fine raised before,
By those three, and one Moor,
Your Majesty's liable now to restore;
But that all such Crimes you may rightly condemn,
We hope Sir, to pay us, you will take it from them.
IV.
For since that our Rights, and our Nations defending
From Tyranny, was of your coming the cause,
No other design of Subversion intending,
But Relief of the Church, and establishing Laws,
Which although have no power
On those three, and one Moor,
To make 'em refund, on a true Legal score;
Yet if you will be pleased Sir to break one for us,
We shall not, and we hope none will say it is unjust.
V.
We think it is unfit, you that came to protect it,
Should your self in the least feel the scourage of the Law,
But rather those Criminals should be rejected,
That such bloody Fines from our Purses could draw,
That the sum named before,
Raised by three, and one Moor,
Their substantial Estates should be pawned to restore,
And in Parliamentary method be taken.
And so let your Majesty save your own Bacon.
IV The PRAYER.
We therefore, Great Sir, do most humbly beseech ye,
To Except the said four in the next Act of Grace,
Not that we have any design to o're-reach ye,
But through a deep sentiment of our own Case;
For the three, and one Moor,
As I told you before,
Will Not refund it but by a Parliamentary power,
Which if you will be pleased to effect, in our way,
As always we used, we will zealously Pray.
FINIS.

