TRANSCENDENT AND MVLTIPLIED REBELLION AND TREASON, DISCOVERED, By the Laws of
the Land.

I had not known Sin but by the Law.

8. Romans 7. Let our strength be the Law of Justice: for that which is feeble is
found to be nothing worth. Therefore let us lie in Wait for the Righteous,
because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings, he
upbraideth us with our offending the Law.

Wisd. 2. 11. 12. Am I your Enemy because I tell you the truth?

4. Gal. 16. Anno, 1645.

READER,
INstead of an Epistle, thou shall have my resolution, concerning some
particulars, principally agitated at this time, and necessary to be premised.

1. Concerning Political and Regal Authority and Power, and the Author
thereof.

Political Authority, Political and Regal power, and the Author thereof.
is the power which the Supreme Magistrate has over men's Persons and Estates,
over their Lives and Fortunes; and such is the power of a King in his Kingdom:
And that power with us is to be exercised by the King according to the Laws of
the Land. The original thereof is from God; who is the only Potentate, The
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1. Tim. 6. 15. and from none other, Men or
Angels: For the Creatures generally are under the Commandments, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal. And then cannot by any Authority of their
own, warrant any man to take away another Life without Murder, nor his
Estate without Theft. Only God, who is the Lord of Life and Death, the Lord
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, the Creator of all things, and therefore has a
Natural Dominion over all, can Authorize in these cases: And he gives this
Authority to Kings and other supreme Magistrates, his Vicegerents, and
Deputies here on earth, for the administration of Justice, and for the
effectual Restraint of Sin and Vice, by the utmost of Corporal and
temporal punishments, and for the maintenance of Order and Government amongst
men. And so the Apostle tells us, That there is no Power but of God, Romans 13.
1. And in the Scripture Kings are called Gods Anointed; Anointed with power,
as the Holy Ghost phraseth it, Act. 10. 38. Yea they have the Compellation of
God himself, because, says Mr Perkins, they partake of his Power in their
Authority, and of his glory in their Majesty. And Daniell tells us thrice in
one Chapter, That the Kingdoms also are Gods, and he gives them to whom he
will. 4. Dan. 17. 25. 32. For instance, it is by the Grace of God that our
Sovereign Lord Charles is King of England, Scotland, etc. And in these
Kingdoms He constitutes Governors also as he will; either by His own
Nomination or by Natural Generation, or by the Peoples Election: I know that
too, to the end Popes might usurp power over Kings, it is the Tenent of the
Papists, and of the Parliament party, Kings have not their Power from the
People.
That the King has his power from the People, and that they may reassume it.
But this Opinion is founded in Blasphemy, loosens the bonds of Loyalty,
advances Popular insolency, leads on to Rebellion, and ends in Anarchy, and
Confusion.

And in truth all the People do in this case, or can do, is this; They may in
Order to the Divine disposition of things, and in some tlaces they do (not
without Gods especial Inclination and direction) elect such a one to be their
King, but they do not, they cannot, invest him with Royal Authority and
power; which he has from God alone, at his Inauguration, or first entrance
upon his Kingly Office; according to that Commission, Dixi Dii estis, I have
said ye are Gods: Psalm. 82. 6. As in Corporations, the Inhabitants do elect
the Major, but they do not confer on him his Authority, which he has from
the Kings Charter only, investing him with such power, and giving them power
also of electing him, which they could not have done without special License
from the King. And as it is of the Kings singular favor and indulgence, that
they chose their Governor; And as, for all their Elections, the Major is
Minister Regis, the Kings Minister, constituted in Authority by and under him,
in that Corporation, to represent his Person, and to discharge his Offices So
it is between God, the King, and People, in point of Election and Ministration.

And as God constituteth every Supreme Governor, so does he every kind of
Government in the World; according to the Confession of the Church of Scotland,
delivered in these following words.

We confess and acknowledge Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions and Cities to be
distincted, and ordained by God; the Powers and Authorities in the same, be it
of Emperors in their Empires, Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in
their Dominions, and of other Magistrates in their Cities, to be Gods holy
Ordinance, ordained for the manifestation of his own glory, and for the
singular profit and commodity of mankind: Ancient Constitutions not to be
overthrown.
So that whosoever goes about to take away, or confound the whole State of
Cavil Policies now long established, we affirm the same men not only to be
enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods expressed will.

And hitherto appertains that Maxim. Qui introducit mala, peccat contra
voluntatem Dei revelatam in verbo: qui nova introducit, peccat contra
voluntatem Dei revelatam in factis: He that introduces evil things, sins
against the will of God revealed in his word: and he that introduces new
things, sins against the will of God revealed in his works.

2. Concerning the Kings Negative Vote in Parliament, The Kings negative Vote
in Parliament.
which the two Houses would utterly overthrow: And to that end they allege the
form of an Oath in Hen: the fourths time, which they say the Kings of England
usually took at their Coronation: and whereby they promise to protect the
Laws, and to Corroborate such as the People shall choose: The Kings Oath to
Corroborate such Laws as the People shall choose.
quas vulgus just and rationabiliter elegerit (as it is rendered, Rot. claus.
1. R. 2. nu. 44.) which the people shall choose justly and reasonably: And such
was not the first controverted Bill of the Militia; for it was both unjust (to
take the Kings Power from him) and unreasonable, because without the Militia he
cannot, according to his Oath protect the Laws; And the true sense of that
branch of the Oath is expressed by that form used at the Coronation of Edw:
the sixth. Do you grant to make no new Laws, but such as shall be to the
honor of God, and to the good of the Commonwealth, and that the same shall be
made by the consent of your People, as has been accustomed?

So that branch in the Kings Oath, To Corroborate such Laws as the People
shall choose, must not be understood universally, That the King is sworn to
pass all those Laws that the People shall choose, but restrictively, that he
shall enact only such Laws as the People have chosen, and none other; And it
is only a restraint and limitation of that absolutenes in Law-making, exercised
by the Kings of England formerly, from which they receded by degrees: using
first the advice of the Bishops and Barons in making their Laws, and afterward
their Consents also: then not their advice and consent only, but also the
advice and consent of the Commons also. And hitherto does the clause in the
Oath relate, To the end that no Law, not agreeing with the Interest of every of
the three formal parts of the Kingdom might pass, to the maiming and
enfeebling of the established frame of the Kingdom.

And these forms in Rich: 2. and Edw: 6. are cited by the Lords and Commons in
their Remonstrance. 2. Novem. 1642.

3. Concerning the Kings Counsels. Beside his great Council, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, The Law takes notice of the Kings Power to Swear unto
himself a body of Council of State, The Kings several Counsels.
(which our Laws call sometimes his Grand Council) and to swear unto him all
Counselors at Law; even the Judges, and others learned in the Law, those to
advise him in matters of State, Cook upon Littleton. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 164.
these in matters of Justice: And hence is that Maxim in Law, The King can do
no wrong; if any ill be committed in matters of State, the Council, if in
matters of Justice, the Judges must answer for it. And it will be very
preposterous to make the two Houses of Parliament the Kings only Counselors in
these cases; if things shall be managed by the major part of the House of
Commons, as now they are: for that House has not in it an hundred Knights of
the Shires, and three or four hundred Citizens and Burgesses, which may be all
Mechanics, and so unfit Counselors in those cases: And who with the help of
the Tumultuous People about London, may deal with the King and Nobles, and
Gentry as they please.

And because the two Houses are a numerous body, and the King a single Person,
therefore to counterpoise them, does the Law express the King has a Council
of State, and Counselors at Law, faithfully to advise him in his Government,
that be may neither do, nor receive any wrong, especially in Parliament, where
the wrong may be perpetual.

How unjust then, and unreasonable is it at this time, to debar or remove
those Counselors from His Majesty, and to express no legal cause against
them, to which the King has ever submitted them?

4. Concerning the Tumults raised and countenanced this Parliament, whereof if
any man doubt, let him consider,

1. Tumults this present Parliament.
That multitudes of People went to Westminster with Clubs and Swords; crying,
No Bishops, No Bishops.

2. That they assaulted the Bishops, and would not suffer them to come to, and
sit in the House of Lords.

3. That upon the Complaint of the Bishops, the House of Lords twice moved the
House of Commons to join with them in an order against Tumults.

4. That the Lords having in vain tried that way (upon the advice of the
Judges) sent a Writ to the Sheriff and Justices for setting watch and ward,
and hindering all Tumultuous Resort to Westminster: And for it one of the
Justices was sent to the Tower by the House of Commons.

5. That they assaulted, and evil entreated some of the Members of the House
of Commons, Strangsways.
as Sir John Strangswayes; who also complained of them in the House.

6. That Mr Kyrton, a Member of the House of Commons, offered proof to the
same House, that Captain Venne several times sent, and solicited the People,
to come down out of the City of London, with Swords and Pistolls, when he had
told them, or sent them word by his Wife, that the worser Party was like to
have the better of the good Party.

7. That ( December: 31.) His Majesty sent a Message to the Lord Major of London,
for endeavoring to suppress the like Tumults; and that at a Common Council
held that day, the Lord Major and Aldermen found, that there had been
Tumultuons and Riotons Assemblies spread day and night in the City, etc.

8. That Jan. 31. The poor People about London, preferred a desperate Petition
to the House of Commons, against some of the House of Lords: whereof in its due
place.

Now by the ancient Law and custom of the Parliament, a Proclamation ought to
be made in Westminster, in the beginning of the Parliament, That no man upon
pain to loose all that he has, should during the Parliament in London,
Westminster, or the Suburbs, etc. wear any Privy Coat of Plate, or go armed
during the Parliament; and the reason hereof was, that the high Court of
Parliament, should not thereby be disturbed, nor the Members thereof (which are
to attend the arduous and urgent business of the Church and Commonwealth)
should be withdrawn. Cook. 4. part. Instit. l. 1. of the high Court of
Parliament.

5. Concerning the Cause of the War on the Parliament side. The Parliament
pretenses, for taking up of Arms.
Sometimes it is pretended, that the first Army was raised to fetch in
Refractory Delinquents, and to bring them to coudigne punishment: But who are
those Delinquents? Such as apply themselves to the King, and were ready to
assist him in the Recovery of his Rights taken from him; 1. The fetching in
Delinquents.
his Magazine at Hull, the Power of the Militia, the disposition of the Forts
and Castles, his Navy, etc.

As for other Delinquents, His Majesty left them to their Justice at the
beginning of the Parliament: And they proceeded against whom they pleased. The
Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury: but whether they or
their Judges proved Delinquents, most men now know. And yet they spared whom
they pleased in Relation to their Design, as the Lord Privy Seal, etc.

Again, as those Delinquents were of their own making, so the necessity of
raising an Army to bring them in, was from themselves; for whereas that is done
ordinarily by the Posse Comitatus, they had dissolved it by their Vote, 15.
March. 1641. That the several Commissions granted under the Great Seal, to
the Lievtenants of the several Counties, are illegal and void. Though such
Commissions had been in use during the Reigns of, King James, and Queen
Elizabeth of blessed Memory; and the ordering of the Militia had been ever in
the Crown: And the Crown has its Customs as well as the Subject his, and not
to be violated by the Subject.

So then Arms were taken up, not in a judiciary way to force Delinquents
properly so called, and to punish offenders against Law; but in the way of
State Policy to subdue the Kings friends, and their opposites; not to do
Justice, but to promote their designs.

Again, 2. The Defense of our Religion and Liberty.
sometimes it is pretended, that the King endeavored to bring in Popery and
Tyranny; and that they were forced to take up Arms, for the defense of our
Religion and Liberty.

But our Liberties were all asserted by several Acts passed at the beginning
of the Parliament: And before Arms were taken up, His Majesty had promised to
enact whatsoever they did desire against Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and Popery,
as appears by His Declaration. Iun. 2.

And to secure our Liberties and Religion, and the whole Kingdom (before Arms
were taken up) His Majesty had Promised that the Forts and Castles should be
always in such Hands, and only such, as they should have cause to confide in,
Ian. 27.

And he accepted of Sir John Coniers, to be Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
in the place of Sir John Byron, Feb. 11. And he allowed their Recommendation of
the Lievtenants for the several Counties, Feb. 28.

And what need then of an Army, to defend and secure our Liberties, and
Religion, against Tyranny and Popery?

And the truth is, this pretended necessary defense and security of our
Religion and Liberty, against Popery and Tyranny, was only a Color for the
taking up of Arms, and a slight to gain, or rather to entrap and ensnare the
People, that by the Power of the Kingdom, and the help of the People, they
might carry on, and compass their design against Monarchy, and against
Episcopacy and the Liturgy.

And so the present Quarrel is, The true state of the present War.
for a (not to be pretended to by any Law,) Liberty against Monarchy, not
against Tyranny; and for a (not known or chosen by themselves,) Religion
against Episcopacie and the Liturgy, and not against Popery: For therein the
King opposes them, and they have no enemy otherwise.

And this Alteration of Government in Church and State, was first attempted in
a Parliamentary way, then it was carried on by Tumults, afterward they
proceeded to apparent Treason; and from Treason to Treason, until at last they
came to the height of Rebellion: As the subsequent Discourse will show the^.

SEVERAL TREASONS BY the Laws of the Land.
TO compass the death of the King and Queen, or to intend or imagine it.

To intend to deprive, depose, or disinherit the King, if it may appear by
word or otherwise.

To leavy War against the King in this Realm, Treasons by the Laws of the
Land.
or to conspire to leavy War against Him.

And this was high Treason by the Common Law, for no Subject can levy War in
the Realm, without Authority from the King, for to Him it only belongs,
Cook. 3. part. Instit. cap. de High Treason.

Again, if any levy War to expulse Strangers, to deliver men out of Prisons,
to remove Counselors, or against any Statute, or to any other end pretending
Reformation of their own heads without warrant; this is levying of War
against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority, which is
against the King, Ibid.

Also to detein or hold a Fortress or Castle against the King. And to deteiue
or withhold from Him, or against Him, any his Ships or Ordinance, is to levy
War against the King, in the Construction of the Law.

To encounter in fight, and kill such as are assisting to the King in his
Wars, or such as come to help the King.

To Plot, or do any thing toward the moving Sedition, either in respect of the
King, or his Army; or to give advice, or to procure or lend aid thereunto.

To succor the Kings Enemies.

To be adhering to the Kings Enemies, ayding them, or giving them comfort in
this Realm, or elsewhere.

Besides other Treasons mentioned in Mr. Saint-Johns Argument, upon the Earl
of Strafford; as,

1. To endeavor to corrupt the peoples judgment, Other Treasons in Mr
Saint-Iohns. Argument.
and to take off the bonds of Conscience, the greatest security of the Kings
life; as in Owen's case, who said, that King James being excommunicated by the
Pope might be killed of any man, and that such killing was not murder, but
only the Execution of the Popes supreme sentence: God forbid I said one of
better judgment then Owen, that I should stretch forth mine hand against Gods
Anointed: No says Owen, the Lord does not forbid it, you may for these
reasons kill the King.

2. To endeavor to draw the Peoples hearts from the King, to set discord
between Him and them; whereby the people should leave Him and rise up against
Him, to the death and destruction of the King, as in Sparhawks case.

Also at the Arraignment of the Earl of Essex, the Judges delivered there
opinions for matter of Law upon two points;

1. That in case where a Subject attempteth to put himself into such strength
as the King shall not be able to resist him, Rebellion*
and to force and compel the King to govern otherwise then according to his
own Royal Authority and direction, it is manifest Rebellion.

2. That in every Rebellion, the Law intends as a Consequent the compassing
the death and deprivation of the King; as foreseeing that the Rebel will never
suffer that King to live or Reign, which might punish or take revenge of their
Rebellion and Treason.

And at the Arraignment of Sir Christopher Blunt.

That the Subject that Rebelleth or rises in forcible manner, to overrule the
Royal will and power of the King, intends to deprive the King both of Crown
and Life; And that the Law judges not of the Fact by the intent, but of the
intent by the Fact.

How then, is not this Rebellion in those who are now risen in forcible manner
to overrule the Royal will and power of the King; and have put themselves into
such strength, as the King shall not be able to resist them, thereby to force
and compel the King (in some particulars) to govern otherwise then according
to his own Royal Authority and direction, and to take from Him the power of
governing in some cases; as of the Church, and of the Militia of the Kingdom?

And in prosecuting this Rebellion, how have they incurred several Treasons?

1. By endeavoring to corrupt the judgment of the People, The present
Rebellion and Treason.
and to take off the bonds of Conscience, the greatest security of His Majesty,
and to draw the Peoples hearts from the King, and to set discord between him
and them, whereby they should leave the King, and rise up against him.

2. By levying War against the King in his Realm.

3. By deteining his Forts and Castles from him; and his Ships and his
Ordinance.

4. By encountering in Fight, and killing them that assist him, and by adhering
to the Kings Enemies, and giving them aid and comfort.

5. By compassing the death and deprivation of the King: Rebels never suffering
that King to Live or Reign, which might punish or take revenge of their
Treason.

Now the method observed in this Rebellion, The Method used in this present
Rebellion.
was this.

The Government of the Church being in the King by Law; and he governing it by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc.

A Bill was brought into the House of Commons for the Extirpation of them, A
Bill against Bishops.
but it passed not.

Also the Government of the Militia of the Kingdom being by Law in the King,
for the effectual protecting of the Law and his people, Sir Arthur Haslerigges
Bill concerning the Militia.
Sir Arthur Hasterigges, brought a Bill into the House of Commons, for taking
away the Militia from His Majesty, and placing it in the hands of Subjects: And
this Bill was rejected with indignation.

When they could not compass their design by Vote in Parliament, they attempt
and prosecute it otherwise.

And whilst His Majesty was in Scotland* they send forth Lecturers, Traitorous
Lecturers and Pamphleters.
and give license to Pamphleters, by their preaching and writing to corrupt the
judgment of the people, and to take off the bonds of Conscience toward His
Majesty; and to draw the Peoples hearts from the King, and to set discord
between him and them, whereby they should leave him, and rise up against him:
And this is the scope of the Remonstrance published, December: 15. 1641.

The Peoples judgment thus corrupted, and their hearts not only alienated
from, but also set against the King, they run head long into Rebellion; and
first those about London conspire, and go in multitudes to Westminster with
Swords and Clubs; and with Clamours they revive and press the matter of the
Bill against Bishops, Tumults revive the Bill against Bishops.
formerly rejected; And they menace, affront, assault, and chase the Bishops,
then actual Members of Parliament: so that they could not sit and Vote in the
House of Peers; and they proclaimed the names of others of the Peers, as evil
and rotten-hearted Lords; And they assault and evil entreat those of the House
of Commons, who they supposed favored the Bishops, and had Voted against their
Bills, and against their design, as Sir John Strangswayes, etc. And as they
pass and repasse through the streets, Articles of high Treason against the L.
Kimbolton, and the five Members.
they utter seditious and traitorous words against the King and His Government.
Hereupon His Majesty exhibited Articles of High Treason against the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five Members, the Ringleaders in this Rebellion.

For endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the
Kingdom, and to deprive the King of his Legal Power, and to place on Subject
an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power.

For endeavoring by many foul Aspersions upon his Majesty and his Government,
to alienate the affection of his People and to make his Majesty odious to them.

For endeavoring to subvert the very Rights and being of Parliaments, and as
far as in them lay, by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join
with them in their design.

But the accused Members shelter themselves under the Privilege of Parliament;
No privilege of Parliament in case of Treason.
(though it be a maxim in Law that in case of Treason Privilege of Parliament
does not extend, is of no signification) and by the power and protection of the
City of London, and the Counties adjacent.

And now they begin to put themselves actually into the strength of the
Kingdom; They put themselves into the strength of the Kingdom*
and they dispose and order the Militia of the City of London, under the
Command of Major. General skippon, and seize on his Majesty's Magazine at
Hull, and commit the custody of it to Sir John Hotham. And the House of
Commons Petition His Majesty, that the Militia of the whole Kingdom may be in
such hands as they should confide in; and when the major part of the Lords
would not concur with them, the poor people in and about London, come in a
tumultuous manner to Westminster, Tumults revive; Sir Arthur Haslerigges Bill,
concerning the Militia.
and they revive and press the matter of Sir Arthur Hasterigges Bill for the
Militia formerly rejected, and Petition the House of Commons against those
Lords, as Malignants, and disturbers of the peace, and desire to have their
names declared, and threaten to remove them, ( Jan. 31.) So they withdrew, and
the Militia was carried by the remaining party of the Lords.

In Feb, The Ordinance for the Militia.
and March, they settle the Militia of the whole Kingdom by an Ordinance,
excluding His Majesty from any power in the disposition, or execution of it.

In April, The Navy-Royall.
they possess themselves of the Navy-Royall. And having put themselves into
the strength of the Kingdom, They declare against the Kings Negative Vote, and
so against his Legislative Power.
they seek to overrule the Royal will and power of the King, by declaring
against his Negative Vote in Parliament May, 26.

And to compel the King to govern otherwise then according to his Royal
Authority, and directions; as appears by the 19 Propositions tendered to His
Majesty, Jun. 2.

And upon His Majesty's Refusal of those Propositions, The 19 Propositions*
against His Gubern^tive power.
according to the Latitude of their desires, they raise an Army, Iun. 10.

Though His Majesty by his Declaration, in answer to those Propositions which
concern Religion, revives and renews His promises made formerly, His Majesty's
Answer to the Propositious.
( viz. December. 1. and 15.) to remove all illegal Innovations, and to call a
National Synod, and to abolish Offensive Ceremonies: professing himself also
willing to a Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of the Church, according
to His Message sent to both Houses, Feb. 14.

And though in Answer to the Propositions which concern the choice of
Privy-Councellors, and other great Officers of State etc. His Majesty promised
that He would be careful to make election of such Persons in those places of
Trust, as have given good testimony of their Ability and Integrity, and against
whom there can be no just cause of exception: And that if He should be mistaken
in His election, and they should offend in their several places, He would
leave them to the Justice of the Law; to be executed every Trienniall
Parliament at the least: showing moreover, that if the two Houses of Parliament
should have the power of electing them; great Factions, animosities and
divisions would follow thereupon, both in the Houses themselves, and between
the two Houses, and in the Several Counties also.

Lastly, touching the other Propositions, though His Majesty had fully declared
and showed, that they tended to the depriving Him of the Power of Protecting
His People and the Laws, which He is sworn to maintain; And to the very
deposing of Him and of His Posterity; and to the utter overthrow of that
Ancient, happy, equal, and well-poysed constitution of the Government of this
Kingdom, and to the overthrow and ruin of the Kingdom it self, by
destroying Monarchy, and therewith Unity; by introducing Aristocracy, and
Division with it, and Democracy, and with it Tumults, Violence, and
Licentiousness.

Though the King, I say, in His Answer to their Propositions had declared,
promised, and showed this, yet they took up Arms, They raise an Army.
without Authority and Commission from His Majesty, and so they levy war
against our Sovereign Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity. And they encounter
in fight, and kill such as assist the King, and they gave Battle to the King
himself in Person at Edgehill.

They insist also upon the same Propositions at Oxford, The same Propositions
insisted on, at the Treaty at Oxford.
1643. And upon the King's refusal of them, they prosecute War, as before.

Lastly, the Parliament of both Kingdoms offer the same Propositions to be
Treated on at Vxbridge, And at Vxbridge.
1644. wherein also, they farther desire the concurrence and consent of the
Parliament of Scotland, in our Reformation of Religion; in the settling and
managing of the Militia of the Kingdom, and in concluding of Peace and War
with Foreign Princes.

Besides, they require the Cessation in Ireland to be made void, and that the
two Parliaments may order the War there, and the Militia; and conserve the
Peace of the Kingdom of Ireland.

True it is, How the King is restrained already: And how they would farther
restrain him.
that in some points of Regality and Sovereignty, the King of England is
already restrained and limited, so that He cannot rule and govern absolutely
as He will, as in making of Laws (which He cannot do, but with the Consent of
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,) and in declaring of Laws,
(which He cannot do, but by the proper Judges in His several Courts) but in
all other things that are not expressly restrained by Law, He is free and
absolute, and the Sovereignty both of Judgment and Power, is in the Person of
the King alone: As in providing for the present safety against sudden danger,
and in levying of Arms, suppressing of Tumults, and Rebellion; convoking of
Parliaments, and dissolving them, making of Peers, granting Liberty of sending
Burgesses to Parliaments, treating with Foreign States, making of War,
League, and Peace, giving of Honor, Rewarding, Pardoning, etc. And in these,
and the like particulars, it is* that they would farther limit and restrain
the King, that He should not govern as He has done formerly, according to his
own judgment and will, informed and Regulated by the Advice of his Council
of State, and Counselors at Law, but according to the judgment, and with the
Consent of both Houses of Parliament in some Cases, according to the judgment,
and with the Consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and in some other
Cases they would assume the Government wholly to themselves: and they take up
Arms, and fight to force the Kings Vote and assent to several Bills
concerning these particulars, and so at once wholly to overthrow the Kings
Sovereignty, Legislative and Gubernative.

But though others may not, Ob.
yet the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, may rise in a forcible
manner, and compel the King to govern as they please, in some cases; and
deprive him of his Government in other cases as they please. And others, in
obedience to their Authority and Command, may assist in this War against His
Majesty, without Rebellion and Treason.

This is a false and Treasonable suggestion, Ans.
as Owen's was, to corrupt the judgment of the People, and to take off the
bonds of Conscience toward His Majesty, by advancing the Houses of Parliament
above the King.

And the falsenesse and Treasonablenesse thereof will plainly appear, upon the
due Consideration of the Kings Superiority to the two Houses of Parliament, and
of the Relation between His Majesty and the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and between them and us out of Parliament.

1. Touching the point of Superiority between the King and the Parliament, The
King superior to the two Houses of Parliament.
the two Houses themselves have long since determined it. The Parliament 25. H.
8. declares thus; This your Grace's Realm recognizing no Superior under God
but your Grace. The Parliament 16. R. 2. 5. affirms the Crown of England to
have been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly Subjection, but
immediately to God in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown, and
to none other. Ergo. The two Houses of Parliament cannot of Right have or
exercise any authority over the Crown, or the Realm, over the King or the
Subject of England.

And though some Parliaments called in troublesome times of Faction, as now,
and overswayed by those that were the head of the most potent Faction, as at
this time, have de facto deposed and murdered some Kings, yet such instances
prove no more claim of Sovereignty in the Parliament, over the King, then a
Robber, when he exercises an Arbitrary power over a man's person and purse; And
the Observator himself confesses ingeniously, that there was never King
deposed in a free Parliament: And that the Acts of the Parliament R. 2. were
not so properly the Acts of the two Houses, as of H. ^. and his Victorious Army.

Nor is it Treason only, but impiety also to advance the Parliament (the
Representative of the people) above the King, (the Representative of God:) And
it is to set up Kings and not by God. ( Hos. 8. 4.) Yea and against him too.

2. Touching the Relation between the King and the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, The Lords and Commons in Parliament subjected to the King.
we must know this: That the high Court of Parliament consists of three
integrall parts; the King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons. The
King is the Head, and the two Houses are the gross Body subordinate to the
King; and to be considered always as a part of the Parliament, and in a notion
under the King, as well in Parliament, as out of Parliament: and they are
subjected to the King in Parliament.

1. In their persons; In their Persons.
for the King calls them together and dissolves them. And as they have occasion
to petition the King in Parliament they confess themselves his Subjects: and
directing their Petitions to His Majesty, thereby they acknowledge his
Sovereignty; Majesty being a Ray of Sovereignty. Yea the very Legislative Acts
wherein consists their Parliamentary Eminency speak them always his Subjects,
and style him their Sovereign: And according to the Information of the Judges
in the time of H. 8. The King in Parliament stands in his highest Estate
Royal, in respect of the exercise of his Sovereign Authority and power in
making Laws, which he cannot do but in Parliament. Besides, in token of his
Sovereignty and their subjection the King personally takes Homage and Oath of
Fidelity of the Lords, and he Commands the Commons before they Sit and Vote in
the House to take the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, whereby they
acknowledge him to be the only Supreme Governor in this Realm, and swear to
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities, belonging to him, his Heirs and Successors, or annexed to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm. And farther the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament have bound themselves by their Protestation, to maintain
and defend with their Lives, power and Estates, His Majesty's Royal Person,
Honor, and Estate. So the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, are in
the condition of Subjects to His Majesty, and they have sworn Fidelity and
Allegiance to him; and therefore they cannot rise up against the King, and
compel him, as aforesaid, without manifest Rebellion, and Perjury also.

2. In their Votes, In their Votes.
in passing Bills, and making Laws; wherein though they concur with the King
necessarily, yet it is not by equal Authority but by consent only; not as joint
Sovereigns, but as free Subjects; not as enacting with the King, but as
choosing, and preparing and proposing Laws to be enacted by the King;
according to the passage in the Oath, That the King shall Corroborate such
Laws as the People shall choose: And without this Corroboration, by the Royal
assent, which gives life and motion to our Laws, the Votes of the two Houses
of Parliament dye in the womb where they were Conceived, like an Embrio, and
never see the light.

3. Touching the Relation between the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, They are our fellow Subjects.
and our selves out of Parliament, we take them to be no other than our fellow
Subjects, and them with us, and us with them, to be equally subjected to our
Sovereign Lord the King, who is Head both of the Kingdom and of the
Parliament, and to none other. Nor are they invested with any Superiority over
us, but are armed with some privileges against us, that we cannot arrest them
or their servants during the Parliament: And in case of Rebellion and Treason,
they are no more privileged, then we out of Parliament.

So then the Lords and Commons'assembled in Parliament are wholly subjected to
the King, their Persons to his Person, and their Votes to his Vote; nor are we
in any subjection to them or their Votes; nor have they Jurisdiction over us,
nor are we bound to the observance of them in any case whatsoever; and our
submission to them at any time, is an Act of Compliance only, and arbitrary,
and not of obedience and duty.

And their Votes and Ordinances, Their Votes in this Case.
in this case at this time, are not legal Obligations upon, but Traitorous
Propositions to, and public Invitations of the people to join with them, and
assist them in their Rebellion and Treason. And their partakers do not so
properly obey them, (having no Authority of Command) as conspire with them.

Thus the Lords and Commons of England, All one, whether a Rebellion be by the
Subject in Parliament, or out of Parliament.
being always subjected to the King by the constitution of the Kingdom, and
of the Parliament, it is all one whether a Rebellion be hatched, and Acted by
them in, or out of Parliament; and if there be any aggravation, it is when
perpetrated in Parliament, for such Rebellion leaves a Brand upon that
Parliament, and is a dishonor to all Parliaments, it involves in the sin the
whole Kingdom for the present, and is an ill president for time to come: and
how shall we be ever hereafter liable to change, and upon change to intestine
divisions, and to civil War, it may be, if (as this does) so other
Parliaments shall, challenge to themselves absolute power to alter the
established Government of the Church and State; and if opposed, to take up
Arms for effecting it, as at this day.

But though the name of both Houses of Parliament, be used to Authorize and
countenance this Rebellion, yet the Lords and Commons generally do not
concur in this Action: But a great part of the House of Commons, and a great
part of the House of Lords, driven from Westminster by the violence of Tumults,
and upon the Horror of their proceedings there, do oppose it, both by their
Declarations and by force of Arms.

And the Lords and Commons now remaining at Westminster, A Party of the Lords
and Commons, only engaged in this Rebellion.
are such as are either professed Enemies to the Established Government of the
Church and State, or malicious against His Majesty, and Ambitious of His
Royalties, or covetous of the Revenues of the Bishops, and Deanes, and
Chapters; or lastly, such as live in the Counties near London, and within
their Associations, and comply with them for their private interests. And all
that those Lords and Commons can truly challenge to themselves, is, that they
are the Ringleaders in this Rebellion and Treason, and that they have made
other their Fellow Subjects, their fellow Rebels, and Fellow Traitors.

And let such as take part with those Lords and Commons, Upon what Motives
others have engaged themselves.
reflect upon themselves, and search their hearts, and examine their
Consciences, whether the like Seditious dispositions, and perverse affections,
and ambitious and covetous desires, and private respects, did not at first
engage them in this War, and whether in their Houses they have not prevented
those Lords and Commons, rather then observed and followed their commands, all
along throughout the whole progress of their Rebellion and Treasons; and so
whether their compliance be not a Traitorous Conspiracy with the Lords and
Commons at Westminster, rather then an act of sincere and faithful Obedience
to the Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

It is observed by ancient Parliament Men out of Record, Parliaments have not
succeeded well in five Cases.
that Parliaments have not succeeded well in five cases.

1. When the King has been in displeasure with the Lords and Commons. So
essential is the King's good will toward his Commons, that it was one of the
Petitions of the Commons to Ed. 3. That the Archbishops, and all others of the
Clergy should pray for it; and many times are the like-Petitions for the Lords.

Always provided, Note.
that both Lords and Commons keep themselves within the Circle of the Law, and
Custom of the Parliament.

2. When any of the Great Lords were at variance within themselves.

3. When there was no good correspondence between the Lords and Commons.

4. When there was no unity between the Commons themselves.

5. When there was no preparation for the Parliament before it began.

And there is at this time, The sixth Case.
a 6th unprecedented, and unparalleled case; making the present Parliament,
not only succeslesse, but also pernicious; even the disloyalty, and Rebellion,
and Treason of a party of Lords and Commons of Parliament, who being assisted
by the Anti-Episcopall, Anti-Monarchicall Faction about London, and throughout
the whole Kingdom, first violate the Liberty of Parliament, by Tumults driving
away diverse of the Members thereof; then they make themselves Masters of the
Militia, and afterward they raise an Army, as was pretended, The beginning and
progress of this Rebellion.
for the defense of the Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and His
Person in His Royal dignity, and to maintain the free course of Justice, the
Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Privilege of Parliament.

And being in a Military posture, Their Proceedings in Church and State.
and having the power of the Sword, they Declare themselves to be the
Parliament of England, and assume unto themselves a new Capacity of an absolute
Body, and independent State, and they take upon them Authority Legislative and
Gubernative; and they pass Votes, not in Order to the King, to be proposed to
him, and to be enacted by him, but by themselves, and they publish them not as
Laws in His name, but as Ordinances in their own names, and to be put in
execution, not in a judiciary way (as our Laws are) by the Ordinary Ministers
of Justice, the Judges and Justices in their several Courts, and Countries,
but by Creatures of their own making, their Committees and Sub-Committees, and
by their Deputy-Lievtenants, and in a way Extrajudiciall and Military. And they
force us to submit to them, either by observing and doing what they enjoin, or
by suffering what they impose.

We shall also have (when they can agree upon it) the like Model of Government
in the Church: The Authority to be derived not from the King, but from the two
Houses of Parliament, and to be executed not by Bishops, but by Presbyters, and
such Church Officers as the two Houses shall think fit to ordain. And
howsoever at first they pretended, that they took up Arms for defense of
Religion, etc. yet their proceedings have been only against Religion by Law
established, and against the King and against Regality it self, and against
the Laws of the Land, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and so against
the Liberty of the Subject; and lastly against the Peace, and the very
Constitution and being of the Kingdom: And they fight against them that defend
these, and oppose their usurped power, and new frame of Government, whether
their fellow Subjects, or their fellow Parliament men, or their King and
Sovereign himself. Yea from the first bringing in of the two Bills, against
the Government of the Church, and for taking the Militia out of the Kings hand,
all their Proceedings have been only Rebellious and Traitorous until this day;
and they and their Accomplices have spoken and acted nothing but Rebellion and
Treason, if examined and tried by the Laws of the Land.

And their Rebellion is an attempt to force and compel the King in some cases
to govern otherwise then according to his own Royal Authority and direction,
The present Rebellion.
and by force of Arms to deprive him of his Government in some other cases:
and to force and compel his Vote and Assent to several Bills in Parliament
against himself, and against his Authority and Government: And so at once to
subject both his Gubernative and Legislative Authority to the two Houses of
Parliament.

And the Treasons already acted for promoting this Rebellion, Treasons already
acted, and by whom.
are,

The corrupting the judgment of the People, and the taking off the bonds of
Conscience toward His Majesty, and the drawing away the Peoples hearts from
him, and the setting of discord between him and them, whereby they should leave
him, and rise up against him: And these are the Treasons more especially of
their Preachers and Pamphleters.

The levying War against the King in this Realm.

The deteining his Castles and Forts from him, and his Ships and his Ordinance.
And these are the Treasons of those Lords and Commons principally.

The encountering in fight, and killing them that assist him; and the adhering
to the King's Enemies and giving them aid and comfort. And these are the
Treasons of their Soldiers and Contributers.

Thus the Treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous
dealers have dealt very treacherously, Esaias. 24. 16.

And the Treasons to be acted (which I tremble at, Horrid Treasons to be Acted
for completing the Rebellion.
and whereof all will be guilty that have any hand in the preceding Treasons) I
say, the Treasons to be acted for consummating this Rebellion, are

The depriving, or deposing, or murdering of the King, the Lords Anointed: In
every Rebellion the Law intending, as a consequent, the compassing the death
and deprivation of the King; as foreseeing that the Rebel will never suffer
that King to Live or Reign, which might punish, or take Revenge of his
Rebellion and Treason. And therefore doubtless it is, that Sir Thomas Fairfax
has his Commission without exception to fight with, kill, and slay all that
shall oppose him.

But God forbid that I should strech forth mine hand against the Lords
Anointed; For who can stretch forth his hand against him, and be guiltless, 1.
Sam. 26. 9, 11.

And my admonition to them, The Rebels admonished.
and to all, and every one any way engaged with them, shall be that of Simon
Peter, to Simon Magus; Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, that if it
be possible, the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I see thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity, Acts, 8. 22. 23*

And for the King it shall be my prayer, and let it be the prayer of all Loyal
hearts.

Plead thou the Kings cause, A Prayer for the King.
O Lord, with them that strive against him: and fight against them that fight
against him.

Lay hand upon the Shield and Buckler: and stand up to help him.

Bring forth the Spear, and stop the way against them that persecute him: say
unto his soul, I am thy Salvation.

Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seek after his soul: let them
be turned back, and brought to confusion that imagine mischief for him.

Let them be as the dust before the wind: and the Angel of the Lord scattering
them.

Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

For they have privily laid their net to destroy him without a causes yea, even
without a cause have they made a pit for his Soul.

Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares, and his net that he has
laid privily, catch himself: that he may fall into his own mischief.

And the Kings soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his
salvation. Amen, Amen.

And now to conclude this Tract, The Conclusion.
as Sir Edward Cook does his Chapter of Treason. It appears in the Holy
Scripture, that Traitors never prospered, what good soever they pretended, but
were most severely and exemplarily pu^^ished: As Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, by
miracle. The ground clave asunder that was under them: And the Earth opened her
month and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all the men that appertained
unto Korah, and all their goods, Number. 16. 31, 32.

Absalom, who by fair speeches and courtesies stole the hearts of the People,
and sought his Father King David's life, riding upon a Mule under the thick
Boughs of a great Oak in the wood of Ephraim, where the Battle was, his head
caught hold of the Oak, and he was taken up between the Heaven and the Earth:
And Ioab took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of
Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the Oak, 2. Sam; 18. 9, 14.

Achitophell, Absolon's chief Counselor hanged himself, 2. Sam. 17. 23.

Shimei, for cursing David, had his hoare head brought with blood to the grave,
2. Sam. 16. 5, 6. 1. Kings 28. 46.

Abiathat, the Traitorous high Priest against Solomon, was deprived of his
Priest hood, 1. K. 2. 26. 27.

Zimri, who conspired against Elah, and smote him, and killed him, when he saw
the City was taken wherein he was, went into the Palace of the Kings House and
burnt the Kings House over him with fire and dyed. 1. Reg. 16. 9, 18.

Athaliah the daughter of Omri, who d^stroyed all the Seed Royal, was slain
with the Sword, 2. Reg. 11. 16.

Bigthan and Teresh, who sought to lay hold on King Ahasueerus, were both
hanged on a tree. Est. 2. 21. 23.

Thewdas, who rose up, beasting himself to be somebody, and to whom a number
of men about 400. joined themselves, was slain, and all even as many as obeyed
him were scattered and brought to naught. After him rose up Judas of Galilce*
in the days of taxing, and drew much People after him: He also perished, and
as many as obeyed him were dispersed, Act. 5. 36, 37.

Judas Iscariot, the Traitor of Traitors hanged himself, 27. Mat. 5. And
purchased a Field with the reward of iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst
asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, Act. 1. 18.

Peruse over all our Books, Records, and Histories, and you shall find, a
principle in Law, a rule in Reason, and a trial in Experience, That Treason
does ever produce fatal and final destruction to the offender, and never
attaineth to the desired end, (two incidents inseparable thereunto.) And
therefore let every one abandon it, as the most pernit^ous bayte of the Devil
of Hell; and follow the precept in holy Scripture.

My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them
both, Prove. 24. 21, 22.

Cook 3. part Instit. cap. 2.

POSTSCRIPT.
And now Reader see the Accomplishment of that Evangelicall prediction. The
Postscript.


In the last days, perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers, of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, Proud, Blaspheamers, Disobedient to
Parents, Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasure more then Lovers of
God; Having a form of Godliness but denying the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3. 1,
2, 4, 5.

Presumptuous are they, selfewilled, they are not afraid to speak evil of
Dignities. 2. Pet. 2. 10.

Woe to them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after
the Error of Balaam for a reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core, Jude
11.

Also Reader Learn and Consider, That what things soever are evil in their
own nature (as are Rebellion and Treason) cannot be the Subject of any command,
or induce any Obligation of Obedience upon any man, by any Authority whatsoever.

As the Lords and Commons at Westminster have delivered in their Declaration,
May. 19. 1642.

FINIS.

