THE IMPROVEMENT OF MERCY: OR A short Treatise, showing how, and in what
manner, Our RULERS and all well-affected to the present Government should make
a right and profitable use of the late great Victory in Ireland. August 2.
1649. ALSO Here are several things propounded to all such as are disaffected
and enemies to the State (whether Presbyterian, Royalist, or Papist, etc.)
Being both useful and seasonable upon this occasion, of so wonderful and
glorious a Victory.

BY JOHN CAN.

Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? Who is like
thee? glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders!

Deu^. 32.31. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves
being Judges.

Published by Authority.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1649.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF MERCY: OR A short Treatise, showing how, and in what
manner, our Rulers and all well-affected to the present Government should make
a right and profitable use of the late great Victory in Ireland. August 2. 1649.
IT has been the custom of men in former time, as we find it recorded, both
in divine and humane History: when the Lord had given them any remarkable and
special victory, to erect some great Monument, whereby the Remembrance of such
a Mercy might continue from Generation to Generation.

As I consider our late victory in Ireland, how wonderful it was, and how
seasonably God gave that blessing to us, with other circumstances; I find my
spirit much let out, to move and desire, that some thing now may be done by
this Nation (who enjoyes the fruit of that happy harvest) to keep up the
memory of it, that our Posterity hereafter may know, what the Lord did for us
at such a time, and may say, We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers
have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the times of old, Psalm.
44.1.

And I am the more encouraged to take this work in hand, and have the greater
hope, that England will be an example to the whole world, of minding Gods
providence, and improving this mercy, because no Nation like England for many
years, has had so large experience of GODS power and goodness.

And that I may the better obtain the thing so much desired, I shall in an
humble and submissive way; first propound a few things to the State. My Lords,
I need not tell you, how much you are concerned in this Victory: What an
Interest you have in it; I know you do observe how wonderfully herein God has
honored you, owned your present Government, and don more for you, then was
expected. But now what will ye render to the Lord for so great a benefit
toward you? What Pillar or Monument of Praise will you erect to continue the
memory of this Victory. I shall not take upon me to prescribe the particulare,
nevertheless, it cannot be thought either presumption or boldness in me, if
I deliver mine own opinion, and set down what I humbly conceive, will be a fit
Monument; acceptable to God, honorable to you, and whereby your names shall be
a blessing to posterity.

First, Seeing the Lord has so really appeared to enlarge and establish your
Commonwealth, is it not fit that you should be as real for him in advancing
the glorious Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. There have been several
Petitions presented to the Parliament, from many godly and well affected
people, whose bowels do earne to consider, what multitudes of people sit still
in darkness, and have not the glorious Gospel preached unto them. Thanks
indeed they had, and fair promises: now we know a man may draw a thousand
prints in water, but as soon as his finger is off, all is out. Sirs; our hope
is, that you will now do something effectually toward the salvation of such
ignorant and poor souls.

Secondly, It will manifest both your acknowledgement and improvement of this
mercy, if you honor such, whom God has so far honored, as by them to bring
over several Victories to you. When tidings was brought to Philip of Macedon:
1. that Parmenio had got the victory over the enemies. 2. Alexander his Son was
borne. 3. That his Chariots won the priz: at Olympus; and all in one day; he
called for some cross, that these things might not make him forget himself:
howsoever, we wish you no crosses, but increase of blessings, and all good
things, yet withal we desire, that what success soever God gives you, you
may not so far forget your selves, as to forget your friends, such as have
ever been cordial and faithful to you, carried their lives in their hands for
you, and thought nothing too dear for your sake.

Thirdly, In this victory you may behold Gods displeasure against Malignants,
he will not take them by the hand, neither should you into your bosom. Is the
Lord pulling of them down, be not you then setting of them up. If a spider can
prevail so much as come into the hive and weave a cobweb within it, he will
kill all the bees, there is no remedy. We hope you will take care to keep such
spiders out: to wit, of place and office in the Commonwealth. We would count
him unwise, that would feed rats, mise, and such vermin, to destroy his bodily
estate; but it is greater folly to nourish such as seek to destroy the Nation.

Fourthly, Has the Lord compassed you about with songs of deliverance, and
filled your hearts with joy and gladness; do something now for the people, I
mean some remarkable thing, that so by you they may be glad and rejoice
likewise. I need not tell you whose hearts are sad, nor why, and what would
comfort them: open but a door to them, and hear what they would say, how many
weeks and months some have waited, and can find no way or passage to have
their heavy condition and case come before you. It would therefore be a notable
Monument to continue the memory of this Victory, if some present course were
taken, that the case of the poor and friendlesse might be heard as soon as
others; and people not suffer so extremely as they do, in that their
businesses are not speedier dispatched. Augustus thought that day ill spent, in
which he had not helped some poor person: Mark that, (not himself, not his
brother or sister, not such a Lord or Lady, etc. but the poor who had no
friends,) consider he was a Heathen, you are Christians.

Fifthly, Dublins Enlargement may serve to put you in mind of the poor
prisoners for debt: I know you have spent some time about this business, but I
pray consider with what celeritie and quickness, God did that great work in
Ireland for you: and therefore you shall do well to follow God, as in matter,
so in the manner of doing good. Say not unto thy neighbor, go, and come
again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee, Pro. 3.28. Jam
quando suppetit, quid probibet, quo mini^s liberaliter impertiare? Nonne inops
adest? Nonne plena horrea? Nonne merces a domino parata? Nonne mandatum
manifestum? Esuriens fame absumitur, nudus frigore rigescit, and tu eleemosynam
in crastinum differs? Basil. homil. 6. ex varijs.

Among such as are well affected to this present Government, I have thought
good to mention the Lord Major of the City of London, with the Court of
Aldermen, and Common Council. I know you are much affected with this Victory,
judging it one of the greatest Mercies, that ever God gave to his Church and
people in this Nation. And it being so, I hope then we shall have some Monument
erected by you for a memorial of such a remarkable blessing, fit to be
transferred to future posterities. We see in nature when the Sun shines upon
those inferior bodies, if solid bodies, when they reflect their beams, they
cast their light and heat upon other bodies that are nearest about them: but if
they are empty and hollow bodies, and such as have no soliditie, they take all
into themselves, and reflect not. The Lord by this victory has in a special
manner shined on your City, on your families, callings, estates; blessed you in
cursing the enemy. Now in charity I am bound to believe, that you are men
solid, sincere: and as the Moon taking light from the Sun above her,
bestows it upon the creatures here below, so you will make others partakers
of the good blessings of God bestowed upon you. And here I shall desire with
your leave and patience to propound a few things briefly to you, as the use of
this victory in relation to your City.

1. As God has been zealous for you, so be you zealous of his glory and name.
2. Let there not only be kept days of feasting, and joy, and of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor: but let something now be don
for the poor, and in such a way, as the victory may be remembered in all ages
hereafter. 3. Let the Army be still dear and precious to you: for Gods
presence (you see) is amongst them wheresoever they are: and whether they are
English, Scots, or Irish, which come against them, they are bread for them, God
scatters their enemies, and they fly before them. Who would be unwilling to
give wages and large recompense unto servants who are faithful, prosperous,
profitable? 4. The consideration of this victory may encourage you, to hold
your own, and stand fast to the Parliament, Council of State, and the present
Government, and not to fear the secret plots and designs of the adversary,
neither their number nor forces. Let them associate themselves, and they shall
be broken; take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word,
and it shall not stand: for God is with us. 5. Methinkes this Victory should
move you to be now very active in suppressing lewd and scandalous Pamphlets,
and that roguish generation of Ballad singers, such varlets were not suffered
in many Heathen-Common-wealths, and truly it is much to be wished, that more
diligence and greater severitie were used to remove from your City and
suburbs, these base vermin, viler then the earth.

Sixthly, We shall expect now, as a proper improvement of this victory, that you
will no longer suffer in your City Pulpit-Incendiaries, men who turn praying
and preaching into rebellion. As for their aspersing the ways of God and his
people, we let it pass (as the fruit whereby they are known to be --) But to
hear them revile the Rulers of the people, and to speak traitorously against
the present Government, it is unsufferable. A Magistrate (says one) who has
discovered a Conspiracy, and seems fearful to remedy it, is as faulty as
the Conspirator himself. But here is no cause of fear, the thing now may be
easily remedied without any danger, or difficulty. We see the bladder is puffed
up with a little wind, and if two or three beans or pease be put into it,
they make a mighty sound or rattling, yet prick the same but with a pin, and
instantly it falls flat, and comes to naught: I leave the application and use
to your selves: only take notice, that in Christian policy; Init^o
seditionum, quamprimum apparuerint comprimantur. Clem. Templ. pol. lib. 4. c.
7. p. 424.

For the rest of the Nation, who are well affected to the State, to the end
they may make a profitable and good use of this great victory, I shall set down
before them these observations.

1. About the time that the Lord scattered his enemies, they were boasting what
they would do with the Roundheads and Sectaries: Into England they should not
go: Ormond as he was playing at Tables swore, he would send them all into
America: Another in his cups vowed, he would try if they could swim thither.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my
lust shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, mine hand shall
destroy them. Now no sooner were these words out of their mouth, but the wrath
of God fell immediately upon them, and they were all, either slain, taken, or
put to flight. So let thine enemies perish, O God.

2. If we consider, the several advantages of the enemy, as their number,
place, provision, and other circumstances; and how notwithstanding they were
totally routed, it is matter sufficient, to persuade every rational man, to
believe, that God was an enemy to them, and to the cause they stood for, and
that he owned the others, by an unheard of victory and deliverance.

3. In this victory we may behold a full victory over the enemy, both there,
and here, and else where: For as soon as they heard of this thing, their hearts
melted, and such a terror is fallen upon them, as they have no mind to engage
again, nor to prosecute any more their new plots and designs against this
Common wealth.

4. Upon the Affairs of Ireland, the enemies to this State much depended: it
was indeed as the great Wheel of the Clock: For many made full account to move
here, if the Rebels there prevailed. But as its said, Many of the people of the
Land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell upon them: so this victory
in all places where it comes, brings people over to the Parliament, as well
knowing, it is their best and safest course.

5. That five thousand men, should take and kill seven thousand, and put
thirteen thousand to flight, who sees not that it is the immediate finger of
God. And it is worth the observing, that since this later Army was raised, God
has given us many such wonderful victories: not only for the comfort and
encouragement of the well-affected, but to let the enemy see, that God is
against them, and that they shall never prosper in such a way. When thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Isa. 26.9.

6. Here we may observe, Gods revenging hand upon Apostates; not to speak of
Inchequeen, that Grand turn-coat, there were in Ormonds Army many Soldiers who
had basely and treacherously a little before deserted the Parliaments service:
but see how the Lord dealt with them for their perfidiousnesse: he delivers
them up into the hand of Justice. A fair warning to others, to take heed, that
they keep themselves with that party where they see God is, and still crowns
with victory, and not to join with a rebellious rout, who have not his
presence, but are forsaken of him, and prepared for the day of slaughter.

7. Whereas we hear of some unclean spirits, like frogs, going forth unto the
Kings of the earth, to gather them to battle against this Commonwealth: there
is so much of God to be seen in this victory, as that no man needs to regard,
whatsoever is reported concerning this thing. When other Nations shall hear
how wonderfully the Lord goes along with us in the work of Reformation, it is
probable they will keep at home, and seek to pull their necks out of the yoke
of Tyrants, as we have don. But howsoever, we shall never hereafter be afraid
of multitudes, the number shall not fright us: for we are confident, upon the
experience of former victories, that God will still make good that promise and
blessing to us; Five of you shall chase an hundred: and an hundred of you shall
put ten thousand to flight; and your enemies shall fall before you by the
sword, Deuteronomy. 28.8.

From the well-affected to the State, I come now to the illaffected: and first
to you of the Presbyterian party: And here that I may not be mistaken, I only
intend such men, as do vilify and reproach our present Government. And as for
such we have thought good from the occasion of this victory, to frame
something like a Looking-glass, wherein they may see themselves; specially at
such times, when instead of preaching the doctrine of the Gospel, and praying
in the Spirit, they speak false, scandalous, and seditious things, tending to
a new war, and hindering the relief of Ireland.

1. Consider, England has received a mercy, in spite of you: you may remember
the other day in your talk (I dare not call it prayer) how you told the Lord
you knew not into whose hands to pray Ireland: only you would not, that he
should give it up into the bands of the Independents. Besides, we are not
ignorant, how proudly you contemnd Authority, and when others sought the Lord
for Ireland, you most profanely and irreligiously, like Haman and the King
sat down to drink: you made it a time of feasting, joy, and gladness, when
others by Commandment kept a day of public fast: not unlike to that in Isa.
22.12, 13. Behold now, we have a return of our prayers, our petition is
granted, and the Lord has looked on our tears, and the Lord has requited
good for your cursing that day.

2. You have strugled a long time to destroy this present Government, but do
ye not see now, how ye kick against the prick: As he that moves the weik of a
burning Candle with his finger, blacks it, and burns it, and causes the light
to shine the more clear: So all your mutinous and seditious attempts, turn to
the burning and blacking of your selves. As for the State, opposed by you, Lo
it shines more and more in strength, glory, and beauty.

3. But whither will ye run? do you not see how you are already fallen? here
is a victory, one of the greatest mercies that ever God brought from Ireland
over to this Nation; nevertheless, you see it not; nor thought it worth
thankesgiving in your Churches the other day. Some report of the Manna, that at
first it was sweet and tasted well, but afterward through the murmuring and
unthankfulness of the people, it was either bitter to them, or it had no
savor. I believe the time was, when such a public blessing as this, (yea much
inferior to this) was counted sweet: you could raste then how good God was to
his people, in giving them victories; but now such Mercies are either bitter,
or you feel no savor in them: Sirs, you may thank your selves for this change:
For the truth is, your great murmurings and unthankfulness against God and
man, has brought you into this unhappie and sad condition.

4. Methinkes in this victory you should see the snare and pit before you. Milo
Crotoniatas, whilst he was tearing asunder the stock of an Oak, his strength
sailing him, the cleft suddenly closing, was so held fast by the hands that he
became a prey to the Beasts of the field. You have been a long time trying to
tear asunder this Commonwealth, and great hope you had, that Ormond with the
Rebels there would work wonders for you, but you see that strength now fails
you, take heed then, least the cleft close, and you are held fast by the neck.

5. This victory gives me an occasion to remember that saying of Solomon; Who
so rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house, Pro. 17.13.
Howsoever, these men will not acknowledge that they are beholding to the
Parliament and Army, for their present peace, liberty, livelihood, yet the
thing is so: yea more, under God, by their care and wisdom, these rash and
headdy men, were kept from bondage and slavery, into which they (poor fools)
most willingly and greedily would have thrust themselves. It is reported of one
Balthazar Gerard (who named himself Francis Guyon) that with the money which
the Prince of Orange gave him for his relief, he bought pistols, powder and
shot, and therewith killed the Prince: The Presbyterians (I mean not the
moderate and sober sort) would serve our Governors and Soldiers so, even
murder them if they could, for purchasing liberty and peace for them.

6. The backslider (says the Wiseman) shall be filled with his own ways, Pro.
14.14. What generation of men are more revolted then these, from their own
grounds and former Principles: For have they not desired, that Ireland might be
relieved, and that the Protestant blood shed there, might be revenged upon the
barbarous Rebels? But behold their Apostacy, when they see this don, they vex
and murmr at it; and are so much the Lord outrageous and invective against
the State, by how much the Lord blesses our Forces there, and honors them
with success and great victory. Tame foxes if they break loose, and turn
wild, do ten times more mischief then those, that were wild from the
beginning. It is very remarkable, that none of the malignant Ministers
thorow-out the Land, who have from first to last held with the King, speak so
seditiously, or rayl so grossly against the Parliament and Army as these men
do; these men, I say, who were once tame and stood for both, but are now
broken loose, and turned wild.

7. These great victories which God gives the Parliament, should cause your
hearts to smite you, to consider how by your seditious doctrine many poor and
ignorant people are brought to the slaughter, whose blood one day will be
required at your hand. The cruelties and infamies of Caligula are imputed to
the Nurse that gave him suck, which being cruel and barbarous of her self,
rubbed the ends of her breasts with blood, causing the child, to whom she gave
milk, to suck them. Such cruel and inhumane nurses are these men: instead of
the sincere milk of the Gospel, they give their hearers the bloody Tenants of
Rebellion; so that the cruelties and infamies of the people, may be (at lest in
a great measure) imputed unto their Teachers: For no doubt the people would be
willing to live a quiet and peaceable life under our present Government, but
that these Sheba's, these sons of Bieri, blow a Trumpet, to cause hurliburlies
and commotions in the Land.

8. Seeing God has made the Parliament so victorious, it would not be amiss
(when you come to your selves) to consider whether Christ or his Apostles have
left you any precept or example to asperse that Government which is set over
you. I cannot find, either in Scripture, or other History, that any Ministers
of Jesus Christ (for so you style your selves) did ever before your time,
meddle with civil Government, as to deny the lawfulness of that Government
under which they lived. The abuses of Magistrates, and their miscarriages in
Government, we grant Gods Ministers have spoken against, (yet so, as always
observing time, place, and other circumstances, which you never do) but the
Government it self, whether Kingly, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, they
condemned not, neither meddled with the change and alteration of ordinary
Government, upon what ground or occasion soever it was. So that there are two
treasonable crimes here charged upon you: first, that you are busiebodies, as
meddling with things wherein you are not concerned. Secondly, False accusers, in
calling that State unlawful, which is founded upon Scripture, Law, and Reason.
Boiling liquor swelling above the brinks, falls into the fire, and comes to
nothing: you are best beware, least by rising above your element you tumble
down, and your names perish.

9. It may be, upon the occasion of this victory, you will be the more willing
to take notice how the Malignants make use of you only as Journeymen to serve
their turn. Some write of the Jaccal, as he pursues his prey, barking like a
dog, the Lion meeting with the noise, follows it; now the Jaccal having
wearied the Beast he chased, the Lion that followed by the cry comes in, when
he is at a bay, and takes from the other, what he had before spent his time and
labor about. Brethren, suppose by your bawling and barking at the present
Government, you should weary it, and bring it at a bay; do ye think to have
the prey? not in the least; for the Royalists would take that from you, and not
you, but the Prelates should be established, their Courts, Canons,
Service-Booke, etc. It is true, you knew in this case how to help your selves,
namely, faces about, turn-coats, and as you were before; and so indeed you
would fare better then the Jaccal, have some of prey howsoever, with the Lion.

10. I would willingly know, when you are unpowring and speaking evil of
dignities, what people do you think are pleased with such vile and wicked
stuff. Methinkes you cannot be ignorant, that in doing so, you make sad the
hearts of the righteous, and are no other, then servants to the base lusts of
unholy and profane men. The Indians have a fruit which they call Yogma, it
fattens swine, but men loath it: The Idolater, Adulterer, Swearer, Drunkard,
Sabbath-breaker, Atheist, Papist, etc. delight to hear your railing at the
State; indeed they flock after you merely for this Yogma: But I must tell you
in the mean time, the godly of your own Congregations cannot abide it: so that
by this means you loose them, and are cast out of their hearts and affections,
though you seem to gain the favor and applause of some Malignants.

11. In this looking-glass, you may see two faces under one hood: you think
to please the Royalists, by crying up a King, a King: and your brethren the
Scots by crying out, The Covenant, the Covenant: but do not cozen your own
souls, for you cannot any longer herein deceive rational and knowing men:
they perceive well enough your game and aim: it is your outward pomp and
worldly preferment that ye seek after, under such pretenses. The Pope will
have Kings and Princes to kiss his feet, and to draw them on, did use to have
on his pantophile the Crucifixe or picture of Christ hanging on the Cross:
that forsooth he would have reverence don unto. The truth is, you would feign
be Popes, and have every man to kiss your feet; our Parliament, Council of
State, and the whole Nation bow down to you: and to draw them on, you tell some
of a King, others of a Covenant, a mere cheat, for it is your feet you would
have them kiss, submit to your arbitrary power and lawless will.

12. This seditious course of yours has brought you already into a great
straight: And I believe, it will require some meetings at your Synon-house, to
resolve what to do upon the Thankesgiving day near at hand: If you obey the
Parliaments Order, and keep the day, you know what the Cavaliers and Royalists
will say of you: Neque fidei constans, neque strenuus in perfidia: as it was
said of Claudius Apollinaris, A man that neither constantly kept his promise,
(as you have not yours to the Parliament) nor stoutly maintained his treason,
(as you not yours, if ye keep that day). Again, if not, you know there is
great danger in that. For howsoever upon the fast day, for Ireland, you proudly
contemned the Magistrate, and made it a day of recreation, yet I would not wish
you to presume now upon the like impunitie or indulgence. And if you fall into
the hand of Justice, and so suffer, consider before hand, what comfort you can
take in such suffering.

Now it follows, that I speak something (as occasioned by this victory) to
Royalists and Cavaliers. We see by daily experience, if the coin be good, men
are contented to receive it from any hand: I shall not propound any thing to
these men, but what is profitable and good for them, if the Lord be pleased to
give them understanding hearts to embrace it, and make a right use thereof.
Thunder (they say) falling upon a Serpent, takes not away the life, but her
venom: The searcher of all hearts does know my desire is, so to apply this
thundering-victory, as their malignity, obstinacy, blindness, etc. may be
removed, and they live happily, and in a comfortable and prosperous condition.

1. Consider how such as have engaged, and have been most active in the cause
you stand for, have in the end (as the just recompense of such service) undon
themselves, and brought ruin and misery upon their wives and children. There
is no Pilot in his right wits, when he sees Sea-markes purposely set up to give
warning of rocks, sands, or shelves, will thereby take occasion to run his
vessel upon them, but rather will employ all his care and skill, that by
avoiding them, he may escape the danger. To what end has the Lord set before
your eyes, the desolation of many honorable and great families, the precious
blood of several thousands shed on a day; but to be a warning and caveat unto
you, to keep off from such dangerous and destroying rocks, and not to run your
selves vainly and foolishly, as they have don, into a way and course, which is
neither honorable nor profitable for you. The bird will not fly into the net,
or light on the limebush, or run into the snare, when he sees another bird
flutter before her: The horse as you are traveling will not follow the track
of another horse that sticks fast before you: you are men, and should be
rational: Will ye then seeing others before you in the pit, fall likewise
into the same? if you do, you are the more to blame, and the less to be
excused. You know that lesson; Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

2. Methinkes by this time you should perceive, that the matter you stand for,
is not good, and so much the Lord from time to time has made known unto you
by many clear and plain demonstrations. Take notice of the late King, how
apparently God was against him; fought against him, cursed his blessings,
scattered his counsels, so that nothing indeed prospered under his hand. How
dare ye then carry on the same work, and his design, knowing by former
experience, in doing so the Lord will not prosper you. I cannot more fitly
liken this generation of men, then to Bowlers, who having delivered their Bowl,
use to follow it with bowing their body, to have it fall in toward the jack,
but it keeps her bias, goes off, and runs another way. Much struggling and
striving there has been to bring the conquest in, on the Kings side, no plots
or devises have been wanting, what sea and land could do has been don: but
providence still carried it another way, and this they saw, and could not but
acknowledge that the Lord was not with them, although they parsisted, and still
do in their froward and crooked courses.

3. This victory gives me occasion to put you in mind, how your principles and
grounds are false, concerning forms of civil Government. The Israelites
living poorly in Egypt, thought no kind of food better then Garlic and
Onions: so you, having lived long under hingly Government, and not acquainted
with a free State or Commonwealth, conceive Monarchy to be the best kind of
Government, which undoubtedly is the worst: and my Reasons for it are these.

1. The great Revenues which are wasted to maintain this King ship, unusefull
Creature, a thing which the Land has no need of, but can do much better
without it, (as Courts, Palaces, Castles, Mannours, Parks, Forests, etc.) if
converted to a public use, will be for the great profit and general good of
the whole Nation, poor and rich; whereas formerly, as employed, did little
service, but fed Locusts and Caterpillars, who destroyed the people.

2. How chargeable to a Kingdom are Kings children, through their pride,
pomp, and excessive riot? and what is expected from them for all this? truly,
if they be not a curse and plague to the Nation, men think it a mercy, as for
comfort and profit they expect none. Now how many Orphans and poor children by
such charges might be charitably and largely relieved, and would bless God for
it; whereas the others devour all, without saying, Sirs, we thank you: as if
they were not at all beholding unto the people for the same.

3. When corruptions and abuses break forth, they are easier and sooner
suppressed in a free State, then in the other. For 1. As they have their
original and rise usually from the Court, so the King (as we have had
experience) will seek to defend the same. 2. Put case, the King has no hand in
such abuses (which would be a strange thing) nevertheless, considering he sees
and hears with other men's eyes and ears, they are not easily or thoroughly
reformed. But in a Commonwealth well settled, it cannot be so.

4. It is seldom seen in a Monarchy, but the Officers and Ministers of State,
are corrupt men, chosen by Princes, not for the public good, but to serve
their turn and interest. Whereas in a Commonwealth, the people choosing their
own Magistrates, are careful to choose such as shall do just and right things
for them. Besides, If Magistrates be corrupt, the people can sooner help
themselves by removing them, and choosing better, in a free State, then under
Kings.

5. In no Commonwealth is there such sufferings of good men, innocent blood
spilt, unlawful and unnecessary wars raised, intolerable taxes imposed,
undue and illegal courses taken, as where Kings do reign.

6. That must be best, which is a mean between two extremes, and thus is a
free State, between Monarchy and Anarchy: that one should rule alone, is
against the common Maxim; Plus vident oculi quum oculus; two eyes see more
then one. Again, that none should govern, or all, is absurd and senseless.

7. It is rightly observed by Bodin; We commonly see (says he) in the
changing of Princes, new designs, new laws, new Officers, new friends, new
enemies, new habits, and a new form of living: For Princes take delight to
change and alter all things, that they may be spoken of, which does many times
cause great inconveniences, not only to the Subjects in particular, but also
to the whole body of the State. De Rep. l. 6. cap. 4. But no such prejudice or
peril is incident to a Commonwealth, if any thing be publicly altered, it is
maturely don, and upon good ground, and for the general profit and safety of
the people.

8. In a well governed Commonwealth, great men as well as others, are
encouraged unto the study of virtue, wisdom, Justice, because there, not
titles or birthright, but abilities and good parts make them capable of
preferment: in such a State there is no door open to come into places of
authority, by bribery, flattery, friendship, but as men are fitted and gifted.
Whereas in Kingdoms men come to have Offices and preferment by succession; a
fool, or a knave, will challenge authority by being the Kings cousin.

9. We know by experience, that in all ages the Gospel and way of Christ has
been most withstood and opposed under Kings. As on the contrary, in
Commonwealths the same has found greatest favor, furtherance, and
enfargement: And hence it is, that our Pulpit-Incendiaries, with their brethren
the Scots, cry out so much for a King; they well know such a form of
Government, is fittest for them, and will best serve their turn, whereby to
suppress the truth, persecute the Saints, under the name of Sectaries, and to
erect a form of will worship, forcing all both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to fall down and worship their Image, if not, neither buy
nor sell, but killed for heretic.

In the writing of these things, it makes me call to mind the condition of the
people in the Low Countries, living in a Free State, such there, as are Papists
among them, will not have the King of Spain, to reign again over them, but
desire rather to be under the present Government: yea though they are Papists
(I say) and have not liberty granted them for the free exercise of their
Religion, yet by no means will hear of a King any more. And no doubt the like
ere long will be the case of the people of this Land, when they have once
tasted the sweetness of a Free State (as I hope they will every day more and
more) and have their present grievances and taxes taken off, every man enjoying
his own without molestation, and have justice speedily don them, they will no
more desire a King to Rule over them. And to have it so, the way is, for every
one to submit to the present Government, live peaceably, and do what he can,
that all things may be effectually and well settled amongst us.

4. And lastly; it is not possible that this victory should do you good, or
any counsel given you from the occasion of it, so long as you make lies your
refuge, yea delight to be encouraged and strengthened in falsehood: do not many
of you, take pleasure in scurrilous and base Pamphlets, and by reading the
filthy and scandalous things in them, are hardened in your dangerous and bad
condition? I have read some-where, when the Soldiers of Avidius Cassius opened
a Chest, which they found in Apollo's Temple at Seleucia, that there came forth
such an infection, as thereby they were all poisoned and killed. If you will not
be murdered, then look not into their venomous and abhorred Libels, for these
villains only study, how by lies, slander, and calumniation, to make you
disaffected to the State, and act against it, and so to be undon in body,
soul, and estate. They which hawk for birds, do of purpose make a stale of
the Owl, for whilst the silly birds come flocking and staring about her,
unawares they are taken: The Libeller against the State, is the Devils Owl,
whilst the foolish and silly people are looking upon him, and harkening to him,
he takes them in his snare, and holds them fast. I shall say no more but thus;
A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and bideth himself: but the simple pass
on, and are punished, Prove. 22.3.

As for Papists, it is to be feared, they will make no good use of this great
victory: but as a furious mastiff is the madder for his chain: and iron
hardens under the hammer: so the Angel of God, now pouring out his Vial upon
the seat of the Beast and his Kingdom, will cause them the more to blaspheme
the name of God, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Neither indeed
may we wonder, that such woeful blindness has overtaken them, considering
they are given up, by divine justice to the lusts of their own hearts, and to
strong delusions. Besides, the damnable doctrines which they embrace, puts them
forward to destruction. Nevertheless, upon this occasion, something we will
say, concerning them; leaving the issue to God.

1. They may clearly see, the Lord is now making inquisition for blood, and the
day of recompense is at hand; They have shed the blood of Saints, and of
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. Green
wood which is long in kindling, continues longer then the dry, if it have once
taken fire: The Lord has a while forborne to revenge the horrid cruelties of
that barbarous and savage Nation, but now he is fallen in amongst them, and
woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants. As the Galli-Senones, after they had laid
Rome wast, were so overthrown, that their name was not left in the world: So it
may be, that the memory of such an inhumane and cruel Nation shall be bloued
out from under heaven. Wolves and Foxes make many turnings forward and
backward, run into brakes and briers, hide under bushes, fly from one starting
hole to another: but all will not serve the turn, the dogs follow incessantly,
and never give over till they overtake them, and devour them: So evil
pursues, sinners, even the Irish-sinners, those Rebels, murderers, monsters,
monstrous Monsters, I know not what to term them; the Lord (I say) has now
set his judgments after those Wolves, and it is not their bogs or woods that
shall save them from the wrath of the Lamb, but they shall become as dung for
the earth, and their hope as the giving up of the Ghost.

2. Neither let them expect relief from other places; as for their new King,
and his adherents, they shall stand either a far off, for fear of their
torments, saying, alas, alas; or what assistance and aid soever they have, it
shall but add to their plagues, and further their destruction. As a we sack,
wherein a naked man is covered, is so far from defending him against the cold,
as it increases his shivering; so their help from others will prove their
greater ruin. Ormond and Inchiqueen, the two Apostates, may shortly expect the
just reward of perfidious traitors.

-- Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
Seldom Revenge, though slow of pace,
Leaves ill foregoing men to trace.
As the Egyptians going after the Israelites, as they passed through the
Red Sea, could not but behold their death before them: So these men in lifting
up their hands against this State, may see (if they were not stupid and
senseless) they are dead man, and that God will put them to shame, and
confound them for ever.

3. What men (unless given over to a reprobate sense) would not plainly
apprehend, that the Lord has a quarrel against them, hates their persons,
their course and cause; to consider the time, when they were scattered: namely,
when they were grown into a numerous body, by uniting the false Scots, and
Renegado English, with the Irish. When all Munster was theirs, all Connaught
lost, and all Vlster, except Derry, and Lempster, even to Dublin. When all the
English Interest in Ireland was reduced and shut up in those two towns, and
the latter straightly befieged by 19000 men, according to their own accounts.
Then the Lord looked down from beaven (as the Parliament in their Declaration
have piously expressed) the habitation of his holiness, and his glory, and
defeated them; Then he sent forth his wrath and consumed them as stubble or as
chafe before the wind. And here I challenge, all Papists, Royalists, and
Malignants, to produce, if they can, the like example, where and when, Jebovob
Iireh, God was ever so seen in the Mount for them, and appeared even so
miraculously, since the wars began. Who so is wise will observe these things:
But, A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this. As he
that will not go out of darkness cannot see the shining light of the Sun:
So the Papists, unless they come out of Babylon, the kingdom of darkness,
death, and hell, they will not observe, neither indeed can they, the works of
God, though they shine and are as clear as the Sun at noone day.

We may not (upon this occasion) altogether forget our dear Brethren in
Scotland; Now a word is enough to the wise.

1. We understand that this victory is not very welcome to them, and no
marvel, for it tends not to the advancement of their Interest here in
England, and they see, whom they curse, God blesses. It has been their
endeavor a long time, that our Magistrates should persecute Gods people. Their
laws (say they,) are diverse from all people; neither keep they the Kings
laws, therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. And as Haman
prevailed so far with Abasuerus, as there was an Act made and published, that
the Church and people of God should be destroyed; yet afterward by a mighty
hand of providence were preserved and honored; so that Nation (with others)
wrought with our State, that something was don, for the suppressing of many
godly and faithful Christians: insomuch, as they despaired of life, liberty,
safety: but God (who abhorres the bloody man) frustrated their purposes. The
truth is, our Governors have had so much experience, of the fidelity, trust,
and conscientiousnesse of such men, whom they brand for Sectaries, and of many
victories and deliverances under God by them, as they cannot hearken any more
to their Antichristian and bloody counsel: neither will they be brought into a
snare by their general humiliations so often talked of. The Wolf ordinarily
washes his mouth after he has preyed, lest he should be discovered by the
color of his blood: It is worth the noting, when the Scots have aspersed our
Nation, and urged the State to persecution, immediately they cry, a fast, a
fast, as if such innocent blood were wiped off by hypocritical fasting.

2. The modesty and patience of our State, is much to be admired; being so
often provoked and occasioned by the Scots, that they say nothing in relation
to the condition of that people. For otherwise they might soon stop their
mouths, and put them to shame and silence for ever. They cry out against
England, because of Sectaries, as Separatists, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. But
suppose there are such, yet these Independents, are not false, not liars,
dissemblers, flatterers, deceivers, swearers, drunkards, whoremasters, and
irreligious and profane persons, as it is well known who are such, for the
generality and greater part of the Nation. Now is it not better and more for
the safety of a Commonwealth, to have therein, men, known to be faithful,
just, true, upright, religious: then a kind of people who are neither honest
nor godly, neither make conscience of what they do or say?

3. This victory, it may be, will cause our brethren to keep at home, and
meddle no more with us; but leave our State to order their own affairs. An
Ass will not go by a pen or place where she once fell: I know they have not
forgotten the place where they fell: I do not say like Asses: only under
favor I may say, they will show themselves little better, if they come again
into the same place and case.

4. But how comes it to pass, that since this victory, the Scots complain of
great persecution in England: and that their Presbyterian brethren here suffer
exceedingly for the truth. Some children will tear and scratch their Mother in
the face, and then cry, as if they had been beaten or abused; whereas there is
nothing don to them, but only they wronged their Mother. The men for whom the
Scots are now praying, as under sad and heavy sufferings, they revile the
Magistrates, despise their Government, set at naught their lawful and just
commands, and stir up the people to rebellion: and then cry out, Persecution;
ah how their mouths are stopped, they cannot deliver the whole counsel of God,
their forefathers were never under the like Tyrants, etc. Whereas there was
nothing in the world don to them, but only they abused the State.

Before I conclude, a word or two, to that noble Jones, and the victorious
Soldiers with him.

1. There was a law among the Persians, if any man were unmindfull of a
benefit, he might be called to Law, and found so, was punished for it: We are
very sensible of the blessing which the Lord has given us by your hands; we
are thankful to God, mindful of you, and do desire to Improve the mercy in
the best way and manner we can. The Jews use to say, of him that has don any
memorable thing for his Nation; Zicrono libraca; Blessed be his memory: your
memory amongst us is blessed, your names precious, and all well-affected people
love and honor you. Si omnes qui reip: consulunt, cari nobis esse debent:
certe inprimis imperatores, quorum consilijs, virtute, periculis, retinemus and
nostram salutem and imperij dignitatem. Cic. de Orat. lib. 2. If all those that
care and have the charge of the Commonwealth, ought to be dear unto us; then
especially ought our noble Captains, by whose counsel, prowess, and peril,
we maintain the estate and honor of our Country.

2. For the General, employed in that service, it does appear, he has the
parts and qualities of a right Commander. (...). Diodor. Sicul. Captains in
war must look both forward and backward, and every way whence any danger or
advantage is toward. They ought to know when to march, and to fight with
advantage; where to employ horsemen, where shot, and to understand the
advantages of all sorts of grounds; neither to be ignorant of any stratagem of
war. Live. 9. Now in these particulars, and many more, has Jones showed
himself a worthy and gallant Soldier; neither may it be said of him untruly
or unfitly, what is written of C. Caesar, in his actions be was most
considerate, in hazard and danger most resolve, in executions speedy,
oppressing his enemies many times before the coming of the news were heard.
Sueton. in vita Caes. So of Cato, in watchings and labor he went beyond the
common Soldiers. Live. 34. Monstrabat tolerare labores, as Lucan reports of the
younger Cato in that painful march through the deserts of Afric, he by his
patience and example showed what others were to do. As Valerius Corvinus used
no other encouragement to his Soldiers then this; Facta mea non dicta sequi
volo, nec disciplinam sed exemplum a me petere. Live. 7. So has Jones always
encouraged his, saying, they should imitate not his words but his deeds, and
do as they saw him to give them an example.

3. For the rest, whether Officers or private Soldiers: In this victory you
may behold, how wonderfully the Lord has honored you for your fidelity to
your Country: and because you did not, when ye were low, and the enemy at the
highest, forsake the Parliament, or your trust, as others basely did, who since
have seen and felt the revenging hand of God upon them for it. And no doubt,
this great deliverance will not a little encourage you, and the rest of our
English there, to stand firm and fast together against the Irish Rebels, not
only to revenge the Protestant blood, which they have shed in a villainous and
barbarous sort: but also for the safety of your Country, your families,
friends, wives, children, kindred, and what else may be thought precious and
dear to you. For the heads of the Rebels there, as Rupert, Ormond, Inchiqueen,
etc. intend further then our loss of Ireland, they seek the ruin and
overthrow of England, even our persons, estates, yea and our souls too. Dulce
and decorum est pro patrio mori.

It is a sweet and noble Gain,
In Countries quarrel to be slain.
King Leonidas comforted himself and three hundred more of his servants, who
were killed at The^mopilas, fighting for the defense of his Country, as
appears by Simonides his Greek Epitaph, turned into Latin by Tully, thus.

Dic hospes Spartae, nos te hic vidisse jacentes,
Dum sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur.
Lastly, to close this Discourse: As we have showed how this Mercy should be
improved at home, so we hope our Army there, will use this victory to purpose,
and be careful still to maintain that which they win. Vincere scis Annibal,
victoria uti nescis; as Maberbal said to Hannibal, he was not so well able to
make use of his victories, as to obtain them. Caesar having obtained a great
victory against the Helvetians, ceased not to pursue the remainder so long,
until all yielded. And afterward having foiled Vereingetorix in the field, and
caused him to retire with the rest of his Army, He did not leave him until be
bad forced him to take Alexia for his defense: nor then neither, until such
time he had the town, and all within yielded to his mercy. Vanquishing Pompey
in open field, he would not suffer him to take Sanctuary in his camp, but
drove him thence, and rested not, until he had taken his flight, nor before
the relics of his Army that fled to the hills near by, had yielded, being cut
from water. Three things ought to be don when an Army is victorious. 1. Not to
suffer the enemy to gather head, but to scatter his forces. 2. To befiege the
chief City, and to ceaze the Country into their hands, not suffering the
enemy in any place to rest. 3. The Generals care ought to be, how to take off
the enemies subjects from them, and to deprive them of the aid of their
Confederates. A matter easily don, if he proceed wisely in war and justly
after the victory. For as good success procures the Conqueror friends: so
men are ready to abandon and forsake such as are overcome. Now for the good
will of him that dwelt in the Bush, let the blessing be upon the head of our
Army.

FINIS.

