A CAUTION AGAINST SACRILEGE: OR,SUNDRY QUERIES CONCERNING TITHES.

Wherein is held forth The Propriety, and Title that Ministers have to them,
The mischiefs which would ensue if Tithes were brought into a common Treasury,
and Ministers reduced to Stipends. The danger of gratifying the Petitioners
against Tithes, and all imposed Maintenance. And something of the Spirit and
end of their Actings.

Collected, and composed by One that has no Propriety in Tithes, and humbly
tendered to this present Parliament.

ROMANS 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

LONDON,Printed by Abraham Millerfor Thomas Vnderhillat the Anchor and Bible in
PaulsChurch yard, near the little North door, 1659.

CERTAIN QUERIES Concerning the PROPRIETY and RIGHT OF The Ministry of England
TO TITHES.
1. WHether the Ministry of England has not as good a Propriety in Tithes, as
Noblemen, Gentlemen and Freeholders have in their Lands? The Reasons of this
Query are,

1. Because Ethelwolph son of King Egbert (who had brought the Saxon.
Heptarchy into a Monarchy) had all the Lands in England for his Demesne, as is
acknowledged See S. Hen. S^e^mans Counc^ls anno. 855.
by Sr Edward Cook in his Commentaries upon Littletons Tenures, and conferred
the Tithes of all the Kingdom upon the Church, by his Royal Chartar dated Anno
855. in these words, King Ethelwolph, by the consent of his Prelates and
Princes which ruled in England under him in their several Provinces, did enri^h
the Church of England with the Tithes of all his Lands and Goods by his Charter
Royal, etc. Adding in the end, That who so should increase the Gift, God would
please to prosper, and increase his days: But if any should presume to
diminish the same, that he should be called to an account for it at Gods
Judgment Seat, etc. And this he did, not only as Lord Paramount, but as
Proprietary of the whole Land, the Lords and great men at that time having no
property or estates of permanency, but as accountants to the King, whose the
whole Land was, and yet they also gave their free consents, which the King
required that thereby they might be barred from pleading any Tenant-right; as
also to oblige them to stand in maintenance of Tithes against all pretenders.

2. Because the people can have no Right, or Propriety in them; for they never
bought or paid for them: Neither could they come by Inheritance; For that which
was not their forefathers could not descend to them: Neither came they to them
by Donation, which they can never show.

2. Whether it be agreeable to Piety, Prudence, Justice, and Equity to alienate
Tithes from the Ministry, which have been so freely given by our own Christian
Kings out of zeal to advance Gods glory, confirmed by many Acts of Parliament,
oft-times renewed, and reitered, as by Magna Charta thirty times confirmed, and
many other Statutes since, yea by the Text, and Body of the Common Law, which
affirms Tithes to be due Jure Divino, as Sr Edw. Cook testifies in the second
part of his Reports.

3. Whether the inconveniences and evils can possibly be foreseen, which will
ensue upon the alteration of such fundamental Laws of this Nation, as have
continued in force through all changes for above a thousand years together?

Tithes have been given to the Church for maintenance of Gods Word and
Ministers, with a curse to all such as should alienate them.

4. Whether it is agreeable to Piety and Prudence, to pull them from God, to
rend them from his Church, to violate the dedication of our Fathers, the Oaths
of our Ancestors, the Decrees of so many Parliaments, and to expose our selves
to those horrible curses which the body of the Nation has obliged it self to,
in case they consented to the alienation of the same? as N^hem 10. 32, etc.

5. Whether it be not more then probable that the Ministry has had a propriety
in the Tithes in all Christian Churches, ever since Christians had a propriety
in their estates; since Origin, and Tertullian, who lived not much above two
hundred Orig. Hom. Han Number. Cypr. epist. 66.
years after Christ, tell us, That the community amongst Christians was not
wholly ceased in their time, and yet where it was, the Tithes were paid?

6. Whether it be not Sacrilege to alienate Tithes from the Church, having
been dedicated and consecrated unto God, either by the voluntary consent of
Churches, or by Donation of Princes? Seeing what is voluntarily consecrated by
man, is confirmed by God, and may not be alienated, Lev. 28. 14, etc. which Law
is the same under the Gospel, as appears in the example of Annanias, Act. 5. 3.
whom Peter arraignes, and God condemns, for this very Sacrilege. Why have thou
(said Peter) kept back part of the price of the Land? Whilst it remained (viz.
unsold) was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? viz. to have consecrated, or not consecrated it, verse. 5. And Annanias
hearing these words, fell down and gave up the ghost.

7. Whether it is not against the light of Nature, and custom of all Nations,
to disannull the Will of the dead? Gal. 3. 5. Brethren, I speak after the
manner of men, though it be but a man's Covenant (or Testament) yet if it be
confirmed (viz. by the death of the Testator) no man dissanulleth it, i. e. no
man ought to disanull it. Therefore Tithes having been given by Testament,
confirmed by the death of the Testators, Is it not against the light of Nature,
and custom of all Nations to alienate them? Heb. 9. 16, 17. For a Testament is
of force after men are dead.

8. Many Impropriations having been restored to the Church by godly Noblemen,
and Gentlemen, and others having been bought in and settled in the most legal
way that could be devised upon the Ministry; Is it not against all Justice and
Equity to take them from the Church again? and will it not discourage all men
for the future from works of Piety and Charity when they see them thus
perverted?

9. Whether it be not more then probable that there was a positive Precept
given by God to the Fathers for the giving to him the tenth part of their
substance, as he had formerly required the seventh part of their time? And
whether do not the examples of Abraham and Jacob so readily giving their tenth,
evince this; Or without such a Precept, Had it not been will worship in them?
And do not such positive Precepts (if unrepealed) bind all to the end of the
world? as we see in the case of the Sabbath.

10. Whether Tithes, as an honoring of God, be not enjoined in the first
Commandment? As they tend to preserve the public worship of God, in the second
and fourth Commandment? And as maintenance to the persons of Ministers, in the
fifth Commandment? being part of the honor due to spiritual Parents.

11. Whether Tithes can be called Antichristian, which were paid long before
Antichrists time? And when Antichrist [the Popes of Rome] were the first that
durst take upon them to alienate them from the Church, by granting Exemptions,
Appropriations, etc. thereby robbing the Church and Parish Ministers, to
gratify the This also is justified by Bellarm. de clericis, l. 1. c. 25.
Monks and Friars? And whether Alexander of Hales and Thomas of Aquin. (who
lived about four hundred years ago) were not the first that pleaded for these
alienations made by the Pope? And whether they were not the first that to
justify the Popes Proceedings, pleaded that Tithes were Jewish?

12 Whether these Scriptures do not concern Christians, as well as they did the
Jews? Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine. Prove. 20. 25. It is a snare to devour
that which is holy, and after the vow to make enquiry. Prove. 23. 10, 11. Remove
not the old Landmark, and enter not into the field of the fatherless: For
their Redeemer is mighty, and he shall plead their cause with thee. And Sr Edw.
Cook says in his Institutes, Our Law Books teach us, that Instit. 2. c. ^.
the Church is ever understood to be under age, and to be a Pupil and
Fatherless: and that it is not agreeable to Law or Right that such should be
dis-inherited. Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10, etc. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed
me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and in Offerings. Ye are
accursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye
all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and
prove me now therewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the
windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it: And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her
fruit before the time in the field, says the Lord of Hosts: And all Nations
shall call you blessed: And ye shall be a delightsome Land, says the Lord of
Hosts.

13. Whether those Texts in the New Testament do not prove, that to
Gospel Ministers belongs as large, if not larger maintenance than to the
Levitical Priesthood, as their Ministry is more excellent, and the blessings
conferred thereby are greater. Luke 10. 7. The labourer is worthy of his hire.
1 Cor. 9. 4. Have we not power 2 Cor. 3. 6, etc.
to eat and to drink? ver. 6, etc. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to
forbear Working? Who goes to warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth
a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or says not
the Law the same? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzle
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Or
says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt it is written:
that he that ploweth should plow in hope: and that he that thresheth in hope
should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, Is
it a great thing if we shall reap your carnalthings. Ver. 13, 14. Do ye not
know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are made partakers with the Altar?
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to
him that teaches in all good things. Phil. 4. 17. Not that I desire a gift,
but I desire fruit that may abound to your account. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the
Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the World and Doctrine. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzle
the Ox that treads out the corn: And the labourer is worthy of his reward.

14. Whether to speak of a sufficient maintenance without Tithes, be not a mere
fancy, that never was, nor (as I believe) ever will be brought into action? And
whether it would not trouble the wisest men that are, to name a stipend that
would be sufficient at all times, as Tithes are; which proceeding from the
wisdom of God, cannot be matched, much less betterd by man's wisdom?

15. Whether be not Tithes the fitrest maintenance for the Ministry, seeing
hereby they partake with the people in times of plenty, which will more enlarge
their hearts in thankfulness; and suffer with them in times of scarcity, which
will more affect them with sense of Gods judgments? for that when natural
affections concur with spiritual, they are more active and vigorous.

16. Whether the practice of the Heathens, which used to give a Tenth to their
gods, will not rise up in judgment against Christians, if they rob God of the
Tenth which their Predecessors have given to him?

17. Whether the judgment of so many eminent Divines as have held it Sacriledg
to alienate that from the Church which was once consecrated to God, should not
lay a restraint upon all men from practicing that which is so hazardous and
scandalous? That it is Sacrilege, is the judgment of Calvin, Polanus,
Kickerman, Perkins, with many others.

18. Whether all or most of the Arguments bent against the morality of Tithes,
do not equally militate against the morality of the Sabbath? as Dr Sclater has
showed in his parallel in the end of his book of Tithes.

Certain Queries concerning bringing Tithes into a Common Treasury, and
reducing Ministers to stipends.
1. IF Tithes should be brought into a common Treasury, and Ministers paid out
thence, whether would our Contrymen that say Tithes are such an intolerable
burden, be any whit eased? Yea would they not be more burdened by how much
their Tything would be looked more narrowly into?

2. Would not the trouble of Ministers be far greater, being enforced to send,
or go from Market to Market for every bushel of Corn or Malt, etc. that he
spends in his house?

3. If a dearth come, would it not tend to the ruin of many Ministers
Families, who will be for ced to spend more in a quarter then they receive for
their half years allowance?

4. If things should rise in the price the next hundred of years as they have
done the last, how shall Ministers be then able to live upon these stipends?

5. How many Officers must there be employed in every County to bring the
Tithes into a common Treasury, all which, either in whole or in part, must be
maintained out of them? And how will this curtail the Ministers share?

6. What attendance must Ministers give quarterly, or each half year, upon the
Trustees, or Treasurers in every County, till they have list or leisure to pay
them? What trouble, journeys and expenses will this put them to? How will they
be enforced to bribe, and pay for expedition, or to be fobbe^ off with base and
clipped money? or be forced to take wares for their money, if the Treasurers be
Tradesmen; as many have been served of late in the case of Augmentations?

7. Will not Ministers hereby be cast upon ten^ations, to speak only pleasing
things (like Trencher-Chaplains) lest their stipends should be taken from them?

8. Can it be expected that Ministers can or will be so liberal to the poor,
and given to hospitality, when they buy all with the penny, as when they have it
in Tithes?

9. Will not such as bear the bag, and upon whom the Ministers must depend for
their subsistence, Lord it over them with pride and contempt enough? as bad, or
worse then the Bishops and their Chancellors did?

10. Though such as are of the best repute in each County, should be chosen out
to be the Treasurers, yet do we not see by daily experience, how men are
mistaken in judging of the honesty of others? And how many men fall from their
former principles of honesty? and that if neither of these should be so, yet
how apt standing waters are to putrify.

11. If contentious suits have been between Ministers and People about Tithes,
has it not for the most part arisen from the peoples covetousness, pretending
customs, prescriptions, or compositions, to defraud the Ministers of their due?

12. Were not Patrons at the first made choice of, to defend the Ministers
right against the fraud and injustice of the people? And may not the wisdom of
the Parliament find out the same, or some such like course, whereby the
Minister shall neither be engaged in contentions with his people, nor troubled
with avocations from his study thereby?

13. May there not arise as many or more quarrels, in case Tithes be brought
into a common Treasury, whilst some pretend conscience, and so will pay none
at all; others think themselves over-rated; others think that the Tradesman,
who gets more by his Shop than they do by the Plough, should bear an equal
share in this common burden? And who then shall take course to enforce such to
pay? If the Treasurers in the Country, surely they will prove but cold
Solicitors in another cause. But suppose they do stir, they must spend out of
the common stock; and such suits being like to be many, especially in such
times as these, how will the Ministers stipends be curtailed thereby? Besides,
may it not be supposed, that they which spend of other men's purses, are like to
cut large thougs out of others hides?

14. If the Countryman shall pay a rate in money for his Tithes, will it not
come far more hardly from him? even like drops of blood, money being usally
very short with them. And will he not think it far easier to part with a cock
of Hay, or a sheaf of Corn, or such a small thing, than to part with so much
money as his whole Tithes may come to, once or oftener in the year? And how
little will he think himself eased hereby?

15. If Tithes be brought into a common Treasury, when a Living is worth two,
three, or perhaps four hundred pounds by the year, a great part of it will be
disposed to other places, and will it not certainly be a great grief to the
people, that their Tithes shall go to they know not whom? certainly to such as
neither feed their souls with the bread of life, nor their bodies with the
staff of bread? And will not their poor want that relief, and themselves that
entertainment, which they used to have at their Ministers house, to the
aggravation of their discontent?

Certain Queries concerning our late Petitioners against Tithes, and an imposed
Maintenance.
1. Whether have we not cause to suspect, that those persons which petition
against Tithes and an imposed Maintenance, are acted by Jesuits, who cunningly
creep in amongst them, seeking hereby to overthrow the English Ministry, which
has so strongly opposed them, both by word of mouth and wri^ings? And the
rather, because of that Scottish Jesuit, who lately turned Anabaptist, and
upon examination at Newcastle confessed that he was sent over for that end. And
I have good information that there are lately come over 100. Jesuits that have
their frequent meeting in London to drive on this design.
Osterweeke a great Agitator, went here under another name, who in his Romish
Pontificalibus did lately officiate at the Mass publicly in Dunkirk, as the
Printer hereof can prove; besides some other like examples which might be
easily produced.

2. Whether can such Petitioners be rightly styled the godly and well-affected
of the Nation, who strive hereby to bting the greatest judgment upon the
Nation that ever did, or can possibly befall it? viz. A samine of the word,
Amos 8. 11, etc. And the removing of our Teachers into corners, Isa. 30. 20.

3. Whether have we not cause to belieye, that the far greatest part of the
Gentry, Yeomandry and Commons of the Land that have Tithes to pay, are desirous
to have them continued to the Ministry: seeing so many thousands of them out of
a few Counties, have formerly petitioned for the same, and the City of London
of late. And no doubt but many thousands more out of every County would do the
like, if they had the least encouragement thereunto.

4. Whether if Tithes were wholly taken away, would the generality of the
people be at all eased, seeing both Purchasers and Tenants must pay so much the
more for their Land?

5. Whether can we imagine that the Parliament, that has so often and lately
declared to the world, That they will be exceeding tender of every ones Liberty
and Property, will now so soon after, take away the Propriety of all the
Ministry of England at one blow, to the ruin of so many thousand Families for
the present; to the discouragement of Parents from bringing up their Children
to the Work of the Ministry for time to come, and so to the endangering of the
removal of the Gospel from amongst us.

6. Whether would not these Petitioners (if Tithes were removed) cry out and
complain as much of the tyrannical oppression and burden of Rents, as the
Anabaptists in Germany did, and so never be quiet till they have levelled all
things?

7. Whether all persons, whose eyes are open, do not clearly see, that the
actings and motions of many persons of all ranks, does demonstrate that the
Jesuits Rules for reducing England to Popery are prosecuting? See the Jesuits
^irections translated in Baxters Preface to his Holy Commonwealth: and also the
Preface to Dailles Apology for the Reformed Churches, by Thomas Smith, Printed
at Cambridge, 1653.
And whether it be not the duty of all worthy Patriots, especially the
Honorable Members of the Parliament, to oppose such a damnable design with
their Wisdom and Power? And all the godly Party of the Land to stand in the
gap, by improving their Interest in Heaven, for the stopping of Popery, and the
upholding the Gospel Ministry?

-- Si non prosunt singula, mult a juvant. FINIS.

