A FVLL ANSWER TO AN INFAMOUS AND TRAITEROUS PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, A Declaration
of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, expressing their Reasons and
Grounds of passing the late Resolutions touching no further Address or
Application to be made to the KING.

MICAH 3. 11. The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach
for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon
the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.

Printed for R. ROYSTON. 1648.

THE CONTENTS
THe Authors Method. page 2. Their several Charges against the KING. ib. 1.
That His Majesty has laid a fit foundation for all Tyranny, by this Maxim, or
Principle; That He owes an account of His actions to none, but God alone; and,
That the Houses of Parliament, joint or separate, have no power, either to
make, or declare any Law. p. 3. 2. The private Articles agreed in order to the
Match with Spain, and those other private Articles upon the French marriage,
etc. p. 12 3. The Death of King James. ib. 4. The business of Rochel. p. 17.
5. The Design of the German Horse, Loanes, Privy-Seales, Coat and
Conduct-mony, Ship-mony, and the many Monopolies. p. 19. 6. The torture of our
bodies by whipping, cutting off ears, pillories, etc. with close-imprisonment
aggravated, with the dominion exercised over our souls by Oaths,
Excommunications, new Canons, etc. p. 24. 7. The long intermission of
Parliaments; and, at the dissolution of some, how Privileges have been broken,
and some Members imprisoned. p. 26. 8. The new Liturgy, and Canons, sent into
Scotland; And the cancelling, and burning the Articles of Pacification. p. 27.
9. The calling, and dissolving the short Parliament, and the Kings proceeding
after the dissolution thereof. p. 28. 10. The King summoned the present
Parliament to have assistance against the Scots: And when He found that hope
vain, He was so passionately affected to His Malignant Counselors, that He
would rather desert His Parliament and Kingdom, then deliver them to Law and
Justice. p. 29. 11. The Queens design to advance Popery, and Her observing a
Popish Fast: with Secretary Windebank's going beyond Sea by His Majesty's Pass
after he was questioned. p. 30. 12. Commissions given to Popish Agents for
private Leavies. p. 31. 13. The bringing up the Northern Army to overawe the
Parliament. ib. 14. Offers made to the Scots of the plunder of London, if they
would advance; or of 4 Northern Counties, with three hundred thousand pounds,
but to stand Neuters. p. 36. 15. The business of Ireland. p. 38. 16. The
unusual preparation of Ammunition, and Arms, (upon the Kings return from
Scotland) with new Guards within, and about Whitehall; the Fireworks taken and
found in Papists houses; the Tower filled with new Guards, Grenades, and all
sorts of Fireworks, Morters, and great Pieces of Battery; the displacing Sir
William Balfore, and placing other Officers, who were suspected by them and the
whole City. p. 58. 17. The Charge of Treason against some of both Houses, and
the Kings going so attended to the House of Commons. p. 62. 18. A Parallel
between the Kings proceedings against the 5, and the Armies against 11 Members.
p. 67. 19. Commissions granted to the E. of Newcastle, and Colonel Leg, for
attempting Newcastle, and Hull: And their intelligence of forain Forces from
Denmark. p. 72. 20. The Queens going into Holland, and her carrying away, and
pawning the anncient Jewels of the Crown. p. 76. 21. When they first took up
Arms against the King. ib. 22. Breach of Honor, and faith in the King for
making so many solemn Protestations, against any thought of bringing up the
Northern Army, or of Levying Forces to wage war with His Parliament, or of
bringing in forain Forces, or Aids, from beyond Sea. p. 79. 23. They have not
observed their Professions made to the King, nor kept their promises to the
People. p. 95. 96. 24. That His Majesty proclaimed them Traitors and Rebels,
setting up His Standard against the Parliament, which never any King of England
did before Himself. p. 97. 25. The setting up a Mock-Parliament at Oxford, to
oppose and protest against the Parliament of England. p. 102. 26. A full
Relation of the first Tumults. p. 107. 27. The Pacification and peace in
Ireland. p. 113. The King's several Messages, and their Propositions, and
Addresses, for peace. p. 118. Their 4 Bills presented to His Majesty at
Carisbrook-Castle. p. 132. The Commons Resolutions of making no more Addresses
to the King. p. 148. The Conclusion: Demonstrating, That they can never
establish a Peace to the Kingdom, or any security to themselves, but by
Restoring the just Power to the KING, and dutifully submitting and joining
themselves to His protection. p. 156.
An ANSWER to an infamous and traiterous Pamphlet, entitled, [A DECLARATION of
the Commons of England, in Parliament, expressing their reasons and grounds of
passing the late Resolutions, touching no further address or application to be
made to the KING.]
IF the nature and minds of men were not more inclined to error and vice, then
they are to truth and virtue, and their memories more retentive of the
Arguments and evidence, which is administered to pervert, then of those applied
to reclaim them, there would be little need of composing any Answer to this
seditious and traiterous Declaration, which consists only of the several
infamous and scandalous imputations and reproaches (except the odious and
groundless discourse of the death of King James, which though they have
always whispered, they never thought fit to own till now) which have been
thrown and scattered against the King throughout their Declarations and
Remonstrances, and is but the same Calumny and Treason, bound up in a lesser
Volume; to every particular whereof His Majesty (whilst he was at liberty to
speak for himself, and to take the pains to undeceive and inform his people)
gave full and clear answers, in His several Declarations and Expresses, so
that from thence all men may gather the most natural and proper Antidotes, to
expel this poison, the spirit and malignity whereof, (it is hoped) is so near
spent, by the stalenesse and palpable unskilfulnesse, as well as malice, of the
Composition, that it will neither be received by, or work upon any healthful
Constitutions; yet it will not be amiss, for the information of those, who (it
may be) have not taken the pains to read the KING's former Answers and
Declarations; and refreshing the memory of others, who have forgotten what they
have read, to collect the Answers formerly given to those particulars, with
which His Majesty is now charged, and to add to those Answers, what the
knowledge and observation of most men who have been faithful inquirers into
past Actions, with that integrity and duty that becomes Subjects, may supply
them with; For which there will need no great Apology, since every honest man
has a more regular and legal qualification, to vindicate His Majesty from
those foul aspersions, then any Combination, or Congregation of men, can have
to traduce Him with them.

Before any discourse be applied to the monstrous Conclusions, which are made,
and for the support and maintenance whereof, that Declaration is framed and
contrived, or to the unreasonable glosses upon His Majesty's Propositions, and
prosecution of his desires of peace and Treaty, it will be the best method, to
weigh and consider those particulars, upon which they would be thought to found
their desperate Conclusions, and in which they say, there is a continued tract
of breach of trust in the three Page 11.
Kingdoms since His Majesty wore the Crown.

1. The first Charge is, that His Majesty in public Speeches and
Declarations, has laid a fit foundation for all Tyranny, by this most
destructive Maxim or Principle, which he says, he must avow, That He owes an
account Page 12.
of His Actions to none, but God alone; and that the Houses of Parliament,
joint or separate, have no power, either to make or declare any Law.

That which all learned Christians in all ages have taught, and all learned
Lawyers of this Kingdom have always held, and acknowledged, is not like to be
a destructive principle, and a fit foundation for Tyranny; and surely this
assertion of His Majesty's has no less authority; For the first, the
incomparable Grotius, upon whom all learned men look with singular reverence,
says, that even Samuel jus Regum describens, satis ostendit adversus De jur:
bell: fol. 64.
Regis injurias nullam in populo relictam potestatem; which, says he, recte
colligunt veteres ex illo Psalmi; Tibi soli peccavi: Because being all, ejusaem
ordinis, the people owe the same obedience to these, as they did to those,
though the absolute power and jurisdiction the Kings of Israel had, be no rule
for other Princes to claim by: And Grotius there cites Saint Ambrose his note
upon the same Text, Neque ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus, tuti imperii
potestate, homini ergo non peccavit, cui non tenebatur obnoxious.

The wise and learned Lord Chancellor Egerton, in his Postnat. p. 107.
Argument of the Postnati, mentions some Texts in the Civil Law, of the great
and absolute power of Princes, as Rex est lex loquens, and Rex solus judicat de
causa a jure non definita, and says, he must not wrong the Judges of the
Common Law of the Kingdom, so much as to suffer an imputation to be cast upon
them, that they or the Common Law do not attribute, as great power and
authority to their Sovereigns the Kings of England, as the Canon Laws did to
their Emperors; and then cites out of Bracton, (the Chief Justice in the time
of King Hen. 3. and an authentic Author in the Law) these words, De Chartis
Regiis and factis Regum non debent nec possunt Justitiarii, nec privatae
personae disputare, nec etiam si in illa dubitio oriatur, possunt eam
interpretari, and in dubiis and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contineat
intellectus, Domini Regis erit expectanda interpretatio and voluntas: and the
same Bracton in another place says of the King, Omnis sub eo est, and ipse sub
nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo.

The ground of that excellent law of Praemunire in the 16 Rich. 2. c. 5.
16 year of King Rich: 2. c. 5. and the very words of that Statute are, That
the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in no
earthly Subjection, but immediately subject to God in all things, touching the
Regality of the same Crown, and to none other; and upon that Maxim of the
Law, that good Statute against the Pope, was founded.

If the King were bound to give an Account of his Actions to any person or
power whatsoever (God excepted) he could not be the only supreme Governor of
this 1 Eliz. c. 1.
Realm, which he is declared and acknowledged to be by the Oath of Supremacy,
which every Member of the House of Commons has taken; or if he has not, he
ought not to sit there, or to be reputed a Member of Parliament by the Statute
of 5 Eliz. c. 1.

For the other part of this most destructive maxim or principle, That the
Houses of Parliament, joint or separate, have no power either to make or
declare any thing to be Law, which has not been formerly made to be so: It
has been the judgment and language of the law it self in all Ages, and the
language of all Parliaments themselves.

It was the judgment of the Parliament in the 2 year of King Hen. 5. (remembered
and mentioned by the King, in his Answer to the 19 Propositions) That it is of
the Kings regality to grant or deny such of their Petitions as pleases
himself, which was the form then usual to present those desires, which by the
Kings approbation and consent were enacted into Laws.

It was the language of the Law in the 36 year of K. H. 6. Dyer, fol. 60. pl.
19.
reported by my Lord Dyer, that the King is the head, and that the Lords are
chief and principal Members, and the Commons, to wit, the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, the inferior Members, and that they all make the Body of
Parliament: and doubtless the Privilege of Parliament was not in that time
held so sacred a thing, when an Action of Debt was brought against the Sheriff
of Cornwall for having discharged one Trewynnard, a Burgess of Parliament,
taken in Execution during the Session of Parliament upon a Writ of privilege
directed to the said Sheriff, and the Kings Bench (where the Action was
brought, and the Sheriff justified) was in those days the proper place to
judge what was the privilege of Parliament, the Law being the most proper
Judge of that privilege, as well as of all other rights.

It is the language of the Author of Modus tenendi Parliamentum, who lived
before the time of William the Conqueror, and it is the language of Sir Edw.
Coke in the 4 part. Instis. p. 25.
Chapter of the high Court of Parliament, which was published by a special
Order of the House of Commons since the beginning of this Parliament, that
there is no Act of Parliament but must have the consent of the Lords, the
Commons, and the royal assent of the King: and the same Sir Edward Coke says,
in the 11. p. of that Chapter, that Innovations and Novelties in Parliamentary
proceedings are most dangerous, and to be refused.

It is the language of the Parliament in the 1 year of 1 Iac. c. 1.
King James, when to the first Act that was past, they desired His Majesty's
royal assent, without which (they say) it can neither be complete or perfect,
nor remain to all posterity, etc.

Lastly, it is the language of this present Parliament, and Exact Collect. p
207.
in a time in which they were not very modest in their pretenses, for in their
Declaration of the 19 of May, they acknowledge, that by the constitution of
this Kingdom, the power is in His Majesty and Parliament together, albeit they
conclude in the same Declaration, that if He refused to join with them, they
will do their work themselves without Him.

There is no one Proposition that has more misled men, then the discourse of
the Parliaments being the supreme Court of Judicature, and therefore that they
have the sole power to declare Law; It is confessed, that the House of Peers in
Parliament (for any pretense of the House of Commons to judicature is
groundless, and unreasonable, and unheard of, till within these last seven
years) is the supreme Court of Judicature, whither any person that conceives
himself oppressed by the judgment of any other Court, may by writ of Error
remove that judgment, of which he Complains, and from the Sentence of that
Court there is no Appeal; which His Majesty well expressed in His Answer to
that Declaration of the 19 of May, in these words, We deny not, but they may
Exact Collect. p. 251.
have a power to declare in a particular doubtful case regularly brought
before them what Law is, but to make a general Declaration, whereby the known
rule of the Law may be crossed or altered, they have no power, nor can exercise
any without bringing the Life and Liberty of the Subject to a lawless and
arbitrary subjection: Which assertion the too sad experience of all men has
evinced to be most reasonable. The truth is, that power of declaring in a
particular case so brought before them, is rather a power to declare what shall
be done in that case, then what the law is; for if they reverse a judgment
brought before them, and determine the right otherwise, then it has been
judged by the sworn Judges, that judgment is no rule to the sworn Judges to
judge by, but they may in the like case without imputation of Crime or error,
judge as they did formerly; which shows that the Judges are the only
Interpreters of the Law, in their several Courts, though in these cases,
removed regularly before the Lords, the party must acquiesce, there being no
other Court to appeal to.

Add to this, that there has been in all times, that reverence to the sworn
Judges of the Law, that the Lords in Parliament have always guided themselves
by their opinion in matters of law; neither will it be ever found before this
Parliament, that the House of Peers ever declared or judged the law in any
particular case against the unanimous opinion of the Judges, who are assistants
only for that purpose; neither is it reason that any should be thought fit
Interpreters or Declarers of the law, but they who have studied it, and are
sworn to do it truly. And to this point, though there are multitude of
examples and Presidents, there shall be one only remembered: In the Parliament
in the 28 year of Hen. 6. upon the 16 of January, the Commons desired, That
William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk should be Committed to prison for many
Treasons and other heinous Crimes committed by him; The Lords in Parliament
were in doubt, what Answer to give, they demanded the opinion of the Judges,
their opinion was, that he ought not to be Committed; And the reason was, for
that the Commons did not charge him with any particular Offense, but with
general Slanders and Reproaches; And therefore because the specialties were
not showed, he was not to be Committed: this opinion was allowed, and the Duke
was not Committed, till a Fortnight after that the Commons had exhibited
special Articles against him, that he conspired with the French King, to
invade the Realm, etc. And then he was sent to the Tower: So great respect did
those times bear to the Judges of the Law, and so much courage had the Judges
then to declare what the Law was.

Having now made it manifest, that this most destructive maxim or principle,
is no new position, but agreeable to antiquity, Conscience, truth, and Law, and
therefore not like to be a fit foundation for all Tyranny; It will not be
unseasonable, to observe that these words were spoken by His Majesty at the
first Session of Parliament in the 3 year of his Reign, and that though the
matter of them has been often since, and must be always averred by him; the
very words have not been used in Speech or Declaration by His Majesty since the
beginning of this Parliament, and that that very Parliament continued many
Months after, and never in the least degree made question of them, nor has any
objection been made to them, till this new Declaration of the Commons, near 18
years after, and therefore it is not probable, that they have been before
mis-interpreted or censured.

It may be likewise in this place fit to inform the people, what these men
mean by the power of Declaring Law, which they are so ambitious of; that they
may know how little else they would need to destroy King and people, if they
were possessed of this power, in the sense they intend; which will best appear
by the instances in which they have assumed it.

The King proclaims Sir John Hotham guilty of high Treason, for having shut
the Gates of Hull, and having made resistance with armed men in defiance of His
Majesty, which he says is high Treason by the Statute of the 25 Exact Collect.
p. 276, 277.
year of Edw. 3. c. 2. They declare that Sir John Hotham did not shut the Gates
against Him in defiance, but in obedience to His Majesty, and that the meaning
of that Statute is only against those, who levied War against the Kings laws
and authority; that the Kings Authority is only in them; and they only can
judge of the laws; and therefore that they who shall levy War by their
authority, (though against the personal Commands of the King, and accompanied
with his presence) incur no danger by that Statute: And that they who did
attend His Person against them, are guilty of Treason within that Statute.

The King for the information of his Subjects, remembers them of the Statute
made in the 11 year of K. Hen. 7. cap. 1. by which it is enacted, That no
manner of person, whosoever he be, that attends upon the King and Sovereign
Lord of this Land for the time being in His Person, and do Him true and
faithful service of allegiance in the same, or be in other places by His
Commandment in His Wars, shall be convict or attaint of high Treason, nor lose
Lands, Goods, etc. They declare that by the King, in this Statute, Exact
Collect. p. 280.
is meant the Parliament. If they are told the King is Supreme head and
Governor over all persons within His Dominions, and that He is so acknowledged
to be by the Oaths themselves have taken, They presently declare, Exact
Collect. p. 703.
that it is meant of singular persons rather then of Courts, or of the
collective body of the whole Kingdom: Examples innumerable of this kind might
be remembered, and the consequence needs not be pressed.

That the absurdity may a little appear, as well as the mischief, they apply
this faculty of declaring to the satisfying their Curiosity, and supporting
their Credit, to matter of right, and matter of fact, or to any purpose that
may advance their Designs: They intercept a Letter directed to the Queens
Majesty from the Lord Digby before the War began, and declare it would be
dishonorable Ex. Col. p. 82.
to His Majesty and dangerous for the Kingdom, if it should not be opened; and
thereupon with unheard of presumption, they open and peruse the Letter, Her
Majesty being within a days journey of them: And when the King caused Sir John
Hotham's Letters to be opened, which were intercepted after he was in
Rebellion, They declare, that it was a high breach of Privilege, which by Ex.
Col. p. 156.
the Laws of the Kingdom, and by the Protestation we are bound to defend with
our lives and fortune.

One Master Booth, a Gentleman of quality of Lincolnshire, delivered a Petition
to the King at York, in which he complained of certain Gentlemen, who as
Deputy Lieutenants, had put the Ordinance for the Militia in execution in that
County; and set forth in his Petition several Actions done and words spoken by
them at that time, and both himself and one Master Scroope made affidavit
before a Master of the Chancery, that the Information in the Petition was
punctually and precisely true; which Petition and Oath being printed, the House
of Commons frankly declared, That it was false; Not to Ex. Col. p. 481.
speak of their declaring that the Kings coming to the House of Commons was a
traiterous design against the King and Parliament; and that His Proclamation
which Ex. Col. p. 40.
He published for the apprehension of those Members, was false; So that this
sole power of declaring, would not stand in need of any other power to subvert
the whole frame of Government, and so dispose of the entire rights of Prince
and People according to the variety of their appetites and humor; For they
say, as some presidents Ex. Col. p. 26^.
of their Predecessors ought not to be rules for them to follow, so none can
be limits to bound their proceedings.

And in truth the inconstancy and contradiction in their rules and resolutions
is no less observable then the other extravagancy; In their Petition of the 14
of December. 1641. they declared, that the King ought not to manifest or declare
His consent, or dissent, approbation or dislike of any Bill in preparation or
debate, before it be presented to Him in due course of Parliament; yet within
few days after, in the Petition that accompanied the Remonstrance of the State
of the Kingdom, they desired His Majesty that He would concur with them, for
the depriving the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament, the Bill for that
purpose being still depending in the Lords House, and then not like to pass.

By the Order of the 3 of January 1641. and many Declarations after, they
declared, that if any Person whatsoever, shall offer to Arrest or detain the
Person of any Member without first acquainting the House, that it is lawful
for him to stand upon his defense and make resistance, and for any other Person
to assist him in so doing; but in their Declaration of the 2 of November
following, they deny that Ex. Col. p. 727.
they had said so, and acknowledged that a Member in the cases of Treason,
Felony, or the Peace, may be Arrested and detained in ordine to his appearance
before the Parliament.

There would be no end of these instances, not to speak of those, where the
House of Peers have declared the Law one way, and the Commons an other, as in
the Order of the 9 of September.

2. The next Charge is, the private Articles agreed Page 12.
in order to the Match with Spain, and those other private Articles upon the
French Marriage, so prejudicial to the Peace, Safety, Laws, etc.

What those private Articles were, or are, is not expressed, which doubtless
would have been, if a reasonable advantage might have been hoped from it; all
those Papers being seized and perused by those, who have neither respect to the
dignity of their Sovereign, or regard of the honor of their Country. The
Articles with both Kingdoms, were transacted by the great wisdom of King
James, and cannot be imputed to His Majesty that now is; neither is there in
one, or the other, any one Article that was not in the Kings power to agree to,
in the manner in which he did agree; and that neither of them were prejudicial
to the Peace, Safety, Laws, and Religion here established, is most evident, for
that Peace and Safety were never more visible, nor the Laws and Religion
established did ever flourish more in any age, then from the time of those
Articles to the beginning of this unhappy Parliament, which no discourse of
correspondence with Rome, can hinder from being acknowledged.

3. The third matter objected is, a Discourse concerning Page 12.
the Death of King JAMES, in which there is mention of a Clause in the
Impeachment carried up against the Duke of Buckingham by the House of Commons,
in the 2 year of this King; and that the King came into the Lords House and
took notice of that Charge, and said, He could be a Witness to clear him in
every one of them; and that shortly after the Parliament was dissolved, and
they conclude, that they leave it to the world to judge where the guilt
remains.

During the life of King James, and to the hour of his death, there was no
earthly thing He took equal joy and comfort in, as in the obedience and piety
of His Son; who was not more reputed and known to be Heir apparent to the
Crown, then to be the most dutiful and pious Son in the Kingdom, and was
never known to displease His Father in His life; The King died in the 59 year
of his age, after many terrible fits of an Ague which turned to a quotidian
Fever, a disease usually mortal to persons of that age and corpulency of body,
which K. James was of.

After His death, in the 1 year of His Majesty's Reign, there was a Parliament
called, during which time there was never the least whisper or imagination of
the King's death, to be otherwise then natural, and yet the King had many
great persons in His Council, and there were more afterward in that
Parliament, who did not pretend any kindness to the Duke of Buckingham; many
of whom must necessarily have observed, or at least have been informed of any
Arguments for such a notorious and odious practice, and would not have suffered
any jealousy, that could reflect on the Duke, to be untaken notice of.

By that time the Parliament in the 2 year of the King began, one George
Eglisham, an infamous Scotch-man, and a Papist, having an ambition to be taken
notice of as an Enemy to the Duke, transported himself into Flanders, and from
thence about the beginning of that Parliament, sent over a small Pamphlet in
the form of a Petition in his own name to the Parliament, accusing the Duke of
Buckingham of having poisoned the Marquess of Hamilton, and King JAMES; which
Pamphlet was industriously scattered up and down the streets in the City of
London; and the House of Commons being at the same time incensed against the
Duke, in their Impeachment or Remonstrance against him, thought fit to insert
the giving of that Drink, and applying that Plaster (which was all that was
mentioned in that Pamphlet concerning King James) as a transcendent presumption
in the Duke, as is set forth in this Declaration.

If they had been ingenuous, they would likewise have set forth the Duke's
answer to that Clause, and then the people would have understood that there was
nothing administered to the King, without the privity of the Physicians, and His
own importunate desire and Command; the applications being such, as unlearned
people upon observation and experience in those known and common Diseases,
believe to do much good, and the learned acknowledge can do no hurt; And the
Parliament continued above a Week after that Answer was put in, and no one
person appeared in that time to offer the least evidence concerning that
Clause; and the King might very well in justice to the honor of a faithful
Servant discharge His own knowledge to free him from so horrible an
imputation; And after the dissolution of that Parliament, all imaginable care
was taken to examine the grounds, and to discover the Authors of that
Suggestion; And it is known the miserable wretch, who raised the Scandal, with
great penitence afterward acknowledged his Villainy, and died with the horror
of his guilt.

In the year following, there was another Parliament summoned, which continued
and sat many Months together before the Dukes death, and which was not more
devoted to him then the former had been; where those two Gentlemen mentioned in
the Declaration bore great sway, and were nothing reconciled to the Duke or the
Court, yet in all their Remonstrances, not the least word of that aspersion,
all men believing and knowing it to be the most groundless, that could be
imagined.

After the beginning of this Parliament when the license of Talking and
Preaching seditiously was introduced, it was whispered amongst some of the
chief Agents for the confusion which has since followed, that they would
examine the matter of the Death of King James, and shortly after the business
of the five Members, when the King was at Windsor, and the two Houses governed
so absolutely; This Pamphlet written so long since by Eglisham was printed, and
publicly sold in Shops, and about the Streets, and a very powerful person of
that Faction, with some seeming trouble in his countenance, told one of the
Secretaries of State, that many took the liberty abroad to discourse too boldly
of the Death of King James, and that he would send one to him, a Clergy man,
who could give him a particular information of it; the same night the man came
to him, who told him that there was a Papist, who lived about London, or in the
nearest part of Surrey, who reported, that he could prove, that King James was
poisoned; the Secretary required the Informer to attend him at an hour the
next day; and early in the morning, assembled the Privy Council, acquainted
them with the Information, and the Informer; and desired their Lordships advice
and opinions what should be done upon it; the most of them were very shy in the
matter, and he who had first spoken of it, and sent the Informer, seemed
wonderfully troubled that it was Communicated so publicly; by which it was
evident he had in the intimation some Design either upon that Honorable
Person or his Master, of which he hoped to have made another use: The Secretary
immediately after he had received the intelligence, sent an Express to His
Majesty with the account, and that he intended forthwith to impart it to the
Council, since it was no hard matter to guess what was meant by those, who
were privy to it, and therefore desired His further pleasure upon it; and
finding the swaying part of the Council at that time unwilling to meddle in
it, he expected the King's Command, and in the mean time only sent a Warrant to
apprehend that Papist, which could not be done without the diligence and advice
of the Informer, who only knew where he was, and whom he required to assist.
The same, or the next day the King returned His positive and express Command,
That the Lords of His Council should use all possible Industry and diligence
in the examination, and leave no way unattempted for the full discovery: which
Command was immediately delivered by the Secretary to their Lordships, who
thereupon gave some directions, but those Lords who desired to conceal them,
knowing only who the Authors were, though a formal Order was given for the
enquiry, no further discovery was made, or any avowed Discourse of it till this
Declaration; It being then said privately amongst themselves, that the time was
not yet come, that they might make use of that matter.

This is too much to be said, upon the occasion of this most impossible Calumny
and Scandal, which has never, nor can make impression upon any sober honest
understanding, except to beget a horror against the Contrivers of it; And all
true English hearts will so far resent it, as to express a detestation of the
Authors, who being drunk with the blood they have spilt, and confounded with
the sense of their own wickedness, have by this last impotent Act, declared,
that they are at the bottom of their malice; and that by the just judgment of
God, their wits are as near an end as their Allegiance; and that they have no
other stock left, but of despair and madness, to carry them through their
impious undertakings.

4. The next reproach is the business of Rochel, and that His Majesty let
diverse of the Navy Royal, and other Merchant Ships to be employed against
those, whom he was engaged to have assisted; and the King's Letter to Captain
Penington, which they say they can show under his own hand, and that hereby
Rochel was betrayed.

Though the age, quality, and education of most of those who consented to this
Declaration will not admit a Supposition, that they knew much of the
transaction of this matter, yet there are some amongst them, who might well
have remembered, that there was only one Ship of the Navy Royal (the Vantguard)
lent by His Majesty to the French King, and that the same was returned long
before Rochel was besieged, and near if not full two years before it was
rendered; and therefore it would not be very easy to prove, that it was lost
(much less betrayed) by that Action, or that the Ships were employed against
those, whom His Majesty was engaged to have assisted; But because much
unskilful discourse has been of this Argument to the prejudice of the King,
and many wel-meaning people have been too credulous in it, without considering
that Actions of that nature between great Princes, are grounded upon deep
reasons of State, above the apprehension of vulgar understandings; and that the
King upon this new alliance, having at the same time a War with Spain, had
great reason to gratify France in all offices of friendship; It may be worth
the labor briefly to set down the truth of that matter, and the proceedings
thereupon.

About the time of His Majesty's Marriage with the Queen, the French King had
many designs upon Italy, and a particular difference and contest with the
States of Genoa, and upon conclusion of that Treaty, and renewing the ancient
League and amity, confirmed and strengthened by this Marriage, His Majesty was
content to lend the Vantguard, and to give license that six or seven Merchant
Ships might be hired (if the Owners were willing) to serve the French King in
the Mediterranean Sea, and upon a precise promise, that they should not be
employed against those of the Religion in France: Accordingly the Vantguard
(and no other Vessel of the Navy Royal) was delivered, and the Merchants
Ships likewise hired by the French Agents, with the full consent of the Owners,
One of which (or one by their nomination) Commanded each Ship and carried the
same into France, and there themselves delivered the Ships into the possession
of the French.

After these Ships were thus engaged in the French service, and joined to their
Fleet, in which were 20 Ships of War likewise borrowed of the Hollanders,
commanded by Hauthaine the Admiral, and Dorpe his Vice Admiral, who it is
very probable, nor their Masters, were privy, or consenting to that enterprise,
and with which they were much superior to those of the Religion, though the
English Ships had been away, they fell upon the Rochel Fleet, and took and
destroyed many of them; The King was no sooner informed of this, then he highly
resented it by His Ambassador, and the French King excused it upon those of
the Religion, who, He Alleged, had without cause, broken the peace; the Duke
of Subese having when all was quiet, seized all the French Ships at Blauet,
which very Ships made the best part of the Fleet he had now incountred and
broken; And that the King of England ought to be sensible of the injury, the
peace (thus broken) having been made and consented to by the French King, upon
His Majesty's earnest mediation and interposition; Notwithstanding which His
Majesty justly incensed, that His Ships should be employed contrary to His
pleasure and the promise made to Him, immediately required the restitution of
His, and all the English Ships, the which was no sooner made, then to publish
to the world how much He was displeased with that Action, He entered into
Hostility with France, the chief ground of that quarrel being, that the
English Ships had been employed against those of the Religion, contrary to the
express promise made that they should not be used against them, as appears as
well by the Manifest of the Life of Lewis 13. p. 79.
Duke of Buckingham, dated 21 July, and printed since this Parliament, as by
the Records of State of that time. Let the world now judge with what color the
loss of Rochel (which as is said before happened not till near or full two years
after the return of the English Ships) can be imputed to the King.

5. The fifth Article, is, the design of the Germane-Horse, Page 18
Loanes, Privy Seals, Coat and Conduct money, Shipmony, and the many
Monopolies; all which, are particularly mentioned in the first Remonstrance of
the House of Commons of the 15 of December, 1642. as the effects of evil
Counselors, and with a Protestation in that Petition which accompanied it to
His Majesty, that it was without the least intention to lay a blemish upon His
Majesty's Exact Col. p. 4.
Royal Person, but only to represent how His Royal Authority and trust had
been abused: And finding that the vile language and aspersions which they cast
upon the King were generally censured and ill spoken of, The Lords and Commons
afterward in their Declaration of Ex. Col. p. 198, 199.
the 19 of May, tell the people, that if they should say that all the ill
things done of late in His Majesty's name have been done by Himself, they
should neither follow the direction of the Law, nor the affection of their own
hearts, which (they say) is as much as may be to clear His Majesty of all
imputation of misgovernment, and to lay the fault upon His Ministers; and then
finding fault with those, who make His Majesty the Author of evil Counsels,
they use these words, We His Majesty's loyal and dutiful Subjects, can use no
other Style, according to that Maxim of the Law, [The King can do no wrong:]
but if any ill be committed in matter of State, the Council; if in matters of
Justice, the Judges must answer for it: So that if they would guide themselves
either by the good old, or their own new laws (from which in truth they swerve
no less, then from the other) they have themselves answered, and declared
against this Article; but since that is not current, examine the particulars.

The time when this design is supposed to have been, was when His Majesty had
a War with the two greatest Kings of Christendom, France and Spain, and
therefore if He had purposed to have drawn auxiliary Forces into His Service,
it had been no wonder, nor more then all Princes use, yet in truth, there was
never any design to bring in Germane Horse, only in those unquiet times when
the Kingdom was so much threatened from abroad, amongst other expedients, for
strength and defense, such a proposition was made, or rather some discourse
upon it, which the King rejected, and did never consent that it should be put
in practice; and therefore it may seem strange, that this design should be now
objected against His Majesty, who alone refused and hindered it, and that
Balfore and Dalbiere, (who were the principal, if not the only Projectors of
it) should be in such high reputation and esteem with the Declarers.

The Loanes, Privy Seals, and other courses of raising Money were upon
extraordinary, and immergent occasions, and of the same nature, that have been
in all times practiced, upon reason and necessity of State; And Monopolies are
weeds, that have always grown in the fat soil which long peace and plenty
makes, and of that kind they may find a larger Catalogue in their Journall book
of the 43 year of Queen Elizabeth (a time that no sober man complains of) then
in any time since, and which was not then, nor reasonably can be imputed to the
Crown, since new inventions have justly so great encouragements and
privileges by the Law, that if those Ministers, through whose hands such
grants are to pass, are not very vigilant, it is not possible, but upon
specious pretenses, many things unwarrantable, of that nature, will have the
countenance of the Kings hand; yet those particulars were no sooner complained
of to His Maty, then He willingly applied the remedies which were proposed; and
before these troubles began, passed such excellent laws for the prevention of
the like inconveniences for the future, that a better security cannot be
provided: So that men must think this Rebellion to have been raised on the
behalf of, not against those exorbitances, which without it, could never
probably have been again exercised in this Kingdom.

And here the people cannot enough observe, and wonder, that these grievances
should in this manner be objected against the King, who removed and abolished
them, in a time when, and by those, who have renewed and improved the same, and
introduced new vexations upon His Subjects in an illimited manner, and
intolerable proportion.

That, They should complain of a design of bringing in German Horse to enslave
us (which (if any such designs were) by the goodness of the King was
frustrated and rejected) who have actually brought in an Army of all Rations
upon us, and have no pretense of continuing it, but that they may subdue us,
dissolve the Government of the Kingdom, and make us Slaves to their own
passions and appetite.

That, They should remember the King of enforced Loanes, Privy Seals, Coat and
Conduct money, who (since Ex. Col. p. 763, 764, 765.
the same have been abrogated by Him) have by their Ordinance, compelled men to
lend the Fifth and the Twentieth part of their Estates for the maintenance of
their Armies; that fifth and twentieth part to be rated according to such
proportion, as certain persons named by them shall assesse, and if any person
shall refuse to pay the money Coll. Ordin. 2. Vol. p. 173.
so assessed upon him, then Collectors shall leavy it by distress, and for
want of distress he shall be committed to prison, with such circumstances of
severity and uncharitableness as were never exercised by any Royal Command.

That, They should complain of the engrossing of Gunpowder, in which His
Majesty did nothing but what by His legal Prerogative He might do, who by
their Ordinance of the 3 of April, 1644. for the making of Saltpeter, Col. Ord.
2 vol. p. 477, and 796.
and by the other of the 7 of Febr. 1645. for making Gunpowder, have
established all those clauses in His Majesty's Commission of which there was
any color of complaint, to Projectors of their own, with so much worse
circumstances, as the jurisdiction their Committees exercise (to whom appeals
are to be made) is more grievous, chargeable, and insupportable, then that was
of the Council Table.

That, They should mention the Patent of Wine, which was to pay forty Shillings
upon the Tun to His Majesty, when by the Ordinance of the 22 of July, 1643.
they have laid an imposition upon it of six pounds, over and above all
Customs, and by the Ordinance of the 9 of October following, have authorized
the Vintners to sell it at as great, and some at greater prices, then was ever
tolerated during the time of His Majesty's imposition.

Lastly, (to omit the other particulars of Salt, Alum, Tobacco, and the rest,
upon every one of which they have by their particular Ordinances laid much
heavier taxes then was thought of in those times) that they should reproach the
King with the Ship money (which by their own computation came not to above
200000l. by the year) as the compendium of all oppression and slavery, for
which His Majesty had a judgment in a Court of Law, before all the Judges of
England, and which was always leavied by the due forms of Law, and which His
Majesty, when He was informed of the injustice of it, frankly quitted, and did
His best to pull it up by the roots, that no branch of it may hereafter grow up
to the disquiet of His people, when themselves have almost ever since by that
one Ordinance of the 1 of March, 1642. imposed a Weekly tax Ex. Col. p. 932.
upon the Kingdom of three and thirty thousand five hundred and eighteen
pounds, which in the year amounts to no less then one million seven hundred
forty two thousand nine hundred and odd pounds, to which they have since added
by their Ordinance of the 18 of October, 1644. for the relief of the British
Army in Ireland a Weekly tax upon the Kingdom of three thousand eight hundred
pounds, which Col. Ord 2 vol. p 563.
in the year comes to one hundred ninety seven thousand six hundred and odd
pounds (as much as ever Ship money arose to) over and above Free Quarter, and
all their other Orders for Sequestration, and twentieth part, and the cruel
circumstances in the executing those and all other Ordinances, against the
irregular doing whereof, they will allow no Appeal, to the Judges, though of
their own making, but reserve the entire Connusance and direction to themselves.

It is pity that parenthesis of the Spanish Fleet with a great Army therein
brought into the Downs, 1639. (of which out of their goodness, they say, they
will say nothing) should receive no Answer; That having been often unskilfully
spoken of, as it is now insinuated, as a design against England, whereas they
who know any thing, know, that Fleet was bound from Spain to Flanders, with
money to pay their Army, and new leavied Soldiers to recruit it, of which there
was the greater number, because it was purposed to carry many old Soldiers from
thence to Catalonia, but all those Soldiers in the Fleet were without Arms,
and without Officers, and the Fleet so far from being provided for an invasion,
that in a little Fight with the Hollanders before the wind brought them into
the Downs, they had so near spent their Powder, that they had a supply for
their money from London, which the King could not in honor and justice deny,
the Hollanders themselves offering them what Powder they wanted for ready money.

6. Next follows the torture our bodies heretofore suffered Page 18.
by whipping, cutting off Ears, Pillories, and the like, with close
imprisonment, aggravated with the Dominion exercised over our Souls, by
Oaths, Excommunications, new Canons, etc. by which they would have it
concluded that His Majesty's Government was full of cruelty and oppression.

It is an undeniable evidence of the excellent Government, Sobriety, and
obedience of that time, that there were not above six infamous persons, from
the beginning of His Majesty's Reign, to the first day of this unhappy
Parliament, who were publicly taken notice of to have merited those corporal
punishments and shame; and of the mercy of that time, that those suffered no
greater, there being not one of them who was not guilty of sedition to that
degree, that by the Law they were liable to heavier judgments then they
underwent: And for the Oaths, Excommunications, Ceremonies, and Canons, they
were no other, and no otherwise exercised, then was agreeable to the Laws, and
the Government established; Of and for which, the Sects, Schisms, and
Heresies, the dissoluteness, profaneness and impiety, which have followed
that since blessed Order has bin discountenanced and suppressed, has made a
fuller and more sensible Vindication, then any discourse can do.

And here the people will again take notice, that these Judgments and
proceedings (which always passed in due form of Law, in Courts of Justice, and
in which no innocent man can pretend to have suffered) are objected against the
King, by those, who without any color of jurisdiction, but what themselves
have assumed and usurped, in stead of inflicting any ordinary punishment, take
away the lives of their fellow Subjects, who have not trespassed against any
known Law, and imprison others, with such unusual circumstances of restraint,
cruelty, and inhumanity, that many persons of reputation, integrity and
fortunes, being first robbed and spoiled of all their Estates, for not
conforming themselves to the wickedness of the time, have perished in prison,
and very many of the same condition are like to do so for want of such
nourishment, as may satisfy nature; and whosoever compares the good old Oaths
formed and administered by lawful Authority, to every clause whereof the
consciences of these very men have seemed fully to submit, with the Oaths and
Covenants enjoined by themselves, will have reason to conclude men's Souls were
never in so much danger of captivity, and that what the worst men underwent for
their notorious crimes in the time of which they complain, was recreation and
pleasure, to what all are now compelled to endure for being honest and
conscientious men.

7. The long intermission of Parliaments is remembered, Page 19.
and that at the dissolution of some, privileges have been broken, and that
followed with close imprisonment and death.

That long intermission of Parliaments was graciously prevented and remedied
for the future long before these troubles, by His Majesty's consent to the Bill
for trienniall Parliaments, and the people would think themselves very happy,
if they had no more cause to complain of the continuance of this, then of the
former intermission, they having during those twelve years enjoyed as great a
measure of prosperity and plenty, as any people in any age have known, and an
equal proportion of misery since the beginning of this: For the breach of
Privilege, and imprisonment of Members, the Laws were open for all men to
appeal and have recourse to, and that single person that died under restraint,
suffered that restraint by a Judgment of the Kings Bench, so that if there were
any injustice in the Case, it cannot be charged upon His Majesty.

8. The Scene is now removed into Scotland, and the Page 19.
new Liturgy and Canons with what succeeded thereupon makes up the next Charge,
aggravated with the Cancelling and burning the Articles of Pacification which
had been there made upon the mediation of the Lords.

If the King had not been so tender of the Act of Oblivion in the Treaty of
Pacification between the two Kingdoms, that he would not suffer any
provocation to incline Him to ravell into that business, he might easily have
freed Himself from all those calumnies and aspersions; And it will be but
justice and gratitude in that Nation, highly to resent, that whilst all guilty
men shelter themselves under that Act of Oblivion, His Majesty (who is the only
innocent and injured Person) should have His mouth stopped by it (which is His
own expression and complaint in His Answer to the Declaration at Newmarket) Ex.
Col. p. 106.
from any Reply to the reproaches cast on Him in that matter; otherwise He
might easily have made it appear that that Liturgy and those Canons were
regularly made and framed, and sent thither by the advice, or with the
approbation of the Lords of the Council of that Kingdom; and if the putting
them in practice and execution was pursued with more passion and impatience
there, then in prudence and policy was agreeable, the error was wholly to be
imputed to those Ministers of that Kingdom, who were most proper to be trusted
in it; however, that so general a defection, and insurrection was not in any
degree, justifiable or warrantable by the Laws of that Kingdom, is most
certain, they having no visible Form either of Parliament or King to
countenance them, as the Army Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 39.
has lately observed; And that the Pacification first made by His Majesty's
mercy, and Christian desire to prevent the effusion of the blood of His
Subjects, how ill soever, was broken by them, and thereupon declined by the
full advice of the Lords of His Council, by whose unanimous advice the
Articles were publicly burned, as may appear by the Record in the Council
Book of that transaction.

9. In the next is remembered, the calling and dissolving Page 20.
the short Parliament, and the Kings proceeding after the dissolution.

That the calling that Parliament was an Act of the Kings great wisdom and
goodness, was then justly and generally acknowledged, and that it was in His
own power to dissolve it when He thought fit, is as little doubted, but that
He did unhappily for Himself, by false Information in matter of fact, and evil
advice dissolve that Parliament, is believed by all men, and upon the matter
confessed by Himself, and that that information and advice was most pernicious,
and the rise of all the miseries we have since undergone, is not denied; and
it is therefore the more wondered at, that the charge of that guilt being part of
the impeachment against two great persons, whose blood they have since drunk,
that particular was declined in the prosecution of them both; and that though
it be enough known by whose false information and instigation that unfortunate
counsel was followed, extraordinary care has been taken, that he should not
be questioned for it, which, together with the excessive joy that the
principal Actors in these late mischiefs expressed at that sad time, gives men
reason to conclude, that it was contrived by those who have reaped the fruit
and advantage of the error: What the King took from His Subjects by power,
which He could not otherwise obtain, after that dissolution is not particularly
set forth, and therefore it is very probable there was no ground for the
calumny, nor indeed was any man a loser by any such Act of His Majesty.

10. Thus far the catalogue reaches of the Kings enormous Page 20.
crimes during the first sixteen years of His Reign to the beginning of this
Parliament, in which they confess they proceeded with ease, as long as there
was any hope, that they would comply with His Majesty against the Scots, and
give assistance to that war; but when He found that hope vain, and that they
began to question the Authors of those pernicious Counsels, His Majesty
discovered Himself so strongly and passionately affected to malignant
Counselors, and their Counsels, that He would sooner desert and force the
Parliament and Kingdom, then alter His course, and deliver up His wicked
Counselors to Law and Justice.

There are not so many years expired since the beginning of this Parliament,
(though it has been a tedious age of misery and confusion) but that all men's
memories will recollect and represent to them the folly and the falsehood of
this Charge: It is not imaginable that the King could expect after the
beginning of this Parliament, that it would comply with Him and give Him
assistance in a War against the Scots, when He plainly discovered, that they
who were like to be, and afterward proved, the chief Leaders, and Directors in
that Council, were of the same party; and how far He was from sheltring any
Counselor or Servant from justice, or any colorable proceeding of the Law,
is as well known: neither did He deny His royal assent to any one Bill, till
after He was by force and Tumults driven from White Hall, and after he had
indeed consented to whatsoever could be honestly asked of Him for the security
and benefit of the Kingdom.

11. The Queen is too near His Majesty not to bear a Page 21.
part and a share with Him in these calumnies, and therefore Her design to
advance Popery is remembered, and Her observing a Popish Fast, with Secretary
Windebanks going beyond Sea by His Majesty's Pass, after He was questioned by
the House of Commons.

What that design of Her Majesty was for the advancement of Popery, is not
particularly mentioned, and therefore no Answer can be given to it, and having
expressed so much undutifulnes and malice to Her Majesty, throughout the whole
course of their Rebellion, it is not probable they have concealed any thing
they could lay to Her charge; For the Fast observed by Her, it is well known
that the time of it, was when the King was in the Field, and his Person liable
to much danger, which piety and devotion was very agreeable to Her goodness
and exemplar affection toward her Husband; And the Kingdom would think it
self abundantly blessed, if the Fasts since observed by these men had produced
no worse effects, then that did, which was observed by her Mty, For S.
Windebanke, the House of Commons had it in their power to have proceeded
against him, and to have prevented his escape, he being in the House, and
according to order withdrawn into the Committee Chamber, after the report was
made, and after as much appeared against him, as was ever objected or
discovered afterward; but the House, contrary to custom rose without
proceeding upon it, and therefore His Majesty might very well give him leave to
dispose of himself: And the truth is, they by whom the House was then guided,
were best pleased with his absence, and purposely declined the proceeding
against him, when he was in their hands, thinking it easier to procure his
place for one of their principal Members to whom they had designed it, upon
the advantage of his flight, then if he had staid to abide his Trial, which
for many reasons they would not have thought fit to hasten, or to proceed in.

12. The Allegations of Commissions given to Popish Page 21.
Agents for private leavies (except they intend the Collections made amongst
the Papists of money for the Kings expedition into the North, which was
likewise amongst, and no less liberally complied with by the Lords of the
Privy Counsel, and the other Protestants of the best quality throughout the
Kingdom) or that the Papists began to rise and arm themselves in the Northwest
of England and Wales, the raising Soldiers under pretense for Portugal, and the
seizing of the Tower, are so stale, vain, and ridiculous, that (though upon
the first contrivance of them, the fame served the turn of the Contrivers, men's
observation and knowledge having since informed them, that there was nothing
like either of them) there needs no further Answer to them.

13. The next Article is, the great Caball for bringing Page 22.
up the Northern Army to overawe the Parliament, the chief part of which they
can prove (they say) to come from Himself to the maine Actors, though the King
did so often and solemnly dis-avow it, as nothing but loose discourses of a
modest Petition, which also vanished two or three Months (he says) before they
knew of it.

They do well to except against the Kings positive denying it, when they have
only their own confident and positive affirming it for proof; but they had
need suppress and burn all His Majesty's Declarations and Answers, in which He
has abundantly satisfied the world in this particular, as well as they
restrain His Person, and as they have concealed all those Depositions taken by
themselves in this Argument, which would manifest clearly, that there was no
such design by His Majesty, so they need recall all those they have already
published, if they desire to have that design believed. Ex. Col. p. 107.


The King in His Answer to the Declaration, presented to Him at Newmarket, uses
these words, We cannot without great indignation, suffer Our self to be
reproached, to have intended the least force or threatening to Our Parliament,
as the being privy to the bringing up the Army, would imply, whereas We call
God to witness We never had any such thought, or knew of any such resolution
concerning Our late Army; And afterward His Majesty in His Declaration of the
12 of August (a Declaration that never was offered to be Answered) at large set
forth all He ever knew of that business, or which upon exact inquiry He could
imagine to be in it, by which it plainly appears, that some Officers of the
Army, (of very good and confessed reputation for their affection to their
Country) observing the strange Petitions every day presented to the House of
Commons against the established Laws and Government of the Kingdom, and the
unlawful manner in the delivering those Petitions, by thousands of disorderly
persons in Tumults, supposed, that a Petition of a most modest Ex. Col. p. 524.
and dutiful nature from the whole Army, for the composing and settling all
grievances in the Church and State by Law, might for the reason of it prevail
with the whole House, and coming from such a body, might confirm those, who
might be shaken with any fears of power or force by the Tumults; and His
Majesty being made acquainted with this proposition, gave his full approbation
to it, which He had great reason to do, since as there was notable industry
used to corrupt His Army, and to make it applicable to the ill purposes then
resolved on; so pains was taken to persuade the people, that it was in truth
very indevoted to the King, and ready to serve the Parliament any way it should
direct; And (as His Majesty says) if in the managery of this debate, any rash
discourses happened of bringing up the Army, it is evident whether they were
proposed in earnest or no, that they were never entertained, and the whole
matter was laid aside, above two Months before any discovery, so that that
danger was never prevented by the power or wisdom of Parliament.

It appears by the evidence and Depositions published by themselves, by the
Order of the 19 of May, 1642. together with that Declaration, that this
dangerous Plot began Ex. Col. p. 218.
without the least privity of the Kings, upon some Officers taking offense and
dis-like, that of fifty thousand pounds Ordered for payment of the Kings Army,
ten thousand pounds was taken by an after Order out of that sum to satisfy a
new motion and importunity from the Scots: and that those Officers upon that
distaste discoursed, that they were disobliged by the Parliament, and not by the
King, and thereupon concluded to tender their Services to His Maty in all
things honorable and agreeable to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; That
in debates afterward together, mention was made of bringing up the Army to
London, and making sure the Tower; and as soon rejected, as proposed; and only
proposed (as their evidence says) Page 217.
to show the vanity and danger of other Propositions: And that when the King
was made acquainted with it, He said, those ways were vain and foolish, and
that they should Page 219.
think of them no more.

That the Petition it self, which His Majesty approved, was not above the size
of Petitions, and very much modester then any one Petition received by the
Authors of this Declaration with approbation, appears by the Petition it self
to be read in the 563 page of the 1 vol. of the Collect. of Ord. published by
themselves, which being directed to the two Houses, as well as to the King,
took notice of the seditious Tumults, which they said, had beset the Parliament
and White Hall it self, not only to the prejudice of that freedom, which is
necessary to great Counsels and Judicatories, but possibly to some personal
danger of His sacred Majesty and Peers, and therefore desired that the
Ringleaders of those Tumults might be punished, and that His Majesty and the
Parliament might be secured from such insolences hereafter; for the
suppressing of which they offered themselves to wait on them, if they pleased,
which has not been since thought so unnatural a security, an Army being since
called up and kept about them, upon the same pretenses, to the same purpose, of
which more must be said anon: And for the strangeness suggested, that three
Gentlemen should flee beyond Sea upon discovery of a modest Petition, it is no
wonder, when men were every day imprisoned, ruined, and destroyed upon the most
trivial discoveries, and unreasonable conjectures and apprehensions, that men
desired to avoid their Judgment, (who had it in their power to put what
interpretation they pleased upon any discovery, and to inflict what punishment
they thought fit upon such interpretation) or that the King contributed His
allowance to remove His Servants from such a Tribunal.

It is a wonderful presumption these men have upon the credulity of the
people, that they will not examine the truth of any thing they allege, how
easy soever it is to disprove them; otherwise they would not affirm that at
the meeting of Officers at Burrough-Bridge, Propositions were made, and private
instructions brought from the King, whereas it appears, by their own evidence,
that Capt. Chudleigh, who is supposed to have brought those Propositions
thither (and what they were, appears not) did not receive those Propositions
from the King; and Ex. Col. p. 223.
that when he kissed the Kings hand, His Majesty spoke not a word to him of
those Propositions, which without doubt He would have done, if He had been
privy to, or expected any thing from His agitation, it being not alleged that
there was any other Officer of the Army at that time so immediately employed or
trusted in that Agitation: And as there has not been the least colorable
evidence in any of the Depositions then or since published, which can reflect
upon the King; And as there is much in Master Goring's second Examination, and
other Depositions, suppressed by them, which if produced, would manifest that
there was never any such design, as is suggested; and that to the very
Communication concerning it, the King was not any way privy, and dis-liked it
when he heard of it. So it was observed then, and not a little wondered at, that
Capt. Chudleigh, who was the principal Ex. Col. p. 220.
person employed, and who confesses in his Examination of the 10 of May, that
he used all his power to incense the Army against the Parliament; and to kindle
a zeal in them toward the King, was so far from being in disfavour with them,
that he was immediately employed by them into Ireland, and afterward re-called
thence, and trusted in the second, if not the first Command in the West against
the King, which they would not have done, if he had been in that manner first
engaged by His Majesty.

For the discourse of the Prince his meeting the Army, with the Earl of
Newcastle and a body of Horse, it is Ex. Col. p. 222.
proved to be by a private Major in the Army, who had not only any relation to
the King, but at that time had never spoken word with His Majesty in his life,
and had no more ground, then the other of the design, for some French to seize
on Portsmouth, which is so ridiculous, that it needs no other Answer then
repeating it.

14. The Offers made to the Scots of the plunder of Page 23.
London, if they would advance, or of four Northern Counties, with three
hundred thousand pounds or Jewels of great value, but to stand Newters in that
design, is another impossible branch of this Charge, for which there appears
not the least pretense of proof in any thing published by them, (and they have
not been tender of publishing all they know, or imagined) but that Master
Oneale asked Sir Jacob Ashly, what if the Scots could be made Newtrall? It is
not imaginable that the King knew not the temper of that time, (which he so
grievously felt) well enough, to conclude that the Parliament and the Scots
were too fast combined, to be severed for any interest of his; and the offer of
four Northern Counties, (a thing so confessedly out of the King's power to
give) is so senseless a calumny, that no man, out of the highest fit of
madness can believe it, and they to whom this Offer is supposed to be made,
would in all this time have accused the King of it, if they had been able to
justify any thing like it.

However it is to be observed, that though these men hold these imaginable
overtures and designs to be very heinous crimes in the King, they reckon the
reducing such designs into real and complete execution, no Offenses in
themselves; and that though the King may not wish His Subjects of Scotland to
stand newters in the differences between His Majesty and His English people,
yet it is no fault in them to engage that Nation to assist them in Arms
against the Sovereign of both Kingdoms; and though a cursory discourse by
other men of bringing up the Army to awe the Parliament, be alleged as a
breach of trust against the King never to be forgotten, yet the actual
bringing up an Army upon them, and thereby awing it so far, as the driving away
many Members, and making those who remained do any thing that Army directs, is
no offense in them, either against the freedom or privilege of Parliament.

To that clause His Majesty not being persuaded by their Petitions to defer His
journey into Scotland, in the year 1641. there needs no Answer, then the
remembering His Majesty's own words in His Declaration of the 12. of August,
which are these: We gave them warning that if Ex. Col. p. 525.
there were any more good Bills, which they desired might pass for the benefit
of Our Subjects, We wished they might be made ready against such a time, when
We resolved, according to Our promise to Our Scotch Subjects (with which they
were well acquainted) to repair into Our Kingdom of Scotland, to settle the
unhappy differences there; Upon this We were earnestly desired by both Our
Houses of Parliament to defer Our journey thither, as well upon pretense of the
danger, if both Armies were not first Disbanded, as that they had many good
Laws in readiness for the settling of differences here, We were by their
entreaty persuaded to defer Our journey to a day agreed on by themselves, etc.
Which relation at large of what followed, may satisfy all men of His Majesty's
extraordinary compliance; and when He went, He left such a Commission behind
him, as was agreeable to Law, and sufficient to prevent any inconveniences
which might arise in His absence; whereas, That desired by them (being to
consent to all Acts they should pass before He returned) was so monstrous,
illegal, and unheard of, that they were themselves ashamed to press it
farther, and rested satisfied, with that which His Majesty granted; nor does it
appear that there was in any time before, any issued out by the means of
Secretary Windebanke of a larger extent; or that was not agreeable to Law, and
the policy of that time.

15. Now succeeds the high Charge of the business Pa. 24.
of Ireland, as if they hoped to persuade the people, that the King is
accessory to a Treason and Rebellion against Himself; and that in a time when
there were so great distractions in two of His Kingdoms* He should Himself put
the third into a flame, that so He might have none to help Him, to quench the
fire that was kindled in the other; the particulars out of which this grand
Charge is compounded shall be severally examined.

They who have used no kind of conscience or civility in the publishing all
Letters of His Majesty's, (by what ill means soever the same have come into
their hands) which they imagined might by the simplicity and weakness of the
people, or the most malicious glosses and interpretations they could put upon
them, beget any prejudice to His Majesty, cannot be imagined now to conceal
any thing that would contribute to their purpose, and therefore their not
publishing those Letters, which they say the King sent into Ireland by the Lord
Dillon, immediately before the Rebellion, is argument sufficient, that either
there were no such Letters, or nothing in them, which can in any sense reflect
upon His Majesty; nor can it find credit with any (not maliciously and stupidly
sottish) that after so many reiterated infusions into the people by their
several Declarations that the Rebels of Ireland avowed, that they had a
Commissiion under the great Seal of England for what they did; It is now
inverted into a Commission under the great Seal of Scotland, Sealed at
Edinburgh when the King was last there; when it is known He could no more have
affixed that Seal (in whose hands soever it was) to any such Instrument, (if
He had had the will, which no Christian believes He had) then He can now
dispose of that at London, of which Commission, the world should long since
have been informed by the Scots, if they could have found a probable ground for
the Suggestion: And surely these men would have published the Depositions of
those, who (they say) have seen it, if they had believed them such, as would
find credit amongst men.

What was promised to the Irish Committee at London, is like to be much better
known to the Authors of this Declaration, then to His Majesty, the greater
part whereof being Papists, and since Active Rebels, having during their stay
in London, so great an interest in the powerful and active Members there, that
they were able to prevail with them to interpose in the affairs of that
Kingdom in such manner as they desired; and very probably then laid the
foundation, and design of their future Rebellion, upon the principles they
then saw introduced and countenanced here: By the earnest advice, and
importunate interposition of some of those principal Members, they prevailed,
that after the death of the Lord Deputy Wansford, no such person might be
appointed temporarily to succeed, as was like by his power and vigilance to
prevent the wickedness they intended; and if the King gave away, or promised
them more then five Counties, it was not upon their private mediation, but
their public address according to their instructions from the Parliament,
after the House of Commons had made the recovery of, and intit'ling His Majesty
to those Counties, a particular Article of their Impeachment against the Earl
of Strafford, and so blemished His Majesty's just and legal interest, and what
His Majesty did thereupon, was by the full and deliberate advice of His
Council Board, according to usual forms observed in the affairs of that
Kingdom: It is very probable that His Majesty might think Himself at that time
oppressed by the two Houses of Parliament, as He had great cause, but that He
should express so much, and wish that He could be revenged on them, to, or
before that Committee, whom at that time He had reason to believe to be
combined with the other, is more then very unlikely.

The not Disbanding the Irish Army is next remembered, and indeed ought not to
be forgotten; the not seasonably disposing that body, giving (no doubt) a great
rise, and contributing much to the Rebellion, that shortly after brake out; but
where the fault of that was, is as evident.

That Army was justly and prudently raised, when the intention in Scotland was
clearly known to invade England, and with a purpose to restrain or divert that
expedition, and if need were, to reduce that Kingdom to their Allegiance,
which was the sense, and could be no other of those words charged upon the Earl
of Strafford, if any such words were spoken: And after the Scots Army was
entered England, it was no wonder if the King were not forward to Disband that
Army, till He could discern that the other did in truth intend to return, and
He no sooner was confident of the one, then He resolved the other; but then He
wisely considered that the Disbanding such a body at that time, when so much
license was transplanted out of this, into that Kingdom, was not so like to
contribute to the peace of it, as the transporting them; and therefore His
Majesty agreed with the Spanish Ambassador, that he should have leave to
transport three or four thousand of them for his Masters service, which was no
sooner known, but the Irish Committee then at London (who, it may be, had
otherwise designed the service of those men) prevailed with the House of
Commons to interpose, and hinder the execution of that Agreement, who
(principally, upon consideration of the umbrage the Crown of France might take
at such an assistance given to Spain) pressed the King to revoke that grant,
and to consent to the Disbanding; That objection was easily answered by His
Majesty, having agreed likewise with the French Ambassador, that the like
number should be likewise transported for France, whereby the whole Army, would
have been disposed of; against which the Irish Committee more pressed then
against the other, alleging that there were not men in that Kingdom to spare:
whereupon, the House of Commons (by their private Agents) prevailed with the
French Ambassador (who more desired to hinder the supply for Spain, then to
procure the like for his Master, and it may be, to see the King controlled by
the Parliament then either of the other) to release the King of His promise to
him, so that they would prevent the Spaniard's having any men; And thereupon
they reinforced their importunity to the King for the present Disbanding, and
not sending any of that Army out of Ireland in such a manner, as His Majesty
was forced to yield to it; and thereby (no question) much was contributed to
the opportunity and disposition of rebelling; and to whose account that
advantage is to be put, all the world may judge: yet it may be fit to observe,
that of that Irish Army (which these men would have believed to be no less
then a Stratagem against the Protestant Religion) not one Officer above the
quality of Captain, and not above two of that condition, have served in that
Rebellion in Ireland against the King.

In all Rebellions the chief Authors and Contrivers of it have made all fair
pretenses, and entered into such specious Oaths, as were most like to seduce and
corrupt the people to join with them, and to put the fairest gloss upon their
foulest combination and conspiracy, and therefore it is no wonder, if the
Rebels in Ireland framed an Oath by which they would be thought to oblige
themselves to bear true Faith and Allegiance to King Charles, and by all means
to maintain His Royal Prerogative, at a time when they intended nothing less;
And Owen Ex. Col. p. 237.
Connelly (who was the first happy discoverer of that Rebellion) in the same
Deposition, in which he says the Rebels would pay the King all His Rights,
says likewise, that they said, they took that course to imitate Scotland, who
got a privilege by it: and Mark Paget in the same Examination, in which he
says, that the Rebels report that they have the Kings Warrant and great Seal
for what they do; says likewise, that they threaten, that as soon as they
have rooted out the British and English there, to invade England, and to
assist the Papists in England: and therefore it is a wonderful thing, that
what they swear, or what they say, should be imputed to Him, against whom they
have rebelled and forsworn themselves. The Authors of this Declaration have
(besides their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) in the Protestation of the 5.
of May, sworn, that they would maintain and defend the Kings royal Person,
honor, and estate; and shortly after would persuade the people, that they were
by that very Protestation obliged to take up Arms against Him; in their
Declaration of the 19. of May, they used these words, Ex. Col. p. 195.
The providing for the public peace and prosperity of His Majesty and all His
Realms, we protest in the presence of the all-seeing Deity, to have been, and
still to be the only end of all our Counsels, and endeavors, wherein we have
resolved to continue freed and enlarged from all private aims, personal
respects, or passions whatsoever: and the very next day Voted, that He intended
to make War against His Page 259.
Parliament, and that whosoever should serve or assist Him were Traitors by the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and (upon that conclusion of His intention)
actually leavied an Army, and marched against him.

In their Petition of the 2. of June, they tell him, that Ex. Col. p. 307.
they have nothing in their thoughts, and desires, more precious and of higher
esteem (next to the honor and immediate service of God) then the just and
faithful performance of their duty to His Majesty, and together with that
Petition, present the 19. Propositions to Him, by which they leave Him not so
much power in His Kingdom, as the meanest Member of either House reserves to
himself.

Lastly, (to omit infinite other instances) in their Instructions of the 18. of
August to the Deputy Lieutenants Ex. Col. p. 572.
of Cheshire, they required them to declare unto all men, that it had been, and
still should be, the care and endeavor of both Houses of Parliament to provide
for His Majesty, That they do not, nor ever did know of any evil intended to
His Majesty's Person, when the only business and end of those directions and
instructions were to raise that whole County against Him; So that this clause
of the Rebels Oath in Ireland, is no more to be objected against the King, then
those other clauses in their own Oaths and Declarations, which they have not
yet charged His Majesty withal.

Concerning the Proclamation against the Rebels in Ireland, which they say,
they could not obtain in diverse Months, and then that but 40 Copies were
printed, and express Order given that none should be published till further
directions: hear His Maj. own full Answer to that Charge in His Answer to the
Declaration of the 19. of May, in these words, It Is well known that we were,
when that Rebellion Ex. Col. p. 247.
brake forth, in Scotland, That We immediately from thence recommended the care
of that business to both Houses of Parliament here, after We had provided for
all fitting supplies from Our Kingdom of Scotland, that after Our return
hither, We observed all those forms for that service, which We were advised to
by Our Council of Ireland, or both Houses of Parliament here; and if no
Proclamation issued out sooner, it was because the Lords Justices of that
Kingdom desired them no sooner; and when they did, the number they desired was
but Twenty, which they advised might be Signed by us, which we for expedition
of the service commanded to be printed (a circumstance not required by them)
and thereupon signed more then they desired: So that it is an impudent
Assertion, that they could not obtain a Proclamation in diverse Months, when
they never so much as desired or moved it; and it was no sooner moved to the
King, but He gave Order in it the same Hour.

But it will not be amiss, (since this particular has bin with so much
confidence, and so often unreasonably objected against His Majesty) to speak
somewhat of the custom and order usually observed in sending Proclamations
into that Kingdom, and of the reason why so many, and no more were at that
time sent: except upon any extraordinary reasons, the King never signs more
then the first draught of the Proclamation, fairly engrossed in parchment,
which being sent to the Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices in Ireland, is there
printed, and the printed Copies dispersed, as they are in England; His
Majesty's sign Manual being not to any of those Copies: The Lords Justices
and Council, taking notice of the rumor industriously spread amongst the
Rebels that they had the Kings authority for what they did, which might get
credit amongst some; desired, that they might have twenty Proclamations sent
over signed by the King's sign Manual, to the end, that besides the printed
Copies, which they would disperse according to custom, they might be able to
send an Original with the King's hand to it, to those considerable persons,
whom they might suspect to be misled by that false rumor, who when they saw
the King's very hand, would be without excuse if they persisted: This Letter
and desire from the Lords Justices and Council, was communicated at the
Council Board, and the resolution there taken, that they should have double the
number they desired, signed by the King; and because the engrossing so many
Copies would take up more time, directions were given for the printing forty
Copies, all which were signed by His Majesty, and with all possible speed
dispatched into Ireland; and the caution that there should be no more printed,
then were sent away thither, was very necessary, left the Rebels, by having
notice of it, should find some device, to evade the end, for which they were
sent, and be prepared to defend their old, or raise some new scandal upon His
Majesty; besides that there was no imaginable reason, why any more should at
that time be printed in London.

What was written from Court to the Lord Muskery, that His Majesty was well
pleased with what He did, cannot reflect upon His Majesty, nor had the person
who is supposed to have written such a Letter (whom they have in former
Declarations declared to be the Lord Dillon* and who expressly denied the ever
writing any such Letter) any place or relation at Court, and the King had good
reason long after to write to the Marquess of Ormond to give particular thanks
to Muskery and Punket, They having bin both at Oxford, employed by the Irish to
His Majesty during the Cessation, and having made there such professions of
their endeavors to reduce the other to reason, as might merit His Majesty's
thank and acknowledgment, which His Majesty has been as forward to give to
such of the Rebels here, as have expressed any moderation or inclination to
return to their obedience, and yet He was never well pleased with what they
have done, nor can give them thanks for it.

For the delaying and detaining the Earl of Leicester, beyond all pretense
from going against the Rebels, it is well known how often his Majesty pressed
the Houses, that he might be dispatched and sent away, and that it was one of
the reasons, which His Majesty gave in His Answer to the Petition of both
Houses of the 28. of April, Ex. Col. p. 144.
of His resolution to go in Person into Ireland, because the Lord Lieutenant on
whom He relied principally for the Conduct and managing of affairs there, was
still in this Kingdom notwithstanding His earnestness expressed, that He
should repair to his Command; after which, it was near three Months before any
preparation was made for his journey, and then about the end of July or
beginning of August his Lordship came to the King at York, to receive his
instructions, pretending to have his dispatch so fully from the two Houses,
that he would return no more thither, but as soon as he could have His
Majesty's Command, he would immediately to Chester, and imbarke; This being
about the time that the King was preparing Forces for His defense against the
Earl of Essex; the Earl was detained about a Month before he could receive
his instructions, and all those dispatches that were necessary, and then he
took his leave of His Majesty, with profession of going directly to Chester,
but either by command or inclination, that purpose was quickly altered, and his
Lordship returned to London, where he was detained full two Months longer, and
then was Commanded expressly by the Houses to repair to Chester, and not to wait
on the King in his way, though His Majesty being then at Oxford, he could not
avoid performing that duty, but by avoiding the ordinary road; when the King
heard of his being at Chester, where he expected the Ships that were to
transport him above three Weeks, and that there was no other force in readiness
to be sent with him, but his own retinue, those Regiments of Foot and Troops of
Horse which had been raised for that Service having been employed against His
Majesty at Edgehill, and being still kept as a part of the Earl of Essex his
Army, and that there were none of those provisions or money to be now sent over,
which had been importunately desired by the Council of that Kingdom, His
Majesty considered that the Rebels, having been kept in some awe, with the
apprehension of the Lord Lieutenant's coming over with all such supplies as
were necessary to carry on the War, (the assurance whereof had likewise kept up
the spirits of the Protestants there) if he should now arrive there in so
private a manner, without any addition of a strength, or provision for the
supply of that strength that was there, it would bring at the same time the
greatest affliction, and dis-heartning to his Protestant Subjects that could be
imagined, and an equal encouragement to the Rebels, and therefore His Majesty
sent for him to Oxford, till he might receive better satisfaction from the
Houses concerning their preparations for that Kingdom: So that by whom the
Earl of Leicester was delaied and detained, the world may judge.

The Kings refusal of a Commission for the Lord Brook and Lord Wharton, has
been long since Answered by His Majesty, the truth of which Answer was never
yet denied, or replied to; That the Forces to be under their Command, were
raised before His Majesty's Commission was so much as desired; And then the
Commission that was desired, should have been independent upon His Majesty's
Lieutenant of that Kingdom, and therefore His Majesty had great reason not to
consent to it: And how reasonably those persons were to be trusted with such a
Command, may be judged, by their bringing those very Forces which were raised
for the relief of the poor Protestants of Ireland, against the Rebels there, to
fight against the King at Edgehill within a very short time after those
Commissions were desired.

They say they have long since named diverse Papists and persons of quality,
that by the Kings special Warrants after the Ports were shut by both Houses of
Parliament passed hence, and headed the Rebels, when they wanted Commanders;
Examine the truth of this, which all men who will take the pains may be judges
of.

His Majesty taking notice of the effect of this Charge, to be spoken by Master
Pim at a Conference with the Lords about the beginning of February, 1641. (the
Speech Ex. Col. p. 69.
being printed) by His Message of the 7. of that Month to the House of Commons,
required to know whether such a thing had been said, and if so, upon what
ground, His Majesty being sure He had used all caution in the granting of
Passe-ports into Ireland.

The Commons answered, that the Speech delivered by Page 70.
Mr. Pim, was agreeable to the sense of the House, and that they had received
diverse advertisements concerning several persons who had obtained His
Majesty's immediate Warrant for the passing into Ireland, since the Order of
restraint of both Houses; some of which, as they had been informed, since their
coming into Ireland, had joined with the Rebels, and been Commanders amongst
them, and some others had been staid, and were yet in safe custody, the Names
of whom they set down, being all in custody, and said the particular Names of
others they had not yet received, but doubted not, but upon examination they
might be discovered: But they said they believed it was by the procurement of
some evil Instruments too near His royal Person, without His Majesty's
knowledge, and intentions.

The King hereupon replied, That the persons named to Page 71.
be under restraint, made not good the assertion in that speech; besides that,
their Passes were granted by His Majesty at His being in Scotland, long before
the restraint, and being persons of whose good affections there was then no
suspicion; and that he was most assured that no such person as was comprehended
under that Charge had passed by His Warrant or privity: and then He desired His
House of Commons to consider whether such a general information and
advertisement (in which there was not so much as the Name of any particular
person mentioned) be ground enough for such a direct and positive affirmation,
as was made in that Speech, which in respect of the place and person, and being
acknowledged to be agreeable to the sense of the House, was of that authority,
that His Majesty might suffer in the affections of many of His good Subjects,
and fall under a possible construction (considering many scandalous Pamphlets
to such a purpose) of not being sensible enough of that Rebellion, so horrid
and odious to all Christians, by which in this distraction, such a danger might
possibly ensue to His Majesty's Person and Estate, as He was well assured his
House of Commons would use their utmost endeavors to prevent; and therefore His
Majesty said, He expected that they should name those persons, who by his
License had passed into Ireland, and were there in the head of the Rebels; or
that if upon their examination they did not find particular evidence to prove
that aspersion (as His Majesty was confident they never could) as that
affirmation which did reflect upon His Majesty was very public; so they would
publish such a Declaration whereby that mistake might be discovered, His
Majesty being most tender in that particular, which had reference to Ireland,
as being most assured, that he had been and was from his Soul resolved to
discharge his duty (which God would require at his hands) for the relief of his
poor Protestant Subjects there, and the utter rooting out that Rebellion.

It was above a Month before the King could receive any other Answer from them,
and then they said, that Ex. Col. p. 117.
they had affirmed nothing, but what they had cause to believe was true, and
presented some of their grounds to His Majesty; one of which was, that those
Licenses granted to the persons under restraint were apt to produce such an
effect as was mentioned in that positive affirmation; and another ground was,
that His Majesty could not be assured, that no other did pass upon his
License, and they had cause to believe, that some did, because they received
such general Information: which reasons (with some other of the same kind)
they said, they hoped would be sufficient to persuade His Majesty to believe,
that as they had some cause to give credit to the said Informations, so they
had no intention to make any ill use of them to His Majesty's dishonor, but
did impute the blame to his Ministers.

The King replied again to that Message, That there Pa. 18.
was nothing yet declared, that would be a ground for what Mr. Pim had so
boldly affirmed, for yet there was not any particular person named, that was so
much as in rebellion, much less in the head of the Rebels to whom His Majesty
had given License, and therefore. He expected, that the House of Commons should
publish such a Declaration, whereby that mistake might be cleared.

Since that time to the hour of the publishing this Declaration, they have
never made the least address, or given the least information or satisfaction
to His Majesty in that particular, which they then said they had no intention
to make use of to his dis-honour; so that this last presumption could proceed
only from a confidence that the people would believe what they said, not
examine the truth of it.

What they mean by the Commanders and Officers, whom the King (they say) called
off from their trust against the Rebels; and Ships from their guards at Sea,
that so the Rebels might be supplied with forain aides, is not understood,
except by the Ships they mean those under the command of Captain Kittleby, and
Captain Stradling, who then attended the Irish Coast, when all his Majesty's
Fleet was seized by the two Houses, and employed against Him, and whom His
Majesty upon that occasion, and confidence of the Loyalty of the Commanders,
required to attend Him with their Ships about Newcastle, or the North of
England, that He might have two of his own Ships at his disposal, and at the
same time (that any inconvenience might be prevented by the coming of supply
to the Rebels) His Majesty gave notice to the two Houses of his command in that
particular, and required them to take care for the guarding of that Coast,
which they altogether neglected; notwithstanding that they found means
likewise to seize those two Ships, which His Majesty hoped He should have been
possessed of.

Nor is it better understood what they mean by supplies from the Earl of
Antrim and Lord Aboyne, or of Arms and Ammunition from the King's Magazines,
or from the Queen, which no sober man believes, or of which no evidence or
instance has so much as been offered: Some few Suits of clothes in the
beginning of the War were taken by the Kings Soldiers about Coventry, when
that City was in open Rebellion, which they pretended were prepared for
Ireland, and which His Majesty did what could be done to cause to be restored,
but it was not possible, and was apparently their fault, that would not send
for a safe conduct, when they were to pass through His Majesty's Quarters.

And how far the King was from consenting to, or approving that Action, appears
by His Majesty's express Command (which was executed accordingly) for the
transporting into Ireland of three thousand Suites of Ex. Col. p. 680.
cloths, which He found provided for that Service at Chester, after his Majesty
was possessed of that City, and which had been neglected to be sent, and which
no necessity of His own Army could prevail with Him to seize, or divert from
that necessary use for which they were provided.

His Maty never denied any Pieces of Battery desired by the Council of
Ireland, nor is there the least color to affirm the same; what directions the
Rebels give in their Letters of Mart, or whether they gave any such directions
as are alleged, is no way material as to His Majesty; and for Officers and
Commanders, who left their trust against the Rebels, it is sufficiently known,
that the Earl of Leven, who by His Majesty's consent was sent General of the
Scots into Ireland against the Rebels, was called from thence to lead an Army
into England against His Majesty; and when the King's Commissioners at the
Treaty at Uxbridge alleged and complained, that many Officers both Scots and
English had in the beginning of that War left that Service, and been
entertained by the two Houses against the King, all the Answer they could
receive was, That they were not sent for.

This being the case (as without any possibility of contradiction it is) these
Gentlemen had no more reason to believe the Rebels, when they did so often
swear they did nothing without good authority and Commission from the King,
then the Rebels had to believe them, when they swore on the 22. of October,
1642. That no private passion Ex. Col. p. 663.
or respect, no evil intention to His Majesty's person, nor design to the
prejudice of His just honor and authority, engaged them to raise Forces, and
the next day gave His Majesty battle at Edgehill: Nor is it more material,
that Sir Phelim Oneale would not be persuaded, that General Laesly had any
authority from the King against the Rebels, then that these Gentlemen should be
persuaded in the same hour to believe that an Army should be raised for the
safety of the King's person, and to swear that they would live and die with
the Earl of Essex, whom Ex. Col. p. 457.
they nominated General to lead that Army against the King.

What information was given diverse Months before to the Archbishop, and others
of the Kings Council, of a design amongst the Papists for a general Massacre
of all the Protestants in Ireland and England, etc. is no objection against the
King, and as the Archbishop was imprisoned diverse Months before that Rebellion
brake out, so it is not like, if they had been able to have charged Him with
any concealment, that they would have forborne accusing him with it at his
Trial, when they so much wanted evidence against him, that they were feign to
make his Chaplains not licencing such Books against Popery, as they thought did
discredit the Protestant cause, an Argument of his Treason; and they would
likewise now have named the others of the King's Counsel, if they could have
alleged any matter, that could have reflected upon them or their Master.

Next follows a huddle of the Kings Letters to the Pope, when he was in Spain,
and of others since on the behalf of the Duke of Lorainge, and of the King's
having an Agent at Rome (which it is known he never had) some Months before
the Irish Rebellion: all which are so obscurely mentioned, and so ridiculous,
as to any charge against the King, that they are not worthy any Answer; yet
because (how impertinently soever) by the license of these times, much has
been scandalously discoursed of a Letter written by the King, when he was
Prince, and in Spain, to the Pope, and such a Letter translated and printed,
out of a Copy published in the French Mercury, it may not be amiss to say
somewhat of that business.

The Prince being by the command of his Father sent into Spain, to conclude a
Marriage with the Daughter of that Crown, which had been long treated of,
could not but be obliged, whilst he was there, to perform all Ceremonies which
were requisite to the compassing the business he went about; The Kingdom
where he was, had a fast friendship with Rome, and such a kind of dependence,
that a dispensation from thence was thought necessary by the wisdom of that
State to the marriage in treaty, toward the procuring whereof, though the
Prince would not contribute the least application of his own, yet he was not
reasonably to do any thing, which might make that dispensation the more
difficult to be procured; The Pope that then was, writ a Letter to the Prince,
which was delivered to his Highness, by his Minister there resident; It was a
Letter of respect, and in the interpretation of that State, of great kindness;
and it would have been thought a very unseasonable neglect, if the Prince had
vouchsafed it no Answer: on the other hand, it was easier to resolve, that it
was fit to write, then what; in the mean time, they who were officious that it
might be done, prepared the draught of a Letter, and brought it to him; the
which, when his Highness had perused with his own hand, he expunged those
clauses, which might seem to reflect upon the Religion which he professed, and
having so altered and mended it, he caused it to be sent to the Pope; Copies of
the first draught were spread abroad, by which that was inserted in the French
Mercury, (which is so carefully translated and printed, and dispersed these
late ill years) and now is given in evidence against His Majesty: But admitting
it were the same, and that the Prince being in a forain Kingdom, (with the
policy whereof he was then to comply) had written that very Letter, which is
printed, with what color of reason can any man make that an Argument of his
inclination to Popery, who at that time, and ever since has given the greatest
testimony of his affection to the Protestant Religion, that any Prince or
private person has done? The Authors of this Declaration, would not think it
just, that from their very loving Letters to the Bashaw at Argyers, and his to
them, in which He thanks God that the Agent of the Parliament of England is
come thither to make a peace and love betwixt them to the end of the world, as
appears by the relation of that business fol. 15. published by their
authority, and from the amity with them, to that Degree, that they have given
the Turks men-of-war the freedom of their Harbors, men should conclude, that
they are resolved to turn Turks, and yet such a conclusion will more naturally
result from those Letters, and that strict correspondence, then of the King's
affection to Popery from that Letter to the Pope.

It is said that the same design was laid in England at the same time, and
that many thousands were appointed to cut the Protestants throats in this
Kingdom also, when the King went into Scotland, and that it was confessed by
some of the principal Rebels, that their Popish Committee with the King, had
communicated that design with many Papists in England, by whose advice (though
some things were altered, yet) it was generally concluded, that about the same
time, there should be the like proceedings of the Papists here; all which if
true, (as no sober man believes it to be) does no way reflect upon the King;
and that Popish Committee was sent more to the two Houses, then to the King,
and were more owned by them, who took special care for their Accommodation.

By what is said, it sufficiently appears, how unjust and unreasonable all the
particular Scandals are, with relation to the business of Ireland, in which
His Majesty (how impudently soever He has been aspersed) never did any, or
omitted the doing any thing, but according to those rules, which are most
justifiable before God and man; it were to be wished that the two Houses of
Parliament had but as well performed their duty, and obligations; but it cannot
be forgotten, that near the beginning of this Rebellion, when the Houses
pretended wonderful difficulty to raise men for that Service, and when a
seasonable supply would utterly have broken and defeated the Rebels, the King
sent a Message to them on the 28 of December, Ex. Col. p. 33.
1641. That His Majesty being very sensible of the great miseries and
distresses of His Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland which daily increased,
and the blood which had been already spilt, by the cruelty and barbarousnesse
of those Rebels, crying out so loud; and perceiving how slowly the succors
designed thither went on, His Majesty Himself would take care, that by
Commissions (which He would grant) ten thousand English Volunteers should be
speedily raised for that service, if the House of Commons would declare, that
they would pay them: which offer from His Majesty was rejected, and no
considerable supplies sent till they had compelled His Majesty to consent to
such a Bill for Pressing, as might divest and rob Him of a necessary and legal
power inherent in His Crown.

Nor can it be forgotten, that they reserved those men, which were raised for
Ireland, and would not otherwise have been engaged in their Service, but on
that pretense, and brought them to fight against His Majesty at Edgehill, and
afterward retained them still in their Service; That they employed the money,
raised by Act of Parliament for the relief of Ireland, and with a particular
caution, that it should be employed no other way, for the support and
maintenance of that Army led by the Earl of Essex against the King, and that
from the beginning of the Rebellion in England, (though they received vast sums
of money raised only for Ireland) they never administered any considerable supply
thither, that they could apply to the advancement of their own Designs at
home against the King.

These particulars (of which kind every man may call to mind many more) nor
their notable compliance with the Irish Committee, when they came first over,
are remembered, to imply that the two Houses of Parliament were guilty of
raising the Rebellion in Ireland (otherwise then by their principles, and
proceedings in diminution of the King's sovereign power) or that they
cherished it after it was begun (otherwise then by not wisely and vigorously
endeavoring to suppress it, before it spread so universally) but that which
may be justly laid to their charge is, their affecting and grasping the power
of carrying on that War, which so great a body is not fit for; their imprudent
and unpolitique declaring an animosity against the whole Nation, and even a
purpose for their utter extirpation, and disposing their Lands to those, who
would be adventurers for it; which Act and Declaration it is known drove many
into open Rebellion, who were not before suspected, or at least declared to be
affected to the Rebels; and lastly, their giving all their minds up to the
kindling that horrid and monstrous rebellion here, rather then to the
extinguishing the other in Ireland.

16. Next succeeds the Charge against the King, for Page 29.
the unusual preparation of Ammunition and Arms (upon His return from
Scotland) with new Guards within, and about White Hall; the Fireworks taken
and found in Papists houses, the Tower filled with New guards, Grenades, and
all sorts of Fireworks, Morters and great pieces of Battery, the dis-placing
Sir William Balfore, and placing other Officers, who were suspected by them,
and the whole City.

Not to speak of the entertainment they provided for the King against His
return out of Scotland, when in stead of thanking Him for having passed so many
good Acts of grace and favor to them, that there was no one thing more, that
the Kingdom could reasonably ask from Him, or requisite to make them the most
happy Nation of the world; They presented Him a Remonstrance (as they called
it) of the State of the Kingdom, laying before Ex. Col. p. 528.
Him (to use His Majesty's own words) and publishing to the world all the
mistakes, and all the misfortunes; which happened from His first coming to the
Crown, and before, to that hour, forgetting the blessed condition all His
Subjects had enjoyed in the benefit of peace and plenty under His Majesty to
the envy of Christendom: Not to speak of the license then used in language,
when upon debate of some pretended breach of Order, one of the principal
Promoters of this Declaration publicly said in the House of Commons, without
control, that their Discipline ought to be severe, for the enemy was in view,
when the King was come within one days journey of the City; His Majesty found
a band of Soldiers entertained to guard the two Houses of Parliament, which as
it had bin never known in age before in that manner, so there was not now the
least visible cause for it, but that there had been a Plot in Scotland against
the persons of the Marquess of Hamilton and Argyle, and therefore there might
be the like upon some principal Members here: Upon the King's return the Earl
of Essex resigned up the Commission with which he had been entrusted by His
Majesty during His absence to preserve the peace of the Kingdom, and thereupon
that Guard which was drawn together by virtue of that authority in that Earl,
was dissolved with it: The King came then to White Hall, and for what passed
afterward, hear in His own words, in His Declaration of the 12. of August,
Great multitudes of Page 533.
mutinous people every day resorted to Westminster, threatened to pull down the
lodgings where diverse of the Bishops lay, assaulted some in their Coaches,
chased others with Boats by water, laid violent hands on the Archbishop of
York in his passing to the House, and had he not been rescued by force, it is
probable they had murdered him, crying through the streets, Westminster Hall,
and between the two Houses, No Bishops, no Bishops, no Popish Lords; and
mis-used the several Members of either House, who, they were informed,
favored not their desperate and seditious ends, proclaiming the names of
several of the Peers as evil and rotten-hearted Lords; and in their return
from thence, made stand before Our gate at White Hall, said, they would have no
more Porters Lodge, but would speak with the King when they pleased; and used
such desperate rebellious discourse, that We had great reason to believe, Our
own Person, Our Royal Consort, and Our Children to be in evident danger of
violence, and therefore were compelled at Our great charge to entertain a Guard
for securing Us from that danger; These are His Majesty's own words, and
contain no more then is known to all men, and has never yet been particularly
denied by themselves, therefore sure the King had great reason to provide some
Guard for Himself; and what was that Guard? Many Colonels and Officers of
quality attended the Parliament for Money due to them by the public Faith
(which to this day has not been paid to them) these Gentlemen upon the Offer
of their Service to the King in this exigent, were listed, and attended at
White Hall to defend it against the insolency of those Tumults: and the little
Ammunition and Arms which was brought thither, was for that purpose: That the
Houses within few days after raised a stronger Guard for themselves, without
and against the King's Consent, and with that and other Forces countenanced by
that, drove the King from the Town, is as true and notorious to all the world.

What is meant by the Fireworks found and taken in Papists houses, is not
understood, except they intend the Lord Herbert's house, which being at that
time mentioned and examined, was in the House of Commons rejected, as an idle
brute, some of their principal Members affirming they had been there, and
were satisfied, that there was nothing in the practice or design, but what was
very justifiable.

The Tower was so far from being filled with new Guards, that there were no
new Guards put there, till the Houses took the boldness to do it; and if the
King had made any addition of strength to His own Fort, it would have been no
more, then He might well have done: But that the having Grenades, and all
sorts of Fireworks, Morters and great Pieces of Battery ready prepared in the
Tower, should be objected to the King, is wonderful, since it is the proper
place, where such Utensils for war are to be; and if they had been in any other
place, it might have administered some occasion of jealousy: there were no more
pieces of Battery prepared and mounted against the City, then had been usual
and accustomed.

It was in the King's just power to remove any man from being Lieutenant of the
Tower, whose fidelity or affection he suspected or made question of, yet (what
just reason soever He had for either) Sir William Balfore was removed with his
own consent, and upon such a present recompense in money, as himself thought an
ample compensation: it is true, some factious Citizens (who were always ready
to be applied to any seditious action) petitioned against Sir John Byron, who
succeeded in that Command; and alleged that their jealousy was such, that
they were forced to forbear the bringing in of Bullyon to the Mint; when in
truth there was not one of those who concurred in that Petition, that ever
brought Bullyon thither, or used thar Trade; and to use His Majesty's own
words, it is notoriously known, There was Ex. Col. p. 546.
more Bullyon brought into the Mint, in the time, that Gentleman was
Lieutenant, then in the same quantity of time in any man's remembrance: And
surely it will be a great brand upon that time, and the City, to posterity, and
an evidence how far they were from lodging English hearts in their breasts, that
they would think themselves less secure in Sir John Byron, a person of Noble
Extraction, generous education, unblemished reputation, and a full fortune;
then of an indigent Forainer, who had no other Arts to live by, then those of
which they justly complained, and could not serve them, without betraying his
faith to his Master, to whom he was particularly sworn, and engaged by infinite
Obligations.

Hitherto they have examined only the errors and oversights, at least the less
raging enormities of the first Sixteen or Seventeen years of His Majesty's
Reign, now they are entering into the high ways, where they say, the tract of
open force against the Parliament and Kingdom did appear more visible.

17. The first instance is the Charge of Treason against Page 29.
some of both Houses; and that unparalled Act of violence by the King's
coming so attended to the House of Commons, which they say was, but the
Prologue to a bloody Tragedy, etc.

Though the tale of the Members did at that time serve their turn, to work
upon the un-skilfull and un-distinguishing minds of the people, and to apply
them to their Service, it was believed they would have now blushed to have
remembered it, since as discerning-men were not at that time in any degree
satisfied of their innocence: so all men by the demeanor of those Members
afterward, have concluded that the King had very good reason, then, to accuse
them, though it may be the act was not so happily deliberated on, as to foresee
those accidents, which might disturb the progress of it.

Before any thing be said of the matter it self, how far the King was from
doing what was not right, it will not be amiss to look back, how far they then
imputed this act to the King, which is now so principal a part of the Charge
against Him: After His Majesty had excepted against some expressions used by
them of His coming to the House of Commons, as if He had intended violence; in
their Petition presented to Him at Tiballs, 1. of Ex. Col. p. 93.
March, 1641. they besought His Majesty to believe, that the dangerous and
desperate design upon the House, was not inserted with any intention to cast
the least aspertion upon His Majesty, but therein they reflected upon the
malignant party, etc. so that it seems the Houses then were not of the same
opinion these men are now of.

For the matter it self, That any Members of either House may be prosecuted in
the same manner, as if they were not Members, in the case of Treason, or
Felony, is so known a truth, that no man (who pretends to know the Laws of the
Kingdom, or Presidents of Parliament) ever thought the contrary, or heard the
contrary said, till since the case of these Members; and the same has been
always acknowledged in all Parliaments, and may be said to be acknowledged 4
Part Instit. fol. 25.
by this, since the Lord chief Justice Coke sets it down as a maxim in his
Chapter of the High Court of Parliament, which was printed by the especial
Order of the House of Commons, since this Parliament began.

That the King had reason to accuse these Members of high Treason, can be as
little doubted, since He could make particular proof against them of a solemn
Combination Ex. Col. p. 534, and 535.
entered into by them for altering the Government of the Church and State; of
their soliciting and drawing down the Tumults to Westminster; and of their
bidding the people in the height of their rage and fury to go to White Hall; of
their scornful and odious mention of His Majesty's Person; and their design
of getting the Prince into their hands; and of their Treating with Forain power
to assist them, if they should fail in their enterprises; And why the King's
Attourny upon these reasons might not as lawfully accuse those Members of high
Treason, as the Attourny General in the first year of this King's Reign, did
accuse the Earl of Bristoll upon a Charge more general, who was thereupon
committed to the Tower; And why His Majesty might not as well have expected,
that upon his Articles (not so general as a mere verbal accusation) of high
Treason, either House would have Committed their several Members, as they had
done so many this Parliament; and about that time, twelve Bishops together
(upon a confessed ground, which every man there, who knew what Treason was,
knew that fact to be none) merely, because they were accused, His Majesty (upon
occasion of mentioning this passage) says, He could neither then, nor yet can
understand.

This being the case, there remains nothing but His Majesty's own going to the
House of Commons, for which, hear His own words in His Answer to the
Declaration of the 19. of May, where that matter was loudly laid to His charge:
When We resolved, that it was fit for Our own Ex. Col. p. 245.
safety and honor, and the peace of the Kingdom, to proceed against those
persons, though We well know there was no degree of privilege in that case,
yet (to show Our desire of correspondence with the two Houses of Parliament) We
chose rather then to apprehend those persons by the ordinary Ministers of
Justice (which according to the opinion and practice of former times We might
have done) to command Our Attourny general to acquaint Our House of Peers with
Our intention, and the general matters of Our Charge (which was yet more
particular then a mere Accusation) and to proceed accordingly; and at the same
time sent a sworn Servant, a Sergeant at Arms to Our House of Commons to
acquaint them, that We did accuse, and intended to prosecute the five Members
of that House for high Treason; and did require that their persons might be
secured in custody; This We did, not only to show that We intended, not to
violate or invade their Privileges, but use more ceremony toward them, then
We conceived, in justice might be required of Us, and expected at least such an
Answer, as might inform Us, if We were out of the way: But We received none at
all, only in the instant, without offering any thing of their Privileges to Our
consideration, an Order was made, and the same night published in print, That
if any person whatsoever should offer to arrest the person of any Member of
that House, without first acquainting that House therewith, and receiving
further order of that House, That it should be lawful for such Members, or any
person to assist them, and to stand upon his or their guard of defense, and to
make resistance according to the Protestation taken to defend the Privileges
of Parliament; and this was the first time we heard the Protestation might be
wrested to such a sense, or that in any case (though of the most undoubted and
unquestionable privilege) it might be lawful for any person to resist, and to
use violence against a public Minister of Justice, armed with lawful
authority: though we well know, that even such a Minister might be punished for
executing such authority: Upon viewing this Order, we must confess We were
somewhat amazed, having neither seen nor heard of the like before, though We
had known Members of either House Committed, without so much formality, as We
had used, and upon crimes of a far inferior nature to those We had suggested:
And having no course proposed to Us for Our proceeding, We were upon the matter
only told that against those persons, We were not to proceed at all, that they
were above Our reach of the Law: It was not easy for Us to resolve what to
do* if We employed Our Ministers of Justice in the usual way for their
apprehension (who without doubt would not have refused to have executed Our
lawful Commands) We saw what resistance and opposition was like to be made,
which very probable might cost some blood; if We sat still, and desisted upon
this terror, We should at the best have confessed Our own want of Power, and
the weakness of the Law; in this strait We put on a sudden resolution, to try,
whether Our own presence and clear discovery of Our intentions (which happily
might not have been so well understood) could remove those doubts, and prevent
those inconveniences which seemed to be threatened: And thereupon We resolved to
go in Our Person to Our House of Commons, which we discovered not till the
minute of our going, when We sent out, That Our Servants and such Gentlemen as
were then in Our Court, should attend Us to Westminster, but giving them
express command, that no accidents or provocation should draw them to any such
Action, as might imply a purpose of force in Us, and Our self (requiring those
of Our train not to come within the Door) went into the House of Commons, the
bare doing of which, We did not conceive would have been thought more a breach
of privilege, then if* We had then gone to the House of Peers, and sent for
them to come to Us, which is the usual custom.

This was His Majesty's Answer formerly to this Charge, which is therefore here
inserted at large, as being so full, that nothing need be added; and it
appeared by the Deposition of Barnard Ashly, and others taken by them, that the
King gave His Train express and positive charge, that they should give no
offense or ill word to any body, what provocation soever they met with; which
Depositions were carefully suppressed, and concealed, whilst they made use of
the testimony of indigent and infamous Fellows, to reproach His Majesty, from
some light and unadvised discourse, which was pretended to be uttered by some
young Gentlemen, who had put themselves into the Train.

To conclude, it is to be observed, that though it were so high a transgression
in the King, (against whom Treason can only be committed) to prefer such a
Charge against five Members of the House of Commons, who were called together
by His Writ, and accountable to Him for any breach of Duty, that it did absolve
them from their Allegiance, yet the preferring the like Charge 1 Article
against the 11 Members.
since against Eleven Members by the Army, raised and maintained by them, and
to which they were not accomptable for any thing they did, has been held no
crime; and it may be no ill exercise for those Gentlemen, who with such high
contempt of that Sovereign power, to which they owed their allegiance, took
delight to despise and resist His Majesty's just Authority, now in their
affliction, restraint, and banishment to consider the hand of God upon them,
which has compelled them to submit to the mercenary power raised by themselves
to suppress their King; That though they broke 1 Article against the 5 Members.
through the Kings Article, for endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws
and Government of this Kingdom, and to deprive the King of His legal power,
and to place on Subjects, an Arbitrary and tyrannical power: yet they could
not break through the Charge of the Army for invading, infringing, or
endeavoring to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this
Nation, in arbitrary, violent, and oppressing ways, and for endeavoring by
indirect and corrupt practices to delay and obstruct Justice, to the great
damage and prejudice of diverse of the poor Commoners of England.

Though they were too mighty to be touched upon the 2 Article against the 5
Members.
Kings accusation, of having endeavored by many foul aspersions upon His
Majesty, and His Government, to alienate the affections of His people, and to
make His Majesty 2 Article against the 11 Members.
odious to them; yet they were not able to bear the burden of an Accusation of
having endeavored by false informations, mis-representations, or scandalous
suggestions against the Army, to beget mis-understandings, prejudices, or
jealousies in the Parliament against the Army, and to put insufferable
injuries, abuses, and provocations upon the Army, whereby to provoke and put
the Army into dis-temper.

Though they slighted the King's Charge of having 4 Artic. against 5 Members.
traitorously invited and encouraged a forain power to invade His Majesty's
Kingdom of England, yet they cannot throw off the Charge from the Army, of
having invited the Scots, and other forain Forces to come into 4 Artic. against
11 Members.
this Kingdom in a hostile manner, to abet and assist them in the prosecution
and effecting of their designs.

Lastly, they may with their eyes, hands, and hearts lift up to Heaven,
remember how they contemned and despised 6 Artic. against 5 Members.
the King, when he charged them, that they had endeavored (as far as in them
lay) by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join with them in their
traiterous designs, and to that end had actually raised, and countenanced
Tumults against the King and Parliament; And now their own Army whereof very
many then assisted them in those Tumults to drive away the 5 Artic. against 11
Members.
King, and the Members of both Houses, accuses them of having invited,
encouraged, abetted, or countenanced diverse Reformadoes and other Officers and
Soldiers, tumultuously and violently to gather together at Westminster to
affright and assault the Members of Parliament, in passing to and from the
House; to offer violence to the House it self; and by such violence, outrages,
and threats, to awe and enforce the Parliament.

As the Charge allowed, and countenanced now from their own Army, is upon the
matter the same, which was with so much noise and insolence rejected, when it
was presented from the King, and is now objected against Him as a heinous
crime, so with reference to their Privileges (which, like the Logitians line,
is divisibilis in semper divisibilia, and serves their turn, to enable them to
ask any thing from the King they think fit to demand, and to refuse any thing
to Him He requires from them) the progress and proceedings thereupon, has
been very different; in stead of suspending and discountenancing them upon the
King's accusation, they are brought in triumph with an Army to the House; the
Army upon the bare exhibiting their general Articles, require that the persons
impeached, may be forthwith suspended from sitting in the House, and will
receive no denial, it must be consented to, for they will not endure, that the
persons impeached by them shall continue in power and capacity to obstruct due
proceedings against themselves* Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 52.
and for their own escape from justice to threaten ruin to the whole Nation,
as by the Letter from the Army of the 21. of June, appears.

The King was checked upon the matter of Privilege, and then imperiously
required to send the evidence, which He had against those He had accused, to
the House, where they principally governed, and could easily judge what was
secure for themselves; His Majesty desired, that before His proofs were
discovered against them, and Ex. Col. p. 56.
lest a new mistake should breed more delays, it might be resolved, whether
His Majesty were bound in respect of Privileges to proceed against them by
impeachment in Parliament, or whether He were at liberty to prefer an
Indictment against them at Common Law, in the usual way, or had His choice; to
which they would give no other Answer, then that they desired Him to give
directions, that the Parliament might be informed before Friday next, what
proof there was against them, that accordingly they might be called to a legal
trial, it being the undoubted right and privilege of Parliament, that no
Member of Parliament can be proceeded against without the consent of Parliament.

The Army tells them plainly, by their Letter of the 25. of June, That they
wish the name of Privileges, may not lie in balance with the Safety of a
Kingdom, and the reality of doing justice; which (as they had said too often)
they could not expect whilst the persons they had accused, were the Kingdoms
and their Judges. And in the Remonstrance of the Army of the 23. of June, that
no privileges ought to protect wicked men, in doing wrong to particulars, or
mischief to the public; and that whoever most adores or tenders those
privileges, will best express his Zeal toward them, in taking care they be
not abased or extended to private wrong and public mischief, for they say,
they clearly find, and all wise men may see it, that Parliament privileges as
well as Royal prerogative, may be perverted and abused, to the destruction of
those greater ends, for whose protection and preservation they were admitted,
or intended (viz.) the Rights and Liberties of the people, and safety of the
whole; and in case they be so, the abuse, evil, or danger of them, is no less
to be contended against, and a remedy thereof no less to be endeavored, then
of the other: And upon these grounds they conclude, that they shall be Decl.
and Papers of the Army, p. 67.
enforced to take such courses extraordinary, as God shall enable and direct
them to, unless by Thursday night next they receive assurance and security to
themselves and the Kingdom, for a more safe and hopeful proceeding in an
ordinary way, by having those things granted, which before they insisted on.

These have been the proceedings of late in the point of accusing Members, and
in the case of Privilege, all which are so far justified by the Houses, that
the Army has received public thanks and approbation for all that they have
done, and their accusations have been received, countenanced, and promoted, and
their desires granted against the persons they accused, so that as the King did
nothing in the accusation of those Members, but what was justifiable by the
Law, and former Presidents of Parliament, so whatsoever He did is since
justified by the later Presidents, which themselves have consented to, and
approved; And so we return to the place from whence this consideration carried
us.

There is a mention of the Lord Digby's appearing in a Warlike manner, and
afterward his going beyond the Seas, and from thence giving advice to the King
to retire to some strong place, etc. which are all so well known, have been so
often answered, and have so little reference to the King, that time is not to
be wasted to reply to them.

18. The next Charge is, the Commissions granted to Page 30.
the Earl of Newcastle, and Colonel Leg, for attempting Newcastle and Hull,
which (they say) occasioned them to provide for their security; to which their
intelligence of forain Forces from Denmark contributed; and then they take
great pains to make that jealousy of Denmark reasonable, and fit to sink
into them.

The Commissions granted by the King to the Earl of Newcastle, and Colonel
Leg, were no other then by Law He might grant; neither did He grant any such,
before He was assured the leading Members in the House of Commons had it in
their purpose to procure an Order for the seizing that Town, and after they
had caused a power to be placed about the Tower of London both by land and
water under the Command of their new Officer Skippon, who was required not to
suffer any provisions to be brought in thither by what Authority or Warrant
soever.

If there had been any expectation, or apprehension of forain Forces to be
brought from Denmark, that could be no warrant for them to seize on Hull,
without and against the King's leave, whose peculiar jurisdiction and right it
is, to provide against forain Invasions; but as that discourse of Forces from
Denmark, was then looked upon as most ridiculous by all men of sense, so
experience has since made it apparent, that there was not the least color for
it: And the arrival of that Vessel with Ammunition and Arms (for there came
no Commanders in her) near Hull, was near six Months after the Houses had put a
Garrison into Hull, and near three Months after Sir John Hotham had shut the
Gates of it against His Majesty; and if it had not been for that rebellious
Act, that Ammunition and Arms had not been sent.

The Invasion of the King of Denmark's Dominions by the Swedes was above two
years after the seizing of Hull, therefore that could not be any interruption
to that design, if it had been intended; but that a frivolous report of a
discourse between a Servant of the Lord Digby's, (that was never named) with a
Mariner, whom he had never seen before, to conduct a Fleet into England from
Denmark; or an intercepted Letter from the Hague to Secretary Nicholas, which
is pretended to be written the 26 of November. after the Battle of Edgehill; and
in which is mention of Arms for ten thousand Foot, and for fifteen hundred
Horse should be thought of moment to justify a rebellious jealousy of the
King's purpose of countenancing an Invasion of His own Kingdom, is below the
folly and sottishness of any, to whom satisfaction ought to be applied.

The employing of Colonel Cockram to the King of Denmark, was after the
Rebellion was begun, and when the Earl of Essex was marching with his Army
against His Majesty, and the principal instruction given to him, was to press
that King to assist His Majesty, with Money, Arms, and Ammunition, (the two
Houses having seized all which belonged to His Majesty) and that the same might
be sent by some Ships of that Crown, because all the King's own were taken
from Him, and lay in wait to intercept any Provision that should be sent to His
Majesty; and it is no wonder if the King indevoured by His instructions to His
Agent, to make His Uncle of Denmark as sensible as he could of the injuries
and indignities offered to His Majesty; nor was that very clause (with which
these wicked men so insolently and rudely reproach His Majesty) without good
grounds, it being known that they ordinarily whispered many things then in
their private Caballs, which they durst not publicly avow; of which nature
were their discourses of the Death of King James, which they are now grown up
to the wickedness to publish, and the other which was mentioned in that
instruction.

They say they repeat this rather, because when they declared their
intelligence, that Cockram was sent into Denmark to procure Forces thence, the
King disavowed it, calling it a vile scandal in His Answer to their Decl. of
the 22 of October. 1642.

Their charge upon the King in that Declaration of the 22 of October. was, That
Sir John Henderson and Colonel Cockram (men of ill report both for Religion and
Honesty) were sent to Hanborough and Denmark, as they were credibly informed,
to raise Forces there, and to bring them to Newcastle, and to join with the
Earl of Newcastle, etc. To this the King made Ex. Coll. p. 670.
Answer, That He had never greater cause to be confident of security in His
own Subjects, and therefore He could not believe so vile a scandal could make
any impression in sober men: And it is known He did desire no other aid or
supply at that time from Denmark, or from any of his Allies, but Money, Arms,
and Ammunition, but if He had not been confident in the security of His own
Subjects, He would have been justly to be blamed, if He had not endeavored to
get any forain succors to preserve Himself, His Crown, and the Kingdom from
being overrun and subdued by the power and strength of His rebellious Subjects.

In the same instructions to Cockram, they say, the King declared, that He then
expected assistance from His neighbor Princes and Allies, in particular the
greatest part of the States Fleet from Holland: which if it were truly set
forth, needs no Answer, it being very reasonable that the King should have
expected that all His neighbor Princes and Allies should have assisted Him
against so odious and horrid a Rebellion, and it may be many of them may live
to find the inconveniencie of not being sensible of the assault, which has
been made upon Sovereignty, especially, if in stead of assisting the King, they
have contributed toward the oppressing the Regal power; but these men are such
enemies to ingenuity, that in the very repeating, what has been said or done
by the King, they will leave out any words that will make the sense otherwise
understood, then fits their purpose, though any man that will take the pains to
examine it, will quickly find the truth; so they who will peruse these
instructions (by what means soever they came by them) published by themselves,
will find that the King mentioned the Holland Fleet only, as King's Cabinet, p.
41.
allowed by the States to give Her Majesty a Convoy into England, which these
men would have understood, as lent to assist the King against His rebellious
Subjects; whereas it is too well known, that at that time the two Houses found
more respect and assistance from those States, then His Majesty did; and what
His Majesty then said of His neighbor Princes and Allies (which they would
persuade the people to relate to some present engagement from them to send
Forces to Him) being only grounded upon His reasonable hope of the sense those
Princes would have of the indignities offered to His Majesty, His words being,
He expects and hopes that all His neighbor Princes and Allies, will not look
upon so dangerous a Precedent to their own Crowns and Monarchies, without
contributing to suppress this so pernicious a design begun in this Kingdom:
God forgive those Princes who suffered His Majesty to be deceived in so just
and Princely an expectation.

It is here likewise to be remembered, that the two Houses Ex. Col. p. 635.
had dispatched their Agent Strickland to the States of the united Provinces,
to invite them to their amity and assistance, and to decline their League with
His Majesty, before Colonel Cockram was sent for Denmark, their Declaration to
those Provinces bearing date the 8 of Occtober, which was before the time that
Cockram went toward Denmark.

19. The Queens going into Holland, is next objected Page 33.
to the King, and that contrary to His trust He sent the ancient Jewels of the
Crown of England, to be pawned or sold for Ammunition and Arms, of which,
they say, they had certain knowledge before they took up Arms; and that they
had not so much as once asked the Militia, till the Queen was going for
Holland; and that Her going beyond Sea was stayed, many Months before Her going
into Holland, by their motions to the King, because (amongst other reasons)
they had heard, that She had packed up the Crown Jewels, by which they might
see what was then intended by that Journey, had not they prevented it till the
Winter.

They are very unwilling to agree upon the time when they first took up Arms,
and would have their seizing upon the King's Forts, possessing themselves of
the Militia of the Kingdom, of the Royal Navy, to be thought only an exercise
of their Sovereign power, and no taking up of Arms; but though they could
persuade the world that their countenancing and bringing down the Tumults, by
which they first drove away many Members from the Houses, and then the King
Himself from Whitehall, was not taking up Arms, because there was no avowed
Act of both Houses to bring down those Tumults, yet sure they cannot deny
their marching out of the City with all the Trained bands of London in a
hostile manner to Westminster, where both Houses gave the chief Officers
thanks, approved what they had done, undertook to save them harmless, and
appointed a new Officer of their own to Command those Train bands, which was
on the 11 of January, 1641. to be taking up Arms.

When they appointed the next day their own new Officer Skippon to besiege the
Tower of London, with the City Forces, by land and water, and not suffer any
provision to be carried thither, when the King's Lieutenant was in it, and
declared, that whosoever should trouble him for so doing, was an Enemy to the
Commonwealth, which was accordingly executed by him; they must confess
undoubtedly that they took up Arms; and both these high actions (which by the
express Statute of the 25 year of King Edw. 3. are High Treason) were before
any one Jewel belonging to the Crown or the King, was carried out of the
Kingdom.

For the time of asking the Militia, though no circumstance of time could make
it justifiable (not to speak of the Bill preferred to that purpose many Months
before) the House of Commons by their Petition of the 26 of January, after the
House of Peers had refused to concur with them in so dis-loyall a suit, desired
His Majesty to put the Tower of London and the principal Forts of the Kingdom
and the whole Militia, into such hands as they thought fit; and the Queen went
not into Holland till the 23 of February, neither was her journey resolved on
till the beginning of that Month; so that their assertion of not having so much
as asked the Militia till the Queen was going into Holland is utterly untrue,
and when they were made acquainted of such Her Majesty's purpose, they never in
the least degree dissuaded it.

But what was the Queens going into Holland, and the King's sending with Her
the Jewels of the Crown, to their taking Arms? The Queen might very well go to
any place the King thought fit She should go, and the Princess Mary (being at
that time to go into Holland to her Husband) His Maj. thought it fit that the
Queens Maj. should accompany Her Daughter thither: And for the Jewels of the
Crown (though most of the Jewels carried over by the Queen, were Her own
proper goods) let them show any Law, that the King may not dispose of those
Jewels for the safety of His life, and to buy Arms and Ammunition to defend
Himself against Rebels, who have seized all His Revenue, and have left Him
nothing to live upon, but those Jewels, which He had only in His power to
convey out of theirs, or to leave them to be seized on and sold by them, who
applied all that He had else, and His own Revenue to hasten His destruction.

In their mention of the Queens former purpose of going beyond Seas, stayed (as
they say) upon their motion, because they had then heard, She had packed up the
Crown Jewels and Plate, they use their old and accustomed license.

If they will examine their own Journall, they will not find amongst all those
reasons, which were carried up by Master Pim to the Lords at a Conference on
the 14 of July, and the next day presented to the King to dissuade Her
Majesty's Journey, the least mention, of Her having packed up the Crown Jewels
and Plate, but that they had received information of great quantity of treasure
in Jewels, Plate and ready Money packed up to be conveyed away with the Queen;
and that diverse Papists and others, under pretense of Her Majesty's Goods were
like to convey great sums of Money and other treasure beyond the Seas, which
would not only impoverish the State, but might be employed to the fomenting
some mischievous attempts to the trouble of the public peace: And they might
remember that* the chief reasons they gave to dissuade Her Majesty, was, their
profession and Declaration, (since they heard that the chief cause of Her
Majesty's sickness proceeded from 5. Reason.
dis-content of Her mind) that if any thing which in the power of Parliament
might give Her Majesty contentment, they were so tender of Her health, both in
due respect to His most excellent Majesty and Her self, that they would be
ready to further Her satisfaction in all things; and that it would be some
dis-honour to this Nation, if Her Majesty 6. Reason.
should at this unseasonable time go out of the Kingdom, upon any grief or
discontent received here; and therefore they would labor by all good means to
take away and prevent all just occasions of Her Majesty's trouble in such
manner as might further Her content, and therein Her health, which would be a
very great comfort and joy to themselves, and the rest of His Majesty's loving
Subjects.

These obligations they should have remembered, and left the world to remember
how punctual they were in the performance: The discourse at Borough Bridge,
that the King would pawn His Jewels for the Army, is as material, as any
other part of the discourse there, being said only by Captain Chudleigh, who it
seems believed it not, by His engaging Himself to the Parliament from that Ex.
Col. p. 220.
time, (as the better Pay-masters) and was highly valued by them.

20. It seems they take it as granted, that their frivolous and malicious
allegations will serve turn in stead Page 34.
of proofs, and therefore they take the boldness to tax His Majesty with
breach of honor and faith, and to reproach Him for calling God to witness,
and making so many solemn protestations against any thought of bringing up the
Northern Army, or of leavying Forces to wage war with His Parliament, or of
bringing in forain Forces or aids from beyond the Sea, which (they say) Himself
said would not only bury the Kingdom in sudden destruction and ruin; but His
own name and Posterity in perpetual scorn and infamy.

If these Gentlemen would deal faithfully with the world, and confess what
troubles them most, they would acknowledge, that their grief is, that the King
is so punctual and severe in keeping His word, and protestations; not that He
is apt to fall from them. If He would have practiced their arts of dissembling,
and descended to their vile license of promising and protesting, what He never
meant to think of after, He might have prevented them in many of their
successes; but the greatness of His mind always disdained even to prosper or
be secure by any deviations from truth and honor; and what He has promised,
He has been religious in observing, though to His own damage and
inconvenience; He has made no protestation about bringing up the Northern
Army, or of leavying Forces against the Parliament, or for the Rights of the
Subject, which was not exactly true, and agreeable to the Princely thoughts and
resolutions of His heart.

The occasion of His Majesty's using that expression concerning forain Force,
(which is here remembered by them) was this: In the Declaration delivered to His
Majesty from the two Houses at Newmarket on the 9 of March, 1641. they told
Him, that by the manifold advertisements, which they had from Rome, Venice,
Paris, and Ex. Col. p. 100.
other parts, they expected that His Majesty had still some great design in
hand, and that the Popes Nuntio had solicited the Kings of France and Spain to
lend His Majesty four thousand men apiece to help to maintain His Royalty
against the Parliament, were some of the grounds of their fears and jealousies;
To which His Majesty made answer in these words, What your advertisements are
from Rome, Page 108.
Venice, Paris, and other parts, or what the Pope's Nuntio solicited the Kings
of France or Spain to do, or from what persons such informations come to you,
or how the credit and reputation of such persons have been sifted and examined,
We know not, but are confident no sober honest man in Our Kingdoms can
believe, that We are so desperate, or so senseless, to entertain such designs,
as would not only bury this Our Kingdom in sudden destruction and ruin, but
Our name and posterity in perpetual scorn and infamy.

That this Answer was most prudently and justly applied to that extravagant and
senseless suggestion, cannot be doubted; but because the King at that time,
before the War, or a declared purpose in them to raise a War against Him, held
it an odious and infamous thing to think of bringing in foraine Forces upon
His own Kingdom, that He might not therefore think it afterward necessary,
and find it just, to call in forain Succors to defend Him from a Rebellion,
that besides mixtures of all Nations, was assisted by an entire forain Army to
oppress Him, and His posterity, no reasonable man can suggest or suppose; and
yet how far He has been from entertaining any such aid, the event declares,
which it may be, many wise men reckon amongst His greatest errors and
oversights; and which no question, (if He had not been full of as much
tenderness and compassion toward His people, as these men want) He would have
found no difficulty to have practiced.

They proceed to improve this most groundless and unreasonable scandal by
another instance, that when His Majesty Himself, and the Lords made a
Protestation at York against leavying Forces, He commanded His Subjects by
Proclamation to resist the Orders of the Parliament, and did many other Facts,
contrary to that Protestation, the particulars whereof are mentioned, and shall
be examined and answered.

The Act which they call a Protestation by the King and the Lords at York
passed on the 15 day of June, 1642. being six and twenty days after both
Houses had declared that the King intended to leavy war against the Parliament,
and thereupon published their Propositions for bringing in Money or Plate for
the raising and maintaining an Army: The King conceiving so positive and
monstrous an averment might make some impression upon, and gain credit with his
people, called the Peers together who attended Him, and taking notice of that
wicked Declaration, declared to them, That He always had, and then did abhor
all such designs, and desired them to declare, whether being upon the place,
they saw any color of preparations or counsels, that might reasonably beget a
belief of any such design, and whether they were not fully persuaded, that His
Majesty had no such intention: whereupon Ex. Col. p. 357.
seven and thirty Peers, who then attended His Majesty (being double the number
that at that time or since remained in the House of Peers at Westminster)
unanimously declared under their hands (which was published to the Kingdom)
that they saw not any color of preparations or counsels, that might reasonably
beget the belief of any such design, and did profess before God and testify
to all the world, That they were fully persuaded that His Majesty had no such
intention, but that all His endeavors did tend to the firm and constant
setlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just Privileges of Parliament,
the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace, and prosperity of the Kingdom;
notwithstanding which clear evidence, they made what haste they could to raise
an Army, and to engage the people against their Sovereign Lord the King.

That His Majesty intended not by that profession on His part, nor the Lords
thought themselves obliged on their parts, to give any countenance to, or not
to resist the Orders, which then issued out every day, from those at
Westminster, who called themselves the two Houses, needs no other evidence,
then His Majesty's Declaration published two days before (13 of June) in which
amongst other particulars, He declared to the Peers, That Ex. Col. p. 349.
He would not (as was falsely pretended) engage them, or any of them in any War
against the Parliament, except it were for His own necessary defense and
safety against such as should insolently invade or attempt against His Majesty,
or such as should adhere to Him: And that very day, the very same Peers
(whereof the Earl of Salisbury was one) engaged themselves to the King under
their hands, That they would defend His Majesty's Person, Crown and Dignity,
together with His Majesty's just and legal Prerogative, against all persons
and power whatsoever, and that they would not obey any rule, Order, or
Ordinance whatsoever concerning any Militia, that had not the Royal assent.

The first Commission of Array issued out some days before this Profession and
Protestation made by His Majesty, and therefore cannot be said to be against
it; and above three Months after the passing the illegal and extravagant
Ordinance for the Militia, and after that Ordinance was executed in many parts
of the Kingdom, notwithstanding His Majesty's Proclamation of the illegality
and treason of it, when He had desired them to produce or mention, one
Ordinance from the first beginning of Parliaments to this very Parliament,
which endeavored to impose any thing upon the Subject, without the King's
consent: of which to this day they never gave or can give one instance. The
Commission it self of Array, is according to Law, and so held to be at this
time by most learned Lawyers, and was so declared to be by Mr. Justice Hutton
in his Argument in the Exchequer Chamber, in the case of Mr. Hambden.

The Letter which they say they can produce under His Majesty's own hand to
Sir John Heydon Lieutenant of the Ordnance, of the 20 of June, 1642. is no way
contrary to His Majesty's professions, and such as His Majesty in that ill time
was necessarily to write, being to a sworn Officer and Servant of His own, to
send such of His own Goods to Him as were in His custody, and which His Majesty
so reasonably might have occasion to use; and if He wished it might be done
privately, it is only an instance of the wickedness of that time that the King
was forced to use art and privacy to get what belonged to Him, lest He might be
robbed by those, who nine days before the date of this Letter had published
Orders to Ex. Col. p. 342.
intercept whatsoever was going to Him.

His Majesty required not any subscription for Plate, Horses, or Arms, till
many days after they had published their Propositions to that purpose, and
received great sums of money, and vast quantities of plate upon those
Propositions, against which His Majesty writ His Princely Letter to the City of
London on the 14 of June, and two days after published a Declaration with the
testimony and evidence of all the Peers with Him, in which He said, That if
notwithstanding, so clear declaration and evidence Ex. Col. p. 35.
of His intentions, these men should think fit by those Alarums to awaken Him
to a more necessary care of the defense of Himself and His people, and should
themselves in so unheard of a manner provide (and seduce others to do so too)
to offend His Majesty, having given Him so lively testimony of their
affections, what they were willing to do, when they should once make themselves
able; all His good Subjects would think it necessary for His Majesty to look to
Himself; and He did then excite all His well-affected people, according to their
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and according to their solemn Vow and
Protestation (whereby they were obliged to defend His Person, Honor, and
Estate) to contribute their best assistance to the preparations necessary for
the opposing and suppressing of the traiterous attempts, etc.) And then He
would take it as an acceptable Service, if any person upon so urgent and
visible a necessity of His Majesty, and such an apparent distraction of the
Kingdom, would bring in to Him, or to His use, Money or Plate, or would furnish
Horse or Arms, etc. This was the time, and the manner of His Majesty's
requiring subscription, for Plate, Horse, and Arms, which these men impute to
Him.

They say the King raised a Guard of Horse, and Foot about Him; and by them did
not only abuse their Committees sent to Him, beat their public Officers and
Messengers, protect notorious Papists, Traitors or Felons, such as Beckwith and
others, from the Posse Comitatus, but also with those guards, Cannon and Arms
from beyond Sea, did attempt to force Hull, in an hostile manner, and that
within few days after that solemn Protestation at York: All which suggestions
must be particularly examined: The raising the King's Guard was on this
occasion, and in this manner:

The King residing with His Court at the City of York, and being pressed by
both Houses of Parliament to consent, that His Magazine at Hull might be
removed from thence (for the better supplies of the necessities for Ireland) to
the Tower of London, which for many reasons He thought not convenient, His
Majesty resolved to go Himself in Person to His Town of Hull, to view His Arms
Ex. Col. p. 152.
and Munition there, that thereupon He might give directions what part thereof
might be necessary to remain there, for the security and satisfaction of the
Northern parts (the principal persons thereof having petitioned Him, that it
might not be all removed) and what part might be spared for Ireland, what for
the arming the Scots, who were to go thither, and what to replenish His
chiefest Magazine the Tower of London; and going thither on the 23 day of
April, 1642. He found all the Gates shut against Him, and the Bridges drawn up,
by the command of Sir John Hotham, who flatly denied His Majesty's entrance
from the Walls, which were strongly manned, and the Cannon mounted thereon and
planted against the King; His Majesty having in vain endeavored to persuade
Sir John Hotham, and offered to go in with twenty Horse, because he alleged
His retinue was too great, was at last compelled to return to York, after He
had proclaimed Hotham Traitor, which by all the known Laws, he was declared
in that case to be.

The next day the King sent a Message to the Houses to require justice upon Sir
John Hotham: to which they returned no Answer, till above a fortnight after; in
the mean time they sent down some of the choice Members to Hull to give Sir
John Hotham thanks for what he had done; and to assure him that they would
justify him in it; and others into Lincolnshire, with directions to their
Deputy Lieutenants and all other Officers, to assist him if he were in any
distress; and then they sent some other Members as their Committee to York,
with their Answer to the King, in which they told Him, That Sir John Ex Col. p.
179.
Hotham could not discharge the trust upon which, nor make good the end for
which he was placed in the Guard of that Town and Magazine, if he had let in
His Majesty with such Counselors and company, as were then about Him; and
therefore upon full resolution of both Houses they had declared Sir John Hotham
to be clear from that odious crime of Treason; and had avowed, that he had done
nothing therein, but in obedience to the commands of both Houses: whereas in
truth, though they had presumed against law and right to send him thither, and
constitute him Governor for a time, of that place, there was no word in his
Commission, or instructions implying the least direction, not to suffer His
Majesty to come thither; but on the contrary, the pretense was for His
Majesty's especial service.

His Majesty made a quick reply to this strange Answer, and delivering it to
their Committee wished them to return with it to the Houses, which they
refused, telling Him, That they were appointed by the Parliament to reside at
York, but they would send His Answer to Westminster.

It would be too long in this place, and might be thought impertinent to
consider, whether this custom of sending Committees to be Lieger in the
Counties, which began at this time, be agreeable to law, and the just regular
power of the Houses; for as the like will not be found in the Presidents of
former Parliaments, so it may be reasonably believed, that, that Council,
which is called by the Kings Writ to assemble at Westminster, can no more
appoint some of their Members to reside at York, or in any other place, then
they can adjourn themselves thither; and it seems against right, that those
Deputies which are sent by the Counties or Cities to be present on their
behalfs in the House of Commons at Westminster, may be sent to another place,
by which they whom they represent are without any Members there.

Upon this Answer of the Committee, as unexpected, as the other from the
Houses; and the other acts done in this conjuncture, as the sending another
Committee to Hull, another into Lincolnshire, all to persuade the people to
approve of what Sir John Hotham had done, and to assist him if there were any
occasion; the King began very justly to apprehend a design upon His own
Person, and then and not till then, resolved, and declared His resolution to
have a Guard to secure His Person, that Sir John Hotham might not (as His
Majesty Ex. Col. p. 261.
said) by the same forces, or more, raised by pretense of the same authority
(for he raised some daily) continue the War, that he had leavied against Him,
and as well imprison His Person as detain His goods, and as well shut His
Majesty up in York, as shut Him out of Hull.

This Guard was hereupon raised, with the advice of the principal Gentlemen of
that County, and consisted of one Regiment of their Train bands, commanded by
the proper Colonel, who was one of the prime Gentlemen of fortune and
reputation there; and one Troup of Horse, which had the honor of being called
the Prince of Wales his Troup, commanded by the Earl of Cumberland, and
consisting of near one hundred, most if not all of them, of the Gentry of that
Shire; and that the rumor, scandal, and imputation of entertaining Papists,
might be clearly answered; there was neither Officer or Soldier of the
Regiment or Troup, who did not take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
they were punctually paid by the King, that there might be no complaint on any
side.

This was the Guard, the occasion, and manner of leavying it, full five Months
after the two Houses against Law or President, and without the least probable
color of danger had raised a greater Guard for themselves, under the command
of their new Officer Skippon, after they had besieged the Tower, and compelled
the King to commit the government of it to a man of their own nomination, and
election; after they had put a Governor and Garrison into Hull, and that
Governor and Garrison kept His Majesty out of the Town; after they had in
defiance of His Majesty and against His express pleasure signified to them,
put His Royal Navy into the hands, and under the command of the Earl of
Warwick; after they had in many Counties executed the Ordinance of the Militia;
and after they had brought the danger to His Chamber door, by their Orders to
the very Sheriff of Yorke-shire to assist Sir John Hotham, and employing their
Committee there to the same purpose.

For abusing the Committees sent to His Majesty, they should (and no doubt if
it had been in their power they would) have mentioned one particular abuse
offered to them; it is very well known that they had all freedom and respect,
albeit His Majesty well knew the ill and seditious offices they did there; and
though they appeared publicly at all meetings, and when His Majesty proposed
any thing to the County, they produced their instructions, and dissuaded the
County from complying with His just desires; the suffering and enduring whereof
might more reasonably be imputed to the King, then any ill usage they received;
of which their own Letters printed by Order, will be sufficient testimony; and
when the King went from York, toward Nottingham, Ex. Col. p. 185.
after He had declared by His Proclamation, that He would erect His Royal
Standard; the Lord Fairfax (being one of that Committee) by some accident of
sickness continuing still at his house in that County; albeit the King well
knew the dis-service he had done Him, and that the keeping him in prison might
prevent much more, that he was like to do Him, yet since He had received him
there as a Member employed from the Parliament, and that his return thither
was hindered by an indisposition of health, he would not suffer him to be
apprehended, but left him un-disquieted, or disturbed, to recollect himself,
and to revolve His Majesty's goodness: So far was that Committee, or any
Member of it from being abused, whatsoever they deserved.

The next instance of the King's breach of His Protestation, or doing somewhat
against it, is, the beating their public Officers and Messengers, and
protecting notorious Papists, Traitors, Felons, such as Beckwith and others
from the Posse Comitatus: since there is no other named, it may be supposed,
that this is the only, or most notorious example of that protection, and
therefore it will be fit to examine, what the Case of this man was:

This Gentleman Mr. Beckwith (whether a Papist or no is not material) lived in
Beverly, whither His Majesty came that night, after Sir John Hotham had refused
to suffer Him to come into Hull, and was utterly unknown to His Majesty, but
had the just sense an honest Subject should have of the indignity offered to
his Sovereign, and the mischief that might befall that County and Kingdom by
this rebellious act, and was forward to express (as most of the Gentlemen of
that County were) a desire to repair His Majesty, and to prevent the
inconveniences which were otherwise like to follow.

He had in the Town of Hull a Son-in-law, one Fookes, who was a Lieutenant of
a Foot Company in that Garrison, whom he supposed (being only drawn in with the
Train bands) not maliciously engaged in the purpose of Treason, and therefore
as well to preserve a man, who was so near to him, innocent, as for other
respects to his King and Country, he sent for him to come to him to his house,
which the other (there being then no intercourse hindered on either side) did,
and upon discourse fully sensible of the unlawfulness of the act, which had
been done, and willing to do any thing for the King's service; declared, That
the Thursday night following he should have the Guard at the North Gate, and
that if an Alarm were given at another Gate, called Hessell-Gate, he would let
those in who came from the King; Mr. Beckwith promised if he would perform
this, he should have a very good reward, and that if he could convert his
Captain one Lowanger (a Dutchman) to join with him, he should likewise be very
liberally rewarded. This is all that was alleged against Mr. Beckwith, as
appears by Sir John Hothams Letter of the whole information to Mr. Pim, entered
in the Journall book of the House of Commons, and printed by their Order.

Fookes (as soon as he returned to Hull) discovered all to Sir John Hotham, and
he derived it to the House of Commons, as is said, and they upon this evidence
sent their Sergeant at Arms, or his Messenger to apprehend Beckwith as a
Delinquent, who upon notice of the treachery of his Son-in-law, durst not stay
at his house, but removed to York.

The Messenger, with the confidence of his Masters, boldly came thither, and
finding the Gentleman in the Court, and in the Garden where the King himself
was walking, had the presumption to serve the Warrant upon him, and to claim
him as his Prisoner; it was indeed a great wonder that the Messenger was not
very severely handled, but the reverence to the King's Person preserved him,
who bore no reverence to it; and His Majesty being informed what had happened,
called for the Fellow, and having seen his Warrant, bid him return to those
that sent him, and forbear committing the like insolency, lest he fared worse;
this was the beating their Messenger, and this the protection Mr. Beckwith had;
nor was there ever any Posse Comitatus raised, the High Sheriff daily waiting
on His Majesty, and observing the Orders he received from Him, according to the
duty of his office.

Whatever this offense had been, it was never known (before this Parliament)
that the Messenger of either House ever presumed to serve a warrant within the
King's Court, much less in his Presence; which whilst loyalty and duty were in
reputation, was held too sacred for such presumptions; the Law confessing such
privileges and exemptions to be due to those places, That the Lord cannot Dyer
fo. 60. b. pl. 23.
seize his Villain in the King's presence, because the presence of the King is
a sanctuary unto him, says my Lord Dyer.

For the matter it self, sure there is no man yet that will avow himself to be
so much out of his wits, as to say, that the King should have suffered Mr.
Beckwith to be carried to Westminster, as a Delinquent for doing the part of a
good Subject; and to be tried by those, who owned the Treason that was
committed, nor can there be one person named, whom they sent for as a
Delinquent, and the King protected; except those who had been a year together
attending upon them and demanding justice; or those against whom nothing was
objected, but that they waited on and attended his Majesty: For the Traitors
and Felons, they were only to be found within their own verge; and protected
by their own privileges.

Very few lines will serve here, to take notice of the difference between the
King's usage of their Messengers, and their usage of the King's; their
Messenger sent by them on an unlawful employment, to apprehend a person they
had no power to send for, and for a crime of which (if he had been guilty) they
had no cognizance, and executing their commands in an unlawful manner, and in
a place, where he ought not to have done it, though the command had been just,
was by the King fairly dismissed without so much as imprisonment or restraint:
The Kings Messenger sent by his Majesty with a Daniel Kniveton.
legal Writ to London, for the adjournment of the Term, which is absolutely
in the King's power to do, and can be regularly done no other way, for
performing his duty in this Service, according to his Oath, and for not doing
whereof he had been punishable, and justly forfeited his place without any
other crime objected to him, was taken, imprisoned, tried at a Court of War, by
them condemned to be hanged, and was executed accordingly: That blood will cry
aloud.

But they say, with those Guards, Cannon, and Arms, from beyond Sea, the King
attempted to force Hull in a hostile manner, and that within few days after
that solemn Protestation at York.

What the Protestation was, is before set down, and his Majesty's published
resolution in this point, before that Protestation; nor did his Majesty ever
conceal his purpose in this or other cases of that nature, or disguised his
purpose with any specious promises or pretenses, but plainly told them, and the
world, what they were to expect at his hands.

To their expostulatory and menacing Petition delivered to his Majesty at his
first coming to York, on the 26 of March, the King in his Answer used these
words, As we have not, nor shall refuse any way agreeable to justice Ex. Col.
p. 128.
or honor, which shall be offered to Us for the begetting a right
understanding between Us, so We are resolved, that no straits or necessities
(to which We may be driven) shall ever compel Us to do that, which the reason
and understanding that God has given Us, and Our honor and interest, with
which God has trusted Us for the good of Our Posterity and Kingdoms shall
render unpleasant and grievous to Us.

In this second Message concerning Hull, the second day after the Gates were
shut against him, his Majesty uses these words, If We are brought into a
condition so much Ex. Col. p. 156.
worse then any of Our Subjects, that whilst you all enjoy your privileges,
and may not have your possessions disturbed, or your titles questioned, We only
may be spoiled, thrown out of Our Towns, and Our goods taken from Us, it is
time to examine how We have lost those privileges, and to try all possible
ways, by the help of God, the Law of the Land, and the affection of our good
Subjects to recover them, and vindicate Our self from those injuries.

In his reply to their Answer concerning Sir John Hotham, presented to him on
the 9 of May, his Majesty told them, that He expected that they would not put
the Militia Ex. Col. p. 192.
in execution, until they could show Him by what Law they had authority to do
the same without His consent; or if they did, He was confident, that He should
find much more obedience according to Law, then they against Law.

Lastly, in his Answer to a Declaration of the 21 of June, 1642. (about a
fortnight before his going toward Hull with his Guards) his Majesty told them
plainly, Ex. Col. p. 380.
That the keeping Him out of Hull by Sr John Hotham, was an act of High Treason
against him, and the taking away his Magazine and Munition from him, was an act
of violence upon him (by what hands, or by whose directions soever it was done)
and in both cases by the help of God and the Law he would have justice, or lose
his life in the requiring it; so that certainly the King never concealed or
dissembled his purposes, and accordingly he did indeed toward the middle of
July, go with his Guards to Beverly, having some reason to believe, that Sir
John Hotham had repented himself of the crime he had committed, and would have
repaired it as far as he had been able, of which failing (to his own miserable
destruction) without attempting to force it his Majesty again returned to York.

Having made it now plainly appear how falsely and groundlesly his Majesty is
reproached with the least tergiversation or swarving from his promises or
professions (which no Prince ever more precisely and religiously observed) it
will be but a little expense of time, again to examine how punctual these
conscientious reprehenders of their Sovereign, have been in the observation of
what they have sworn or said.

In the first Remonstrance of the House of Commons, of the State of the
Kingdom they declare, that it is far Ex. Col. p. 19.
from their purpose or desire to let loose the golden reins of discipline and
government in the Church, to have private persons, or particular Congregations
to take up what form of divine Service they please; for (they said) they held
it requisite that there should be throughout the whole Realm, a conformity to
that Order which the Laws enjoyne.

In their Declaration of the 19 of May, speaking of the Bill for the
continuance of this Parliament, they say, We Ex. Col. p. 203.
are resolved, the gracious favor His Majesty expressed in that Bill, and the
advantage and security which thereby we have from being dissolved, shall not
encourage us to do any thing, which otherwise had not been fit to have been
done.

In the conclusion of their Declaration of the 26 of May, 1642. apprehending
very justly that their expressions there would beget at least a great suspicion
of their loyalty, they say, They doubt not but it shall in the end appear Ex.
Col. p. 281.
to all the world, that their endeavors have been most hearty and sincere, for
the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives,
the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament, in
which endeavors by the grace of God, they would still persist, though they
should perish in the work.

In their Declaration of the 14 of June, 1642. the Lords and Commons do
declare, That the design of those Propositions Ex. Col. p. 376.
(for Plate and Money) is to maintain the Protestant Religion, the King's
Authority and Person in His Royal dignity, the free course of Justice, the
Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and Privileges of Parliament.

As they have observed these and other their professions to the King and the
Public, so they have as well kept their promises to the people; in their
Propositions of the 10 of June, 1642. for bringing in Money or Plate, the Lords
and Commons do declare, That no man's affection Ex. Col. p. 340.
shall be measured according to the proportion of his offer, so that he
express his good will to the Service in any proportion whatsoever; the first
design was to involve as many as they could in the guilt, how small soever the
supply was, but on the 29 of November following, the same Lords and Commons
appointed Six persons, who, Ex. Col. p. 765.
or any Four of them should have power to assesse all such persons as were of
ability and had not contributed, and all such as had contributed yet not
according to their ability to pay such sum or sums of money, according to
their estates, as the Assessors or any Four of them should think fit and
reasonable, so as the same exceeded not the twentieth part of their Estates.

Infinite examples of this kind may be produced, which are the less necessary,
because whosoever will take the pains, to read their own Declarations, and
Ordinances, shall not be able to find, one protestation or profession made by
them to God Almighty in the matter of Religion, or to the King in point of duty
and obedience, or one promise to the people in matter of Liberty, Law, and
Justice, so near pursued by them, as that they have ever done one composed Act
in Order to the performance of either of them: which very true assertion shall
conclude this Answer to that reproach of his Majesty's, not having made good
his Protestations.

21. The next Charge is, That His Majesty proclaimed Page 35.
them Traitors and Rebels, setting up His Standard against the Parliament,
which never any King of England (they say) did before Himself.

His Majesty never did nor could proclaim this Parliament Traitors, he well
knew (besides his own being the head of it) that four parts of five of the
House of Peers were never present at any of those traiterous conclusions, and
that above a major part of the House of Commons was always absent, and that of
those who were present, there were many, who still opposed or dissented from
every unlawful act, and therefore it were very strange, if all those innocent
men of whom the Parliament consisted as well as of the rest, should have been
proclaimed Rebels and Traitors for the acts of a few seditious persons, who
were upon all occasions named; and if the Parliament were ever proclaimed
Traitors, it was by them only who presumptuously sheltred their rebellious
acts, under that venerable name, and who declared, that whatsoever violence
should be used either against those, who Ex. Col. p. 376.
exercise the Militia, or against Hull, they could not but believe it as done
against the Parliament. They should have named one person proclaimed Rebel or
Traitor by the King, who is not adjudged to be such by the Law.

The King never proclaimed Sir John Hotham Traitor (though it may be he was
guilty of many treasonable acts before) till he shut the Gates of Hull against
him, and with armed men kept his Majesty from thence, and besides the
concurrent testimony of all Judgments at Law, it appears and is determined by
the Lord Chief Justice Coke (published by the House of Commons this Parliament)
in his Chapter of High Treason, That if any with strength and weapons invasive
and defensive does hold and defend a Castle or Fort against the King and His
power, this is leavying of War against the King within the Statute of the 25
year of Edw. 3.

The King proclaimed not those Rebels or Traitors, who Voted, That they would
raise an Army, and that the Earl of Essex should be General of that Army (what
ever he might have done) nor the Earl of Essex himself a Traitor upon those
Votes, until he had accepted that title and command of Captain General, and
in that quality appeared amongst the Soldiers, animating and encouraging them
in their traiterous and rebellious designs, as appears by his Majesty's
Proclamation of the 9 of August, 1642. by which he was first proclaimed
Traitor: and there was no other way to clear the Earl of Essex from being
guilty of Treason by that act of his, within the express words of the 2
Chapter of the 25 year of King Edw. 3. but by declaring, that by leavying war
against our Lord the King in his Realm (which in that Statute is declared to
be high Treason) is meant leavying war against the Parliament, and yet Mr. St.
John observed in his Argument against the Earl of Strafford, printed by Order,
that the word KING in that Statute must be understood of the King's natural
person, for that person can only die, have a Wife, have a Son, and be
imprisoned.

The Lord chief Justice Coke in his Commentary upon that Statute, says, If any
leavy War to expulse Strangers, to deliver men out of Prisons, to remove
Counselors, or against any Statute, or to any other end, pretending
Reformation, of their own head, without any warrant, this is leavying war
against the King, because they take upon them Royal authority, which is
against the King; and that there 3 Part. Instis. fol. 9.
may be no scruple, by that expression without warrant, the same Author says,
in the same place, and but few lines preceding, that no Subject can leavy War
within the Realm without authority from the King, for to him it only belongs.

Preparation by some overt act to depose the King, or to Id. fol. 12.
take the King, by force and strong hand, and to imprison Him, until he has
yielded to certain demands, this is a sufficient overt act to prove the
compassing and imagination of the death of the King, for this is upon the
matter to make the King a Subject, and to disspoyle Him of His Kingly Office of
Royal government, as is concluded by the same reverend Author, and likewise,
that to rise to alter Id. fol. 9.
Religion established within the Kingdom, or Laws, is Treason.

These Declarers cannot name one person proclaimed a Rebel or Traitor by the
King, who was not confessedly guilty of at least one of these particulars: and
being so, the King did no more then by the Law He ought to do; and Mr. St.
John's acknowledged in his Argument Fol. 7.
against the Earl of Strafford, that he that leavies War against the Person of
the King, does necessarily compass His death; and likewise that it is a War
against the King, when intended for the alteration of the Laws or Government
in any part of them, or to destroy any of the great Officers of the Kingdom.

For the setting up the Standard, it was not till those persons, who bearing an
inward hatred and malice against his Majesty's Person and Government had raised
an Army, and were then traitorously and rebelliously marching in battle-array
against his Majesty their Liege Lord and Sovereign, as appears by his
Majesty's Proclamation of the 12 of August, 1642. in which He declared His
purpose to erect His royal Standard; and after they had with an Army besieged
his Majesty's ancient standing Garrison of Portsmouth, and required the same
(in which the King's Governor was) to be delivered to the Parliament; and
after they had sent an Army of Horse, Foot, and Cannon, under the command of
the Earl of Bedford into the West, to apprehend the Marquess of Hertford, who
was there in a peaceable manner without any Force, till he was compelled to
raise the same for his defense, and to preserve the peace of those Counties,
invaded by an Army; and then when his Majesty was compelled for those reasons
to erect his Standard, with what tenderness He did it toward the two Houses
of Parliament, cannot better appear then by His own words, in his Declaration
published the same day on which that Proclamation issued out, which are these,
What Our opinion and resolution is concerning Parliaments Ex. Col. p. 561.
We have fully expressed in our Declarations; We have said, and will still say,
they are so essential a part of the constitution of this Kingdom, that We can
attain to no happiness without them, nor will We ever make the least attempt
(in Our thought) against them; We well know that Our self and Our two Houses
make up the Parliament, and that We are like Hipocrates Twins, We must laugh
and cry, live and die together; that no man can be a friend to the one, and an
enemy to the other; the injustice, injury, and violence offered to Parliaments
is that which We principally complain of; and We again assure all Our good
Subjects, in the presence of Almighty God, that all the Acts passed by Us this
Parliament shall be equally observed by Us, as We desire those to be which do
most concern Our Rights; Our quarrel is not against the Parliament, but
against particular men, who first made the wounds, and will not suffer them to
be healed, but make them deeper and wider by contriving, fostering, and
fomenting mistakes and jealousies betwixt body and head, Us and the two Houses,
whom We name, and are ready to prove them guilty of High Treason, etc. And then
his Majesty names the persons.

This was the King's carriage toward, and mention of, the Parliament; very
different from theirs, who are now possessed of the Sovereign power; the Army;
who in their Remonstrance of the 23 of June last, use these words, We are in
this case forced (to our great grief of heart) thus plainly to assert the
present evil and mischief, together with the future worse consequences of the
things lately done, even in the Parliament it self, which are too evident and
visible to all, and so in their proper colors to lay the same at the
Parliament Doors, until the Parliament shall be pleased either of themselves
to take notice and rid the House of those, who have any way misinformed,
deluded, surprised, or otherwise abused the Parliament to the passing such
foul things there, or shall open to us and others some way, how we may, etc.
which would not have been mentioned here, if they had been only the
extravagant act, and words of the Army, but they are since justified, and made
the words of the two Houses by their declaring in their late Declaration of the
4 of March, in Answer to the Papers of the Scots Commissioners, That if Page 88.
there be any unsound principles in relation to Religion or the State in some
of the Army, as in such a body there usually are some extravagant humors, they
are very injuriously charged upon the whole Army, whereof the governing part
has been very careful to suppress, and keep down all such peccant humors,
and have hitherto always approved themselves very constant and faithful to
the true interest of both Kingdoms, and the cause wherein they have engaged,
and the persons that have engaged therein; so that this Remonstrance, being the
Act of the General, Lieutenant-Generall, and the whole Council of War, (which
is sure the governing part) it is by this Declaration fully vindicated to be
the Sense of the two Houses.

22. The setting up a mock Parliament at Oxford to Page 35.
oppose and protest against the Parliament of England, which his Majesty and
both Houses had continued by Act of Parliament, is in the next place objected
against his Majesty.

There was neither real nor mock Parliament set up at Oxford, but when the
King found that most of the Members of either House were driven from
Westminster by force as his Majesty had been, and yet that the authority and
reputation of Parliament was applied for the justification of all the
rebellious Acts which were done, even to the invitation of Forain power to
invade the Kingdom; as well for the satisfaction of His people that they might
know how many of the true Members of Parliament abhorred the acts done by that
pretended authority; as for His own information, his Majesty by his
Proclamation of the 22 of December. in the year, 1643. invited all the Members of
both Houses, who had been driven, or (being conscious of their want of
freedom) had withdrawn from Westminster, to assemble at Oxford upon the 22 of
January following, when (He said) all His good Subjects should see how willing
He was to receive advice for the Religion, Laws, and safety of the Kingdom,
from those whom they had trusted, though He could not receive it in the place
where He had appointed; Upon which Summons and Invitation by his Majesty, eight
and forty Peers attended his Majesty, there being at least twenty others
employed in his Armies, and in the several Counties, whose attendance was
dispensed with, and nine others in the parts beyond the Seas, with his
Majesty's leave; and of the House of Commons above one hundred and forty, there
being likewise absent in the Armies near thirty more, who could not be
conveniently present at Oxford.

When his Majesty found the appearance so great, and so much superior in
number, as well as quality, to those at Westminster, He hoped it would prove a
good expedient to compose the minds of the other to a due consideration of the
misery, into which they had brought their Country; and referred it to them to
propose any advice, which might produce so good an effect; what addresses and
overtures were then made by them, and afterward by His Majesty to persuade
them to enter upon any Treaty of Peace, and with what contempt and scorn the
same was rejected, will be too long to insert here, and is sufficiently known
to the world; thereupon this body of Lords and Commons published a Declaration
to the Kingdom, at large setting forth the particular acts of violence, by
which they had been driven from Westminster, and by which the freedom of
Parliament was taken away, and then declared how much they abhorred the
undutifull and rebellious acts, which were countenanced by those who staid
there, and declared their own submission and allegiance to his Majesty; and in
the end concluded, That as at no time either or both Houses of Parliament can
by any Orders or Ordinances impose upon the people without the King's consent,
so by reason of the want of Freedom and Security for all the Members of the
Parliament to meet at Westminster, and there to sit, speak, and vote with
freedom and safety, all the Actions, Votes, Orders, Declarations and pretended
Ordinances made by those Members who remain still at Westminster were void and
of none effect; yet they said they were far from attempting the dissolution of
the Parliament, or the violation of any Act made and confirmed by his Majesty,
but that it was their grief in the behalf of the whole Kingdom, that since the
Parliament was not dissolved, the power thereof should by the treason and
violence of those men, be so far suspended, that the Kingdom should be without
the fruit and benefit of a Parliament, which could not be reduced to any
action, or authority, till the liberty and freedom due to the Members should
be restored and admitted; which Declaration has not only ever received any
Answer, but with great care has not been suffered to be printed in the last
Collection of Orders and Declarations, where the other proceedings at Oxford of
that time are set forth, that the people may lose that evidence against them,
which can never be answered or evaded.

This was that Assembly, which these Declarers call the mock Parliament at
Oxford, and these the proceedings of it; of the justice and regularity whereof,
if there could have been heretofore any doubt made, the same is lately
vindicated sufficiently by both Houses: for if those Lords and Commons at
Oxford might not justifiably absent themselves from Westminster, where their
safety and freedom was taken from them; by what right or authority could a
smaller number withdraw themselves in July last upon the same pretense? and if
that body of Lords and Commons regularly convened by his Majesty's Authority to
Oxford, who had first called them together at Westminster, might not declare
the Acts made by those who remained at Westminster void and of none effect,
because they might not attend there and Vote with freedom and safety; by what
imaginable authority could the Speaker of the House of Commons (who has no
more freedom or power to make any such Declaration, then every single Member
of the House) declare, that such and such Votes passed in the House were void
and null? and that the omission of a circumstance or some formality in the
adjournment of the Houses could not be any prejudice to the future meetings and
proceedings of Parliament, when it might meet and sit again as a free
Parliament, as he did by his own single Declaration in July last: whereupon
that powerful Umpire (the Army) very frankly declared, Decl. and Papers of the
Army, p. 127.
That all such Members of either House of Parliament, as were already with the
Army for the security of their persons and were forced to absent themselves
from Westminster, that they should hold and esteem them, as persons in whom the
public trust of the Kingdom was still remaining, though they could not for
the present sit as a Parliament with freedom and safety at Westminster, and by
whose advice and counsels they desired to govern themselves in the managing
those weighty affairs; and to that end invited them to make their repair to the
Army, and said, they held themselves bound to own that honorable act of the
Speaker of the House of Commons, who had actually withdrawn himself, and they
engaged to use their utmost and speedy endeavor, that he and those Members of
either House, that were then enforced any way from Westminster, might with
freedom and security sit there, and again discharge their trust, as a free
and legal Parliament; and in the mean time, they did declare against that
late choice of a new Speaker by some Gentlemen at Westminster, as contrary to
all right, reason, law, and custom, and professed themselves to be most
clearly satisfied in all their judgments, and were confident the Kingdom would
therein concur with them; that as things then stood, there was no free nor
legal Parliament sitting, being through the foresaid violence at present
suspended; and that the Orders, Votes, or resolutions forced from the Houses on
Monday the 26 of July last, as also all such, as should pass in that Assembly
of some few Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster, under what pretense and color
soever, were void and null, and ought not to be submitted to by the freeborn
Subjects of England.

It is not denied, that the presentation of those humble desires of the young
men and Apprentices of the City of London to both Houses on the 26 of July
last, by which they compelled them to reverse and repeal two several Acts of
both Houses passed but three days before, was most destructive to the
privilege and freedom of Parliament; and no question the Speakers and Members
of both Houses had good reason to withdraw and absent themselves upon that
violation; but it is affirmed, that the freedom of Parliament, was as much
obstructed by several other acts preceding, as it was on the 26 of July last;
and that the Members of both Houses, who attended his Majesty at Oxford, had as
great reason to withdraw themselves, and at least, as much authority to declare
their want of freedom, as the Speaker and the others had then, or the Army to
declare on their behalfs.

When the Tumults brought down by Manwaring and Ven, compelled the House of
Peers to pass the Act of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford, to which
the fifth part of the Peers never consented, (the rest being driven from
thence) and afterward so absolutely forced his Majesty to sign it, that it
cannot be called His Act, His hand being held and guided by those who kept
Daggers at His Breast, and so His royal name affixed by them; and it being
told Him at His Counsel board, by those who were sworn to defend Him from such
violence, that if it were not done in that instant, there would be no safety
for Himself, His royal Consort, or His Progeny, the Rabble having at that time
besieged His Court: The freedom of Parliament was no less invaded, then it
was on the 26 of July last.

When the same Captain Ven, then a Member of the House of Commons (in November
and December, 1642.) sent notes in writing under his hand into the City, that
Decl. Lords and Commons, Oxf. f. 8* 9.
the people should come down to Westminster, for that the better part of the
House was like to be over-powred by the worser part, whereupon at that time and
some days after multitudes of the meanest sort of people, with Weapons not
agreeing with their condition, or custom, in a manner contrary and destructive
to the privilege of Parliament, filled up the way between both Houses, offering
injuries both by words and actions to, and laying violent hands upon several
Members, proclaiming the names of several of the Peers, as evil and rotten
hearted Lords, crying many hours together against the established Laws in a
most tumultuous and menacing way; and when this act was complained of to the
House of Commons, and Witnesses offered to prove Capt. Ven guilty of it; and a
Fellow who had assaulted and reproached a Member of the House of Commons in
those Tumults coming again to that Bar with a Petition showed, and complained
of to that House; and yet in neither of these cases, justice, or so much as an
Examination could be obtained, and when these proceedings were so much
countenanced by particular Members, that when the House of Peers complained of
them as derogatory to the freedom as well as dignity of Parliament; Mr. Pim
said, God forbid we should dishearten our friends, who came to assist us: no
doubt the freedom and safety of the Parliament was no less in danger and
violated then it was on the 26 of July last.

When in January, 1642. (after the first Proposition concerning the Militia was
brought to the House of Peers, and by them rejected) a Petition was brought in
a tumultuous manner to the House of Lords, in the name of the Inhabitants of
Hertford-shire, desiring liberty to protest against all those as enemies to the
Public, who refused to join with the Honorable Lords, whose endeavors were
for the public good, and with the House of Commons for the putting the
Kingdom into a posture of safety under the command of such persons, as the
Parliament should appoint; when other Petitions of that nature, and in the same
manner delivered, were presented to that House, concluding that they should be
in duty obliged to maintain their Lordships, so far as they should be united
with the House of Commons in their just and pious proceedings; when at the same
time a Citizen accompanied with many others said at the Bar of the House of
Commons, without reprehension, That they heard there were Lords, who refused to
consent and concur with them, and that they would gladly know their Names.

When that signal Petition of many thousand poor people was delivered to the
House of Commons, which took notice of a Malignant faction, that made abortive
all their good motions, and professed that unless some speedy remedy were
taken for the removing all such obstructions, as hindered the happy progress of
their great endeavors, the Petitioners would not rest in quietness, but should
be forced to lay hold on the next remedy, that was at hand to remove the
disturbers of the peace; and when that monstrous Petition Ib. p. 12.
was carried up to the House of Peers, by an eminent Member of the Commons, as
an Argument to them to concur with the Commons in the matter of the Militia;
and that Member desired, That if the House of Commons was not assented to in
that point* those Lords who were willing to concur, would find some means to
make themselves known, that it might be known, who were against them, and they
might make it known to those who sent them: Upon which Petition so strangely
framed, countenanced, and seconded, many Lords thereupon withdrawing
themselves, in pure fear of their lives, the Vote in Order to the Militia twice
before rejected, was then passed: The freedom of Parliament was as absolutely
invaded, as it was on the 26 of July last.

In August, 1643. the House of Commons agreed, after a long and solemn debate
to join with the Lords in sending Propositions of Peace to the King; the next
day printed Papers were scattered in the Streets, and fixed upon the public
places both in the City, and the Suburbs, requiring all persons well-affected,
to rise as one man, and to come to the House of Commons next morning, for that
20000 Irish Rebels were landed; which direction and information was that day
likewise given in Pulpits by their seditious Preachers; and in some of those
Papers it was subscribed, that the malignant Party had over-voted the good, and
if not prevented, there would be Peace; a Common Council was called late at
night, though Sunday, and a Petition there framed against Peace, which was the
next morning brought to the House, countenanced by Alderman Penington, who
(being then Lord Major of London) that day came to the House of Commons,
attended with a great multitude of mean persons, who used threats, menaces, and
reproaches to the Members of both Houses; their Petition took notice of
Propositions passed by the Lords for Peace, which (if allowed) would be
destructive to Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and therefore desired an
Ordinance according to the tenor of an Act of their Common Council the night
before; Thanks were given by the Commons, whilst the Lords complained of the
Tumults, and desired a concurrence to suppress them, and to prevent the like,
many of the people telling the Members of both Houses, that if they had not a
good Answer, they would be there the next day, with double the number: by these
threats, and this violence, the Propositions formerly received were rejected,
and all thoughts of Peace laid aside: and then surely the freedom of
Parliament was as much taken away, as on the 26 of July last.

In a word, when the Members of both Houses were compelled to take that
Protestation, to live and die with the Earl of Essex, and some imprisoned and
expelled for refusing to take it; when they were forced to take that sacred Vow
and Covenant of the 6 of June, 1643. by which they swore, that they would to
their power assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament
against the Forces raised by the KING; when they were compelled to take the
last solemn League and Covenant, that Oath Corban, by which they conceive
themselves absolved from all obligations divine and humane, as their
Predecessors (the Jews) thought they were discharged by that (though they had
bound themselves) not to help or relieve their Parents; and lastly, when the
Army marched to London in the beginning of August last, in favor of the
Speakers and those Members, who had resorted to them, and brought them back to
the Houses, and drove away some, and caused others of the Members of a contrary
Faction to be imprisoned, and expelled the Houses, the liberty and freedom of
Parliament was no less violated and invaded, then it was on the 26 of July
last.

Upon these reasons, and for want of the freedom so many several ways taken
from them, those Lords and Commons, who attended his Majesty at Oxford, had
withdrawn themselves from Westminster, and might then, as truly and more
regularly have said, what the Army since with approbation and thanks have said,
on the 22 of June last, That the freedom of this Parliament Decl. and Papers
of the Army, p. 53.
is no better, then that those Members, who shall according to their
consciences endeavor to prevent a War, and act contrary to their ways; who
(for their own preservation) intend it, they must do it with the hazard of
their lives: which being a good reason for those lately to go to St. Albons or
Hounslow heath, cannot be thought less justifiable for the other to go to
Oxford.

Since this objection of calling the Members of Parliament to Oxford is not of
weight enough to give any advantage against his Majesty to His Enemies, they
endeavor to make their entertainment and usage there very reproachful with
His friends, and would persuade them to believe themselves derided in that
expression of the Kings in a Letter to the Queen, where He calls them a
Mungrell Parliament, by which they infer, what reward His own Party must
expect, when they have done their utmost to shipwreck their faith and
conscience to his will and tyranny.

Indeed they, who shipwreck their faith and conscience have no reason to expect
reward from the King, but those Lords and Gentlemen who attended his Majesty in
that convention well know, that never King received advice from His Parliament
with more grace and candor, then his Majesty did from them; and their
consciences are too good to think themselves concerned in that expression, if
his Majesty had not Himself taken the pains to declare to what party it
related; besides, it is well known, that some who appeared there with great
professions of loyalty, were but Spies, and shortly after betrayed his
Majesty's service, as Sir John Price and others in Wales, and some since have
alleged in the House of Commons, or before the Committee for their defense to
the Charge of being at Oxford at that Assembly, That they did the Parliament
more service there, then they could have done at Westminster; So that the KING
had great reason to think He had many Mungrels there.

23. The last Charge is the making a Pacification in Page 36.
Ireland* and since that a Peace; and granting a Commission to bring over ten
thousand Irish to subdue the Parliament, and the rebellious City of London, and
the conditions of that peace.

That loud clamor against the Cessation in Ireland was so fully and clearly
answered by the King's Commisioners at the Treaty at Uxbridge, that there can
no scruple remain with any, who have taken the pains to read the transactions
in that Treaty; it plainly appears, that the King could not be induced to
consent to that Cessation, till it was evident that His Protestant Subjects in
that Kingdom could not be any other way preserved; The Lords Justices and
Council of that Kingdom signified to the Speaker of the House of Commons by
their Letter of the 4 of April, (which was above six Months before the
Cessation) That his Majesty's Army and good Subjects Relat. of the Treaty, p.
141.
there, were in danger to be devoured for want of needful supplies out of
England, and that His Majesty's Forces were of necessity sent abroad, to try
what might be done for sustaining them in the Country, to keep them alive till
supplies should get to them, but that design failing them, those their hopes
were converted into astonishment, to behold the miseries of the Officers and
Soldiers for want of all things, and all those wants made insupportable in the
want of food, and diverse Commanders and Officers declaring they had little hope
to be supplied by the Parliament, pressed with so great importunity to be
permitted to depart the Kingdom, as that it would be extreme difficult to
keep them there, and in another part of that Letter, they expressed, that they
were expelling thence all Strangers, and must instantly send away for England
thousands of poor dispoyled English, whose very eating was then insupportable
to that place, that their confusions would not admit the writing of many more
Letters, if any, (for they had written diverse others expressing their great
necessities:) And to the end His Majesty and the English Nation, might not
irrecoverably and unavoidably suffer, they did desire, that then (though it
were almost at the point to be too late) Supplies of Victual and Ammunition in
present might be hastened thither to keep life, until the rest might follow,
there being no Victual in the Store, nor a hundred Barrels of Powder (a small
proportion to defend a Kingdom) left in the Store, when the out-Garrisons were
supplied, and that remainder according to the usual necessary expense besides
extraordinary accidents would not last above a Month; and in that Letter they
sent a Paper signed by sundry Officers of the Army delivered to them, as they
were ready to sign that dispatch, and by them apprehended to threaten imminent
danger; which mentioned that they were brought to that great exigent, that they
were ready to rob and spoil one another, that their wants began to make them
desperate; That if the Lords Justices and Council there did not find a speedy
way for their preservation, they did desire, that they might have leave to go
away; that if that were not granted, they must have recourse to the law of
nature, which teaches all men to preserve themselves.

The two Houses, who had undertaken to carry on that War, and received all the
Money raised for that Service, neglecting still to send supplies thither; the
Lords Justices, and Council by their Letters about the middle of May,
advertised the King, That they had no Victual, Cloths, or other provisions, no
Money to provide them of any thing they want; no Arms, not above forty Barrels
of Powder; no strength of serviceable Horse; no visible means by Sea or Land of
being able to preserve that Kingdom. And by others of the 4 of July, that his
Armies would be forced Coll. Ord. 2. vol. p. 344.
through wants to disband or depart the Kingdom, and that there would be
nothing to be expected there, but the instant loss of the Kingdom, and the
destruction of the remnant of his good Subjects yet left there.

This was the sad condition of that miserable Kingdom, to whose assistance his
Majesty was in no degree (of Himself) able to contribute; and His
recommendation and interposition to the two Houses, whom He had trusted, was so
much contemned, that when upon their Order to issue out, at one time, one
hundred thousand pounds of the Moneys paid for Ireland, to the supply of the
Forces under the Earl of Essex, (albeit it was enacted by the Law upon which
those Moneys were raised, that no part of it should be employed to any other
purpose then the reducing the Rebels of Ireland) His Majesty by a special
Message advised and required them to retract that Order, and to dispose the
Moneys the right way, the necessities of Ireland being then passionately
represented by those upon the place, they returned no other satisfaction or
Answer to his Majesty, but a Declaration, That those Ex. Col. p. 57^.
directions given His Majesty for the retracting of that Order, was a high
breach of privilege of Parliament.

When His Majesty perceived that no assistance was, or was like to be applied
to them, and that the Enemy still increased in strength and power, He referred
the consideration and provision for themselves, to those, whose safeties and
livelyhoods were most immediately concerned, and who were the nearest witnesses
of the distresses, and the best Judges, how they could be borne, or how they
were like to be relieved; and so with the full advice and approbation of the
Lords Justices and Council there, and concurrent opinion of all the chief
Officers of the Army, that Cessation was made, by which only the Protestants
in that Kingdom, and His Majesty's interest there could at that time have been
preserved.

Of this Cessation, neither His Majesty's good Subjects in that or this
Kingdom, have reason to complain. Examine now the peace, which they say was
afterward made, on such odious, shameful, and unworthy conditions, that His
Majesty Himself blushed to own, or impart to His own Lieutenant the Earl of
Ormond, but a private Commission was made to the Lord Herbert to manage it.

Whilst the King had any hope of a tolerable peace in this, or a probable way
of carrying on the War in that Kingdom, He never gave a Commission to conclude
a peace there, and it plainly appears by the relation of the Treaty at
Uxbridge, (to the truth of which there has not been the least objection) the
Acts of the Commissioners of both sides being extant, that there was no
expedient proposed (though desired often on the King's party) for the
proceeding in that War, but that His Majesty would quit absolutely all His
Regal power in that Kingdom, and so put all His Subjects there (English and
Irish) out of His protection, into that of the two Houses of Parliament here,
who at the same time were fighting for the same Supremacy in this, and who had
at the same time disposed a greater power thereof to the Scots, then they
reserved to themselves; it concerned the King then in piety and policy, in His
duty to God and man, to endeavor to preserve that Kingdom by a peace, which He
could not reduce by a war, and to draw from thence such a body and number of
His own Subjects, as might render Him more considerable to those, who, having
put off all natural allegiance, and reverence to his Majesty, looked only what
power and strength, and not what right He had left.

The peace that was concluded, was upon such terms and conditions, as were in
that conjuncture of time just and honorable; and when it could not be
continued without yiedling to more shameful and less worthy conditions, the
Marquess of Ormond, his Majesty's Lieutenant of that Kingdom, (who had the
sole and entire authority from his Majesty to conclude a peace, and against
whom all their envy, and all their malice, has not been able to make the least
objection) best knowing his Masters mind, chose rather to make no peace, and to
trust providence with his Majesty's Rights, then to consent to such
Propositions; nor had the Lord Herbert ever any Commission to make a peace
there, but being a person, whose loyalty and affection to his service, the King
had no reason to suspect, and being of the same Religion with the Enemy, might
have some influence upon them, was qualified with such a testimony, as might
give him the more credit amongst them to persuade them to reason: His restraint
and commitment was very real by the whole Council board there, though when it
appeared that his errors had proceeded from unskilfulnesse and unadvisednesse,
and not from malice, he was afterward enlarged by the same power.

The unnatural conclusions and inferences these men make from what the King
has said or done, applying actions done lately, to words spoken seven years
before, cannot cast any blemish upon the Kings Religion, which* shines with the
same luster in Him, as it did in the primitive Martyrs; and even those Letters
taken at Nazeby, (which no wise Rebel, or gallant Enemy would have published)
will to posterity appear as great Monuments of His zeal to the true Protestant
Religion, in those straits in which He was driven by those who professed that
Religion, as any Prince has left, or have been left by any Prince since
Christianity was embraced: And if that Religion should prosper with less
vigor, then it has done, and the Christian and Pagan world have less
reverence toward it, then they have had, these Reformers may justly challenge
to themselves the honor and glory of that declension, and triumph in the
reproaches they have brought upon the most Orthodox Church, that has
flourished in any age since the Apostles time.

These Charges and reproaches upon the King, which have been now particularly
examined and answered, and of which the world may judge, are aggravated by the
King's so often refusing their addresses for peace; the truth of which
suggestions (though for method sake the Order of their Declaration has been
inverted) must be now considered, and all of that kind, which is scattered and
dis-jointed in the Declaration, shall for the same method sake be gathered
together and resolved; and in this Argument they seem to think, they are so
much upon the advantage ground, that they are rather to make an Page 7.
Apology to the world, for having so often made Addresses to their King, then
for resolving to do so no more; that is, for enduring so long to be Subjects,
then for resolving hereafter to be so no more.

The truth is, they never yet made any one address for peace; only sometime
offered to receive his Crown, if his Majesty would give it up to them, without
putting them to fight more for it, for other sense or interpretation, no
Propositions yet ever sent to Him can bear; and whereas they say, they must not
be so unthankful to God, as to forget they were never forced to any Treaty, it
is affirmed, that there are not six Members, who concur in this Declaration,
who ever gave their consent to any Treaty, that has yet been, but when they
were forced by the major part to consent to it, they were so unthankful to God
for the opportunity of restoring a blessed peace to their Country, that they
framed such Propositions, and clogged their Commissioners with such
Instructions, as made any Agreement impossible.

Though no Arithmetique, but their own, can reckon those Seven times, in which
they have made such applications to the King, and tendered such Propositions,
that Page 7.
might occasion the world to judge, they had not only yielded up to their wills
and affections, but their reason also, and judgment, for obtaining a true peace
and accommodation; yet it will be no hard matter shortly to recollect the
overtures, which have bin made on both sides, and thence it may best appear
whether the King, never yet offered any thing fit for them to receive, or would
accept of any tender fit for them to make.

What Propositions were made by them to prevent the War, need not be remembered,
who ever reads the nineteen sent to Him to York, will scarce be able to name
one Sovereign power, that was not there demanded from him; nor can they now
make Him less a King, then He should have been, if He had consented to those.

After His Standard was set up, and by that his Majesty had showed that He
would not tamely be stripped of His Royal power, without doing His best to
defend it, He sent a Message before blood was yet drawn from Nottingham, to
desire that some fit persons might be enabled Ex. Col. p. 579.
by them, to treat with the like number, to be authorized by His Majesty, in
such a manner, and with such freedom of debate, as might best tend to that
happy conclusion, which all good men desired, The peace of the Kingdom; to
which gracious overture from His Majesty, the Answer was, that until the King
called in His Proclamations and ^ag. 580.
Declarations, and took down His Standard, they could give Him no Answer.

And at the same time published a Declar: to the Kingdom, That they would not
lay down their Arms, until the King should withdraw His protection from all
such persons, Ex. Col. p. 575.
as had been voted by both Houses to be Delinquents; or should be voted to be
such; that their Estates might be disposed to the defraying of the charges the
Commonwealth had been put to; And who they meant by those Delinquents, they
had in a former Declaration to the Inhabitants of Yorkshire expressed, that
all persons should have reparation out of the Estates of all such persons in
any part of the Kingdom whatsoever, who had withdrawn themselves to York, and
should persist to serve the King, etc. This was one of their Applications, in
which they had yielded up their wills and affections, and their reason and
judgment for obtaining peace.

They say, they have cause to remember that the King Page 9.
sometimes denied to receive their humble Petitions for peace: the which they
had rather should be believed in gross, then trouble themselves with setting
down the time, and manner when it was done; but out of their former writings it
is no hard matter to guess what they mean: When the KING was at Shrewsbury,
and the Earl of Essex at Worcester toward the end of September, 1642. the two
Houses sent a Petition to their General, to be presented to His Majesty in
some safe and honorable way; In which Petition they most humbly besought his
Majesty, to withdraw His Person from His own Army, Ex. Col. p. 632.
and to leave them to be suppressed by that power, which they had sent against
them, and that He would in peace and safety without His Forces return to His
Parliament. The Earl of Essex by Letter to the Earl of Dorset, who then
attended his Majesty, intimated that He had a Petition from both Houses to be
delivered to his Majesty, and for that purpose desired a safe Conduct for
those, who should be sent with it; The Earl of Dorset (by his Majesty's
command) returned Answer, That as He had never refused to receive any Petition
from His Houses of Parliament, so He should be ready to give such a reception
and Answer to this, as should be fit, and that the Bringers of it should come
and go with safety, only He required that none of those persons, whom He had
particularly accused of High Treason (which at that time were very few) should
by color of that Petition be employed to His Majesty. This Answer was declared
to be a breach of privilege, and so that Petition, which (as His Majesty says
in His Answer to the Declaration of the 22 of October) was fitter to be Ex.
Col. p. 699.
delivered after a Battle and full Conquest of Him, then in the head of His
Army, when it might seem somewhat in His power whether He would be deposed or
no, was never delivered to his Majesty, and this is the Petition, which they
now say He sometimes denied to receive.

They say that when they desired Him to appoint a place for a Committee of both
Houses to attend His Majesty with Propositions for Peace, He named Windsor,
promising to abide thereabouts till they came to Him, but presently marched
forward so near London, that He had almost surprised it, whilst He had so
engaged Himself for a Treaty.

This likewise refers to the Petition sent to his Majesty at Colebrooke; and
all the circumstances were fully answered Ex. Col. p. ^45.
by his Majesty in his Declaration upon that occasion, when this aspertion was
first unreasonably cast upon Him; It is true, after the Battle at Edgehill,
when they could no longer persuade their friends of the City, that the King's
Forces were scattered, and their Army in pursuit of Him, but in stead thereof,
they had pregnant evidence, that his Majesty's Army was marching toward them,
and was possessed of Reading, whilst the Earl of Essex continued still at or
about Warwick, on the 2 of November, they resolved to send an Overture to his
Majesty concerning Peace; and though it must not be said they were forced to
that Address, yet truly who ever reads that Petition which was brought to his
Majesty to Colebrooke, will be of opinion by the style of it, that they were
fuller of fear, or of duty, then they were when they rejected his Majesty's
offer from Notingham, or then they were ten days after, or ever since: That
Petition was answered with all imaginable candor by his Majesty; and Windsor
chosen if they would remove their Garrison out of it, for the place of Treaty:
But when the Messengers were returned, who made not the least mention of a
Cessation, it appeared by sure intelligence that the Earl of Essex, who had the
night before brought his Army to or near London, after those Messengers were
dispatched to his Majesty, had drawn a great part of his Forces, and the London
Train bands toward his Majesty, and sent others to Acton on the one side, and
Kingston on the other; so that there being likewise a Garrison at Windsor, if
the King had staid at Colebrooke, He had been insensibly hemmed in, and
surrounded by the Enemy; whereupon He took a sudden resolution to advance to
Brainceford; thereby to compel them to draw their Body together, and so making
His way through that Town with the defeat of a Regiment or two which made
resistance there, and thereby causing those at Kingston to remove, the King
went to His own House at Hampton Court, and having there in vain expected the
Commissioners from the Houses to Treat, retired to Reading, where He staid,
till He found they had given over all thought of Treaty, and they sent Him a
new scornful Petition, to return to His Parliament with His Royal, not His
Martial attendance.

In January following, the importunity of the City of London, and general
clamor of the people forced them to pretend an inclination to peace; and so
they sent Propositions to his Majesty, which though but 14 in number, contained
the whole matter of the former 19. with an addition of some Bills ready passed
the two Houses, to which His royal assent was demanded, one of which was for
the extirpation and eradication of the whole frame of Church Government; and
another for the confirming an Assembly of such Divines as they had chosen, to
devise a new Government, which they were so much the fitter to be trusted with*
because in the whole number, (which consisted of above one hundred, and might
be increased as they thought fit) there were not above a dozen, who were not
already declared Enemies to the old, to the which notwithstanding there were
few of them who had not subscribed, and a promise required from his Majesty,
that He would give His assent to all such Bills which the two Houses should
hereafter present to Him, upon consultation with that Assembly.

How extravagant soever these Propositions were, the King so much subdued and
suppressed His Princely indignation, that He drew them to a Treaty even upon
those Propositions, expecting (as He expressed in His Answer, when He proposed
the Treaty) that such of Coll. Ord. 2 vol. p. 52.
them as appeared derogatory from, and destructive to His just Power and
Prerogative, should be waved, and many other things that were dark and
doubtful in them, might be cleared and explained upon debate; and concluding
that if they would consent to a Treaty, they would likewise give such authority
and power of reasoning to those, whom they should trust, that they might either
give or take satisfaction upon those principles of piety, honor, and justice,
as both sides avowed, their being governed by.

How that Treaty was managed, how their Commissioners were limited and bound up
by their Instructions, that they had no power to recede from the least
material tittle of the Propositions upon which they treated; how they were not
suffered to stay one hour beyond the time first assigned to them, albeit his
Majesty earnestly desired the Treaty might be continued, till He had received
an Answer to Propositions of His own, which He had sent to the Houses, because
the Committee had no power to answer them; and how the same day their
Commissioners left Oxford; the Earl of Essex marched with his whole Army to
besiege Reading, is known to all men, who may conclude thereupon, that they
never intended that Treaty should produce a peace.

On the other side, the King proposed only, That His Ships might be restored to
Him, and His Castles, and Revenue, which by the confession of all had been
violently taken from Him; and that His Majesty and the Members of both Houses,
who had been driven from Westminster might either return thither, upon such a
provision as might secure them against Tumults for the future; or that the
Parliament might be adjourned to some safe place, and so all Armies presently
to be disbanded: To which Proposition from his Majesty, they never vouchsafed
to return Answer, and the King after He had above a Month in vain expected it
from them; and in that time received a good supply of Ammunition, which He was
before thought to want, sent another Message by Mr. Alexander Hambden on the 19
of May, 1643. in which He told them, Coll. Ord. 2 vol. p. 181.
That when He considered that the scene of all the calamity was in the bowels
of His own Kingdom, that all the blood which was spilt was of His own
Subjects; and that what victory it should please God to give Him, must be over
those who ought not to have lifted up their hands against Him; when He
considered that those desperate civil dissentions, might encourage and invite
a forain Enemy to make a prey of the whole Nation; That Ireland was in present
danger to be lost; That the heavy judgments of God, Plague, Pestilence, and
Famine, would be the inevitable attendants of this unnatural contention; and
that in a short time there would be so general a habit of uncharitableness
and cruelty contracted throughout the Kingdom, that even peace itself would
not restore His people to their old temper and security; His Majesty could not
suffer Himself to be discouraged though He had received no Answer to His former
Message, but by this did again with much earnestness desire them to consider
what He had before offered, which gave so fair a rise to end those unnatural
distractions.

This most gracious Message from the King, met with so much worse entertainment
and success then the former, as it was not only ever Answered, but the
Messenger likewise (being a Gentleman of quality and singular integrity) though
he was civilly received by the House of Lords, to whom he was directed, was by
the House of Commons apprehended and imprisoned, and never after freed from his
restraint, till he ended his life, after a long and consuming sickness.

This is the Messenger they mean, who (to excuse their Page 10.
inhumanity and cruelty toward him) they say, at the same time he brought a
specious Message of renewing a Treaty, was instructed how to manage that bloody
Massacre in London, which was then designed by virtue of the Kings Commission,
since published.

Before any thing be said of that Plot, it is known, that Gentleman was
imprisoned many days before there was any mention of a Plot; and the House of
Peers solemnly expostulated the injury done to them in it, and in vain
required his enlargement, which they would not have done, if there had been any
other objection against him, then the coming without a Pass from their
General, which was never understood to be requisite, till the House of Commons
very few days before declared it to be so, albeit themselves sent Messengers
to the King without ever demanding a Pass.

Now to the Plot it self; They have indeed published Coll. Ord. 2. vol. p. 199.
a Narration of that Plot, which served their turn barbarously to put two very
honest men to death, and to undo very many more; and it is very probable they
made that relation as full and clear, as their evidence enabled them to do, and
yet who ever reads it, cannot conclude reasonably, that there was ever more in
it, then a communion between honest men, of good reputation and fortunes, and
desirous of peace, how they might be able to discountenance that disorderly
rabble, which upon all occasions protested against peace, by appearing as
strong and considerable in numbers as they, and which certainly ought to have
found as great countenance and encouragement from the Parliament, as the other;
these discourses produced a disquisition of the general affections of the
City, and that a more particular computation and estimate of the inclinations
of particular men, and so mention of several things which in such and such
cases would be necessary to be done; and these discourses being by the
treachery of a Servant discovered to those, who could compound Plots and
Conspiracies out of any Ingredients, they joined those and a Commission they
had likewise met with, together, and so shaped a Conspiracy, that they used as
a Scar-crow to drive away any avowed and public inclinations for peace, the
pressing whereof at that time was like to prove inconvenient to them; but those
discourses, and that Commission, had not the least relation to each other, nor
was there one man, who was accused of or privy to those discourses, whose name
was in that Commission, or indeed privy to it, which had issued out a good time
before, and was to have been made use of (being no other then a fair legal
Commission of Array in English) if the Kings motion with His Army toward those
parts gave the people so much courage to appear for Him; nor can there be a
sober objection against the Kings granting such a Commission, when they had
their Ordinances ready upon all occasions, to be executed in the Kings
Quarters, and had named Commissioners for that purpose in all the Counties of
the Kingdom.

But to proceed, in the Overtures for peace, from the end of the Treaty at
Oxford, which was in April, 1643. they never made one Overture or Address to
his Majesty toward peace, till the end of November, 1644. in the mean time
what approaches the King made toward it must be remembered: After the taking of
Bristol, when his Majesty's strength and power was visible and confessed in the
West, and in the North, and the Enemies condition apparently low, and in many
of their opinions even desperate; the King albeit His last Messenger was still
in Prison, and no Answer to his Messages, by His Declaration of the 30 of June,
again renewed all the professions and offers He had before made, and told them,
that revenge and blood thirstinesse had never been imputed to His Majesty by
those, who had neither left His government or nature un-examined with the
greatest boldness and malice, and therefore besought them to return to their
Allegiance: what passed from his Majesty himself, and from the Lords and
Commons at Oxford in March following, and with what importunity, they desired
there might be a Treaty, by which some ways and means might be found, how a
peace might be procured, and how peremptorily and disdainfully they rejected
that desire in their Answer to his Majesty of the 9 of March, Coll. Ord. 2 vol.
p. 451.
because the greatest, and the greatest number of the Peers of the Kingdom,
and the greatest part of the House of Commons, then with his Majesty at Oxford,
seemed by Him to be put in an equal condition with them at Westminster, though
they had been content since to put the Officers of the Army into at least an
equal condition with them, by treating with them, is to be seen and read, and
needs no repetition.

In July following, which was in the year 1644. after He had routed the best
part of Sir William Waller's Army, and taken his Cannon, his Majesty sent from
Evesham another Message to the two Houses, to desire them, that there might yet
be a Cessation, and that some persons might be sent to Him with any
Propositions that might be for the good of His people, and He would condescend
to them: to which they never returned Answer.

Two Months after, on the 8 of September, when He had totally defeated the Army
of the Earl of Essex in Cornwall, taken all their Cannon, Arms, and Baggage;
the King again sent to them, that the extraordinary success with which God had
blessed Him in so eminent a manner, brought Him no joy for any other
consideration, then for the hopes He had, that it might be a means to make
others lay to heart, as He did, the miseries brought and continued upon this
Kingdom by this unnatural war, and that it might open their ears, and dispose
their minds to embrace those offers of peace and reconciliation, which had been
so often and so earnestly made unto them by Him, and from the constant and
fervent endeavors of which He resolved never to desist: and so conjured them
to consider His last Message and to send Him an Answer: To this Message
likewise, they never sent Answer: and these were the tenders made by his
Majesty, which they say were never fit for them to receive; we shall now
proceed to those they thought fit to offer, and accuse his Majesty for not
accepting.

On the 23 of November, 1644. the Committee from the two Houses brought the
Propositions to the King, which, they say, were agreed on by the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms not only as just, but necessary also for the very being of these
Kingdoms in a settled peace and safety: And which required his Majesty to
resign up all His Regal power in His three Kingdoms, to those who sent those
Propositions; to take their Covenant, and injoyne all others to take it; and to
sacrifice all His own Party (who had served Him honestly and faithfully) to
the fury and appetite of those, who had cast off their Allegiance to Him, and
to leave Himself the mere empty name of a King.

How the twenty days were afterward spent at Uxbridge, is published to the
world, in which the last observation made by the King's Commissioners must not
be forgotten, That after a War of near four years, for Relat. Treat. p. 175.
which the defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and the Privileges of the Parliament, were made the cause and
grounds, in a Treaty of Twenty days, nor indeed in the whole Propositions upon
which the Treaty should be, there has been nothing offered to be treated
concerning the breach of any Law, or of the Liberty, or Property of the
Subject, or Privilege of Parliament, but only Propositions for the altering a
Government established by Law, and for the making new Laws, by which almost all
the old are or may be cancelled; and there has been nothing insisted on of the
Kings part, which is not Law, or denied by the Kings Commissioners that the
other required, as due by Law.

For the Protestation, which they say, was entered (about Page 10.
the time of this Treaty) in the Councell-Book, and of which his Majesty gave
the Queen account, it is known to be no other then a Declaration, that by
calling them a Parliament, there could be no acknowledgment inferred, that he
esteemed them a free Parliament, which few at that time did believe them to be;
and they have since upon as small reasons confessed themselves not to be.

They allege, as a wonderful testimony of their meekness Page 8.
and good nature, that after His Majesty's Armies were all broken, so that in
disguise He fled from Oxford to the Scots at Newarke, and from thence went to
Newcastle, they tendered to Him at Newcastle, and afterward, when the Scots had
left Him to the Commissioners of Parliament, at Hampton Court, still the same
Propositions in effect, which had been presented before in the midst of all His
strength and Forces: which is rather an Argument that they had at first made
them as bad as possibly they could, then that they were good since; and
(considering the natures of these Declarers) there cannot be a more pregnant
evidence of the illness and vileness of those Propositions, then that they
have not made them worse; nor is the condition in which they have now impiously
put His Majesty for His refusal, worse, then it had been, or would be (His
Personal liberty only excepted) if He consented to them; and in one
consideration it is much better, because it is now a confessed act of violence
and treason upon Him, which if He once consent to their Propositions, they will
(when ever they find occasion) appear legally qualified to do the same.

They have once again out of their desire of his Majesty's concurrence
descended to one other address to Him, and they said, they did so qualify the
said Propositions, Page 9.
that where it might stand with the public safety, His wonted scruples and
objections were prevented or removed, and yielded to a Personal Treaty, on
condition the King would sign but four Bills, which they judged not only just,
and honorable, but necessary even for present peace and safety during such a
Treaty; and upon His denial of these, they are in despair of any good by
addresses to the King, neither must they be so injurious to the people, in
further delaying their setlement, as any more to press His consent, to these
or any other Propositions.

What the former Propositions and Addresses to His Majesty have been, and how
impossible it has been for Him to consent to them with His Conscience, Honor,
or Safety, appears before; and how inconvenient it would have been to the
Kingdom if He had done it, they themselves have declared, by making such
important alterations in respect of the English interest in those presented at
Newcastle, from the other treated on at Uxbridge; it will be fit therefore to
examine these four Bills which were to be the condition of the Treaty.

One of these Bills is, to divest His Majesty and His Posterity for ever of any
power over the Militia, and to transfer this right, and more then ever was in
the Crown, to these men, who keep Him Prisoner; for it is in their power
whether they will ever consent that it shall be in any other; and to give them
power to raise what Forces they please, and what Money they think fit upon His
Subjects; and by any ways or means they appoint, and so frankly exclude
Himself from any power in the making Laws.

There need no other Answer, why it is not fit or possible for the King to
consent to this, then what the Commissioners from Scotland gave to the Houses,
when they declared their dissent; If the Crowns have no power of Answ. Sc.
Com. p. 20.
the Militia, how can they be able to resist their Enemies, and the Enemies of
the Kingdoms, protect their Subjects, or keep friendship or correspondence
with their Allies? All Kings by their royal Office and Oath of Coronation are
obliged to protect their Laws and Subjects, it were strange then to seclude the
Crown for ever from the power of doing that, which by the Oath of Coronation
they are obliged to perform, and the obedience whereunto falls within the
Oath of Allegiance; and certainly if the King and His Posterity shall have no
power in making Laws, nor in the Militia, it roots up the strongest foundation
of honor and safety which the Crown affords, and will be interpreted in the
eyes of the world, to be a wresting of the Scepter and Sword out of their hands.

Nor can this just and honorable Assertion be answered, and evaded, by saying,
that the Militia was the principal Decl. concerning the Scots Papers, p. 68.
immediate ground of their quarrel, in order to the preservation of Religion,
and the just Rights and Liberties of the people; and that the Scots
Commissioners have often agreed with them in it, and that the Kingdom of
Scotland fought together with them for it, and upon the ground thereof; and
that now they argue against their enjoying it, almost in the very same words,
as the King did at the beginning of the War in His Declarations.

It is no wonder that what these men have done, and the horrid confusion they
have made, have evinced many truths, which appeared not so manifest to all
understandings by what the King said, or that they have not Mart. Inde* p. 15.
so good an opinion of those, who tell them that there is another and a more
natural way to peace, and to the ending the war, then by Agreement, namely by
Conquest; As they had of them who with all imaginable solemnity swore that 3
Art. of the Covenant.
they would sincerely, really, and constantly endeavor with their estates and
lives, mutually to preserve and defend the King's Majesty's Person, and
authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties
of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with their Consciences of
their Loyalty, and that they had no thoughts or intentions to diminish His
Majesty's Power and Greatness, which Engagements might persuade many, that
their purposes were other then they now appear to be.

For that other power, they require to raise what Moneys they please, and in
what way they please; All the people of England will say, that which the Army
said honestly in their Representation, agreed upon at Newmarket on the 4 and 5
of June against the Ordinance of Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 31.
Indemnity, We shall be sorry that our relief should be the occasion of
setting up more Arbitrary Courts, then there are already, with so large a power
of imprisoning any Freemen of England, as this Bill gives, let the persons
entrusted appear never so just and faithful.

Indeed that is asked of his Majesty by this Bill, which the King can neither
give, nor they receive; the King cannot give away His Dominion, nor make His
Subjects, subject to any other Prince or power, then to that under which they
were born; no man believes that the King can transfer His Sovereign power to
the French King, or the King of Spain, or to the States of the united
Provinces; nor by the same reason can He transfer it to the States at
Westminster. And the learned and wise Grotius (who will by no means endure that
Subjects should take Arms against their Princes upon any specious pretenses
whatsoever) concludes, Si rex tradere regnum, aut subjicere moliatur, quin ei
resisti in hoc possit non De jure bell. fol. 85.
dubito, aliud enim est imperium, aliud habendi modus, qui ne mutetur obstare
potest populus; to the which he applies that of Seneca, Etsi parendum in
omnibus patri, in eo non parendum, quo efficitur ne pater sit; And it may be
this may be the only case in which Subjects may take up defensive Arms, that
they may continue Subjects; for without doubt no King has power, not to be a
King, because by devesting himself he gives away the right which belongs to
others, their title to, and interest in his protection.

The two Houses themselves seemed to be of opinion, when in their Declaration
of the 27 of May, 1642. they said, the King by his Sovereignty is not enabled
to destroy Ex. Col. p. 35.
His people, but to protect and defend them; and the high Court of Parliament,
and all other His Majesty's Officers and Ministers ought to be subservient to
that power and authority, which Law has placed in His Majesty to that purpose,
though He Himself in His own Person should neglect the same: So that by their
own judgment and confession it is not in the King's power to part with that,
which they ask of Him; and it is very probable, if they could have prevailed
with Him to do it, they would before now have added it to His charge, as the
greatest breach of trust that ever King was guilty of.

They cannot receive what they ask, if the King would give it; in the Journall
of the House of Commons, they will find a Protestation entered by themselves in
the third year of this King, when the Petition of Right was depending, in the
debating whereof some expressions had been used, which were capable of an ill
interpretation; That they neither meant, nor had power to hurt the King's
Prerogative: And the Lord chief Justice Coke, in the fourth part of his
Institutes, published by their Order since the beginning of this Parliament,
says, That it 4 Part Instit. fol. 14.
was declared in the 42 year of King Edw. 3. by the Lords and Commons in full
Parliament, that they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended
to the disherison of the King and his Crown, whereunto they were sworn: And
Judge Hutton in his Argument against Ship-mony, printed likewise by their Order
since this Parliament, agrees expressly, That the power of making War and
Leagues, Page 25, 26.
the power of the Coin, and the Value of the Coins (usurped likewise by these
Declarers) and many other Monarchical powers and prerogatives, which to be
taken away, were against natural reason, and are incidents so inseparable,
that they cannot be taken away by Parliament: To which may be added the
authority of a more modern Author, who uses to be of the most powerful
opinion, Mart. Inde* p. 27.
Mr. Martin, who says, that the Parliament it self has not, in his humble
opinion, authority enough to erect another authority equal to it self; And
these ambitious men, who would impiously grasp the Sovereign power into their
hands, may remember the fate which attended that Ordinance in the time of King
Hen. 3. to which that King metu incarcerationis perpetuae compulsus est
consentire, and by which the care and government of the Kingdom was put into
the hands of four and twenty; how unspeakable miseries befell the Kingdom
thereby, and that in a short time, there grew so great faction and animosity
amongst themselves, that the major part desired the Ordinance might be
repealed, and the King restored to His just power; that they who refused came
to miserable ends, and their Families were destroyed with them, and the
Kingdom knew no peace, happiness, or quiet, till all submission and
acknowledgment, and reparation was made to the King, and that they got most
reputation, who were most forward to return to their duty; So that it is
believed, if the King would transfer these powers, though many persons of
honor and fortune have been unhappily seduced into this combination; that in
truth no one of those would submit to bear a part of that insupportable
burden, and that none would venture to act a part in this administration, but
such whose names were scarce heard of, or persons known before these
distractions.

If the King should consent to another of their four Bills, He should subvert
the whole foundations of government, and leave Himself, Posterity, and the
Kingdom without security, when the fire, that now burns, is extinguished, by
making Rebellion, the legitimate Child of the Law; for if what these men have
done be lawful and just, and the grounds upon which they have done it be
justifiable, the like may be done again; and besides this, He must acknowledge
and declare all those who have served Him faithfully, and out of the most
abstracted considerations of Conscience and Honor, to be wicked and guilty
men, and so render those glorious persons, who have paid the full debt they
owed to His Majesty and their Country, by loosing their lives in His righteous
cause, and whose memories must be kept fresh and precious to succeeding ages,
infamous after their deaths, by declaring, that they did ill, for the doing
whereof, and the irreparable prejudice that would accrue thereby to truth,
innocence, honor, and justice, all the Empires of the world would be a cheap
and vile recompense.

Nor can this impossible demand be made reasonable by saying, It would be a
base and dishonorable thing for Decl. concerning the Scots Papers, p. 86.
the Houses of Parliament being in that condition they are, to have treated
under the Gallows, to have treated as Traitors, their cause being not
justified, nor the Declarations against them as Rebels recalled. It would be a
much more base and dishonorable thing, to renounce the Old and New Testament,
and declare that they are not the word of God; to cancel and overthrow all the
Laws and Government of the Kingdom; all which must be done, before their
cause, or their manner of maintaining their cause can be justified: and if that
were not perversely blind to their own interest, they would know and discern,
that such an act is as pernicious to themselves, as to truth and reason, their
own security depending on nothing more, then a provision, that no others for
the time to come, shall do what they have done; nor can they enjoy any thing,
but on the foundation of that Law they have endeavored to overthrow.

The King has often offered an Act of Oblivion, which will cut down all
Gallows, and wipe out all opprobrious terms, and may make the very memory and
mention of Treason and Traitors, as penal, as the crimes ought to have been;
they who desire more, ask impossibilities, and that which would prove their
own destruction; and who ever requires their cause to be justified, can have no
reason for doing it, but because he knows it is not to be justified.

The end of the third Bill is to dishonor those of His own Party, whom He has
thought fit to honor; and to cancel those Acts of grace and favor He
vouchsafed them, which is against all reason and justice, for if He had no
power to confer those Honors, there needs no Act of Parliament to declare or
make them void; if He had power, there is no reason, why they should be less
Lords upon whom He conferred that honor the last year, then those He shall
create the next: nor is this Proposition of the least imaginable moment to the
peace of the Kingdom, or security of a Treaty; though it be of no less
concernment to His Majesty, then the parting with one of the brightest Flowers
in His Crown.

The last Bill is to give the two Houses power to adjourn, to what place, and
at what time they please, which by the Act of continuance, they cannot now do,
without the King's consent, though there is no reason they should attribute
more to His Person in that particular, then they do in other things, to which
His assent is necessary, and if they do indeed believe, that His Regal power
is virtually in them, they may as well do this Act without Him, as all the rest
they have done.

The King in His Message of the 12 of April, 1643. rather intimated, then
propounded the Adjournment of the Parliament to any place twenty miles from
London, which the Houses should choose, as the best expedient He could think
of, for His own and their security from those tumultuous Assemblies which
interrupted the freedom thereof; to which though they returned no Answer to
His Majesty, yet in their Declaration after that Treaty Col. ord. 2 vol. p. 97.
at Oxford, they declared the wonderful inconvenience and unreasonablenesse of
that proposition; the inconveniences that would happen to such persons that
should have occasion to attend the Parliament by removing it so far from the
residency of the ordinary Courts of Justice, and the places where the Records
of the Kingdom remain; That it would give a tacit consent to that high and
dangerous aspersion of awing the Members of this Parliament, and it would give
too much countenance to those unjust aspersions laid to the charge of the City
of London, whose unexampled zeal and fidelity to the true Protestant Religion,
and the Liberty of this Kingdom (they said) is never to be forgotten, and that
they were wel-assured, that the loyalty of that City to His Majesty, and their
affections to the Parliament, is such, as does equal, if not exceed, any other
place or City in the Kingdom; which reasons being as good now, as they were
then, the King has followed but their own opinion in not consenting to this
Bill.

In a word; All the world cannot reply to His Majesty's own Answer upon the
delivery of these four Bills, or justify their proceeding, That when His
Majesty desires a Personal Treaty with them for the settling of a peace, they
in answer propose, the very subject matter of the most essential part thereof
to be first granted; and therefore the King most prudently and magnanimously
declares, That neither the desire of being freed from this tedious and irksome
condition of life He has so long suffered, nor the apprehension of what may
befall Him, shall make Him change His resolution of not consenting to any Act,
till the whole peace be concluded; for in truth nothing is more evident, then
that if He pass these Bills, He neither can be able to refuse any thing else
they shall propose, for He has reserved no title to any power, nor can have
reason to do it, for having resigned His choicest Regalities, it would be great
improvidence to differ with them upon more petty concessions, and having made
all honest men guilty, He could not in justice deny to refer the punishment of
them to those, who could best proportion it to the crimes: So that a Treaty
could afterward be to no other end, then to finish His own destruction with
the greater pomp and solemnity: whereas the end of a Treaty is (and it can have
no other) upon debate to be satisfied, That He may lawfully grant what is
desired, That it is for the benefit of His people, that He should grant it, how
prejuditiall soever it may seem to Himself, and that being granted, Himself
shall securely enjoy what is left, how little soever it be, and that His
Kingdom shall by such His concessions be entirely possessed of peace and
quiet; the last of which cannot be, (at least His Majesty has great reason to
suspect it may not) without the consent of the Scots, who peremptorily protest
against these Four Bills, And say that it is expressly provided in the 8 Article,
That no Answ. Sc. Com. p. 23.
Cessation nor any Pacification or Agreement for Peace whatsoever shall be made
by either Kingdom, or the Armies of either Kingdom without the mutual advice
and consent of both Kingdoms, or their Committees in that behalf appointed,
which is neither Answered, or avoided, by saying, that no impartial man can
read that Article of the Treaty, but He must needs agree, that it could be
meant only Decl. concerning the Scots Papers, p. 92.
whilst there was War, and Armies on both sides in being; and that it must of
necessity end, when the War is at an end; for besides that war is not, nor can
be at an end, till there be an Agreement, (and if it be, why is there so great
an Army kept up in the Kingdom?) by the same reason that Article was so
understood as it is now urged by the Scots before their coming into the
Kingdom, it may be so understood after they are gone; and that the Houses
themselves did understand it so, in the beginning of January, 1643. before the
Scots Army entered, appears by a Declaration Mr. St. John's made at that time in
the name of the Houses (and printed by Order) to the City of London at
Guild Hall, upon the discovery of a cunning Plot (as they said) to divide and
destroy the Parliament and the City of London, under the notion of peace; and
by engaging them in a Treaty of peace, without the Cunning Plot, p. 3.
advice and consent of their Brethren of Scotland, which (he said) would be
contrary to the late Articles solemnly agreed upon by both Kingdoms* and to
the perpetual dishonor of this Nation by breach of their Public Faith
engaged therein to that Nation; so that the two Houses having given their
judgment in the point, the King has great reason, if He had no other, to have
the whole well debated before Him, and the several interests weighed and
agreed upon, before He give His consent to any particulars, which will else
produce more mischief then His refusing all can possibly do.

Nor will these and their other extravagant and licentious demands be better
justified, by their undervaluing the Kings present power, in their insolent
question in their late Declaration concerning the Scots Commissioners (which in
truth, throughout is but a paraphrase upon that Speech of Demetrius to his
Companions of the like occupation, Sirs, you know that by this craft we have
Page 83.
our wealth) what can the King give them, but what they have already?

It is not out of their duty or good will to Him, that they make any
Application to Him, and if they did indeed believe, that His Majesty could give
them nothing, but what they have already, He should hear no more from them, but
they very well know, they have yet nothing, except He give them more; and that
the man that is robbed and spoiled of all that He has, when He has procured a
pardon for, and given a Release to the Thieves and Robbers, He has given them
more, then they had before, and that which only can make, what they had before
of benefit and advantage to them; they know and will feel the judgment upon the
wicked man in Job, He has swallowed down Riches, and he shall vomit Job 20.
15, 19, 22.
them up again, God shall cast them out of his belly; Because he has
oppressed, and has forsaken the poor, Because he has violently taken away a
house which he builded not; In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in
straits: That all their reproachings and revilings with which they have
triumphed over the Lords Anointed, must come into Psalm. 109. 18.
their Bowels like water, and like Oil into their bones; And that nothing can
restore and preserve them, but the Antidotes, and Cordials, and Balm, which
the King only can Administer; they know very well, that even the most
unfortunate Kings, that ever have been in England, could never be destroyed
without their own consent; and that all their power, and strength, and success
(though for a time it may oppress) can never subdue the Crown without its own
being accessory to its own ruin; and the King very well knows, that what He
yet suffers is not through His own default, but by such a defection as may
determine all the Empires of the world, and that in the unspeakable miseries
(which all His good Subjects have undergone) He is yet innocent; the conscience
whereof has refreshed Him in all His sufferings, and makes Him superior to
their insolence, contempt and Tyranny, and keeps Him constant to His Princely
and pious resolution; but that, if by any unhappy consent of His own, such an
establishment shall be made, as shall expose Himself, His Posterity and people
to misery, it will lie all upon His own account, and rob Him of that peace of
mind, which He now enjoyes and values above all the considerations of the
world, well knowing that God requires the same, and no more of Him, then he did
of his servant Joshuah, Only be thou strong, and very courageous, Ioshuah 1. 7.
that thou may observe to do according to all the Law which Moses my
servant commanded thee, turn not from it to the right hand, or to the left,
that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go.

Honest men and good Christians will be less moved with their bold and
presumptuous conclusion, which they have learned from their new Confederates
the Turks, That God himself has given his Verdict on their Decl. concerning
Sc. Com. p. 70.
sides, in their successes; not unlike the Logic used by Dionysius, who
because he had a good gale of wind at Sea, after he had sacked the Temple of
Proserpine, concluded, That the immortal Gods favored Sacrilege. It is very
true, they have been the instruments of Gods heavy judgments upon a most
sinful people, in very wonderful successes, yet if they would believe
Solomon, they would find, There is a time wherein one man rules Eccl. 8. 9.
over another to his own hurt; and prosperity was never yet thought a good
argument of men's piety, or being in the right; and yet if these men did enough
think of God Almighty, and seriously revolve the works of his own hand
throughout this Rebellion, and since they had looked upon themselves as
Conquerours, they would be so far from thinking that he had given his Verdict
on their side, that they would conclude, that he has therefore only suffered
to prosper to this degree, that his own power and immediate hand might be more
clearly discerned and manifested in their destruction, and that the cause might
appear to be his own by his most miraculous vindication of it.

If Master Hambden had been less active and passionate in the business of the
Militia, which might have proceeded from natural reason, and reformation of
his understanding, the judgment and Verdict of God would not have been so
visible as it was in the loosing his life in that very. Field, in which he
first presumed to execute that Ordinance against the King.

If Sir John Hotham had never denied his Majesty entrance into, and shut the
Gates of Hull against Him, from which natural Allegiance, and civil prudence
might have restrained him, the judgment and Verdict of God had been less
evident then it was, when after he had wished, that God would destroy him and
his posterity if he proved not faithful to the King, at the same time that he
had planted his Cannon against him; he and his Son were miserably executed by
the judgment of those, who but by his Treason could never have been enabled to
have exercised that jurisdiction; and that having it in his power he should
perfidiously decline to serve his Majesty, and afterward loose his head for
desiring to do it, when he had no power to perform it.

They who remember the affected virulency of Sir Alexander Carew against the
King, and all those who adhered to him; and how passionately he extolled and
magnified the perjury and treachery of a Servant, as if he had done his duty to
the Kingdom by being false to his Master the King; and that this man
afterward should by the treachery of his Servant be betrayed, and lose his
head by their judgments, for whose sakes he had forfeited it to the King,
cannot but think the Verdict of God more visible then if he had contained
himself within the due limits of his obedience, and never swarved from his
Allegiance.

To omit infinite other instances, which the observation of all men can supply
them with, the Verdict of God had not been so remarkable and notorious, if the
King had prevailed with his Army, and reduced his rebellious Subjects to their
duty, which might naturally have been expected from the cause, and the fate
that Rebels usually meet with; as that after a total defeat of the King's
Forces, and their gaining all the power into their hands, they could possibly
propose to themselves, they should not only be in more perplexity and trouble,
then when they had a powerful Army to contend with, but in more insecurity and
danger, then if they had been overcome by that Army.

That the City of London should be exposed to all imaginable scorn, contempt
and danger, upon the same Ordinance of the Militia, by which their pride and
sedition principally exposed the Kingdom to the miseries it has endured; that
the same Arts and Stratagems of Petitions and Acts of Common Council with
which they affronted the King, and drove Him from them, should be applied to
their own confusion and ruin.

That those Members who were the principal Contrivers of our miseries, the
most severe and uncharitable persecutors of all, who were not of that opinion,
and the greatest cherishers of those Tumults, which drove the King and all that
wished well and were faithful to Him from Westminster, should themselves be
persecuted for their opinions by those, whom they had supported, and be driven
thence by the same force; and as they had to make the KING odious to the people
against their own consciences, cast aspersions on Him of favoring the
Rebellion in Ireland; so themselves to the same end, should be accused of the
obstructing the relief of Ireland; so that to some of them, that Story of
Jason, (which though it be not canonical Scripture, is yet canonical 2 Mac. 5.
History) may be literally applied, who slew his own Citizens without mercy,
not considering, that to get the day of them of his own Nation, would be a most
unhappy day for him, who afterward flying from City to City, was pursued of
all men, hated as a forsaker of the Laws, and being had in abomination, as an
open Enemy of his Country and Countrymen, was cast out into Egypt: Thus he
that had driven many out of their Country, perished in a strange Land, and he
that had cast out many unburied, had none to mourn for him, nor any solemn
Funeral at all, nor Sepulcher with his Fathers.

That they who told the King, that if He should persist in Ex. Col. p. 93.
the denial of the Militia, the dangers and distempers of the Kingdom are
such, as would endure no longer delay, but unless He would be graciously
pleased to assure by those Messengers, that He would speedily apply His Royal
Assent to the satisfaction of their former desires, they should be enforced for
the safety of His Majesty and the Kingdoms, to dispose of the Militia by the
authority of both Houses in such manner as had been propounded, and they
resolved to do it accordingly, and upon that ground did raise the Rebellion
against the King, That these men should be told by their own Militia, That they
were clearly convinced Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 67.
and satisfied, that both their duties and trust for the Parliament and
Kingdom, called upon them, and warranted them, and an imminent necessity
enforced them, to make or admit of no longer delays, but they should take such
courses extraordinary, as God should enable and direct them unto, to put things
to a speedy issue, unless by Thursday next they received assurance and
security to themselves, and the Kingdom, that those things should be granted
which they insisted on; which were to have several Acts passed by the Houses,
speedily reversed, and other Acts formerly refused, to be consented to, all
which was done accordingly.

That their own Army should rebel against them upon the principles of their
own Declarations, which (they tell Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 39, and 40.
them) directed still to the equitable sense of all laws and constitutions, as
dispensing with the very letter of the same, and being supreme to it, when the
safety and preservation of all is concerned; and assuring them that all
authority is fundamentally seated in the Office, and but ministerially in the
persons; and that it is no resisting of Magistracy to side with the just
principles and law of Nature, and Nations: All which were the very grounds and
assertions upon which they raised and justified their Rebellion against the
King.

Lastly, that this very Declaration which they hoped would prepare the minds
and affections of the people with so much prejudice to his Majesty, that they
would concur with them in any desperate Act against Him and His Posterity,
should so much incense all sorts of people against them, that they are since
looked on, as the most odious scum of men, that ever infested a Nation; and
have lost more by it, then they have ever got by any Victory.

These are the visible instances of Gods Verdict in the cause, so that if they
had (with all their hypocritical discourses of Religion) the least sense of
Gods favors, or fear of his judgments, if they had not said unto him, Depart
Job 21. 14.
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, they would before this
have felt, that agony of heart, and trembling in their joints, out of the very
sense of the hand of God upon them, that they would take no rest, till they
cast themselves at his feet whom they have offended, and employ all their
faculties toward repayring their gracious Sovereign, and binding up the wounds
of their almost ruined Country.

Instead of which, to make their madness as public and notorious as their
Rebellion, they have resolved, and published their resolutions to the Kingdom:
1. That they Page 5, and 6.
will make no further address or application to the KING. 2. That no person
whatsoever shall make any, without their leave. 3. That whosoever shall break
this Order shall incur the penalties of High Treason. 4. That they will receive
no more any Message from the KING, and that no person shall presume to bring
any Message from the KING to them, or to any other person.

By the first and last of which, they have made and declared themselves no
Parliament; for being called by the King's Writ to Treat with Him, if they will
neither send to Him, or hear from Him, they can be no longer a Parliament.

By the second, they have taken away from the Subjects of the three Kingdoms,
that which themselves acknowledge to be their natural right and liberty, for
they say (and they say truly) in their Declaration of the 6 of May, 1643. That
to present their humble desires and Propositions Col. ord. 2 vol. p. 98.
to His Majesty is a liberty incident unto them, not only as Members of
Parliament, but as freeborn Subjects, yet this freedom is by this Vote taken
away.

To the third there needs be no more said then what the Army (who no doubt will
justify what they say) said upon this Argument, Not only to be denied the
right Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 35.
and the liberty to Petition, but withal by a censure, no less then capital,
to be exposed to a forfeiture of Estate, liberty, life, and all, for but going
to ask what a man conceives to be his due; and this without ever asking, or
hearing what he can say in his excuse; would carry so high a face of injustice,
oppression, and tyranny, as is not easy to be exampled in the proceedings of
the most corrupt and arbitrary Courts, toward the meanest single man: And they
shall do well to remember their own judgment in their Remonstrance of the 26 of
May, 1642. in these words, If the solemn proclaiming a man Traitor, signify
any thing, it Ex. Col. p. 278.
puts a man, and all those that any way aid, assist, or adhere to him into the
same condition of Traitors, and draws upon him all the consequences of Treason;
and if this may be done by Law; without due process of Law, the Subject has a
very poor defense of the Law, and a very small, if any proportion of Liberty
thereby; and it is as little satisfaction to a man that shall be exposed to
such penalties, by that Declaration of him to be a Traitor, to say, he shall
have a legal trial afterward, as it is to condemn a man first, and try him
afterward.

All the particulars of their Declaration are now examined, and however these
desperate men may flatter themselves, and how long soever they shall continue
in this their damnable Apostasy; the present age and posterity will believe
that in stead of rendering and making the KING appear unworthy of, or unequal
to the high Office and charge, to which God has advanced Him, they have in
truth vindicated Him from all those aspertions and blemishes their malice had
cast on Him, and that He appears the most worthy the great trust He was born
to, if He had no other title to it, then His admirable virtue and perfection:
After the boldest and strictest inquisition, that was ever made into the life
and manners of any Gentleman; after their examining all the actions, and all
the words of his life, and with impious license, perverting and torturing those
actions and words with their unreasonable glosses, and interpretations; after
their breaking into His Chamber, by corrupting His nearest Servants, and
thereby knowing what in any passion or indisposition He has said or done;
After their opening His breast, and examining His most reserved thoughts, by
searching His Cabinets, perusing His Letters, even those He had written in
cipher to His dearest Consort the Queen, and His private memorials; They have
not been able to fix a crime or error upon Him, which would draw a blush from
the modestest cheek, nor by all their threats, and all their promises, to shake
His pious and magnanimous resolutions; so that in truth, their main trouble and
vexation is no other, then David heretofore gave Saul, who, when he saw that he
behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him. 1 Samuel 18. 15.


But these miserable men must know, that if the King were as unjust, and as
oppressing as they would have Him believed to be, or as the best of them would
be, if he were in His place; they have not any title or qualification to use
Him as they have done: For if it were lawful for Subjects to take up Arms
against their Sovereign, upon pretense, that He were injurious, and performed
not the duty and Office of a King, besides the confusion, that must follow,
upon their assuming the judgment in that case, they would have it in their
power to resist, and avoid one of the greatest and most immediate judgments
which God sends to correct and chastise a Nation, which has provoked him to
displeasure: And Isa. 19. 4.
the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel Lord, and a fierce King
shall rule over them, says God himself by the Prophet Isaiah; He that can
destroy a Nation by what judgment he pleases; he that can humble this people
by a famine, and destroy that by a plague, may if he think fit, choose to do
either by the cruelty and fierceness of a King, I gave thee a King in mine
anger, Hos. 13. 11.
says the same Spirit by the Prophet Hosea. Now if it were lawful for us to be
angry with that King, who^ God has in his anger given us; or to be fierce
against him, whose fierceness the Lord has sent as his judgment upon us, we
might easily elude those sentences of his wrath, and drive those afflictions
from us, by our own courage, without waiting his leisure for our redemption:
And it may be no ill reason of that expression in the Prophet Samuel, that
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, that as men go to Witches, and Witches
go to the Devil, to get or discover somewhat, which God would not have them
get or discover; so they who rebel, endeavor by the help of the Devil, to be
too hard for God Almighty, and to avoid by their own skill and activity, a
calamity, by which God meant to reclaim them; The wrath of Prove. 16. 14.
a King is as Messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify it, says
Solomon; Not, oppose and resist, or rebel against it; and yet the same Solomon
tells us, that wrath is cruel; There is an ingredient of injustice, of
uncharitableness, of cruelty in all wrath, and yet the wise man, the honest,
just, conscientious man, thinks of nothing but pacifying it; gentleness,
application, and humility should be used to soften and mollify his wrath;
Indeed, so much is due to any wrath; A wise and a charitable man, will take so
much pains to reform and compose the wrath and distemper of his Neighbor, of
his equal; but there is much more to be done to the wrath of a King; and
Tremelius extends this care of the wise man much further, then such a
pacifying, and renders this Text, Vir sapiens expiabit eam, let this wrath be
never so unjust, so unreasonable, so immerited, the wise man, expiabit eam; he
will behave himself as if the fault were in him, as if he had provoked and
incensed the King to that wrath, he will expiate, he will give satisfaction by
prayer, by submission, by any sacrifice that may pacify, and be acceptable to
the offended Majesty; and by an exact and punctual performance of what becomes
a Subject, convince the King of the error and mistake of his passion; They who
under pretense of innocence and of faultlesnesse, neglect and contemn the anger
and displeasure of Princes, are not innocent enough, nor look on Majesty with
that reverence, which becomes them; Solomon's wise man will expiate the Kings
wrath from what fountain of passion or prejudice soever it proceeds.

It cannot be denied, that unjust, cruel and unmercifull Princes are great
afflictions and judgments upon a people; yet the calamities under such are much
more supportable, then the confusion without any; and therefore God frequently
exercised his peculiar and chosen people, with profane, wicked, and tyrannical
Kings, and refreshed them again, with pious, and devout, and just Princes, but
it was a signal mark of their desolation, when he declared, that the Children
of Israel should abide Hos. 3. 4. 10. 3.
many days without a King, and without a Prince; and it was a sure sign, when
they had no King, that they had not feared the Lord, and then what should a
King do to them?

If the most notable Ministers of confusion, and they who apprehend least the
effects of it, would but a little consider in their own stations, the misery
and desolation that must inevitably attend the breach of Order and subjection
in little; If the Father thought of the impossibility of living in his own
house, if his Wife and Children might follow the dictates of their own reasons,
and wills, and appetites, without observing his rule and directions; If the
Master would consider the intolerablenesse of his condition, if his Servants
might question, dispute, and contemn his commands, and act positively against
them, they would be the more competent Considerers of the mischiefs and
miseries that must befall Kingdoms and Commonwealths; If Subjects may Rebel
against the power and authority of Princes, whom God has appointed to govern
over them; There is not one of these Declarers, who does not think he has a
prerogative vested in him by nature; It is the prerogative of the Husband, the
Father, the Master, not to have his pleasure disputed, by his Wife, his Child,
his Servant, whose piety consists in obedience; yet they cannot endure the
mention of the Kings prerogative, by, and under which, only it is possible for
them to enjoy theirs. It was a welweighed scoff, by which Lycurgus convinced
him, who desired him to establish a popular Government in Lacedemon, Begin
(said he) first to do it in thine own house; and truly though these Ephori
(whose profession is to curb the power of Kings) intended nothing less, then
to part with the least tittle of their own just authority, They are appealed
to, whether they have not felt that power insensibly shrink from them, whilst
they have been ambitiously grasping at that belonged not to them? Is the piety
of Children, and the obedience of Servants the same it was before these days
of license? Has not God sent the same defection of reverence, kindness, and
affectionate inclinations into Families, to the rooting up and extirpating of
all possible joy, and delight in each other, which the heads of those Families
have cherished and countenanced in the State? It may be there would not be a
better or an easier expedient to reduce our selves, and recover that Allegiance
we have forsaken, then by sadly waighing and considering, the effects, and
kinds, and species of Gods judgments upon us, since we have been guilty of that
breach; If every Father whose soul has been grieved and afflicted with the
pertinacious undutifulnesse of a Child, would believe (as he has great reason
to do) that God has sent that perverseness and obstinacy into his own bowels,
to punish his peremptory disobedience to the Father of the Kingdom, his
Sovereign Lord the King; If every Master of a Family, who has been injured,
betrayed and oppressed, by the treachery, infidelity, or perjury of a Servant,
would remember how false, unfaithful and forsworn, he has been to his Master
the King, and conclude that his Servant was but the Minister of Gods vengeance
upon him, for that transgression; If the whole Nation would consider the scorn,
contempt and infamy it now endures and suffers under, with all Nations,
Christian and Heathen in the known world, and confess that God has sent that
heavy judgment upon them, for their contempt of him, for whose sake they were
owned and taken notice of for a Nation; It would not be possible but we should
bring our selves to that true remorse of conscience for the ill we have done,
that God would be wrought upon to take off the ill we have suffered, and we
could not entertain a fond hope of enjoying the least prosperity our selves,
without restoring to the King what has been rebelliously taken from Him.

They say, that though they have made those resolutions Page 37.
of making no more applications to the King, yet they will use their utmost
endeavors to settle the present Government as may best stand with the peace
and happiness of this Kingdom. What the present Government is, no man
understands, and therefore cannot know what that peace and happiness shall be,
which they intend shall accrue to the Kingdom by it; The little Cabinet of
Peers (for the House is shrunk into that proportion) has no share in it, as
appears by the giving possession of the Navy to Rainsborough without their
consent, after they had asked it; and by their doing many other things of high
moment, without so much as asking their concurrence; That it is not in the
Commons is as plain by their repealing such Acts of their own, and making
others, as the Army requires them to do; And that the Army is not possessed of
it, needs no other Argument, then the invasion and violation of all the
Articles ever made by the Army upon any Surrender, which if the power were in
them, would for their own honor have been observed, so that the endeavor they
promise to use to settle the present Government, is to take an effectual care,
that all Laws and legal Authority may for the present be so suppressed, that
there may be no Government at all: And truly it may be in their power for some
time to improve the confusion that is upon us, and to draw on the desolation
which attends us; but to settle any kind of Government, which can bring peace,
or any degree of happiness to the languishing Kingdom, nay which can be any
security to themselves and their posterity, except they submit to the good old
one, under which they were born, cannot be within their power, nor sink into
their reasonable hope: Nothing is more demonstrable, then that they can never
establish a peace to the Kingdom, or any security to themselves, but by
restoring the just power to the King, and dutifully submitting and joining
themselves to his protection; and it is as manifest, that by that way, they may
restore the Kingdom to peace, and preserve themselves and Families and
Posterities in full security and honor: The examination and clearing of which
two Propositions shall conclude this discourse.

The reverence and superstition which the people generally paid to the name and
authority of Parliament, and by which they have been cozened into the miserable
condition they now are in, is so worn out, that without captivating their
reasons any longer to it as a Council, they plainly discern, the ambition,
weakness, vanity, malice, and stupidity of the particular Members, of whom it
is, and of whom it ought not to be constituted, and easily conclude, that as
they have robbed them of the most happy and plentiful condition any freeman
of the world ever enjoyed, so they can never be instruments of any kind of
peace and security to them; and that as they have upon the matter dissolved the
noblest structure, and frame of government, in Church and State, that has been
at any time in the Christian world, so that they are too much transported with
passion and guilt, and of too little interest, experience and understanding, to
devise and settle a new form, or to mend any defects in the old: Besides that,
they plainly discern that they are not the Ministers of their Country for whom
they were chosen and deputed, but for the Army, whose dictates they are obliged
and forced to follow, so that if their inclinations were good, they have not
power to execute accordingly: And are like the Eagle in Esdras, when 2 Esdr.
11. 10.
the voice went not out of her head, but from the midst of her body.

The mutual confidence between them and their Army is totally dissolved, it
being not possible for the Houses ever to repose trust in any Army, for they
can never believe any Army to be more at their devotion, then they had reason
to think that under Sir Thomas Fairfax; nor for the Army to pay a full
submission to the Houses, for, admitting that Party which is most powerful in
the Army, for the present, is of the same mind and opinion with that Party
which is most powerful in the Houses, yet being both still Rivals for the
Sovereign power, they can never entirely trust, or entirely submit to each
other; Though the Houses should consist of none but such who were glad at that
time, that the King was taken from Holmby, and that the Army did not disband,
yet they will always remember, that the one was done without their Order or
consent, and that the Army may do the like again when they think fit, and when
it may not turn so much to their advantage; And that they did not only not
disband at that time, but have declared by their solemn Engagement of the Army,
5 of June, That they will not Disband, nor divide, nor suffer themselves Decl.
and Papers of the Army, p. 22.
to be divided or disbanded, till they have first security and satisfaction in
those things they have desired, in such manner as shall be agreed upon by a
Council, to consist of those general Officers of the Army (who have concurred
with the Army in what they have done, and what they have demanded) with two
Commission Officers, and two Soldiers to be chosen for each Regiment, who have
concurred, and shall concur with them in the premises and in this Agreement; so
that it is evident that the Army will be governed, and disposed of only by
themselves, for which they have very great reason, and without which indeed
they can have no security, for how complying soever the Houses are for the
present, the Soldiers cannot forget, that they were once declared Traitors but
for preparing a Petition, and they wisely observe, that what was done, may be
done again; and by the demurs which have been made concerning the safety and
immunity of the Speakers Id. p. 140, 141.
and those faithful Members who were driven away by violence, and the immunity
of the Army in advancing to London, (notwithstanding the public acknowledgment
and thanksgiving to God for it) They discern that they are only safe, by the
want of power in the Houses of what party soever they consist, the ambition,
injustice, and tyranny of both being equal.

The Army have already fully declared against their late Votes and resolutions,
and therefore it must be presumed they will never concur, or contribute to the
supporting them: The General himself in his Letter of the 6 of June, from
Cambridge, to the Speaker, tells him, That as it is his most earnest and humble
desire, so he found Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 23.
it to be the unanimous desire and study of the Army, that a firm peace in this
Kingdom may be settled, and the Liberties of the people cleared and secured,
according to the many Declarations by which they were invited and induced to
engage in the late War; And in the Declaration and representation from the
General and the whole Army of the 14 of June to the Parliament, they tell them
plainly and honestly, That they were not a mere mercenary Army, hired to serve
any Arbitrary power of State, but called forth Decl. and Papers of the Army, p.
39.
and conjured by the several Declarations of Parliament to the defense of
their own, and the peoples just Rights and Liberties, and so they take up
Arms in judgment and Conscience to those ends, and have so continued them, and
are resolved according to the first just desires in their Declarations, and
such principles as they had received from their frequent Informations, and
their own Common sense concerning those fundamental Rights and Liberties; and
to assent and vindicate the just power and rights of this Kingdom in
Parliament for those common ends premised, against all Arbitrary power,
violence, and oppression, and against all particular parties or interests
whatsoever: And in their Remonstrance of the 23 of June from S. Albons, they
say, That the Kingdom calls upon them not to disband, Ib. p 63.
till they see the Rights, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdom settled,
according to the many Declarations, by which they were first called forth, and
invited to engage in the late War.

Now what those ends, desires, and principles were in their Declarations, are
set forth before, and known to all men, who have or will read their Declar: to
be no other then the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Ex. Col.
p. 281.
King's just Prerogative, the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and the
Privileges of Parliament, in which endeavors (they said, they would still
persist though they should perish in the work; And they were so far from
avowing, that they would not send to, or hear from the King, or not suffer His
Majesty to come to them, that they declare, that as they never gave Him any
just cause of withdrawing Himself from His great Council, so it had ever Ib.
588.
been, and should ever be far from them to give any impediment to His return;
And in their Declaration in Answer to the Kings, after the Battle at Edghill,
concerning the allegations, that the Army raised by the Parliament was to
murder and depose the King, they say, They hoped Ib. 655.
the Contrivers of that Declaration, or any that professed but the name of a
Christian, could not have so little charity as to raise such a scandal,
especially when they must needs know the Protestation taken by every Member of
both Houses, whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God to defend His
Majesty's Person: And by that Protestation of the 22 of October, 1642.
(remembered before) Ib. 663.
they declare in the presence of Almighty God, to this Kingdom and Nation, and
to the whole world, That no private passion or respect, no evil intention to
His Majesty's Person, no design to the prejudice of His just Honor and
Authority engaged them to raise Forces, and to take up Arms; So that these
being the desires, ends, and principles in their Declarations, by which the
Army was invited to engage in this War, they will not suffer themselves to be
betrayed into a perpetual abjuring their Allegiance, or to be made instruments
for the destruction of all they were engaged to defend, but they will discern,
that as they may be excused for having upon such specious professions been
misled by those, whom they might reasonably believe, (which has been the case
of many honest men) so after so palpable a discovery of their wicked purposes,
they can only recover and preserve their innocence and credit by abhorring
those, who having engaged them to honest public ends, would now corrupt them
to sacrifice their bodies and souls to their own private lusts, malice, and
ambitions: And they cannot forget, that true acknowledgment of the Lords and
Commons in their Petition of the 14 of December, 1641. to the King, in which
they say, they acknowledge His Royal favor and protection to be a great
blessing and security to them for the enjoying and preserving of all those
public and private Liberties and Privileges, which belong unto them.

If the people could be so mad; if their fear, or their folly prevailed over
them to submit to such a setlement, as these Declarers would devise for them,
there are not ten of them, whose names are known to the Kingdom, who do know
and are agreed what kind of Government they would establish in Church or State;
Their fears and jealousies with which they delighted themselves, are now grown
real diseases, and take away their sleep from them; so that setting aside the
peace of Conscience, which they contend not for, there is not a man amongst
them injoyes that assurance of outward Security, as the poor Cavalier does,
whom they have robbed and spoiled of all that he has, upon whom all their
pride and plenty looks even with an envy and reverence; Is not the Ezekiel. 8. 3.
seat of the Image of Jealousy, which provokes to jealousy (as it was in
Ezekiel's Vision) in the gate that looks toward the North? and do they not
every day look to be destroyed by those, by whose assistance, they have been
enabled almost to destroy their Country?

They have not a foundation of credit to be trusted or believed at home or
abroad, but not only having broken all obligations divine and humane, but
publishing such a contempt of those obligations, that they are not henceforth
capable of any trust; for how can they be believed upon Oaths (which are the
most solemn bonds between men, when they are lawfully entered into) when they
make glosses and interpretations upon them to serve their turns, directly
contrary to the letter and words of the Oath? and if they cannot evade them
that way, call them Almanacks of the last year, and so out of date to direct
Mart. Inde. p. 1^.
them? when they with whom they have entered into Treaties, and the most fast
League could be devised, and to whom they have obliged themselves, never to
transact any matter of public concernment to the Kingdom without their
concurrence, shall be told) after they have raised them to the pitch they are
now at) that they Decl. concerning the Scots Papers, p. 62.
have nothing to do, to assent, or dissent, attest or protest concerning any
thing they shall think fit to establish in this Kingdom, either for the
Government of Church or State? Nay, when they shall be told, that it is no more
manners Mart. Inde: p. 7.
in them to press their advice and insist upon it, then it would be in the
same number of Spaniards, Indians, or the most remote Region of the earth; and
that so long, as they needed their assistance, they might have occasion to give
them meetings now and then, whereas now since they are able to protect
themselves, they may surely be sufficient to teach themselves to go about their
own business?

It will be necessary to add, that in all their transactions at home, to which
they have applied the Public Faith, they have not only not performed the
contracts they have made, but resolved at the time when they made them, not to
observe them, as appears by the Order of the 2 June, 1646. by which the House
of Commons resolved, That all persons that have or shall come Col. ord. 2 vol.
p. 889.
and reside in the Parliament Quarters, shall take the National League and
Covenant, and the Negative Oath, notwithstanding any Articles that have been or
shall be made by the Soldiery: And so they did not only break the Articles
formerly made upon the Surrender of Exeter and other places, but by virtue of
this Order, which could not be known to the persons concerned, they evaded
those made afterward upon the Surrender of Oxford, which were confirmed by
themselves; of which a principal Article was, that no man should be compelled
to take any Oath during the time he was allowed to stay in London, or at his
own House, or where he pleased, which was for the space of Six Months after the
Surrender.

As upon these, and infinite other reasons, the affections and hearts of the
people, are quite aliened from the Parliament, so they are with an equal
vigor recovered and converted to the King, and a full reverence to His sacred
Person (the want of which may be held justly the primary cause of all our
evils, and the advancement of all our distractions) and an ample acknowledgment
of His Princely wisdom, and unparalleld constancy is confessed to be due to
Him; And by His truly magnanimous carriage during the time of His Restraint,
when all persons have been removed from Him, who are either inclined to His
Person, or Rights, out of their duty and Allegiance, or to His opinions out of
judgment and understanding; by His unshaken constancy, in not being moved from
His great principles, with all their promises, and all their threats
successively administered to Him; by the sharpness and steadiness of His
understanding, with which upon all occasions, and in all discourses with the
Commissioners, who attended Him, He has demonstrated the impiety in point of
Religion; the injustice in point of Law; the unreasonablenesse in point of
Policy, even in relation to themselves, of all that they have proposed to Him
in order to Peace, with such a clearness of judgment, and such a candidnesse
of nature, that some of their own Ministers, not of the softest and gentlest
constitutions, have been forced to their disadvantage, to publish His
wonderful abilities: All men acknowledge that whatsoever has been wisely
said, or prosperously done throughout the managery of his great Affairs, has
proceeded from His own virtue and conduct; and that all the ill Successes, and
oversights, which have preceded and caused those ill successes, were the
effects of the unadvisednesse, unskilfulnesse, and passion of His Counselors
and Ministers.

And that the Kings great virtue had, and would have this great influence upon
the people, the Army well knew, when (to indear and ingratiate themselves after
the taking His Majesty from Holmby) they declared in their Remonstrance of the
23 of June from St. Albons, That whereas there had been scandalous informations
presented Decl. and Papers of the Army, p. 64.
to the Houses, and industriously published in print, importing as if His
Majesty were kept as a Prisoner amongst them, and barbarously and uncivilly
used, they said they could not but declare, that the same, and all other
suggestions of that sort, were most false and scandalous, and absolutely
contrary not only to their declared desires, but also to their principles,
which are most clearly for a general right and just freedom to all men; and
therefore upon this occasion (they say) they cannot but declare particularly,
that they desire the same for the King and others of His Party, and they
further clearly professed, that they did not see, how there could be any peace
to this Kingdom, firm or lasting, without a due consideration of, and
provision for the rights, quiet, and immunity of His Majesty's Royal Family
and His late partakers; And their General by his Letter of the 8 of July to
the Speaker, which was as soon printed as sent, freely acquainted them, that
their Army had Ib. p. 74.
made many Addresses to the King, to desire His Majesty's free concurrence with
the Parliament, for establishing and securing the common Rights and Liberties,
and settling the peace of the Kingdom; And to assure Him, that the public
being so provided for, with such His Majesty's concurrence, it was fully
agreeable to all their principles, and should be their desires and endeavor,
That (with and in such settling of the Public) the Rights of His Majesty's
Royal Family should be also provided for, so as a lasting peace and agreement
might be settled in this Kingdom; And that as they have formerly declared for
the same in general terms, so (if things came to a way of setlement) they
should not be wanting (in their spears) to own that general desire in any
particulars of natural or civil right to His Majesty's Person or Family,
which might not prejudice, or again endanger the Public: By which gaudy
professions, together with the admission of such Servants and Chaplains to
attend His Majesty whom He desired, and which had been barbarously denied by
the Houses (who were by this time so sensible of their error, as they desired
His Majesty's presence amongst them upon His own Conditions) they raised
themselves to that credit with the Kings party, with the City of London, and
universally with the people, that by this Stratagem only they grew able and
powerful enough to confine Him to Carisbrooke-Castle, and to proceed since as
they have done; And surely when the Army has thoroughly weighed and considered
the huge advantages they have gotten by those professions and protestations,
and how far they have been from making the same good to the King, they will not
suffer themselves to be made a stalking Horse to the vile ends of particular
persons, nor let their Moral Righteousness, in which they so much triumph, to
grow into a Proverb, for the highest and most unworthy Craft, Hypocrisy, and
Treachery.

It remains now, since by any endeavors of these men, severed from the return
to their duty and Allegiance, it is not possible for them to establish any
peace or happiness to the Kingdom, or security to themselves, to persuade
them that by doing at last the duty of Christians, they may not only preserve
their Country, which no body can doubt, but they may be superior to any
difficulties and hazard, their guilt suggests they shall be liable to.

It is yet in their power so absolutely to make the Kings restoration their own
work, that His Majesty may be obliged even in point of gratitude to acknowledge
it, and to remember only by whose fidelity He has recovered what He had lost,
and not by whose fault He lost it; and His party, (who for Conscience sake have
lost all) know that charity is so fundamental a duty of a Christian, that
there is no excuse for the least degree of animosity and revenge, let the
injuries they have received be never so great; and the Kings own experience of
men has sufficiently informed Him, that as many of good inclinations have by
inadvertency and credulity, been cozened into a combination against Him, and it
may be, the worst of them grown by degrees worse then they intended to be; so
all who have seemed to follow a good cause, are not good men, but had ends as
ill as they, whom they opposed; and therefore all mention and memory of former
Errors being blotted out, it may be presumed He will trust and employ all His
good Subjects, according to their several faculties and abilities, without
remembering how they have been at any time disposed against Him; and they have
reason to believe that whatsoever His Majesty shall freely consent to, He will
most religiously observe, and cause all others to observe it; Let them
therefore seasonably enter into a Treaty with His Majesty, attended with such
of His Counsel as He shall choose; and let the fullest Articles be agreed upon,
which may give a mutual assurance of security to all persons and interests, to
which His Majesty having given His Assent in such manner as shall be desired,
all His Counsel and all Ministers of Justice throughout the Kingdom, may be
solemnly sworn to those Articles; the which being done, and the same confirmed
by such an Act; and in that manner passed as they shall conclude may be valid;
Let this unhappy Parliament be dissolved, an intermission of Parliament being
at this time more necessary for the vindication of the justice, and Laws of
the Kingdom, and restoring a happy peace, then ever a convention of Parliament
was for the reformation and removing of grievances.

To conclude, unreasonable and unjust Propositions may continue the War, and
the distractions; never make a peace, which is nothing, but the liberty to
enjoy what in justice and right is our due; and as long as the world lasts,
that Answer of the Ambassador from Privernum to the Senate of Rome will be
found to be reason, who when he was asked what peace the Romans might depend
upon with them, (because they had been guilty of some defection) answered, Si
bonam dederitis, and fidam, Live. li. 8. 21.
and perpetuam; si malam, haud diuturnam; which that wise Senate confessed to
be an honest Answer, and that it was madness to believe any people or private
person in ea condition, cujus eum poeniteat, diutius quam necesse sit
mansurum: Let us then (like English men) make up the breach our selves have
made, and let not our Country and Posterity owe their redemption to any forain
power; but let us prostrate our selves at the feet of our abused Sovereign,
with that hearty acknowledgment and testimony which the King of Tire sent to
Solomon: Because the Lord has loved his people, he has 2 Cron. 2. 11*
made thee King over them; To a profane, dissolute, and licentious people, he
has given the most pious and temperate King, to recover and reform them by his
example; and to a wicked and rebellious people, the most gentle and merciful
King to preserve them by his goodness; But, if they sin wilfully after that
they have received the Heb. 10. 26, 27.
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devowre the Adversaries.

Micah 7. 4. The best of them is as a Bryer: the most upright is sharper then a
Thorn-hedge: the day of thy Watchmen and thy visitation comes; now shall be
their perplexity.


Ezekiel 23. v. 5, 9. And Aholah played the Harlot when she was mine, and she
doted on her Lovers, on the Assyrians her Neighbors.

Wherefore I have delivered her into the hands of her Lovers, into the hand of
the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.


The End.

