The City-Dames PETITION, IN The behalf of the long afflicted, but
well-affected CAVALIERS.

PRESENTED To the Supreme Powers of this Kingdom.

printer's device: a central fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor rose and a
Scottish thistle

Printed in the Year, 1647. 7ber 28

The City Dames Petition, in the behalf of the long afflicted, but
well-affected CAVALIERS.
Right Honorable,
WE whose names are underwritten, do in the behalf of all the well-affected
women in and about the Cities of London, West-minster; and other adjacent
parts, in hopes of a sudden redress, make known unto your Lordships and the
honorable the House of Commons, the unsupportable grievances which have long
befallen us, by oocasion of this unhappy, unnatural, and intestine war, and
have been continued to us of late by means of several orders issuing from
both Houses, for the extirpation of the Nobles and Gentry of this Kingdom, who
suffer for their loyalty to their King, and go under that noble attribute of
Cavalier, which the shorthaird brethren mistook for a name of infamy, being as
well over-seen in matters temporal as spiritual, and in both grossly. But
least we may seem prolixe, or like the people of Myndus, make our gate bigger
then our City, let us fall back to the Cavaliers, and make show of those
secrets which (to our griefs) have been long concealed.

It is not unknown to your Lordships, and the rest of this Kingdom, that
since his Majesty was compelled to leave White hall, by reason of unruly
multitudes, trading of all sorts have been mightily impeaded, unless a little
in the Suburbs, where your French Commodities are so frequently vendible,
whereas before the City supplied men with all commodities. And in justice we
ought to have our desires answered in some measure, for who paid the Scots
(those beggarly Saints) after they were invited to begin this war, but the
City? Who continued this war but the City? Or who are like to be undone by
this war but the City? We are sure our husbands have little reason to hold
their heads so high since the Cavaliers left the Town, to our great griefs,
our shops which heretofore were fragrant as the springs first flowers,
occasioned by gallants frequent visits, are now like houses haunted with
spirits, unfrequented, happy those days when they were stuck with variety,
Nobles, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, then every Citizens wife of any quality,
was occupied in her several vocation then might our husbands freely take the
air, or go to their countrey-houses, whilst we had those at our command to act
their parts in the City, which was a great contentment (good soule^) to them.
But now the case is altered, let us have ever so good commodities not a chapman
is left to cheapen, which will occasion a horrible inconvenience in time; we
shall not have a son but of the City breed, borne with a what do you lack?
in his mouth, or the issue of some foul mouthed fellow, who will be crying
down the Whore of Babylon, who are confident is a bawd by this time, for we
have heard her ra^^ed against by a Wicker chaird* brother, ever since the time
of our minorities. Besides my Lords, what an inconvenience it will be, when our
poor husbands have been hard at it all day, must be forced (though may be
disabled in the service) to work at night: in this we appeal to your
Lordships, or else we must be forced to be at the trouble to send our
Emissaries abroad to look out some friends, who no sooner entered -- into our
acquaintance, and indeered to us, but presently issues an Ordinance of
Parliament, which suited to the terrible sounds of Drum and Trumpet, forces us
to make a field business of it, or else to defer our joys till three tedious
months are wasted.

My Lords, we desire your Lordships, as you have been borne by women, or borne
of women, that your Lordships would advise of some convenient times to do it
your selves, or otherwise (in case you have miscarried, lying so long with the
Commonwealth) not to hinder well-affected people.

It is not unknown to your Lordships, that the Gentry of this Kingdom, I mean
the Cavaliers, have always stood stiff to the City upon all occasions, and
would still, were they not disabled by Parliamentary proceedings truly you have
by your rough handling, I hope your Lordships will not be offended, taken the
edge of their abilities much off, and by that means have left many good women
in a pitiful plight.

Consider we beseech your Lordships, it is not one, but many that suffer by
this unjust dealing, view but the now unfrequented streets, where whilome
Coaches plowed up the pavements, stuffed with gallants whose breaths were sweet
as Amber, instead whereof you shall see a mouse-hair'd fellow, with a long thing
God bless us by his side, as rusty as himself, with his erected ears, just
like our husbands, are not these goodly chapmen to deal in wholesale
Commodities?

To trouble your Lordships no further, what do or will people think when they
see that we are fit in our husbands shops for no other use but (just as
buckets are hung up finely painted in Churches) to extinguish the fire of some
poor neighboring building, when we might serve (were a right use made of us)
to extinguish the high rising flames of a Kingdom.

We beseech your Lordships to consider the premises, and according to your
mercy (not your justice) give a period to our grievances, and we shall (as in
duty bound) pray for your Lordships length, etc.

Mrs. I. Stradling, Obediah Placket, Ma. Lecher, Sa. Lovesicke, P. Horn, R.
VVantall, Pr. Tooly. Mrs. E. Overdooe, Han. Snatchall, D. Swivewell, K.
Stretch, A. Troublesome, Jo. Scanted, Reb. Dooling, etc.


Here Is the treasure of the City,
Beauties plenty, blithe and witty.

FINIS.

