PROPOSALS FOR Mr. CLARK'S SUPPLEMENT to his Annotations, which both together
make a complete Commentary on the Holy Scriptures: BEING A Survey of the whole
Bible.
Containing An Analytical Account, or Division of all the Holy Scriptures;
affording a pleasant Prospect into the several Rooms of this sacred Edifice,
and the Variety of Furniture contained in them.
THIS is the most exact and useful Work of this kind extant. For the Analysis
in Deodate is partly so general, and partly so confused, that it is of little or
no Use. The Analysis also in Robert's Key, is for the most part too general.
But this gives an Account of the several Parts both general and particular of
every Chapter, brought down to every Verse, especially in the Doctrinal and
Prophetical Books, and sometimes of particular Verses.

In which respect it will be exceeding useful, both for Ministers to show the
Coherence and Connection of a Text; and likewise to furnish with Matter of
Enlargement upon any Text there is occasion to quote: And also for private
Christians in their daily Course of reading the Scriptures, to give a more
comprehensive Understanding of the Drift, Scope, and Design of every Chapter,
and thereby the better to fix it in their Memories.

The Person underwritten does offer these PROPOSALS to all such as are willing
to encourage such a useful Book, viz. I. That the Book consists of 107 Sheets,
on Paper and Character, in Quarto, answerable unto the following Specimen. II.
That a perfect Book unbound shall be delivered unto each Subscriber, who shall
pay Nine Shillings: which, considering the excessive Dearness of Paper, is no
hard Condition. III. To encourage all Persons that shall procure six Books, he
or they shall have a seventh gratis.


The Undertaker, is Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, Bookseller.

Here follows a Specimen of the Method and Order of this Work.

GENESIS.
THis Book contains the History, 1. Of the Creation of the World, chap. 1. 2.
Of the State of Innocence, chapter 2. 3. Of the Fall, c. 3. 4. Of the Government of
the Church, 1. Before the Flood, c. 4, 5, 6. 2. After the Flood; and that (1)
scattered over the whole World, c. 7-11. (2) In Abram's Family and Posterity.
And therein is contained the History; 1. Of Abram, c. 12-24. 2. Of Isaac, c.
25-27. 3. Of Jacob, c. 28-36. 4. Of Joseph, c. 37-50.





CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter is described the Creation of the visible World, with all the
Creatures therein contained: Showing, I. The general Matter of all, v. 1. II.
The Nature or Condition of that Matter, v. 2. III. The Forming of the several
Creatures out of that Lump on the several Days: As, 1. On the first Day, Light:
concerning which is showed, (1) God's Decree about it. (2) The Execution
thereof, or the Creature made, v. 3. (3) God's Approbation (4) Its Separation.
from Darkness, v. 4. (5) The Name thereof; together with the Time, v. 5.
2. On the second Day, the Firmament; concerning which is showed, (1) God's
Decree, v. 6. (2) The Execution v. 7. (3) The Names; together with the Time, v.
8.
3. On the third Day, the Gathering together of the Waters, and the dry Land:
Concerning which is showed, Decree; together with the Execution, v. 9. Name;
together with the Approbation, v. 10. (3) The Decree concerning the Earth's
bringing forth Grass, Herbs and Trees, v. 11. (4) The Execution and
Approbation, v. 12. (5) The Time, v. 13.
4. On the fourth Day the Furniture of the Firmament, with Sun, Moon and Stars:
Concerning which is showed, (1) The Decree concerning them; together with the
Place Uses thereof, v. 14, 15. (2) The Execution thereof, v. 16-18. (3) The
Time, v. 19.
5. On the fifth Day the Furniture of the Waters and Air, with Fishes and Fowl:
Concerning which is showed, Decree, v. 20. (2) The Execution and Approbation v.
21. (3) God's Blessing, v. 22. (4) The Time, v. 23.
6. On the sixth Day the Furniture of the Earth, with living Creatures, 1.
Sensitive: concerning which is showed, (1) The Decree, 24. (2) The Execution
and Approbation, v. 25.
2. Rational: concerning which is showed, (1) The Divine Consultation about it.
(2) The Divine Pattern, according to which he was framed. (3) The State in
which he was to be p^ac'd; to be Lord over all God's Works v. 26. (4) The Work
done; and that as to v. 27. (5) God's Blessing, v. 28. Food. 1. For Man, v. 29.
Beasts, v. 30.



IV. Gods Approbation of all his Works; together with the Time, v. 31.


CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter the Account of the World's Creation is enlarged;

Recapitulation of the whole, v. 1. II. In respect of the Institution of the
Sabbath; and that (1) By Resting on the Seventh-day, v. 2. (2) Blessing and
Sanctifying it upon that Ground, v. 3.
III. By a further Account of the Manner how things came to Power alone, v. 4.
Particularly; (...)

