AN ITEM AGAINST SACRILEGE: OR, SUNDRY QUERIES CONCERNING TITHES.

Wherein is held forth, The Propriety and Title that Ministers have to them.
The mischiefs which would ensue if Tithes were brought into a common Treasury,
and Ministers reduced to Stipends. The danger of gratifying the Petitioners
against Tithes, and all imposed Maintenance.

Collected, and composed by one that has no Propriety in Tithes.

ROMANS 2. 22.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, Do thou commit Sacrilege?

LONDON,Printed by Abraham Millerfor Thomas Vnderhillat the Anchor and Bible in
PaulsChurch-yard, near the little North-door. 1653.

CERTAIN QUERIES Concerning the PROPRIETY and RIGHT OF The Ministry of England
TO TITHES.
1. WHether the Ministry of England has not as good a Propriety in Tithes, as
Noblemen, Gentlemen and Freeholders have in their Lands? The Reasons of this
Query are,

1. Because Ethelwolph son of King Egbert (who had brought the Saxon
Heptarchy into a Monarchy) had all See S. Hen. Spelmans Councils. anno 855.
the Lands in England for his Demesne, as is acknowledged by Sr Edward Cook in
his Commentaries upon Littletons Tenures, and conferred the Tithes of all the
Kingdom upon the Church, by his Royal Charter dated Anno 855. in these words,
King Ethelwolph by the consent of his Prelates and Princes which ruled in
England under him in their several Provinces, did enrich the Church of England
with the Tithes of all his Lands and Goods by his Charter Royal, etc. Adding in
the end, That who so should increase the gift, God would please to prosper, and
increase his days* But if any should presume to diminish the same, that he
should be called to an account for it at Gods judgment seat, etc. And this he
did not only as Lord Paramount, but as Proprietary of the whole Land, the Lords
and great men at that time having no property or estates of permanency, but as
accountants to the King, whose the whole Land was, and yet they also gave their
free consents, which the King required, that thereby they might be barred from
pleading any Tenant-right; as also to oblige them to stand in maintenance of
Tithes against all pretenders.

2. Because the people can have no Right or Propriety in them; for they never
bought or paid for them: Neither could they come by Inheritance; For that which
was not their forefathers could not descend to them: Neither came they to them
by Donation, which they can never show.

2. Whether it be agreeable to Piety, Prudence, Justice and Equity to alienate
Tithes from the Ministry, which have been so freely given by our own Christian
Kings out of zeal to advance Gods glory, confirmed by many Acts of Parliament,
often times renewed, and reiterated, as by Magna Charta thirty times confirmed,
and many other Statutes since, yea by the Text, and Body of the Common Law,
which affirms Tithes to be due Iure Divine, as Sr Edw. Cook testifies in the
second part of his Reports.

3. Whether the inconveniences and evils can possibly be foreseen, which will
ensue upon the alteration of such Fundamental Laws of this Nation, as have
continued in force through all changes for above a thousand years together?

Tithes have been given to the Church for maintenance of Gods word and
Ministrs, with a curse to all such as should alienate them.

4. Whether it is agreeable to Piety and Prudence, to pull them from God, to
rend them from his Church, to violate the Dedication of our Fathers, the Oaths
of our Ancestors, the Decrees of so many Parliaments, and to expose our selves
to those horrible curses which the body of the Nation has obliged it self to,
in case they consented to the alienation of the same? as Nehem. 10. 32, etc.

5. Whether it be not more then probable that the Ministry has had a propriety
in the Tithes in all Christian Churches, ever since Christians had a propriety
in Orig Hom. 11. in Number. Cypr. epist. 66.
their estates; since Origin and Tertullian, who lived not much above two
hundred years after Christ, tell us, That the community amongst Christians was
not wholly ceased in their time, and yet where it was, the Tithes were paid?

6. Whether it be not Sacrilege to alienate Tithes from the Church, having
been dedicated and consecrated unto God, either by the voluntary consent of
Churches, or by Donation of Princes? Seeing what is voluntarily consecrated by
man, is confirmed by God, and may not be alienated, Levit. 27. 14, etc. which
Law is the same under the Gospel, as appears in the example of Ananias, Acts 5.
3. whom Peter arraigns and God condemns, for this very Sacrilege: Why have
thou (said Peter) kept back part of the price of the Land? Whilst it remained
(viz. unsold) was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine
own power? viz. to have consecrated or not consecrated it, ver. 5. And Ananias
hearing these words, sell down and gave up the ghost.

7. Whether it is not against the light of Nature, and custom of all Nations,
to disanull the Will of the dead? Gal. 3. 5. Brethren, I speak after the manner
of men, though it be but a man's Covenant (or Testament) yet if it be confirmed
(viz. by the death of the Testator) no man disanulleth it, i. e. no man ought
to disanull it. Therefore Tithes having been given by Testament, confirmed by
the death of the Testators, Is it not against the light of Nature, and custom
of all Nations to alienate them, Heb. 9. 16, 17. For a Testament is of force
after men are dead.

8. Many Impropriations having been restored to the Church by godly Noblemen
and Gentlemen, and others having been bought in and settled in the most legal
way that could be devised upon the Ministry; Is it not against all Justice and
Equity to take them from the Church again? And will it not discourage all men
for the future from works of Piety and Charity when they see them thus
perverted?

9. Whether it be not more then probable that there was a positive Precept
given by God to the Fathers for the giving to him the tenth part of their
substance, as he had formerly required the seventh part of their time? And
whether do not the examples of Abraham and Jacob so readily giving their tenth,
evince this? Or without such a Precept, Had it not been will worship in them?
And do not such positive Precepts (if unrepealed) bind all to the end of the
world? as we see in the case of the Sabbath.

10. Whether Tithes, as an honoring of God be not enjoined in the first
Commandment? As they tend to preserve the public worship of God, in the second
and fourth Commandment? And as maintenance to the persors of Ministers, in the
fifth Commandment? being part of the honor due to spiritual Parents.

11. Whether Tithes can be called Antichristian, which were paid so long before
Antichrist time? And when Antichrist [the Popes of Rome] were the first that
durst take upon them to alienate them from the Church, by granting Exemptions,
Appropriations, etc. thereby robbing the Church and Parish Ministers to
gratify the This also is justified by ^llar^^, decleric^^, l, ^, c. 25.
Monks and Friars? And whether Alexander of Hales and Thomas of Aquin (who
lived about four hundred years ago) were not the first that pleaded for these
alienations made by the Pope? And whether they were not the first that to
justify the Popes proceedings, pleaded that Tithes were Jewish?

12. Whether these Scriptures do not concern Christians, as well as they did
the Jews? Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance and with the first
fruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine. Prove. ^0. 25. It is a snare to devour
that which is holy, and after the vow to make enquiry. Prove. 23. 10, 11. Remove
not the old Land mark, and enter not into the field of the fatherless: For
their Redeemer is mighty, and he shall plead their cause with thee. And Sr Edw.
Cook says in his Institutes, Our Law Books teach us, that Instit. 2. c. 1.
the Church is ever understood to be under age, and to be as a Pupil and
Fatherless: and that it is not agreeable to Law or Right that such should be
dis-inherited. Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10, etc. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed
me: But ye say. Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and in Offerings Ye are
accursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye
all the Tithes into the ^^ore house, that there may be meat in mine house, and
prove me new therewith, says the Lord of hests, if I will not open you the
windows of heaven, and pour you out a bless^^g, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it: And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her
fruit before the time in the field, says the Lord of hefts: And all Nations
shall call you blessed: And ye shall be a delightsome Land, says the Lord of
hefts.

13. Whether those Texts in the New Te^^^ment do not prove, that to
Gospel Ministers belongs as large, if not larger maintenance then to the
Levitical Priesthood, as their Ministry is more excellent, and the blessings
conferred thereby are 2 Cor. 3. 6, etc.
greater. Luke 10. 7. The labourer is worthy of his hire. 1 Cor* 9. 4. Have we
not power to eat and to drink. ver. 6. etc. Or I only and Barnal as, have not
we power to forbear working? Who goes to warfare any time at his own charges?
Who planeth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a
flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or
says ^^t the Law the same? For it i^ written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall
ne^ muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care
for Oxen! Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt it is
written: that he that pleweth should plew^^n hope: and that he that thresheth
in hope should be partaker of his hope. If we have sewn unto you spiritual
things, Is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? ver. 13. 14 Do
ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar?
Even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel. Gal. 6* 6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him
that ^ea^keth in all good things. ^hil. 4. 17. Not that I desire a gift, but I
desire fruit that may abound to your account. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18 Let the Elders
that rule well be countedworthy of double honor, especially they who labor in
the Word and Doctrine. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox
that treads out the corn: And the labourer is worthy of his reward*

14. Whether to speak of a sufficient maintenance without Tithes, be not a mere
fancy, that never was, nor (as I believe) ever will be brought into action? And
whether it would not trouble the wisest men that are, to name a stipend that
would be sufficient at all times, as Tithes are; which proceeding from the
wisdom of God, cannot be matched, much less bettered by man's wisdom?

15. Whether be not Tithes the fittest maintenance for the Ministry, seeing
hereby they partake with the people in times of plenty, which will more enlarge
their hearts in thankfulness; and suffer with them in times of scarcity, which
will more affect them with sense of Gods judgments? for that when natural
affections concur with spiritual, they are more active and vigorous.

16. Whether the practice of the Heathens, which used to give a Tenth to their
Gods, will not rise up in judgment against Christians, if they rob God of the
Tenth which their Predecessors have given to him?

17. Whether the judgment of so many eminent Divines as have held it
Sacrilege to alienate that from the Church which was once consecrated to God,
should not lay a restraint upon all men from practicing that which is so
hazardous and scandalous? That it is Sacrilege, is the judgment of Calvin,
Polanus, Kickerman, Perkins, with many others.

18. Whether all or most of the Arguments bent against the morality of Tithes,
do not equally militate against the morality of the Sabbath? as Dr Sclater has
shevved in his parallel in the end of his book of Tithes.

Certain Queries concerning bringing Tithes into a Common Treasury, and
reducing Ministers to stipends.
1. IF Tithes should be brought into a commoon Treasury, and Ministers paid out
thence, whether would our Countrymen, that say Tithes are such an intolerable
burden, be any whit eased? Yea would they not be more burdened by how much
their Tithing would be looked more narrowly into?

2. Would not the trouble of Ministers be far greater, being enforced to send
or go from Market to Market for every bushel of Corn or Malt, etc. that he
spends in his house?

3. If a dearth come, would it not tend to the ruin of many Ministers
families, who will be forced to spend more in a quarter then they receive for
their half years allowance?

4. If things should rise in the price the next hundred of years as they have
done the last, how shall Ministers be then able to live upon these stipends?

5. How many Officers must there be employed in every County to bring the
Tithes into a common Treasury, all which, either in whole or in part, must be
maintained out of them? And how will this curtail the Ministers share?

6. What attendance must Ministers give quarterly, or each half year, upon the
Trustees or Treasurers in every County, till they have list or leisure to pay
them? What trouble, journeys and expenses will this put them to? How will they
be enforced to bribe, and pay for expedition, or to be fobbed off with base and
clipped money? or to be forced to take wares for their money, if the Treasurers
be Tradesmen; as many have been served of late in the case of Augmentations?

7. Will not Ministers hereby be cast upon tentations, to speak only pleasing
things (like Trencher-Chaplains) lest their stipends should be taken from them?

8. Can it be expected that Ministers can or will be so liberal to the poor,
and given to hospitality when they buy all with the penny, as when they have it
in Tithes?

9. Will not such as bear the bag, and upon whom the Ministers must depend for
their subsistence, Lord it over them with pride and contempt enough? as bad, or
worse then the Bishops and their Chancellors did?

10. Though such as are of the best repute in each County should be chosen out
to be the Treasurers, yet do we not see by daily experience, how men are
mistaken in judging of the honesty of others? And how many men fall from their
former principles of honesty? and that if neither of these should be so, yet
how apt standing waters are to putrify?

11. If contentious suits have been betwixt Ministers and People about Tithes,
has it not for the most part arisen from the peoples covet^usnesse, pretending
c^stoms, prescriptions, or compositions, to defraud the Ministers of their due?

12. Were not Patrons at the first made choice of to defend the Ministers right
against the fraud and injustice of the people? And may not the wisdom of the
Parliament find out the same, or some such like course, whereby the Minister
shall neither be engaged in contentions with his people, nor troubled with
avocations from his study thereby?

13. May there not arise as many or more quarrels in case Tithes be brought
into a common Treasury, whilst some pretend conscience, and so will pay none
at all; others think themselves over rated; others think that the Tradesman,
who gets more by his Shop then they do by the Plough, should bear an equal
share in this common burden? And who then shall take course to enforce such to
pay? If the Treasurers in the Country, surely they will prove but cold
Solicitors in another cause. But suppose they do stir, they must spend out of
the common stock; and such suits being like to be many, especially in such
times as these, how will the Ministers stipends be curtailed thereby? Besides,
may it not be supposed, that they which spend of other men's purses, are like to
cut large thongs out of others hides?

14. If the Countryman shall pay a rate in money for his Tithes, will it not
come far more hardly from him? even like drops of blood, money being usually
very short with them. And will he not think it far easier to part with a cock
of Hay, or a sheaf of Corn, or such a small thing, then to part with so much
money as his whole Tithes may come to, once or oftener in the year? And how
little will he think himself eased hereby?

15. If Tithes be brought into a common Treasury, when a Living is worth two,
three, or perhaps four hundred pounds by the year, a great part of it will be
disposed of to other places, and will it not certainly be a great grief to the
people, that their Tithes shall go to they know not whom? certainly to such as
neither feed their souls with the bread of life, nor their bodies with the
staff of bread? And will not their poor want that relief, and themselves that
entertainment which they used to have at their Ministers house, to the
aggravation of their discontent?

Certain Qeries concerning our late Petitioners against Tithes, and an imposed
Maintenance.
1. Whether have we not cause to suspect, that those persons which petition
against Tithes and an imposed Maintenance, are acted by Jesuits, who cunningly
creep in amongst them, seeking hereby to overthrow the English Ministry, which
has so strongly opposed them, both by word of mouth and writings? And the
rather, because of that Scottish Jesuit, who lately turned Anabaptist, and I
have good information that there are lately come over 100. Jesuits that have
their frequent meeting in London to drive on this design.
upon examination at Newcastle confessed that he was sent over for that end.
Besides some other like examples which might be easily produced.

2. Whether can such Petitioners be rightly styled the godly and well-affected
of the Nation, who strive hereby to bring the greatest judgment upon the
Nation that ever did, or can possibly befall it? viz. A famine of the Word,
Amos 8. 11, etc. And the removing of our Teachers into corners, Isa. 30. 20.

3. Whether have we not cause to believe that the far greatest part of the
Gentry, Yeomandry and commons of the Land, that have Tithes to pay, are
desirous to have them continued to the Ministry: seeing so many thousands of
them out of a few Counties petitioned the late Parliament for the same: And no
doubt but many thousands more out of every County would do the like, if they
had the least encouragement thereunto.

4. Whether if Tithes were wholly taken away, would the generality of the
people be at all eased, seeing both Purchasers and Tenants must pay so much the
more for their Land?

5. Whether can we imagine that the Parliament, that has so lately declared to
the world, That they will be exceeding tender of every ones Liberty and
Property, will now so soon after take away the Propriety of all the Ministry of
England at one blow, to the ruin of so many thousand Families for the present;
to the discouragement of Parents from bringing up their Children to the Work of
the Ministry for time to come, and so to the indangering of the removal of the
Gospel from amongst us?

6. Whether would not these Petitioners (if Tithes were removed) cry out and
complain as much of the tyrannical oppression and burden of Rents, as the
Anabaptists in Germany did, and so never be quiet till they have levelled all
things?

-- Si non prosunt singula multa juvant. FINIS.

