THE Lying-VVonders, OR RATHER THE Wonderful-Lyes, WHICH WAS LATELY Published
to the World, in a Lying-Pamphlet, (called Strange and True News from
Gloucester) Containing a Relation of the wonderful power of God, showed for
Injustice at Fairford, by Frogs and Toads; And in the sudden death of the
Clarks Daughter at Brokington in Gloucestershire.

Presented to the view of the World, with some Observations in the end on
another such like Pamphlet (The Lords loud Call to England)

I. That the subtilty of Deluders may be discerned. II. That the simple may
from their delusions be preserved. III. That the Lovers of Truth may be
strengthened. IV. That all men about these Wonders may be satisfied.
By ROBERT CLARK, Minister of Gods Word in Norleach.

Fidei perfidia Error Veritati cedat.

If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not:
for there shall arise false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders,
Matthew. 24.23, 24.

Their coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.

London, Printed in the Year, 1660.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Andrew Barker and William Oldisworth, Esquires.
Grace, Health, and Happiness be multiplied.
SIRS,
SO long as the enmity lasts, betwixt the seed of the woman and the Serpent,
so long must the Godly, (though mirrours of piety and grace) be subject to
wicked men's unjust molestation, for the Just shines, as lights in the midst of
a crooked Generation; and the tongues of wicked men (the lying offspring of
the father of lies) are under such command of Satan, to act this restless
malice against the truth and holy Religion, both in Doctrine and practice, that
Godly men cannot expect to have their names free from reproaches.

It is no wonder then, that I find your names, (worthy and ever Honored
Friends) which (no doubt) are written in the book of life, and whom good men
honor, abused upon Record, by one of Satan's Emissaries, who seeks to bring
about the bad cause he has in handling, by such bad and wicked means, as
shameful lies. The which, the less ground and color of truth they have, with
the more clamor and impudency, he thrusts forward into the world,
endeavoring thereby (as if he were the first born of Satan) without all shame
and fear, to darken the bright and shining light of your clean and unspotted
Conversations.

That Lesson which the Devil taught his apt Scholar Machiavel (Calumniare
audacter aliquid sultem haerebit) he has perfectly learned; by confidently
belying you, he hopes to fling some dirt of reproach in your faces, and that
not only, because ye run not with him and his followers, but also, to make
others to run wi^h them, to the same excess of riot, of licentious Doctrines
and practices, against the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints.

What advantage Satan has gotten in this age, as well as in other ages, by the
strength of Lies, to bring Gods Truths and our Holy Religion into suspicion and
disgrace, may be seen by the easy entrance that Calumnies make in the corrupt
minds of men of these times, who will hardly be dispossessed of such prejudice.

Faction and Schism, being maintained by works of darkness, and
unconscionable deceits, the multitude are ready to drink in the venom thereof
out of a Cup of Lies, the which they greedily catch, and swallow down, though
to the poisoning of their souls.

It has amazed me to consider how a lying Pamphlet will amaze the poor
ignorant people of the Land, nay put men of more settled judgments at a stand;
Nay did I not know the probate of it, by ocular and experimental
demonstrations, I could never have brought my understanding to believe, that
such groundless lies, as this Pamphlet contains (called Strange and ^rue News
from Gloucestershire) should have such a vent of belief in the hearts of men as
they have.

Alas! That ever men in their wits, should believe such untruths, and yet they
do; Though the wonders expressed therein be Lying-Wonders; and that,

First, In their Original, as proceeding from the Father of lies.

Secondly, In their matter being bottomless and gross falsities.

Thirdly, In their end, which is lying and seduction: Yet the Current of them
are so swift and dangerous, as greatly needs to be stopped by some Sluice of
contradiction.

I therefore having some experimental knowledge of you (my ever Honored
Friends) and the spreading infection of these lies, which are scattered to
eclipse your worthes, and to advance separation, thought it my duty to stop the
mouth of this Detractor, who with impudent face, and seared conscience, has
out-faced the world, by publishing to the world this Short and sudden
Narrative; being a plain refutation of the Lies therein contained, and a right
demonstration of the truth of the matter, not only, to undeceive deluded poor
souls, by acquainting them with the subtilty of these Impostors, and to
preserve others out of the snares of such Serpents; but to preserve also the
preciousnesse of your names in the hearts of all good men, which the Relator
sets up as Buts to shoot his lying Arrows against, thinking thereby to wound
your unblemished Reputations; that those honored names of yours, which like a
precious Ointment does not only persume your own houses, nay your Town of
Fairford, but sends forth a sweet savor to all that know you, or ever heard
of you, might not be (like the precious Ointment of the Apothecary) corrupted
with any dead Flies of slanderous, and lying reports.

And if I may be thought of you to presume too much herein, I beg both your
pardons, because this action proceeds merely from the passion of love; And
all such actions (according to the Lawyers position) are not liable to Law, at
least pardonable in respects.

Pardon therefore I humbly beseech you, this action of mine, which proceeds
from the love I owe to God, whose Glory I ought to advance; To the Church in
general, of which I am a Member; to my Mother Church of England, of which I am
a dutiful Son, to your Town of Fairford, as having spent some time in the
execution of my Ministerial Office therein; to your selves and relations, whose
Christian steadfast walking through these unsettled times, I have with much
comfort and benefit been an observer, whose steadfast, pure, and holy
conversation in these deluding times, have not only strengthened your own
assurances for the hope of happiness, but have been props to them that live
under you, dwell by you, and converse with you, to keep them from Apostasy, and
Spurs to further their Christian race, provoking them by your pious examples,
to press the more toward the same glorious mark.

(...)comb, by the holding up of the Pistol at her, and the uncivil Language
given her (the Truth of which I doubt of, Page 18.
unless it was provoked by her uncivil Language) received such Terror, as
brought upon her, such a sore distemper, and brought her nigh unto Death: but
it was rather, the strange News of the Kings return, by a Vote from
Parliament, against whom, and his loyal Subjects and Ministers, the said Mr.
Helm had highly acted; which made both their hearts sick, and suddenly to
remove from Winchcomb (contrary to his often Engagement in his Pulpit, to his
selected people, to live and die with them, notwithstanding the highest
sufferings) and to act the part now of a loyal subject, upon some other
Theater, as it is not the first time he has done it.

As true likewise, Page 17.
as those Soldiers (some whereof were eminent Gentlemen of the County) who did
in pursuance of their order from the Commissioners, upon that change of
Government, endeavor to disarme the Fanatickes) did rudely ransacke any for
Arms, or act any way so barbarously as to be styled, The imbittered
persecutors in the County; when, their civil demeanours to all places, and
persons, were such as procured no other returns but flouts and Jeeres for
their civilities, when they were just reproves of the others vile carriages,
not long before when the power was in their hands; The Rudeness of whom, Two
Famous Families in our County of Gloucester have cause to remember, as Sir Henry
Frederick Thin, and his Lady, who were plundered not only in the grounds
and stables of their, and other men's Horses, but in their closets of their
sweetmeats, so that it is no marvel that their Prophets have such sweet
Tongues; and Mr. John How, and his Honorable Lady, whose very persons endured
a tedious restraint, beside; the loss of all his Horses, and imprisonment of
his servants, and loss of his Estate too, had not our Sovereign Lord the King
come in for his Freedom.

As true, Page 2.
as our former days under the usurped Government, were times of Reformation,
Page 1.
and that some in Oxford were cut off for reading the Book of Common Prayer,
and that the Societies from whence those that are imprisoned at Redding, Page
25.
for Refusing the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleagiance, are the more cheerful
and the more increased.

As true, Page 43.
as the death of twenty or thirty Dogs at Graves-end on the Kings Proclamation
day, was a Judgment of God for proclaiming the King.

Lastly, As true as Not Loyal Subjects, and Orthodox Ministers, but such as
profess disloyalty to Sovereignty, Page 4.
and separation from the Church of England, be the only people of God.

For my own part, I am glad, That the Seducer has no other foundation left him
then lying wonders to build their Babel of Confusion on, and that the Town of
Fairford have no more to render them odious to the world then A PECKE full of
Lies.

Let the Seducer Boast of the hand of God apparently gone out for them, and
their ways, Not an established Christian, that have read and studied the
providence of God in these changes of Times, and Affairs, but may see the
Hand of God apparently gone out against all ways of Separation; Their
Counsels dissipated, their Designs Blasted, and those persons that have acted
high against order, and Government in Church, and State, Psalm. 9.16.
snared in the works of their own hands; so that, notwithstanding the Crying
up of the hand of God, by way of execution of Judgment in their new coined
Lies, God is certainly known in the Judgment that he has executed; so that
notwithstanding, that passage in the Letter that was written of that Mr.
Fletchers abuse by J.D. who was no Minister at Badgington, but Cutler at
Gloucester, Page 19.
(That Judgment is begun at the house of God) we will leave it to be
interpreted by the Tongue of Magistracy, whose eye looks over them, and us,
who no doubt will tell us in some short Time, what will be expected of them,
that neither own, or obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Surely, God has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of us, Page 19.
we have been sold for naught, and they that have ruled over us, have oppressed
us very sore: The Bowels of our God are at this Time moved, his repentings are
kindled together; The Salvation of Israel is come (we hope) out of Sion; For
God has so turned the Captivity of his poor afflicted Church, that for the
suddenness and strangeness thereof we become like unto men that dream;
Psalm. 126.2.
filling our Mouths with laughter, and our tongue with Singing: Psalm. 44.4.
So that the Lord our King has commanded deliverances for us his people.

Now we know that the Kingdom is the Lords, and that he is Governor among the
Nations: Now we know that the Lord saves his Anointed, having heard him from
his Holy Heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. Surely Salvation
is nigh unto us his people, that glory may again dwell in our Land.

Let the house of Israel (the Commonwealth) trust in the Lord, and bless the
Lord, who is our Help and our Shield.

Let the house of Aaron (the Governors of the Commonwealth) trust in the Lord,
and bless the Lord, who is their Help and their Shield.

Let the house of Levi (the Ministers of the Lord) trust in the Lord, and
bless the Lord, who is their Help and their Shield.

Let all them that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, and bless the Lord, who
is their Help and Shield.

The Lord make all Deluders to mark that doom which St. Peter tells them, 2
Pet. 2.1. Who for bringing in privily damnable Heresies, (without repentance)
will bring upon themselves swift destruction.

The Lord open the eyes of all such as are deluded, or subject to delusion,
that they may mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which they have received, and to avoid them, Romans 16.17.

The Lord so unite the hearts of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, that differ not
so much in Doctrine as in Discipline, that by their unseasonable Differences,
they give not advantage to Deluders, who daily wait for it, threatening the
better use of it then has been made of former advantages, who will then appear
to the Kings Loyal Subjects, and the true sons of the Church of England, worse
then the Frogs of Fairford, that (as they fained them) troubled only the house
of the Lords of the Town, and the Justice adjacent, like the Frogs of Egypt,
that covered the Land sparing not the Kings chamber: worse then those swarms of
Flies, that covered (as they fained them) (though only seen in the Orchard) the
Garden of the Lords of the Town, but like the swarms of Flies wherewith the
Egyptians were plagued, which like the unmerciful Tyrants which God threatened
to wicked men, night nor day shall give any rest.

But the Lord we hope who has a mighty arm, a strong hand, and high right
hand, which has brought such mighty things to pass, in giving great
deliverance to our King, by stilling of the tumults of the people, and
preserving him from the violence of those assemblies of wicked men, and causing
the captivity of his Loyal Subjects to return, will so order the affairs of
this Nation by his providence for good, that the enemy (that is now enraged
through Gods cross dispensations to them, breathing out such notorious lies
(as thick mists) to darken the way of his providence over his Church and
People) may no more magnify himself, but under the protection of the
Allmighty, (who is our Rock, our Shield, and a wall of fire about his Church)
and under the shadow of our Most Gracious Sovereign ( who under God is the
breath of our Nostrils, the Light of his poor Israel, the Repairer of our
breaches, the Restorer of our decayed paths, nay Pater patriae, The Father of
our Country) may live happily. Into the hands of the which Allmighty God, the
King of Kings, who have the hearts of all men, and the events of all things
under his Rule and Governance, and into the hands of our most Gracious
Sovereign, with those Renowned Worthies in Parliament, who are but Gods
instruments for the effecting of his designs; I, with all the Lords People, do
commend this poor despised Church, and distracted State, waiting in hope for
that time, when through Gods providence, and their prudence the Church of
England, which through lies, errors, and divisions, now seems to be
disfigured like the Daughter of Antichrist; shall through an established
Government shine like the Spouse of Christ; and this Commonwealth of England,
with all other of His Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, which have long lain
among the Pots, be brought forth at last with silver Wings, and be made the
glory of all Lands, which is the desire, as well as the hope of him who wishes
well, not only to the peace of our Jerusalem, both Church and State, but to thy
Soul.

The Lord establish thee according to his Gospel, and keep thee from falling,
and present thee faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding
joy.

This is the desire of Thy Friend in the service of thy Faith, R. C.

THE LYING WONDERS, Or rather THE WONDERFUL LIES of Gloucestershire discovered.
WHere Christ and his Gospel cannot prevail, there the Devil, being armed
with power, and efficacy of Delusion, comes and prevails; the Soul of
man, being such a Tenure, as cannot want an Occupier.

No sooner Gods Spirit departed from Saul, but presently the evil spirit
comes upon him; so no sooner, men cast out of their hearts the love of the
truth, but the belief of lies will enter, and take possession; if they once
depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.
they will presently give heed to Seducing Spirits, 1 Timothy 4.1.

Our present Age is a Theater, whereon (with some) Lies are acted more then
Truth; which is a sign, they Love Lies more then Truth, nay prefer lies
before it, who employ their minds to devise Lies, their tongues to speak Lies,
and their hands (by writing) to spread them, as if they were the very children
of the Devil, given up to the Father of Lies.

The Devil for craft, and cunning, is called the Serpent, the old Serpent, who
deceives the whole world, and his subtilty he shows, by translating
himself, though he be a Devil of Darkness, into an Angel of Light: and in
the shape of a Serpent he beguiled Eve.

What a world of men have learned this Art, from their Father the Devil? who
are as cunning grown, as the Devil himself to deceive, and may as well be
called Serpents, as the Devil; and to this end ( Protheus and Camelion-like)
they can shift themselves into any shape; where Lions skins will not serve,
they can use the Foxes Tail: We know that the best Drugs have their
Adulterates; The most current coins their clips: Hypocrites can easily cloak,
their worst intentions, with the best religion; and therefore, no wonder it is
to see them, put on the rare, and excellent Jewel of Grace, to Grace themselves
withal; that under the semblance of piety, they may bring about their horrid
designs.

Oh the Hypocrisy of this age! The Mystery of iniquity does busily work
amongst us; The Impostor bestirres himself, being with his Father the Devil,
come down with great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time, Rev. 12.12.
What a Great Mist of darkness, of black darkness, has he raised, and does
daily raise to obscure the bright Sun of grace? he knows, he cannot now by
open force destroy the Church, and therefore striveth to cloud the beauty of
the Church, from the eyes of the world, by damnable and hellish untruths; That
thereby he may beguile the simple, into the ways of Separation, from the
Church of England; that thereby they may be led into error, and held therein
at his pleasure.

Oh what senseless, bottomless, and Gross Lies, are raised by Sectaries, to
keep men from our public Assemblyes! and to allure them, to join with them,
in their private Conventicles! and what a strange, and incredible belief of
them, is there entertained in the world! How this English Nation, who have ever
professed themselves, to be the Defenders of the Truth, is at this time
deceived with a Cup of error; we may plainly see, by the entertainment, that
One Lying Pamphlet, has at this time, in the ears and hearts of men that live
at a distance, which is lately thrust forth in Print by some deluder, styled,
(Strange and True News from Gloucester.) The which Pamphlet (Christian Reader)
I do here cry down; assuring thee, That it is but the invention of some vile
deluder, who would wound thy Christian Faith, under pretext of Christian Faith;
and under a profession of Friendship, prove thy Great Adversary.

We all know, that open Mischief, is easier to be avoided, and prepared for,
then that which is more secret, and undiscernable; and the death of the Soul,
is a worser death then the death of the body: Therefore (as a True Minister of
the Gospel, that wishes well to the souls of all men) have I set up This my
Light, to keep men out of those secret pits, which are dug, and those
indiscernable snares, that are laid for their souls; Which though I know, will
be most unwelcome to the Seperatists, being men of giddy spirits, and impotent
prejudices, against any thing settled, either by civil, or Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, and Customs in Church and State, to whom I shall be as Michaiah
to Ahab; Yet, I hope, it will find Acceptance with thee, and all such as
profess themselves to be Lovers of Truth, and haters of Lies, and love and
desire the prosperity of this our Sion, both Church and State.

And if you please to follow my Light, it will direct Thee (Reader) unto;

1. The Notorious Lies, that are in the Inscription of the Pamphlet. 2. The
Monstrous False News enclosed. 3. The Gross Hypocrisy of the Author in the
Conclusion.
First, Concerning the Inscription.
The Title of the Pamphlet, is this; [Strange and True News from Glocester];
It Is strange, but not true, and it would have been strange News indeed, had it
been true.

From Glocester] I verily believe, the Author does highly Abuse that Famous
City, by making it the fountain of those lies; and this is not the first time
that that City has been thus abused by such Deluders: who for the more
general, and speedier vent of their delusions, and for the more general, and
easier belief of them, makes their lies to take rise from thence; But I dare
acquit Gloucester of the coining of these Lies; There be several Mints out of
Gloucester, as Cicister, Fairford, Stow, Burton on the water, Kemp^ford, and
Norleach, where are men as famous, for the promoting of such coin, as at
Gloucester; and indeed the very impression on the coin (though the Author
concealeth his Name) gives to many hereabouts, a manifest Guess, who was the
coyner thereof.

But what is the News?

1. A perfect Relation, of the wonderful and miraculous power of God, showed
for Injustice at Fairford, by an Innumerable Company of Froggs and Toads.

2. A Great and Terrible Earthquake, the Running of Blood, and Hailstones of
a pound and an half weight in France.

3. The wonderful Example of Gods Justice, in the sudden death of the Clarks
Daughter of Brokington, in Gloucestershire.

Observe the Workings of this Serpent, which is after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and Lying Wonders, 2 These. 2.9. The relation of
which he calls a perfect Relation; though every string in his Relation be out
of Tune, he would not have his music to sound amiss, which discovers the
Author to be of the seed of a Serpent Serpentina Soboles.
: whose ways of undermining of Gods Church, is as the way of a Serpent on a
Rock unknowable, Pro. 30.19. When they cannot suppress it by force and
cruelty, they will undermine it if they can, by craft and lies: Though the
Relation be altogether counterfeit coin, yet it must pass for current.

And that it may so, The Author (as a chief Emissary of Satan) courts the
worlds Belief of it, with a known impudent Lie; calling the Relation, not
only a perfect Relation, but telling us, That the Relation is entered according
to Order; The which Order, he would have us believe, to be from the present
power at Westminster, when it is from the Court of Hell; but no question, the
printing of these lies, were like his daily walking, Disorderly; so that if the
Inscription stumble, and fall from Truth, what encouragement have we to think,
that the News enclosed, will stand upright?

I confess, for the French News, I had rather believe, then The Author is
lame.
Travel, to find out the certainty of it: but for our Glocestershire News, I
have weighed in a Balance, by a strict inquiry, and find them
(notwithstanding this Fair Color, the Author has drawn over it, in calling
a perfect Relation) Gross Lies; The which (let the Author be what he will)
must needs proceed from a man of an evil Conscience, though he has not such
an impudent Face to prefix his name to it.

Secondly; Concerning the Monstrous false News enclosed.
THat Great and heavy Judgments of God have attended those that have reviled,
and injured Gods chosen people (as the Author begins his News) Those
Scriptures alleged by him, 2 Kings 2.23, 24. and Exodus 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and 14 Chapters, are sufficient Testimonies.

But who the Author means, by These his chosen people; and how the Froggs and
Toads at Fairford, and the death of the Maid at Brokington, may be said to be
Gods Judgments on the Revilers of those his chosen people, craveth our
inquiry.

No question, by [These his chosen people] the Author means the Company of
Christians (as if all the rest of the Town were Heathens) which met together
at Fairford on the Lords Day in private, in opposition to the public worship
of God; and those that met at Brokington, on the third of June, where was,
those Famous Gifted Brethren, Brother Collet, and Brother Collins; and those
that met in the Marketplace at Stow, to hear him whom the Author styled, John
Belcher (as if he be not worthy to be one of the Brotherhood, as well as the
other, and is not as precious, an humble, and tenderhearted man, as Brother
Collet.)

But how these can be thought to be the only Chosen people of God, I leave to
any Rational man, and true Christian to Consider of; being Men of Turbulent
Spirits, preferring their own houses before the Temple; Meetings in the
Marketplaces, before our public Meetings in our Churches; The Jewish
Sabbath, before the Christian; being enemies to all Ordained Ministers, crying
up themselves to be the only Propagators of the Gospel, who under the name of
Truth, have brought in damnable heresies, and by good words, and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple: Surely, if these be the only chosen
people of God, God has precious children indeed.

And as for the Army of Froggs and Toads, which the Informer says, he saw at
Fairford, and the sudden death of the Clarks Daughter when they met at
Brokington; how they can be thought to be examples of Gods Judgments, on those
the Informer nominateth, puts me to a stand.

Indeed, The Author speaking of his Relation, which he published, says, that
it is sufficient to reclaim any rational man whatsoever: Had the Relation been
(as he calls it) a perfect Relation, he might have had the better hopes of
it; but that Lies should reclaim any rational man whatsoever, I must beg the
Authors pardon, not to believe: And the fullness of both which stories. I come
now to present to the eyes of all rational men to consider of. The true Account
whereof, is as follows.

I. Concerning the Authors Relation about the Frogs and Toads, which he
reports to have seen at Fairford.
THe Author in the beginning of his Relation tells the world of a company of
Christians met together, (as if there were no Christians in the Town but them)
their business being to serve God, according to their present apprehensions,
(what zealous worshippers of God be these, who having no rule for their
worship, but their present apprehensions, must needs differ therein as their
apprehensions differ) at the place before named, that is, I conceive as the
Inscription tells us, at Fairford, but whither the Church or House was their
meeting place, the Informer is silent, but sure it must be at the house of some
knowing eminent Christian, because the Informer says there was none but a
company of Christians met together: Not the Church, the house of prayer (where
is the presence of the blessed Trinity, God in his Son, by his Spirit, The
presence of Gods Angels, the presence of his Minister, and of the greater
number of people assembled to enjoy his Ordinances, whose Ranks being likened
to Beds of Spices, which is an Holy Place, set apart for Holy uses, wherein the
power and glory of an holy God is to be seen and felt) that is an abomination
to those Christians.

The which Meeting being collected (not by the noise of Bells but of some
Tinckling Cymbals) was disturbed by the rude multitude, who were (as I am
informed) little children, whose usage must needs be cruel, uncivil, and
dangerous; so dangerous it seems to be, that nothing but a Justice of the
Peace could appease the wrath and fury of those children, to whom some zealous
persons repaired (whose Residence was nigh) for his Assistance.

But the Justice (says he) being encouraged thereunto by the Lord of the Town
(differing from them in Judgment) was so far from assisting them, as that he
rather spoke hardly unto them by way of threatening.

Observe here the tender Consciences of these zealous persons; who though they
are overgrown with an Anti-Magistraticall Jaundice, having envious and
implacable eyes against Magistracy, and are men of such high minds and heady
passions, giddy spirits, and popular principles, that they are impatient of any
thing Authoritative, yet will storm if the Justice deny to them his Assistance.

But who is this Justice that dare be so bold as to discountenance these
Zealots? and who is that Lord of a Town, that will not vail Bonnet to these
Pleberans?

Though they are both famously known in their County, and elsewhere, yet they
are not here named, and as I conceive out of malice, That those (Justa
parentaliae) praises which all that know them, give (as most due) to their
accomplished worth, might not give check to their Demonial Malice, and unjust
Calumniations.

As for the Justice of Peace; He is very well known to be a lover of Justice,
and of tender Conscience, in the execution of his Office, in the distribution
of Justice: And as concerning this particular (his denying of Justice to these
Zealots who made Application to him) I know, as he did not approve of their
irregular meetings, being done in opposition to our public Assemblies, so
neither did he of the rudeness of the children, having no Law to countenance
them; Whose care for the administration of Justice was proportionable to the
Offenders, and offense, and as for his speaking hardly to them, I dare behold
to say, that he rather hardly spoke to them that way.

As for the Lord of the Town, though his obedience to the word of God, Loyalty
to Sovereign power, and love to his Country, would never admit him to
countenance such Meetings, yet I know such is his zeal to Justice, and his
inclination to peace, that he will neither promote disturbances, or by any
encouragement give any stop to the execution of Justice, knowing that Justice
will in its due time find them out.

And this I am bold to certify the world thereof, being a man very well
instructed in the knowledge of those Worthy Gentlemen, as having spent since
these late Revolutions of times, some time in the execution of my Ministerial
Office, in that Town of Fairford; so that the sting of those Calumniations that
is thrust in their Reputations, can never wound them, who have in their Country
ever lived, live, and no doubt so long as God permits life, will live in their
deserved Reputations, for their Loyalty to their Sovereign, zeal to Justice and
goodness: Silly therefore is the charge which this Phanatick have drawn up
against these Worthy Gentlemen (which though it be no wonder in him, or any
other of his Tribe) yet I will assure thee (Reader) is one of his gross lies.

The other is worse concerning the Progs and Toads, which he calls the
judgment of God showed on unrighteousness and ungodliness. Though there
might have been a great number of small Frogs and Toads lie upon the ground,
and yet no wonder to see them, or judgment on the Town by reason of them, they
having not a personal but equivocal Generation, as fallen in Rain from the
Clouds, being before drawn up in Attomes, and generated by the heat of the Sun,
and so no miracle, being a work not surpassing the whole power of created
nature; Miraculum proprie quod fit preter ordinem totius naturae. Aquin:
Yet there was no such Spectacle: The Informer might see at that time of year
Frogs and Toads enough, by reason of so many Ponds, Ditches, and Moorish places
as be about Fairford, and need not stand in any byplace to behold them; but not
such well Disciplined Frogs and Toads, as can march in Rank and File, turn to
the right, or left hand, keep Court of Guards (as the Informer tells us they
did) about the house of the Lords of the Town, and the house and person of the
said Justice, and make at last a sudden retreat, that is, from the house of the
said Justice; (They may be till this time upon duty, about and in the house of
the Lords of the Town for any satisfaction that the Informer gives us,
concerning their quitting his house.)

Indeed for the great Army of Frogs and Toads, for their orderly march, for
their strict observance of duty, for the reproving of the said Justice by his
Maidservant, for the impression that her expression left on her Master, for
the vanishing of the said Frogs and Toads upon his countenancing those Zealots,
and discouraging and punishing the rude multitude; The world is extremely
beholding to the Authors invention, being very glad that neither he or his
brethren, have any other materials left them then lies to build their Babel.
Let this Relation travel whither it may, as it may travel far, having a
Pamphlet for its pass, yet it carries enough with it, as does give all true
Christian hearts occasion to suspect it, and needed not be followed by the Hue
and Cry of a loud, and general voice of contradiction.

But though the Relator faineth an Army of Frogs, which had received a
Commission from the Allmighty to plunder the houses of the Lord of the Town,
and the said Justice, or to bring them away Prisoners upon refusing of doing
Justice upon the multitude that disturbed those Fanatics at Fairford; Yet I
shall without hypocrisy certify the world. That the Town of Fairford (though
it has been freed from the Egyptian plague of Frogs, yet it has not been
freed from the general plague of England) Some spirits came often there in the
likeness of Frogs.

See in Rev: 16.13. what St. John saw, when the sixth Angel powered out his Vial
on the great River Euphrates, it was three unclean spirits like Frogs, came out
of the mouth of the Dragon, out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth
of the false Prophet. Where observe the principal Agents are the Dragon, the
Beast, and the false Prophet: By the Dragon is meant Satan himself the father
of lies; By the Beast, Antichrist with his whole body; By the false Prophet,
any false Teachers belonging to the Kingdom of Antichrist: The three unclean
spirits that were belched out of their mouths were

First, The spirit of pride which came out of the mouth of the Devil, the
Dragon.

Secondly, The spirit of blasphemy, which came out of Antichrist, the Beast.

Thirdly, The spirit of a lie, which came out of false Teachers, which
belongs to the false Prophets.

The which unclean spirits are said to be like unto Frogs; Now what St. John
saw come out of the mouth of the false Prophets, we may ordinarily at Fairford,
as well as in other places of the County, see also; Namely the spirits of lies,
and that in the likeness of Frogs, the which unclean spirits resembles Frogs
in these particulars.

First, Ranae ex limo natae.
Frogs have their beginning and life out of filthy Ponds, and Pools, and do
most delight in filthy Ponds and Pools, whence they had their beginning and
life; So does these unclean spirits which are like Frogs, fetch their life and
beginning from the Ponds and Pools of filthy errors, and stinking abominations
of doctrine, and do continually delight in those most filthy Ponds, and Pools
of corrupt doctrine, out of which they fetch their beginning and life.

Secondly, Called by the Poet, Ranae Clamosae.
Frogs does importunately croak, and make a noise about the Ponds, and moorish
places where they are, being called therefore Ranae, from the Hebrew word,
(...) which is vehementer exclamare; So does these unclean spirits (like Frogs)
croak in those places where they frequent, by sounding out their errors and
heresies, with importunate clamors, haunting the poor simple people with loud
and incessant importunity.

Thirdly, Limosoque novae saliant in Gurgite Ranae. Ovid.
Frogs do hop and skip from place to place; And therefore a Frog is called in
Saxon, Hopper ab Huppen, saltare, to leap or skip, because he does hop and skip
about with his four feet; So do these unclean spirits skip and hop about the
Country, They are now here, now there, to day in this place, to morrow in
another; Nay before their Kingdom shall be abolished, they will hop far to
propagate.

Fourthly, Rana anima amphibium coaxans. Varro.
Frogs are both for water and land; Varro so describes a Frog to us to be an
animal which croaketh on the water, as well as on the land; so do these unclean
spirits (being for water as well as land) they live and croak in both places;
when their Proselites have any need of washing of their foul bodies, then ye
hear them croak on the waters; when they are willing to eat their broken bread,
then they croak on the Land.

Fifthly, Ranae apibus mimicae. Plin:
Frogs are great enemies to the laboring Bees that gathers Honey; so are
these impure spirits like Frogs, sore enemies both to the true Preachers of the
Gospel, and established Christians, the true lovers of the Gospel, which like
painful Bees yields and gathers the Honey of the truth, and by meditation
and conferences franieth their Honey-Combes within their Hives.

Sixthly, Ranae ictus apum non sentiunt. Plin.
Frogs have such skins as they feel not the stinging of Bees; no more do these
impure spirits, so singular they are in their own opinions, and so hardened in
their Resolutions, that the sharpest sting of reproof, from those laboring
Bees (Gods Ministers) cannot make them sensible of their errors.

Seventhly, Ranae linguae mirus in Magicis usus. Plin.
The Inchanters and Witches makes great use of the tongue of a Frog; so these
impure spirits which are belched out of the mouth, like the tongues of Frogs,
are of wonderful use for the enchanting of the hearts of simple people, for
these being the Prophets that have sweet tongues, mentioned Jer. 23.34. Who
having taught their tongues to speak lies, with sweet words and fair speeches,
deceives the hearts of the simple; So that knowing the Inchanters, we need not
ask our simple people, as St. Paul did the Galatians, O ye foolish Galatians!
who has bewitched you from knowing the truth?

Eighthly, The use of Frogs is that they may be instruments which God uses
sometimes for the punishment of wicked men: so those Frogs which did cover the
Land of Egypt, were sent to take revenge on the sins of the Egyptians; these
impute spirits which resembles Frogs, is a greater punishment to the people of
England, in that they have the souls of people, which God permits in his
Church, not only for the good of his Church (they being like the Nations which
God left to prove Israel, Judge. 3.1.) but for the just punishment of wicked
men, who will not obey and stick to the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

Ninthly, The plague of Frogs, was the next punishment upon the Egyptians, to
their waters which were turned into blood; so these impure spirits, which at
this time, like that Egyptian plague of Frogs covers the Land, followed our
bloody waters of affliction; No sooner were our waters turned into blood, but
these impure spirits like Frogs sprang up, and filled the Land, nay we find
them in our streets, in our marketplace, in our very houses.

These (not such Frogs as the Relator speaks of) are often seen at Fairford,
The which impure spirits in the likeness of Frogs, are often to be seen
hopping and skipping about their streets, nay they are known to creep into
their houses, often filling the same, but not the houses of the Lord of the
Town, or of; the Justice adjacent (as the Relator expresses) their housen are
better disciplined then to be harbor for such filthy vermin; but the housen of
some men of giddy and unstable brains, whom these Inchanters have bewitched
with their sweet tongues, whose houses they make as filthy Ponds and Pools of
stinking errors, and vile abominations of doctrine, wherein they do most
delight, and where they do importunately croak, whose croaking noise did invite
the children of the Town to enter into one house (who became like a stone cast
into a Ditch where multitude of Frogs are) making them for that time cease
their croakings, The which judgment the Lord did not send upon Fairford for
injustice, as the Relator says, but for their not receiving the love of the
truth: Mark that place, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. For this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: For this cause, what is that?
Mark the precedent words, because they received not the love of the truth that
they might be saved.

And this is not a peculiar judgment on Fairford alone: We have such filthy
Ponds and Pools of corrupt Doctrine at Norleach, wherein are often to be heard
the croakings of such Frogs, but they are not so troublesome to the ears of
many at Norleach, as they are at Stow, Burton on the water, and other places
adjacent.

But indeed not a rational man but may perceive this judgment to be a general
judgment; Men have so fallen away from truth, that they are given up to strong
delusions, to believe lies; So that these impure spirits in the likeness of
Frogs, may be seen hopping, and heard croaking, in most places of the Land.

But my hope is; That as the plague of Frogs on the Egyptians was not an
everlasting plague, but removed by the prayer of Moses, Exodus 8.12. So neither
this punishment of Frogs on England, but may in time be removed from the
Nation, by the endeavors and prayers of sound Christians.

Prayer which is Vis Deo grata, Tertul:
is of great efficacy with God, for the removal of this judgment, and
therefore let all Christians pray.

The voice of the Gospel is likewise of great force to stop the mouths of these
kind of Frogs, though never so clamarous: Veritas mendacio long fortior.
Ministers must now (if ever) appear for the truths of God, and be able to
convince the Gain-sayer, and the people must labor to be well grounded in the
Scripture, which is profitable for doctrine and reproof; 2 Timothy 3.16.
And both Ministers and People must be valiant for the truth, and contend
earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

The Law of the Land is of no small force to stop the hoppings from place to
place, to silence the croakings of these Frogs; Let but Magistrates, which for
their Office, in Scripture are called masters of restraint, but show their zeal
for God in the execution of Justice on such troublers of Israel, and we shall
find them soon to vanish.

The Informer faineth the vanishing of those Frogs and Toads (which he fained
likewise to be at Fairford) to be upon the Justice of the Peace his
countenancing the Zealots, and discountenancing and punishing the Disturbers.

If our Magistrates would but countenance those that are Lovers of peace and
truth, and discountenance and punish those that are the Disturbers of peace and
truth; These hopping Frogs would quickly stop their journeys, and these
croaking Frogs soon change their notes.

That the eyes of the Inhabitants of Fairford, and all other places (which are
visited with these impure spirits, which comes to them in the likeness of
Frogs) may behold no more such horrid Spectacles, that their ears may be no
more afflicted with their odious croakings, that their conversations may not be
disturbed with their hoppings and crawlings.

FIAT JVSTITIA.
II. Concerning the Authors Relation about the death of the Clarks daughter at
Brokington.
COncerning the Meeting at Brokington; I find by inquiry, that at the time and
place expressed there was such a meeting, when and where was B. Collet, and B.
Collins, and some from Stow, and other places, but John Belcher I find by the
Authors relation was not there; and that precious humble tenderhearted man
(Brother Collet) was in exercise, and that Sarah the daughter of Thomas
Woodward, Clark of Senington, about 17 years of age was there with her mother,
and that the Maid did dye there suddenly, is a truth which cannot be denied.

But that the hand of the Lord of Hosts went out against that Daughter for her
opposing, and reviling them, and uttering hard speeches against them, their
meetings and ways, is as far from truth, as these troublers of Israel are from
peace.

For both the Daughter and the Mother to whom the Relator attributes
opposition, and reviling, are known to be so far guiltless of it, as that they
are great Lovers of these persons, great approvers of their meetings and ways;
Nay the Parish Clark himself, the Maids Father (as I am informed) is one of
their Followers, who performs his Office at Church, and when he comes Home,
performs his Devotion with them.

And as for the Demeanor of the Daughter at the present exercise, she was
observed to behave her self with great attention, and devotion, and solemn
silence, not a word she uttered, nor gesture expressed she, as could plead her
guilty, either of any dislike in her self, or any disturbance of the Exercise;
so that I wonder at the gross impudency of the Informer, that dare
excommunicate her out of the number of those chosen Ones, and publish her to
the world as a Reviler of those chosen people of God.

Now for the manner of her death, it was thus; The Clarks Daughter having some
children to look unto, which were without Doors, was bidden by the wife of one
Thomas Timbrill, to go forth to look to the children, she went forth and
fetched them and came in, and gave a sudden screek, and fell down dead before
them all, whose Corpse after some rubbing and chafing (there being no
appearance of life) was carried into the passage, at what time (as it is
related) came that Esquire Mr. Heiden, that led that party of the Troop, to
disturb their meetings; and the death of the Maid having dissolved them, he
without any injury done them, forbad only their disorderly meetings for the
time to come, and departed.

This I find to be the truth, and to this I have the attestation of some of
those neighbors who were present, and of many others, who (since the
publishing of the death of this Maid as a wonderful example of Gods Justice) by
them have of the truth hereof been informed.

For my part, I dare not say that she was in her sudden death, made any example
at all of Gods Justice, no otherwise then as death is the wages of sin; but an
example of the frail, and brittle condition of man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, which may suddenly vanish; and therefore Brother Collins answered
well, when Mr. Heiden charged them with the death of the Maid, We have not
(said he) killed her, but the Lord has done it, in whose hands is your breath
and ours; wherein Brother Collins does seem to differ much from the Relators
censure, who makes her to us, not an example of Gods Justice, but a Spectacle
of mortality, to usher us in the School of death, that we may always be
watchful in an holy preparation for our change.

As for those that does look upon her death as an example of Gods Justice on
the Maid; I think them to be of the safer judgment, that conclude her to be an
example of Gods Justice, for frequenting the Meetings of such Impostors, who
under the color of spreading the Gospel, corrupt the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel by their vile errors, and base opinions, and instead of spreading the
light, fight against it, by their despisings of the Ministers of the Gospel,
the holy Ordinances of Christ, and of all those that desires to walk in the
light thereof; rather then an example of Gods Justice for revilings and hard
speeches against them, who was a zealous follower of them, and out of whose
mouth was heard no such reproofs.

And as for that wise and zealous Oration of the Clark her Father, who after
that time spoke (as he did before) saying, These are the People of God, were
the Clark so gifted a Brother as Brother Collins, as precious humble
tenderhearted man as Brother Collet, as great an Oracle as John Belcher, it
would as little evidence his Daughters death to be an example of Gods Justice,
as canonize them for the people of God.

And as for their much peace, and freedom from Molestations in their Meetings
to hear John Belcher in Stow, in the Marketplace, and other places, which they
have enjoyed (as the Informer says) since this remarkable hand of God; I
believe that neither John Belcher, nor that gifted man B: Collins, nor that
precious humble tenderhearted man B: Collet, will attribute it (though the
Informer does) as an effect which followed upon the Death of the Clerks
daughter.

But being as Full of State-pollicy, as they are of spiritual Revelations, I
know they cannot but conclude their peace and and freedom, to proceed either
from the wisdom of the State, forbidding all public disturbances, and the
Loyalty of peaceable Subjects, who in their conversations subscribes to
Government, or from the clemency of the State, by conniving (not approving) of
their separations, and divisions; upon which clemency of the State, they have
mightily improved themselves, who must know, they are not favored, though not
punished, who may have (though the State sits silent for a while) in a short
time by the prudence of the State, their errors set in order before their eyes.

But their great Boasting of their much peace, and Freedom, that they enjoy
now in Marketplaces, and other places, puts me in mind of the difference
between Loyal Subjects, and Rebellious Sectaries; The Sectaries without
disturbance have now their Freedom to publish their errors and lies in the
very Marketplaces, but we could not heretofore enjoy our Liberties in our
Churches, to publish Gods truths without high disturbances.

And seeing they have so much peace and freedom from Molestations in the
Marketplaces, I would they would take this Counsel from one that wishes
their conversion, not their destruction, their safety, not their peril; that
neither the Relator that boasts so much of freedom, neither any of the
Brotherhood that does enjoy it, use any more their peace to provoke war, by
blowing up all Coals of dissentions amongst us, and their Freedom to set
Rebellion again in a Blaze, to fire both Church and State; If so, Let them be
men as well Gifted as Brother Collins, as precious humble tenderhearted men as
Brother Collet, and have as much Freedom in the Marketplace of Stow as John
Belcher, The hand of Justice may soon find them out; when by the hand of the
Magistrate, God may in the very Marketplaces, where they proclaim their
Rebellion, make them more evident Examples of Gods Justice for their Rebellion,
then was the sudden death of the Clerks Daughter of Broking^o^ for her
revilings, who was a Sister, a Disciple, one that against them was not heard to
open her Mouth.

Now Reader, If thou be a Rational man, whom the Informer by his Relation
would reclaim, and to whose Judgment I have recommended this Narrative, thou
can not but find, the News from Gloucester, to be strange, but not true; and
the Author (who ere it be) not to be (as he styles himself) The true
Informer, but an Hypocritical Liar.

And as his Notorious Lies proves him a Gross Hypocrite, who has spoken
these Lies through Hypocrisy, so does his Conclusion lay open his Hypocrisy
to the view of any indifferent Reader.

Lastly, Concerning the Gross Hypocrisy of the Author in the Conclusion of
his Pamphlet.
THe Relator tells us, that much more was expressed, both in the Letter, and
by sundry personal evidences, this cannot be applied to the News from
Fairford; there he certifieth us, that he was an eyewitness, being in a
By-place, to see what would be the issue of those Froggs and Toads: and here he
speaks of a Letter, wherein somewhat and much more was expressed; (And says
he, also by sundry personal evidences) but this I am sure, had the Relator any
Greater evidences of cruelties and indignities offered by such spirits as he
specifieth, they could not have escaped the press, herein being little said
(the truth being uncased) to cry up any cruel usage of them.

Now whereas the Author and Printer (who are said to deliver only the Truth in
General (when they have branched out the Lying Wonders in particular
circumstances) do desire a kind acceptance of the Reader, I cannot see how it
can be granted by any Reader, who is a Lover of Truth; but only by seduced
persons, such as are fettered to other men's vile opinions, and held fast under
their power; to whom I crave to urge that reproof which the Apostle urged to
the Corinthians, 2 Ep: 11.19, 20. Ye suffer fools gladly; ye suffer, if a man
bring you into bondage, if a man devour you; so say I, to all such seduced
persons, ye suffer fools gladly, to work on your affection, to fasten on your
persons, to spoil you, to carry you away from the Truth, as a Bear, Wolf, or
Lion, carry away their prey; becoming as Leopards and Blackmoors, whose spots
and ugliness of base opinions, can never be washed away, who have cause to
fear their own condemnation; for when God shall send such strong delusions,
as shall produce such an effect in the hearts of men, as to cause them to
believe a lie; the end is, that they might be damned, 2 These. 2.11.

But though we cannot grant a kind Acceptance of these notorious Lies, yet we
may embrace the counsel they give us, which is to amend that which is amiss,
either in the Relation which is full of lies, or in our selves being full of
Frailties.

For the amending of what I have found amiss in the Relation, I have performed
my endeavor, by bringing these lies to the Light of Truth, whereby Truth may
be discerned from error, and for the amendment of what we find amiss in our
selves, let us daily beg the Assistance of Gods Spirit, to enlighten our eyes
in the knowledge of the Truth, and to lead us into all Truth, and preserve us
therein by his Allmighty power even unto Salvation.

Here I should have finished, but that the Relator or Printer, o^ both, has
given me cause of Jealousy, to conceive that as they will not own me for
their Fellow-Christian, so I dare not own them for my Fellow Subjects, who
seems by their unusual phrase in their Conclusion, not to own King Charles
for their King, but some other King to Reign over them.

GOD SAVE OUR KING. BY the phrase [ Our and not The] some are of the opinion,
they mean not King Charles, to whom they are apparent Enemies, but Christ,
whom they make a cloak for their wickedness; Though I am of opinion, that
there be many that in this Nation owneth no other King but Christ, yet should
they mean him here, they could not but discover a great deal of ignorance, in
thus praying for him, That God would save him, who is our Alone Savior.

But I am more apt to believe, that seeing This Government does not please
them, and they expect some Alteration of Government, of which some are very
confident, expecting through fresh divisions to have the sword again in their
hands, of which they say, they will make better use then they have done; That
they mean some eminent Commander, whom God in time may raise up for their
protection in their licentious practices. But God who has already Blasted
their designs, I hope will so order, by his powerful providence, the Affairs
of this Nation, that such cruel and Tyrannical Spirits, shall be so far
from sitting any more at Stern in the Ship of this Commonwealth, as they
shall for ever be kept under Hatches; And that this Our Gracious Sovereign
(whom the Lord miraculously has preserved, and restored to be a repairer of
our breaches, and a restorer of our decayed paths; whose name was, is, and will
be ever precious, among his sound-hearted and Loyal Subjects, and whose
Princely Dignity is adorned with such piety, Temperance, and humanity, as will
be steadfast props to uphold his regal Authority) shall sit immovable in his
Throne, shining therein above all other men in a parcel of Gods Majesty, by
righteousness establishing his Throne, and by Judgment the Land, Prove. 16.12.
Prove. 29.4.
and so make us his Subjects by his wise Government a happy people, and his
Kingdoms the glory of all Lands.

GOD BLESS KING CHARLES.
FINIS.

