A short and full VINDICATION Of that sweet and Comfortable ORDINANCE, Of
singing of Psalms.

Together with some profitable Rules, to direct weak Christians how to sing to
edification.

And a brief Confutation of some of the most usual cavils made against the
same.

Published especially for the use of the Christians, in and about the Town of
Wramplingham in Norf. for the satisfaction of such, as scruple the said
Ordinance, for the establishment of such as do own it, against all Seducers
that come amongst them; and for the instruction of all in general, that they
may better improve the same to their spiritual comfort and benefit.

By Io. Clapham, M. A. and Minister of Christ there.

1 Cor. 14.15. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with understanding
also.

December. 9 LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1656.

To the Reader.
REader,
I desire thee to take notice, that this short Vindication of that precious
Ordinance of singing of Psalms, was not intended by me for the Press, but was
transcribed for the private satisfaction of my neighbor, Ca. I.L. which my
relation to him engaged me to endeavor. For having some contest with him about
this Ordinance, he desired my Arguments for the same, and promised me before
several witnesses, if he were not satisfied therewith, to give me an answer
under his own hand. But instead thereof, my Papers were given to some of those
persons commonly called Quakers, and part of them were printed without my
knowledge and consent (the other part being left out) and an answer framed
thereto by two of them, viz. Chr. Atkinson, and George Whitehead, which I think
no rational man could have taken for an answer to my Arguments, if they had not
so called it in their Papers.

Reader, it is not my desire to have any contest with this generation of men,
as having found them by sufficient experience (such as the Apostle, 2 These.
3.2. speaks of, viz.) absurd and unreasonable men; such as are not worthy to
have place amongst men, being more like bruits then men, whom no reason will
satisfy; The word the Apostle there uses, is (...), and signifies men of no
settled abode, vagabond persons, absurd fellows, compact of mere incongruities,
which how fitly it agrees to them, I leave to thy descerning: Only I request of
thee (Christian Reader) thy prayers that we may be delivered from such absurd
and unreasonable men.

If any boast, that the reason why I did not answer them, was because I could
not, and so impute it to the weakness of the cause I maintain, and make it a
temptation to any of my neighbors to cast off this Ordinance. I here declare.

1. I have with utmost diligence and impartiality, weighed what might be worthy
the name of an answer in their papers, and laying aside all their absurd
nonsense, vain repetitions, foolish impertinencies, and wicked railings, (with
which this, and all other their papers (that I have seen) are stuffed) I cannot
epsy any thing that looks like an Argument against singing, except it be that
they do often, even in every page, over and over again in some pages, usque ad
nauseam, urge the unfitness of singing of David's conditions, and cavil against
profane persons singing with us, both which I had sufficiently answered in the
latter part of my vindication; but they would not print it with the rest of the
Arguments, lest (peradventure) these their simple cavils being removed, they
should have had nothing to have stumbled the weakest reader, and so their folly
should be made manifest to all.

2. I judge it not wisdom to meddle with such irrational men, from whom a man
can expect no reasons but railings, no answers but accusations; one had as good
deal with those mad men of Bedlam, as with men mad with error and strong
delusions: upon this account I have declined to deal with them; only the first
time when they came to this Town, I went to oppose them (judging it my duty)
but when I found them such absurd, and unreasonable men, I presently turned my
back upon them, although those that were deluded by them, did boast (oh the
misery of being given up to delusions!) that it was because I could not answer
them. And since that time being reviled in the public Assembly, and cursed, I
have departed with silence, not replying, as men use to depart from angry dogs
that bark at them, and not regard them; and lately have permitted them to
affixe their revilings against me, upon the Market Cross, rather then I would
condescend to answer a simple paper sent to me, consisting of 23. Quaeries,
with this threatening annexed [That if I would not answer them, I should be set
upon the Cross] This (Reader) is the custom of those Rabshakehs whose trade is
to rail and revile; and therefore what ingenious man can fault me, if I refuse
to deal with such bawling creatures.

3. I have several times offered my neighbor aforesaid, That I would show so
much respect to him, that if he asserted any of their opinion; I would give him
my Arguments in writing under my hand, for vindication of the Truth, and
confutation of errors, provided he would answer them under his hand, and I
would allow him liberty to advise with as many as he pleased, (himself owning
the answer) but as for those men, I judged them such as were not responsible
for reason or repute, and therefore it would be but a scandal for me to deal
with them.

4. I conceive it the best way to remove their cavils, and to satisfy the
scrupulous Reader, to print over my Arguments entirely by themselves (part of
which only were printed in their books) and not at all to meddle with them,
there being sufficient (I hope) in these Arguments, to vindicate the truth, and
to silence their objections: Only I desire of the Lord, to give thee an heart
to submit to what Scripture evidence is held forth in them, or else all that I
can say, will not give thee satisfaction, and also to help thee to improve
these brief Rules laid down, that thou may sing more with understanding for
the future. For let me tell thee what my observation is, the chief cause why so
many scruple or deny this Ordinance, is, their own ignorance, nor having yet
learned the right use thereof, how to sing understandingly, and to edification;
the more knowing and godly sort of Christians being able witnesses by their own
experience, That it is a most excellent and heavenly Ordinance. Reader, I shall
detain thee no longer in the porch, only (seeing it is the will of God to make
this discourse public) I shall pray that his blessing may be with it to make
it profitable.

From my study, March 26. 1654/5. I am, thine in Christ J. C.

Arguments to prove, that Singing of Psalms is a Gospel Ordinance, and a part
of Divine Worship to be used in Gospel times.
SInging of Psalms was once an ordinance of God in the Church, and a part of
Divine Worship. And (1) was never repealed under the Gospel. (2) Nor was of a
typical nature and use, as were the Ceremonies, and so to cease with them. (3)
But ever reckoned amongst moral and perpetual duties; as, Prayer, and Hearing
of the Word. See Ps. 95.1, 2, 6, 7. (4) Such a duty as the very light in all
men taught them to practice, witness the custom of all Nations (for which,
see Goodwins Romans Antiq. and read Homers Hymns, Horace's Odes) which shows it
to be of an universal and perpetual obligation; Therefore it contiues an
Ordinance of God still, as well as prayer, and hearing of the Word, and should
not be abolished under the Gospel.

Arg. 2. The Prophesies in Scripture, that foretell the state of the Church in
the New Testament, do speak of Psalms to be used, as a part of Gods worship
then, Psalm 98.1, 2. Psalm. 100.1, 2. Ps. 108.1, 2, 3. where mention is made of
the Gentiles when converted, singing Psalms to God. So Romans 15.9. See Isa.
26.1. and 35.10. Rev. 14.13. and 15.3.

Arg. 3. It has been a duty practiced, not only in the time of the Law, but by
the people of God under the Gospel. Under the Law we have the Songs of Moses,
Deborah, and Barak, of David the sweet singer of Israel; of Solomon, who
composed to the number of 1005. songs; of Asaph and Heman, of Habbakkuk, etc.
Under the Gospel we read of the songs of Mary, Simeon, Zachary, of Christ and
his Apostles, singing an Hymn after the Lords Supper, Mat. 26.30. according to
the Jewish custom, who sung some of David's Psalms, the night wherein the
Passover was eaten (as those who are skilled in their customs, write) We read
of Paul and Silas, Act. 16.25. singing in Prison. Of Psalms used in the Church
of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. and in primitive times, before Antichristian Apostasy,
it was commonly practiced; as Philo, Tertul. Just. Mart. Chrysostom. testify;
yea the very Heathen took notice of this practice amongst the Christians, and
write of it. Pliny in his letter to Trajan the Emperor, writes of the
Christians Hymnos antelucannos, morning songs or Psalms, according to David's
practice, early will I praise thee, etc.

Arg 4. If all this suffice not, know further, there is express Scripture
command (as well as example) for this duty of singing of Psalms, Ephesians. 5.18,
19. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to your selves in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, etc.
where the Apostle alluding to the custom that drunkards have, when they are
filled with wine, they have their songs: So when Christians are filled with the
wine of the spirit, they should have their spiritual songs, Psalms and hymns.
The Hebrews had three words to divide David's Psalms into, Sherim, Tehillim,
Mizmorim, answerable whereto, the Apostle calls them Psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs. So Col. 3.16. in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing, etc. And Jam. 5.13. If any be afflicted let him pray, if any be merry,
let him sing Psalms. It Is spoken generally, if any, etc. let him sing; not
that it is unlawful to sing at other times, for then it might be argued as
well, its not lawful to pray but when sad; but mirth is the most proper season
for singing: In other places we read of singing when sad, as David often, and
Christ a little before his sufferings, when his heart was sorrowful; and Paul
and Silas, when in prison. See Ps. 102. title. Thus we have express command for
it.

Arg. 5. There are several rules given in the New Testament, directing how to
sing aright, as 1 Cor. 14. with the spirit, and with understanding, and Col. 3.
with grace in our hearts, which directions were needless, if it were no
Gospel-duty.

Arg. 6. Much profit and benefit may be had, by the right using of this
Ordinance; there is an efficacy in it, to lift up the heart more, and elevate it
in Gods praises; an holy delight it brings to the soul in God; therein is a
more deliberate and distinct meditation of Gods word and works, then when we
read or hear, a more solemn profession of God, and of his praises; mutual
edification, Col. 3. and provocation to rejoice in God, as drunkards by their
songs, stir up carnal and sinful mirth, so these help spiritual joy, to which
alludes the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

These Arguments being so clear and cogent, might silence all objections; yet
these things I find most commonly urged against this duty, to which I briefly
answer.

Object. If singing be a duty, yet we should not sing David's Psalms, but such
as God gives the gift to, of making Psalms, should endite them for the Churches
use?

Ans. This objection grants then singing to be a Gospel-Ordinance, but denies
the expediency of singing David's Psalms. I shall therefore annexe to the
former six Arguments, proving the warrantablenesse of singing in the general,
six other.

Arguments to prove the warrantablenesse of singing David's Psalms.

Arg. 1. The singing of David's Psalms, is no where in Scripture forbidden; tell
then a reason why we should not sing them, if singing be a duty?

Arg. 2. If any Psalms be lawful to be sung, then certainly, those that were
inspired by the spirit of God, as being most excellent, containing variety of
matter, suiting every condition the Saints usually are in, of a large
comprehensive scope, affording advantage to enlarge the thoughts and affections
upon, infallible for the truths contained in them, and exceeding heavenly and
spiritual, able to ravish the gracious heart in singing of them.

Arg. 3. Its exceeding propable, that the Psalms sung by Christ and the
Apostles, were David's Psalms. (1) Because Christ and the Apostles followed the
Jewish custom in singing after supper, as they did after the Passover; and
therefore its likely they did also intimate them in singing David's Psalms,
which the Jews used to do. (2) And the rather, because we read not of any
other Psalms used by them, which might have been recorded by some of the
Evangelists, as well as his prayer, John 17. if other Psalms had been used.

Arg. 4. The Apostle Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. where he commands singing of Psalms,
does clearly point us to David's Psalms, by using those three words, Psalms,
hymns, and spiritual songs, which answer to the three Hebrew words, Shirim,
Tehillim, Mizmorim. whereby David's Psalms were called.

Arg. 5. Where the Scripture cites any where the Psalms (as Act. 13.33, 35.
and in other places) none question but David's Psalms be understood; why then
should not these be understood, when we are commanded to sing Psalms?

Arg. 6. How much better is it to sing David's Psalms (since singing is a duty)
then Psalms of any private men's composure? the experience we have in these
times of those Psalms, that some have taken on them to compose, and to sing in
the congregations, may easily persuade us to prefer David's Psalms before
such whimzies, etc.

Ob. But it is unlawful to sing with a mixed multitude, you admit ignorant and
profane persons to sing with you, and this is unwarrantable.

Ans. This objection denies not the lawfulness of singing of Psalms in
general, nor yet of singing David's Psalms in particular; only scruples at
singing with profane persons, I shall therefore in the next place, add
Arguments to prove the lawfulness of singing in a mixed Congregation.

Arg. 1. David calls on all creatures to sing praises to God, Psalm. 148. and on
every thing that has breath, to praise the Lord, Psalm. 150. ult.

Arg. 2. Has God any where forbidden their singing? show a Text for it.

Arg. 3. Has not he rather enjoined it by the very dictate of nature, it being
(as was before showed) an homage, that the light in all men teaches to offer
unto God, even as prayer, and not an instituted worship only? why then should
i^ not be as lawful for them to join with us in singing, as well as in prayer?
Let them that cast off singing upon this account take heed they cast not off
ere long, prayer also, in our Congregations.

Arg. 4. Singing is not an act of Church Communion properly, as the Sacraments
be, because it is a duty common to all men, as before was declared; but the
Sacraments hold forth visible communion of Saints, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and
therefore we need not be so scrupulous of our joining with others in singing as
in receiving the Sacrament.

Arg. 5. Why should any fear that mixture of wicked men in singing (who are
bound to sing Gods praises, as well as to pray, though they sin in both) should
pollute an Ordinance more then the mixture of their own corrupt hearts? if you
forbear singing in respect of the former scruple, you should rather forbear it
in respect of the latter. But this ought not to be, and therefore not that.

Arg. 6. Wicked men may read a Psalm, give then a reason why they may not sing
it?

Arg. 7. Moses and the children of Israel joined together in singing, the whole
Congregation; and Miriam and all the women, Exodus 15.1, 20. and yet with many
of these, God was not well pleased, their carcasses fell in the wilderness.
Now Moses and Miriam were not offended at this mixture in singing, why should
any now?

Arg. 8. All the earth are bidden sing to the Lord, Psalm. 68.32. and 96.1. who
then dare take upon them to forbid any?

Ob. But some Psalms you sing, do not suit our conditions, is it not absurd to
give to people; David's conditions to sing, and for them to tell God, it is so
or so with them?

Ans. This objectinon does not argue for the unlawfulness of singing such of
David's Psalms, as suit with our condition. Therefore let such wisely make choice
of such Psalms, as do suit their condition, and not ^east off the duty of
singing, altogether upon this account, seeing there is such variety of matter
in David's Psalms, as may suit every condition that the Saints usually are in.

Ans. 2. But this objection discovers too much ignorance in them that make it;
for we must not think that every Psalm sung, should suite our condition
exactly, no more than every Scripture read, does it. All Scriptures are
profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16.
and written for our learning and comfort, Rom 15.4. and therefore all the
Psalms. We are to meditate on what we sing, to our edification, we may make
application of it to our spiritual benefit, though what we sing, suites not
ever our present estate exactly. Now that we may sing to edification, and with
understanding, I shall in the next place lay down a few Rules of Direction, to
help weak Christians in singing.

Some general rules directing weak Christians how to sing profitably.
1. Some Psalms are Laudarory, that is, contain especially matter of praises,
setting forth the praises of God, from the consideration of his nature and
attributes, as his power, wisdom, holiness, goodness, justice, mercy, truth,
etc. Now in singing these Psalms, we should get our hearts affected to love,
fear, and honor this God, to trust in him, and with our tongues speak out his
praises: or from the consideration of his works, as creation, providence,
redemption. Now we should get our hearts taken up with the meditation of these
works, till al holy affections be enflamed toward him.

2. Some Psalms are Supplicatory, containing petitions for good things, either
spiritual, as pardon, grace, communion with God, etc. Now here we should get
our hearts affected with the excellency of these things so much desired by the
Saints, and with them beg the same blessing of God: Or temporal, as
deliverance, protection, provision, etc. And here we should eye God as the
author of these blessings, and in the want of them, pray to him for the same,
as the Saints did.

3. Some are Imprecatory, praying for judgments on enemies, and containing
direful imprecations, etc. Now in singing them, we are not to wish the same
curses on our private enemies, but see the horrible judgments of God on
ungodly men; and tremble at them, see what will be the end of wicked ungodly
men, though they prosper for the present, and we may pray for the like
judgments on the implacable enemies of Christ and the Church.

4. Some are Eucharistical, containing thanksgivings for mercies, private or
public, temporal or spiritual. Now herein we may meditate how good God is to
his people, how comely praise is for the upright, and be provoked to offer up
in these Psalms, thanks to God for what mercies we have received.

5. Some are Doctrinal, containing instructions to fear God, love God, walk in
the ways of God, backed with promises to encourage us: Or showing the way of
sinners, and their sad event, to deterius therefrom. Now in singing of these,
we should be provoked to shun the one, and embrace the other.

6. Some are Querulatory, containing the sad complaints of the sufferings of
Christ, or the Chu ch, or of particular Saints. Now when we sing these, we do
not ever remonstrate our own condition, but should meditate on the suffering^
of the Saints for our edificat on, and on the love of Christ to us for our
comfort.

I might instance in all the Psalms; (as indeed it were an excellent and
profitable work, i^ some able pen would (according to these general rules) give
some directions upon every particular Psalm, to help weak Christians in
singing, it might conduce as much to the upholding this Ord^nance as 100
Argument.) But I do now study brevity. This may suffice to teach how to sing
other Psalms to edification and consolation. Let none therefore cast off an
Ordinance, because themselves or others have abused it, but learn the right use
thereof, that they may sanctify Gods name therein, (...).

FINIS.

