A Second VOICE FROM THE TEMPLE TO THE Higher Powers. WHEREIN Is proved that
the Decrees and Institutions of Popes, and Popish Counsels, which have been
established by the Law of the Land, and have been continued and confirmed
throughout diverse Ages, by several Acts of Parliament, against Jesus Christ, in
the way and order of the Gospel (the same yet standing) ought by the present
supreme Authority of this Nation to be taken away.

MOREOVER; Here is showed, some particular Decrees of Popes, which have been
established by several Acts of Parliaments, viz. A National Ministry, Tithes,
Prohibiting men from public Preaching of the Gospel, unless Elected and
Ordained after a Popish manner, etc. All which, as they are the Institutions of
Popes, formerly confirmed by the Law of the Land, so now, to be abrogated.

By JOHN CAN.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold at his House next door to
the Gilded Lion in Aldersgate street. 1653.

TO THE SVPREAM AVTHORITY OF THIS NATION, The PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth
of England.
SIRS;
WHo knows whether ye are called to the Commonwealth for such a time as this?
It is a singular mercy, when the Lord in the way of his providence, calls men
himself to employment, and puts a fair opportunity into their hands, to Act
for him. Your Call to this present work was more then ordinary, and there is
something more then ordinary expected now to be done by you.

I would think you should never be sitting in that House, but be thinking still
on those who sat there before you, whom the Lord has laid aside, as despised
broken Idols, and vessels wherein his soul had no pleasure; and why? ah they
knew not their Generation-work, neither were faithful to the interest of Jesus
Christ. God is no respector of persons, as men sow, so they shall reap.

Charles King of Naples, was sir-named Cunctator, Delayer, because he stayed
till opportunity was past: but Fabius the Shield of Rome, was so called,
because he only stayed till opportunity was come Truly my desire and prayer to
God is, that you may be like Fabius: As for the opportunity, its come, its
before you, and in your hands: do ye ask, what? The Lord is now taking
vengeance, and doing execution upon Babylon: in order whereunto, he has
stained the power and pride of the Prelates destroyed their Courts Canons, and
other abominations. This work he is still carrying on, for it must be wholly
desolate, not a stone left upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down. And
as before he made use of the Higher Powers, for the effecting of what was then
done: so he will do for the rest, command his sanctified ones, and call his
mighty ones, to fulfill all his pleasure upon the great whore.

It is true, as the work behind is more choice, high, and spiritual, so he
will single out men of clearer principles, greater zeal, and larger affections
and love to him, and his Son, for it. Whether you be the men whom the Lord will
honor in this work, I know not, but this I know, it is speedily to be done;
for Sion is in travail, and ready to bring forth. Is it not a goodly thing, to
behold in Poets, Jupiter, who has forsaken his fiery Chariot, and rainged
Horses, letting all go at random, in the mean time to busy himself in
painting upon the Clouds, sometimes Goats, Apes, Centaures, etc. To deliver my
mind plainly (for I desire to be plain) if you stick not to the interest of
Christ, and set upon his work in good earnest, which is to destroy the
Antichristian Kingdom (so far as your power and place extends) as for other
things, comparatively (I speak it) they are but as Jupiters paintings on the
Clouds, soon pass away, and the remembrance of them hereafter, will administer
small comfort to you.

I remember Christ's words to his Spouse, Rise up my love, my fair one, and
come away, for lo the winter is past, the rain is over and gone. If you speak
to a Mariner, in winter, why he keeps at home, and lets his Vessel lie still in
the Harbor, he has something to say in reason for himself, viz. the
unseasonablenesse of the time, but in summer he cannot excuse himself so: If a
man should have spoken to you 10 or 20 years past, about this National
Ministry, and Tithes, and to have men preach not ordained by Bishops, you might
have said then, it is winter, we are not Parliament men, nor in a capacity to
help the Lord against the Mighty; well, it is otherwise now with you, and
therefore suit your selves like men, and do the Lords work, whiles it is to
day. Let not this Voice from the Temple, pass through your ears, without
taking some impression your hearts: The which is the desire of

Your humble Servant, in the work of Sion. JOHN CAN.

SEVERAL REASONS Proving that the Decrees and Institutions of Popes, and
Popish-Counsels ( viz. A National Ministry, Tithes, Prohibiting men from
Public Preaching of the Gospel, unless Elected and Ordained after a Popish
manner) ought to be Abolished by the Present Authority.
IT is a saying of Solomon, To every thing there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under the Heaven, Eccl. 3.1. I know not that ever there was a
time or season more fit then now to publish these things. For I hope (and till
I see the contrary, shall believe it) that those men who are the Higher Powers,
as they will prove all things, so, hold fast that which is good. My meaning is,
whatsoever they find upon due and mature examination, to be the mind of Christ
revealed in his holy word, and as a work proper to them so they will
accordingly act and do that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God.
First then I shall lay down this Assertion, and humbly set it before them.

Whatsoever Decrees and Institutions of Popes, and Popish Counsels, have been
established by the Law of the Land, and have been continued and confirmed
throughout diverse ages by several Acts of Parliament, against Jesus Christ,
in the order and way of the Gospel (the same yet standing) ought by the present
supreme Authority of this Nation, to be taken away.

My Reasons for it are these.

1. This tends to the effectual accomplishing of that good Promise in Zeph.
2.11. where the Lord speaks that he will famish all the Gods of the earth, and
men shall worship him, etc. Now what way or course can be taken more effectual
and certain, to starve and famish the Antichristian Idols (as the false Church,
Ministry, Worship, Government) then the Magistrate to take away the food and
maintenance, whereby hitherto (and at this present) they are nourished, fed,
and kept alive.

2. If the Civil Magistrate, be to hate the whore, and make her desolate and
naked, as it is expressly prophesied, Rev. 17.16. then he is to repeal all such
Laws and Statutes which Popish Princes formerly have made, whereby she has
lived deliciously and proudly, and keeps on to this day, her whorish attire.
And this I understand as one special and choice work of the Magistrate, To
make the whore desolate and naked, It is that no Act or Law do stand in force,
which does yield any relief or help to her.

3. If we must pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, as 1 Timothy 2.2. Then
it must needs follow, that as it is our duty to pray, that those Decrees and
Institutions of Popes and Popish Counsels, which have been established by the
Law of the Land, against Christ, may be taken away; so it is the Magistrates
part and duty likewise, to repeal them; for otherwise the Church and people of
God, cannot lead a quiet, and peaceable life, etc. but either must live
unquiet, or ungodly, or both.

4. If the Civil Magistrate be at all concerned in taking vengeance on Babylon,
as to set himself in array against her, bend his bow, fan her, and empty her.
If the pouring out of the later viols, do any way belong unto him, this then
is most proper to him (as acting within his own sphere) to null all Statutes
and Laws, which idolatrous Princes have made (when they gave their power to
the Beast) whereby the Antichristian Kingdom ever since has stood and been
supported.

5. How are the Kings and Judges of the Earth, wise and instructed, how do
they serve the Lord in fear, and kiss the Son, as they are commanded, Psa.
2.10, 11, 12. If people under their Government, are required and commanded by
any Law in force (though enacted before their time) to practice false worship,
or any act of Idolatry and Superstition, or to suffer in their person or
estate, in case they refuse.

6. So long as Rulers permit old Laws and Statutes in force, whereby
superstition and false worship is continued and established, they are a terror
to good works, and not to evil: They are not (in this respect) the Ministers of
God to us for good, which is quite contrary to Paul's doctrine, Romans 13.3, 4.

7. Such Laws and Statutes as were made at first by Idolaters, against the
ways and truths of the Gospel, so long as they are not repealed, all
succeeding Governors which allow and command the practice of them, do wrap
themselves in the sin and guilt of that power by which they were first enacted,
and stand no less guilty before the Lord, then the authors and contrivers of
them; and so much is clear by the words of the Prophet; For the Statutes of
Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their
Counsels: That I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof a
hissing, therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people. Mic. 6.16. Omri and
Ahab were both deceased long before, but some unjust Statutes of theirs
remained, for which the Lord has a Controversy with the mountains of Israel,
in regard they had not repealed such wicked acts. It is true, the Prophet in
the place, does not expressly say what those Statutes and works were:
nevertheless by the History of the Kings of Israel, it may easily be
conceived: They had devised a false worship, and ordained Priests for the high
Places, and for the Devils, and for the Calves which they had made.

Now this being done, no question but it was by the States of Israel afterward
Enacted, 1. That those Priests should be acknowledged to be true and lawful
Ministers, and that none should separate from them, but communicate in all
their public Acts of Idolatry. 2. That the people should pay Tithes to these
Priests of the high places. 3. That no man unless ordained after the manner
and form of these Priests, should presume to open and expound the Law publicly
to the people.

I shall say no more concerning the proof of this Assertion, only my desire and
prayer to God, is, that those who are in Authority, may well consider, how much
it does concern them, to inquire after the Decrees of Popes and Popish
Councels, which have been by the Law of the Land established against the
Gospel, and are to this day unrepealed: In regard if the same be still allowed
by them, how they wrapped themselves (as was said before) in the guilt and sin of
those men who first made such irreligious Laws: And therefore the Magistrate
has need to take heed what Law he makes (or being made before, does allow) in
matters appertaining to Religion, and the worship of God, as binding men to the
obedience and practice thereof.

I come now to the next particular, that is, to show what Decrees of Popes,
established by the Laws of the Land, against Jesus Christ (yet in force) ought
to be repealed.

1. The National Ministry, commonly called the Ministry of the Church of
England. That this is a plant which the heavenly Father never planted, and
therefore to be plucked up by the roots (howsoever established by Law) I shall
make it good by many plain demonstrations.

But by the way, least I should be mis-understood, and the matter applied
further and otherwise then is intended, this I have thought good to declare,
that I do believe there are in this Nation, many faithful and true Ministers
of Christ, elected and ordained according to the Gospel: some I know, whom I
love, and honor: so that it is a Ministry, or more truly a Priesthood, taken
and derived from the Sea of Rome, which I here speak of, this I call the
National Ministry, because to say the truth, I know no ecclesiastical person
(properly so called) which the Law of the Land allows as lawful, but he whose
Ministry is essentially derived from the Pope. But to proceed.

1. The National Ministry is so carnal and earthly, as that such as hold and
maintain the same, they have not a piece of Scripture, precept nor example to
justify their opinion: Insomuch as the learned of them, and those who are
true to their own Principles, do ingeniously confess the very thing which we
said before, namely that the Ministry of the Church of England (that which is
established by the Law of the Land) is derived from the Pope. Thus Francis
Mason of Consecration, published by Authority, proves at large by undeniable
Reasons. So Mr Yates, we are Ministers from Rome, though not of Rome, and gives
this, as a bone for the Brownish to pick. Model of Divinity, page 257.

2. This being so, that their office and calling is essentially derived from
Rome, and the Pope, it must needs follow, that such men as have not renounced
that Ministry, but stand formally and actually in the condition they were at
first, whither Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, have dangerously run themselves
upon a point of Treason and Felony, and might be legally executed for treason
and felony, if the State were not pleased to interpret the Statute contrary
(as I conceive) to the very letter and form of it. The words of the Statute
are these, Eliz. 27.2.

It shall not be lawful for any Seminary Priest, or other Priest or
Ecclesiastical person what soever, made without or WITHIN any of her Majesty's
dominions, by ANY AUTHORITY CHALLENGED OR PRETENDED FROM THE SEA OF ROME, by or
of what name, or title, or degree soever the same shall be called, or known,
to be, or remain in any part of her Highness dominions, and every person so
offending, shall be judged as Traitor, and shall suffer as in case of Treason:
And every person which shall wittingly or willingly receive, relieve, comfort,
or maintain any such Priest or Ecclesiastical person, shall be judged a Fellon
without benefit of the Clergy, suffer death, loose and forfeit, as in case of
Felony.

Now hence it was (as I conceive) that the Non conformists made so many humble
suites unto Princes and Parliaments, for a lawful Ministry to be established
throughout the Realm, and that the present Ministry might utterly be abolished,
as a base Ministry, which God never erected in his Church. As they knew it was
originally from Rome, so not safe to be taken up, for being ordained Priests
and Ecclesiastical persons, by authority from the Sea of Rome, they became ipso
facto by our Statute, Traitors and Felons, and might have been punished as
other Priests, had the Law been prosecuted indifferently against the one, as
the other. And here I cannot forget the zeal of the old Puritans, against the
Nation Ministry, their opinion of it, and often addresses to the State, to have
it quite taken away.

It is in their writings ordinarily affirmed by them, that the Ministry of
England is a base Ministry, which God never erected in his Church, but came
wholly from the Pope: not only the calling of the Hierarchy but also their
dependent Offices, all unlawful and Antichristian: A Ministry strange from the
Scriptures, and never heard of in the Primitive Church, a mere humane invention
taken up without any warrant from Gods word, and brought into the Church by the
boldness of men: It wants the life, essence and being, whereby a Minister is a
Minister.

The Books are extant wherein these things and a great deal more are asserted,
with Admonitions, Supplications, petitions to the Parliament to have the
National Ministry quite rooted out.

Now is it not strange, this being so, that those men in times so dangerous,
and when little could be expected from the supreme Authority, in answer to
their Petitions, should appear with so much boldness against the National
Ministry: whereas now though we have better times, and better men in place,
from whom we may expect better things, and more then they could hope for,
nevertheless not so much is done, but the good principles of the
Non-conformists are laid aside, the national Ministry pleaded for, and by
whom? even such as pretend more to purity of Ordinances, then the old puritans
ever did.

3. To countenance and allow such a Ministry as is from Rome, is a great
dishonor to our State, specially now, as if we must be beholding to the Sea of
Rome, and know not how to worship God without taking a Popish Clergy from
thence. As on the contrary to disown it, by repealing the Law by which it
stands, and so to send it back from whence it came, this would make the faces
of our Governors to shine, and their names to be precious, and blessed in
future Generations.

4. To allow such a Ministry, is to acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be a true
minister of the Gospel. I pray observe it, those Laws and Statutes by which the
national Ministry is established and continued, they do acknowledge and
justify that great Antichrist, as to be a true and lawful minister of Jesus
Christ. Hence it is by our Law, that those who are made Priests in the Church
of Rome, if they come to the Church of England, retein their Priesthood as full
and ample as before. And the Reason is, because the Law puts no difference
between a man, made Priest at Rome by the Pope, or Ordained Priest by a Prelate
in England, as to the Office and Calling, it is one and the same.

5. This national Ministry is a great dishonor and shame to the Gospel, and
to Christ himself in his most excellent servants, the Apostles and Churches of
the Apostolic Institution, in rejecting and reproaching their precept and
practice. And therefore it much concerns the Parliament, to confider how they
suffer such laws in force, as do openly and publicly speak out contempt
against Jesus Christ. I do not deny but men may be (yea and ought to be)
tolerated, though they err in their opinion and practice: But that the
Magistrate should make a Law (or continue any Law made before) to the dishonor
of Christ and the Gospel, this they cannot do.

6. It is a dishonor to a State that any mark of the Beast should by Law be
justified and practiced in it: But this national Ministry as derived from the
Sea of Rome, is one of the most perspicuous and notorious marks that Popes and
Popish Councels ever gave, one of the first, and by which Babylon has been
most advanced, and Sion ever since most opposed, hated, persecuted.

7. This Antichristian Ministry, (whether it be in Spain, France, England,
etc. For it is all one, I speak of the Office and calling, and not of the
Administrations of Priests) is guilty of blood, for thousand thousands of
Saints have been murdered by it. And therefore as the Lord is making
Inquisition for blood, so should those who are called gods on earth, now follow
the Lamb, and show forth the likeness and Image of their great God and Master
in heaven, in searching after the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and
to execute the judgment written.

It is true, as the times may be, some Acts of Justice may be foreborn, which
afterward ought, and must be don. David complains, that the sons of Zerviah
were to hard for him, yet Solomon following (being in a better capacity) put
one of them to death, and justly too.

To illustrate this by a Comparison; though murder be discovered, and the
person known, yet no execution can be don upon him, till he fall into the hand
of Justice. Indeed then, if the Magistrate neglect his duty, and suffer him to
escape, he wraps himself in the blood and guilt of the Malefactor. That blood
guiltiness lies on that Ministry which essentially is derived from the Sea of
Rome, this has been known to Saints in former ages: but the sons of Zerviah
were still to hard for them. But now, when the power shall be in their hands,
not to arraign and execute the murderer, is to be accessory (I mean in some
measure and degree) to the blood of the Prophets and of the Saints, shed in all
ages and nations by this bloody Ministry.

Lastly, It might here be showed what great inconvenience will follow, so long
as this National Ministry is not abolished: for though Tithes be taken away,
yet will the people do as they have done, go to these Priests for marrying,
burying, Christnings, Churchings, administering the Lords Supper, Reading the
Service Book, etc. And join with them in other Acts of superstition and
will worship. Which they will not do, if by public authority it be declared,
that this Ministry is held no longer true and lawful, and all such laws
Null, by which the same was established.

Object. That ignorant and scandalous Ministers, be removed, none, or few are
against it, but we would have such as are godly Ministers to continue in their
places: otherwise men would live like Heathens, without God and Christ in the
world.

To this objection, I shall answer diverse ways.

1. If we consider the persons of the National Ministry, as distinct from
their calling, here indeed we are to put a difference between persons, though
not things. Concerning their persons we grant, some are much better then other:
but for the thing it self, that is, the Ministry, the Law allows and owns
all alike, good and bad, godly or ungodly, wise or foolish. And this is no
other then what is asserted by a great Doctor of their own: If you repel (says
he, writing against Mr Penrie) the unpreaching Minister because of his outward
calling, you may by the same reason discharge the worthiest Minister in the
Land of the holy Ministry; FOR ALL HAVE ONE AND THE SAME EXTERNAL CALLING IN
THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, Dr Somes last Treat. c. 10. p. 125.

And this is most true, and therefore to make the calling of one Narional
Minister better or more lawful then another, is absurd: In their personal
graces, qualifications, administrations, here they may differ, but as to their
office and Ministry, so they are alike, and all one. I speak here what the
Law of the Land has established, and allowed, not valuing the distinction
which some make of their own head.

2. That the disowning of the National Ministry should hinder the propagation
of the Gospel. I answer: 1. This is to cast some dishonor upon Christ, as if
there were a necessity that he must be beholden to the greatest Enemy he has,
to help him in the carrying on of the preaching of the Gospel, for the sadding
of souls. 2. Howsoever it is true, God has made the labors of some National
Ministers succesfull to the comfort of many souls: yet that he has ever ownd
their Calling or Ministry, that I deny. It is no good reasoning, Because the
Lord makes a man's work prosperous, therefore he justifies the false calling he
has taken up.

But 3. That the laying aside of this National Ministry will be for the
furtherance of the truth, appears thus. 1. Because the greater number (I
think I may here leave out but few) are ignorant of the Gospel, and have not
received the things of the spirit of God, but they are foolishness unto them.
How fitly here may that place be applied, Matthew. 23.13. Woe unto ye Scribes and
Pharisees hypocrites: for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye
neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
2. As the unworthy are laid aside, so for men of parts, and piety, though the
State do no longer own that Ministry which they took from the Sea of Rome,
yet setting themselves on the Lords work in his own way, doubtless they will
give them countenance and all due encouragement. Besides, they shall have the
presence of God with them more then now they can exspect. 3. The whore of Rome,
has so bewitched the Nations of the world, which have drunk the wine of her
fornication, that until her abominations be put away, they will not hearken to
the voice of Christ. We see the throwing down of the Bishops was very much for
the enlargement of Christ's kingdom, of this we have had ever since large
experience; so the disowning of the National Ministry, will be as much (if not
more) to the propagation of the Gospel, for it is no other then to pluck up a
weed, that the good Corn may grow and prosper the better.

The next particular we are to handle, concerns Tithes: a thing (as now in
use) devised first by the Pope and his Council, and established by the Law of
the Land, contrary to the true maintenance of a Gospel Minister, and therefore
by the Magistrate to be taken away. But before I prove this, a word or two by
the way.

1. The Author of that Book lately published, entitled, A view of all
Religions, reckons this (among other things) to be the opinion of the
Independents, viz. that the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes is superstitions
and Judaical: It is probable heretofore when some such men were not in a
capacity to take Tithes, by reason of Subscription and Nonconformitie, they
were against the thing, and held it superstitious and Judaical, as the learned
Knight reports: But the power of the Prelates being since broken, their opinion
now seems to be otherwise, their practice I am sure speaks it so.

2. As the saying is; Vno absurdo mill sequuntur, grant one absurdity, and a
thousand will follow: So is the case here: grant a National Ministry, which is
Popish and Antichristian, Tithes must follow: For what more congruous and
proper, then every Ministry (whether Christian, Antichristian or Jewish) to
have its maintenance, according to the Rule and Law belonging to it. I know it
is the opinion of many that Tithes being taken away, a multitude of profane
and scandalous Priests will fall with them. Now admit this be so.
Nevertheless, if the National Ministry be as unlawful as Tithe: and that
which is the foundation of it, why should it not be taken likewise into
consideration, yea and first of all. Physicians tell us, and we find it true
by experience; The effect cease, when the cause is taken away.

3. Howsoever I have seen several Addresses made to the Parliament, and many
books in print against Tithes: yet methinkes, I do not find the Case well
stated, at least not home; That tithes are an oppression and too great a burden
for the people to bear, a great discouragement to the husbandman, etc. Though
this be true, yet its rather a circumstance or an aggravation, then the thing
it self. I would state the case thus; The Pope and his Councels have sent
hither an unlawful Ministry, and for the maintenance of it, they have
appointed Tithes, as the Priest had under the Law. These Ordinances and
Constitutions of the great Whore have been established here by Idolatrous
Princes and Parliaments, against the Lord Jesus, who is the King of Kings, and
whom all the powers of the world should obey. In which regard it is desired,
not so much for the ease of the people, and husband man's sake, as for Gods
sake, for Christ's sake, and for the Gospel sake, that such sinful laws may be
repealed, and this mark of the Beast kept here by Authority no longer.

4. Howsoever I do observe that the Independents and Presbyterians do appear
most for Tithe, yet the truth is, neither of them by the Law of the Land have
any title to it. For they are not such Incumbents or Ecclesiastical persons,
as the Law allows in case of Tithes. For whosoever has not been ordained
Priest or Deacon by a Bishop, that is, whose Ministry is not essentially from
the Sea of Rome, to use Masons words. Or as the Non-Conformists express it, he
whose entrance into the Ministry is not by a Popish, and unlawful vocation,
strange from the Scriptures, and never heard of in the Primitive Church: Cannot
(as a Minister) by act of Parliaments claim any propriety in Tithes. Again for
such as have renounced their ordination by Bishops, and take themselves to be
Ministers by Election and Ordination some other way, these the Law of the Land
counts Sectaries and Schismatics, men that have forfeited their livings and
places, and so to be suspended.

It is true, Doctor Corn: Burgess, though he have turned often, yet probably
has not turned himself out of his title, but with Gilhinham, Gauden, Hamond,
Slater, Reeves, Tailor, Aern: And so Mossom, Hardy, Baker, Williams, and other
Service Readers, he, I say, and such as these of the old Popish way (as true to
their Principles) may pretend something to Tithes, as they have been
established by the Law of the Land, and as they have been continued and
confirmed throughout diverse ages by several Acts of Parliaments: but for
others (specially the Independents and the Presbyters made since the Bishops
were put down) as the Law of God is clear against them, so the Law of the Land
will not speak one word for them, though their Counsel may.

5. For what cause some lately desired the Committee, to have Counsel to plead
the Incumbents propriety for Tithes, it is a riddle to me: For who doubts but
there is custom, usage, Laws, and Statutes of this Land for payment thereof:
as Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, and (before them) Monks and Friars had. Besides
that honorable Committee, well knows, by the politic Law or custom of
England, which is the common law of England, Tithes have bin vested and settled
in persons Ecclesiastical. But the Question is; 1. What the Incumbent has to
say, Why the Laws and Statutes of this Land enjoining the payment of Tithes
should not be abrogated. 2. Why Tithes should continue payable to this
National Ministry. 3. Why the Magistrate (as a thing proper to his place)
ought to appoint Tithes, as the due maintenance of a Gospel Minister. Now here
is little work for Lawyers, it belongs rather to the Parsons and Vicars
themselves to speak to this point.

And here I cannot but take occasion to note, how some men lately in their
namelesse Pamphlets for Tithes, have made a great noise about a Catalogue of
the Acts of Parliaments, confirming the Right of Tithes to the Church. And that
the world may know, what pains they have taken for Babylon (or it may be
rather for their own Interest) they begin at Magna Charta, and go through all
the Popish Parliaments, even to the reign of Queen Elizabeth; and raking
together a great deal of the Popes trash and dung, tell us very soberly, of
many special Acts and Grants for payment of Tithes, confirmed by such a King
in the years so and so: what remedies the Priests had for recovery of the
Tithes, and penalties for non-payment of them, as treble damages, imprisonment
without bail. Now what is all this but wind and vanity, a seeking to gull and
befoole the Nation: I except the Parliament, for I hope they are so wise, as to
see this to be a cheat (and as we commonly say, causam pro causa) a taking that
for defense of their cause, which makes nothing to the purpose. For thus they
argue, Because Popes have made unlawful decrees, and idolatrous Magistrates
have confirmed them. Ergo, this Parliament must do so too. Now I come to the
Reasons against Tithes.

1. This way of maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, is a Popish custom,
imposed by the Popes authority, without any warrant for it in the New
Testament: not practiced in the Primitive Church in the Apostles times, nor in
the times of the Ministers that succeeded them for the space of some hundred
years, until Christian doctrines, and Apostolical orders were corrupted with
errors, heresies, and idolatrous orders of superstitious persons, as Monks,
Nuns, etc. But no sooner sits the man of sin in the Temple of God, and had
set up an Antichristian Priesthood, calling himself the high Priest, and the
Priests, the Tribe of Levi, and Gods inheritance, but he made all the Clergy
to swear Alleagiance to him; See Fox Act. page 961. And commanded the people to
pay Tithes to his Priests, and his Priests to pay first fruits, and tenths or
tithes to him, after the manner of the Jewish people, and Levites to Aaron
under the Law.

For the Antiquity of the payment of Tithes in this Nation, the Original I
think can hardly be showed: Doctor Willet says in his Synops: in the fifth
General Controversy, page 314. that in Austins time there was no general law
nor custom in the Church for the paying of them. And in those Questions that
Austin the Monk (after that he came into England) propouned to Gregory Bishop
of Rome: and in the answer which the Bishop sent him back, there is nothing
said of Tithes, nor any such thing required for the maintenance of the
Ministers, but of the free gift of the people; and this was about 596 years
after Christ; see Fox Act. Mon. page 105.

Before the Council of Lateran, which was under Innocent. 3. in the year 1215.
any man might have paid his Tyth to any Ecclesiastical person he pleased, but
by that Council it was decreed, that Tithes should be paid to the Pariochal
Priests. William Thorpe, says, that Pope Gregory 10. was the first that
ordained tithes to be paid to Priests in the year 1211. Fox page 494. Doct.
Ridley in the book of his called, A view of the Civil law, page 147. says;
The Customs we pay our Tithes by at this day, were settled upon this kingdom
by the Popes Legates, in Provincial and Synodal Constitutions about the time of
Henry 3. and Henry 5. Howsoever these writers agree not in point of time, yet
in this they accord, that the maintenance of Priests by Tithes, was a decree of
the Pope, that vile person divided the Land for gain, Dan. 11.39. which was
confirmed by Popish Princes. And therefore to be abolished, as we have proved
before.

This I shall only add: In the second Article of the Covenant of the two
Nations, many have sworn to endeavor the extirpation of superstition, and all
kind of Popery, that the paying of Tithes is popish, nothing more certain,
and therefore as it is a case of conscience, so men ought to be careful,
either how they press it, or practice it.

2. If we will follow the example and practice of our Savior and his Apostles,
and the Churches of the Apostolic Institution, the Ministers maintenance is
not any set portion of men's goods, nor to be taken from them by compulsion, but
to be free, 2 Cor. 9.5, 6, 7. It is true the exhortation is, Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches him in all good things,
Gal. 6.6. Again, They which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.14. But will it hence follow. 1. That the Magistrate is to appoint what
the Minister shall have. 2. And so much every man shall be forced to give. 3.
That he must allow him maintenance, who teaches him not. 4. Though his calling
be unlawful, and doctrines unsound, yet he must have tithes. Master Shaw, I
hear, in a Sermon lately drew some such Conclusions, where bewailing the going
down of tithes, he had this passage: Some (says he) call us hyrelings, if we
be so, yet we ought to have our wages. Others say, we are Beasts: grant it: yet
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn is not to be muzled: beasts have
provision allowed them. Admirable! its his own I dare say, it looks so like
him.

Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus. One looking as it were babies in
another eyes: But for Answer, 1. Being hyrelings, why seek ye wages of those
who set you not at work, nor do any thing for them. 2. What have I to do to
provide for that Beast, which is neither my own, nor works for me. 3. If any
thing be allowed to such creatures, it should be only that which is meet and
proper for hyrelings and beasts to have.

3. To retein tithes, is to keep up and give honor to the Jewish shadows,
which by Christ's death were taken away. It is no other then superstition and
abomination, a manifest tempting of God, and by consequence a denying that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Hence a Jew might well twit our Tyth-Takers
in the words of the Samaritan woman. How is that thou who professest thy self
a Minister of the New Testament, observest our Mosaicall Ceremonies, and live
by Tithes as did the Priests under the Law? I know what their usual answer is.
Tithes were paid before Moses time, long before the Ceremonial law was
written; for Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedek of all that he had, Genesis 14.19,
20. And Jacob vowed that if God would prosper his journey, he would give unto
God the tenth of all that he should give him, Genesis 28.21, 22. And it is
probable by this fact of Abraham, and vow of Jacob, that tithes are due by the
law of nature, and the tenth of every thing was given unto God: and so it is no
part of the Ceremonial law, there being no prescription or law written.

I cannot say of this Objection, that is (certo certius) not liable to
exception: For 1. By the same reason we should take up Circumcision, Oblations
and Offerings, distinction of clean and unclean, both of Beasts and Fowls, the
observation of the seventh day Sabboath, for these things were practiced before
the Law was written.

But 2. Neither Abraham, nor Jacob, nor any other man, nor Adam himself before
his fall, did or could know Gods will, by any Law of nature, or natural
knowledge, as how he would be worshipped and served by the Creatures which he
had made for man's use, or with which of them, or how much of them, whether all,
or any one of them, God would accept of at man's hand, until he had revealed
his will to him for a command of his worship and service, Genesis 2.16, 17. and
3.1, 2, 3.

3. We answer, that the Ceremonial Law of sacrifices, oblations, and offerings
of first fruits, and tithes, and the distinction of clean and unclean Beasts
and Fowls, was revealed to Adam, presently after the fall, and to the Fathers
before the Flood, and God commanded so much of the Ceremonial Law, as might
serve for the good of his Church and people, at that time, Genesis 3.21. and 4.4,
5. and 8.20.21. Hence it is plain, that the Ceremonial Law of first fruits,
and Tithes, or the tenth part of men's goods, was not known by any Law of Nature
or Nation all knowledge, to be due unto God, no more then the distinction of
clean and unclean Beasts, and Fowls, was known unto men by any natural
knowledge to be offered unto God, but (as we said) the Lord revealed it to the
Fathers before the Flood, and afterward established it under the Priesthood of
Levi. And the Law of first Fruits and Tithes was to be abolished, with the
Priesthood of Levi, under which they were established with other Ceremonies, as
may be collected from Heb. 7.12.

But 4. suppose a man should grant Tithes are due by the Law of nature; that
is, the tenth of every thing is to be given to God, what is this to the parish
Priest, or national Ministrey, Can there be nothing given to God, but what the
Priest must have? now such must be the conclusion, or nothing can be made of it.

4. Though I shall not meddle with the great controversy about the Magistrates
power in Ecclesiastical things, and how far he is Keeper of both Tables, yet
this certainly may be Asserted, viz. that no Parliament by any Act or statute,
is to command any thing contrary to the Laws of God, either of the first or
second Table. As the Magistrate is not to make any Law (neither if made, to let
it stand) which should require men to steal, murder, commit adultery, sins
forbidden in the second Table, so neither must he command the practice of
Idolatry, superstition, will worship, etc. by any Law, either new or old,
against the first Table.

Now for payment of Tithes, it is a sin two ways against the 2d Commandment.
1. In it self, as being Jewish and superstitious. 2. As paid to an unlawful and
Antichristian Ministry. That the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes is
superstitious, and forbidden in the second Commandment, we prove it thus.

1. From the nature of superstition, which is as lib. 1. vit. excul. oppos.
Col. 501.502.
Zanchy describes it, a taking into the worship of God, more then he requires
in his worship. Hence superstition (as some derive the word) is that which is
done supra statutum, and in this respect the paying of Tithes is superstitious,
as being a serving of God upon no other ground, but man's invention.

2. According to the Aquin. 2.20. Q. 92. Art. 1.
Schoolmen, that is superstition, when any thing concerning Religion, is given,
Vel cui non debet, vel non eo modo quo debet, either to the person it should
not be, or not in the way or manner as it ought: and this is held a sound truth
by all Orthodox writers. which is the case here.

3. It is a great superstition to approve, countenance, or give honor to any
of the ways or devices of Antichrist. They that are sincere Christians (says
In Censura. cap. 9. fol. 471.
Bucer) cannot abide any thing that is his. The least show (said synop.
Antichrist.
Vigandus) to please him or his followers, is will worship. Of this judgment
were in Hos. 2.16.
Junius, Loc. com. de trad. p. 421, 422.
Musculus, Tract. theol. vol. 3. p. 210.
Beza, in Psa. 16.
Mollerus, de Polit. p. 72.
Sipperus, Contr. Mon. page 70.
Sadeel, and others. Now men approve, countenance, and give honor to the ways
of Antichrist, by paying Tithes to Priests, we have showed before.

4. It is vicious and superstitious to simbolize with Idolatery. By the Deuteronomy.
12.30. Lev. 18.3. Exodus 23.24. Genesis 25.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Lev. 19.17.27.28. Isa.
27.9.
Scriptures we are forbidden all conformity with them in any of their way,
order, custom, traditions, and manner of worship, or religious observations.
And the Saints in all ages have carefully shunned it, as might be showed by
several examples. It was the Herodot. in Thalco. Becan. in Anolog. vetet. nov.
test. c. 5.
custom of the Arabians, and other Heathens, in imitation of Dionysius, that
is, Bacchus, to round the corners of their head, now this the Israelites Lev.
19.27.
might not do, though a thing indifferent, (as Calv. in Levit. 19.17.
Calvin observes) because God would not have them to be like Idolaters.

5. Superstition is committed, when more estimation is had of a thing, more
dignity and excellency placed in it, and more regard had to it, then God
allows, or can stand with his will revealed in his word; and so much lib. 1.
de vit. ext. cult. oppos. col. 504, 505.
Zanchy proves by sundry instances. And in this regard also, paying of Tithes
is superstitious, because that thing is honored and embraced, which we find
not in the New Testament to be lawful, and thus an idol is set up, Tanquam deus
ex part, though not deus simpliciter.

6. This may be further proved by the testimony of learned men: For to have any
thing common with Idolaters, or to serve God after any way of theirs, or to
take up, and make use of any of their rites, orders, customs, observations,
institutions, they hold it utterly unlawful. Thus have the Tertul. de coron.
mil. Greg. l. 1. epist. 44. ad Leon. Theod. l. 1. c. 10. August. ep. 86. ad
Casul.
old Fathers affirmed, so our later writers, Pareus in 1 Cor. 10.14. Bucer in
Mat. 18. f. 143. Beza Tract. theol. vol. 3. p. 210.
Calvinists, Cen. 4. c. 13. col. 406. Chemnit. exam. theol. Melane. par. 2. p.
491.
Luthervns, B. Jewel upon 1 Thessalonians. 5. p. 219. Sutclief. chal. p. 62.
Formal Protestants, Perth. Assemb. p. 55, 56. Altar. Damosc. p. 539.
Reformists, Bellar. de monac. c. 40. and de ester^. sac. l. 2. c. 31. sect.
10. Rhem. Annot. on 1 Cor. 6.14. and 1 Timothy 6. sect. 4. and in Rev. 1.1.
Papists, yea many See Mr Ainsworth on Levit. 19.27.
Jew Doctors, and some Taledo can. 5.40. Laodec. c. 38. Brac. can. 32. and 73.
Councels have thus concluded, and the Deor. pa. 2. cause. 26. quaest. 27. c.
13. etc. 14.
Cannon Law speaks so too.

Thus much for the first particular, that Tithes ought not to be paid, as being
in it self superstitious: The next is not to be paid to an unlawful and
Antichristian Ministry, as is this national ministry, essentially derived
from the Sea of Rome. Our Reasons are,

1. Because this is little better then to rebel against Christ, and to seek
what in us lies, to uphold that thing which the Lord will cast down, and
utterly destroy.

2. It manifests the great want of that zeal, and love of God which all
Christians should have, specially here the Higher powers, as to disown and
abrogate all Decrees of Popes, and Popish Counsels, which have been confirmed
by idolatrous Princes for the payment of Tithes to an unlawful Clergy.

3. To pay Tithes to this National Ministry, is to serve Antichrist, according
to that saying, His servants ye are, whom ye do obey.

4. To do this, it is to condemn the Generation of the righteous, who have
suffered under Popery and Prelacy, for refusing to pay Tithes to the ministers
of Antichrist, and to destroy what the others built.

5. So long as Tithes are payable by Law to this ministry, it grieves the
hearts of the righteous, and gives just cause of offense to the Churches of the
Saints: Now woe unto that man by whom the offense comes.

6. The continuance of Tithes will be an occasion to harden the National
ministry in their error and sin, as to think their unsanctified places are
lawful and good, because the Law allows them maintenance. And indeed they
have little else to say for themselves, their calling being so contrary to the
order and way of the Gospel.

7. This paying of Tithes strengthens every where the ignorant people, in their
superstition and blindness, and is a means to hinder them from the light and
knowledge of a Gospel-minister. For how can they otherwise but believe that
their Parish Priest is sent of God, and Tithes due to him: so long as by the
Law of the Land, his ministry is only owned and justified. And he shall say,
Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of
the way of my people, Isaiah 57.14.

Before I end this point, I shall answer two Objections (and I know no more of
weight) which are usually brought against the taking away of Tithes. 1. That it
is injurious. 2. Irreligious. First, Injurious to alter or abolish them, seeing
the Law of the land has vested and settled them in persons Ecclesiastical, and
so are their right and possession. We might send these pleaders for Tithes, to
what has been said before as a full and sufficient Answer to this Objection:
Notwithstanding we shall further add.

1. This is no more then what the Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc. and before
them, Monks and Friars might have said: and upon as fair pretense, ground, and
reason: so that in taking away their Tithes, if no injury was done them, then
none here, the case being clearly one and the same.

2. Acts of Parliament are Acts of men, not Oracles from Heaven. A Parliament
(as well as a Council) may be led by wrong principles, and so err, and make
Laws and Acts that are unjust: We do not think (though Tythe-takers would be
glad if it might be so) that Acts of Parliaments are like the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, that never alter. But the same power that made such an Act,
can repeal it again: yea, and is bound so to do, if it stand not with the
rule of justice and equity, contained in the moral Law of God and nature, or
sound natural reason. And this is the case here, viz. that those Acts and
grants confirming Tithes to Priests, were not agreeable to the moral Law of
God, nor to the Law of nature, or sound natural reason, not according to the
rules of equity, and justice, but devised by Satan and Antichrist, to support
their Kingdom, and carry on their interest, against the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. The taking away of Tithes is so far from doing injury, as that it will ease
the people (specially the Husbandman) from one of the forest burdens, and
greatest opression and Tyranny that lies upon them: This by other hands is
already manifested, and abundantly proved, and therefore I shall let it pass,
and the rather, because my purpose is, to prove the unlawfulness of paying
Tithes to the National Ministers, upon another ground.

For the other Objection, How irreligious a thing it will be to abolish Tithes,
which are the Ministers maintenance, their livelihood and subsistence, and to
leave them destitute of all provision, other then what their new Congregations
shall voluntarily bestow upon them.

Answ. 1. It is worth the noting, how handsomely they beg the Question.

1. That they are the Ministers of Christ (for so I think they would be
understood.

2. That the Ministers maintenance is to be by Tithes, thus, Fallacia alia
aliam trahit, one falsehood or suttlety brings in another. But this is too
much to grant all at once. As all the reason Laban could render Jacob, in
cozening him with the elder Sister for the younger, was but pleading the
custom of the Country, Genesis 29.26. So it is now with our sticklers for Tyth,
Jus divinum, is laid aside, its antiquity and custom that they fly unto: But
this plea, I believe, will be too weak to deceive our State thereby.

But 2. Why must it be irreligious to take away Tithes? Are Tithes the props
and foundation of Religion? We know before the Priests had Tithes, Religion
did flourish, and do believe when they are abolished, the truth shall prosper
more then now it does.

3. I do not yet see by any thing they can say, that it is irreligious to
abolish Tithes and the Priests too. Indeed when Hezechiah had put down the high
places, and the Priests of Baal, he was charged by Rabsaketh with irriligion
and sacrilege; as if he had committed a grievous crime; but the Scripture
commends him greatly for it; so possibly it may be, that the Parliament in
abolishing tithes, and dis-owning the National Ministry, shall be cried out
against, as irreligious men, and Enemies to the Church, but the Lord will
commend their zeal and love them for it.

But I may not here omit the example which is brought to prove the abolishing
of tithes to be an irreligious thing: I shall deliver it in their own words.
These sort of people never red nor heard of the history of those two great
persecutors of the Church of Christ in the primitive times, the one under
Diocletian the Emperor, the other under Julian the Apostata. This Diocletian
intending to root out and utterly to extirpate Christianity, murdered all the
professors and Preachers of the word of God; but the history tells us, that the
more he killed, the more did Christian Religion increase and flourish: For the
blood of the Martyrs proved to be the seed of the Church. But though this
persecution was barbarous and horrid, yet that which followed did more
mischief: for Julian intending the same thing took another course. For he
laid violent hands upon the Revenues of the Church, robbed and spoiled the
spiritual persons of all they had to live upon, and this proved more
destructive to Religion and Christianity then the other. For in short time,
insued great ignorance of the true worship and service of God, and consequently
a great decay of Christian profession.

Trallianus reports of a woman who continually kept her hand shut, least the
world (which in her opinion was between her fingers) might escape her, by
opening the same. It is no marvel that tithes are held so fast; they would
persuade us, that all Religion is folded up in them, but this is no other then
a melancholy conceit, like Oromazes enchanted egg, which had (as he boasted)
enclosed in it all the happiness of the world, but being broken, there was
found in it nothing but wind.

But to answer: 1. That such great ignorance should follow upon the taking away
of the Revenues of the Church, it may easily appear what kind of men these
spiritual persons were in that time: some Pluralists, Non-Residents, Parsons
and Vicars gotten into great livings, such as served not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own belly: For had they been such Pastors and Teachers as were before
in the Primitive Church, they would have continued teaching and instructing the
people, though for their livelihood they had wrought with their own hands.

But 2. we have not only read and heard of the history of Julian, but of
Constantine too, and do perceive that either these men are not well versed in
the history of the Church, or they are like the unjust Steward, in giving us
but fifty for the hundred. Therefore to undeceive the ignorant, I shall set
down what is truth concerning the Revenues of the Church, as we have received
it by tradition.

When Censtantine first began to endow the Church with a set maintenance of
lands and possessions, a voice was heard from heaven, saying; Hodie venenum
Ecclesiae est immissum, that is, this day is poison powered into the Church. And
indeed it was just so: For thereupon most of the primitive Institutions,
Orders, and Customs were broken; and men began to run mad in ignorant
devotion; and thinking that true piety stood in works of that nature, made
themselves slaves to the Priests (then called the Church) by giving away not
only their Lands, but their goods and labor under the name of tithes: And
then men of evil and corrupt minds entered into the Ministry, that were not
fitted nor qualified with gifts and graces for that calling; nor ever minded
the glory of God, nor the good of the people, but looked at their own
self ends, to make themselves great among the people, and to live in pomp and
ease upon the labors of the poor people.

Thus you have in short what was the effect in endowing the Church with a set
maintenance of lands and possessions: viz. idleness, pride, riot,
covetousness, etc. in the Priests, and ignorance and gross superstition in
the people.

It is true, Julian afterward, took away some lands and possessions from the
Clergy: But I deny that it tended to the hinderance of the Gospel, or power of
godliness: it rather occasioned such as were sincere and upright to do the
more good in a private way. Some by this means were plucked down from their
pomp, pride, excess, and their beastly lies and vanities not so publicly
practiced, as before. But wherein did the truth suffer for this? What! Because
the just hand of God was upon the covetous and ambitious Priests. Besides, if
there ensued great ignorance of the true worship and service of God, upon this
action of Julian. It was not so much occasioned by Julian, as through the
idleness and baseness of the Priests, that would not teach the people,
unless they had great and large revenues.

But I wonder how any man, unless a Prelate, would mention this of Julian?
considering it was the revenues of Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. which he
took away: nothing from the Parish Priest: for as yet there was no set
maintenance for him, nor such a humane creature in the world. But why is this
story of Julian so often repeated in their Pamphlets? It must be for one of
these two Reasons: either to render the Parliament irreligious and contemptible
to the world, if they take tithes away; or else that they cannot take care for
Religion and Christianity, unless they support a carnal Ministry by
tithes. For the plea which they make of the Patrons Interest in the Donation of
Parsonages and Vicarages; The thing is so unjust, as the Non-conformists in
their writings against the Bishops, usually called them, Latrons, Thieves: and
profess their places to be unlawful and wicked, and give many Reasons for it.
If some one in a Parish had entailed to him, and to his heirs for ever, the
power of appointing husbands and wives to all the people therein, the slaverie
were unsufferable, although in a matter of a Civil nature. But how much more
then unsufferably great is their sin, which loose a spiritual freedom, and
greater those Patrons which keep it, and greatest such Time-servers, who
labor what they can, to maintain so corrupt and vile a thing.

I come now to the last General head, which is, that the Gospel may have a free
passage amongst us, and all such men liberty, publicly and every where to
preach the same, whom the Lord has fitted and enabled for that work (though
not in office) and all restraints and prohibitions to the contrary (both former
and later) removed and taken away. Our Reasons are.

1. That none should preach unless ordained: this (as the National Ministry
and Tithes) came likewise from the sea of Rome: For Gregory 9. in the year
1227. made a Decree that no lay man should preach. Here began the abomination
that makes desolate: Now the occasion was, to suppress the truth, which at
that time began most gloriously to break forth by the Waldenses; so that no
higher can they bring this practice, then to the year 1227. Neither have they
any other Author to father and fasten it on, then Satan and Antichrist: For
howsoever before this time many fowl abuses and corruptions were crept into the
Church; yet, it was so many years after Christ, before this Decree of the Pope
came forth, viz. That no lay man should preach. But how sinful and unlawful
that Decree of the Pope was, will appear by this Position or Conclusion which
I shall here lay down, and prove; namely;

That faithful men, able to speak to edification, exhortation, and comfort,
though not Ministers, or in any office, may open and apply the holy Scriptures,
to the profit and benefit of others. Or thus: Preaching of the Gospel whether
in public, or private, is not tied to any office, function, calling,
ministry, but those out of office, have right, power, liberty, to make
known the truths of the Gospel, wheresoever they are, or come.

1. This was a practice both allowed, and observed in the Jewish Church. For
howsoever Christ and his Apostles were more then private men, viz.
extraordinarily called of God: yet were they not by the Jews, acknowledged as
Prophets and Apostles, or men in office, either ordinary or extraordinary,
but as gifted men, and able to teach; so they were permitted according to the
laudable custom of the Church, Luke 2.46, 47. and 4.17, 18. Act. 4.4. Act. 13,
14, 15, 15. And there remains among the Jews the foot steps of this practice
to this day: as I have often seen in their Synagogues.

2. Whether the Primitive Churches took up this practice as from the Jews, I
shall not determine: But that the brethren not in office, might publicly
preach, it cannot be denied: You may all prophecy one by one, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.31. That he speaks not of any Church Officer or Minister,
the words, verse. 34. make it clear. Let your women keep silence in the
Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak. This is brought in, to
answer an objection; as thus: If all may speak in the Churches, then women
likewise No, says the Apostle, it is not allowed them, for several Reasons.
Besides, if none might speak to the edification of the Church, but Ministers,
then the Apostles words (forbidding women to speak) would be vain and absurd:
For what use was there that he should mention a restraint or prohibition of
women: if none might speak, no not men, unless Pastors or Teachers.

3. As this was practiced both in the Jewish and Christian Church, so we find
it a duty pressed upon the people of God, and earnestly called upon, not to quench
the Spirit. But as every man has received the gift, even so minister the same
one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet 4.11.
Again, Having then gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to
us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith.
Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering, or he that teaches on teaching,
or he that Exhorts on Exhortation, etc. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. He that well
observes the words here, may plainly see, how the Apostle distinctly sets down
the Exercise of prophecy, from what is to be don ministerially, and by the
officers of the Church.

4. If men out of office may not open and apply the holy Scriptures; observe
what absurdities would follow.

1. In case the Church have no Minister, (as it may often fall out by
sickness, persecution, etc. then she must want Teaching: and so, Vision
ceasing, the people perish, Pro. 27.9.

2. Multitudes in darkness and the shadow of death are hereby left to perish
in their blood and sin: For to deny preaching to them by men out of offices,
is to leave them without the arm of God, for their conversion, gathering, and
bringing in to the Lord Jesus.

3. Should there be no preaching till there are Ministers, then necessarily
after the General Apostacy of Antichrist, there could never be raised up
either Churches or Officers. For it is so absurd and ridiculous, to imagine
Officers before Churches: and therefore we well know, by the preaching of men
out of office, people were first called out from Babylon, and being separated
from the world, they covenanted together to walk in the faith and order of the
Gospel, and they become the true Churches of Christ, electing and ordaining
afterward their own Ministers, according to the Apostolical Institution.

5. The benefits are great and precious, which not only Saints, but sinners
too, may receive, by the private and public teaching of men out of office.
For 1. what does more speak out the glory of Christ in his Saints, then to see
the gifts and graces which he has bestowed upon them, shining forth to the
refreshing and comfort of others. The light of the Sun if it should be
restrained to some particular place or Country, would not have the praise which
now it has for so excellent and glorious a creature. So to restrain the gifts
of the Spirit to particulars (as to shine forth from none but Ministers) it is
to eclipse the honor of Jesus Christ exceedingly. 2. If this be more
practiced, truth will more increase, error and superstition daily be
discovered and convinced, and the glorious Scepter of Jesus Christ more lifted
up and advanced. I know it is objected that this liberty; for which I plead,
opens a door to heresies, blasphemy, Atheism, and what not. And some have
with such swelling words formerly so prevailed with the Magistrate as to
confirm and keep up Pope Gregory's Decree, to wit, that no lay man should
Preach.

But to answer this Objection in brief: 1. I do affirm, and will abide by
it, since it pleased the Lord to draw out the hearts of some Soldiers, and
others, publicly to preach (which is not above 10 or 12 years) the people of
this Commonwealth have had more true light and glorious discoveries, of Christ
and his kingdom, then all the Nations Ministers ever before made known to
them, since first they took their calling from the sea of Rome, to this day.

2. As Nero dealt with the Christians, who hurled them to dogs to be devoured:
and when he saw the Mastives would not touch them, he clad the Christians in
Beare-skins to kindle the fury of the dogs, that they might take them to be
beasts, and not men. So has the Clergy every where dealt with the Truth, that
the Magistrate might suspend and stop the passage of it, and people be
discouraged from embracing the same. They hence rendered it odious to the world,
Clad it with Beares-skins, as naming its error, heresy, blasphemy, etc. And
no marvel though they have prospered in such a design; For as children what
you give into their hand, they put it into their mouth; so ignorant and simple
people will believe what the Priests tell them, be it never so false,
improbable, impossible. And here lies the Masterpiece, of the Scotch
Ministers, in aspersing the godly of this Nation (as to be Separatists,
Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc. Hence they keep up their idle
Traditions, and formalities, and occasion that people to be disaffected to the
purity of Gods ordinances, and the power of Godliness.

But 3. Why should not Ministers be suspended from preaching as well as those
that are not in office, if it be to prevent the publishing of Error: For the
greatest heresies and blasphemies which have been in the world, have been
broached by them, whereas lay men (as they call them) at the same time have
been found in the faith, and zealously earnest against such abominable
doctrines. As I could give many examples both ancient and modern.

Object: If Ministers deliver any unsound Doctrines, there is a course to be
taken with them, by conviction, suspension, or otherwise.

Answ. The like may be done if private men be exorbitant and offensive, and no
question but the State will do so, when there is just cause for it.

Object: But to give way that all shall preach who are able and willing, will
bring Ministers into some contempt, and their labors the less regarded and
rewarded.

Answ. 1. One Reason of the Papists, which they give, why the Priests at Mass
are to have the Wine alone, it is to put a distinction between them and the
people, and to keep them at distance. My mind gives me, there are some would
have none but Ministers to teach the people, thereby to keep up their own
reputation, as being loath to come into an oneness and likeness with their
Brethren.

2. There is a spiritual Monopoly as what is civil, and this much worse, and
more hurtful then the other: Now to engrosse (as it were) the whole trade of
preaching into the hands of the Clergy, its a Monopoly superlative, and
therefore the State (as I conceive) is bound to see it suppressed, as they have
don in the case of other Monopolies of far less concernment. This being the
Popes Monopoly, as the other from the King.

I shall now draw to a conclusion, I see there is at this time much ado about
Tithes, and great thoughts of heart some have for the maintenance of Ministers:
I could wish (in the midst of these things) that something were considered,
and effectually done for the encouragement and enabling of such as are willing
to give themselves freely to the work of the Lord, to spend and to be spent.
And for their livelihood, to live by faith in the promises of the Gospel. That
the State would set open the public doors which the Parish Priests shut
against them, and disclaim Pope Gregory's Decrees. Whilst the former
Parliament stood, we thought it not strange to see a company of precious
Christians constrained to be in private houses, and there to worship God in
spirit and truth: Whilst the Parish Priests, and unhallowed multitudes, had
the public places to do their will worship in. But now seeing we have better
men (as we have hope) so we expect better things: namely, that these public
places (which are the States) may be otherwise and better disposed. It is not
the place we affect, for if they were razed to the ground it would be well. But
considering at present, they are the places where the people of the Nation
resort to, we desire they may be left open to such as will freely declare the
mysteries of the Gospel to the people, and left no longer to a company of
Hirelings, who as they use the place, in many places, it is a Den of Thieves,
and Cage of unclean Birds, then the gathering together of Saints, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

CERTAIN QUESTIONS Propounded to the LAWYERS, who are retained by the
Ministers, to plead on their behalf for TITHES.
I. WHether by any Acts of Parliament confirming the propriety of Tithes to the
Church, any man (as an Ecclesiastical person) can claim any right or propriety
to Tithes, that is neither Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon, ordained according to
the Law, made in that case.

II. Who by the Law of this Nation, are formally and actually Ecclesiastical
persons, as to claim Tithes.

III. Whither those Statutes and Acts of Parliament confirming Tithes to
Ecclesiastical persons, do stand with the Rules of justice and equity,
contained in the moral Law of God, and nature, or sound natural reason.

IV. Whether Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc. and before them, Monks, and Friars,
had not Tithes ratified, settled, and confirmed upon them by the Law of the
Land, as firmly and fully as any present Incumbent.

V. Whether the State in taking away Tithes and other Revenues from Monks, and
Friars, and since from Bishops, etc. (as their Civil right) did justly and
lawfully in it.

VI. Whether the National Ministers can prove themselves (or you for them) to
be legally successors to the Priests in whom Tithes were first settled and
vested, and how: if not, whether they fall not into the States hand, for want
of right Heirs.

VII. Whether there be not just cause of suspicion, that those who pretend to
be Ministers of the Gospel, waving to plead their own case in matter of
maintenance, and seek to Lawers for Counsel, have any thing to say for
themselves, as in that particular, from the word of God.

VIII. Whether those Lawers that are to plead for the Ministers, who have
retained them, cannot justify by Acts of Parliaments, that the Tithes of this
Nation, are more properly and legally due (as a civil right) to Popish Priests,
then to the Ministers they are to plead for, and if they were as well feed,
whether they would not plead for them: or why not.

IX. Whether those Lawers who are to plead for Tithes are not bound, if not in
point of Law, yet of conscience, truly to declare before the Honorable
Committee, that neither the Independent, nor Presbyterian Ministers, who were
not ordained Priests and Deacons by the Bishops, or have since renounced the
same, are not (by any Act of Parliament confirming the right of Tithes, to the
Church and ecclesiastical persons) in a capacity to receive Tithes, neither
does the Parochial Tithes legally belong to any such persons.

X. Whether those Lawers in point of conscience should not first weigh and
consider the Reasons before. And if they find it plainly proved (as easily they
may, if they know half so much of the Gospel, as Law) that the National
Ministry is unlawful and Antichristian, established by Popish Princes against
Jesus Christ. Whether (I say) they ought not to give the Ministers their money
back again, and let Baal plead for himself.

Though I have done this without any Fee, yet not without assurance of profit:
I shall only commend to these Lawers, the good advise which a great Doctor of
the Law gave his Brethren: If this Counsel, or this work be of men, it will
come to naught.

REV. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. The Merchants of these things which were made
rich by her, shall stand afar of, for the fear of her torment, weeping and
wailing,

And saying, Alas, alas, that great City, that was clothed in fine linen, and
purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls.

For in one hour so great riches is come to naught. And every ship-master, and
all the company in ships, and sailers, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar
off,

And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What City is like
unto this great City?

And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying,
Alas, alas, that great City, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea, by reason of her costlinesse: for in one hour is she made desolate.

Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you, on her.

JER. 51.10.35. The Lord has brought forth our righteousness: come and let us
declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God.

The violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant
of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Caldea, shall Jerusalem say.

JER. 50.45. Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out.

FINIS.

