Ministers Dues AND PEOPLES DUTY; OR A BILL of ACCOUNTS BETWEEN Ministers and
People: SHOWING What People owe unto their Ministers; which may also serve to
mind Ministers, what they are to expect from their People.

By Sam. Clark M. A. sometimes Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridg, and now
Minister of Grendon Underwood in Buckinghamshire.

HEB. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

Curant, and sanant haec amara, quamvis sensum exasperent.

Clemens Alex. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Miller at the Golden Acorn
in St Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1661.

To the Right Worshipful Sr RICHARD PIGOT OF Dothershall Knight, His honored
Patron, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Right Worshipful,
IT was one of the statute-Lawes of the Jewish Theocracy, that, If a Master
gave his servant a wife, Exodus 21.4.
and she did bear him sons or daughters, the wife and her children should be
her Masters. An Ecclesiastical Benefice, is by some Authors called a wife:
such a wife, endowed with a competent Portion, you were pleased freely and
undeservedly to bestow upon me: and between us this tender Infant (this weak
Tractate) is brought forth, which by the tenor and obligation of the former
Law, belongs to you. Will you now be pleased to own it upon this consideration,
and look upon it for its relative, though not for any real inherent worth; and
to let some drops of that love and kindness, which you have done, and do
continually pour upon the head of its unworthy Author, fall down upon it. Let
that pity, charity, and hospitality, which all sorts do so frequently
experiment, be extended to this poor exposed birth. Besides, as you are Lord of
the Manor in which it was first conceived and born, so it owes homage to you,
and I am confident is ready to pay suit and service to you, according to its
utmost capacity and possibility. Will you be pleased but to make trial of its
service, and see what; it can do for you, and hearken to its voice, as Naaman
to the little maids, 2 Kings 5.2, 4, 5. And though it is true, you stand not in
need of such a servant, yet it may stand in need of such a Master: and
therefore it begs the favor of one of your retainers, which I likewise crave
in its behalf, that it may serve as a public monument of my gratitude, and
testify to all that I am

Sir, Your most obliged and devoted Servant, Samuel Clarke.

TO THE READER.
Readers;
AS it has long been the happiness of this unworthy Land, to have had great
store of faithful Pastors (and long may it so continue) so is it the
aggravated unhappiness of too many, that they know not the worth and use of
this mercy; but lose it, and turn it to the increase of their sin and misery,
by contemptuous disesteem, supine neglect, or obstinate disobedience. Some use
the name and shadow of the Ministry to quiet their consciences, while they
live a worldly fleshly life, and are strangers to the Spirit and power of the
Gospel, and perhaps abhor, or at least refuse, to live by faith, a holy and
heavenly conversation: as if the Ministry were appointed by certain formalities
to bless the ungodly and the Hypocrites, whom God condemns; and to charm
those into Heaven, that God has said shall not come there. Others do honor
them, while they humor them in their opinions, or cross them not in the way of
their sensuality, ambition, covetousness, or outside hypocritical
self-deceiving Religion. But if Pastors will be Pastors, guiding, and not
following the humors of the people; and if they will be faithful, resolving
rather to profit, than by flattery or sinful silence and omissions and
complyances to please, they shall then be the object of the anger of some, the
censures of others, the scorns of too many, and it is well if not revenge and
persecution. Were Lawyers as despitefully, contemptuously, and unworthily used
by their clients, and Physicians by their Patients, and the Teachers of any
Languages, Arts, or Sciences, by their Disciples, you may easily conjecture how
it would be born, and what would be the effects and consequences. But it se^ms
it is Heaven only, and the way and guides that lead to Heaven, that must be
patiently slighted, vilified and abused. And if our blessed Lord, the Captain
of our salvation, in whom they profess to place all their hopes, must
practically be rejected, it beseems not his servants to be impatient of men's
ingratitude and contempt. Readers, because as it is not having food, but eating
it that must nourish you, nor having clothes, but wearing them that must keep
you warm, nor having a Physician, but opening your cases to him, and taking and
following his advice, that must cure you; so it is not having faithful
Pastors, but understanding their office, and use, and applying your selves to
them for necessary advice in public and private, and submitting to their holy
Ministrations, that must make you savingly partakers of the blessing of their
Office and labors. We recommend this Sermon to your perusal, and practice,
which with plainness and brevity acquainteth you more particularly with your
duties, in relation to those that are over you in the Lord, beseeching you to
believe and consider, that if you own, defend, and maintain your Teachers, and
yet do not heartily and resolvedly entertain and obey the heavenly message
which they bring you, you are in the way to Hell among Sermons and holy
Ordinances, as well as Heathens are, that sin in greater darkness. He that has
ears to hear, let him hear. I ^m

November. 10. 1660. Your faithful Monitor. Richard Baxter.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT is an effect which falls under the common observation of the narrowest and
most unapprehensive capacities. That many things do move contrary to their
proper and particular inclination for the general benefit and good of the
Universe: The cause where^f Philosophers assign to be, ne detur vacuum. A
cons^deration of something parallel to this in morality, has moved me,
contrary to my general resolution against all such attempts, to close with
thoughts of the publication of my weak endeavors upon this subject. For
having occasion to take notice that (as far as my little reading and
intelligence would enable me to discern) this subject is not so fully and
thoroughly handled as might be desired by any one of those many that have written
of Relative duties, and yet it being of so great concernment for the peace and
settlement of the Church, especially after our sad distractions and divisions,
and for the reducing of things into some order again, I thought such a sorry b
sh might serve to stop this gap, till some better materials were provided, and
a more effectual remedy administered, by an abler band: So that as peoples
neglect of their duty first moved me to preach on this Subject; so want of
sufficient means thoroughly to know their duty, prevailed with me to print it.
Oportet eum qui instruit rudes animos talem esse, qui pro ing^ni^ auditorum
possit se aptare. Gratian.
And as you see it is set out in a plain garb, and familiar style, as being
calculated for the Meridian of Country-capacities, which usually for the
generality are not of any great latitude; And therefore some of the particulars
here published were omitted in the Preaching, because in all probability they
would have flown over the heads of most, if not of all of my hearers: and I
desire to shoot just breast-high, and to aim especially at the hearts, or
however never above the heads of my Auditors. Again, other passages may seem to
some abominable truths, which they are unwilling to hear and take notice of,
and yet they cannot tell how to gainsay; but if truths, they must not be
always thrown aside and disregarded; they must neither be always concealed by
Ministers, nor neglected by people: and what more fitting season for the
declaring of them, then such an opportunity? And lastly, some things may be
disputable, which all do not agree in; concerning which, if any one shall
vouchsafe nostras esse aliquid putare nugas, and so far inhance the price of
them, as to render them considerable by a public refutation, yet I do not take
my self bound to enter the lists with any one in their defense, and to engage
in such a quarrel; for my design (as has been said) was only to acquaint
people with their (much neglected) duty, wherein I have given them my judgment
of what came in my way: if any be otherwise minded in any of the particulars, I
shall not quarrel with them. There are too many differences in the Church
already de lara caprina, about these extra essential points, which have made it
very Litigandi pruritus est Ecclesiae scabies. Wotton.
scabbed. I had rather stroke than scratch it, be a peacemaker than a peace
marrer. My aim is to quicken those that are remiss, to practice, not to provoke
the learned to contend. And if this Discourse may be any way useful to thee in
this way, give God the glory, and pray for a further blessing upon his
endeavors, who is

Thine in the Lord, S. C.

1 Thessal. 5.12. And we beseech you, Brethren, (...)
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you.


THe subject of these words, though, Introduction.
it may be, not so toothsome and acceptable to some palates, yet, I am sure, it
is both wholesome and profitable, yea and necessary too; there being no way to
Heaven but by Christ Joh. 14.6.
; no way to Christ but by Faith Joh. 1.12.
; no way to faith but by Hearing To. 10.14.
; no way to hear but by a Preacher To. 10.14.
; no likelihood of profiting by what he preaches, without some esteem of, and
affection to, both his doctrine and person Mar. 6.4, 5.
, and a competent performance of the other duties hereafter to be mentioned.
And therefore consulting rather how to profit then to please people, I have
made choice of these words to be handled at this time: which I may call The
peoples directory, how to carry themselves toward their Ministers. I gloss them
thus:

Explication.
And] or, But. i. e. Though private charitative edification, (mentioned in the
words immediately preceding the Text) be to be endeavored, yet not to the
prejudice and disadvantage of public and authoritative. Duties must not starv,
eat up, or justle out one another. No; God will have mercy and sacrifice both,
in this sense.

-- we] The Ministers and Messengers of Christ, authorized by him to bind and
loose, See Dr Lightf. Harm. of N.T. Sect. 52.
i. e. (according to the common use of that phrase among Jewish writers) to
teach you what is lawful, what unlawful; what you ought to do, and what to
forbear: And more particularly and especially, I Paul, who am guided by the
unerring Spirit of God in what I now write to you, and require of you,

-- beseech] Though we might be much bold in Christ, (i. e. in his Name, and by
virtue of that authority he has given us) to enjoin you that which is fitting
and convenient, and require your obedience thereto; yet for loves sake, to show
our affection and love to you, and our gentleness and mildness toward you, we
beseech and entreat, as if it were some great courtesy and kindness to our
selves, whenas it is your own greatest concernment.

-- you] The private members of the Church of Thessalonica, and in you, all
Christians of your rank and place to the end of the world.

-- Brethren] Though, it is true, you be our younger Brethren, as I may so say,
(for we are Elders) and so ought to be guided by us, yet because you are our
brethren, and children of the same Father and Mother, therefore we deal thus
gently, lovingly, and respectfully with you.

-- to know] Which is not meant of a bare personal, but of a practical
knowledge, (for, verba sensus, etc.) i. e. so to carry your selves as befits
the relation you stand in.

-- them that labor among you] i. e. your Ministers; whose calling is a
painful, laborious employment, how slight soever some make of it: for Solomon
says, Much study, or, reading ((...) which Luther renders predigon,
preaching,) is a weariness to the flesh, ay and to the spirits too, spending
them more then any bodily exercise whatsoever; as appears by those
consumptions, apoplexies, and such like diseases, which Ministers are more
subject to then others.

-- and are over you in the Lord] Whom God has set to be your spiritual
Parents, to beget you unto God; and Nurses, to feed you with the sincere milk
of the word; and Guides, to direct you in your way to Heaven; and Physicians,
to counsel you for your souls good. And therefore though you be never so high
and much above them in other respects, yet in these respects they are above
you, yea above the highest. For as Ministers are no where in Scripture exempted
from the secular power, so nor I grant that Cleries both may and ought to
display their colors and ensigns of their censures against Princes, who
violate their public and solemn Oath, do raise and make open war against
Jesus Christ. King ^ames's defense of right of Kings against Card. Petron. p.
113. Edit. in 4o.
Magistrates from the Ecclesiastical; but if there be an [ Romans 13.1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers.
omnis anima] that reaches Ministers; so there is a [ Joh. 20.23. Whosesoever
sins ye remit, etc.
cujuscunque] that includes Magistrates.

-- and admonish you,] or, instruct you. Where you are faulty, they must deal
plainly and truly with you, and reprove you for your miscarriages, and teach
you how to behave your selves better, and as becomes Christians.

The words thus opened and anatomized, show you something that concerns the
Ministry, and something that concerns the People or Populary; Division.
That which concerns Ministers is, A description of them, both by their
dignity, that they are over their people in the Lord; and by their duty, more
generally, they labor among you; and more especially, they admonish you, or
instruct you.

That which concerns the People, is their Duty toward their Ministers, viz. to
know them; and this earnestly pressed upon them, by a most friendly and
patheticall supplication, We beseech you, Brethren; manifesting both the
weightiness and concernment of this duty; as also the necessity of performing
it.

Hence many Doctrines might easily be raised, but I shall only take up that
point that lies uppermost next my hand, and which is the principal intendment
of the words; viz.

Observation.
God expects and requires of people, that they should carry and behave
themselves toward their Ministers, as is befitting such a relation: that they
should diligently perform all those duties toward their Ministers that he has
commanded them. The 5th Commandment enjoins the duties of all relations; now
there being a near, and necessary relation between Pastor and people, the
duties of each, and therefore of people to their Pastor, as well as of Pastors
to their people, are there commanded. But you will find the full proof of the
Point in those several particular duties which people owe to their Ministers,
which are as follow. High Estimation; Singular Affection, Diligent Attendance,
Ready Obedience, Patient Submission, Humble Meekness, Holy Imitation, Careful
preservation of their Credit, Cheerful Maintenance, Fervent Prayer, and
Grateful Memorial. Where, by the way, pray you take notice, that I lay upon
you no other, or greater burden, than these necessary things plainly held forth
in Scripture.

The first duty that people owe to their Ministers (for I begin with those
which are next neighbors to the Text) is

1. A high Esteem and Account of them. High Estimation.
Esteem them very highly, ver. 13. Mark: An ordinary Esteem will not serve the
turn: He contents not himself with the bare word of [Esteem] but adds two other
words to set forth the wonderful high esteem you should have of them. It Is not
enough to esteem them after an ordinary manner as you do other men, but you
must esteem them Highly, or (...).
abundantly: nor is that yet enough, but you must do it (...).
over and above abundantly, or beyond measure, as a phrase (...).
very near of kin to it is rendered, Mar. 6.21.

The like expression is not used concerning any other sort of men what ever.
It Is but 1 Pet 1.17.
Honor the King: and Exodus 9.12.
Honor thy Father and Mother [Honour] barely, without any more ado; but here
it is Esteem them very highly. This is elsewhere called Double-Honour, 1 Timothy
5.17. A single is not sufficient. They must have a double portion of Honor to
other men: not only a Child's portion, but a First-borns portion, into whose
place they are adopted Numb. 3 12.
. People are commanded also to Hold them in reputation, Phil. 2.29. (...),
Esteem them precious So the word is rendered, 1 Pet. 2.4, 6.
, your Jewels and treasures; or Honorable h, accounting their very feet (much
more their other parts) beautiful, Romans 10.15. Thus the Galatians prized and
rated Paul, So Luk 14.8. (...), Gal. 4 14. Acts 10.25. a more honorable man
then thou.
when they counted him as an Angel of God, yea even as Jesus Christ: and
Cornelius, Peter, when he gave him such extraordinary reverence and respect:
and indeed a little too much; as appears by Peter's words, ver. 26. And the
people of Antioch, Chrysostom, when they cried out upon his silencing, satius
est ut Sol non luceat, quam Chrysostomus non doceat: better that the Sun should
be eclipsed, then Chrysostom silenced. Yea thus did Joash, an Idolater, value
and respect the Prophet Elisha, when he cried out, upon Elisha's being sick, O
my father, my father, the charet of Is^ael and the horsemen thereof. Nay the
very Heathens (who therefore will rise up in judgment against many Christians)
set such a high price upon their diabolical Votaries, 2 King. 12.14.
that one of the Roman Consuls riding in his chariot, and seeing a Priest and
some vestall Virgins going on foot, descended and would not go into it again,
till they were first placed.

Yet mistake me not in this point: I would not be understood to speak so much
of outward respect; we do not stand so much upon that. I do not say, the Honor
you owe to us, is such as is due to Magistrates, and the great men of the
world: we do not challenge to our selves, either that civil authority, or
those titles, or that outward pomp and state, or that wealth and abundance that
is due to them. No; our message is spiritual, our Master is heavenly, and his
Kingdom is not of this world, and therefore his Officers must not gape after
worldly Honor. But, as in his servants he looks principally to the heart, and
will be worshipped in spirit, so that honor that belongs to us, is chiefly
inward and spiritual; consisting especially in a high esteem of the
Excellency, Necessity, and Utility of our calling and emplyment. And yet
withal, as we must serve God with our bodies, as well as our souls, 1 Cor.
6.20. and it is as impossible there should be true inward devotion without some
outward expressions some time or other, as for an opacous body to be in the
light of the Sun without casting a shadow; so let me tell you, that where there
is an inward Honor and respect, it is impossible, but that that man that
understands himself, should make foam outward manifestation thereof in a civil
way; which, particularly, in this case, must be done, partly in words, 1 Timothy
5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father. Rebuke not, (...), Jerke
him not, lash him not, chastise him not with the scourge of the tongue; handle
him not roughly; box him not about the ears with any uncivil, disrespectfull
language, by prating to him, as Diotrephes did, 3d Ep. Joh. v. 10. (...),
prating with evil words. You must not talk to them saucily, malepertly,
impudently, insolently, sharply, roughly, slightingly, or any way unhandsomely:
but entreat them as Fathers, speak reverently, submissively, humbly,
respectfully to them, as children to their Parents. If you find any thing
rebukeable in them, you must tell them of it in an humble manner, and entreat
them to be more cautious for the time to come: and partly in gesture, by a
respectfull carriage toward them: as Obadiah the Governor of King Ahab's
house, meeting with Elijah, fell on his face before him. Cultum exhibens, non
ut Petro Cornelius, aut Johannes Angelo, Divinum; 1 King. 18.1.
nec mere tamen, ut fratres Josepho, civilem, sed spiritualem quendam, atque eo
nomine quod esset Propheta: qualis erit and Angelis, sicubi spectantur,
tribuendus, says the Author of the Anonymous Annot. printed Cantabr. 1653. 2 Samuel 28.14.
Even King Saul also stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself
before him, whom he conceived to be Samuel. And Alexander the Great, Joseph.
Antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
when he saw Jaddua the High Priest, alighted from his horse, and humbled
himself with much reverence unto him: and, Constantine when he entered into the
Synod of Nice, bowed himself very low unto the Bishops there assembled, and
sat not down until they desired him. And well may it be thus, that people
should so highly Esteem, Honor and Reverence their Ministers, since

Their Calling is the most honorable in the world: for, Mal. 2.7. 2 Cor. 5.20.
they are Messengers (or Angels) of the Lord of Hosts; and Ambassadors of God.
Now a special Messenger is a Messenger sent after an honorable manner from
some great personage to represent his own person: and therefore the dignity of
an Ambassadors place is greater or less according to the excellency of his
Master that sends him. They then being Ambassadors of God, who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, sent in his own 2 Cor. 5.20.
stead, their Calling must needs be honorable in a spiritual way, as I said
before. Hence also they are called, Angels, Elders, Rulers, Overseers, Fathers,
Lights, all which call for and bespeak, esteem, honor, and respect. Yea even
many who seem in their words most to vilify and undervalue the Ministry, yet
by their actions discover a high esteem of it; in that they invade it with so
much eagerness, and earnestness. For who goes a wooing to a poor forlorn maid
or widow that has nothing of worth in her? This then being their due, as you
have seen, Render to them their due -- honor to whom honor belongs, Romans 13.7.

2. A second due is, Singular Love and Affection, Singular Affection. Magis ac
magis charos ducatis. Beza. Gal. 4.15. Romans 16.4.
Esteem them very highly in love. Or, Count them more than exceedingly dear.
They must have a specialty in their peoples affection. Thus the Galatians loved
Paul so entirely that they would have pulled out their own eyes to have done him
good. So did Aquila and Priscilla, when for his life they laid down their own
necks: resolved to stick close to him whatever it cost them. And good Obadiah
came not behind any of them in love, when, not without adventure of his life,
he hid the Lords Prophets in caves, 1 King. 18.4.
from the rage of Jezabel. Alexander the Great was wont to say, that he was
more beholding to his Master Aristotle, then to his Father Philip, for that he
had his being only from the one, and his well-being from the other. And surely
if we owe love to our natural parents, as authors of our temporal life; how
much more is due to our spiritual parents, who have begotten us by the
immortal seed of the word, unto a blessed and eternal life?

And truly it is but equal that people should thus entirely love their
Ministers, because their Ministers do most passionately affect them. Witness
that strange wish of Paul, I could wish that my self were accursed (or
separate) from Christ, for my brethren, Romans 9.3.
my kinsmen according to the flesh. Where some lay the emphasis upon the word
[could,] q.d. if it were possible to be done, Balls Power of godliness. p. 8.
and lawful to be desired, I could find in my heart to do it. Others thus: He
does not wish to be made the enemy of Christ, but only, not to enjoy the
blessed vision of Christ: not of an elect person to be made a reprobate, but,
remaining a chosen vessel, to be deprived of the glory of the elect, that his
brethren might be saved; however it was a high and admirable strain of
heroical love. So 1 These. 2.8. Being (...), an emphaticall word, not used
elsewhere in the New Testament, signifying to be in a manner, overborn with
earnest desire.
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted to you, not
the Gospel of God only, but our own souls also, because ye were dear unto us.
True, the Galatians would have parted with their eyes for Paul; ay, but he
would part with his soul ( i. e. his life; either by pains in preaching, or by
persecution) for the Thessalonians here. See also 2 Cor. 2.4. and 12.15. 1
These. 3. per totum. Phil. 1.7, 8. and 2.20. And this also is the temper of
every faithful Minister in some measure; as appears by their readiness to
spend and be spent in the service of their peoples faith. Now then, if there be
but the least spark of good nature in you, this cannot but engage you in the
strongest bonds of love to them again. Magnes amoris, amor. And therefore if
you will not amorem impendere, freely vouchsafe them your love, yet are you
bound, amorem rependere, to requite their love with love. But yet withal
observe, that you must not love them merely, nor only upon this account,
because they love you, nor yet for the excellency of their gifts, courtesy,
liberality, or the like; but principally, for their works fake; because they
teach you to know God, (...). Chrysostom. hom. in 1 These. 5.12. Et paulo post (...).
they are the instruments of your conversion and regeneration; open Heaven
gates unto you; make you partakers of a Kingdom; inform you of your duty,
reprove you for stepping aside, and admonish you of your miscarriages; for this
is part of their work, ver. 12. and for this works sake, you must count them
dear; even for their admonition, and reprehension, as well as for their
exhortation, and consolation. This is right love, and indeed such a love, as
that they which can find it in their souls, may take much comfort therein, as
being a very good sign of sincerity.

3. Diligent Attendance Diligent Attendance.
upon them for Instruction, whereby first people must seek unto their Ministers
privately for satisfaction and resolution in any thing they are ignorant of, or
scrupulous about: So they are directed to do, Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should
keep knowledge, and they (the people) should seek the Law at his mouth: not
only, out of their own brains, nor out of their books. It Is no praise for them
to be (...), self-taught; as Austin reports of Anthony the Monk: lest they have
cause to complain with Jerome, Having no other guide whom I might follow, Nullum
praevium sequens, pessimum Magistrum memetipsum habeo.
I had the worst Master that could be, viz. my self. But they must be (...),
taught of God, inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his Ministers. Hence
Cornelius was appointed by the Angel to send for Peter, Acts 10.5, 6.9.6. Hag.
2.11.
and Paul is sent by Christ himself to Ananias for instruction; and God sends
the people to the Priests to be resolved in a Law-case. And it is observable,
that this was the ordinary practice of the Disciples, when Christ had taught
any thing in public which they understood not; to ask him privately about it.
Mark 4.10. And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve,
asked of him this Parable; i. e. the meaning of it. So again Mark 7.17. and
10.10. Yet they should not enquire so much concerning doubtful disputations
(as the Apostle calls them) and notionall points (as the woman of Samaria
questioned Christ about the great controversy then in fashion, Romans 14.1.
between the Jews and Samaritans, concerning the place of worship (though there
may be time and place for these also) as about practical cases of conscience,
that thereby they may learn rather how to do better, then to know more: which
was the first and principal care of the Jailor, when his heart was touched,
Acts 16.30, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? So, Sir, How may I walk more
holily, enjoy more communion with God, get power over such a corruption? and
the like? 2. They must watch all opportunities of public Instruction; As one
that attends upon another waits his leisure, and is ready upon all occasions;
so people must be ready not only on the Lord's day, but on a week day, if
opportunity be offered, to hear the word. They must lie daily at wisdoms gates,
Prove. 8.34. and at the pool of Bethesda. Thus the people of God are described,
Calling upon, and quickening one another hereto. Esaias 2.3. Many people shall
say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob. And sitting in his presence. Ezekiel. 33.31. -- they sit before me as my
people. Psalm. 122.1.
And David rejoiced in such opportunities. I was glad when they said unto me,
Let us go into the house of the Lord. But especially

3. They must hearken diligently, and heed, and give attention to what is
delivered. Prove. 4.1. Attend to know understanding. Fix thy quicksilver mind,
and set thy self to hear, as Jehoshaphat did to pray. Thus did Lydia, Acts
16.14. Luk 19.48. (...).
She attended to the things that were spoken of Paul. And the people on Christ,
who were very attentive to hear him; or, they hanged upon him, as Birds do on
the bills of their Dams for food. They did as it were, hang their ears upon his
lips. They gaped after his words.

And here it may not impertinently be enquired, Cas. Consc.
Whether it be lawful for people to make a common practice of going from their
Minister that God has set over them, to hear another?

I answer briefly, Solut. See Hild. on Joh. 4. p. 241. Baxt. Christian Concord.
p. 35.
It Is not without good ground generally resolved by Divines, that if the
Minister of a place be such an one as is approved by the Church of God for his
ability, faithfulness, and diligence in his place, so that there is no just
exception to be made against him, it is not lawful for any of his flock to go
ordinarily from him to hear another; because he is in a more especial manner
appointed by God to watch over them; and, it is to be supposed, that he is
better acquainted with their temper and condition, and consequently is beter
able to suit himself to their occasions, then another who is but a stranger to
them, or not so well acquainted with them. And besides, it would bring
confusion into places, 1 Cor, 14.33.
which God allows not of.

As for that common pretense of many, that they cannot so well profit by their
own Minister, as another, I answer, If he be such an one, as is before
described (for I would not be thought to be an advocate for any idle, ignorant,
or insufficient person, of which sort, God knows, too many were put into
places in these later times: No; let Baal plead for himself, for me: but) if,
I say, he be such an one as is before mentioned, then you had need to examine
your hearts, strictly, whether there be no fault in your selves. For I must
needs say, I cannot but think that generally (I will not say, always) the
defect is rather in your selves that you do not profit, than in your Minister.
My reason is plainly this. Because our profiting by any man's Ministry depends
principally, 1 Cor. 3.7.
nay wholly (for neither he that plants, nor he that waters, is any thing) upon
the blessing of God, and assistance of his Spirit: and not upon any man's parts,
gifts, and abilities: Insomuch that our Savior Christ himself, though, He
spoke as never man spoke, Joh. 7.46. most graciously, to admiration, Luke 4.22.
most powerfully and demonstratively, to conviction, Luke 14.6. Mat. 22.46. yet
had not such success in his Ministry as many of his Apostles, because the
Spirit was not yet given in that plentiful manner, as afterward, Joh. 7.39.
Now the blessing of God being Mat. 28.20.
promised, and so belonging as well to one true Minister of Christ as another,
certainly, if there be any defect, and want of profiting, it is not on Gods
part, but on ours. It Is true, God being wont to concur with means according to
their natural capacity and efficacy, where he has bestowed greater gifts, it
may reasonably be supposed, that, caeteris paribus, he does concur with a
greater degree of efficacy and assistance; whence we find the gain
answerable to the talents, Mat. 25.15, 17. and therefore people under such an
eminent Ministry, may be more edified, yet it warrants not others to forsake
their own Minister upon this account, for the Reasons forementioned.

But yet to grant with the most; Suppose that any should not yet be satisfied,
but, after much experience and dealing impartially with themselves, they do find
that they can profit far more by another than by their own Minister, yet they
must not go to another constantly, or ordinarily without the consent and leave
of their own Minister. Because by Gods Ordinance they owe duty to him as their
Superior in all things that concern their souls (as shall be showed presently)
And likewise, they are bound to seek his comfort, and give him all good
encouragement, that he may do the work of his Ministry with joy and
cheerfulness. Heb. 13.7.


4. Ready and cheerful obedience. Ready Obedience.
Enjoined plainly and fully, Heb. 13.7. (...), which signifies such a
subjection as an inferior, who counts himself under another, yields to him, who
is over him. Gouge in loc.
Obey them that have the rule over you; even your ordinary Pastors. Mentioned
also in several other places, Isa. 50.10. Who is there among you, that fears
the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant? i. e. Priest, or Prophet.
(Where, by the way, Observe, That it is the property of one that truly fears God
to obey his Minister,) 2 Cor. 2.9. For this end did I write, that I might know
the proof of you, whether ye would be obedient in all things, a large word. And
7.15. His inward affection is more abundant toward you, while he remembers
the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling you received him. Here Is
a universality of persons, as in the former place, of things. All persons must
be obedient in all things. And this was mystically represented in Ezechiels
Vision, where the wheels were guided by the four living creatures, See Lightf.
Descript. of Temple. c. 38. p. 255.
i. e. b people, by their Pastors and Ministers. Thus much, I suppose will be
readily and generally granted, being so plainly and positively enjoined: all
the difficulty is,

Dub.
Concerning the extent of this Obedience: How far forth, and wherein people are
bound to obey their Pastors. This therefore we shall a little enquire into; and
the rather because some who yet pretend great respect and friendship to the
Ministry, do so clip and restrain it, that they make it little more then a
mere cipher, and leave scarce any thing, but the name thereof.

Solut.
In General, It must be In all things, 2 Cor. 2.9. whereby it is paralleled
with, and made as large, as the obedience of children to parents, Col. 3.20.
Servants to Masters, ver. 22. and wives to their husbands, Ephesians. 5.24. And this
I shall branch out into three particulars. In necessary Duties; undetermined
Circumstances; and doubtful points or Cases.

1. People must obey their Ministers, In those necessary duties plainly laid
down in the Word, which they declare unto them, and in Gods name require their
conformity to; as Sanctification of the Sabbath; performance of Family duties;
diligence in frequenting the public Assemblies: avoiding drunkenness,
swearing, lying, etc. Matthew. 23.3. All therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe (viz. not of their own heads, or according to the Traditions of the
Elders; but, which is enjoined in the Law of God) that observe and do. People
must conform to their advertisements; both in obedience to God and them: and
the neglect hereof is a contempt, and disobedience against them, as well as
against God; and rendered censurable by Christ, Mat. 18.17. If he neglect to
hear the Church, (sc. urging the reformation of scandalous miscarriages) let
him be, etc. And is also a great aggravation of their sin, 2 Chronicles. 36.12. He
(Zedekiah) did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and humbled not
himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking to him in the name of the Lord.
Therefore also the Lord says, Ezekiel. 33.33. that when that should come to pass,
(viz. which he has threatened, verse. 27, 29.) that they should then know, that
a Prophet had been among them, i. e. their own consciences should, in their
afflictions, aggravate their sin, by this circumstance; that the Lord had sent
his Prophets to them, and they had not regarded, or obeyed them.

2. In those circumstances of public worship, which are necessary in the
general, but not particularly determined by God. Such are, Time; as, What hour
on the Lords day to begin; how long to continue together; what days the Lords
Supper shall be administered, and how often; when any shall be baptized; what day
of the Week to keep a Lecture. Place; as, Where the Assembly shall meet; where
the Minister shall stand to read, preach, administer the Sacraments; and where
the people shall sit to hear, receive, etc. Whether the Corpse shall be brought
into the Church, or stand by the grave, or put into it, while the solemnity is
performing. Gesture; as, To hear, sitting or standing; with the Hat off, or on;
and so for the Minister to preach; to receive the Lords Supper sitting, or
standing, or kneeling. Habit; as, Whether the Minister shall preach in a Cloak,
or Gown, etc. of what color or materials his clothes shall be. See a full
enumeration of them in Baxt. of Episc. p. 400.
Many other such circumstances there are, which being necessary in general, i.
e. such, as no action can be performed without, and yet not particularly
determined by God now under the Gospel, and so being left to the prudence of
Church-guides to determine of, according to the general Rules, of Order,
Decency, Edification, etc. people ought to yield conformity to such
determinations; for if a difference should arise concerning any of these
circumstances, between Pastor and people, whether think you fittest should
submit, Pastor to flock; Ruler to ruled; or on the contrary?

See Baxt. of Episc. p. 10. Propos. 10.
3. In doubtful points and difficult cases, which either they are ignorant in,
or cannot be satisfied about; till they receive satisfaction, or understand
them themselves, and are able to judge of them, Heb. 13.7. Whose faith follow.
For where common people have not time, or leisure, or ability to study all
points of Divinity themselves, whom is it more fit they should hearken to, and
be ruled by, then their own Pastors and Teachers: as a wife should by her
husband, and children by their Parents? It being to be supposed ordinarily (for
I speak not of extraordinary cases, which may sometimes happen in some places,
as in the Universities, or Innes of Court) that they understand themselves
better in these things then their people, because it is their business and
employment to study them: And therefore as we see in all other cases, men will
usually take the judgments of Artificers in matters that concern their own
trade. If you have a matter of Law, you go to Lawyers; of health, to
Physicians; of building to Carpenters, etc. And if I were to be resolved in a
point of Husbandry, which I understand not my self, I would come to some of you
that have been versed, and experienced in it all your time, and take your
judgment rather then mine own, because it is your calling and not mine; so
ought you in those points you understand not, especially controversall points,
to submit your judgment to ours, and to conform your practice to our
directions: for it being our office to teach you, it is your duty to believe us
with a humane faith, Oportet discentem credere.
in cases where you have no evidence to the contrary. So that in case a
Minister require his people to believe such a point, which they know not
whether it be a truth or no; or conform to such a practice, which they know not
whether it be lawful or no, then the command of obeying them takes place: for
the duty of obeying them being certain, and the error of the point held forth,
or unlawfulness of the practice required, being uncertain, and unknown, and
only suspected, they must go on the surer side. But yet withal let me add,
That you are not so wholly to rely upon the suspected judgment of a single
Pastor, but that you must search diligently after the truth, and labor to find
out whether those things he teaches be so or no, as Act. 17.11. And also in
weighty cases apply your selves to the unanimous Pastors of other Churches, for
their judgment.

But because all obedience is founded upon authority, and where there is no
power to command, there is no obedience owing: therefore I shall briefly assert
the authority of Ministers over their people: And that both

Generally, from those names and titles given unto them, which clearly hold
forth as much. They are called (...), or (...), as in the Tex^, and rendered,
are over you, and if God has set them over you, then he has put you under
them. Rendered also, such as rule, or, Rulers, Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. And that
as a Governor rules his family, 1 Timothy 3.5 (...).
. and a Parent his children, ver. 12 (...).
. and have not they power to command? Called also (...), Heb. 13.7, 13, 24.
Shepherds, Mat. 9.36. that lead, guide, and govern their flocks. Stewards, 1
Cor. 4.1. Fathers, Philemon 10. All which imply superiority, rule, and
authority: and hence, they have sometimes not only desired, requested,
entreated, and beseeched their people (as in the Text) but peremptorily
commanded them, as you may see several times in one Chapter, 2 Thessalonians. 5.4, 6,
10, 12. And also

Particularly, in the several cases aforementioned. As

See Baxter of Episc. p. 8.
1. That they have Authority to teach their people, and declare their duty unto
them, none will deny. You may see their Commission, Mat. 28.19. Some indeed
allow thus much to others, but I think none take it from them. And it is true,
private Christians may exhort, admonish, edify one another; but there is as
much difference between these and a Ministers preaching, as between a
neighbors advice, and a Justice of Peace his Warrant: or between a Canon
charged with a Bullet, and one only with Powder, which may make as great a
noise, but does no execution.

2. Concerning the Circumstantialls of public worship not determined in
Scripture, that place, 1 Cor. 14.40. empowers them to judge and determine, Let
all things be done decently and in order All things, i. e. that he had been
speaking of before. viz. what language they should use; and in what manner to
exercise the gift of tongues and prophesying; and others of like nature, being
only necessary Circumstances not determined by God (not mystical Ceremonies)
must be ordered by them, in a grave, sober, and comely manner.

3. For controversall points of faith, or practice; (which we call Cases of
Conscience) which people understand not so well themselves, their Ministers
have likewise power to determine; as appears by the practice of the Council at
Jerusalem, who made binding determinations for the Church. Acts 15.28. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden,
then those necessary things. Not necessary in their own nature, but in that
present juncture of time, for the avoiding of offense. Even as the Priests
under the Law had power to determine controversies. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 12. and as
among us Justices of Peace have at the Sessions.

5. Patient submission, Patient Submission.
in case of Censure, by Admonition, Suspension, or Excommunication; submit your
selves, says the Apostle, Heb. 13.17. which properly refers to some
punishment. Not on the one hand fretting, raging, railing, and crying out, that
they take too much upon them, and meddle with that that belongs not to them.
What! cannot a man be overtaken a little, but he must presently be told of it,
and censured for it? Nor, on the other hand, slighting, and making nothing of
it, and saying, Well! If I cannot receive the Sacrament here, I can go
elsewhere, where I can. If he will not give it me, yet I hope God will save me
without him: this is far from submission; but to be sensible of your demerit,
to acknowledge the justice of the sentence, and to endeavor by a speedy
repentance and reformation to get it revok't, and your selves restored to
communion with the Church again; as the incestuous person did, 2 Cor. 2.7. And
this submission is due to them, upon the account of that power they have
received from Christ, to call their people to account for their miscarriages,
and to take cognizance of scandalous sins and transgressions of Gods Law, by
hearing complaints and testimony of witnesses. Mat. 18.16, 17. by censuring,
judging, or passing sentence upon offenders. 1 Cor. 5.12. Do not ye judge them
that are within? and that finally and decisively, so as that there lies no
appeal from that censure. Mat. 18.17. If he neglect to hear the Church,
(there is no further process; no appeal to the Civil Magistrate: Levit. 13.
Here Is the non plus ultra of these cases, let him be to you, etc. Even as
under the Law, the Priests were judicially, decisively, to determine concerning
Lepers, and to pronounce them either clean, or unclean, and according to the
Priests sentence, was the person to be accounted to all intents and purposes,
so as to be admitted, or excluded the Congregation; so it is here. And then in
case of Repentance, they have power to absolve, acquit, pronounce clean, as I
may so say, and to admit to communion with the Church again; called by Christ
loosing, or unbinding. Mat. 18.18. a metaphor showing the efficacy and strength
of Church Censures: and forgiving their sins. Joh. 20.23. And therefore I would
not have people to think, they may do what they will, and have nothing said to
them: profane the Sabbath and be blameless: be drunkards, swearers, negligent
in coming to Church, and yet escape scot-free. No, the Ecclesiastical, as well
as the Civil Magistrate, I mean, their Pastors, may and must punish them for
such miscarriages. And as it is a neglect of their duty, and betraying the trust
in Justices of Peace, or Constables, to see the Laws of the Land broken, and
take no course with transgressors; so that Minister neglects his duty, that
suffers his people to live in such sins, and does not only not reprove and
admonish, but also not call them to account, and more deeply censure them for
the same. And if this be not a compulsive power, and that as great, nay more,
(as we shall see anon) then any Civil Magistrate on earth has, then I know
not what a compulsive power is. For how do Magistrates use to compel their
subjects? Why, only in a moral, not physical, or natural way, i. e. when
they forbid such a practice, suppose murder, they do not tie the hands of all
their subjects, but only annex a penalty to the Law, that if any transgress,
they shall be punished in such a manner. So for things enjoined; the penalty is
the compulsion. Now this power have Ministers; power to punish and revenge all
disobebience, 2 Cor. 10.6. and that in a higher way, and with greater
punishment, then any Magistrate on earth can inflict. For all punishment
inflicted by the Civil Magistrate, is but outward, either upon the persons
body, or estate, Psalm. 49.20.
or both: but the punishment infligible by the Minister, or Ecclesiastical
Magistrate, is spiritual, and reaches to the soul; so that by how much the
soul is more valuable then the body, or estate, by so much is the punishment
infligible by the Minister, more terrible and dreadful, then any can be
inflicted by the Civil Magistrate. Although it is true, because men do so much
obbrutescere, and become like the beasts that perish, and are led so much by
sense, thence it comes to pass, that they are more affected with corporal,
then spiritual punishments, and more fear the death of the body, then the
damnation of the soul, and consequently stand more in awe of the Laws of the
Land, then of the Laws of God. Yet in it self the spiritual punishment is
incomparably the greater, and consequently, there is incomparably a Quod si
homines reputarent, metuerent sibi plus ab Ecclesiae censuris, quam a gladio
and virgis Reipubl. cum Ministri habent potestatem vitae and necis aeternae; ut
de omnibus vel ad vitam, vel ad mortem sententiam ferant. -- Si e terra exigere
and exturbare sit magnum, quanto magis expellere e caelo? si e collegio vestro
civem movere, quanto magis e coetu and collegio Sanctorum aliquem excludere
posse? Cartwr. Harm. p. 560.
stronger obligation lies upon persons, to obey the commands of God and his
Officers, i. e. Ministers, than the Laws of the Land and the Civil Magistrate:
because, I say, the soul is concerned in the punishment inflicted by the
Minister. Now it reaches to the soul, inasmuch as while persons lie under
Ecclesiastical Censures duly inflicted, they are in a state of damnation (as
far as man can judge of them,) because their sins are unpardoned. (Joh. 28.23.
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained:) and without pardon no
blessedness. Psalm. 32.1. The Kingdom of Heaven is shut against them -- portam
coeli ei occlusam iri, cui Ecclesiae ostium and valvas obturaverit; rem
Sacramenti illis substractam iri, cui Ecclesia Sacramentum negaverit, etc. id.
p. 604. b.
; for God ratifies and confirms the censure. Mat. 16.19. -- whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven: He adds his Dicu le veult,
whereby it becomes not only an Ordinance of the Church, but a Statute Law of
Heaven too: so that if a justified person should fall under this censure, it is
as impossible for him to die in that condition, as for David to die in the act
of adultery, before repentance; so that in it self, it is incomparably greater.
Only here is that, that something qualifies the matter, That punishments
inflicted by the Civil Magistrate, are sometimes purely (at least perfectly)
vindictive; as when they touch the life of the offender; for in that case
there is no place left for Repentance and amendment: but now the punishment
inflicted by the Church, is purely and perfectly (in its own nature)
medicinal, aiming at the reformation and amendment of the party punished: that
his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.5. for his edification,
not destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. that he may learn not to blaspheme,) or
transgress in any other particular.) 1 Timothy 1.20.

So then, Lay all these things together, and then tell me whether Ministers
have not a compulsive, as well as a directive power. For can you imagine that a
Minister has no more power over his people, than a Physician over his patient?
who cannot inflict the least shadow of punishment upon them, for the greatest
nonobservation of, or contrary practice to his directions? or that, people are
no more bound to obey their Minister, than a patient, his Physician, who yet (I
doubt not, but) is bound in conscience to follow his prescriptions? No; it is
certainly in it self the highest compulsory power imaginable; and I see no
reason, why it may not properly be called Jurisdiction; which is nothing else,
but such a commanding, as carries in consequence a revenge against the
disobeyer (as the greatest Scholar of his time defines it; F. Paul. Hist. of
Inquis. p. 85. 2d Edit. in 8o.
) which the Apostle Paul almost totidem verbis attributes to Ministers in the
place aforementioned. 2 Cor. 10.6. Having in readiness to revenge all
disobedience. As also, Why it may not be said, That people should obey their
Ministers, not only for conscience sake, but for wrath (which yet is commonly
denied:) as subjects must their Magistrates, not only for wrath, but, for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. only the obligation lies stronger toward Ministers
than Magistrates, because they are more immediate deputies of Christ, and deal
more immediately for him than Magistrates do.

Morris of the Sacrament, Sect. 32. p. 300.
derivative, delegated, executive, and Ministerial;

viz. the Supreme Magistrate, and nothing in their own. 2. It Is so in relation
to God only, and not to man: They derive not their power from man, nor are his
servants therein. And thus, the highest Civil power on earth is derivative,
viz. from God. True, we are our peoples servants, (2 Cor. 4.5.) to do them all
the good we can; but yet they are not our masters, to rule and command us.

6. Another duty people owe unto their Ministers is, Humble meekness Humble
Meekness.
under reproof, (which though it belong properly to the former head, as a
branch thereof, yet in regard of the length of that, I shall handle it
distinctly by it self.) I say, Quiet, and meek enduring of reproof. Heb. 13.22.
I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation: which phrase [the word
of Exhortation,] though it may be taken generally for all manner of
instruction, whether Information, Direction, Admonition, or the like, yet the
word [suffer] seems to aim at something which was grievous and distasteful to
them, and which they did not care to hear; and therefore I take it here more
strictly, for matter of reproof; that people should willingly and patiently
hearken to the reproofs of their Ministers; take Potions as well as Cordials;
suffer them to apply corrasives, when there is occasion, as well as lenitives
at other times: thus did David. Nathan does not sprinkle him with Court
holy water, but tells him plainly of his sin; Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7.
and threatens him grievously for it, ver. 10, 12. Now David does not fret and
fume at him for it, but takes it very patiently, ver. 13. And David said unto
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. A meek and humble speech! the contrary
whereto, viz. fretting at, and impatience of reproof, is a most senseless and
brutish practice, not to be paralleled in any case in the world again. For,
who is angry with his Lawyer for acquainting him with the badness of his cause;
or with his Physician for discovering to him the danger of his disease? or with
a watchman for giving notice that his house is beset, or on fire, though he be
disturbed and affrighted thereby? Who takes it ill of a friend, that seeing a
poisoned arrow or Cannon-bullet coming directly toward him, pulls him away
with such violence, as perhaps to pull his arm out of joint? Why then should
people be angry with their Minister for dealing plainly and impartially with
them, and laying open the true state of their souls to them, and warning them
to fly from the wrath to come? And truly let me tell you, that if at any time
you be galled by the Ministry of the word, it is not so much your Ministers, as
your own consciences that reproach you. For did you ever know a sober man angry
with a Minister for preaching against drunkenness; a chaste man find fault with
a Sermon against uncleanness, etc. so that if you find your selves at any time
aggrieved at a reproof, you must thank your selves, and not blame them.

7. An holy Imitation Holy Imitation.
of their Example. Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark
them which walk so as ye have us for an example. And that because they are
their spiritual parents. 1 Cor. 4.15, 16. For though you have ten thousand
instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Jesus Christ have I
begotten you through the Gospel: Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of
me. Hence Ministers are called (...), types or samplers to their flocks, 1 Pet.
5.3. People must learn of their Ministers by the eye, as well as by the ear; be
taught by their works, as well as their words; take recommendation and
encouragement to duty, by their practice, as well as their preaching. If you
see your Minister strict in the observation and sanctification of the Sabbath,
liberal in works of mercy and charity, peaceable, temperate, or exemplary in
any other duty, then you must be careful to dress your selves by this glass,
to write after this copy; otherwise his example will rise up in judgment
against you, as well as his Doctrine. Only remember, it must be only in matters
of duty, as I said, in the practice of piety: to follow them only so far forth
as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. You must set your clock by theirs, so far
as theirs agrees with the Sun: for if either they give a bad example, or say
and do not, then you must do as they say, and not as they do, Mat. 23.3.

8. Careful preservation of their good name. Careful preservation of their
Credit.
People must charily maintain their Ministers credit, and neither be
tale-bearers, and carriers about, or senders about of disgraceful reports of
them. Acts 23.5. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Which
doubtless will hold good as well concerning Ecclesiastical, as Civil
Magistrates, being here immediately applied to the High Priest: as you must not
speak unhandsomely to them, (as was showed before) so here you are cautioned,
not to speak unhandsomely of them: nor be tale-bearers, or receivers and
credulous in believing disgraceful reports concerning them. 1 Timothy 5.19.
Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but under two or three witnesses.
God here has made an express provision for the safety of their reputation, and
set a special fence and mound about their good names; so that they are
privileged persons, and peculiarly exempted above others; and therefore their
people should be exceeding tender of their credit. Thus we read in
Ecclesiastical History, that, Theod. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. Socr. l. 1. c. 8.
when the Synod of Nice was assembled, by Constantine's command, and some
accusations were presented to the Emperor against some Bishops and Ministers,
he looked not on the particulars, but sealed them up with his own Signet, and
having first reconciled the parties, commanded the Libells to be burnt; adding
withal, That if he should see a Bishop in adultery, he would cover his
nakedness with his own Royal Robe; for, says he, the sins of such men ought
not to be divulged, least their examples do as much hurt to the souls of
others, as their fact to their own; their good name being as necessary for
others, as a good life for themselves. And therefore you must be very cautious
both of your tongues and ears, both in telling and hearkening to any ill report
of them. And truly there is great reason for it. Partly because men are apt to
hate him that reproves in the gate, Amos 5.10. Gal. 4.16. and we know, Ill Will
never speaks well. Partly, because men in office are most watched and observed.
Jeremy complains, that all his familiars watched for his halting, Jer. 20.10.
and God discovers thus much to Ezekiel concerning himself, Ezekiel. 33.30. -- the
children of thy people are always talking against thee by the walls, and in the
doors of the houses. Yea thus was Christ himself served and dealt withal by
the Chief Priests and Scribes, ( Luke 20.20.) who watched him, and sent forth
spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of
his words. And he warnes his Disciples to expect the like. Joh. 15.20. -- if
they have (...), insidiose observarunt sermonem meum. Sic (...) sumittur? Mat.
27.36, 24. Gatak.
observed, (or watched, for so it should be translated) my sayings, they will
watch yours also. And partly, because their Credit is of most concernment for
the honor of the Gospel. For as one would be loath to eat meat (otherwise
wholesome and good) if served up in a foul dish; so even wholesome truths will be
but slighted, if brought by one whose good name is bespattered, and besmeared
with reproaches, whereby prejudices are entertained against him. In all which
respects, people must be very careful how they give ear or credit to
disgraceful reports concerning their Ministers.

9. People owe unto their Ministers cheerful and liberal Maintenance.
Cheerful Maintenance.
Though it belongs to Ministers only to preach the word, typified by Aaron and
his sons ordering the Lamps, Exodus 27.21. yet the people must see that the
Lamps be kept burning, by providing oil for continual their supply, ver. 20.
Vines.
The bird that is to keep the nest and sit upon the eggs, must have her meat
brought in to her, and not fly abroad to purvey for her self. Whatever cavils
contentious persons may make, nothing is more clear in Scripture than this
duty, and that in the New Testament as well as the Old; it being an Ordinance
for Gospel Ministers, as well as Legal. 1 Cor. 9.14. -- even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. q. d.
As God took care of the Priests under the Law, to make provision for them, by
several Laws and ordinances concerning their maintenance; so has the Lord
Christ likewise, for Ministers of the Gospel: viz. Luke 10.7, 8. In the same
house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is
worthy of his hire, i. e. deserves to be maintained for his labor: and
therefore meat and drink include all things requisite thereto. Nor makes this
any thing against that freeness of preaching the Gospel, which some in
simplicity or worse, do urge as inconsistent with liberal maintenance; for
even the Volunteer follows not the war at his own charges. Concerning which
maintenance, observe with me these following particulars worthy consideration:

1. That it must not be pinching and scanty, but liberal and plentiful. Thus
it was under the Law: for though the Priests were not above a fourth part of
the people (as See Dr Reyn. on Psalm. 110. p. 478.
Dr Reynolds computes it) or not above a fifth or sixth part, (according to the
Learned Seldom,) yet their revenues in first fruits and prediall tenths,
amounted to near a fifth part of the profits of the Land (as See Seld. Review.
c. 5. prope finem.
Seldom reckons it,) besides their lands and many other advantages: so that
they had above ten times as much as the same number of persons of other Tribes.
Now Ministers of the Gospel having a more excellent Ministry (as the Apostle
shows, 2 Cor. 3.) their maintenance also should be proportionably liberal: for
it is prophesied, that in Gospell-times it should be so, Isa. 23.18. where the
Prophet speaking of the conversion of Tire, and how she should employ her
riches, when she was converted, says, It shall not be treasured nor laid up;
(viz. for any civil, common use, either public or private:) for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently,
and for durable clothing, i. e. from the Tyrian trade, (they being converted
to God) means and maintenance should be freely and largely afforded to God's
Ministers, for all necessaries and accommodations; so the English Annot. but
more clearly, the Apostle gives an express command, that he that is taught,
should communicate to his Teacher, (...), in all his goods, Gal. 6.6. and that
Ministers should have double honor, i. e. maintenance, 1 Timothy 5.17. so as to
be able to keep hospitality, 1 Timothy 3.2.

2. This maintenance must be proportioned out of the least arising profits, as
well as the greatest: Mint, annise, and cummin, and all manner of herbs ought
to be tithed, Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.42. The Jewish Doctors deliver by tradition,
with Seldom, Seld. of tithes. p. 20.
that all things growing out of the earth, and fit for man's meat, is titheable.

3. It is not a matter of alms, or in the nature of a free gift, but that which
Ministers have power to require of the people, 1 Cor. 9.4, 6, 12. 2 These. 3.9.
being due both by God's Ordinance, as was showed before; and also by a Law of
Justice; they performing service for it. 1 Cor. 9.7, 10. Who goes a warfare any
time at his own charges, etc? q.d. Ask the soldier, husbandman, shepherd,
whether they will serve you for naught; and whether they do not justly require
recompense for their labor? And if it be but just to pay them, then, it is but
just to recompense these.

4. That maintenance Ministers receive from their people, they receive it in
Gods name and stead; it belongs primarily to him, and they are but his Officers
in receiving, as well as dispensing; and therefore defrauding of them, is
robbing of God. Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye
say, wherein have we robbed him? in tithes and offerings.

5. Whatsoever maintenance Ministers receive from their people, yet their
people can never make them amends; because there is no proportion between what
people give to them, and what they receive from their Ministers. 1 Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things? Dr Rey.
q.d. If you rightly judge of those heavenly treasures which we bring in
abundance to you, it is impossible you should judge our pains and service toward
your immortal and precious souls, sufficiently rewarded with any of these
earthly perishable things we receive from you. And therefore Paul tells
Philemon, that he owed him even his very self. Philemon. 19.

6. Ministers may justly require maintenance of their people, though they have
estates of their own: for thus God had expressly provided under the Law, Deuteronomy.
18.8. They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which comes of the
sale of his patrimony. The Priest must live of his service notwithstanding his
private estate; the equity of which Law, belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel.

See Jus Divi. Mini. Evang. p. 15.
7. Though, it is true, Paul and Barnabas for some special reasons received
nothing from some Churches, but did work with their own hands to supply their
necessities, yet 1. They put it into the Catalogue of their sorrows and
sufferings, 1 Cor. 4 12. We labor working with our own hands. 2. They still
thought that it was a Gospell-ordinance, and assert their power to receive it.
1 Cor. 9.4 -- 15. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 2 These. 3.9. 3. They received much from
others. 2 Cor. 11.8. That which was lacking to me, the Brethren that came from
Macedonia supplied, Phil. 4.16. Even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again to
my necessity. And 4. He highly commends the Philippians for this their
liberality toward him. Phil. 4.14. Ye did well, that ye did communicate with
my affliction. And ver. 18. -- having received of Epaphroditus the things that
were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
well-pleasing to God.

Concerning the particular proportion of Ministers maintenance, I shall not
meddle with the Divine right of tithes, only say, that this way of maintenance
by tithes being established by the Laws of the Land, people are bound in
conscience to obey the Law (except they can show that it interfears with the
Law of God) in paying of them. Romans 13.5. Ye must be subject not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake. And therefore a person may as well pick the
money out of a Ministers pocket, as defraud him of any due; the latter being as
much to be abstained from as the former; because both are forbidden' by the
same Law.

10. Another duty is, Fervent Prayer for them. Fervent Prayer.
1 These. 5.25. Brethren, pray for us. So Heb. 13.18. Thus when Paul and Silas
went forth to preach, they were recommended by the Brethren to the grace of
God, viz* by prayer, Acts 15.40. People should pray, that God would qualify
their Ministers with sufficient abilities for discharge of their place. Ephesians.
6.18, 19. Col, 4.3, 4. 2 These. 3.1. that he would deliver them from wicked and
unreasonable men, ver. 2. and all other dangers and calamities; and direct them
to speak fitly to the peoples capacities, understandings, affections,
temptations; and suitably and seasonably to all their occasions.

And truly, great need have people to pray for their Ministers;

1. Because it is of all callings the most difficult: which made the Apostle
cry out, Gouge.
Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The Ministers office is, to
quicken such as are dead in sins; raise up and restore such as are fallen;
comfort the troubled in conscience; strengthen the weak; encourage the
faint-hearted; confound the obstinate; stand against all adverse power; with
many other the like; all which are very difficult things.

2. Because faithful Ministers are more opposed by Satan, and his instruments
than any other sort of men whatsoever. Zach. 3.1
When Joshua stood before the Angel of the Lord to receive his Commission,
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. As soon as Christ was pubickely
set apart to perform his Ministerial function, Satan set upon him in the
wilderness Mat. 4. begin. And ever after, the Scribes, Pharisees, and*
Sadduces, and other limbs of the Devil persecuted him from time to time. And
in our own times, we see the storm of the fury of the Quakers, and other
Sectaries, as also of profane, loose and ungodly persons, falls especially upon
the Ministers.

3. Because their failing in duty is most dangerous; for if they perish, many
perish with them, they are like the Admiral Ship that caries the lanthorn
whereby the whole fleet is guided; if that miscarry all the rest are at a
loss. As when Peter slipped aside out of the way, many Jews and Barnabas also
was carried away with them. Gal. 2.13. O therefore let your Ministers never be
forgotten in your prayers!

A grateful memorial A gratfull memorial.
of them, when dead and gone, or removed to some other place. Heb. 13.7.
Remember those your Rulers (so it should be translated) who have spoken to you
the word of God. Let their memory be blessed, (as Solomon's phraise is Prove.
10.7.) So as to bless and praise God for them, and for the benifit you reaped
from their labors while you did enjoy them; as also, to praise them, and
speak well of them; as the LXX render that place. (...). Remember them also,
so as to take all occasions of manifesting your respects unto them, if they be
yet alive, and only removed from you, by desiring and rejoicing to see them
again. Thus it was with the Thessalonians concernning Paul. 1 These. 3.6. When
Timothy came from you to us, he brought us glad tidings of your faith and
charity, and that you have good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to
see us. Or, if they be dead, by showing the kindness of the Lord to their
posterity. Such a remembrance of them, as it is the greatest honor that living
people can do to their deceased, or departed Pastors, so it will be an excellent
means to keep them free from the infection and seduction of false teachers; to
establish them in the truth they received from those Ministers; and to keep
them steady in the way of righteousness, wherein those Ministers walked before
them.

Well, you have now heard what duties you owe unto your Ministers; Now is there
any of you that can or dare deny these things to be the word of God? If so
stand forth, and speak, that we may know Christians from Heathens. But if you
cannot but acknowledge this that I have spoken (for the substance of every duty)
to be the express word and will of God, then consider how you will ever be
able to answer it another day to God and your own consciences, if being
informed of your duty you do not practice it, but remain disobedient and
rebellious against the Law of God. But I hope better things of you etc. But
more particularly.

render to all (and therefore to your Ministers) their dues; as you are
required to do. Romans 13.7. You use to call their tithes their dues, but you
have seen there are many more dues, belong to Ministers from their people
besides them; and which you should make as much conscience of paying, and be
every whit as carfull to com out of their debt for, as for them. And therefore,
I say, be careful to render, as to Caesar the things that are Cesars; to the
Civil Magistrate; what belongs to him; so to God the things that are Gods; and
to his Ambassadors (Ecclesiastical Magistrates) the things that belong to them.
I shall steel and strengthen this Exhortation, by backing it only with this
one consideration taken from,

The Interest you have in them, for the benifit and behoof of your Souls. All
that we Ministers have or are, is yours. Paul, Apollos, and Cephas are yours. 1
Cor. 3.22. We are your servants for Jesus sake. 2 Cor. 4.5. Our A Ministers
gifts are the Town-stock, given for the good of the souls both of rich and
poor. Gurn.
Abilities are for your Edification. Ephe. 4.11, 12. -- he gave some Pastors
and Teachers, -- for the Edifying the body of Christ. Our Authority also is for
the same end. viz. for your Edification, not your destruction. 2 Cor. 10.8.
Whence there arises a great and necessary dependence of people upon their
Ministers for their Souls good; insomuch that it is impossible, in any ordinary
way, that ever you should come to Heaven but by there help. For,

1. From us you receive the means which God has ordained for the bringing you
to Salvation. To us is committed the word of reconciliation. Says the Apostle
2 Cor. 5.17. And we are his Ambassadors, sent with Commission and authority
about the weightiest business that ever was taken in hand, even the treating
and concluding a peace between God and your Souls. To us also is committed the
Administration of the Sacraments and we are the Keepers of Gods Seals, so as
that you cannot have them, but from our hands. 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account
of us as of the stewards of the mysteries of God. Yea, to us are committed the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 16.19. We have that authority from God to
assure you in his name (according to Scripture-rules) of the pardon of such
sins as trouble your consciences, as no man in the world has besides. Yea,

2. You do not only receive the outward means of your salvation from us, but
(which is far more) by us God gives you his Spirit, and saving grace also, and
conveies it into your hearts. God, (says the Apostle) has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.6. Insomuch that where there is any truth of grace, some Minister or other
was the Spiritual Father to beget it, or water it in you. For thus much those
emphaticall questions of the Apostle amount unto. Gal. 3.2. This only would I
learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing of faith? and Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear with out a Preacher? So that you see,
all we have, or are is yours i. e. for your good; as a candle is made to give
light unto others; and nurses are stock't with milk for their nurslings sakes:
now every one uses to be careful of their own; Sic vos non vobis etc.
and make much of that which is their own, and not be wanting in any due
concernment thereof.

That we speak only for our own ends, when we tell you of these things. No!
when we acquaint you with your duty to our selves it is not (as the Apostle
speaks concerning the contribution sent unto him by the Church of Philippi)
because we desire these things (principally and with respect only to our
selves) but we desire fruit that may abound to your account. Phil. 4.17. And
yet if it were so? who refuses good counsel from a Lawyer, or wholesome
directions from a Phisician, out of a conceit that they speak only for their
fee; but I say that is not the reason, but for your own sakes: for (alas!) what
is it to us (comparatively and farther than as we sympathize with you in your
weal or woe) if you will not hear, and obey, and be saved? Do we desire any
thing but what makes for your own good, and turns to your own account, and by
performance whereof, you will be the greatest gainers your selves? O therefore
be not so mad and spiteful as to prejudice and wrong your own Souls, for, the
doing us a little displeasure: As it is in matter of tithes; would not you
count that man brutishly and senselesly wilful and malicious, who should let
his ground ly fallow, and thereby loose his own nine parts, on purpose to
hinder his Minister of his tenth? why, so is it in any other duty: by the
neglect thereof, you prejudice your selves nine parts at least to our tenth i.
e. You do infinitely more wrong your selves thereby than you do us. But I shall
speak a little more particulary concerning each of the forementioned duties.
1. Despise not their Calling 2 Be not disaffected to their Persons. 3. Neglect
not their Instructions. 4. Disobey not their Commands. 5. Be not unsubmissive
to their Censurs. 6. Fret not at their Reproof. 7. Slight not their Example. 8.
Wrong them not in their good names. 9. Grudge not their maintenance. 10. Cease
not to Pray for them. Lastly Forget them not.

1. Take heed of slighting, and lightly esteeming, much more of vilifying and
contemning your Ministers; count them not indifferencies, conveniences,
superfluities which may very well be spared: much less do not groan under
them as your burdens, and epidemicall grievances, whose room you had rather
have than their company: esteem them not the scum and refuse of the world, the
filth and offscourng of all things; nor like Jereboams Priests, the meanest of
the people, so as to Precedence any man's rather than the Ministers: every
mammonist' every younger Brother, every upstart of the first head must have the
place of us. To the gay clothing every one says, sit here in the best room:
but unto us, stand thou there or sit here under my footstool. Thus Children
behave themselves proudly against the ancient and the base against the
h^nor^ble. Esa 3.4. Downs Treat. An Amulet. p. 16.
post-pose them to every Thing that looks like a Gentleman or has got but a
few fine clothes. O Sirs! would you dare to carry your selves so toward Christ
if he were personally here on earth? why, it is all one in effect, if you will
believe his own word. Luke 10.16. He that despises you despises me. The dirt
that is cast in the Ministers face, besmears, and bespatters Christ. And they
that slight his Ministers would serve him so too: they that misused the
Servants dealt no better with the Son, Mat. 21.35, 39. compared. And cerainly
such a sin as this shall not go unpunished: Princes and States have always
been very tender of their Ambassadors; deeply resenting, and severely punishing
(to their power) any affront put upon them. Thus did David. 1 Samuel 10.6. and
12.31. And the Romans extinguished Corinth for violating their Ambassadors,
though the violation were so small, that Florus could not tell whether it were
Voce, or manu. Do you think then that Christ will take it well at your hands,
and put up patiently those wrongs and affronts you put upon his Ambassadors?
Ps. 105.15, 1.
No; he that reproved Kings for their sakes, will not take it at your hands,
nor let you escape scotfree. You may see what to expect, (and learn wisdom too
from thence, if you are not hardened to your sin) by what God has threatened
against, and inflicted upon others for this sin. Christ tells the Jews, the
vineyard should be let out to other husbandmen, Mat. 21.41.
and the Kingdom of God (i. e. the means of grace whereby they should be
brought to happiness) taken from them, v. 43.
and bestowed upon others (sc. the Gentiles) for their misusing his messengers
and servants. v. 35.
There is a spiritual judgment, and in the next Chapter but one, he threatens
them with temporal judgments, viz, the desolation of the Temple, and, as an
attendant thereon, the destruction of their Ceremonial Worship for the same
sin. c. 23.37, 38. Which did shortly after come to pass. And so, long before
that, their Babylonish Captivity is charged upon the score of this sin, 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. They mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose up against his
people, till there was no remedy, therefore he brought upon them the King of
the Chaldees etc And if God has punished this sin so severely in this world, O
what severity then may they expect from Christ in the day of retribution, the
greatest part of whose religion is to heap indignities and disgraces upon his
Ministers and Messengers! Romans 3.8. (...).
and to belch out blasphemies (for that is the term Paul uses concerning
disgraceful speeches of them) against them.

2. Take heed of entertaining any malice, or hatred, yea of giving way to the
least grudge, illwill, animosity, or disaffection to them. It Is a sign of a
wretched miscreant, such an one as Ahab, who sold himself to work
wickedness, to hate a Messenger of God. 1 Kin. 22.8.
O therefore do not requite all their love and kindness and pains to your
precious souls so ill! Yet (Alas!) this is the temper of the ungrateful
world: of whom the Ministers of Christ may complain, as David of some in his
time, They compassed me about with words of hatred, and fought against me
without a cause, for my love they are my adversaries, -- and have rewarded me
evil for good, and hatred for my love. Psalm. 109.3, 4, 5. They are the
Ministers of all others, who are made the chief butt, against which many
persons do shoot all the invenomed arrows of their rage and malice: and no
sort of men, I dare say, are more odious to a number of loose, untractable
persons, sons of Belial, than they: who are many of them, so desperately bent
and furiously driven on with a rage reaching up to heaven, that nothing less
then their blood, (if they could tell how to come at it (and utter extirpation,
would quench their thirst, and satisfy their revengefull hearts, (as it was
with Herodias concerning John the Baptist:) But, as we say, Cursed cowes have
short horns, so some that have spoken big swelling words of vanity against
Ministers and Ministry, breathing out threatings, and designing their utter
ruin and destruction, have, been not only defeated, and disappointed in their
intended mischief, but the wheel is brought upon them selves, (as Solomon
speaks, Prove. 20.26.) whereby they are bruised, and crushed and thresht; and so
their faces are filled with shame, as it is said concerning such. Psalm. 83.16.
So that we have seen of late days the prophetical imprecation of Moses upon
the enemies of Levi, notably verified, Smite through the loins of them that
rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again,
Deuteronomy. 33.11.

3. Take heed of non-attendance upon them for instruction* neglect not seeking
unto them Privately for satisfaction and resolution, a very common and
continual fault, the duty being sildome or never practiced in many places: so
that whereas the doors of Lawyers and Physicians are thronged many times with
attendants, poor Ministers may sit long enough before any one will come to
the mon such an errand: though the former be costly, and this they may have
upon free-coste, only for asking* but however

Neglect not frequenting the public Assemblys, for instruction there. Forsake
not the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some (a great many
now a days,) is: Heb. 10.25. It Is a sign of some sad distemper hanging upon
the soul, when persons either have no stomach at all to their spiritual food,
or prefer unsavory stuff, yea infectious trash, before wholesome provision.
Therefore let neither profanesse, flothfulnesse, nor presumption, detain you
from Church. Nay ramble not from your own Pastor if he be in any measure able
and faithful. A rolling stone gathers no moss, and rambling Christians cannot
grow much either in grace or knowledge. And therefore let not a gadding humor
drive you from your own Church. And when you are there;

Be not drowsy, sleepy, careless, heedlesse, careless hearers: let not your
heads be like leaking vessels, letting that go out at one ear, which you take
in at the other: when you bring your bodies in to the Congregation, leave not
your souls behind you. But be swift to hear Jam. 1.19. Hear as for your
lives, when you are hearing the word of life.

4. Take heed of contemning their Authority, and disobeying their commands and
directions: Heareby a light mispirsion may grow up into a grand transgresson;
an inconsiderable anomy an diniquity, may swell into an heinous and heavy
enormity. For, as obedience is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the
fat of rams; so Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity, and idolatry. 1 Samuel 15.22.23. Think not your selves wiser than your
teachers, so as proudly to contradict and oppose them. A sin not of the least
magnitude: for it is set as a brand of infamy upon those that were guilty of
it; and as an instance of a notorious sin. Hos. 4.4. Thy people are as they
that strive with the Priest. And therefore threatened to be punished
proportionably. Deuteronomy. 17.12. The man that will do presumptuously and will not
hearken to the Priest (that stands to Minister there before the Lord thy
God:) or unto the judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the
evil from Isaerl. And actually censured by the Apostle. 2 These. 3.14. If any
man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed. And truly, methinkes, these words of Chrsts (Mat.
18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven) should be
as so many thunderclaps to strike terror into the consciences of all stuborn
and rebellious persons, who disobey and neglect to hear their Ministers, and
thereby incur Ecclesasticall censures, that they are not only condemned and
censured by them, but by God likewise: and believe it, sirs, its no playing and
dallying with such edg-tooles. O therefore take heed least you find cause one
day to bewail your folly heerin, when it is too late; and to complain of your
selves as he in Prove. 5.13. How have I hated instruction, -- and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me?

5. Take heed of impatience under their censures, or undervaluing thoughts of
them, as if they were but bruta fulmina, blunt weapons, like cannons charged
with powder only, which make a great noise, but do no execution; or like a be
that has lost his sting, which though it may humme, yet it cannot hurt. True;
they wound not the body, nor prejudice the estate (directly and immediately,)
yet are never the less terrible for that, for (like lightning that melts the
Sword, and meddles not with the Scabbard,) they seize upon the soul, and
punish persons in a spiritual way: they turn them out of dooers, as I may so
say, (as masters do unruly servants,) by banishing them from communion with the
Church, they make them to fast (as Parents do untoward children many times,) by
depriving them of the bread of life in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Whereby such persons are in the state of Publicans and heathens. Mat. 18.17.
Yea like dogs and swine. Mat. 7.6. Which surely is no contemptible matter. Yea
by these censures they are bound over to the vengeance of God, with such strong
cords, which ('it is true, they may unty by Repentance, but) they shall never be
able to break and disintangle themselves from, by all their impenitence, and
contempt, or any such like courses.

Is he that advises thee, thy superior? Thine anger is undutifull. Is he thy
friend? It is ungrateful, Dr Rein.
6. Take heed of being angry with them for their Reproves. We Ministers are
too apt of our selves to be mealie-mouth'd many times, and let you alone in
your sins for fear of your displeasure. A pettish patient makes the
Surgeon search the wound less than is necessary to a through cure. Now, do
not you help forward this humor in us, and make us deal more unfaithfully with
your souls than otherwise we should do. Had you not better hear the worst of
it now, while there may be remedy, than feel the misery of it hereafter when
it is too late to help it? And yet how few consider this? Seldom shall one
meet with a professor that can take a close reproof patiently: much less then
is it to be found in others, most persons count their Ministers their greatest
enemy, that deal most freely, plainly, Reprooses are good physic, but they
have an unpleasing farewell: it is hard for men not to vomit them up again in
the face of him that gives them. Gurn.
faithfully, and impartially with them. We cannot speak to them so tenderly,
but they are ready to think, it is to disgrace them, or out of ill will to
them, or that we make more ado than needs, or make them worse than they are,
and are ready to say, Look to your self, you shall not answer for me. Yea
they would, if they could, stop his mouth from preaching, who would stop there
course in sinning, as Amaziah did the prophets, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. Ay but one day,
sooner or later, you will see your own folly herein, and befoole your selves,
as he did, Prove. 5.12. Saying, How have I hated instruction and my heart
despised reproof? And therefore give not way to this humor in your selves, but
rather be angry with thy self for thy sin, and thou will love him that
endeavors to free thee from it. Count it thy disease, thy burden, thine Enemy,
and thou will be thankful to him that discovers this disease, and administers
physic for thy cure; that lends thee his hand to throw off this burden; that
forewarnes thee of this Enemy, and helps thee to fight against it.

7. Beware of disregarding their example as not worthy your observation, or
Imitation. For though, it is true, in matters of Doctrine they are not
infallible, nor in matters of Practice impeccable and unblameable, yet as they
know their duty and the way they should walk in, better than others,
(ordinarily,) so likewise they do many times, (and I suppose, usually,) obtain
more grace of God than others to be faithful in their stations, and to be more
brightly burning and shining lights than others: it being but agreeable to Gods
ordinary method of providence, to qualify persons for those places he calls
them to; so that they being set in Mat. 5.15.
an eminent, observable place, are enabled accordingly, through grace, to be of
exemplary lives. This exemplarinesse then being bestowed upon them, partly for
the imitation of others, should not lightly be accounted of, as not worth the
taking notice of. People should not hide their eyes from beholding the Mat.
5.16.
light of their Ministers good works, much less look upon it through false
glasses, but so to see and observe it, as to glorify God, by an imitation
thereof.

8. Beware of wronging and wounding them in their good names, either by
raising, or receiving any ill report of them: a very frequent and common
practice with many. As it was formerly, Ezekiel. 33.30. Son of man, the children
of thy people are still talking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of
their houses, so it is still. How often are the good names of Ministers thrust
thorough with the sharp swords of backbiting tongues? it is the common trade
that many drive, to cast dirt upon them, wherever they come, but especially if
they chance to spy any nakedness, or humane infirmity in such an one, then
they have some scratch for their itch; presently all the town and country shall
ring of it; instead of covering it with the garment of charity, they (like
cursed Cham) proclaim, and divulge it all abroad to his disgrace. Yea, aut
invenient aut facient; rather then fail, they will invent some lie or other to
blaspheame them, and bespatter their good name with all. A fearful sin, which
you should be very fraid of. For says God, Wherefore were ye not afraid to
speak against my servant Moses? Number. 12.8. q. d. What! to speak against my
servant! against Moses! to disgrace any one whom I put special marks of
honor upon! I wonder you would offer it. Nay, it is a sin of such an ugly
aspect, that I wonder you durst be so foole-hardy as to venture upon it; that
you were not afraid of it. And therefore take heed of being either the Parent,
or Nurse of such a bastard, yea divelish practice, as this; but remember, you
must be responsible both for your Ears and Tongues in this case.

9. Grudge not their maintenance. Beware either of detaining the whole, or
defrauding them of any part of that which is their due either by the Laws of
God or man. It was once said, What shall we give the man of God? 1 Samuel 9.7.
but now every one says, Come let us take the houses of God in possesion, Psalm.
83.12. When Moses built the Taberncle, he was sain to stay the people from
giving, they were so forward, Exodus 36.5, 6. but now would God we could stay
their hands from robbing the Tabernacle. Down.
This is plainly neither better nor worse, than a robbing of God and so you
will find it one day. A point, that, if I mistake not, much concerns both
Impropriators, and Compounders. Impropriators; who, if their be any such sin as
Sacrilege (which I know no reason to deny) are highly guilty of it. For if
either on the one hand the Law of god concerning tithes as to the substance of
it, be still in force, so that such a proportion be due to the Ministers of the
Gospel as was to the Priests and Levites under the Law, then Impropriators
have no right to them; or if on the other hand, that Law be not in force now,
yet this is clear, that the persons who first assigned such portions out of
their estates, did intentionally dedicate them unto God, and set them apart for
the maintenance of his worship and service (however sometimes their might be
some error in the manner) and so they became hallowed things and such as did
belong to God, and consequently not alienable afterward by any man, or company
of men whatsoever, it being both against the doners will, which none ought to
disanull. (Gal. 3.15.) And the nature of hallowed things, which ought not to be
put to a common use. Whence we read that the censers used by Corah and his
accomplices, though it was strange fire that was offered in them, yet because
they were offered before the Lord, therefore they were hallowed and commanded
to be turned into broad plates for the Altar, that so they might not be put to
any common use again. Number. 16.37.38. Besides, being hallowed things, they
belong primarily unto God Lev. 27.30. Now he has appointed his Ministers to be
his receivers. Number. 18 8.9. The Lord spoke unto Aaron, behold I have also giv^n
thee the charge of my heave-offerings of all the hallowed things of all the
children of Israel, Lev. 27 30.
unto thee have I given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons by an
ordinance for ever, etc. so that what is due to God is to be paid to them.
Numb. 5.8. -- Let the trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even to the
Priest, q. d. the Priests (then, and so Ministers now) are the Lords Receivers;
so that which belongs to the Lord must be paid to them; and what is paid to
them, it is all one as if it were paid into Gods own hands; for he allows it
upon account, and gives an acquittance and discharge for it, as if received by
himself. And therefore except these persons can show a Commission from God for
their receiving of them, such as he has given to his Ministers, I wou d fain
know how they will be ever able to answer it to God, and acquit themselves of
the guilt of sacrilege. I might add that these revenues being designed for
the maintenance of Gods service, as I said, i. e. of those, whose business and
particular calling it is to be employed about Gods worship, and service, how
can they have any right to eat of the Altar, who serve not at the Altar? How
unreasonable and unjust a thing is it, that they that are not so much as in a
capacity of doing the work, should have (in a manner) all the wages? Ministers
plow and sow (as I may so say) and Impropriators reap the crop and benefit.
Ministers plant the vineyard, and Impropriators eat the fruit thereof.
Ministers feed the flock, and Impropriators eat the milk, and take the fleece
of the flock. This is not so strange a thing, in many places in England (how
absurd and sinful soever it be) as the Apostle makes it, 1. Cor. 9.7.

And then for Compounders, who take (I will not say, steal) a Goose and stick
down a feather only, (as we use to say) that have large estates and
proportions, and yet allow but some petty inconsiderable Composition in lieu of
all, perhaps not a tithe of their tithe, let them seriously consider, whether
Prescription and Custom will be a sufficient Plea at Gods Tribunal. If a
tenth be still due by Gods Law, (as I think the learnedest of them cannot
disprove) then I am sure that the Law of man will never excuse them, that
limits it to a twentieth, or sometimes it may be scarce a fourtieth part. For
though the Law of the Land may augment and enlarge, yet certainly it cannot
contract and abridge, what the Law of God gives and allows. An inferior power
cannot take away any thing that a superior gives, though it may give more.
True, Lev. 27.
in some cases we read of an exchange allowable; that the hallowed thing might
be turned into money, but then an indifferent price was to be set upon it by
the Priest, and he was not bound to change a Noble for nine pence. I have
spoken the more concerning these things, because persons swallow them so easily
without chewing, and considering, that though they be sweet in the mouth, they
will be bitter in the belly, and in the end. And therefore beware of devouring
holy things in any way whatsoever, but see that you keep a good conscience in
these things, wherein so many do offend, that you may be able to purge your
selves, and make that protestation which the Jews were commanded to do, Deuteronomy.
26.12, 13, 14. When thou have made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase -- then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away
the hallowed things out of mine house, -- according to all thy Commandments
which thou have commanded me: I have not transgressed thy Commandments,
neither have I forgotten them: I have not eat thereof in my mourning, i. e. (as
some expound it) What want soever I have been in, yet durst I never relieve my
necessity by robbing God of his part, by appropriating to my self, or employing
to my own private use any thing that did belong to him.

10. Cease not to pray for them He is counted uncivil, that, if he does but
pass by one at plow, or meet a traveller on the road, will not bid him God
speed: and surely he is both unchristian and undutifull, that will not pray for
the continuance and increase of his Ministers gifts and graces, and for a
blessing upon his labors. Yet many pray rather for a quiet and peaceable man,
as they call him, who will be content with any thing they give him; not
inquisitive into their conversations; not busy in prying into their faults,
but rather winking at them; suffering them to walk in their sinful ways, and
take no notice of it. O this is the man for their turn! Such a one they pray
heartily their Minister may be; but for his ability and fidelity in the
discharge of his place, and other things of the like nature, they never so much
as wish for.

Forget not your Ministers, and their labor of love among you for your souls
good. Let them not have occasion to say of you, according to the old Proverb,
Out of sight, out of mind: hereby you will discover both your ingratitude and
folly. It Is taxed as a foul blemish upon that City which was delivered by the
wisdom of a poor wise man, that no man remembered the same poor man, Eccl.
9.15. And it was the destruction of Joash, that he remembered not the kindness
which Jehoiada had done to him, 2 Chronicles. 24.22, etc. O therefore let it never
be said, that you have so soon forgotten all those wholesome instructions they
gave you, and those other kindnesses they showed to your souls, so that you
should not retain a grateful memorial of them so long as you live.

Take heed of making default in any of these particulars; and think not that an
inconsiderable under-rate Composition will serve for these dues: for assure
your selves, that if either you detain or defraud your Ministers of them, God
will fine you in treble damages at least. And therefore be careful in paying
all these debts and duties you owe to them, that thereby you may make it
appear, that you Know them (and your duty to them) which labor among you, and
are over you, and admonish you. Amen.

FINIS.

