The clearing of Master Cranfords Text, 2 Timothy Chap. 2. verse. 17. from that
imputation of cruelty and un-gospell bloodinesse, which the said Mr. Cranford
(being the Sea the title page of Mr. Cranfords Sermon, he may feed B. la
Bridewell, Nich. la Newgate, etc. If the flesh of Christ's Disciples may be
meat, and their blood tears, and groans drink, for such places and instruments
of cruelty. Instruments of Simeon and Levi brethren in iniquity, in whose
habitations were and are instruments of cruelty; let not the souls of the
Lords and Commons come into their secret, unto their assembly let not* my Lord
Major, and Aldermen, and Citizens be united Cursed be their anger for it is
fierce, and their wrath for it is cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel, Genes. 49. 5, 6, 7.
feeder of Christopher le Stocks, and minding it should seem to fatten his
charge) endeavored to fasten thereon, in a Sermon at Paul's, before the Lord
Major, Aldermen, and citizens of London, contrary to the intent of the whole
New Testament, though not without the suffrages of those Fathers of his
persecuting spirit, the Greek and Latin Prelates (no better Fathers, nor of
better authority to expound, much less to pervert Scripture; the Dr. Andrews
Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Hall B. of Exeter and Norwich, Dr. Usher B. of
Armagh, etc. men of great reading and eloquence, as Mr. Cranfords Fathers were,
and tainted with an unchristian spirit of prelaticall persecution like them and
him, he is their very son; successive hands have not been laid upon him and
his brethren like minded, by their spiritual Fathers in vain. I speak not
against the persons or parts of him or them. They, I hope, are saved through
fire burning that straw and stubble, and whatever painted pageantry they built
upon the foundation Christ and him crucified. The like I wish to Mr. Cranford.
It is the spirit of old Father Abaddon, that old Ebrew Father, and old Father
Apollyon that most ancient Greek Father (Rev. 9. 11.) that I resist* from whose
net I pray Mr. Cranford may be delivered, if perhaps, the thoughts of his heart
may be forgiven him, the bloody thoughts, and he as Saul a persecutor may
become Paul a persecuted professor of that way which he now subtly opposes
under the name of Heresy.
P. Lancelotus Wintoniensis, P. Josephus Exoniensis, P. Jacobus Armacensis.
These names in the Ages following may be as much abused, and as reverently
handled to cheat withal, and to introduce Prelacy, as any Greek or Latin)
together with those anciently venerable Greek and Hebrew Grandsires, P.
Abaddon, P. Satan, P Apollyon, P. Diabolus. That Text 2 Timothy 2. 17. is cleared
from the said false aspersion by a jury of its Peers, viz. twelve texts, three
antecedent, and nine consequent in the same Chapter, faithful witnesses and
true, proclaiming aloud that ver. 17. is abused and falsely charged, as many
otherwise, so chiefly in that the comparison of Heretical opinions to a
Gangrene or Canker intended only in point of spreading, is untruly urged in
point of deading and cutting off by the Magistrates sword* is falsely and
wickedly, propounded as the mind of Christ, in stead of awaking by the word of
the Minister. The Jury is 2 Timothy 2. chap. verse. 14, 15, 16. 18, 19, 20, 21 22,
23, 24, 25, 26. just twelve faithful expositors of the purpose of verse. 17.
falsely accused by Mr. Cranford.
OF these, things put (faithful See verse. 1. This is writ from a Pastor of
Christ's flock to a Teacher thereof, and so is Mr. Cranfords Text which is ill
applied by the Pastor of Christopher le Stocks, to the Magistrates of a great
City and mixed multitude thereof.
men who shall be able to teach others also) in remembrance, charging before
the Not the Lord Major, but Christ Jesus, the sword that proceeds out of his
mouth, not that which comes out of my Lord Majors velvet scabberd, must keep
Teachers in awe.
Lord, that they strive not about As the Pastor of Christopher le Stocks whiles
he perverts the term Gangrene used by Paul to intimate the spreading, not
killing nature of erroneous opinions, as by the context evidently appears.
words to no profit, to the subverting of the hearers.

2 Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Such workmen as Mr. Cranford
may justly blush that cannot do the work of God with his Instruments, (2 Cor.
10. 4. and 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.) nor fight his battles with his weapons, but when
they should be saving my Lord Majors soul, are tampering to draw his sword to
destroy the precious lives of all that are not of the Presbyterian Sect, v. 17.
is not conscious of such wickednsse.
workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

3 But Shun the babbling. He says not strike the babbler accuse the babbler,
provoke the Magistrate against the babbler, much less against the Disciples of
Christ under a color, as those that spoke of Paul, What will the babbler say?
shun profane and vain babbling, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness. And their words will This is the text that is upon purgation,
this is the passage that Mr. Edwards and Mr. Cranford have manifestly
perverted, as the whole scope of the Chapter proclames, will eat, says the
text, and no more, they from the evil treasure of their evil heart add, will
dead, kill, render past recovery as a canker, so that no way but the sword to
cut off, the sword of the Magistrate.
eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus.

4 Who concerning the Truth have Humanum est errare, is the old proverb, It is
an infirmity common to mankind to err, he that is free from the sickness let
him cast the first stone. See Mr. Ioh. Goodw. Cretensis; They have erred, says
the Spirit of Christ; They are dead and must be cut off, says the spirit of
the ancient Fathers by the mouth of the Past of Christopher le Stocks.
erred, saying Few of those Mr. Cranford would have buried out of his sight
think so grossly, if they did in Paul's language they do but err, and may turn
to the right way* if Christopher le Stocks and his brethren will permit them to
enjoy that life and opportunity God has afforded to that end. While there is
life there is hope.
that the Resurrection is Past already, and overthrow the faith of some.

5 Nevertheless the Foundation of God Mr. Cranford need not fear that the
spiritual house of Christ will fall if it be not propped by fire and faggot.
stands sure having the Seal, the The providence of the Lord Christ Jesus
the good Shepherd that will not lose one of his sheep (though he will try them
by such deceivers, that the very Elect shall scarcely be untainted) is the
foundation of his Church, it needs not my Lord Majors sword to sustain it.
Lord knows them that are his; and let every one that names the Name of
Christ The Disciples of Christ, the sectaries of that Sect which was and is
every where spoken against (Act. 28. 22.) must depart from the spiritual
iniquities spoken of, viz. errors in doctrine they must not endeavor that
persons erring be punished with civil punishment.
depart from iniquity.

6 But in a great House there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but
also of In Gods great house, the World, it is his pleasure to reserve vessels
of ignoble and base, though necessary use, all that he requires is that the
vessels of gold and silver may stand by themselves upon the cup-bord in the
Parlor, etc. and vessels of wood, and tin, and iron in the Kitchen,
office-house, etc. Mr. Cranford and his brethren much wiser, would have all the
wooden vessels tinned, gilded and trimmed, and stand among the vessels of
honor, and employed to the same use; or if any will not take color, it must
be broken and cast out of the door. If they cannot make every man in Great
Br^tain and woman a vessel of honor, or appear to be so, they will dash them
to pieces like a Potters vessel; they must be vessels of honor, or the great
house must not hold them. Where is that wise steward whom the Lord will set
over his house?
wood and of earth; and some to n honor and some to dishonor.

7 If a man therefore Every man's care must be to purge himself that he may
indeed be a vessel of honor, not to gild and adorn himself or others like
such a vessel, much less to put vessels of dishonor out of the house, where
they have their proper and convenient use; if a man purge himself from these
says Paul, if the Magistrate purge these out of the Land of the living says
Mr. Cranford, speaking by the mouth of all his ancient Fathers from the
beginning of the world, concerning all those his enemies of the Independent
way, that will not have him and those of his spirit to reign over them.
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and
meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

8 Fly also Youthful lusts of envy, wrath, bloodshed.
youthful lusts: but follow Do as you would be done to, put your souls into
the anti-compulsory-Presbyterians souls stead, and theirs in your stead.
righteousness, Believe that he which hears the young Ravens when they cry,
that clothes the Lilly, that paints the wings of the Butterfly, will not let
your wife and children want necessaries, though men be suffered to live by you,
that err so far as to think and teach that Ministers of Christ ought not to
have maintenance by Tithes.
faith, charity, peace, Have peace with all men, says the Apostle elsewhere;
follow peace as they do, in their company that call upon the Lord, lifting up
holy hands without wrath and doubting.
with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart.

9 But Foolish and unlearned questions are multitudes of those the Schoolmen
start, with whom did not Master Cranford more consult then with the plain Word
of God, he would not so far wander from the evident scope of his text.
foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strife.

10 And the servant of the Lord Whose servant is Master Cranford the while.
must not strive; but be gentle unto None are excepted, if the P. of Chr. le
Stocks be gentle to such as draw in the same pontifician yoke with him, what
wonder, what thanks? how gentle he is to all differing from him, let this
crafty sermon speak.
all men, He that comes to teach a man with a cudgel in his hand, is in a very
unapt posture to teach, apt to strike he may be, and apt to take Tithes. His
arguments lose their force. Our Lord therefore used acts of love and
compassion, and meekness toward all he taught, and therefore the people
willingly heard him, and many became disciples. Such are the acts of those the
man secretly darts his bitter words at, and they may say as he, for which of
our good acts for the City, Parliament, Kingdom, would you stone us? would you
have the State fine, imprison, banish us.
apt to teach, forbearing.

11 In Not in choler with an argument in the mouth, war in the heart, and a
sword in the hand, such an instructor will never succeed in his work, v. 17. is
not guilty of any such crime. Such doctrine is from the ancient Fathers of
prelaticall supremacy.
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God The Apostle says,
If God peradventure will give them repentance, Mr. Cranford says they are dead
and so past repentance, and to be put past peradventure by the Magistrates
sword, if he were no better advised then to handle his Arms at every word of
command from the Mouth of the Past. of Chr. le Stocks, or the brethren of his
spirit. Such instigations, verse. 17. was never acquainted with, and are to be
found in old writings of Abaddon and Father Apollyon, Tom. 1. part. 1. Sect. ^0.
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth.

12 And that they may Mr. Cr. hatchet would put them past waking, the
instruments of his charge would but put them out of the sleep of error into the
sleep of death, never to awake but by the blast of the trump of the
Arch-Angell. The spirit of Christ says, errors cast men into a sleep out of
which they may be waked; the spirit of Apollyon, and Mr. Cran* other Fathers
say, that they kill the soul past hope, and there is no way but death and
bonds: thus does the evil spirit speak in the mouth of Mr. Edwards and the
Past* of Chr. le Stocks, ver. 17. is not acquainted with such wickedness, but
cries out of the violence offered unto it, by drawing the similitude of a
Gangrene beyond the quality of spreading, in which sense and no other the
spirit of love uses it. See here the silliness of that witty speech, that if
such as kill the body, much more such as poison and kill the soul must die.
What mends shall be made that man that is put to death for casting his
neighbor into a dead sleep, when his neighbor shall awake safe and sound. The
Spirit of Christ accounts persons seduced by erroneous opinions no otherwise
dead, then by a dead sleep, a heavy drowsy distemper, with scales covering the
eyes of the mind. Yet from your weak ground of a comparison of such opinions to
a canker for spreading, and no otherwise have Mr. Cr. and Mr. Edwards reared
their Treatises and Sermons, swelling with the venim of a persecuting spirit:
from which I pray God deliver them and all.
awake themselves out of the snare of the That ancient Father Episcopus
Macrocosmensis See his Diocese, Job 1. 7. where he rides circuit in
Visitation: (...) is this Fathers Greek name, in English Accuser of the
Brethren: A right reverend father of great Antiquity, him the Prelates of all
ages and generations have imitated since the Foundations of the World. He from
the beginning liked not his charge, and therefore abode not in his station, but
desirous of more dignity then God allotted to serve his ends, became a
murderer and impostor.
devil, who are taken They are taken alive, and must be recovered alive, if
they be ever recovered, by meekness instructing, if peradventure etc. they
must not be exasperated and made incapable of instruction by Fines,
Imprisonments, etc. much less put past all hopes by banishment or possibility
of recovery by death. This is the language of the followers of the Lamb, that
had the mouth of a Dragon, and nothing but Horns of a lamb, unless it might
be black-wooll-cloathing, Revel. 13. 11.
alive by him at his will.

Behold my Servant in whom my soul delights, shall not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his voice to be heard in the street, a bruised reed shall he not break,
Isay 42. 1, 2. (...). My Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight. Dr. Christ. John 18. 36. Put up again
thy sword into its place, for all they that take the sword shall perish with
the sword Dr. Jesus, Matthew. 26. 52. Ye know not of what manner of spirit ye
are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
Dr. Emmanuel, Luke 9. 25, 26. If ye were Abraham's children ye would do the
works of Abraham, but now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the
truth which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham.

Ye are of your father the false accuser, and the longings of your father you
will accomplish; he was a manslayer from the beginning Dr. Christ. John 8. 44.

We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, nor walking in craftiness,
nor deceitfully handling [adulterating as Hucksters their commodities, and
Vintners their wine] the Word of God, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. For we
preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants
for Jesus sake. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 2. 5. Be not ye called Rabbi, one is your
Teacher, Christ, and all ye are his Brethren. And call no man your Father upon
earth, for one is your Father who is in Heaven. Neither be ye called
Expounders [(...)] for one is your Expositer, Expounder, Teacher, Christ,
Matthew. 23. 8, 9, 10. Christian Reader; Seeing how deceitfully the Word of God
is handled by those that will needs be our Rabbis; obey the command of our
Lord in the Scriptures next above; Put on the noble resolution of the Bereans,
who searched daily the Scriptures whether those things were so which Paul
himself preached, Acts 17. 11, 12.

This Discovery of abuse of Scripture, is humbly presented for serious
consideration to the Parliament, Lord Major, Aldermen and Citizens of London,
by a Lover of Peace and Truth, and an hater of all errors, with a just
Christian and perfect* not an unjust, politic, unchristian, unapostolicall
and pretended zeal.

The Map of Prelaticall Imposture is good to drive away evil spirits, being
hung over the thresholds of houses, and pasted or hung up on the walls of Halls
and Parlors, and all haunted places.

London Printed by Tho. Pain, for John Sweeting in Pope's Head Alley.


