A CLEAR ANSWER To the ARMIES late REMONSTRANCE AGAINST ACCOMMODATION: So far
as to justify their former Remonstrances, for Accommodation.

1 SAMUEL 24.5. David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saules skirt.

1 SAMUEL 26.9. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not; for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless?

CICERO. Omnia misera in bello civili, nihilque ipsa victoria miserius.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Clear ANSWER, to the ARMIES late REMONSTRANCE against Accommodation, etc.
HAving, out of a tender respect of my dear Country, wherein I have enjoyed
many comforts in this life, and care of the honor of that Religion whereby I
hope to attain a crown in the life to come, represented, with a Letter, an
abstract of the Armies formerly published overtures for accommodation, to their
Officers assembled in Council. And being uncertain, whether the said Paper
were delivered according to my directions, or if it were, being certain that
it was not regarded, but instead of pursuing their former offers for Peace, we
meet with an over-ly acknowledgment of their error therein, and an high
attempt to frustrate this Treaty; first presented to the Parliament, and after
to the people in Print: I thought it my duty, to compare their former pretenses
for Peace, with their present propositions for disturbance, to see which in the
balance of reason, and Scripture, may seem more ponderous, to weigh down the
judgment of an indifferent observer.

And first of all it is to be observed, how apparently contrary their present
is, to former Remonstrances. The former clearly declaring no Peace probable to
be firm, and lasting, without provision for the quiet, safety, and Honor of
the King, and His Royal Family, and indulgence likewise to His Party. This is
iterated to be the way to conquer hearts, to remove seeds of fewds, and future
War. But the latter, like the Laws of Draco, is writ in blood, breathing out
Trial or Execution against the King, Prince, and Duke of York, and and all
rigor to their partakers. The former was well made out to us by a double
experience: for first, while these things were held out by the Army, all hearts
were quiet, and expectations fixed to see whether such fair proposals would not
put a happy period to our miserable distractions.

But when all these overtures proved but empty flashes* or golden dreams: and
instead of happy Peace, with some satisfaction to all interests, to make it
lasting; Behold the King first immured in a remote Castle, afterward laid
aside with Votes of no more Addresses, and those that erewhile (when they
needed Him) interposed so gloriously for Him, voluntarily engaging to bear out
those Votes against Him, and all others: what followed, but heart Land, and Sea
commotions, whence such a dangerous flame, that if God had not wonderfully
interposed, to try us with one more lucidum intervallum, to see whether we
would be wiser, and honester actum esset: there had been an end of our hopes,
whether of Reformation or contended for Liberty, if the King be so minded as
they afterward represent Him. And though the Land be now quieted, yet Sea, and
hearts remain still troubled. The Parliament awakened by this, plainly saw
that the state of the Nation would not be settled without the King, nor the
hearts of the Nation quiet, without the Kingdom be settled: for till settling,
the Husbandman, Grasier, and Tradesman, the support of a Nation for
subsistence, and wealth, live in fear, and labor in vain. And though the
disease be quasht, the cause not being removed, a little time must of necessity
bring a relapse, and the danger of relapses natural, or civil, Physicians and
Statesmen very well know. The Parliament finding by sad experience the error
of the Vote for no more Addresses, resolved upon a Personal Treaty with the
King. And though backward to it, while all was in combustion: yet after God had
cleared the coasts, they proceed with more celerity, and alacrity, and things
are very far, and fair for a good issue: And yet in Treaty all things are
proposed, that both Nations thought requisite for the freedom, and happiness
of both Kingdoms; for which they had engaged so deeply. And it is very
observable that during the late second War, rumors were spread abroad (whether
true, or ad faciendum populum to please the people, let God judge) that the.
Officers of the Army had seen their errors too, and if things were quieted,
it should appear, that they would hereafter know their sphere and acquiesce in
the Parliaments determinations: Yet now when upon so good terms peace is at
our doors, Behold a thundering Declaration against His Majesty, and His Royal
Family, to break Treaty, and alter the form of present government, with other
things, which boade nothing but perpetual distractions, to necessitate a
perpetual Army, knowing they must be the men, and so still be in a
circumstance to overawe all that shall dare to cross their designs, wills and
humors. And now a query put upon all Treaty, especially this present Treaty,
resolved to be neither just nor safe: but upon what grounds comes now to be
examined.

And first after many tedious circumlocutions, apt not to instruct, but to
distract the Reader, They grate upon the House, the ingrate remembrance of the
Vote of no more Addresses. But the Houses have learned that secundae
cogitationes meliores, second thoughts are wiser: but our wise Ancestors left
us no proverb for third thoughts. That were indeed to manifest that
instability, that is inconsistent with solid sagacity. After this as tedious
pains is taken to make it seem probable, that the Parliament went not into
this Treaty voluntarily, but enforced: But all that can in truth be asserted in
this particular will I believe but amount to this.

That the discontent and danger that did arise from the Vote of [no Addresses]
did convince them, that that was not the way to settle the Nation in assured
peace, and quiet: And so that a Personal Treaty was more for the Public
good, then the Vote of no Addresses: for, had the Parliament entertained the
motion of a Personal Treaty through fear only, then would they have Treated,
where those they feared, desired it; that is, in, or about London. But they
would not condescend to it any where but in the Isle of Wight: Whence we gather
but that the Parliament were free from force in the thing, because they
overruled the place: And that the People were free from design, otherways
then for setlednesse by Treaty, because they did acquiesce in a Treaty any
where.

After our Remonstrants, proceed page 14, 15. to dispute the Justice and Safety
of this Treaty: But usher it in with the state of the Question. And first,
because the Safety in question relates to Public interest, they set down the
sum of the public interest of a Nation, in relation to common Right, and
Freedom; and therein first, lay down, that for all matters of Supreme trust,
they have a Common and supreme Council, to consist of Deputies, or
Representees freely chosen by themselves, etc. But here is a great stumble at
the threshold, and essential error in the very entrance: for they are not to
set down (if they will speak to purpose) the interest of an Eutopia, an
imaginary People; but what is the Public interest of this Nation, as it now
stands, having a supreme Council, partly of Commons Elect, partly of Lords
Hereditary: and by the continued constitution of our Parliaments, the Power,
and Privileges of the House of Peers, is superior to that of the Commons: and
those Rights and Privileges of both Houses they have protested, sworn, and
covenanted to maintain in general. And particularly, (and that if I mistake
not, to draw on their consent to the Votes of no Addresses) the Army, by some
of their Officers, did declare to the Lords at their Bar, (and after to all
the world) that they would maintain and defend the Privileges of the Peers of
England. It Is apparent then, that the state of the Question which these have
drawn, will not consist with the fundamental constitution of the Government of
England, which the Parliament have often declared, and all have protested not
to alter; and therefore, how impertinent their Arguments must needs be on such
a false foundation, the intelligent Reader will easily judge: For the same
error runs along, in all the particulars of the state of the Question, that
are given of an Imaginary people, not of this People of England, under that
frame of Government which is already established amongst them.

In the application of this to the state of our National affairs, they ascribe
to the King an endeavor by several Wars to maintain an Absolute interest in
Himself, against that Public interest laid down by them, which they say was
asserted by the Parliament: which two particulars, both King, and Parliament
have publicly disavowed. The King in His Answers to the 19 Propositions
delivered at Beverly, clearly acknowledging this Monarchy not to be pa^e, but
mixed with Aristocracy, and Democracy; the wisdom of Our Ancestors, having in
Our constitution, gathered what was good, avoided what was evil, in all the
three. And further, that the Monarchy was not absolute, but Regular in its
administration. And the Parliament all along declaring, that they would not
violate the just Right or Greatness of the King, nor alter the frame of
Government established. And how can it be imagined, that the Lords should
engage for such an Interest, as despoiles them of all part in the Supreme
trust, wherein they have the largest engagement, and an Hereditary right?

After, page 20. they tell us of some particular Interests incident with the
general, both to King and Parliament: wherein in my judgment, they are as much
mistaken in what is said in reference to the King, as they were in the
general, for they say, it was His interest to suppress the power of
Godliness, or any thing of Conscience obliging, above, or against humane
constitutions, etc. for, what is the interest of a King, but to get the peoples
hearts? and how is that better gotten then by countenancing Godliness? And a
King that has a Nation engaged to him by Oath upon Oath, the greatest tie to
Conscience. And a King that pretends but to be a Regular Monarch, what can more
advance His interest, then to countenance conscientiousnesse? So many plain
precepts lying obvious in Gods word, for Christians to be obedient and subject
to such for conscience sake. But to let that alone, and come to the dispute,
where two things are supposed, 1. That where a Person is trusted with a Limited
tower, and obliged by Oath, to rule according to Laws, and breaks that Oath
and trust, etc. He does thereby forfeit all that power and trust he had, and
sets the People free to take their best advantage, and to proceed in judgment
against him. But first of all, this supposition, that abuse of Power is in this
case a forfeiture, must not be assented unto. There is a Limited power, that is
delegatory, sub poena, under pain of forfeiture: and there is a Limited power
Hereditary, which descends absolutely, but is not to be exercised without
limits, and those confirmed by Oath. Our Kings trust is of the latter sort, He
is King, and so proclaimed, that is Heir, as soon as His Predecessor is dead,
and exercises all Regal power, and other Officers their inferior powers under
Him, some years sometimes before Coronation, and so before His Oath. Besides,
in the Oath of Allegiance, we absolutely swear to maintain the King in His
Regality, and His Heirs after Him. Though therefore because He is to be
regulated, we may tie His hands to prevent future Tyranny, yet we cannot strip
Him of His just Regal power, because he holds not on condition of forfeiture.

The second supposition is, of a King breaking His trust, and failing in His
attempt, brought to quit His claim to absoluteness, but afterward shall
endeavor by force to overthrow all again, and so raise War, etc. Then he
must be guilty of the highest Treason, at least of all the bloodshed in the
unjust War, page 22.23. And then it is inferred that all this the King has
done, etc. But here I desire candor to be used, and consideration to be had,
to what His Majesty held forth, and what probability there might be of His
sincerity therein.

First, in all the late business He never pretended to absoluteness, but
only to maintain the Laws, and Legal Rights of Himself and Subjects.

2. The Oath that He had taken at Coronation for the protection of His people,
and in special the Clergy, did carry a very probable show to make him hold
fast the Militia, without which He could not protect them; and to engage Him to
use His power for protection of Bishops, whose standing He thought lawful, and
whose immunities He had sworn to maintain.

3. As the Parliament had Jealousies of Him, so was He not without fair
colors of Jealousies from them, of their intendment to overthrow Monarchy,
which such courses as are in this Remonstrance, may more confirm Him in.

These things considered, He wants a great deal of charity, yea justice, that
shall not acquit the King of any wilful murder: Gods knows His heart, but His
pretenses were fair, and He had very probable grounds to lead him to these
pretenses, to stand on His Guard, to maintain His legal Rights, and the
Rights of those His Subjects, that were afraid of too much alteration in
Religion; which I believe were the greater part for number.

As therefore if He had conquered, though the letter of the Law had made His
Opposites, Traitors; yet because the Law had proved them to have been
Traitors only in action, not in intention, they might have expected favor,
and it had been unjust to have dealt with them, as in a case uncontroverted,
where there had been wilful transgression.

So should it now be considered in the case of the KING, and His Party: and
therefore in laying the case, the KING is not only unjustly, but uncharitably
used.

Neither so far as my reason extends is it truly said, that a few of those
many evils that our King has acted were judged capital in several of His
Predecessors.

We read indeed of some of His Predecessors basely, and wickedly murdered,
but never any suffering death as the result of any judgment passed upon Him.
From this mistaken supposition arises that want of change or remorse, which
they complain of in the King.

The fault they here lay to His charge, He will confess, were He guilty of it,
He has cause to abhor Himself in dust, and ashes. But He will deny their
supposition, and that He intended no slavery in people, nor absoluteness in
Himself, but defense of Himself and those of His People, that craved His
protection in their Legal Rights. And His error was to be jealous of those
that He should have confided in: And from this error has grown these sad
consequences. But so long as the Army go on with such Declarations, they will
free Him from errors, justify His jealousies, countenance His defense.

But yet nearer, for the justice of accommodation with the King without trial,
or punishment: I think it rests in this, when the Law acquits, civil Judges may
acquit; but the Law acquits the Persons of our Kings: Therefore civil Judges
may. You confess such maxims as give absolute impunity to Kings, and that the
Kings of England can do no wrong, are found in Law Books, (though you say) as
Heireloomes of the Conquest. But if they be in our Law Books, books, they are
legal Privileges, and preheminences by our Laws, and then those that have
taken the Oath of Supremacy, and sworn to maintain all the preheminencies,
and Privileges of the Crown, (as all Parliament men have at their admission)
cannot punish the Person of the King, because its an infringing of a legal
privilege.

I might add such Judiciary proceeding against, or without Law, will not stand
with their Oaths, that have sworn to maintain Law and legal Rights of all.

But page 50. they say, they cannot see how it may stand with justice, to
punish the Ministers, and let the Head go free: nay, they further say, what
ever grounds may be brought to exempts Kings from humane justice, or excuse
them when they wilfully give commission etc. The same reason will serve to
absolve, and indempuifie their Ministers, etc. At least, they say, they would
feign hear one principle for the one, which would not by rational deduction,
extend to the other.

I Answer, first, it cannot be denied but that in evil things, he that gives
the Commission, and command, is deepest in trangression; so on their
supposition, a King must deserve more blame and punishment then His
Instruments: But then secondly, it is to be considered, that humane Laws and
penalties look at safety, as well as demerit; now to punish a King is like to
set all on a flame, and so to endanger the Weal public, therefore though their
guilt be great, yet they are left to God to avoid inconvenience. But now
Ministers deserve punishment though not so much, and the punishment of them,
may free the Common wealth from danger for future, for if the King can have no
Instruments, He can do no mischief.

To conclude this point, about the justice of accommodation: let me ask them
this Question, have they not read what David did, in his Civil Wars both with
Ishbosheth and Absalom? closing them up without any trial, or execution,
(though much blond was shed in both.) And if Kings may accommodate with
Subjects without any trying, and punishing them, to avoid future In^^^^^ctions;
why may not Subjects for the same reason, and on the same terms, accommodate
with their Kings, and be blameless? an Argument from a Scripture example is
cogent, where the reason is the same, else our Savior would not have used it,
Mat. 12.3, 4.

Why did this Army themselves gives pardons to that nest of those in Oxford,
whom they accounted the original Delinquents? But to prevent blood, and danger
by loss of time: why may not the Parliament then pass by the errors of the
King, to prevent the bloodshed, that will inevitably follow, upon rigor, and
execution?

But now to the second question touching the safety of this accommodation;
against which they argue: First, from experience, that seldom or never have
such accommodations proved ease to the people: for answer, I would demand
again, where the rejection of a King, and His posterity, has not proved the
fatal cause of endless civil War? and whether that be not as destructive to
public interest as any thing to be feared from accommodation? After the
Deposing of Richard the Second, how long did this Nation continue in blood, and
how endless was the contention? till an accommodation in the union of the
divided Houses by the marryage of their heirs: nor would that serve when there
was but a suspicion of an In Perkin Worbeeke.
Heir male of the House of York surviving. And so is it like still to be. They
have not now all the seed Royal in their hands, if they would with Athaliah
destroy them. Nor are they like to have, since they propose such a way of
summons to the Prince, and Duke of York, as if it be not intended to
discourage Them from returning, yet must it needs have that effect. And they so
banished for such a cause, viz. engagement to free their Father from so close
Imprisonment: on what heart will not move pity, that has either the sense of
humanity, or the affection of a father, or a son in him? And so draw on
Foreign force, to join with a discontented, and oppressed party here, which
they confess to be numerous: which is a danger that can neither be avoided,
nor paralleled on the other hand.

Next for their arguing the likely-hoods of the Kings willingness to break all
those concessions, which He shall grant: We may argue with more probability to
the contrary. Kings that intend to break, care not what they grant, so it be
not of things that disable them from breaking. But our King in the late Treaty,
has been most free, and speedy in passing away His own power, and tenacious
only in those things wherein not only conscience was pretended, but without
great uncharitableness we cannot question but that he was really scrupled
about them. And he that will adventure life and all, rather then grant one
thing against conscience, why shall not we hope, that He will be as tender in
keeping, when conscience is once engaged in other things?

For what is held forth that the King may pretend His non engagement to His
concessions, because under force. I Answer as before, if the King had any such
thought, He would not care what He granted, because all were nullities.
Besides, though there be a dispute in Law, whither promises or obligations,
made under restraint, be binding, yet all Divines know, that to a conscientious
man its sinful to take the oath he intends not, or is not lawful for him to
keep, and if the thing covenanted be lawful, and intended to be kept: he that
makes conscience of any thing, will make conscience of such a covenant: by
taking whereof though he suffer some damage, yet he purchases life, and
liberty to himself.

After there is a long discourse of the advantages the King shall have, to
undo all if He have a mind to it. And if the King after all these concessions,
(which are more in many things then the far greater part of His people do
desire) shall be rejected and fall, will there not be that pity to the
suffering, that indignation against the executioner, that will cause more
dangerous rising then ever, when any Foreign help is brought by the Princes
either to relieve, or revenge their Fathers sufferings? Therefore for ought I
see, the dangers of accommodation are but probable, and scarce that. The
dangers of rejection, and execution inevitable. I would therefore propose it
seriously to the consciences of these men, whether it be truly the fear of
danger to the public interest of the Nation, that makes them so averse to
accommodation, or rather to the private interests of them, and a party in the
Nation; and in that, fear not so much of suffering evil, as losing either
those great hopes or holds, that by the present distractions they enjoy.

Afterward they proceed to their own excuse for formerly being so forward for
Accommodation, and Moderation to the King and His Party, which they now so much
oppose. And indeed they did then hold forth such good grounds for public
interest, as to root out seeds of future war, to conquer hearts, etc. That it
will never be believed, but either then they were not real: but did only
pretend, to strengthen themselves with his party, which done, they showed
themselves in their colors, or else that now private interest does carry them
against that of the public, which they really followed, when their own
private was involved with it. But they tell us, they were cleared in their
judgments by the Parliaments Votes of No Addresses, and the Reasons of it. As
though there were any thing therein now, which had not been known, and murmured
long before, even during the time of Addresses.

But they then come to answer an Objection from the Covenant engaging to a
perpetual care to endeavor the preservation of the Kings Person and
Authority, etc. and so concluding under a necessity of perpetual Addresses.
And to this,

First, they say, the Covenant, as other promissory Oaths, heaping together
several distinct interests, which may be inconsistent, and yet ingageth
positively to them all, may become a snare.

I would they would consider this in the Kings Coronation Oath, wherein mixed
interests entangled him, that it might move some pity in them, as looking on
him under a snare by his Oath, and not take all in the worst sense, as though
all the opposition he made had flowed from wicked principles in him.

Secondly, they say, the undertaking for the King in the Covenant, was not
absolute, but conditional to preserve His Person and Power in maintenance of
Religion and Liberties, etc.

I Answer, Though there be such a clause in the Scotch Covenant, yet in the
Protestation, in the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, there was no such
condition, for evasion: and I hope our English Oaths are as binding as the
Scotch Covenant: I would therefore know how they can answer either for
execution or deposition to the obligation of those oaths.

Secondly, they say, the Covenant, as for the civil part of it, is between
man and man; and the King not concurring, we stand not engaged to him.

This is a grand mistake, for the whole Covenant is to and with God, though in
some things in it, we engage to perform duties to man. And though in Covenants
between man and man, that are mutual and conditional, one stands not bound,
unless the other accept: yet the case was not so in this Covenant, but both
Nations to clear themselves from any evil intentions toward the King, and to
approve their loyalty, do profess to men, and covenant to God, these things,
not with the King, but for the King, and his interest. And therefore an
engagement lies before God, though the King never take the Covenant.

But I would put a question to them upon another branch of this Covenant, and
the Protestation, which is against all Popery. And I would know of them, what
point of Popery has been more fully, or clearly opposed by Protestants,
English and others, then that Jesuiticall one of murdering, and deposing
Princes? And I would know of them, how they will excuse their way of
deposition, and execution, from symbolizing with that point of Popery so
condemned? I doubt not then but I may lawfully conclude, that the Army have
more cause to repent of their present, then former Remonstrances; and may do
well to interpose only for the interest of themselves, and party, to be
considered in the closure: but desist from their endeavor of an absolute
breach.

I will shut up all with a story in our English Chronicle, which has often
been in mine eye, wishes, and hopes too, mutatis mutandis, since the beginning
of our War: Our Henry the third, having first lost the love of his people,
and after feign into their power: And being by means of his son delivered,
he reflected (warned by smart and danger) on his former errors, reformed them:
And being exalted, studied not revenge, but the exalting of his throne by
righteousness, and thereby made his people happy, and himself glorious. And
lived to fashion his Edw. the 1. styled Englands Justinian: for though as many
awes were made in his, as any other kings time; yet none of his were ever
abolisht by following Parliaments.
son and successor to make him partner of his own experience and authority,
so framed him to affect virtue and glory, that he ever showed himself in all
his actions, capable to command not the Realm only, but the whole world. Vid.
Sir Rob: Cottons Hist. of Hen. 3. page 39. to the end. If we have so much faith
and piety to pray, why may we not have so much charity as to hope that our King
restored by Accommodation, will apply those incomparable abilities, that in his
suffering he has made demonstration of, so to promote the happiness of His
people, as may be a full reparation of Himself in Honor, and them in damages.
So prays a lover of his Country, a Zelot (only in the way of conscience,)
for his King, and a friend to the Army in regard of that piety that many of
them profess, and he humbly begs them all to study to practice and honor: and
that by avoiding all such courses that may give suspicion, that men that
pretend highest to piety, and the public, do yet deviate from the rules of
both to uphold themselves and their private interest.

And thus have I adventured to give my sense of some part of this Declaration
so far as it contradicts their former overtures for accommodation, to the
maintenance of which I was somewhat engaged by what I had formerly done.

And this I hope will not be altogether useless, till some man of more
leisure, depth, and insight of state affairs, shall fully show how weak and
impolitick they are in their whole Declarat.

Yet one thing further I cannot but touch, to wit, that Proposal, page 66. The
sum whereof is this, That it be declared, That such Representatives (that is,
of the House of Commons) have, and shall have the Supreme power and trust, as
to the making of Laws, Constitutions, and Offices, etc. and as to the
altering, and repealing the same, the making of Peace, and War, and to be the
highest final judgment, in all civil things without any appeal, etc. And
after this, and other Proposals, is this clause added, page 67. That n^^e may
be capable of any benefit, by the agreement, who shall not consent or subscribe
thereunto.

Here note first, that both King and Lords are excluded from any share in the
Supremacy: now I would feign know with what modesty such a thing can be
propounded to the House of Commons, and that by diverse, themselves Members of
that House, when they know, that all the Members of the House of Commons take
an Oath of Supremacy to the King, at their admission, and all that have taken
either Covenant, or Protestation, are bound by those Oaths to maintain the
Privileges of both Houses of Parliament? And who knows not that by the
present constitution of our Parl. The House of Peers is in many things
superior to that of the Commons: will they propose things for civil
advantage, which will involve both themselves, and those to whom they propose
them in plain perjury the first day? Is this consistent with piety? Nay with
common honesty? And yet here is a further mischief still, for if the Major part
of them should through fear, or delusion become so vile as to receive, and
promote these proposals, then the agreement contained in them must be
subscribed by all, and non-subscribers, be excluded from any benefit by the
agreement. And then I would know of them in what condition these free people
shall be in, that for want of subscribing, shall be excluded the benefit of the
agreement? shall they not loose the benefit of Free borne subjects? and what if
they cannot in conscience subscribe it? As if they have taken, and make
conscience either of Protestation, or Covenant, or Oath of Supremany, (as far
as I can see) they cannot, would they impose such a penalty to enforce
conscience?

Sure this makes me remember that which was foretold me many years ago: That
if these great pretenders for liberty of conscience, could once be possessed of
power, they would be the greatest oppressors of conscience, that ever were in
England since the Reformation. And sure the Bishops imposed subscription only
on Ministers, and on penalty of losing Ecclesiastical livings only: but these
would have a subscription imposed on all, upon penalty of losing the Privilege
of Free Denisens. Does not this call upon City and Country to awake, and to
Petition the Parliament for, and to stand by them in the rejection of such
Proposals, as will either engage to the defiling of their consciences by a
grievous sin, or expose them to greatest misery, and slavery? or else I may
conclude with sorrow. Fuimus Angli.

THE END.

