A TOUR IN France and Italy, Made by an English Gentleman, 1675.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 167^.

ERRATA.
Page. Line. Errors. Corrections. 17. 3. Appear, Appearing. 18. 5. Hand, End.
20. 2. Tower, Town. 35. 16. Duae, Dux. 47. 5. Calacumes, Catacumes. 63. 8.
Capital, Capitol. 68. 25. Vnitage, Vintage. 72. 19. Carso, Corso. 79. 6. Monta,
Monte. Ibid. 8. Fontana, Fontane. 80. 9. Capital, Capitol. biId. 13. Corile,
Cortile. 82. 16. Of the some Pillars, etc. Of the Emperor Nerva, some Pillars,
etc. 83. 25. Are seven, etc. The set Sale are 7. 84. 21. di Bave, di Bove.
Ibid. 26. Auma, Numa. 85. 16. The Colonna is, The Colonna Triana is. 86. 25.
Guglio, Guglia Vaticana, etc. Ibid. Ult. a paret loco, a patre looo. 87. 28.
Teaching, touching spiritual matters, etc. 99. 28 and 29. Are Denominicon 1020
are 1020. put into 16. Troops, etc. Ibid. 30. The Foot of the same, 25078. The
Foot of the same denomination, 25078. 111. In the Margent. Pope obliged. Pope
obeyed. 114. 5. Publicly, Politickly.

A TOUR IN France and Italy.
DIEPPE, a Town, but indifferently Fortified, Dieppe.
the Walls old, has an ancient Fort that commands the Port, and a Castle of the
same Date, that does the like to the Land: The Harbor pretty safe, but very
small: The little Trade they have, is Fish, yet most of it comes from Rye,
Hastings, etc. Is worse built than Calice; has several Monasteries, and a
Presche (as they call it) or Hugenots Church, which has a very great
Congregation.

ROUEN, A large Timber-built Town, not much unlike ^^u^n.
London within the Walls, before the Fire; The Situation within Hills, that
hang over it on every side; has a good Wall on three parts of it, and the River
Seine on the other, which there is pretty large, the Tide rising in it to a
considerable height, so that great Vessels come up to the Quay, which is the
most beautiful Street it has, being broad, and just the length of the Town: The
River formerly had a Stone Bridge, and some of the Arches are still remaining,
but its rapidity and the great shoales of Ice destroyed it: At present, it has
a Bridge of 19. large Boats, which is the most extraordinary thing in France,
and a Duty on Merchandise maintains it: Beyond the River is a place set with
some Trees, where the Ladies in the Evenings make their Tour: It has a
Parliament, is an Archbishops Seat, has 70. Churches and Monasteries, and 32.
Parishes; Their best Ghurch was built by the English, and their finest
Monastery is now of English Women: It is esteemed to have in it 600000. Souls;
by which crowd of Sluttish People, ill Situation, and narrow Streets, it is
most abominable filthy: It has an ill favored Bourse, hung with ugly Pictures
of their French Kings; a small Trade for all sorts of Merchandise, but the most
considerable Commodity is English Lead: The Country thither, indifferent
Fertile and Pleasant, most of it Corn, with some scattered Woods, Copses, and
Apple Trees set in order on every side the Road, which serves in lieu of Vines.

PARIS,Is a great City, yet not above half as big Paris.
as London; the Building high, most of Stone, the Streets narrow, the Windows,
Doors, and Shops, not very good; the Paving inconvenient for Horses at all
times, and men in moist weather; being of large slippery stones of near a foot
broad; has abundance of Palaces which have no back Yards, nor stately Entrance;
their Coaches stand in the Court, and their Stables under their Lodgings; their
Rooms of State, all with the deformity of great unproportion'd Timber appearing
on the Ceilings, nor excused by gilding, and the Churches neither beautiful nor
neat: The River Seine runs through part of it, but is there so shallow, that it
serves for nothing in the Summer but to wash their Clothes, which they do upon
long flat Boats: The Situation is upon a level, excepting a little assent at
the Eastend; the Air so good, that it was never known to have the Plague,
though there be ill Scents enough to make it continually suspected: The
principal Traffic of this City, is, their Language, Dancing, Fencing and
Riding-Masters, Babies, Toys, etc. with which they supply all Europe, yet have
enough left for their own use.

LOUURE, Has only one end, and one side of Louure.
it finished; and when the rest shall be added, will be one of the most
extraordinary Palaces in the World, both as to its Greatness and Figure, not
any in Italy resembling it in either: Behind it is the great Garden of the
Tuilleries, which is near half as long as St. James's Park: Is prettily planted
with Firr-Trees, Cypress, etc. and would be very fine, were they grown up, and
that it had Gravel-Walks. Beyond this, is the Cour de la Reyne, a place by the
Riverside, set with Trees about a Mile long, like the great Walk in St.
James's Park; wherein the Coaches take the Air in the Evening, and with some
jostling, pass and turn, there being in the middle, and at the end, round
places for that purpose. The end of the Louure has this Prospect, wherein is
the Kings own Appartment, which contains these Rooms; Guard-Chamber,
Ante-Chamber, Dressing Room, Bedchamber, a Closet for Private Council, another
for Devotions, a large Chamber for his Toys or Bijous, a Room built
Gallery-wise to give Audience to Ambassadors, a grand Sall for Ballets, and a
Chamber for Comedies, with Theater and Benches: Upon the same Floor is the
Queens Appartment, which in every respect is as rich and large; but has one
Room more, which is a Bedchamber distinct, for them to lie together; Under
these (the Ground-Chambers) is the Dauphins, which are the same with those
above: In these Lodgings there is much Gilding and Painting, Cabbinets of
Ebbony, inlay'd with Brass-Work, some Statues, etc. In one of the lower Rooms,
is all the Models of the Towns in Holland and Flanders, with their exact
Fortifications, Rivers, etc. In another, are ten thousand Poppits, representing
so many French Soldiers for the Dauphin to exercise, being made to turn and
charge at Pleasure: To this, which makes one side of the Louure, is a Gallery
about 800. yards long, and 10 broad, seeming to have been designed for a
Sumptuous Rope-House, and as such the Architecture Merits praise; under it are
the Kings Stables, conveniently placed for the River.

GARDEMEUBLE, In the Old Louure, is the Gardemeuble.
great Wardrobe kept, wherein are several Rich Beds, Canopies, etc. his
extraordinary Chair of State, the glorious Rigging of his great Ship, Damask
Sails embroidered with Gold, and Cordage suitable, Hangings for the exceeding
long Gallery, many great pieces of white Plate, two large Cisterns used for
Baptizing of the Dauphin, 24. mighty Dishes or Basins for Cup-Boords, 24. for
Orenge-Trees, as many for Perfuming, two Candle-sticks of prodigious height
and weight; several Stands near as big; 24. great frames for fruit and
Banquets; a great Table with Figures embossed upon it of the Chariot of the
Sun, etc. Some great Ewres, with other Plate of less weight and show, but none
of Gold: Next to this is a little Armory, where the most remarkable suite of
Arms is that, was given the King by the Venetians, very finely engraved with
the Figures and Prospects of the Conquered Towns in Flanders, etc. Is exceeding
light, yet Musket proof, as appears by the dint in it; there is besides
several strange Weapons, Armor of China, etc.

ARCH TRYUMPHAL, Of Wood, and painted; Arch Tryumphal.
but the exact Model of what is intended to be in Marble; in beauty exceeding
any of the Ancient Romans, erected by this present great Emperor of France, in
honor of himself; upon which is to stand his famous Statue by Bernino's hand.

GOBLINS, A House built for the Kings Artificers, Goblins.
such as Inlayers of Cabinets, Statuaries, Sculptors, Painters, Silver-Smiths,
Tapistry-makers, etc. in all which, both great and small, the design is still
the Kings Tryumphs, etc.

OBSERVATOIRE, A Building not quite finished Observatoire.
for the Kings Chemists and Mathematical experiments, which besides the
sinking, it has below the Surface of the ground, there is a descent of 171.
large steps; which go so low into the Rock, that at one side you meet the River
Seine; from the bottom of this, by a hole quite through the Building, the Stars
may be seen at Noonday; round about it are Labratories in two degrees or
Stories: The Building is Stone, without any Timber; the Chambers Arched as well
as the rest; the Quaries just by it, which yield a Stone so soft, that at first
digging, they work almost as easy as Wood.

INVALIDES, A sumptuous Hospital not quite finished, Invalides.
designed for the maimed Officers of the Army, and is therefore very large; it
has two Courts, besides the Outhouses for Offices, etc. The first is equal to
the Building of the Louure it self, and the Quadrangle as big as that of
Christ-Church; for to honor it, the King, Queen, Duke, and Duchess reserve
Lodgings to themselves in it.

PLACE-ROYAL, A square like Covent Garden Place-Royal.
on Portico's, but neither the Arches nor Building so good; into the Piazza but
one entrance, which makes it melancholy as a Convent.

PALAIS, A great old Building which serves their Palais.
Parliament, their Booksellers and Milliners for an Exchange, their Merchants
and Banquers for a Bourse, etc. but no room in it comparable to
Westminster Hall.

PONTNUEF Crosses the Seine at the point of an Pontneuf.
Island where the River divides, and therefore has seven Arches one way, and
but five another; it is broad and open, and raised on the sides for convenience
of walking: At every twenty yards distance, an Iron-beam to hold a Lanthorn; at
the end, next the Louure, stands a Clock that moves by the Water; in the
middle, the brass Statue of Henry the Great on Horseback, sent from Florence
by Ferdinand the First.

QUATRE NATIONS, A Church and Schools Quatre Nations.
built by Cardinal Mazarin; the Building pretty good, but the Cupola most
remarkable, having much gilding about it; and like other French things, finer
without than within.

VALDEGRACE, A Monastery built by the Valdegrace.
Queen Mother, and the finest Structure they have; the Church little, but paved
with Marble; the Quire railed with Iron, the Cupola lined with painting, the
Pillars of the Tabernacle, well wrought Marble, adorned with Gilding, etc.

PALAIS ROYAL, Monsieurs House, the building Palais Royal.
low, within abundance of gross carving and gilding; the most remarkable thing,
a suit of white Satin Hangings, painted in flowers, which they say came from
China; the Bed railed in with Balustres of Massy Silver, which they boast to be
worth 20000. l.

LUXEMBOURG, Both the House and Garden, the Luxembourg.
best in Paris; equalling to their bigness, the Louure it self, but by piques
between Madle d'Orleans and the Duchess of Guise, (the present Possessors)
suffered to run to ruin.

BASTIL, A little old square Castle with four Bastil.
Towers, serving for great men's Prison, like the Tower of London, but more
fatal to its Prisoners.

PALAIS MAZARIN, Esteemed one of the first Palais Mazarin.
Houses in France; resembles the first Court of Monsieurs, but the building
higher.

THEATERS, Much worse than ours, so are their Theaters.
Plays: In their Opera's their Scenes are infinitely inferior to those of
Venice, as well as their Voices and manner of singing, being as unlike as
Froggs and Nightingals.

FOIRE St. GERMAIN, A large piece of ground Foire St. Germain.
under an ordinary cover of posts and tyles, divided into eight small Walks, or
Streets; and the pleasure and benefit of it, is to cheapen, and then play for a
Toy: It belongs to the Abbot, and yields him a very great Rent.

TOWNHOUSE, Has a good Front, one great Room, Townhouse.
with several Drawing-rooms, Offices for Clerks, etc.

SORBONNE, The only College that deserves Sorbonne.
taking notice of, Rebuilt by Cardinal Richelieu Alamoderna.

St. DENIS, An old Church and Covnent, remarkable St. Denis.
for its great Treasure of Gold, Jewels, Relics, Robes of Coronation, and for
being Sepulcher to so many Kings and Saints.

St. GERMAINS, Has a fine Situation, but the St. Germains.
House out of fashion; stands upon a Hill, and the River Sein running by it; on
one side of it a Forest which is well Wooded, and Pleasant; on the other an
agreeable Country of Vineyards and Corn; has but one Court, is not large, nor
any Rooms in it excellent; only the Kings Closet is pretty, being lined with
Looking-glasses, painted with Cupids on them, and what there is of wood,
covered with Gilding, the Roof being a Cupola, the Glasses very prettily
deceive the eye, and the Floar in proportion of beauty to the rest; the Garden
not extraordinary, but suitable to the House.

St. CLOUD, A House of Monsieurs, not large, but St. Cloud.
pretty; stands upon a Hill, and the Garden (which is not yet in order) all the
way descending to the Riverside, the Cascade very good, which is owed to the
Situation; has a great deal of Wood, but can never have any good Walks.

RUEL, A House so little, that it can only serve Ruel.
the King to Collation in; the Gardens and Walks the most and pleasantest in
France; the whole enclosure of it, being 300. Acres of ground, gives such room
for variety, that there are Cornfieldsd as well as Cascades and Fountains in it.

VERSAILLE, Though it seem to be situate in a Versaille.
hole, being overlooked on every side with Hills, yet nevertheless stands on a
little rising ground; the Front has wings, which by a new addition, are become
much too long for the body; it is stone, colored as brick; not high, and
covered with blew slate; the ridge with Iron gilded, which lies on each side in
Flowre-de luces, etc. Between the Windows little heads in niches; and for yet
greater Ornament, the Roof is adorned with Pinacles; to approach the Door,
there are two ascents of Marble Diamond cut; on the last a little gilded jette
d'eau; and in each corner, at the setting on of the wings, two gilded Vollerys,
or Cages, stuck against the Wall like Martins Nests: It affords not above three
Appartments; the Kings, the Queens, and Dauphins; has some rich Furniture, and
much painting; but his Majestys Bedchamber is most Bizzare, being meubl'd
principally with Purslain, which it has in greater quantity and variety than
any Potters Shop in Europe; adjoining to this, and the Queens Appartment, is a
Terrase paved with Marble, supported with Pillars, and a Basin in the midst of
it: The Garden is very large, and being a continued descent from the House,
makes that side of it to appear higher, and more beautiful; has many Fountains,
Basins, Statues, and great Walks, with tall Trees and Hedges; at the lower end
a Canal, in which is a Yacht with all her Rigging: The King and all the Court
enjoy the pleasure of it in their Coaches; the Deep-loose Sand, rendering it not
agreeable to walk in. The Ministers and Nobility have Houses set at some
distance on a piece of ground waste like Common.

TRIANO, half a mile from Versailles, stands a Triano.
very fine Summer House with Walks and Statues almost as beautiful as the
other; the Roof all covered with Purslain Pots, or their Counterfeits; within
furnished with Pictures, and paved with Marble.

REGALIO, At the bottom of one of the great Regalio.
shady Walks was an Amphitheatre, made of Boughs and Flowers, wherein was
concealed three sets of Music, with which the King did entertain the Ladys: In
another open part of the Garden, amongst the Fountains, was an infinite number
of Trees, set with their branches full of Candles; in the midst of them, a
Table with a Machine upon it, whereon was most artificially hung, all manner of
Fruit, as if it were natural, with branches, leaves, etc. In the middle of it,
abundance of Wax-Candles, and round about the bottom, places for dishes and
covers.

COUNTRY, Toward Orleans has several agreeable Country.
Hills, with pretty Houses on them, and two or three walled Towns, not much
inferior to those upon the Loire.

ORLEANS Is large, ill built, ill paved, not one Orleans.
good House or Gentleman living in it, and yet has about forty Churches; it
stands on the River Loire, which is very broad and beautiful, but very shallow;
its chiefest Trade is Wine and Corn; the Fortifications gone to ruin.

AMBOIS, A little wretched Walled Town, remarkable Ambois.
for a Staggs horn, killed by Francis the First in the Forest of Ardenne,
which are fifteen foot high; his ribs they show seven foot long, and of a
prodigious thickness, and the joint of his neck, which is a solid bone, is a
foot diameter, all kept in the old ruinous Castle there; in which there is
nothing else to be observed, but a winding Staircase, made for Coaches to run
up, 35. fathoms to the Chambers; the Prospect of the Country from it is extreme
pleasant, the River very large, which having forsaken his old Channel, has
there two stone Bridges.

BLOIS Has nothing good in it but its Situation. Blois.


MARMOUSTIER, A large Abbey, wherein is kept Marmoustier.
the St. Ampoule, that anointed Henry the Fourth; it ebbs and flows with the
Moon, and was sent from Heaven to cure St. Martins Leg, which the Devil made
him break by stealing away the Staircase from his Chamber (now a pretty Marble
Chapel on the side of the Church;) they also show a vast Tunn, wherein he kept
his Wine, which probably was the Friend that stole away the Stairs.

TOURS Is not near so big as Orleans, though Tours.
pretty large; the Houses are most of them covered with blew slate, as well on
the sides as roof; the Streets narrow, the best Church (St. Gratian) built by
the English, and has the Windows painted as if they were Enameled; by the
Rampart is a long Walk or Maille well set with Trees: It had a Castle, but now
Ruins; along the Riverside, is a Rock, under which there are infinite numbers
of Buroughs of People, like those of Coneys; the Trade is Spinning, Weaving,
and ordering of Silks; it is an Arch Bishops Seat, the Situation in that part
of the Country which they call the Garden of France.

SAUMURE, A little Walled Town under a Hill, Saumure.
close by the Loire, not bigger than Windsor-Castle; the Walls very clean and
free from Buildings: In the Subburbs, which is much larger than the Town, is a
pretty new Cloister of Nostre dame d'Ardilliers, wherein is every day wrought
Miracles: From the brow of the Hill, on which stands an old Ruinous Castle,
there is a Prospect of a Country something like that about Windsor; it has
abundance of Hugenots and their Churches, as in other Citys, without the Walls,
and Subsists by being a School to Germans and English.

In the Road to Richelieu are two eminent Convents, 2 Convents.
of the Order of St. Benoist, of Men and Women remarkable, in that the Men are
subject to the Women, and receive their Orders from them; the Lady Abbess is
Sister to Madam Montespan, and in her Chapel lie two Kings of England Buried,
who were Benefactors to it, Henry the Second, and Richard Cordelyon.

RICHELIEU: The famous Palace of Richelieu Richelieu.
is much less, and much lower Situated than Audlyend; has a Mote about it, and
a Canal at 50. yards distance again from that, which with several Cutts and
Ditches, go a second time round it; in breadth it is a single House, has but
one chief Court, the Stables and Offices placed on each hand in the approach to
it, the Chambers are pretty square Rooms, but their Roofs all too low, which
their heavy Timbers make to appear worse; there is great store of carved work
on the Chimneys, Doors and Joice, and much French painting on the Ceelings: The
Park exceeds the Garden, being very fine in its kind; has some Stags in it, a
thing so rare in France, that they wonder at them there as Monsters: Near to
this Palace, is a Town built by the same Cardinal, and exactly Uniform, Walled
and Moted too; it consists of one Street and two broad places at each end,
whereof the one is a Market, but is so desolate and poor, that one would
suspect the Plague were in it.

Angers Stands upon the Main, a River that runs Angers.
into the Loire, and almost as fair; it is Walled, ill built, not large, has an
old Castle almost ruinous, which is yet a Garrison, and they show in it a Cage
of wood, in a Dungeon, wherein was formerly kept Prisoner a Queen of Scicily
21. years; it has a very good Maille set with double rows of Trees on each
side, near as long as that in St. James's Park; not far from it a little
Forest, the Country about it, low, yet Wooded, Fertile, and Pleasant.

NANTS, Is less than Angers, but rather better Biult, Nants.
they have an old Castle litile worth, which with suitable Walls is all their
Fortification: In the Carmelites Church, there is a Tomb of Francis the 2 d.
Duke of Bretagne, wrought by Mich. Colombus, which has many Figures about it,
and all perfect; the Country is flat and woody, stands near the Sea, and upon
the Loire, but its principal Trade is Brandy; near the Town, the Prince of
Conde has a House which has a good Prospect.

ROCHEL Is less than Nants, has two or three Rochel.
Streets built with low. Arches, under which are all their Tradesmen, like an
Exchange, and excepting those, and some few Houses, the Town is very ordinary,
not having one good Church: The Harbor is little, and too shallow at flowing
water for any Ship of burden; it has toward the Sea, two Block-houses for its
defense, which is in effect all its Fortification: It Is almost all Hugenots,
and their principal Trade, Salt: The Country from Nants thither, something
resembling England, being Enclosure and Pastorage, excepting a Fen of seven
Leagues next Rochel; the Sheep very remarkable, being most black, with white
foreheads and tails.

ROCHFORT, The place where the King builds Rochfort.
and lays up his lightest Ships of 40, 50, 60, and 70. Guns; the Charante a
little dirty River, or rather Ditch, not so large as Puddle-dock, being the
Harbor wherein they ride; and so shallow, as well as narrow, that they cannot
sail with their Guns in them; at the mouth of it is a little Fort, and by the
side of it is a fine Storehouse built of Freestone, the length of 20. Ships,
with several Appartments for such a number which lie every one over against
their own dressing room, and have their Terrible Names upon black Marble, in
Golden letters over every door: The Country thereabouts Marshy and bad.

BLAYE, A great old Castle upon the River Giron; Blaye.
the use of it to examine such Ships as pass to Bourdeaux, and the place where
the English Trading for Wine were to leave their Guns; with this River, two
Leagues nearer Bourdeaux the Garonne and Dordogne join, all which are muddy and
troubled as a Torrent or Land-flood.

BOURDEAUX Stands upon the Garonne, a River Bourdeaux.
more like Earth than Water, being near the Sea, is there very broad: It has
one good Street with two or three good Houses in it; the rest of the Town
narrow and ill built: It has 12. Parishes, but never a good Church; is governed
by a Mayor, and six Jurats or Aldermen, is an Archbishops Seat, and has a
Parliament: Close to it stands a new Citadel called Chasteau Trompette,
designed more to awe the City than defend it, which makes the Inhabitants hate
the name of it; it is very regular and beautiful, has two Ditches; within the
outwardmost is conveniences for Horse, and in the other for Foot: The Country
about it is a flat, covered with Vines; their sole Trade, Wine, which scarce
any but the English buys.

POITIERS, A straggling ill Situated Town, low Poitiers.
Marshy ground about it, and no good Water in it; the circuit of the Walls
shows it has been larger much than it is; the best Building is the Church of
St. Peter, by Harry the 2 d. King of England; it is a Bishops Seat, and governed
by a Mayor.

CADILLIAC, A little infignificant Walled Town, Cadilliac.
but the Duke of Espernons House there is not much inferior to that of
Richelieu, being of the same sort of Building, and has a better Situation, has
finer Gardens and Orengery; but the dispute by his Nephews about the Title,
makes it very much out of Repair.

AGAIN, A Walled Town, stands upon the Garonne, Again.
neither well built, large, nor otherwise considerable, only that Scalligers
House is there to be seen, and is a Bishops Seat; on the side of a Hill near
it, is the Habitation of five Hermits, who have very good Appartments hewn out
of the solid Rock; as also a Church, in which is a Spring that does wonders,
produced there by the Tears of a Female Saint 13000. years ago; the Father
that showed it me, has been there 45. years, and is the most Devout, most
Reverend, and most Simple Old Man I have seen; from hence is easily discerned
the Pyrenees, and a Country both fertile and pleasant.

MONTAUBAN, A little Town, pretty well built; Montauban
the Market place has all the Houses upon Arches, and under them their Shops;
in one part of it, is a public Fountain, which no Town else in France can
boast, nor so good Wine and Provisions; it is a Bishops Seat, but consists most
of Hugenots.

TOULOUSE Stands on a flat, is not bigger than Toulouse.
Rouen, but esteemed the second City of France; is generally built of a pale
soft brick, and so are the Churches, which might be demolished by scratching;
it has diverse Monasteries, and some very large; a fine Townhouse, and at the
West End, a very good bridge, almost equal to Pontneuf, but the River under it
not to be praised in the Summer: The Soil is so hot, that in three months the
Dead are dried and taken up again, and put into Vaults, where they may be
Visited: It has an Archbishop and a Court of Parliament, who glory in the
privilege of raising such money as the King requires themselves, and not to
have the Officers of the Taille among them: It swarms with Lawyers, and is
Poorer than any other part of France; yet the Country from Bourdeaux thither,
the most fertile of the Kingdom, lying between two Rivers, and two ridges of
Hills.

CARCASSONNE Is in two parts, both distinctly Carcassonne.
Walled, called the City and the Town, but neither of them worth notice, nor
yet the Castle; the Country here is stony and barren, and about this Town are
the first Olive Trees I found.

NARBONNE Is the Frontier Town to Spain, Narbonne.
stands low and unhealthfully, but pretty well Fortified; is an Archbishops
Seat, whose House is the best there; it has some pieces of Bridges, Aquaduets,
etc. remaining of the ancient Romans; has no River, but a cut out of the Aude.

BEZIERS Has a Situation upon a little Hill; and Beziers.
the little River Orb by it, with a pretty good Bridge over it; the Country
still Barren, but full of Olive Trees, which here either breed, or some way
draw a Quicksilver to their roots, that in time destroys them.

MONTPELIER Is one of the best built Towns Montpelier.
in France, though one of the least, all of Stone, and most of it uniform, but
the Streets insufferably narrow; it stands on the side of a little Hill, so
that coming from Toulouse all the Towns is seen, every House appear one behind
another; is Walled, and has a little Citadel, built about 40. years ago,
something like Chasteau Trompette; has Physick-Schools and Garden, and at some
certain times the Apothecaries make the famous Confection of Alkermes in the
presence of the Magistrate; and next to that, their most considerable Trade is
whiting of Wax, and making of Verdegrese: The Country about it is a little
wild, as the rest of France, having no Enclosure, Meadow, or Pasturage, nor
other Shade nor Tree but Olive; nor River, nor Water worth mentioning; and
which is a greater defect, for the Ladys, there is wanting an agreeable Walk,
who having neither Park nor Garden, on the Plough'd ground do Trespass every
Evening: At a Leagues distance on one side, is the Sea, and on the other
Mountains.

FRONTIGNAN, A little ill-favored beggarly Frontignan.
Town, yet Walled, remarkable for the Vines.

PORTSETTE, Where the King is making a Harbor Portsette.
in the Mediterranean, and has advanced a Mole already 600. yards, designs
another Parallel to it, and the entrance to be just in the middle; the Stone
they blow up out of a Mountain close by it, which is very good Marble: Here the
famous Canal falls in, which is to join both Seas, but is scarce so large or
deep as that in St. James's Park; the Garonne that runs that way, has saved a
great expense, yet is never the less excessive, but so wisely placed upon the
Provisions that Country spends, that his Majesty is a gainer by it: There are
two or three Basins and Reservers, one prodigious, being a Valley stopped up at
one end, but the art to get water into them, is not yet known.

NISMES, Where there is an Amphitheatre built Nismes.
by the Emperor Trajan; the Walls the least ruined of any the Romans have left;
it has 63. Arches, and 470. paces in compass; there is also a House on
Corinthian Pillars, 10. in front, and 6. at each hand, supposed to have been a
Capitol, and the Ruins of a Temple to Diana upon the head of a Rivelet: The
Town is not for any thing else considerable, the Trade making of Stuffs, and
the Country thereabouts Rocky: The Hugenots have a Temple in it, which is large
and well contrived, and no less than 1200. Communicants belonging to it; near a
third part of the people in these parts of France being of that Religion.

PONT du GUARD, An Aquaduet made by the Pont du Guard.
Romans 82. foot high, between two Hills cross a River, almost perfect still;
it has three rows of Arches, one upon another, and the lowermost serves for a
Bridge.

AVIGNON Is the Popes, bought for a safe Retreat Avignon.
upon occasion, is Governed by a Vice-Legate, has the best Walls of any Town in
France, though but little good Building in it; stands upon the rapid River
Rome, half of which being the Kings, the Bridge between the two Owners remains
broken: The greatest Curiosities are the Altar-piece in the Celestines Church,
given by a King of Cecilly, which has 40. Figures, all cut in one Marble, and
Laura's Tomb (Petracks Mistress) in the Cordeliers Church, with the Verses
found in it written by him, and the Medaille of a Fortune with it: In this City
are abundance of Poor Jews, which for distinction wear yellow Hats, and to them
an equal number of Whores, which are the greatest part of the Inhabitants; the
Country thus far stony with many rows of Hills.

ORANGE, A little Town very ancient, as the Orange.
Ruins of the Antiquities there do show: It has now lost its Walls and Castle;
the Principallity extends about 8. miles in length, and 6. in breadth, and is
very Fertile.

VIENNE, A little City standing likewise upon the Vienne.
Rhosne, remarkable for Pilates having dwelt there, and the old Tower of the
Gate House, from which he threw himself into the River.

VALENCE, Another Walled City not worth notice, Valence.
unless the breeding Lawyers can make it valueable: It has a Bishop, who is
Count of Valence and Die, two Bishoprics united; and is temporal Lord not only
of that, but of several other places in that Country.

LIONS Is Situate between two Hills, and lies Lions.
about the belly of the biggest, in form of a half Moon, so close crowded up,
that some part of it is crept upon them: It stands on the Rhosne and Saone; two
Rivers, that by the help of the Mountains furnishes it with Foggs, that for
most part of the Winter conceal the Sun; the Buildings are high, Streets large,
Shops better, People neater and richer much than in Paris: It Trades
considerably with Germany and Italy; Prints Books and exchanges Money for all
Europe: It has an Archbishop that esteems himself Primate of France; Eleaven
Parishes, and in the great old Church of St. John, a ridiculous Clock mightily
valued there; which, besides twenty other tricks, has little brass Angels that
appear when it strikes; a Cock that is to be supposed to Crow, etc. but the
Closet of Monsieur Ceruiere does ten times exceed it: The most extraordinary
thing is the Townhouse, which is equal to that at Amsterdam, with pretty Walks
behind it: It is rather less than Rouen, and may be termed the fourth great
Tower of France; the Country about it not very fertile, but from Beauvoysin
thither, seems pleasant, by reason of its ugly Neighbor, Savoy.

GRENOBLE Stands at the foot of a great Mountain, Grenoble.
and upon the little River Isere, besides the Torrent called the Drac: It has
the Fortification of 8. Bastions, is the place where the Parliament of the
Province Assemble, and is famous for Gloves.

GRAND CHARTREUX, Situate in the most Chartreux.
Solitary place that can be found in the World, amongst horrid Mountains, worse
than the Alps, and the way from Chambery, hewn out of the side of Rocks in
steps, with continual Precipices, a roaring Torrent in the bottom, and through
the melancholy shade of Pines and Fir-trees; the House large, but far from
being beautiful or regular; has about 50. Fathers, and half as many Brothers,
which are necessary Tradesmen, that work continually for the others; none else
being admitted. A Stranger that is so Foolishly curious as to come there, is
Lodged for a Night; and a Father, whose particular business it is, entertains
him; and in the Morning he Records himself in a Book at his going away. On the
top of the Hill, in the Desert, is the Chapel of St. Bruno, once his
Habitation, which he finding very cold, resolved t'abandon; but St. Peter
appeared to him, and would never be quiet till he had promised the contrary,
which is the sole reason that all these wise Fathers remain in this miserable
place, though they have many pleasanter in that and other Provinces; the King
of France, Duke of Savoy, and other Princes, having been so great Benefactors
to them, that it is thought they are now able to ransom almost any one of them.

ROHANNE, NEVERS, MOULINS, BOURBON, Rohanne, Nevers, Moulins, Bourbon, Briare.
BRIARE, etc. Are not worth notice, nor the Country comparable to that part of
the Loire, below Orleans.

BEAUVOIS, ABBERUILE, MONTREUILLE, Beauvois, Abberuile, Montreuille, Boulonne.
BOULONNE, are pretty well Fortified, but not in good Repair; best toward
Paris, which seems to have been the work of the English; the Buildings
resembling our Market Towns, low Timber Houses, with some few Brick amongst
them; the Country like the rest, open, bears Corn, but not Fertile.

CALAIS Is strong both to Land and Sea, has Calais.
Ramparts, Ditches, Citadel, Block-Houses, etc. and is a prettier Town, though
less than the four former.

FRANCE in general Would be a very pleasant France in general.
and agreeable Country, had it Enclosures and Pasturage; is neither so Fertile
generally as Italy or England, nor yet has no ground altogether so Barren as
either of them; very few Woods, Parks, or Forests, and fewer Villas, or noble
Country Houses; Rivers not many, and of those scarce any Navigable; much Corn,
but not plump and large, Wines in good quantity, but without any flavor, and
most of them tart and crabbed; Provisions of no kind excellent, their Poultrey
lean, little or no Fish, scarce any Beef, Mutton, nor Veal that is good.

Their Horses little, and so strangely put together, that scarce any of them
can either Trot or Gallop, and it is easier to teach an English Horse to dance,
than one of them to amble, for they can only go the Pas, whence their Coaches,
and all manner of Veiture, is so slow, as it is intolerable.

Dogs of no kind worth a farthing, and to conclude, such is the nature of the
Clime, or Soil, that it produces no Animal in perfection, but Asses.

The People nevertheless, the most gentile of any, giving Laws to us and
others; for Fashions and Behavior, and yet not careful to be exact in either,
but do all things as it were by chance, with a becoming negligence that
extremely pleases -- observable in their Linen, Clothes, Houses, etc. in all
which, they abhor exactness.

Nor has their Language any certain Pronounciation, but varies continually, as
he that speaks affects, so that they do not understand, but guess at each
others meaning, yet is esteemed the sweetest in the World, allowed the advantage
of the Nose and Lisping.

Their Complexions generally yellow and swarthy, the Men withered, the Women
thick lipp'd, flat-nos'd, a little turning up, which gives an air to faces,
and is emulated by our English Ladies.

If they have any defects, they are abundantly supplied by their good Mien and
admirable Deportment, which gains them access before all other Nations, and
above the rest are happy in this, that they can never mistake or commit
absurdity by gestures or otherwise, a Frenchman being every where a Master of
Ceremonys.

The Nobles are most extravagantly Courteous, and so Impartial in their
Friendship, that they never express, or show, more to one man than another.

Are naturally Chollerick, which together with extreme Poverty and Misery,
makes them so brave, as not to regard any danger, a Valor the Gentry are
brought to by Fatigue and Service; the Vulgar by continual Taxes.

Are of an humor airy, and very diverting, always in motion, and ever making
some kind of noise or other, Talking, Dancing, or Singing, being very like
those impertinent harmless Flies that are always busy about you, though
neither to sting nor suck you.

Generally Amorous, but the Men rarely Jealous, and who will enjoy their Women,
may do it at their Perils.

Are very Apprehensive, or Eucille (as they term it) understanding what you
mean, before they know what you will say.

All naturally Poets, so that they cannot write a Letter without some Verses in
it.

No less Historians, Printing every Man's History, or Memoire that is not hanged
in Effigy, for being great lovers of their own fame and glory; their own
impartial Pens does Immortalize it.

GENEVA, A little Town, stands in a Flat, with Geneva.
Mountains at some distance on every side, being the several Territories of
France, Savoy, Swiss Valesians, etc. by whose quarrels and emulation, it
preserves it self; has pretty slight works about it, and an Arsenal not very
considerable; has no good Building, and is only famous for its Religion; there
is a Lake which is 18. Leagues long, and 5. in some places broad, has admirable
Trouts in it, and gives Birth to the rapid Rhone.

CHAMBERY, The chief City of Savoy, is about Chambery.
the size of Saumure, but better Built; stands environed with great Mountains,
and is the place where the Parliament resides.

MONTMELIAN, A little Town, by which upon Montmelian.
a Rock stands a very strong Castle that commands the Passage, and has the
River Isere running by it.

MONT-CENIS, The highest of all the Alps, is Mont-Cenis
a League up, two upon the top, (which is a kind of Plain or Valley between the
Peaks) and in the midst of it, a Lake; the descent two Leagues more, which is
troublesome and horrid in respect of the rude Rock and Stones which lie as if
carelessly all at once there thrown and tumbled down the Hill; at the foot of it
is Novalese and Suza, where Savoy ends, and Piedmont begins.

TURIN Stands at the foot of the Hills, on part of Turin.
the same tract of Land with Lombardy; is lately enlarged by new regular Walls
and Ditches; has a Citadel on the back of it, and the River Po running by it;
the Buildings are of Brick, plastered over, not excepting the Duke's Palace,
from which there is a very fine new Street, with a square at each end, on
Portico's like Covent Garden.

The Old Palace has two or three good Rooms in it, and joining to it, in the
great Church, a black Marble Chapel now building, to keep our Saviors
Windingsheet in; but the prettiest thing in the House is the Duchess her
Bathing-Room, from which to her Bedchamber, she goes up and down by
Counterpoize.

LAVENERIE, A pretty little House three or four La Venerie.
miles distant, in which the Duke delights for Huntingsake, a new straight
Street leads to it; at the end of which is an Oval Building, and two high
Marble Pillars with Statues on them: In the Court immediately before it, is a
brass Stagg in the midst of a Basin, with Dogs about it: The House has
abundance of Painting and Gilding; the Gardens very fine, and a high
Semi-circular-wall with heads in Niches finishes the first, and then
descending, there are two noble Grotta's, a Fountain, and a Semi circular wall,
bent the other way, at the end of this last, is designed a Temple to Diana, of
which I saw the Model.

LA VALENTINE, A little neat House of the La Valentine.
Old Dutchesses; on the other side of Turin, upon the banks of the River Po,
and therefore stands pleasantly; it has much Gilding, and better Pictures than
any of the other.

The Duke calls himself Royal Highness, and Duke.
glorys in having continued there a thousand years, and in all probability he
may continue there a Million yet; for except Piedmont, which is not above a
days Journey in length, and very narrow; none would covet any of his
Territories: Savoy being so Horrid, Barren, and Cold, that one would think it
could never have other Inhabitants than Bears; yet he has in it many miserable
Villages, and it is said, could raise 20000. Men; but his Country being almost
Inaccessible, needs neither Arms nor Policy to preserve it; and therefore it is
no wonder if its Duke have not the latter, since Nature gives nothing in vain.

His Principal Revenue is Salt, which he Revenue.
sells after the French fashion to his People, and in all things Governs like
them; his Court and little flat Country, being France in Minature, all
speaking, clothing, and living as they do; with all sorts of Gabels and
Impositions he is esteemed to have a Million of Crowns yearly, besides his
Pension from the French, to let them into Italy upon occasion.

GENOA, One of the Stateliest Citys of Italy, Genoa.
stands close under the Barren Appennines, and washed by the Sea (Gli san Corona
i Monti e Specchio il Mare) from whence it appears like a half Moon, and at
each point two stout Ramparts, besides little Forts, as that at the foot of the
Pharos, etc. Has an admirable Mole, a Block house to secure its Galleys, and a
noble Enclosure, with abundance of Docks to build them in: The Streets are
generally narrow, but the Buildings most Magnificent, consisting in effect of
Palaces, of which the chiefest are those of the Imperiali of the Prince
d'Oria, of the Duke d'Oria Marchese Durazzo, and Sigre. Balbi.

The Churches are beautiful beyond expression, Annunciata
and in particular that of the Annunciata, which is supported with Pillars of
white and red Marble, like Ivory staind, and so polished, that they may pass
for Jasper; the Roof all Carved, Gilded, and curiously painted; the Altars
finer yet, having such peculiar Ornaments as one might think impossible in
Nature; and all this at the Charge of two Brothers; the Lomellini Merchants
that give a third part of their gains to the Adorning of it.

The Jesuits, and that of St. Ciro, are not St. Ciro.
much inferior, the last exceeding it in Painting and Pillars.

DUOMO Is large, and has black Marble Pillars, Duomo.
but not so fine as the former.

St. DOMENICO Is long and pleasant, its Pillars St. Domenico.
and Arches black and white.

St. PIETRO E PAOLO, Is plain, but well built, St. Pietro e Paolo.
most remarkable for its Figure, being almost round, and having five Cupola's.

SPEDALE MAGGIORE, A great Hospital built Spedale Maggiore.
at the public charge (except some few Benefactors) for poor Whores, Old Men
and Bastards, wherein 4. long Galleries with Iron Beds in them, they have
distinct Appartments, as many over them again to work in, and as many Rooms
about the Chapel to hear Mass. PALAR-

In the Doges Palace, which is great, is the Palazzo del Doge.
Armory which can furnish 30000 men, and there is kept the Armor, their Women
wore in the Holy War.

St. PIETRO del ARENA, Is a Village by the Seaside St. Pietro del Arena.
of Villas, and fine Gardens, which are made more pleasant by the great number
of Orange Trees, Mirtles and Fountains.

The Genouese Territories are but small, yet Revenue.
their ordinary Revenue is said to be half a Million of Crowns yearly, and
every Town pays besides its Soldiers, Officers, and Magistrates.

The City it self has a good Wall, besides the security Strength.
of the Hills at its back, and 20. Ships and Galleys upon occasion at Sea.

Their Intrest is altogether Spanish, obliged to Intrest.
it, not only by their present profit of returning all their money, etc. but by
a great sum, long ago lent the Spaniards, which will never be repaid, to keep
them in awe, and by their Estates in the Kingdom of Naples, which they are not
permitted to sell to other than Genoueses.

Their Trade is Sattins, Velvets, Taffeties, etc. but Trade.
their best, Exchange of Money.

Their Government is by a Doge, chosen every Government.
two years, and eight Senators; but on occasions of making War or Peace, the
Grand Counsel Assembles, which consists of 400. Elected out of the Families of
the best Citizens.

NOVI: Their Frontier Town to the Millaneses, is Novi.
little and inconsiderable; the Country from Genoa thither, all Mountains.

TORTONA, The Frontier to the Genouese, like Tortona.
Novi.

PAVIA, A better Town than either of them; has Pavia.
a fine Statue in Brass of Antoninus Pius on Horseback; and in one of the
Churches lies Buried the famous St. Augustine, a Duke of Suffolk, and Bishop
Parker.

At a little distance from Pavia, is the Carthusian Carthusian Monastery.
Monastery, the second of the Order, and the finest they have; on the
Frontispiece of the Church is abundance of Carving, besides Marble Statues,
Heads, etc. Within it is magnificent, though not built strictly a la-moderna: On
the sides are particular Chapels for each Religious, all along railed with
Brass of great height and beauty, as also is the face of it before the Quire;
the Alterpieces are the hands of excellent Painters, and the Pillars to them
curious Marbles, Lapislasuli and Jasper; the great Tabernacle so rich, that
it is valued at 20000 l. In the Sacristy is the back of an Altar of Ivory, in
which is rarely cut in Figures the History of the New Testament given by a
Queen of Cicilly: The Tomb of the Founder Giovanne Galeszzo Visconti, Duke of
Milan, in a very fine white Marble, with Fame and Victory at head and feet; a
great quantity of Plate, Jewels, etc. Their Cloister large, their Cells neat,
and Gardens vast, and a great Pond in the midst to keep their Fish in, which
has a little current running through it, all faced with Stone and other
Ornaments about it.

MILAN Is only to be praised by saying it is great, Milan.
being full ten miles in compass; has few good Buildings or Streets; the Houses
generally of Brick, the Churches which of all sorts are recon'd to be near 200.
are inferior to those in other parts of Italy, excepting so much of the Duomo
as is built, which is all of white marble, with a bundance of Statues of the
same, standing upon the Walls on the out side; within, the Pillars suitable,
exceeding other Churches, in that the Marble is solid, and not crusted; the
Floor is the most beautiful of all, being the finest Pavement I have seen; the
Church is more than half finished, and has Scaffolds standing as if intended to
go on, and a man or two kept knocking there to excite Charity.

SPEDALE MAGGIORE, The great Hospital is a Spedale Maggiore.
Princely Building, standing upon stone Pillars in a large Quadrangle, has
Conveniences and Endowments for 4000. Poor.

The Lazaretto is as extraordinary in its kind, being Lazaretto.
a square of near a mile about, and a little Rivelet running round it.

In St. AMBROGIO, is the Brazen Serpent S. Ambrogio.
upon a Marble Pillar, which the Children of Israel Worshipped, and the place
where St. Ambrose himself lies Buried.

The Closets of Sigre. Canonico Setali, in which are Curiosities.
all manner of Rarities: In the first, great variety of Burning-glasses and
Reflecting-steels of great breadth, and several other Instruments for Solar and
Mathematical experiments: In others are all sorts of Stones, Minerals, Shells,
Horns, Beasts, Fishes, etc. that are rare, as Camelions, Rhinocera's,
Sword-fishes, etc. Cloth of the stone Abestos, that is made clean by throwing
into the fire; a Load stone but of two ounces weight, that takes up 25. pound
of Iron; in another all manner of Clocks and Watches, as those of perpetul
motion, with Bullets, of local motion, etc. In others Arms of India, China,
etc. with their Kings and Priests hahits, curious Figures in Ivory, Anatomies
of Abortives, fine Cabinets, Collections of Medails, etc. strange
Looking-glasses, Nuts, China Manuscripts, etc.

CITADEL Is larger than that of Antwerp, and Citadel.
is esteemed one of the best in Europe, has all sorts of Conveniences, and
Shops within it self to Accomodate the Soldiers, which are all Spaniards; it
stands close by the Town, but the Government independent of him that governs
Milan.

The City has twelve Senators chosen by the King, Government.
whereof three must be always Spaniards; these make and alter Laws, determine
all Causes Civil and Criminal without appeal; the Governor has the privilege
of being a Judge amongst them, and such is their respect to him, that they
never reject any thing he propounds.

The Revenue Spain draws from it yearly, is not less Revenue.
than a 100000. l. Sterling.

Their Dominions so large in this fertile Country of Strength.
Lombardy, that they can raise 50000. Men.

It ahounds with Artizans of all sorts, in so much, Artizans.
that it is thought to have more than all Italy.

Lodi, Piacenza, Two pretty little Towns; the first Lodi, Piacenza.
frontier to the Venetians; in the latter stands an excellent brass Statue of
Alexander Farnese, the great General, on Horse back; the Country about these
Towns a perfect Garden.

PARMA Has a pretty River runs through it, and Parma.
is esteemed to be three miles in compass; the Walls very good and regular. The
Duke's Palace has two square Courts, and the Theater for Opera's in it, the
finest in the World, being able to receive 14000. persons, and may hear from
the extremities of it distinctly; by the side of it is a less for Comedies,
which is very pretty: At some distance he has a Summer House with Gardens,
Fountains, Orangery, etc. but out of order: His Stables are very good, and his
Coaches excel all Christendom in Richness and Ugliness, the one all of
Plated-silver embossed, as also the Carriage and Naves; another of Velvet
Embroidered, so massy and gross, that it seems as rich, but more detestable in
its shape, being as big as a Chamber, having four great armed Chairs in it,
besides the usual Seats behind them again; and the Gilding is equal to the rest
of the foolish cost, of which the Wheels have their proportion.

The Cupola of the Duomo is Painted by the hand Duomo.
of Carreggio, but faded very much, and the Floor is paved with large Marble.

The Duke's Revenue is said to be 400000. Crowns Revenue.
a year, of which he spends much in Guards, never going abroad without one of
Halberds, and one of Carabines, and his Mother and Duchess have the like.

In all his Dominions he can raise about 20000. Strength.
Men, having other little Territories, besides that rich Cauntry about Parma.

The Government of his Towns is by Podesta's, Government.
which have Power in all civil matters, and a Governor has the care of the
other, but all Appeal (upon occasion) to the Council of State at Parma, of
which, Marquess Vigolino is the principal.

His Intrest is French. Intrest.


REGIO is the Duke of Modena's Frontier and Regio.
best Town, of which Prince Lewis is Governor.

MODENA: In the Palace is an Apartment of Modena.
six Rooms, as richly gilded and furnished as any in Italy; the Dukes Stables
and Horses better much than Parma; close by the Town he has a good Citadel,
and in the rest of his State he has two more.

The chief Manufacture of this City, is making of Trade.
Vizard-Masks, and Masquerading Habits, for which they have a very good return,
and the Duke (though but 16. years old) is a great encourager of Trade and
Protector of Virtuosi.

His Revenue is about 300000. Crowns a year, including Revenue.
his little Mountainous Country of Garfagna, next Tuscany, which supplies him
with Oil.

His Intrest and Government is exactly the same Intrest.
with Parma, and his chief Councellor is Secretary Gatti: When he goes abroad,
in the same manner attended too; has the same Guards; can raise as many Men
upon occasion, and has very near as many Acres as his Neighbor Duke.

BOLOGNA Stands at the end of that rich Tract Bologna.
of Land, that scarce the World cau equal; is large, well built, most of it
upon Portico's like Covent Garden; has several fine Monasteries, but that of
St. Dominick is the greatest, nourishing 150. Friars: That of St. Michele in
Bosco, being on a Hill with admirable Prospect, excels all the rest, and has
the finest Dormitory.

The City is rather under the Protection, then Government Government.
of the Pope; for though he have a Cardinal-Legate there, he can act nothing of
Consequence without the consent of the Senate, who have the Militia in their
own hands, which in the State consists of ten thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse, besides six thousand Citizens, Commanded by a Maestro di Campo of their
own, for all which, they have Magazins of Ammunition, etc. and can as easily
re-take the Government into their hands, as they did unwisely part with it:
Though they Coin their Money with the Popes Arms upon it, they also impale
their own device of Libertas with it; and as a further mark of liberty, they
constantly maintain at Rome an Ambassador, but the Legate lives in greater
State amongst them, and at their charge too, having Guards of Horse and Foot
which continually attend him, and besides the charge of Vice-Legate and other
Officers sends the Pope yearly a hundred thousand Crowns clear, which arises,
from Impositions on Salt and Fish; the Post and the Secretary-Office for
senceless Dispensations, etc.

Their chief Trade and business is Silk, of which Trade.
their is brought out of their own Territories (to every Fair) a million and
two hundred thousand pound weight, besides 200000. by Strangers, all which is
ordered in Bologna, and employs thirty thousand People, and their Hemp not less
than 12000. besides little Dogs, Wash-balls, and Salsicci, which are the best
in the World.

FLORENCE Stands close under the Appennines, Florence.
and seems every way else, to have a large Plain enclosed with Hills; in which
are an infinite number of Villas, and some of them very fine, as that of Poggio
Imperiali, the great Dukes by the Town Wall, which has delicate Walks of Elci,
fine Gardens, Fountains, etc. Near it is a fine Maille, set with Trees by the
River which runs through the City; and on the other side of it, has a quantity
of Meadow-ground well Wooded, with a Farm House upon it, where the G. Duke
keeps his Dairy, and in the Summer is very pleasant.

The G. Dukes Palace stands within the Wall, Paluzzo del G. D.
is very Magnificent, built of great rough stones Alla Rustica, has but one
Court, the wings to the Front being still wanting; most of the Rooms are
painted by the excellent hand of Pietro di Cortona, which with rich Hangings
makes them appear very noble Apartments, especially those of the Cardinal
Leopoldo, where is the greatest and best collection of Pictures I ever saw: The
Garden lies most of it on the side of the Hill, but is nevertheless very
pleasant, and has at the bottom a fine Parterre, environed with Cypress, and a
cut of water, with a tall marble Fountain in the midst, the Basin of which, is
of one stone, and is 36 Braeei about.

In the Galleries belonging to the Old Palace, are Gallery.
kept the Dukes Curiosities, Treasure. etc. On each hand are the Statues, and
over them the Pictures of the most famous men of former Ages, by the greatest
Masters; that of Brutus being unfinished by Mich. Angelo has these Verses by
him writ under it.

Dum Bruti Effigiem Sculptor de marmore ducit.
In mentem Sceleris venit and abstinuit.
By the side of these Galleries are diverse Rooms with variety of rarities: In
some the Weapons and Armor of the greatest Captains in the World; a Musket and
Pistol of massie-gold, secret Arms for Revenge, etc. the skin of a Horse,
whose Main is 5. yards long; a Lodestone that takes up 60. pound of Iron, etc.
In others little Pagan gods of Brass and Iron; the Head of Tiberius Cezar in a
Turquoise as big as an Egg; Statues of the G. Dukes Ancestors in Porphry; a
great Ebbony Cabbinet set with Stones, and within it, the Passion of our
Savior cut in Ivory, by Mich. Angelo; a Nail half Gold, half Iron; a lump of
Gold as 'twas dug without Oar or Refining; shells of Mother of Pearl, with
the Pearls growing to them; an Emerald in Embrio, half Stone, half Earth; a
great Cabinet of Medials set so thick with precious Stones, that it is valued at
five hundred thousand Crowns; a Unicorns Horn, great numbers of Cups Crystal
and Agat, etc. three Tables Inlaid with variety of choice Stones into Flowers,
Birds, etc. the bigest of them the richest and finest in the World, being most
of it Inlaid with Pearls, Rubies, Saphirs, Emralds, Cornelians, etc. In others,
his Plate which is very considerable, one Service of it all of pure Gold,
besides abundance of ancient Vessels of the same, Swards set with Diamonds,
etc. a Saddle and Bridle of Gold set with Turquoise Stones; a Cup of one entire
Emerald, the rich Bed-posts to his Marriage bed; a rare steel Cabinet designed
a Present to the King of France; the Antependium of an Altar set with Stones
very rich, all of massie-gold, and these words with Rubies upon it, Cosmus 2.
Dei Gracia Magnus Duae Etruriae ex uoto, and it had been sent to Loreto had he
recovered of his Sickness: From these Galleries runs a little Close one, to the
Dukes Palace for his Highnesses convenience, being near half a mile long:
Before this old Palace, in the Piazza, stands the Statue of Cosmus the great,
on Horseback, in brass, and his Victories expressed on the Pedestal, the
Fountain of Neptune and Trytons, the two Gigantick Statues of David by Mich.
Angelo, and Hercules killing Cacus by Bandinelli: In the Portico are those in
brass of Perseus Judith, and Rape of the Sabins in Marble: Within this Palace
is also shown his rich Embroidered Marriage-Coach, valued at 40000. Crowns.

The Chapel of St. Lawrence is round, and S. Lorenzo.
three parts finished, lined with polished Jasper of several colors, the Roof
to be of Lapis Lazuli; about the middle of the Walls, Niches for all the
Statues of the Dukes, which are to be of brass gilded, with Cushions of great
value, and Crowns before them, set with Jewels, as appears by those already
done; below them, are round it, the Arms of all his Citys, with their Names
and Motto's in Calcedonia; the Altar and Tabernacle have all the Materials that
Art or Nature can furnish to adorn it; the four Pillars are of Crystal, their
Capitels of Massiegold, and the rest of it proportionable.

The Church, to which this Chapel adjoyns, has two Church.
Brazen Pulpets much esteemed, being the work of Donatello: In the Sacristy are
the four Statues of Day, Night, Aurora, and the Evening, said to be made by
Mich. Angelo, but much to be doubted: Above in the Cloister is kept the famous
Library of Manuscripts, esteemed the best next to the Vatican.

Upon this Bridge are four Statues, representing Ponte Trinita.
the four Seasons of the year, said to be made by Mich. Angelo, and I believe
the Bridge it self, being the neatest I ever saw; the Arches so extended, that
at a little distance they seem almost straight, and without any bending; in the
Piazza (before it) stands the Porphry Statue of Justice.

The Demo on the outside is crusted with II Duomo.
white, black, and red Marble, the Steeple by it of the same, not wanting the
least Stone, or any of its first Ornaments: The Church within (except the
Pavement) has nothing worth taking notice of, only that its Cupola was the
first that ever was made, and served Mich. Angelo for a pattern for that of St.
Peter's in Rome.

S. MICHELE: Round about this Church are the S. Michele.
Statues of St. Thomas, St. Matthew, St. George, St. Peter, etc. very much
esteemed.

In the Baptistery by the Domo, is the Statue of Magdalen, by Donatello, and
the doors to II Battisterio.
this little Church are valued above all the rest, being the History of the
Bible cut in brass, by Lorenzo Cion, who was his whole life about it.

In the Annunciata is the famous Picture of Madonna Annunciata
del Sacco, by Andrea del Sarto, and in the Piazza the brass Statue of
Ferdinand on Horseback.

In this Church, Sa. Croce, the Pulpit is of rare Bassorelieuo, Sa. Croce.
cut out of white Marble, and at the entrance stands the Tomb of Mich. Angelo,
having Architecture, Sculpture, and Painting, in the Figures of Women sitting
and lamenting upon it, and his own Busto above them.

The great Dukes Court has all the great Officers Court.
that is usual in other Sovereigns Courts; but the most in view are his two
Secretaries of State, his two Privy-Councellors, his sixty Gentlemen of his
Bedchamber, his eight Escuyers, and his twenty-four Pages.

His Highness going abroad, is constantly attended Guards.
by a Troop of Germans, and a Guard of Halbertiers, several Coaches, and in
every respect the equipage of a King.

The only Order of Knighthood in this Court, is that of Knights of St. Stephen.
St. Stephen, whereof the great Duke is grand Master, in imitation of that of
Maltha, and like that none can be admitted but upon the same proofs of
Gentility: The number of the Knights is at least 700. dispersed all over Italy,
but obliged to serve several years in his Highnesses Galleys that they may be
capable of Commendums: The Revenue of the Order is about 200000. Crowns, most
of it at the G. Dukes dispose, the rest in private Families: Their place of
Residence, Pisa.

In the Government the G. Duke is absolute, but yet Government.
allows them a Senate in show of Liberty, which consists of 40. Senators, all
chosen by himself, and never act contrary to his Will: It Is accounted very
Honorable, because they have the privilege of being covered before the Duke,
and have generally the best Employments of the City, and Governments in Toscany
conferred on them: In the Dukes absence, the Auditor Fiscal, a kind of Lord
Mayor, does govern.

The G. Duke Taxes no Lands, but the Product of Revenue.
them, so that no Horse or Beast, House or Ground, can be sold, or Daughter
Married, but in every 100. Crowns, seven Crowns three quarters must be paid to
his Highness; his whole Revenue being annually 1200000. Crowns which arises
thus,

Le Dogane di tutto il suo Stato 200000 Gabelle delle Port 150000 Della
Contratazione 200000 Dalle Farine 150000 Dalle Deccime 100000 Beni Stabili
100000 Dal Sale 50000 Avanzi di Magistrati 50000 Appalte di Forni 30000 Dal
Tobacco 25000 Aquavita 20000 Posta 30000 Carta 15000 Assignamenti diversi 50000

His principal Citadel in Florence is very considerable, Strength.
having in it an Armory of four large Rooms, wherein is Arms for 80000. Men,
all in excellent order; and in his whole State he has 26. Garrisons, in all
which (in times of Peace) are but 2482. men; but he has besides these, the
Train'd-Bands, which amount to 3000. Horse, 65000. Foot; and the Citys of
Florence, Siena, and the Countries some miles about them, which are disarmed for
the Dukes security, would make upon occasion 20000. more: The Officers are paid
by his Highness, and the Soldiers have some privileges: His Troop of
Lifeguard consists of a hundred Germans, whose pay is three Giulio's a day,
their Horses kept, and Free Quarter; his Guard of Halbertiers are the same
number, and have five Crowns a month, with several other advantages; he has
also a Guard of Reformed Officers, Italians, whose pay is 14. Crowns a month,
and the Maestro di Camera is always their Captain: The Captains of the several
Guards have 1000. Crowns a year, the common Soldiers a Giulio a day; which pay,
what it wants of other Princes, is recompensed by its certainty, and little or
no deductions; some heing paid every week, others every month punctually.

His Intrest is Spanish, loves the English, and has a Intrest.
perfect aversion for the French, as all Wise men naturally have.

PISTOIA Is not now considerable. Pistoia.


LUCCA, Is a pretty Town near as good as Florence, Lucca.
paved and built much after the same manner; the Fortifications very regular,
faced with Brick; the Rampart exceeding large, set with Trees, like Antwerp,
and like it stands clear from Houses, and in a flat, but Mountains at some
distance on every side: The Churches are least considerable, but in the
Augustins they show a Hole, where an Unbeliever was sucked in alive, for
throwing stones at the Virgin; and in another lies Buried Richard King of
England, who dyed in his Pilgrimage.

They have four or five little Towns more in their Strength.
whole State; and it is said, they may raise in their small Territories 15000.
Men.

It Is Governed by a great Counsel of Citizens which Government.
are changed every year, and a Confaloniero, as most of the other Citys in
Italy have.

The constant Revenue of this little Republic, is Revenue.
esteemed to he near 200000. Crowns a year.

PISA, An ancient Town, stands in a Marshy place, Pisa.
has a good River runs through part of it, and an Aquaduet upon Arches, that
brings water from Mountains four miles distant, and has nothing else
remarkable, except the Camposanto be, which is made of Holy Earth brought from
Jerusalem in 50. Galleys.

LEGORNE Next to Florence, the most considerable Legorne.
in the G. Dukes State, is excellently fortified both to Land and Sea, where it
has a Mole of greater length than Genoa, and by it the fine Statue of Ferdinand
the First, with four Slaves in Brass at his feet: Being a free Port, it is
filled with Strangers, of which the Jews are not a less number than 5000; of
English Merchants Families there are about ten; as many of Hollanders, but many
more French of all sorts.

It Is the Magazine of the Streights, and has a good Trade.
Trade, particularly with England, who carry thither Cloth, Lead, Tin, Iron,
Spices, and Herrings; the only Commodities to be had there, is Silk, Wine and
Oil.

It has two Governors, the one Millitary, the other Government.
Civil; the first is General Borri, the latter Marchese Medici: His Highness
constantly keeps four Galleys, esteemed the best in the Mediterranean, and
several little Ships Crusing against the Turks.

SIENA Is very near as large and beautiful as Siena.
Florence, the Streets neatly paved with a sort of little Bricks set edg ways,
and being built on a rising ground, are always clean; the Piazza is very
spacious, and the Domo is a very noble Church, all of white and black Marble
both within and without; the Floor In-laid in Historical Figures, by
extraordinary Masters; the Roof Azure, sprinkled with little Stars of Gold; the
Library by the side of it curiously painted in Fresco, by Pietro Perugino: It Is
one of the best Towns of the G. Dukes State, and speaks the best Italian of all
Italy.

MONTEFIASCONE, Is remarkable for the Tomb Montefiascone.
of the Drunken German Bishop, who killed himself here, with drinking this
excellent Wine, and has therefore this Epitaph writ by his Man, who had Orders
to mark the doors as he went with Est three times, where he found the best,

Est est est propter nimium est
Dominus meus mortuus est.
In this Country the Duke of Parma has a fine House, Caprarola.
Situate on the side of a Hill, which gives it a Prospect of Rome, though 40.
miles distant.

VITERBO, Is a pretty little Town with many Fountains Viterbo.
in it; from thence (in the Summertime) to Rome, the Air is esteemed
Unhealthful.

ROME, As in other things, in its Situation, excels Rome.
all other Citys, having so many agreeable Hills in and about it, that whether
pursuing pleasure, or busisiness, a Man has several times, every day, the
prospect of this fine Town and Country: The Figure of it is almost round, the
River Tyber running through it, and five Rivelets, or great branches more of
water by Aqueducts brought to it, which supplys such a number of Marble
Fountains, that there is no Street nor Court where they do not run perpetually;
and so many and admirable are the Churches, Palaces, and Gardens, that it is
impossible (at least for me) exactly to describe them.

S. GIO. LATERANO, Of which the Pope is S. Gio. Laterano.
Bishop, and therefore has the Precedence of all other Churches; is very large
and beautiful, stands upon Monte Celio, one of the seven Hills; was first
built by Constantine the Great, and was formerly the place of the Popes
Residence; the Roof is richly Gilded, has much good Painting, the Pillars to
the side-Altars very fine and uniform, and so is the great Tabernacle; in which
is shut the wooden Altar, St. Peter and his Successors, in time of Persecution,
carried about with them to say Mass at; and therefore is so Sacred, that none
but his Holiness himself can Celebrate at it; and to make it more estimable,
there is also the Heads of St. Peter and St. Paul, which are shown upon
Festivals; the Altar of the Sacrament is also very remarkable, having a
Tabernacle of rare polished Stones, and four Brass gilded Pillars that
anciently were Saturns; it has the name from the Table it includes, on which
our Savior eat the last Paschal Lamb, being for certain the very same; besides
diverse other most precious Relics, as the Smock and hair of the B. Vergin,
something of the like nature of Mary Magdalen; the Cloth with which our Savior
wiped the Disciples Feet; the Water and Blood that came out of His Side; some
of the Barly-bread He multiplied; a Shoulder of St. Laurence; a Tooth of St.
Peter, etc. In the Cloister, the pierced Porphry Chair, on which the Pope is
set amongst other Ceremonies at his Creation: The Tomb of Cardinal Respone, who
being yet alive, has erected it with this fancy, Death holding his Gravestone,
and Time carrying his Coffin: In the Porch is the Statue in Brass of Henry the
4th. of France, who restored or gave them part of their Revenue: In the great
Piazza, before it, stands the tall Obelisk of 100. foot high, with
Hierogliphicks on it, brought from the Circus Maximus.

BAPTISTERY of CONSTANTINE, Joins Baptistery of Constantine.
in a manner to this Church, wherein that Emperor was Christened; it is round,
the Well or Font railed about with Marble; the Canopy or Tabernacle over it,
supported with noble Porphry Pillars, and the Roof painted with the History of
his Conversion, Conquests, etc.

SCALA SANTA, Is a Building on purpose for the Holy Stairs which our Savior
went up Scala Santa.
to Pilate, and some can see the very drops of Blood and Tears still upon them
He then shed, which little Grates protect: It Is a very fair white Marble
Staircase, and has on each hand others to return down upon, when they have
gone up that upon their knees; at the top of it is a little Chapel, called the
Sancta Sanctorum, there being Christ's Picture that was made by an Angel, and
formerly his Prepuce, or Foreskin, which now Hallows another place.

S. PETER'S, Is the second Church in esteem in Rome, St. Peter's.
and first in the World for Beauty and Architecture, infinitely surpassing in
both, either the Temple of Solomon, or that of Diana at Ephesus, and to
Bramante and Mich. Angelo is attributed the glory of it, but principally to the
last: The outside is of Freestone, the Frontis-pice supported with vast
Pillars; over which is a row of Balconies or Pavillions, where the Pope is
Crowned; and from thence (on several Festivals) Blesses and Curses; on the top
of all is our Savior and his Twelve Apostles, Statues of ten foot long; and
below them, upon the Balustres of the two Stately Portico's (that enclose the
great Piazza, in form of an Ampki-Theatre) stand an Army of Saints; in the
middle, the Guglia of 100. foot long, Dedicated to Augustus; and on each side a
great Fountain: The approaches to it is up 24. Marble steps; the entrance at 5.
Doors, whereof one is Holy, the two middle-most covered with Brass in
Historical Figures: The Porch is 289. foot long, and 44. broad; the Roof
gilded, and Floor paved with wite Marble; and at one end of it, the Statue of
Constantine on Horseback, by Bernino; the Church it self 520. foot in length,
and 380. foot broad; the top of it divided into little gilded squares, with a
Rose in each; the Pavement inlaid Marble; the walls and sides of the Pillars
(except the very middle) crusted with the same, well polished, adorned with
many little white Figures of Angels, the moral Virtues, fine Tombs, Altars,
Chapels, etc. The Cupola is very large, being 170. paces in compass, lined
with Mosaic work that describes Heaven, supported by four great Pillars, in
which are the Statues in Niches of Veronica, St. Helen, Andrew, and Longinus,
all Gigaintick, and the last of Bernino's hand; under it stands the high Altar,
whose four famous Brass Serpentine-Pillars were likewise made by him, which
without the Canopy, weigh 100000. pound: It Is a very noble thing, but not
sufficient to excuse the Sacrilege of robbing the Pantheon for it; before this
Altar is a Vault railed and hung about with Silver Lamps; and in it lies half
St. Peter and St. Paul; at the further end of all is S. Peter's old Wooden Chair
locked up in a brass case, exposed only on its Feast-days, supported by the four
Doctors of the Church, of the same Metal gilt, by rare Bernino's hand; and
over it an Host of Angels, with a Glory Artificially made of yellow horn; and
in the midst of it, the Holy Ghost upon wing, hovering; on each side are the
Tombs of Urban the 8th. and Paul the 3 d. and under the latter, lies the fine
white Marble Statue of Youth, which for being Ravished by a Spaniard, wears now
a Drapery of brass: On the side of the Church, not far from the great Altar,
under a Canopy of State, in a sitting posture is the brazen Statue of Jupiter,
that stood anciently in his Temple, and now has the good fortune to represent
St. Peter, and be as much Worshipped as ever, none passing but kiss and put
their heads under his feet, not even the Cardinals, his hand lifted up that
seemed to throw the Thunder, now is supposed to bless, and the other makes a
shift to hold the Keys: The most considerable Relics are the Spear that
Wounded Christ's Side, the Handkerchief He wiped his Face with; a piece of the
Holy Cross, some of the Hay that He lay on in the Manger; the great Pinces or
Plyers, with which they took the Primitive Saints in pieces; the Head of Thomas
Becket of Canterbury, with as many Arms, Legs, Ribs, etc. as would Re-build
him at the Resurrection. The Church is Vaulted underneath, wherein are the
Tombs of diverse Cardinals and Popes, and amongst them, that of Adrian the 4th.
an Englishman: The maintenance for this Fabric is about 20000. l. Sterling,
annually.

S. PAOLO Was Built by Constantine, is 120. paces S. Paolo.
long, and 80. broad; the round marble Pillars which are about 100. were taken
from Antoninus his Bathes; it is one of the four Churches that have Holy Doors;
and under the high Altar lies the other half of the bodies of St. Peter and St.
Paul: The Chapel of the Sacrament is very fine, but the Eloquent Crucifix that
talked with St. Bridget, is of all other things most wonderful; the
considerable Relics are St. Paul's Chain, the Head of the Samaritan, an Arm
of St. Ann, a Finger of St. Nicholas, etc. The doors of brass in History.

Sta. MARIA MAGIORE, Stands upon Monte Esquilino, Sa. Maria Magiore.
is the fourth Church that has Holy Doors; the Pillars of the Portico, and
within, are all of Porphry, of one entire piece; the Roof gilded; on each side
of it two neat Chapels, that cost near two millions of Crowns, of Sixtus
Quintus and Paulus Quintus; in the first is kept our Saviors Cribb, enclosed
in Silver, and in the other, the Picture of the Virgin, made by St. Luke, which
a 1000. years ago (being carried about) slopt a great Plague; but the fine
Statues, Jasper Pillars, and Painting of the Cupola, by Guido Rheni, are
nevertheless of much more value: Before the great entrance into this Church,
stands the tall white Marble Corinthian Pillar, of the Temple of peace, with
the B. Virgin in Brass, gilded upon it; and at the other end, an Obelisk with
Hieroglyphics, which part fronting to the City, is Rebuilt and Beautified by
this present Pope Clement. It has Relics enough to fill a Charnel House, not
only of Saints themselves, but of their Companions, and amongst the most
precious, some of the Vesture of Thomas Becket of Canterbury.

S. LORENZO, Built by Constantine, has a piece of the Grate, and the entire
Stone, upon which S. Lautence S. Lorenzo.
was Brotld, set in Crystal; before which, whoever Prays, frees a Soul out of
Purgatory: It has also one of the Stones that was thrown at St. Stephen, which
are the greatest Rarities to be observed in this Church, which I mention,
because one of the seven.

S. SEBASTIANO, One of the Seven Churches also, S. Sebastiano.
is famous for the Calacumes under it, wherein are Buried in the Walls, 274000.
Christians that were Persecuted and Martyred by the Roman Emperors: The place
being a Meander of several Miles, they there met with security to exercise
their Religion; the several windings were occasioned by their digging of Earth
thence, to mix with their Mortar, etc. for the Building of Rome. This Church
has also a pretty quantity of Relics; the body of its Patron, and his Figure
in a dying posture, by Bernino's hand; but the principal is the Stone on which
Christ stood in the Highway, when he appeared to S. Peter in the place where
now is the Chapel Domine quo vadis, and left the print of his Feet upon it.

Sta. GROCE in GIERUSALEMME Is Built likewise S. Croce in Gierusalemme.
by Constantine, in the place, and out of the Ruins of Venus her Temple, of
which a good part still remains. Is the 7th. Church, and has its name by reason
of the Holy Earth, brought from Gerusalemme; upon which stands a Chapel, into
which no Woman is to enter, quite contrary to its former Dedication: The
Relics here are extraordinary, having a Vessel of the Blood of our Savior,
one of the Nails and Title of his Cross, one of the Pence he was sold for, the
Sponge that he had with Vinegar; St. Thomas his Finger that touched his Side,
etc. The Picture at the High Altar of Rubens painting.

MADONNA del POPOLO Has the greatest Modonna del Popolo.
privileges, next to the aforesaid seven Churches, and several fine Ornaments
and Statues, as those of Daniel and Habakkuck, by Bernino; that of Jonas by
Raphael Urbin, much esteemed, being the only Statue he ever made; the fine
Chapel of Chigi, etc. of his Architecture too. In the high Altar is preserved
the Navel of our Savior, some Milk and Attire of the Virgin, some Dust of St.
John Baptist, etc. and in the place where it now stands, was formerly Nero's
Urn, which was the occasion of Building this Church, as all the Popes Bulls and
Indulgences granted it do testify, Nero's ashes had perpetually a crew of
roaring Devils about them which were so mischievous, that they lamed and
suffocated all people that passed near the place, which obliged Pope Paschal to
order a three days Fast; and upon the third night, the Virgin came her own self
to his Bedside, and bid him throw Nero's Urn into the Tyber, and build her a
Church in the place, which the next day, in a solemn procession of all the
Cardinals was performed, the Pope laying the first Stone of the Foundation,
which set all the Devils on howling, and put them to flight: Before it stands
another Obelisk with Herogliphicks on it, and in it is also the famous picture
of the Madonna, made by St. Luke.

TREE FONTANE, Is a pretty Church, wherein are Tree Fontane.
three Fountains made by St. Paul's Head, leaping there 3. times after it was
cut off, and three stone heads to show the places exactly; there is also one of
the Pillars, upon which he was Executed, and a Picture of St. Peter's
Crucifixtion, by Guido Rheni: Close by this Church are two others, under the
one of them, ten thousand Martyrs lie that Dioclesian caused at once to be
slain in that place, after they had finished the Fabric of his Baths; and in
the other is the Head of Anastasius, which the whole Council of Nice affirm can
do Miracles, as cast out Devils, cure the Sick, etc. and for this reason, this
place is the most holy after the seven Churches aforesaid.

S. BARTOLOMEI stands in the place of S. Bartolomei.
Esculapius; his Temple has the Tabernacle supported by 4^ fine Porphry
Pillars, some Chapels, etc. painted by Carraccio: The Island where it is, made
by Corn, the Rabble threw into the River, in the time of the ancient Romans.

S. ONOFRIO: In this Church is the Tomb of S. Onofrio.
Torquato Tasso, and in the Cloister, the Chamber where he dyed, with some of
his Furniture and Manuscripts: Here is good paintings of Bald^ssar di Siena and
Hannibal Carraccio; and from hence is an incomparable prospect of Rome.

S. PIETRO in MONTORIO, The place where S. Pietro in Montorio.
St. Peter was Crucified is a neat Chapel set about on the outside with
Pillars, and in it his Statue: In the Church is the Transfiguration of our
Savior, by Raphael, said to be the best he ever made.

S. MARIA in TRASTEUERE A pretty Church, S. Maria in Trasteuere.
the first that was built in Rome, has a fine Piazza before it, the Roof richly
gilded, supported with marble Pillars, the Tabernacle with Porphry; stands on
the very same ground that formerly did the Taberna meritoria, where the lame
Soldiers were relieved, and where the Fountain of Oil, as they say, did
miraculously foretell Christ's Unction, as the present Inscription.

Dum tenet emeritus miles sum magna Taberna
Sed dum virgo tenet me major nuncupor and sum:
Tunc oleum fluo fignans magnificam pietatem
Christi Nascentis, nunc trado petentibus ipsam.
S. FRANCESCO in RIPA GRANDE: Is the S. Francesco in Ripa grande.
place where all the Boats and Merchandise Arrives, that comes to Rome, and
formerly the abode of great S. Francis; in this Church the Piety is by Ca^a^^co.

S. MARIA del CARMINE: Has the E^^^ richly S. Maria del Carmine.
gilded, the Pillars entire, of reddish Marble, the Tabernacle supported by
four graind, and colored like excellent wood.

S. GRISOGONO Is a pretty Church, in which S. Grisogono.
lies Robert Archbishop of York, and Cardinal of this place; the Pillars of
the high Altar of a Stone different from all I have seen.

S. MARIA del HORTO, Has a good Front, and S. Maria del Horto.
Pictures to the Altars of good hands, stands in the ground given to Mutius
Scevola for a reward of his incredible courage.

S. CECILLIA, Is a Church that was formerly her House, and under the high Altar
lies her Effigies in S. Cecillia.
white Marble, with many Lamps burning about it; at the entrance is seen diverse
ancient Statues yet entire; there also lies the body of an English Cardinal.

S. SPIRITO, Is an Hospital of great Revenue, wherein S. Spirito.
there is two Churches; and that of S ta. Tecla only for the Women: In the
Summer there is seldom fewer than 700. sick people, 300. Girls, 1000. little
Children in the Nurses arms, and 100. little Boys which go in blew Coats: The
Sacristy is very fine, both as to its Building and Plate, of which they have a
great quantity, besides Relics of greater value, as three Fingers of St. Paul,
etc. The occasion of Building this Hospital, and giving it this Name, was, that
Innocent the 3 d. heard a voice that bid him rise, and go and Fish; and casting
a Net accordingly into the Tyber, he caught 400. Children, and being amazed at
such a draught, praid for Illumination, and presently a Model of this House was
shown him.

In S. GIACOMO SCOSSA CAVALLI, S. Giacomo Scossa Cavalli.
are the Stones whereon our Savior was placed the day of his Circumcision, and
that on which Abraham would have Sacrificed Isaac; they were a ^oken from St.
Helen to the Pope, and should have been put into St. Peter's, but the Stones
would go no further than to this place, nor the Horses carry them, and were
therefore forced to build this Church on purpose: This Truth is expressed in
the very name as well as attested by all Catholics.

S. MARIA TRANSPONTINA Is a very neat S. Maria Transpontina.
Church, and has a fine new Tabernacle: In it are the Pillars, at which St.
Peter and St. Paul were publicly scourged, being the same that served other
Malefactors, and stood in the Foro Romano.

S. ANGELO, Is a litte Church Dedicate to the Angel, S. Angelo.
Pope Gregory imagined he saw sheathing of his Sword when the Plague ceased.

S. ATANASIO, Is a Church of very good Architecture, S. Atanasio.
with a Celledge near it for instruction of the Grecians, who have the Jesuits
for their Masters, and as they are ripe, are sent into their own Country.

S. TRINITA del MONTE, Is a handsome Church S. Trinita del Monte.
and Convent of French, which has many Ornaments, besides paintings of Daniel
de Volterra, Z^^ch^^o, and original Pictures of their French King, etc. Their
Garden also is very pleasant, from this place there being an admirable prospect
of Rome.

S. CARLO in CORSO, Is a very fair Church with S. Carlo in Corso.
fine Altars, but most remarkable for its Saints, none but Mistresses, and such
as want them, frequenting it, of which it has every Holy day a very great
Congregation.

S. GIACOMO de gl INCURABILE: Is a Church St. Giacomo de gl Incurabili.
and Hospital for such only as are not curable: At one end of it is an
Octangular Chapel, very pretty, with diverse Ornaments Bassorilieno, etc.

S. ROCCO, Has two Hospitals belongs to it, one S. Rocco.
for Men, another for Women; and in the Church is a neat Marble Chapel.

S. AMBROGIO, A Little Church, has also an Hospital S. Ambrogio.
for the Lombards; the Picture at the high Altar by Tadeo Zuccaro.

S. GIRALOMO de gli SCHIAVONI, A Titular S. Giralomo.
amongst the 70. to the Cardinals, is peculiar to the Sclavonians, and has a
good facciata.

S. LORENZO in LUCINA, Built on the Ruin of S. Lorenzo in Lucina.
a Temple to Diana, has therefore that name; in it every Saturday night is
Music, and a Sermon in praise of the Virgin.

S. SILVESTRO, Has in it the miraculous picture S. Silvestro.
Christ made of himself, and sent to the King of Soria, Abagarus, and here also
is the head of St. John Baptist.

S. ANDREA del FRATE, Now repairing, formerly S. Andrea del Frate.
belonged to the Scotch Friars.

S. GIROLAMO della CARITA, Is a Church and S. Girolama della Carita.
Society of Priests which live in Community upon their own expenses.

S. MARIA in VIA, The Title of Cardinal Bellarmine, S. Maria in Via.
repaired by him; is one of the most Sacred Churches in Rome, and built on this
occasion: In a Well by Cardinal Cap^cci's Stable, was by accident fallen, or
thrown in, the Picture of the Virgin, which though very deep, yet the Water
swelled to that Degree, that (in the Night) they lifted it out again, and
carried it into the aforesaid Stable, where the Grooms found it floting, and
the Cardinal their Master showing it with great Reverence to Pope Innocent the
4th. he ordered the Building of this Church; the Well yet remains, and is made
more worthy the Peoples Devotion, by having added to it that very same piece of
the Well whereon our Savior sat when he talked with the Samaritan.

S. APOSTOLI, Dedicated to the 12. Apostles, Built S. Apostoli.
by Constantine; in it is a Marble Statue, said to be made by Mich. Angelo.

S. MARIA in VIALATA, Is built on the Ruins of S. Maria in Vialata.
the Tryumphal Arch of Gordian; the Front of it very noble, upon Pillars, over
one another, the Portico open, with tall Iron Rails, the Faciata, the
Architecture of Pietro di Cortona: In it is the Oratory of St. Luke, where he
writ the Acts of the Apostles, and another Picture of the Virgin, made by him,
which does as great Miracles as the rest of his Paintings.

S. MARCELLO, In which is the Chapel of the S. Marcello.
Crucifix, which being carried in procession, caused a great Plague to cease:
In this Church also, besides many other Relics, is the Body of the Soldier
that pierced our Saviors Side: The Pulpit is very pretty, being white Marble,
supported by an Angel sitting on a blew Globe spangled with Stars, made by
Bernino: It Is built in the place, and on the Ruins of the Temple of Iside, an
Egyptian Goddess.

S. MARCO, Is a little Church where that Evangelist S. Marco.
lies Buried, and where he was Consecrated Priest, and made Pope too.

S. MARIA di LORETO, Is a very neat Church, built round, with a noble Cupola,
adorned with diverse S. Maria di Loreto.
paintings of Zuccaro, etc.

S. QUIRICO, Cast out Devils out of the Daughter S. Quirico.
of Diocle^ian, and in reward, had a House given him, where now stands thy
Church.

MADONNA de'MONTI, Is the Architecture of Madonna de Monti.
G^^^^m ^^ll^ Porta, built on this occasion, her^ being once ^ Convent, they
h^d left on an old Wall the picture of the Virgin* against which was laid a
Dunghill, etc. and she being disgusted, to be so affronted by extraordinary
Miracles, made her self be taken notice of, to that degree, that the People in
General Club'd to the building of her this Church, which now their Charity
maintains, and as a perpetual mark of their Devotion, every year offer her a
Challice and four wax Tapers.

IL GIESU Is the Jesuits Church, a Majestic Il Giesu.
Building, designed by Vignola, their Sacristy so rich, that as they confess
themselves it is worth 25000. l. Sterling. and their Hangings for it of so great
value, that they cannot tell which is worth most, them or their Plate: Under
the high Altar lies St. Ignatius their Founder, and by him the great Bellarmine.

S. MARIA SOPRA MINERVA Is built upon the S. Maria Sopra Mineva.
Ruins of Minerva's Temple, which was erected there by Pompey; it has Statues
and diverse Pictures by famous Masters in its Chapels, particularly, one of our
Savior, by Mich. Angelo; before it stands a short Guglia, with Herogliphicks,
mounted on an Elephant: The Society of this Church (five times a year) give
Portions to young Girls that want Fortunes, a Charity his Holiness takes such
pleasure in, that he often comes himself to see the Procession, and suffers them
one by one to kiss his Feet.

S. IGNATIO LOIOLA Is a noble Structure adjoining, S. Ignatio Loiola.
and for the use of the Roman College, but is not yet quite finished.

S. FRANCESCO SAVERIO Is a little Church S. Francesco Saverio.
belonging to the former, wherein the Jesuits exhort Sinners to lash
themselves, and the Candles being put out, they wisely follow their advice, and
scourge their naked backs, or what other part they please with knotted
Whip-cords, which the Charitable Fathers always supply them with, let the
number be never so great.

COLEGIO ROMANO Is a magnificent Building, Colegio Romano.
the Windows, Corniches, and Ornaments of the Doors, Marble; within the Court,
it has noble Portico's, great Rooms, and amongst them the Gallery of Father
Kirker, full of Curiosities, and above all, two Basilisks, or Creatures exactly
like their Description, a Sheckle of Silver with an Hebrew Inscription, and
Manna falling into a Cup engraven upon it; the Anatomy of a Child three months
old, which was Christened; several sorts of Clocks and Mathematical experiments,
and the fine Figure of a Boy catching a Grass-hopper, by Bernino: The Fathers
of this College are 140. Jesuits, which instruct and discipline 2000. Youths,
of which few or none are lodged by them: To teach them to Preach, they are sent
upon Holy Days to all parts of the City, where like our Quakers, they get upon
Bulks, or some high place, and Baul for an hour or two to the Rabble about them.

S. BARTOLOMEO e S. ALLESSANDRO de S. Bartolomeo e S. Allessandro de
Bergamaschi.
BERGAMASCHI Is a little Church Dedicate also to a third Saint, Maccute, an
English Bishop that lived 1100. years ago; and the place where it stands is
called after his name: The painting in Fresco is by Polydore.

S. MARIA ROTONDA, Formerly Pantheon, S. Maria Rotonda.
Dedicate to the Mother of the Gods, and all the Gods, but now varied to the
Mother of God; and all the Gods, or Saints, and because in the Heathens time,
it was full of Idols, that it might not now be altogether without Furniture,
Pope Boniface the 4th. carried into it 28. Cart loads of Bodies he took out of
several Churchyards, and made Holy: But which is more Ornament to it, there is
Buried famous Raphael Urbin, with this Distich under his Effigies, by Bembo,

Ille hic est Raphael timuit quo sospite vinci,
Rerum magna parens, and moriente Mori.
The cover of this admirable Structure being of Corinthian Brass, Pope Urban
the 8th. took it away to make Cannons of it, and for some other uses, a thing,
that all the Barbarous Nations that had sacked Rome, never touched; its
Dedication, making it to all People and Religious Sacred, except the Catholic:
Before this Church is a square Piazza.

S. MARIA MADDALENA Is a Church with a S. Maria Maddalena.
neat front.

GLI ORFANELLI Is a Church of the Architecture Gli Orfanelli.
of Volterra, joining to it, a College for Orphans.

S. EUSTACHIO Was Built by Constantine; the S. Eustachio.
S. Peter in Fresco by Perino Vaga.

S. LUIGI de'FRANCESI Was built by Lewis S. Luigi de Francesi:
the 9th. the Architecture of the Front Giacomo della Porta; the Pictures are
of Caravaggio, Bassano, etc.

S. AGOSTINO, Where there is another Picture S. Agostino.
of our Lady, supposed to be made by St. Luke; most certain, it did stop a
great Plague, being carried in Procession by Innocent the 8th. Here is also a
Picture of Raphaels, and a Statue of St. Ann, by Sansovinus, that are mightily
esteemed, besides others by Volterra, Caravaggio, and the Fresco by Polydore.

Sa. AGNESE Is the Architecture of Borromino; Sa. Agnese.
a Church not large but most Majestic, having a Cupola and a Steeple ala
moderna on each side of it; within, adorned with Marbles, Bassirilevi, etc.
'Twas built, and in this very place, because Sa. Agnese was brought hither to
be Ravished, it being then a place for all Manner of sports, but had her
Virginity miraculously preserved by her Guardian Angel.

S. ANTONIO de'PORTUGHESI Is a Church S. Antonio de Portughesi.
and Hospital peculiar to that Nation, of which the Ambassador is always the
Head or Chief.

S. APOLINARE Is a Church wherein there is most S. Apolinare
excellent Music, and belonging to it, a College of Germans founded upon
occasion of Martin Luthers Heresy.

S. GIACOMO de'SPAGNUOLI Is a Church and S. Graiomo de Spagnu. oli.
Hospital for none but Spaniards; in it is a Picture by Annibal Carraccio,
Sansovinus, with some Sculpture, by Bernino.

S. MARIA del'ANIME Is a Church and Hospital S Maria del Anime.
for the Flemmings: In the Chapels are Paintings of Baldassere da Siena, di
Giulio Romano, etc. and on the great Altar, about the Picture of the Madonna,
Souls painted by the life, adoring her.

S. MARIA della PACE Has not only a fine front, S. Maria della Pace.
but is admirably adorned within, being full of Paintings and Statues of great
Masters: The Sibills and Prophets in the Chapel of Chigi, being the work of
Raphael Urbin, and the Statues of St. Peter and St. Paul, of Mich. Angelo: The
occasion of building this Church was, that under the Po^^^co of a Former in
this place, called S. Andrea, stood the Picture of our Lady, at which an
enraged Gamester throwing Stones, and making her bleed in several places, as is
yet plainly to be seen; this Image was held in greater Veneration than any, and
Sixtus the 4th. praying to it, offered the Virgi to Build her a new Church here
to her self if she would cease the Wars then in Italy, which accordingly
succeeding, he performed his promise.

CHIESA NUOVA Is a very neat Church, the Roof Chiesa Nuova.
gilded and painted by Pietro di Cortona, with several other Pictures on the
Altars of Carravaggio, Guido Rheni, Rubens, etc. Adjoining to it is the Oratory
wherein every Festival is admirable Music: In this Church likewise, the
Virgins Picture being wounded by a Blasphemer, did bleed abundantly.

S. MARTINO del MONTE, Is a neat Church, S. Martino del Monte.
where the Pillars and Pedistals are all of new Marble, the Roof gilded and
deserves to be of the first Rate.

SPEDALE de'VECCHI, Is something like Suttons Spedale de Vecchi. S. Gio
Battista de Fiorentini.
Hospital, where 400. Old men Eat in good Order.

S. GIO BATTISTA de'FIORENTINI. Is the Architecture of Mich. Angelo, and would
have been like the Rotonda according to his Model that they show, but the
expense proving too great, 'twas changed and finished by Giacomo della Porta;
it belongs to the Florentines who have built an Hospital by it for their
Countrymen.

S. BRIGIDA Is a little Church and Hospital for the Swedes, the Picture of our
Lady, by Hannibal S. Brigida.
Carraccio: This Saint is very remarkable, because our Lady at seven years old
appeared to her, and put a Crown upon her head, and at ten our Savior himself
made her a visit.

S. TOMASO degl INGLESE Is a Church and S. Tomaso degi Inglese
College for Education of English Jesuits, Dedicated to Thomas Becket, founded
by a Rich English man for an Hospital, and afterward made a Seminary for the
good of this Kingdom, by Gregory the 13th. On this Saints day, every year, all
the English in Rome are treated by them.

S. MARIA di MONSERRATO Has a good S. Maria di Monserrato
Front, an Hospital by it, both belonging to the Spaniards.

S. LORENZO in DAMASO Is built on the S. Lorenzo in Damaso.
Ruins of Pompeys Amphitheatre; the Roof gilded, the Pictures by Zuccaro di
Vecchi, and Pietro di Cortona; the Fresco by Giuseppe and Pomerancio: In this
Church (three times a week) are also Exhortations to discipline their naked
backs with knotted Whipcords.

TRINITA di PONTE SISTO Is a Church and Trinita di Ponte Sisto.
Hospital that entertains Pilgrims, and such as are recovering, discharged from
other Hospitals; of the former, in the holy years, they have very great
numbers, for most of which they provide Meat and Lodging for three days, the
Cardinals, Prelates, and sometimes Popes themselves, washing their Feet and
serving them at Table: The last holy year but this, according to their Books,
they received four hundred and forty four thousand and five hundred Men, and
five and twenty thousand and five hundred Women; in which crowd, they believe
Angels do sometimes come disguised, and under the Pilgrims leather Gorget
conceal their Wings; there is also here once a week a Sermon to the Jews, which
they are obliged to come and hear: The Picture at the Altar is by Guido Rheni.

S. MARIA del PIANTO Is so called because the S. Maria del Pianto.
Image of our Lady on the Walls of the Church wept to see two men quarrel, and
the one kill the other in her presence; which Picture is with great reverence
now kept within the Church, gives a name and badge to the Order, and procured
Alms large enough to Re-build it.

S. CARLO de'CATENARI Is a well built Church, S. Carlo de Catenari.
the Front very fine, the painting in it of Domenichini, Lanfranco, Andrea del
Sarto, etc. Here likewise, every Friday-night, People are invited to lash
themselves.

S. ANDREA della VALLE Is one of the finest S. Andrea della Valle.
Churches in Rome; within, large and Majestic, built upon the Ruins of
Pompey's Theater, has several neat Chapels, that of Strozzi, the Architecture
of Mich. Angelo; the Painting by Lanfranco, and Domenichini.

S. STANISLAO, Is a little Church and Hospital, S. Stanislao.
built by, and only for the use of the Polacks.

S. MARIA in PORTICO Is built in the place S. Maria in Portico.
of Mars his Temple, where the ancient Romans held their Councels of War, and
on the occasion of the Virgins sending Pope John the first her Picture, very
richly set, made in Heaven, and brought by two glorious Angels, which being
afterward Stolen (in the time of Clement the 7th. by Bourbons Soldiers) and
carried into Spain, came back of it self, and when Paul the 2 d. committed a
Rape upon her, and locked her in his private Chapel, she then also escaped to
this her own Church: Leo the 10th. desiring Victory against the Turks, had this
Image carried in Procession and devoutly barefoot followed it with all his
Cardinals; the same did Paul the 3 d. and in the same manner was the Plague
stopped, 1656. for which last favor she had this new Habitation made her, and a
perpetual Feast on the 17th. of July, the day of this Pictures Apparition.

S. CATERINA de'FUNARI, A neat Church S. Caterina de'Funari.
and Cloister for Nuns, wherein is also provision apart for such Women, as by
Poverty or Discord forsake their Husbands; there are Paintings of Zuccaro,
Annibal Carraccio, etc.

S. ANGELO in PESCARIA, Built, and so called, S. Angelo in Pescaria.
upon occasion of St. Michael the Arch-Angel's appearing in this place: The
Chapel of St. Andrew is very pretty; the Paintings of Sacconi, Carracico's
Scholar.

S. GIO DECOLLATO, Is a pretty little Church, S. Gio Decollato.
in which there are several Pictures of great Masters: The charge of these
Fathers, is, to take care of the Souls of Malefactors that dye, whom they also
Bury.

S. MARIA EGITTIACA Is a little Church and S. Maria Egittiaca.
College for the Armenians: In it is Built the exact Figure of Christ's
Sepulcher in Jerusalem; 'twas anciently a Temple to Jupiter and the Sun.

SCUOLA GRECA, Is an ancient Church, where Sevola Greca.
they show an old marble Head, called Bocca della Verita, which some would have
to have served for the utterance of an Oracle, but has rather been an Ornament
for a Sink or Common-shoar.

S. MADALLENA al CORSO, I sa Church and S. Maddalena al Corso.
Monastery for neglected Whores; to which, besides other Alms was given by
Clement the 7th. the fifth part of all other Whores Estates, (whether public
or private at their Deaths) else if detected, they were not capable of making
Wills.

S. SABINA Upon Monte Aventino, Is in the very S. Sabina.
same place, where anciently stood Diana's Temple: In this Church the great
Patriach S. Dominick used to pray, and vexed the Devil so, that he threw a
black Stone at him of the size and figure of a Holland Cheese, which in the
body of the Church is now Chained to a Pedistal, together with the relation in
Print.

S. ALLESSIO, Is built on the Ruins of Hercules his S. Allessio.
Temple, who had it Dedicate for having here killed Caeus that had his Den near
this place: In the Church is most devoutly kept a little Staircase, under which
St. Allexius lived 17. years in his Fathers House, desiring to be private:
There is also his Statue which spoke to St. Alleria.

S. MARIA nel AVENTINO, Is the place where anciently S. Maria nel Aventino.
was the Temple of the Buona Dea, into which, none but Women were to enter,
and yet Cezar, was made a Cuckold there.

In S. SABA, are the marble Tombs of Vespasian S. Saba.
and Titus.

S. BALBINA, Is the Title of a Cardinal, and founded S. Balbina.
by St. Mark himself.

S. NEREO ed ACCHILLEO, Built on the Ruins of S. Nereo ed Acchilleo.
the Temple of Iside; the Picture of Flavia, is by Cavre. Pomerancio.

S. SISTO, Was formerly the Temple of Mars, which S. Sisto.
S. Sisto made to tumble down by a Battery of Prayers, and had it afterward
Dedicate to himself: In the same place S. Dominick did ouce Inhabit, exercising
the Office both of Abbess and Confessor to a Convent of Nunns; during which
time ('it is said) he did raise three men from the dead (or gave them a Being.)
Here likewise is another Picture of the Virgin, made by St. Luke.

S. GIOVANNI a PORTA LATINA, A little S. Giovanni a Porta Latina.
Church where St. John was boyld in Oil; was anciently a Temple to Diana, as is
to be seen by the Figures on the Wall of one on Horseback, a Dog and a Clown
running before him.

MARONITES Is a little Church and College, Maronites.
wherein they say Mass in their own Arabic Language.

ARACELI, So called from an Altar in it, Dedicate Araceli.
by Augustus in these words, Ara primo geniti Dei, which is now adorned with
Marble Pillars, etc. 'Twas anciantly the great Temple of Jupiter, standing on
part of the Capital Hill, and the ascent to it by above 100. white marble
Steps; it is large, the Roof Gilded, and near the Door, on one of the Pillars,
is A Cubiculo Augusforum: Here also is a Picture of our Lady by St. Luke: The
Chapel near the high Altar is Painting, by Caure. Giuseppe.

S. GIUSEPPE de FALEGNAMI, Is a little S. Giuseppe de Falegnami.
Church, Built by the Carpenters, and peculiar to them; under it is the Prison,
wherein St. Peter and St. Paul were kept nine months, the Pillars to which
they were Chaind; and in the Wall is the print of St. Peter's Face, when he
stumbled and ran his Nose against it, being so great a dint, that with two or
three such knoks more he might have got that way out of Prison: In the midst
of it, is a little dirty Spring which (they say) he commanded to appear when he
wanted water to Christen the Jailer.

S. LUCA Is Built upon the Ruins of the Temple S. Luca.
of Mars, now belonging to the Painters, and will be a very neat Church when
finished: The Picture of St. Luke is by Raphel's hand; the Architecture is of
Pietro di Cortona, who Built part of it at his own Charge.

S. ADRIANO, Was formerly the Temple of Saturn, S. Adriano.
and so ancient, that 'twas before Romulus his time; the great brass Doors
were carried to St. John Lateran.

S. LORENZO in MIRANDA Is the Temple of S. Lorenzo in Miranda.
Antonino and Frustina, converted to a Church; the Front, Pillars of the
Portico and Architectave, with the Inscription, being almost perfect still: The
Picture at the high Altar is Pietro di Cortona's, the other of Domenichini; it
belongs to the Apothecaries.

S. COSMO e DAMIANO Is the Temple Dedicated S. Cosmo e Damiano.
to Romulus; it has its brass Doors still remaining, and in it the famous
Picture of the Virgin that reproved Pope Gregory for not saluting her as he had
used to do, This is most certainly true; but how the Old Man excused himself,
is not Recorded.

S. MARIA LIBERATRICE, Where Cicero's S. Maria Liberatriee.
House once stood; has in it three Pillars. taken out of the Temple of Jupiter.

S. MARIA NUOVA, Has before the great Altar, S. Maria Nuova.
the Tomb of Sa. Francesca Romana, of rare Bernino's work, and one of the
Pictures of our Lady, made by St. Luke, which though the whole Church was
Burnt, yet took no harm: Here also is kept the Stone, upon which St. Peter
Prayed (and left the prints of his knees) that Simon Magus might fall, who took
his flight about this place.

S. SEBASTIANO Is a little Church with diverse S. Sebastiano.
Pictures in it, and the place where St. Sebastian was Shot, but healing still
so fast, that 'twas impossible that way to kill him; he was here beaten to
death.

S. TEODORO Is a little round Church Dedicated S. Teodoro.
to Romulus and Renuis, being the very place where they were found, and
therefore here was placed the Statue of the Wolf, with the two Boys at her
Paps, now in the Capitol.

S. MARIA delle GRATIE, Was formerly the Temple S. Maria delle Gratie
of Vesta, Built round, with Corinthian Pillars, which still remain; here also
is another wonderful Picture of our Lady, by St. Luke's hand.

S. MARIA della CONSOLATIONE, Built on occasion S. Maria della Consolatione.
of the Virgins Image, on an old Wall, working Miracles: The Front is the
Architecture of Martino Lunghi, and the Chapel of Matie, painted by Taddeo
Zuccaro.

S. ANASTASIA, Is a Church with a handsome S. Anastasia.
Front, built in the place where was once a Temple to Neptune; in it is
preserved the Head-cloaths of the Virgin, which she pulled off to swath our
Savior in; and likewise a part of Joseph's Cloak, that served for his Covering.

S. GREGORIO in MONTE CELIO, Abounds S. Gregorio in Monte Celio.
with Pardons for the Dead, and besides, admirable Relics, has an Image of our
Lady that spoke to St. Gregory; and which though not so wonderful, is yet very
remarkable; our Savior himself once came to him for an Alms; and at another
time an Angel, who at his departure, confessed he had been often with him before,
and how that he had once got a Silver Poringer; for all which, having
sufficiently testified his Gratitude, he flew away: This Saint, for being so
much Heavens Favorite, was Sir named the Great; his Chapel is painted by
Carraccio.

S. GIOVANNI e PAOLO, Were the two Eunuchs of S. Giovanni e Paolo.
Constanza, the Daughter of Constantine, which she abandoning, they lived a
melancholy, holy Life, in the place where now stands their Church. The two
Chapels are painted by Raphael di Regio, and Pari Romano.

S. STEPHANO ROTONDA, Is built on the Ruins S. Stephano Roconda.
of the Temple, of the Emperor Claudeus; there is a Picture by Raphael, Perino
del Vaga, and some paintings of Pomerancio.

S. QUATRO, So called from four Bodies made S. Quatro.
Saints, by Pope Leo the 4th. for to Hallow this Church, which he drew like a
Lottery, out of the Churchyard, not knowing whom he ^ook; but since ('it is
said) their Names have miraculously been revealed.

S. EUSEBIO Is a little Church, built upon the S. Eusebio.
Ruins of the Emperor Gordians Palace.

S. ANTONIO Is a very pretty Church; to the Fathers S. Antonio.
of which, is committed the Spiritual care of all the Horses, Mules, and Asses
in Rome, who upon that Saints day, come in a noble Procession to receive their
Blessings; and that they may succeed, they bring every one Offerings with them
of Wax-Candles, Money, Hay, Oats, Bricks, etc. according to their Employment,
which two Priests receive, who stand with great brushes and pails of Holy Water
in a proper place to give their Benedictions.

S. PRASSEDE: In a Chapel of this Church is S. Prassede.
to be seen a piece of the Pillar, at which our Savior was scourged: And which
makes the Church more considerable, there is in it 3300. Saints Bodies, and
some Pictures, by Giulio Romano, Giuseppe and Zuccaro.

S. PIETRO in VINCOLI, Preserves St. Peter's S. Pietro in Vincoli.
Fetters: In this Church is a famous Statue of Moses in white Marble, much
bigger than the Life; by Mich. Angelo, and the best that ever he made.

S. DOMENICO a Monte MAGNANAPOLI, S. Domenico a Monte Magnanapoli. S. Silvestro
a Monte Cavallo.
Has another famous Picture of our Lady, painted by St. Luke.

S. SILVESTRO a Monte CAVALLO, In it, and the Chapels, diverse Paintings by
great Masters.

S. ANDREA Is a little neat Church, Built by S. Andrea.
Prince Panfilio, and Caure. Bernino, the Architect; it is so lined with fine
Marble, and adorned with little Statues of Angels, Cherubs. etc. that for the
bigness of it, it is as fine as any thing in Rome.

S. VITALE Is Built on the Ruins of the Temple S. Vitale.
of Quirino, who here appeared to Proculus.

S. LORENZO in PANISPERNA, Stands where S. Lorenzo in Panisperna.
St. Laurence was put upon the Grid-iron by the Emperor Decius, whose Palace
stood in this place; the Martyrdom painted in Fresco; and to make it more Holy
(by a Miracle) they show the Tomb of a Scotch Virgin.

SAPIENZA Is a well built College for public Sapienza.
Lectures; the Architecture of Giacomo della Porta.

PROPAGANDO FIDE Is a College of noble Propagando Fide.
Building for Eastern Students of Catholic Divinity, who are afterward sent
home to make all their Countrymen (if possible) as wise as themselves.

S. PUDENTIANA, The Daughter to a Roman S. Pudentiana.
Senator, Converted by St. Peter, in whose House he lived Seven years, now a
Church: There is a fine Chapel built by Cardinal Gaetano, lined with curious
polished Jasper and Marble, adorned with Pictures and Statues: At the Altar a
Priest doubting whether the Ostia he had Consecrated, were flesh or not, it
leapt out of his hands, and all bloodied the Stones, over which, are now two
Glasses set to preserve the spots, which are very visible to the eye of Faith:
Here also is a Well, in which they say is the blood of 3000. Martyrs; and they
have likewise some of St. Peter's old Clothes, and the wooden Altar, at which he
first said Mass.

S. DEGLI ANGELI, Is the Therme of Dioclesian, S. Degli Angeli.
with little alteration converted to a Church for the Carthusians, who out of
the same Ruins have also Cells; the Dedication is to the seven Angels that are
God-All mighties assistants.

S. BERNARDO Is a great round Tower belonging S. Bernardo.
to the Therme of Dioclesian, now made a Church.

S. SUSANNA Is a very neat Church and Front; S. Susanna.
the History is painted by Baldassere da Bologna, the other Pictures of Pari
Romano, etc. Here was the Campo Scelerato, where the wanton Vestals were Buried
alive.

S. MARIA della VITTORIA, Is so called for the S. Maria della Vittoria.
Battle of Prague: The Chapel of Cardinal Cornaro is very fine, being the
Architecture of Bernino; that of Gessi is Painted by Domenichini; a Crucifix by
Guido Rheni.

In S. AGNESE: On the Feast Day, by the Pope, etc. S. Agnese.
two white Lambs are solemnly blessed, and of their Wool Palls made and sent
Presents to the Patriarchs, Bishops, etc.

S. COSTANZA was the Temple of Bacchus, which S. Costanza.
is entire still, and serves for a Church without alteration; it is round,
supported with double rows of Marblepillars, and in the Roof old Mosaic work
of Unitage, etc. In it, stands a great thick Chest, or Trough of Porphry, with
a cover suitable to the rest of its Beauty; on the Corners of which, is figured
Child hood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age; on the other Bassorilievo in
Grotesque, Boys with Baskets of Grapes, etc. The use of this no man can guess,
but the Vulgar call it Bacchus his Tomb.

PALAZZO VATICANO Stands close to St. Peter's, Palazzo Vaticano.
on the side of an agreeable Hill, and is vast, but not uniform. In the Chapel
Sisto, by the great Hall is Mich. Angelo's last Judgment, but so dark, that one
can scarce discern an Angel from a Devil: The Library is one large Room,
supported with Pillars like a Church; about which are low Presses, wherein are
kept the Books, and the like by the side of the Walls; and over them Historical
Paintings in Fresco; at the end are some little Rooms Gallery-wise, that cross
this, which are also stored with choice Manuscripts, as a Terence 1200. years
old; a Chinese-book, whose leaves are infinitely thinner and smoother than
Paper, made of some Herb, others of Barks of Trees, Hyeregliphicks of Mexico,
Mass-books with Figures of Saints, Angels, etc. in admirable Minature; a Volum
of all Insects with their Figures painted; Henry the 8th. his Book against
Luther, Dedicated to the Pope; his Love Letters to Anna Bullein; an ancient
Greek Bible writ in Gold* etc. The great Gallery is furnished with large Maps
in proper colors of Italy; the other Rooms with Velvet; the Roof and Sides (in
all the principal) Paintings, by diverse great Masters of Devotion, etc. but
most of them by Raphael; and amongst the rest, there is an Armory for 30000.
men. The great Garden has diversity of Pleasure, Trees of all sorts, as Palms,
etc. A little Wood, a Flat, an Ascent, great Fountains falling from high,
others bursting like a River out of rude Rock covered with Greens, Grotta's,
etc. The little Garden is thick set with Orange Trees, and variety of
Fountains; at the upper-end are two brass Peacocks, once gilt, and stood upon
the Tomb of Scipio Affricanus, and by them the great brass Pineapple, taken
from the Moles Adriani: By this, in a little Court, are the admirable Statues
preserved of Laocon and his Sons, bit by Serpents; the Trunk of Hercules, by
which Mich. Angelo learnt so much; two Venusses, two Rivers, Nile and Tyber; a
great Hercules, that admired one of Antinuus of Oriental Marble.

PALAZZO FARNESE, Has before it a fine Palazzo Farnese.
Piazza with noble Fountains; was designed by Mich. Angelo, is square Building,
clear from other Houses, and on every side a great Entrance: The Court is upon
Pillars, in which is the admirable Statue of Hercules found in the Therme of
Antoninus Caracalla; that of the Vestal, that to Vindicate her Chastity brought
water in a Sive from the Tyber; above, are Galleries again in the same manner:
In the Rooms are great numbers of Statues and Pictures; among the rest Mich.
Angelo's, and Raphael Urbins, done by their own hands; but beyond all, is the
Salle, painted by Hannibal Caraccio: On the backside the Court is the famous
Statue of the Bull, with Dirce tied to his Horns, etc. which is as wonderful
for the size, as the work: For the Garden wanting here, it has a noble one by
Ponte Sisto.

PALAZZO BURGHESI, Is the Architecture of Palazzo Burghesi.
Martino Lunghi; has 19. Rooms on a Floor, the first two Stories in the Court
supported with Pillars; the Garden (being in the midst of Rome) little, yet
has three great Fountains, besides diverse small ones placed between every two
Orange Trees; and to recompense the want of ground, has a Garden and Fountains
likewise on the top of the House, which has a noble Prospect: The Rooms are
richly furnished, besides the Pictures and Paintings, which are in great
quantities, by the greatest Masters, as Titian and Mich. Angelo's by their own
hands; the famous Crucifix of the latter, and the Bedchamber hung all with
naked Venusse's in several postures: The Princess, her Room of Audience has two
Fountains and Basins at each end, of a Marble, like the best Wall-nut, and
Tables, and Doorcases too of the same, so admirably colored and grained, that
none would take it to be Stone: The great Looking-glass they show as a
Curiosity, for having the frames of Crystal entire, without any metal to join
or fasten them.

MONTE CAVALLO, Is the Popes Residence; Monte Cavallo.
has an open large Piazza before it, whereon stand the two famous Grecian
Horses that give it the name; it has a great noble Court and Garden, with great
Variety of Fountains, Grotta's, Groves of Orange Trees, and every thing
proportionable except Furniture; the Architecture is of Domenico Fontane.

PAZZORELLA Is the House where Lunaticks and Pazzorella.
Fools are kept, most of the Madmen in it, being Priests, and amongst them,
one that believes himself to be the Pope, and were he in his Habit, might
easily be mistaken, being very like him both in person and face.

PALAZZO del S. UFFICIO, Is the Palace of Palazzo del S. Ufficio.
the Inquisition, where there are diverse Grave Fathers attending, but the holy
Tormentors have now little to do.

PALAZZO PALESTRINO, One of the finest Palazzo Palestrino.
in Rome, is built on the side of a Hill, has abundance of Chambers, and those
very well stored with Statues, Pictures, and other rich Furniture; of the
first, there is a Cupid and a young Lady of the Family rarely done, by Bernino,
and Raphaels Mistress painted by himself, as also the famous Venus by Titian;
of which, there are so many Copies: The Grand Salle, the painting of Pietro di
Cortona.

PALAZZO CHIGI Is a new and excellent wellbuilt Palazzo Chigi.
Palace, the Architecture of Bernino; the Rooms all well contrived and richly
furnished, most of them with Tissue, and full of excellent Pictures of the
greatest Masters, and in every one of them sweet Bags of different and
admirable perfumes: In one Chamber, called the Foutesterium are Looking-glasses
with Crystal frames, hung with great drops of the same, valued at 12000.
Crowns; the Bed of White-sattin, rarely painted in Flowers, and Embroidered
with Gold, and the Ceeling painted with greens, etc. suitable to the rest.

PALAZZO PANFILLIO Is in the great Piazza Palazzo Panfillio.
Navona, in the midst of which, stands that fine Guglia and Fountain, with the
Figures of the four famous Rivers of the World, by Bernino: This Palace has
abundance of Rooms, Statues, and Pictures, and is noble building, but none of
these of the first rate, only the Gallery is the painting of Pietro di Cortona.

PALAZZO PANFILLIO, In the Carso, a Street Palazzo Panfillio.
almost the length of Rome, wherein the Ladies in the Evening take the Air:
This Palace will be fine when finished, but the additional Building makes it
in some disorder; amongst others the Statues there of Bernino's six Boys are
very good.

PALAZZO COLONNA Is a great Palace richly Palazzo Colonna.
furnished: In his Garden, on the side of the Hill of Montecovallo was the
Therme of Constantine, and on the top of it, the place where Nero stood to
behold Burning- Rome; the Ruins of this Pillar there being all white marble
Stones of Prodigious bigness, some six yards long and four Diameter, curiously
cut in foliage, etc.

PALAZZO ORSINI Is a great Palace built on Palazzo Orsini.
the Ruins of Pompey's Theater.

PALAZZO di PAOLO 3o. Is a Palace which Palazzo di Paolo 3.
has had three famous Architects, Sangola, Mich. Angelo, and Vignola.

PALAZZO SISTO 5o;. Is the Architecture of Palazzo Sisto 5.
Giacomo Fontana, not now Inhabited.

PALAZZO GHIGI Is in the Longara, wherein is Palazzo Ghigi.
the Banquet of the Gods, by Raphael, the freshest colors I have seen; as well
as the Palace, the Gardens, Fountains, and Walks of Orange Trees are pleasant.

PALAZZO di RAPHAEL was Raphael Urbins own Palazzo di Raphael.
Habitation, a very pretty Palace.

PALAZZO di CAFFARELLI, Is a very noble Palazzo di Caffarelli.
Palace, built by Raphael Urbin also.

PALAZZO de i RE d'INGHILTERRA Is a Palazzo de i Re d'Inghilterra.
ueat Palace, formerly belonging to the Kings of England; for their
Ambassadors, the Architecture of Bramante.

2. PALLAZZI MASSIMI: The one Architecture of Palazzi Massimi.
Baldassere Peruzzi, the other of Domenico Fontana, in both are many Statues
and Pictures.

CASA PIGHINI Is the house where those admirable Casa Pighini.
Statues are of Meleager and a Venus, for which, my Lord Arundel offered 12000.
Crowns.

PALAZZO del GRAN DUCA Is a fine Palace Palazzo del Gran Duca.
of the Great Dukes, Built not above 30. years ago, and has a piazza before it.

PALAZZO GAETANI, Is a large and noble Palazzo Gaetani.
Palace; the Architecture of Bartolomeo Amanati.

PALAZZO della CANCELLERIA Is a very Palazzo della Cancelleria.
great Palace, Built of the Stones fetched from the Amphitheatre, as were those
of Farnese and St. Marks, is the Architecture of Bramante, and the Habitation
of Cardinal Barberine the English Protector: In the Court stand two Gigantick
Figures, representing two Muses.

PALAZZO CAPO di FERRO Is the Architecture Palazzo Capo di ferro.
of Giulio Mazzoni, very much adorned with Festons, Statues, Bassicilievi, etc.
Within it is yet finer, having many Statues and Pictures; of the first, in the
Hall, is one of Pompey bigger than the Life, much esteemed, the next Room
painted by Mich. Angelo; others by Volterra, Piamentino, etc. The Garden has
two fine Fountains, Orange Trees, etc.

PALAZZO MUTI Is a little Palace with Statues Palazzo Muti.
on the top of it, possessed by the Heirs of Mutius Scevola, it being anciently
his Habitation.

PALAZZO GIUSTINIANO Is the Architecture Palazzo Giustiniano
of Gio Fontana, A Palace well stored with Statues, being so full that it
seems a Warehouse of them, and amongst the crowd, is one of a Goat, as if
alive, that of Dea Natura, of Lelia and the Swan, by Bernino, A Muse, a Sibel,
etc. has some Pictures also of Titian.

PALAZZO ALTIERI Is of the present Popes Palazzo Altieri.
Family, now Building a mighty addition to it for his Nephew.

PALAZZO ALTEMPS, In which are diverse Statues Palazzo Altemps.
and Pictures, one of the last, by Raphael, of the Virgin, worth 5000. Pistols,
and a rare Bassorilievo, of the Triumph of Bacchus.

2. PALLAZZI MATEI, Have in them several Statues 2. Palazzi Matei.
and Paintings.

PALAZZO FALCONIERI Is the Architecture Palazzo Falconieri.
of Borromine: Within, it has diverse Statues and excellent Pictures, a Garden
of fine Fountains, and the Tyber running by the end of it.

PALAZZO LANCELLOTTI, Has a good Palazzo Lancellotti.
Collection of Statues and Pictures: The Architecture of Maderni.

PALAZZO VEROSPI Is the Architecture of Honorio Palazzo Verospi.
Lunghi: In this Palace is a very fine Collection also of Statues and Pictures.

PALAZZO RIARI Is Inhabited by the Queen of Palazzo Riari.
Sweden, in which are several noble Rooms, as that wherein every Tuesday the
choicest Voices and Music of Rome is heard; but some principally furnished
with excellent Pictures of Carreggio, Carraccio, Paolo Veronese, a Venus by
Titian, and that admired little Picture of our Lady, with our Savior in her
Hand, and St. John kissing him, by Raphael, and cost 10000. Crowns; her
Hangings the design of Vandike, and her vast Silver Flower-pots upon Pedestals
of the same, are very fine too.

PALAZZO SAVELLI Is Built on the Ruins of Palazzo Savelli.
the Theater of Marcellus and Semcircular like it.

PALAZZO ALDOBRANDINI, Has several Palazzo Aldobrandine.
excellent Statues and Pictures; and in the Garden (which is very delightful by
iis Prospect, Orange Trees, Mirtles, Fountains, etc.) is an ancient Picture of
a Marriage made in the time of the old Romans, which is much valued for its
rarity, there being but only that in Rome.

PALAZZO MAZZARINI, Has before it a very Palazzo Mazzarini.
spacious Court, and in the Garden the Picture of Aurora, by Guido Rheni.

PALAZZO SALVIATI Is the Architecture of Palazzo Salviati.
Lippi, Built on purpose to Lodge a King of France in.

VILLA del G. DUCA Is the great Duke's Palace Villa del G. Duca.
on Monte Trinita; from whence it has an incomparable Prospect of all Rome, and
the Country about it; before it is a very fine marble Fountain; and in the
Balcony of the second story, is another: In the Rooms, besides many excellent
Statues, are these admired ones; The Venus made by Cleomenes, Son of
Apolidorus, esteemed the best in the World, the Wrestlers, and the Clown
listening to Catalines Conspiracy are not to be equaled, nor that of the
Gladiaator threatening Heaven, besides diverse Heads upon curious marble Pillars,
etc. In the Garden, which is vast, are likewise noble Fountains and Statues; at
the entrance, two great white marble Lions which stand as Guards; a Silenus in
Brass, holding a young Bacchus in his Arms, and many others; an Obelisk with
Hierogliphicks, Walks lined with Orange Trees, Groves of Elci, etc. So much
Beauty and Pleasure, that nothing can be added.

VILLA BURGHESI Has the approaches to it by fine Walks, through a delicate
little Park, full of tall young Trees, most Elci, which are always green, and
stored with variety of Deer; on one side of it pleasant Gardens, Villa Burghesi.
with all sorts of Fountains, Grotta's, Vollerys, etc. close Walks, with water
conveyed through the boughs, which all the way drops like Rain, to cool them;
on the other side, at some distance, Canals and Fish Ponds; behind it
principally, but indeed every way an incomparable Prospect: The Palace it self
Crusted with rare pieces of Bassirilievi, and a great many Porphry Figures
stand like Sentinels about it: Within, it is filled with Statues, Pictures, and
other Curiosities in too great number to be remembered; but some of the
principal are, that of Diana which was Worshipped by Augustus Caesar, the
Gladiator, original of that in St. James's-Park, the Apollo and Daphne turning
into a Lawrel-Tree of Caure Bernini, the best he ever made; David with his
Sling, by the same hand; the Hermaphrodite, or Iside, that turns in her sleep
to a man, lying upon a Quilt, which is so natural, that there is none but
mistakes it; the Heads of Hannibal and Scipio; eight rarely pollish'd Pillars
of Porphry, with little Statues on them, two of green marble, and two of
Pidoechio; a Seneca of Touchstone, coming out of an Affrican Bath; a red Woolf
with Romulus and Renuus at her Paps; a Head of Alexander the Great; Eneas with
his Father on his Back, and his Son in his Hand, by Bernino also; four more
Porphrey Pillars, with Urns of the same; the Statue of Agrippina, and the
Gladiator her Lover, both Ancient; a Silenus excellent also; a Cup of a
petrifi'd Moucheron, which to the eye is still the same; and a Chair that locks
them fast that sit in it, whose opening bottom gives leave to treat Woman or
Boy at pleasure.

VILLA PANFILLIA Stands high, has an excellent Villa Panfillia.
Prospect, Gardens, Grotta's, Statues, and Urns, some fine Fountains, and many
large Walks in and about the Park; Has within, many Statues and Pictures, as
those of St. Peter and St. Paul, by Mich. Angelo; of the former, the best is
the Angel wrestling with Jacob.

VILLA MATEI: Has fine Gardens, VVater-works Villa Matei
and Prospect; in the Palace and Summer House these excellent Statues, Apollo
fleaing Marsius, three Cupids asleep with their Heads laid upon each other;
Andromeda; an ancient Head of Cicero an Amazon, Cleopatra, Hercules, a
Gigantick Antoninus, Brutus and Porcia, etc. rare Jasper Tables and marble
Pillars.

VILLA LUDOVISA Has a Situation as fine as Villa Ludovisa.
the others, great Gardens, noble shady Walks, Grotta's, Fountains, etc. and
two Palaces, on each side one, wherein there are Pictures of Titian, Mich.
Angelo; Caraccio, Guido, Rheni, etc. Two Statues of Apollo, a rare one of a
dying Gladiator, the Porphry Oracle that spoke; three excellent heads of
Scipio, Affricanus, Seneca, and Cicero; and among the rest, the real Body of a
Man turned to Stone, so hard and perfect, that to satisfy Charles the 5th. of
the truth of it, they broke one of his Legs, where the bone under the petrifi'd
flesh plainly appears; besides other Curiosities, there is a Bedstead valued at
100000. Crowns, the Posts of Oriental Jasper, the Head, Teaster, etc. set with
precious stones; the Walls within the Palace plastered with marble, beaten to
powder, which afterward becomes as hard and smooth as at first.

VILLA MONTALTA Has a Garden not inferior Villa Montalta.
to any in Rome, has excellent walks, admirable Waterworks, Trees, Fountains,
etc. In the House several Statues and Pictures, as that of David and Goliath,
where you may see their Back-sides too; the Ariadne and Bacco, by Guido Rheni;
the Busto of Caius Marius; a Picture which one way seems a bunch of herbs, and
turned and held another way, is the face of a man, a piece of Mosaic
Land-skip, several Urns, etc.

VILLA FARNESE: Is a Garden on part of Monte Villa Farnese.
Palatino, wherein there are pleasant Walks, Fountains, and Prospect.

PUBLIC FOUNTAINS Are those two noble Public Fountains.
ones in Piazza Vaticana, by Caure. Maderno.

That great one on Monte Gianicolo, that discharges five Rivelets, brought by
Aquaduct from Bracciano, by Paolo 5. the Architecture of Gio. Fontana.

That before St. Pietro Montorio, by the same Architect.

That of Sisto 5o. on Monte Viminale, issuing in three great branches adorned
with Statues of Aaron, etc. by Domenico Fontana.

That in Piazza Barberina, by Caure. Bernino.

That in Piazza del Popolo, by Domenico Fontana.

That in Piazza di Spagna, in the form of a Ship, discharging a vast quantity
of water, by Bernino too.

That in Piazza di Monta Cavallo, by Domenico Fontana.

The Quatro Fontana, with Figures in cumbent postures, by Pietro di Cortona.

That in Piazza di Sa. Maria Maggiore, by Carlo Maderno.

That in Piazza di S. Giovanni Latterano, by Domenico Fontana.

That in Piazza di Madonna de'Monti, by Giacomo della Porta.

That in Campidoglia, with the Statues of Nilus', Tigris, and Rome, by Mich.
Angelo.

That in Piazza di Muti, by Giacomo della Porta.

That in Piazza Giudea, by the same Architect.

That in Piazza di Sa. Maria in Trastevere, by Gio Fontana.

That by Ponte Sisto, which falls in great quantity from on high, like a
Cascade, by Dom. Fontana.

The two in Piazza Farnese, by Giralomo Rainaldi.

That in Piazza Mattei, by Giacomo della Porta.

That in Piazza Colonna, by the same.

The great one at Monte Citorio, by Francesco da Volterra.

That in Piazza della Rotonda, by Giacomo della Porta.

That del Duca di Bracciano, by Antonio Casoni.

That in Piazza Scossa Cavalli, by Carlo Maderno.

That del Aqua Acetosa, by Caure. Bernino.

That in Piazza Navona, with Neptune and the Sea-gods, by the same.

That famous one under the Guglia, in the same Piazza, with the Statues of the
four quarters of the World, a Seahorse, etc. by the same Architect.

That unfinished one of Trevi, which discharges three Rivelets.

The Capital stands on an Agreeable Hill of Campidoglio.
about 120. steps ascent; on each hand are the Triumphs of Marius, and the two
great Statues, and Horses of Constantine, or as some say, of Castor and Pollux;
in the midst of the Corile, or Piazza, is the famous Statue of Marcus
Aurelius, some think of Lucius Verus, others of Constantine on Horseback,
placed upon a Pedestal, made by Mich. Angelo, who admired this Figure so, that
he asked this Brazen Horse why he did not go, so like it is to Nature: On one
side of it, is Rupes Tarpeia, not high enough now to break any man's neck; and
in the Front is the Palace of the Senators, built on the Ruins of the former;
against the face of the Stairs is a rare Fountain, and close at each end (but
dis-joynd) the two Wings, or Palaces of the Conservatori, designed by Mich.
Angelo, supported with Pillars in Porticos; and on the flat tops of all the
three Structures, Statues set in equal distance: In the inward Court of one of
these, in white marble, are the measures of the ancient Romans, as their Canna,
Palmo, etc. of Corn, Oil, etc. The Pillar which stood in the Foro, from which
they counted their miles to any place, the Colonna Rostrata, in memory of their
Victory against the Carthaginians; the Statues of Julius and Augustus Caesar;
the broken white marble Colossus of Apollo, whose Toe I measured, is thicker
than my middle; the head and hand of that of Comodus, not much less than the
former; the admired Statue of the Lion tearing the Horse; the Rape of the
Sabines in Bassirilievi, the Tryumphs Sacrifices, etc. of Marcus Aurelius in
Mezzo Relievo; the little Idol like a Monkey, taken from the Pantheon, and the
ancient Roman Laws, in Brass: In the Rooms is painted in Fresco the Rape of the
Sabines, Hannibal, and Scipio, Cocles on the Bridge; the Horatij and the
Curatij; that of Brutus, commanding the death of his Son; Mutius Scevola with
his hand in the Torch, by Perugino: The Statues in Brass of young Hercules,
once worshipped in his Temple on the Aventine Hill of Caius Marius, of Junius
Brutus; that rare one of the Boy picking the Thorn out of his foot; that the
Woolf with Romulus and Remus; the Heads in marble of Socrates, Cicero, Virgil,
Plato, Diogenes, etc. In the old Palace the old Statue Marforius, Domitian in
Bassorilievo, worshipped like a God; the Statue of Pudicitia, of Alcibiades, of
the Woman Cursing Heaven for want of a Fortune; an old Hercules, once gilded,
with many more Ancient and Modern of Popes, Generals, etc. their marble
Calendar, etc. the Rooms painted by Giuglio Romano.

Of the infinite number of Temples, and other an Curia Calabria.
tient Buildings, few are now remaining; but the most, in Foro Romano: and on
the backside of the Capitol, is an Architrave, of the Curia Calabria.

Near that, is a great part of the Temple of Concords Temp. Concord.
Portico yet standing, and three delicate Pillars, of some other rare
Structure; not certainly known of what.

The Tryumphal Arch of Septimius Severus, Arch. Septim. Sever. Temp. Saturn.
Temp. Mars Temp. Anton. Pius, etc.
of white marble, with his Victories in Bassirilievi.

The Temple of Saturn, now a Church.

Employed as the former.

The Temple of Antoninus Pius, and Diva Faustina his wanton Wife; the Portico
of Corinthian Pillars almost perfect still.

The Temple of Romulus and Remus, in the Ruins Temp. Rom
of which, was found a Map of old Rome, engraven in large marbles.

The Temple of Peace, of which three great Temp. Peace.
Arches still remain, and was the richest and most beautiful of all the rest,
as the white marble Pillar does sufficiently testify on the Pedestal, before
Sa. Maria Maggiore.

The Ruins of the Foro, of the some Pillars Architraves, Foro Nerv.
etc.

Three Pillars of the Temple of Jupiter Stator. Jup. Stator. Lake Curtius.
Palace, Palatine.


The Lake of Curtius, now a Common-shoar.

The great vast Ruin of the Emperor's Palace on Monte Palatino, the most
pleasant and entire Hill of all the seven.

The ruinous walls of the Circus Maximus, all still remaining, which lined with
Seats, held near 200000. Circus Maximus.
People.

The Temple of Janus Quadrifrous, a square Temp. Janus.
white marble Building, with four Entrances, or Gates.

The Arch built to Septimus Severus, and Marcus Arch. Septi. mus Severe, and
Marcus Aurelius. Arch Constantine.
Aurelius, by the Goldsmiths, whereon is described in Bassorilievo, their
Tryumphs Sacrifices, etc.

The Arch of Constantine almost perfect still, with some excellent pieces of
Bassorilievo on it, taken from other places; the rest detestable.

The Arch of Titus, which was the finest, and Arch. Titus.
is the most ancient Architecture of them all, and has still the spoils of the
Temple of Jerusalem in Mezzorilievo upon it.

Part of the Arch of Gallienus, and the like of Gordian. Arch Galli. and
Gordian.


The inward VValls of Vespasians Amphitheatre, Amphitheatre.
and one part of the outward, with Pillars on each side of every Niche, four
degrees high, one over another, and a part of the Meta Sudans by it.

Antoninus his Baths, a Ruin wherein there are four Therme Antoninus Caracalla.
places large as Westminster Hall, besides diverse less, nothing speaking more
the greatness of the Romans than these prodigious Baths, of which the Pillars
were all of Oriental Granite, as appears by those two in the great Dukes
possession at Florence.

On Monte Aventino are also many broken walls, Monte Aventino.
pieces of ancient Temples, etc. not now distinguishable.

The most entire of all the Baths, is that of Therme Diocletian.
Dioclesian; part of the great Arched Roof perfect still, and many of the
Pillars which are all of a piece, remaining too.

Are seven great Archt places under ground, Set Sale.
said to be made by Dioclesian also, for the same use.

The Bathes of Constantine very much ruined. Therme Constantine Castello d'aqua
Giulia.


The Ruins of a Structure that served to distribute the water into the City,
brought thither by the Aquaducts.

In the walls of Rome stands the fine entire white marble Piramid of Cestius,
one of the Epuloni, and Piramid C. Cestius.
within it were some Statues, but now walled up.

Is a great hill, made of the broken pots thrown Monte Testaccio.
there in the old Romans time.

Is still remaining, now called by St. Paul's name. Porta Trigemmini. Porta
Maggiore. Temp. Sun.


And the Aquaduct joining to it, with all its Inscription perfect still.

On the Quirinal Hill is the Ruins of a Temple of the Sun, and near the Temple
of Peace, another also of the Moon.

A little round Fabric, built on white marble Pillars, Temp. Vesta.
now a Church.

Is another little Temple, placed where Romulus and Remus was found. Temp.
Romul.


Of the same figure with the two former, and Temp. Bacchus.
in all respects perfect still.

Is a place walled in of about 450. yards long for Circus Caracalla.
Games and Exercises; in the midst, it had two of those obelisks now erected in
the City, and on one side of it, is the Ruins of a Temple of Mars.

Is a Tower of about eight or ten yards thick, Cased Moles Mettella.
with white Marble, where Crassus, her rich Husband, placed her Ashes, called
Capo di Bave, from such Heads on the Corniche.

A place with ruined Walls of a great compass, where Pretorium.
the Pretorian Bands did Quarter.

What is now called Caffarelli, was anciently the Caffarelli.
Fountains of Egeria, Auma, Pompillius his Deity, to whom in imitation of
Moses, he went to receive Laws, Divine and Moral, for the People. It Is a long
Archt Grotta, under a Hill, and at the further end, a marble Figure lying
along, leaning upon her hand, and water from three places over it perpetually
running; formerly there was a thick Wood before it.

The Ruins of the Temples of Mars, Venus, and Temp. Venus.
Cupid, are yet to be seen, and secret passages under ground to every one of
them.

The Pillar is still in the Foro, on which Domitian's Colonna Domitiano.
Statue stood, and was adored.

The Common-shoar to old Rome is lined with Free Cloaca Maxima. Temp. Alba Dea.
stone, and so large, that a Cart might pass in it.

The little round Temple of Alba Dea, now a little Church.

Enough of the Erarium is now remaining too, to Erarium.
show how strong and great a Fabric the ancient Romans had for their Arms and
Treasure; it is built alla Rustica, like the great Dukes Palace.

The old Bridge Aurellius, with some Repairs, is still Pont Aurelius.
in being, now called Ponte Sisto.

The Colonna is of white marble, one hundred and seaventy-three Colonna Traiana.
foot high; about it is described in rare Bassorilievo, that Emperors Wars,
Victories, etc.

The Colonna Antonina has been injured by the Fire, Colonna Antonina.
is 175. foot high, and adorned as the other; near it are Eleaven Corinthian
Pillars, part of the Portico of that Emperors Palace.

The Theater of Marcellus would have contained 80000. Theater Marcellus.
persons; the Walls still so good, that it is now made a Palace by Sigre.
Savelli.

The Panteon, A round Temple, By Agrippa Dedicated Pantheon.
to the Mother of the Gods, and all the Gods is perfect still, all but for its
Cover of Corinthian Brass, of which Urban the 8th. Robbed it; on the Architrave
is this Inscription, M. Agrippa, L. F. Cos. tertium fecit; within, it is white
marble, roof and sides, the Pavement the same, and Porphry; has no Window but
that in the middle of the Roof; its height is its breadth, which is 144. foot.
The Portico has all its Pillars still remaining, which are of Granite, of one
entire piece, 53. foot high, 61. Diameter, and best of the Corinthian order,
the door also (which is all cut out of one stone) is as tall as the Pillars,
the door it self faced with brass.

The Mausoleum Augusti is round; at the entrance Mausoleum Augusti.
two ancient Statues, and a Head over the door; within, it has three stories
one over another, covered with Earth, now Gardens, and in the Circumference a
low Building, like a Vault, for the Ashes of the Emperors.

That of Adriani, Now Castle Angelo (because Moles Adriani.
an Angel was seen upon it) was of the same form and use, before it was made a
Castle: It has now five Bastions, a Garrison in it, and may resist an Enemy a
little while: Here the Pope keeps his Triple Crown and Money; and from the
Vatican hither, is a Corridore, by which his Holiness may escape from danger.

By it is the marble Bridge Elius, now called St. Angelo Pons Elius.
too, with the 12. fine new Statues upon it, Angels, holding every one
something relating to our Saviors Passion, as the Cross, Spear, Sponge,
Nails, Hammer, Crown, etc.

In the River by it, are some of the Piles and broaken Triumph Bridge.
Arches remaining of the Tryumphal Bridge.

The Guglio Vaticana is of one entire piece, and on the Obelisco Vaticano.
top of it, part of the true Cross of our Savior placed; on the side of this
Obelisk are these words, Divi Cesari, Divi Julij F. Augusti Tiberio Cesari D.
Aug. F. Augusto Sacrum.

The biggest of the Obelisks is that before St. John Aguglia Laterana.
Lateran, which is 112. foot long, besides the Basiis, has this and another
Inscription to the same purpose; Fl. Constantinus Aug. Constantini Aug. F.
Obeliscum a paret loco suo motum diuque Alexandriae jacentem trecentorum
remigium impositum Navi mirande vastitatis per mare Tiberimque magnus molibus
Romam convenctum in Circo Max ponendum S. P. Q. R. D. D.

The Guglia before Madna. del Popolo is 88. foot Aguglia alla Madonna del
Popolo.
long, and upon it, this Inscription, Imp Caesar Divi F. Aug. Pont Max. Imp. 12.
Cos. 11. Pot. 14. Egipto in Potestatum Populi Romani redacta soli Domum dedit.

That before Sta. Maria Maggiore is 42. foot high, Aguglia di Sa. Maria
Maggiore. Obeli^co Mahuto.
and taken from the Mausoleum of Augustus.

That of St. Mahuto is full of Hierogliphicks, named after a British Bishop
that lived in this place above a 1000. years ago.

In the Great Dukes Garden is a Guglia full of Hierogliphicks Obelifco di
Medici.
too: Such another in the Garden of Matei, and another mounted upon the back of
an Elephant in the Piazza Minerva.

The Government and Court of Rome altogether consists Court and Government.
of Churchmen, and except in that and greatness, differs but little from other
Courts, the Officers being much the same, whose several Charges do make a
Vollum; but what is most observable to a Stranger, is

The College of 70. Cardinals, of which six are Bishops, College of Cardinals.
50. Priests, and 14. Deacons, who sit in the next Room to his Holiness (on red
Benches) like the House of Lords, teaching Spiritual matters.

The Governor of Rome, and the Judges, under him, Governor.
in Civil and Criminal, who upon any Suit or Complaint, cite both Parties, and
presently determine it; the whole expense not amounting to one single Fee, to
drowsy Lawyers given here for Nonsense.

The Cardinal Padrone, a great Minister, applied to Card. Padrone.
on all occasions, and courted by every one, as Favorites usually are.

The Captain, or General of the Popes little Army, General.
which is more or less, sometimes two, three, and now but a 1000. men in Rome,
part Italians, part Germans, except 300. Swizzers, who are Guards to his
Holinesses person; and 200. light Horsemen, who serve for the same purpose.

The Militia which his Holiness can command upon Militia and Galleys.
any sudden occasion, are but 80000. men, nor has he more than five Galleys,
which are in port at Civita Vecchia.

The Traffic of the State of the Church, consists in Traffic.
Oil, Alum, Silk, and Corn; of which last, they have great quantities, and
would have four times more, were all the Campagna Tilled.

Duccats. The certain Revenue of the Church Revenue.
is yearly 2600000 Doganadi di Roma 375000 Appalto di Tobacco Thus
14000 Appalto di Fieno Paglia, etc. 24000 Appalto della Carta e Cera 26000
Appalto del Sapone 10000 Tesoreria della Romagna 233000 Tesoreria della Marca
250000 Tesoreria di Perugia ed Umbria 108250 Tesoreria di Ferrare 34000
Tesoreria di Bologna 18000 Maritima e Campagna 22000 Provincia del Patrimonio
52000 Stati di Castro e Ronciglione 50000 Salare e Polveriere 30000 Lumiere
29000 Posta 34000 Tesoreria d'Urbino 20000 Dateria 350000 Assegnamenti deviersi
880250

The Religion, (allowing the change of Names, and Religion.
some few Ceremonies) is the same with that of the ancient Romans, as appears
by Antiquities of Bassirilievi, Medailles, Histories, etc. For as these, they
had their Pope in the person of a Sovereign, (Cezar Imperator, Pontifex
Maximus) who had the charge, and was the only Interpreter of all Divine things,
did order and decree what Altars, to what Gods, what days, and in what Temples
they should Sacrifice: The care to keep out Heresies and Ceremonies; had a
peculiar habit and a Miter, not unlike those now worn; were adored, at their
Deaths, new ones chosen, by petty Popes or Cardinals, had Flamines,
Arch-Flamines, and Proto-Flamines, as Bishops, Arch-Bishaps, and Patriarchs;
wrought Miracles, Canonized Saints, did Dedicate Temples to them, made Images
in memory of them, and Worshipped them, as they now do; some of which Statues
could speak too, as well as several of the Modern; had Convents and Colleges
of several Orders; had Nuns and Abbess, whose Rules were much the same with the
present Monasteries; kept a Jubilee, had Processions, as that of the Virgin,
Mother of the Gods, whose Image, with diverse others, and particularly that of
Jupiter (on his Festival) was carried through all the Streets with great Pomp,
as now is seen in the Feast of Ged every year; made Holy Water, and placed it
at the entrance of their Temples; used Wine, and an Ostia, or Wafer made of
Flower, Salt, and Water, both which the Priest tasted before he put them on the
Sacrifice; kept Fasts, burnt Incence, gave Alms, etc. Priest confessed before
Sacrifice, had Music and Singing-Boys; wore Surplices, had their Heads shaved;
turned their Faces to the East, and had very near all the same Gestures in
their Devotions, and they and their Benefices depended absolutely on the will
of the Pope.

FRESCATI Is a pleasant little Town, about 12. Frescati.
miles from Rome, Situate upon the side of a Hill which has the Prospect of
all the Compagna; on the highest parts at considerable distance; are three
Villa's, which besides other delights, of shady walks, etc. are incomparable
for their Waterworks.

That of the Belvedere, has a River brought six Belvedere.
miles, which tumbles down in Cascata's, and other infinite forms seven several
times; the side of the Hill being cut into so many ascents and plains; three of
these Fountains are met in so many several Stories, before the Palace, and the
other four in the same manner above it; two of the uppermost being rustic,
with great store of Trees, are of all the rest, the most agreeable; but from
that called the Theater (which is a sumptuous wall with Balustres and Statues
on the top, and Niches for those of Atlas, Polyphemus, Hercules, etc. on the
sides) is imitated Rain, Hail, Snow, and Thunder, which may be heard four
miles; and the same water makes Organs play, Horns wind; and in a Room, called
the Hall of Apollo, he with all his Muses, on Mont Barnassus, join in Concert.

That of Ludovisa has many of the same Ornaments Villa Ludovisia.
and Fountains; and amongst the rest, in a thick Grove of Trees, a noble Basin
enclosed with marble Balustres; out of every Rail of which, runs a thread of
Water, besides the great one in the midst, and lesser about it.

Much bigger, and of more State than either of the Villa Montedragoni.
former; is that of Montedragoni, has the same Prospects, such like Water
works, fine Gardens, Fountains, a Park, etc. The approaches to it, through long
walks set with Lawrel-Trees and Hedges.

TIVOLI Stands yet higher than Frescati, and a Tivoli.
little further from Rome, but has the Prospect of it, and the Compagna beyond
it: Here is the Grand Cascata, or Cattaract of the River Aniene, or Teverone,
which falls with that Violence that it makes a Mist for a great distance round
about; on the corner of a Hill by it, is the Ruins of a Temple, wherein Sibilla
Tiburtina was adored, and under it the Grotta where she lived.

Here also is the Palace and famous Garden belonging Villa d'Este
now to the Duke of Modena, which is larger, has better Prospect, more
Fountains, greater Variety of Waterworks, Grotta's, etc. than any other Villa
whatsoever, besides the Models it has of old Rome, where are most of the
Temples and public Buildings, according to their ancient Figures.

In the Rode to it, runs the little stinking Nitrous River Albula.
River Albula, which though not much bigger than New-River, is yet sufficient
to Poison a Country.

About Twelve miles from Rome, is a Summer Castle Gandolfo.
House of the Popes, but has nothing but its Situation considerable; stands on
a Hill, has a Lake like a great Fish Pond by it, and a View of Rome before it.

VELETRI Is a little pretty Town; in it is the Veletri.
Statue of Urban the 8th. and the Palace and large ^arden of Ginetti; the
Walks all set with Lawrel-Hedges, and in them Lawrel-Trees which look with
great round tops, and straight Stocks, like Orange Trees: In the the most shady
parts there are some thicker than my middle, and tall as Elmes, and being on
the side of a Hill, has a fine Prospect of the Campagna.

TARACINA Has nothing now remarkable but the Taracina.
Ruins of an old Temple.

FUNDI Is the first Town in the Kingdom of Naples, Fundi.
and having been since the time of the Romans burnt, has nothing in it more
worth Notice.

MOLA Is a little Town by the Sea side, where Mola.
Cicero had a Villa, and his several Grotta's, with Fountains in the sollid
Rock, diverse Archt Vaults, with his place of Burial, are still remaining, the
Garden close by the Sea, and now full of tall Orange Trees.

GAETA Is a little Town and Castle on a Promontary Gaeta.
that stands in the Sea, joynd to main Land, only by a little neck: Here is
kept the body of the famous Bourbon, and is shown the Rock that split at our
Savior's Passion.

In the open Fields, without any House, or other Amphitheatre.
Ruin than of an Aquaduct, stands the remains of an Amphitheatre, near a fine
River, which was anciently the Situation of the Town Minturna: Here an open
fertile Country begins to show it self, the way from Rome, thus far being full
of Hills, with (nevertheless) some fruitful Valleys, and those Mountains
covered with Figgs, Olives, Orange Trees, Sage, Rosemary, etc.

CAPUA Is a little insignificant Town, and two Capua.
miles distant now from the place where that great City stood, of which there
is no other remains, but the Ruins of an Amphitheatre, and some pieces of such
other public Structures; here is the entrance on the Campagna felice, which
all the way to Naples, is a Garden, something like Lombardy, but in all
respects, finer.

NAPLES Has one end next the Mediterranean, Naples.
like a Crescent, as Genoa's middle stands, and the rest of it oblong backward
from it: Beyond the little neck of Sea is Mont Vesuvius, and a range of some
other barren Mountains; behind it a Semicircle of fruitful Hills; and on the
other side, the delicious Campagna: The Houses in general are well built, of
Stone, high, well-glaz'd, and flat-roof'd, to walk upon; the Streets admirably
paved, and some of them very large; has some very great Piazza's, many
Palaces, fine Gardens, Fountains, and the best Churches of any City in the
World.

On a Hill that over-looks it, is the Castle of St. Ermo, Castle St. Ermo.
cut out of the solid Rock into that form.

Near that is the rare Carthusian Monastery, which Carthusian Monastery.
has a Prospect as good, if not better than Greenwich: The Town, the Sea, the
Country, Islands, and Promontories, at a very great distance; the Cloister is
of white polished Marble, with Pillars and Balustres of the same; and in the
midst of the Quadrangle, Hedges of Oranges, etc. The Church, Chapels, and
Sacristy, are yet much finer, being not only Marble, but richly gilded and
painted; the Floors admirably paved with squares of white and red, and the
great quantity and great pieces of Plate as remarkable as the rest.

St. Paolo was anciently ths Temple of Castor and St. Paolo.
Pollux, as the noble Portico, great Pillars, Architrave, etc. with the Greek
Inscription, still remaining, shows: It Is now Dedicate to St. Peter and St.
Paul, under whose Statues lies two Truncks, which they make the Vulgar believe,
were the Statues of the first Patrons, and that the Voices of these Apostles
made them to tumble down; the Walls and Pillars of this Church are covered with
Silver Vewes; the Roof rarely painted and gilded.

The Anunciata is very stately, the Roof, Cupola, etc. Anunciata.
painted and gilded as the former: In the Treasury are vast Figures, Vessels,
etc. of Silver. In the Sacristy they show the two Infants of Bethlemme, with
their Wounds, etc. Adjoining is the great and well-endow'd Hospital which
maintains near 3000. Poor.

The Jesuits is a noble Structure; the best of the Order, Il Giesu S. Maria
Nuova Olivietani, etc.
fine and rich in all respects as the others; so is that of Sa. Maria Nuova,
that of the Olivietani, and several more in general excelling the Churches in
Rome: In that of the Dominicans is the famous Crucifix that spoke to Thomas
Aquinus; and in the fine Chapel in the Duomo, is kept S. Gennaro's Blood,
which boyls when brought near his Head; and in that of S. Maria del Parto, the
Tomb of Sannazarius, once his House.

The Vice-Kings Palace is of Stone, and stately; Palazzo del Vice Re.
the Front very large, supported with Pillars, and has a noble Piazza before
it, from whence to the Mole is an admirable descent for Coaches, like a
winding-Stair-case.

The Garden of di Vico has an excellent Prospect, Giardino del Marchese di Vico.
abundance of fine Fountains, and other Water works; and being on the side of a
Hill, is so prettily contrived, that there are Gardens like Rooms, one over
another, for three or four Stories: Besides these, there are many other
Palaces and Villa's, as that Royal one of Poggio Reale, of Pietrabianca, etc.

Virgils Tomb stands likewise in a Garden on the side Sepolechro di Virgillio.
of a Hill, and on the top of it, grows a Laurel, which though ill used by
curious Strangers, yet flourishes: on a Wall by it, is this Epitaph.

Qui Cineres Tumulo hec Vestigia conditur olim,
Ille hoc qui cecinit pascua, rura, duces.
They here also say he had a House, and show a little stone Seat, enclosed like
a Closet, with an excellent Prospect, where he writ his Georgicks.

The Mole lies like a bended Arm into the Sea, and Il Molo.
being very large, there they go in the Evenings to take the Fresco: At the
further end of it is the Pharo's; by the side of it, the Castle Nuovo; and on a
Rock in the Sea, the Casile Uovo.

The great Market place is large, at least as Smithfield, Il Mercato.
stored with admirable Provisions of all kinds; but the Pork, Bacon, and
Pigeons so extraordinary, that they seem quite different meats from ours.
Their Fruits, Limonades, Creams, Sherbets, Wines, etc. and the Cheapness of
them all, deserves no less to be admired and praised, In this Piazza, like the
place above said are their Gallows and Executions.

Vesuvius is about nine miles from Naples, but by Monte Vesuvio.
its great height, appears very near; the way to it, is all covered with
Stones burnt into Cinders of all sizes; the Hill it self very steep, clothed
in Ashes; the sharp top blown away, and a round hole in it, esteemed a mile
wide, which is very deep, but of an equal bore; the sides of it is Rock, the
bottom a perfect flat, except the very middle, where it perpetually smoaks, and
by its venting there, has raised a little Hill, the upper part of which is tipped
with Sulphur.

Behind Naples is a passage cut through a Mountain, Pausilippo.
large enough for two Carts to pass, long at least as the Maille in St. James's
Park, and very high, by which means it is not very dark, the light striking in
at each end, a great way; and in the middle of it is a Lamp that hangs there
for the Virgins sake, who has our Savior in her Lap.

The Grotta del Cane, is a little place cut in the Grotta del Cane.
side of a Hill, where there breaths out from the ground a Vapor of that
malignity, that in a moment it kills a Dog, if his head be held low to it; and
they usually throw him into the Lake Agnano, close by, which they say revives
them again; but if they hold them too long in the Grott, they will be mistaken,
witness a Dog that followed me from Rome. A Torch held in the same manner, will
instantly go out; and in this experiment is seen its force, for hold high, it
burns as at other times; but lower and lower, blewer and blewer, till it
extinguish; It Is kept locked, least some silly Animal should go into it for
shelter, as once a Pilgrim did, and died.

The Solfatara has Hills round it, and seems to be a Solfatara.
place where a Mountain once stood; the ground is very hot, sounds hollow, and
in diverse places the Sulphurous smoke issues with great noise and violence:
They make Cups and Pots of the Earth, which are used Physically, and gather
great quantities of Sal-Armoniack, Nitre, Vitriol, and other preparations, from
this natural Labratory. As anciently, so it is still believed to be the mouth
of Hell; the Fathers Capucins just by it, hearing often Sighs and Groans of Souls
in pain, and sometimes see them in the shape of Birds with humane faces, come
out thence to air themselves, with a great black Keeper, like a Raven with
them; at whose dreadful Croaks they all plunge into the fire again.

Close by the little arm of Sea, of 3. miles and Puzzuolo, and Baia.
a half broad, stands Puzzuolo, now a wretched poor place; and on the other
side, the Ruins of Baia, to which Caligula made a Bridge, thirteen of the
prodigious Piles and Arches being yet remaining: Of that famous Town, some of
the Streets may yet be known, but has nothing left remarkable.

Near it are the Elizian Fields, a place of no great Elysium.
Bliss, yet would have still been Paradise, had it not lost its Priests.

The Piscina Mirabile is a vast Cave, or Cellar, Piscina Mirabile.
entirely under ground, lined with a plaster as hard as flint, supported with
abundance of huge square Pillars, and supposed to have been a reserver of Water
for the Roman Galleys that lay hard by it, in the Mare Mortuum.

The Cento Camerelle are a hundred little Grotta's Cento Camerelle.
in the manner of the former, and for the same purpose, though some say, for to
keep Slaves in for the use of the Galleys.

Of Agrippina's sumptuous Villa, the only entire part Sepolc'r Agrippina.
remaining, is her Tomb, which in a dark hole, amongst the Ruins, by
Torch-light may be seen.

Near that on the Shoer is a Ruin of Cicero's Villa, Villa Cicerone, Lucullo,
Palazzo Nerone, etc.
that of Lucullus; a little further, that of Nero's Palace, and other
Buildings; and on a Hill washed by the Sea, the Walls of a modern Castle; not
much further, Cicero's Bathes, formerly in great esteem.

At a little distance are the hot Bathes cut in a hard Bagni Tritoli.
Rock in several Entrys to Sweat in, which are so warm, that it is almost
impossible to endure two minutes, at the further end.

By this is the new Mountain, a Hill, esteemed a Monte Nuovo.
mile or two in compass, that about 100. years ago, did rise in one night
after, a terrible Earthquake, and almost dried up the Lake Lucrinus.

Near the Shore is a great Ruin of the Temple of Tempio d'Hercole.
Hercules, and some remains of the Villa of Hortensius.

The Sybills Grott is a large passage, cut in a Hill, Grotta di Sibilla.
like that of Pausillippus, and formerly a Rode to Cuma, now walled up in the
middle; about 150. yards within it, there is a straight Entry, which leads to
diverse little Rooms of several sizes, the one of which has been adorned with
Mosaic work, etc. In the furthest, there is a Spring of lukewarm water, which
makes it suspected that these Chambers were cut for the sake of that; but being
so far from light, or air, then what is suffocating, I cannot guess at the use,
or the Inhabitant.

Just before the entrance into this Grotta, is the Lago Averno.
round Lake Avernus; and on the side of it, the Ruins of the Temple to Apollo,
which is made an Argument, that the abovesaid Rooms were the Lodgings of a
Sibill: At a little further distance are several scattered Ruins, and in the
Hills about it, abundance of Baths and Sweating places, esteemed good for
several Diseases; and in the Romans time had Statues there erected, that
pointed, and Inscriptions that told what part and distemper every Bath was
proper for; but the Salernian Physicians growing poor by it, went unanimously
one night and defaced them both.

Further on by Cuma is the Lake of Accheron, Palude Accherusia.
which now is no more horrid than the former, only its water of worse color.

The Government of Naples is by a Viceroy, whose Government.
Commission is usually for three years, with the allowance of 24000. Duccats
annually, besides what he fleas off the People: He is assisted by a Privy
Council, two Secretaries of State, and four Doctors of the Law, called Regenti
della Cancellaria, which are termed also his Counselors, and in matters of
Importance, are joined with the former. Of the same denomination there are
likewise two always residing in the Court of Spain, and sit in the Council of
Italy there, exactly to enform them of the State of Naples; and in these, and
all Courts of Justice, at least half of them must be Spaniards.

The City is between eight and nine miles in compass, Strength.
with Bull-works alla moderna, and encloses 300000. Inhabitants, besides
Monasteries and Strangers; has an Arsenal and five Castles; a Mole and Squadron
of seven Galleys; a Guard of fifty Horse always next the person of the Vice
Roy; a hundred Halberdiers that Guard in the Palace; five Troops of light
Horsemen, and 4000. Spanish Foot, which are there daily upon Duty likewise,
and besides, supply the Castles.

The Kingdom is esteemed to be 1468. miles in compass; Garrisons.
in all the several Castles of which, and Guards upon the Seacoasts, there are
but 1608. Spanish Foot.

The Militia of Horse, called the Battaglione, are denominicon Militia.
1020, put into 16. Troops: The Foot of the same 25078. Every 100. Families
furnishing five Soldiers, such as their Officers shall approve, which are
obliged within, or out of the Kingdom, to serve five years, and then to be
relieved by others sent in their room; but during the time of such Service,
ought to receive the same pay with the Spanish Foot. Of these, as well as all
other Force in the Kindom, the Viceroy is Captain General.

The several Provinces have Governors called Primi Governors of Provinces.
Guisticieri, which are allowed a Guard of twelve Halberds, but their
Governments last but two years.

The Revenue, which before the Rebellion, in 1647. Revenue.
was to the Treasury fifteen Carlini a Family, besides all other payments, for
the maintenance of the Army, etc. and the free gift that every two years the
Parliament in that time made, of 1200000. Duccats, is nuw 42. Carlini a Family,
in lieu of all the other payments and gifts. And in lieu of the Excise and
Gabels that were upon all sorts of things necessary to life, it was agreed
likewise to give the King 300000. Duccats yearly, which is since increased
113000. Duccats by an extraordinary Imposition on Tobacco, not included in the
Covenant, because judged a thing not necessary to humane life. The Imposition
on the Sheep and Pasturage in Apuglia, amounts to 200000. Duccats yearly, And
what the King receives in lieu of his Knights Service, or Tenure d'Adogo,
100000. yearly, which is all the certain Revenue the Spaniards have in the
Kingdom of Naples.

The chief policy in this Government, is the keeping the Nobility at odds,
which are so unwise as to be so to the Policy.
greatest degree imaginable, not daring any one of them to go 20. miles out of
Town, without a Guard of 50. or a hundred Horse, with which they are supplied
for the most part out of the Troops of Banditi, that for this reason are by
them supported and protected, every great man having his Squadron of Rogues
ready at a little summons to attempt any thing upon his Enemy. The Inquisition,
they here, would very fain have as severe as it is in Spain, but the people are
always ready to rebel on the least offer at it.

The holy Chamber brought by Angels to Loreto, Loreto.
has now a Church built over it; before which is a Fountain, and the Statue of
Sixtus Quintus; and for yet better security from eyes and hands, is walled
about with Marble, beautified with Statues of Sibills and Prophets; within it is
little, the materials brick; has but one Window, and at that the Angel entered
when he brought news of the Incarnation; the Furniture is much better, for the
Cupboard of Plate they had sent with the House, was only some earthen Vessels;
but now it has several of Gold, set with Jewels, besides Silver, Amber, etc.
there not being a Prince, nor great Family in Europe, that on the score of some
danger or deliverance have not made their presents to it, except the English,
who have either been more fortunate, or wiser than the rest. What is of value
above all the Riches, is the Virgin with our Savior in her Arms, made of
Cedar, by St. Luke, which came also with the House, and is defended by an
Iron-gate: In the Room where they keep their most superfluous Treasure, they
show diverse rich Gowns, for this Image, which are kept for Holy Days. It has an
Apothecaries Shop belonging to it, for the use of Pilgrims, in which there are
some pots that were painted by Raphael Urbin. The next remarkable thing is
their Cellar, which is the largest in Italy, stored with vast Tuns of excellent
Wine; another mark of Peoples Charity.

ANCONA Stands upon the Gulf; toward Ancona.
Land is defended by a Castle, and has a short Mole into the Sea; the Tryumphal
Arch of Trajane, the most remarkable thing.

RIMINI Preserves upon a Pedestal the Stone, that Rimini.
Caesar stood on, when he persuaded his Soldiers to march to Rome.

FERRARA Stands on a flat, by the noble River Ferrara.
Po; has a Citadel and excellent Walls, with water round them of great
breadth: Before the Duomo are two Statues in Brass, of the Family d'Este; and
in the Monastery of the Benedictives, the Tomb of Ariosto; and is such a sort
of Town as Parma or Modena.

VENICE, The Freeborn State which neither Athens, Venice.
Sparta, nor Rome could boast, stands in the Adriatic, upon little Islands,
every way two or three Leagues from Land, for which distance the water about it
being very shallow, renders it impregnable; the main Sea is kept off by a long
natural Bank of twenty or thirty miles, so that the strongest winds are not
prejudicial: The body of the City is esteemed five miles in compass, besides
the scattered Islands about it; the Houses so close for want of ground, that
there are more than in a Town of double that circuit: It is well built, has
diverse Palaces, and if inferior to any other City in Italy, it is in Churches:
The Streets have convenient passage for such as go on Foot, as well as for the
Boats, having that admirable Situation, that one may go to every House in Town
by Water or by Land: In the middle of it is the Canal Grande, deep and large,
over that, and all the rest, Stone Bridges of one Arch, under which their
Gondola's conveniently pass; the number of which are said to be 20000. and in
all the little Call or Land-passages, little Shops well furnished.

The Church of St. Mark has a great deal of Marble, S. Marco.
both without and within, as the Front, the Pillars, Pavement, etc. but not
modern Architecture, very high over the door, stands the four brass gilt
Grecian Horses of Lisippus, sent by Tiridates, King of Armenia, to Nero. The
Treasure of this Church is very great, shown always in the presence of one of
the Procuratori; some of the principal things are the twelve Suits of gold
Armor, set with Pearl, with Crowns worn by so many Virgins anciently on some
Festivals; two other Royal Crowns, and the Doges, all set with Stones of great
value; three great Carbuncles, a Flowre-de-luce with a great Diamond in it; a
huge Saphir, a cup of one Turquoise, great Massive Candlesticks, and Chalice of
Gold; two Crucifixes set with Pearl, etc. besides Relics of greaier value, as
a Tooth of St. Mark; another of Mary Magdalen, a lock of the Virgins Hair, some
of the Blood at our Saviors Passion; a piece of John Baptist's skull; one of
the Stones that was thrown at St. Stephen, etc.

Before this Church is the fine Piazza built about Piazza St. Marco.
with Portico's; and were it not for the Buildings that almost divide it into
two, would be exceeding spacious.

Next to the Church is the Doges Palace; very Palazzo del Doge.
large, and was much finer before 'twas burnt, as by that part which escaped,
crusted with white Marble apparts: The Duke himself has only one Appartment,
the rest employed for the use of Councels, Officers, etc. The great Senate Room
is rarely painted, Roof and Sides, the end over the Doges Seat is by the hand
of Tintoret, and esteemed one of the four best pieces of the World: By the
Chamber, where the Concillio di Dieci sit, is a little Armory, with Arms in
great readiness for 1000. Men; the Muskets always charged, and Match so
disposed in a little Engine with Gunpowder, that pulling a string, lights 100.
pieces at once; to this, there is a door out of the Council, and the Key lies
always by the Duke: There is also a great many Curiosities, as the Sword of
Scanderbeg, some Persian Armor, secret Arms, as Halberds that discharge
several times a Trunk with Pistols, laid Artificially to go off at the opening;
Cross-bows to shoot Needles, etc.

The fine Church and Monastery of St. George has Monasterio di S. Georgio. ^
an Island to it self, with a Garden both large and pleasant: In the Refectory
is the excellent Picture, by Paolo Veronese, of the Wedding in Canaan, where
amongst the Musicians he has placed himself; this likewise is one of the four
Renowned pieces, and is the freshest and strongest painting of all I have seen.

Before the Church of St. John is a brass Statue of S. Gio. e Paolo.
Bartolomeo Colone on Horseback: In the Chapel of St. Hyacinth the Martyrdom
of the two Patrons, by Titian, which is the third famous piece; and that of
Mich. Angelo's last Judgment at Rome makes the fourth: In the Refectory is a
Painting by Paolo Veronese, almost equal to his other; the Cloister and
Dormitory very noble.

In St. Salvatore there is two Pictures by Titian, of S. Salvatore
the Transfiguration and Annunciation.

The Church of our Lady is built in an Oval, but Madonna di Salute.
not yet finished, was a Vow of the Senates in a great Plague.

In this Monastery of the Carita, there is the raising La Carita.
up of Lazarus, painted by Bassan.

The Arsenal is esteemed three miles in compass, but Arsenal.
though not half so much, is vastly great, having Rooms not only for materials,
and to make all sorts of Provisions of War, and Magazines for them, when done,
but their Docks for Galleys, Ships, etc. are there also, and every thing that
appertains to them, there furnished and wrought; all which employs constantly
about 1500. Men. In two Chambers above-stairs are Arms for 50000. men, and in
two other Rooms the same for 60. Galleys, among which there is the rich
Bucentoro, gilded and carved all over, on which the Doge and Senators go to wed
the Sea.

The Island of Murano is the place where their Glasshouses Murano.
stand, whose Trade is infinitely decreased, and the Canal by it, the place of
Corso, where the Summer Evenings the Ladies take the Fresco.

The Diversions there in Carneval, are variety of Carnevale.
Habits and Humors, 10000. meeting every Afternoon in St. Marks Piazza, of
almost so many different Shapes and Gestures, where there is freedom of saying
or doing any thing whilst masked: After it is dusk, many of the best quality
retire to the Ridotti, a sort of Gaming houses where they play at Cards, or
talk with the Ladies, a liberty they only have at this Season, and for that
reason, the men in general are Cuckolded but once a year, from thence they
either go to the Comedies or incomparable Opera's, where the Scenes and Voices
so far excel the French, that they have scarce resemblance. Toward the latter
end of Carneval, they make sport with Baiting of Bulls, and some of their heads
are cut off with Swords at a blow: They have Girls, Boys, etc. that play all
the Tricks on the high and low Rope, fly down from St. Marks Steeple, with
Fire works, etc. In the Cavallerizzo I saw twelve noble Venetians richly armed
and dressed with Point, Feathers, and Habits of different colors (to distinguish
them) perform on Neapolitane Horses all the exercises of Lance, Sword, and
Pistol; at Sea Monsters so placed, that they made a pretty Figure in the
action; afterward the Deities of Earth and Sea in great Machines being
present, to the Music, soft Tromba, and incomparable Voice of rare Antonina,
galloped and stopped in such excellent time and order, that no Country Dance was
ever better performed, not the least mistake or error happening all the time.

The Sovereignty is in the Grand Council, which Government.
consists of all the other Councels and Magistrates; next in the Senate, or
Pregadi, the College, the Council of Ten, the Quarante Criminale, etc.

The Grand Council having the Supreme power, confers Grand Council.
Dignities, makes Laws, Creates Magistrates, and all the other Councels, and
into it no Noble Venetian can enter, before the Age of 25. years, except by
Balloting for it, and then if it be his lot, he may sit at 20.

The Pregadi are the body of the Senate, so called Pregadi.
from being prayed to come to Council, has now an addition of 60. more, called
the Giunto, and admits besides the College, the Concillij Criminali, the
Council of Tenn, and some other Magistrates, in all to the number of 276. who
Vote by little soft Balls like Buttons, white and yellow put into a Box
divided, of the same colors, which takes away all fear of making Enemies, and
prevents Cabals and Factions: To these are belonging 24. Secretaries, 12.
attending, the others with Ambassadors.

The College consists of the Doge, and six Counselors, College.
together styled the Sigria. and the eldest of them, in the Doges absence
supplies his place, so that business has no delay: There sits likewise three
Capi, of the Quarante Criminale, which represent that Council; six Savij
Grandi, five di Terra Ferma, and five Savij alli Ordini; which last, are young
men, placed there only to Learn: These receive Petitions, open Letters, give
Audience to public Ministers, etc. but no positive Answers, those depending on
the Senate. Embrs. And.


At the Entrance of Ambassadors into this College, they all rise up, and are
bare, except the Doge, who is so only to Cardinals and Princes, on whose right
hand they are afterward placed.

The Doge is chosen by all the Nobility of above Doge.
thirty years old, by Ballotting several ways for Electors, and then they again
for others, varying so often to prevent Factions: The Duke, when Elected, has
no Sovereignty but in Name, the honor of a Throne, his Mantle and fantastic
Crown; yet to make him something esteemed, they allow all Letters to be
directed to him, Money Coined, and Dispatches Signed by him, but no Guards,
least he should make himself more considerable: His constant Revenue but 100.
Zecchins a week, and his Children and Brothers deprived th'enjoying any great
charge in the State, during his Life, he himself not being permitted to go out
of Venice without Leave, and is then without any power.

The Council of Tenn now increased to the number Council of Tenn.
of Seaventeen, besides the Duke and his six Counselors, Elected of different
Families, without the least affinity or Alliance; are Judges of Treasons and
all Criminal matters of highest importance, and Instituted for a check upon the
Nobilli: These choose amongst themselves Inquisitors.
three Inquisitors of State, who serve by turns, have power to enquire against
the Doge himself, and every slight suspicion is sufficient to Banish, Imprison,
or punish with Death, without mercy, any that reveal their secrets, or Usurp
any of the public Treasure, or Revenue, not regarding the doing an Injustice
to particulars for the public good.

The 40 Criminale is formed most of the Nobilli too; Quaranta Criminale.
of which sort of Council, there are two more, of a second Rank, or Poorer
Nobillity; instituted, that none might be discontented, but every one might
have his share in the Government: The one is called Civil Vecchia; the other,
Civil Nuova: The first, for Appeals from the City, the latter from the Country;
and they sit in Senate by turns, every sixteen Months; which Change is
practiced, in the Senate it self, the Council of Tenn, and in all other
Offices, and Magistrates, except the Chancellor: The People by that means, in a
little space, being freed from Oppression, and ill Governors, if such should
chance to be Elected: Besides, so many Councels prevents the Altering of the
Government; which from a few, might easier succeed, and sooner dispatch
Business.

The Six Savij Grandi, are a kind of Ministers of State; who every day after
Council, consult together Savij Grandi.
of that Days Business; and once a Week, carry what is Ripe to the Senate; and
being Men of great Experience, their Preparation prevents the Confusion that
would arise from so many Opinions; the Ignorant being ever the greatest Number
in all Assemblies.

The Savij di Terra Ferma are inferior to the Former; 5 Savij di Terra Ferma.
can give their Votes in the College, but not in the Senate: And of these are
chosen the Savio Cassiere, and the Savio alla Scrittura; the first provides and
disburses the Money; the other has the Superintendance of the Militia.

The Procuratorij ought to be but Nine, but are now Procuratorij.
Thirty six; increased by their Necessities in the War of Candia, then selling
these Honors, for 20000 Duccats a piece; but as they dye, will come to their
first Institution. The Dignity is esteemed very great; for, having the doors of
the Senate always open to them, and freed from being sent Ambassadors, except
in extraordinary; yet this Office nevertheless is void of all power, not having
the liberty to enter either into the Grand Council, or that of Tenn, but is
purely Churchwarden, and without any other Authority than what relates to the
Church of St. Mark, the having a care of Orphans, etc.

Citizens are admitted to have several Charges; one Grand Chancellor.
of the Principal is made Grand Chancellor, with the Title of Exc^. Ducal
habit, and the privilege to enter into Senate, Councels, etc. where he may
give his Opinion, but not Vote; his allowance 3000. Duccats a year, and worth
10000. more, is the only place that is for term of Life, and esteemed the best
in the Republique.

They have also three Avogadors, a sort of Attorney Avogadors.
General, which to make more fierce and keen, are allowed good part of the
Estates Confiscated: The several Providitori, etc. because too tedious, I omit;
but it is to be observed that no man is suffered to enjoy two places, be they
never so inconsiderable, and the Nobility must run through the most inferior
employments, before they can possess those that are desirable, by which means
they arrive at the great ones, when they are in riper years, and fitter to
manage them, and the small ones are not despised; for if any refuse the charge
he is Elected to, he is fined 2000. Duccats, and Banished the Grand Counsel for
two years.

The noble Families, with those added in the War of Number of Nobility.
Candia, are about 220. and before that, to conceal their small number, and
take away emulation, they gave leave to Secretaries, Lawyers, Physicians and
Notaries to wear their habits, which they still continue.

They are so Jealous of one another aspiring to the Jealousy.
Sovereignty, that they will not suffer Popularity in any, and therefore
poisoned Loredano for having eminently served his Country in quieting and
appeasing a Tumult with his single presence, that none of the Magistrates with
Arguments or Force could prevail upon.

To speak with any foreign Minister, or his Servants, is no less than Treason,
and therefore they fly them like the Plague, a Policy in such a Government,
absolutely necessary, for in so great an Assembly there will be some, from whom
Ambassadors by their presents would not want Intelligence of their greatest
secrets, and now no Treasure or Reward can prevail to make them hang upon the
Gallows by the foot.

Their own Ambassadors, at their return, are obliged to give in writing an
account of their Negotiation, and to lay their presents before the Senate which
marks of honor, they are nevertheless not deprived of.

In the Government they leave the Reins loose, in all Policy.
things that are not directly prejudicial to the State; their greatest Vices,
Wenching and Gaming, are countenanced, because it renders them too Slothful and
Effeminate to think of Rebellion; and in imitation of the Nobility, the
Religious also take their liberty, it not being in the power of the Nuncio nor
Pope himself to hinder; for the Secular Magistrate can only imprison, who will
rather protect than punish; and they would not have the Priests of Exemplar
piety, lest they should by the Vulgar be too much loved and revered, which
might at one time or other prove dangerous to the State; besides, by conniving
at their Debauchery, they can the easier get their Monasteries suppressed by
the Pope when they have need of money.

The Spiritual affairs are governed by a Patriarch, Patriarch and Inquisition.
which always is a noble Venetian, and chosen by the Senate, who have placed
three Nobles also in the Inquisition, as Assistants, without which the
Ecclesiastics can effect nothing; and ordered that the goods of the Condemned
should not go to the Church, but to the Heirs of the Criminal; so that, that,
which in other places is a terrible Tribunal, there frights no body, having
power only to act by the Senates will, who suffer Heresy because it is a City
of Trade, and other Crimes and Sins being inferior to that, are not minded;
Lutherans too, etc. are without scruple Buried in their Churches.

When any Dispatch arrives from Rome, the Senate Pope obliged.
make use of two Doctors, one of Divinity, the other of Law; and the latter is
to observe there be nothing in it any way to the damage of the State; and then
having both Signed it, it is presented to the Senate, without whose assent no
Bull has there any force; and if it require any Answer, those two above-named
Doctors form it to their mind; and then sending for the Nuncio, tell him in
very good words their Resolution; and if he reply, or desire any further
satisfaction in the matter, they are silent; and any Senator that has Relation
to a Cardinal, or Popes Nephew, etc. cannot be at such debate.

The Devotion of the City in general, is after the Devotion.
Example of the young Nobilli, who use the Churches chiefly for Love
appointments: And for the Monasteries of Women, their Exercises are such as
would have made even Aretine to blush, being accused of Wantonness, Shameful,
and Incredible.

They permit abundance of Jews to Live and Trade Jews.
there, who are obliged to keep a small Banck to lend to the Poor on Pawns,
without Interest; and wear red Hats for distinction: These for their reputed
Secrecy are very much cherished by the Nobility, there not being one but has
his Jew for his Confident, nor Jew without his Protector.

Their Territroies on Terra serma, are put into these divisions, La Marca
Treviggiana, Il Friuli, Il Padouano, Government of Terra ferma.
Il Vicentino, Il Veronese, Il Bresciano, Il Bergamasco, Il Cremasco; then part
of Dalmatia, Istria, the Islands of Corsu, Zante, and Cephalonia, Cerigo, T^ne,
and three places still remaining to them in the Kingdom of Candia. In the
Government of these, to make them most secure, they do all they can possible to
keep the Nobility at odds, and make them to each other mortal Enemies, a Policy
begun by Erizzo Lieutenant of Udine, who observing the great Unity and
Friendship of that Gentry, and natural Affection to the House of Austria, writ
to the State that they would provide some remedy for the inconveniences that
might grow from it. The advice was grateful, and immediately they sent him
Ducal Letters to confer the Dignities of Counts on several of the most ancient
Families, which he was to do on pretense of rewarding their merits: These
Honors were greedily received, and immediately between them and those that
wanted, grew a mortal feu'd, not yet extinguished, which has not only prevented
them from having any Plots or Intelligence with their Neighbors, but by their
frequent quarrels and follies, made them forfeit most of their Estates, to the
great advantage of the Venetians.

Their strongest places are Orsinuovi, Peschiera, Places of Strength.
Linago, Castle di Brescia, Castle S. Felice di Verona and Palma Nuova in
Friuli, which is one of the best, being round, with nine Royal Bulworks, three
miles in compass, and requires 8000. Men. It is a Fortification against
Germany, and secures that Country from the Ravage of the Turks.

As to their Soldiers, the Republique is served by Soldiers, Galleys, etc.
Strangers, Germans and others, their Militia of Terra Ferma being of little
Value, having no experience; but they think them useful on any sudden Alarm,
and might resist till they could provide better; besides, do serve to make a
show to their Neighbors of seeming always Armed: Their own people they dare not
train, nor of them compose an absolute Army, lest they should turn their Arms
upon the Nobility themselves, who they perfectly hate: The State therefore
leaves them freely to enjoy all manner of Sloth and Luxury; the Republique by
their Money only, and others Dissentions, having made themselves thus
considerable, not by their own Valor. Of this Militia (such as it is) they
have 139. Companies, and the Captains and Sergeants have Pay; they have besides
20. Companies, of 200. each; and 15. Troops of Horse that are all paid; six
Gallys always in the Gulf, and 30. more in readiness, which they can double
upon occasion.

Their Revenue is about four Millions and a half Revenue.
yearly of Duccats, but in time of War they increase their Gabels and
Impositions on all things, which is ever paid without Force or Violence. In the
last War with Candia, they sold all Offices, by which they raised 500000.
Duccats, the Lands that was given to the Church of St. Mark, Commons, etc.
besides the great sum by the suppressed Monasteries, and the advantage they had
by leaving the door of Honor open to all that brought 100000. Duccats to be
made noble; which last has been of ill Consequence, for being most Merchants
that were so admitted, that money, and they, being otherwise employed, they have
since considerably decayed in their Trade; the soul of that, and all other
States: In the same time they also had a Lottery, with which they got a very
great sum of money, and drew most of it out of Strangers pockets, and a long
time publicly delayed the giving the Prizes, alleging they were not all
drawn; so had the use of both.

Of greatest advantage is the Banco di Giro, where Banco di Giro.
the Republic have the Benefit of more than five Millions of Duccats without a
farthing Interest; every Merchant putting in part of his Estate there, which
upon any bargain is passed to another without other delay or circumstance, then
altering the name; and if any man would have ready money for his Intrest in it,
there are always those ready to give it him; and who have not moneys in this
manner, have not any Credit; for there they go to see the worth first of him
they intend to trust, and accordingly confide.

Money constantly paid into the Public Treasury.
Duccats. Datij di Venezia 1724988 Decime ordinary 240000 Dalli Taglioni 80000
Dall Impositione del Campadego 70000 Dalle Decime del Clero 10000 Dalli
Contributioni dell'arti 60726 Dall Universita dell Hebrei 52000 D'uffitij e
Cariche Vitalitie 25000 Dalli Datij di Terra ferma 1168973 Dalle Decime 2810000
Dalli Taglioni 110000 Dall' Impositione del Campadego 90000 Dalle Decime del
Clero 100000 Dalle Colte 40000 Rendite di Dalmatia 11448 Rendite delle tree
Isole 132258 4195393 Constant Disbursments out of the Treasury.
Duccats. Officiali del Arsenale 124000 Per comprare Rob bisognose al detto
Arsenale 89033 Frutti chepaga la Zecca 1692657 Per Salnitri 36000 Per Paga del
Armata e suoi Bisogni 399043 Per i Biscotti 200000 Per mantenemento delle
Fortezze 29000 Militie e Fortezze delle tree Isole 200053 Salarij del Sermo.
Doge 97778 Cancellaria Ducale 11910 Per spese straordinarie 148924 Per il
Magistrato dell Aque 40738 Per l'occorrenze del Cono. di Dieci 42350 Per la
Fanteria di Terra ferma 128140 Per la Cavalleria della Medesima 32380 Per la
Cavalleria di Dalmatia 31680 Per l'Offitiali condotti 25000 3135786

Traffic for many Reasons is forbidden to the Nobili; Traffic.
yet privately nevertheless, most of them do use it; but the Trade in General,
now is very inconsiderable, having long ago lost that of the Indies from
Aleppo, and since that with the Turks, the Genoese being crept into it; besides
what the English and Dutch did furnish in the time of their War with Candia;
before which they made in Venice yearly 2600. Clothes, now not 500. which they
sent into Turkey, besides Silks, Gold, Silver, Crystal Glasses, etc. some of
which went further on into Persia, Arabia, and Armenia. To avoid Transportation
of their Money to any Foreign Country, they wear nothing but their own
Manufacture, having very severe Laws against Extravagance of Habit.

The Pope and this Republique are like those Twins, which Intrest with Pope.
growing together in their bodies, find such Impediment, that the one would
certainly destroy the other, if they did not both know that on the life of his
Companion depended his own, and not daring to Ruin, they assist each other.

To Savoy (though they hate that Duke for his pretension Savoy.
to Cyprus) they always give their assistance, lest a more powerful Neighbor
should come in his place.

They have much esteem and affection for the great Tuscany.
Duke, believing him very wise, and of great knowledge in State affairs, and
because Neutral to the two powerful Crowns of France and Spain, and as a mark
of their respect, his Resident is received with open doors, a Complement not
allowed to any other Prince in Italy.

There was anciently great Enmity between the State Genoua.
of Genoua and this Republic; but since they appeared for the Intrest of
France, as well as Spain, it is much lessened.

The Duke of Mantoua they call their Son, having Mantoua.
been under their Protection in his Minority, and upon any occasion are ready
to defend his State at their own expense, being desirous he should absolutely
depend upon them.

With Modena they are lukewarm, and with Parma Modena and Parma.
no correspondence; upon occasion of a disgust given his Resident at Venice,
whether now he sends no more.

With the Swizzers and Grisons they have great Swizzers and Grisons
Friendship, as well in respect of resemblance of Government, as to resist
Spain or the Emperor; against either of which, for their sakes they would make
no scruple to declare open War, and do the like to France.

To the Emperors damage they are always forward to Emperor.
contribute where it is not prejudicial to themselves, and the rather, because
conscious how much they Usurp of his, They conclude he can never be their
Friend; and are so strickt in their Dominion over the Adriatic, that they make
him pay an acknowledgment for all Vessels that come into any of his own Ports
in that Sea.

With Spain at present they have a pretty good Spain.
Correspondence, because more inconsiderable than it formerly was.

There is no Nation they hate so much as the French, France.
for they look upon them as Authors of the War in Candia, and the loss of it
too, giving them seeming succors only, and behaved themselves there, as they
did in their Fleet, assisting of the English.

With England they ever had, and still have a good England.
Correspondence.

With Holland they did believe they should have had Holland.
a lasting Amity, since they had both the same designs and the same fears from
the two Crowns; but now out of Emulation of the Hollanders too great Dominion
at Sea, there is no more that Friendship.

Denmark and Sweden are so remote, that they are Denmark and Sweden.
insignificant to them, but their good wishes they would soonest bestow on the
latter.

With the Great Turk they are forced to keep an Ambassador, G. Turk.
called il Bailo, lest he ravish some of their Territories in Dalmatia, etc.
and out of that fear, frequently make presents to him, and the principal
Sultana's in the Seraglio.

PADOUA Stands on the River Brent; on the Banks Padoua.
of which, all the way to it, are Villas of the noble Venetians; it is environed
with a Ditch, and great Ramparts faced with Stone, but not alla moderna; is
very large, and therefore very weak, low Built, few Inhabitants, and most of
the Houses upon Portico's of very ordinary Pillars. It has about 400. Scholars
and 40. Professors, paid by the Republic, but scarce any Colleges: The
Anatomy Schools only are remarkable, and the great Hall of Justice big almost
as that in Westminster, and like it, without Pillars: In the Situation, and in
every thing else it very much resembles Pisa.

The Church of St. Anthony has on the side of it in S. Antonio.
Mezzo Relievo, the History of its Patron, and some of the Figures, by
Sansovinus; and before his Tomb hang thirty or forty Lamps of Silver: On the
other side lies famous Gatto Mela, the Venetian General, who near the Church
has his Statue on Horseback, made by a Florentine.

Sa. Giustina is plain, but Majestic; the Architecture Sa. Giustina
much esteemed, being built by Paladio; the floor Marble, black and yellow,
finer than can be expressed, and the high Altar suitable: here are the Tombs of
St. Luke and St. Matthias, and the Martyrdom of Sa. Giustina, painted by Paolo
Veronese; the Monastery also is very fine and large; by it is the Campo Santo.

There is also a Church dedicate to our Saint Thomas S. Tomaso di Cantuaria.
of Canterbury, and in it lies an English Lady, Katherine Whittenhal.

In the Street is the old Tomb of Anteonor, with Anteonor's Tomb.
Gothic Letters on it, which makes it doubted whether his or not.

It Is governed by a Podesta, as the rest of their Governor.
Cities; a Magistrate that Judges on Life and Death, but suffers the
Inhabitants to quarrel as much as they please; for the Padoans having been the
Creators of the Venetians, now hate the very name; and they knowing it, suffer
them to destroy one another, and gain that way a sweet revenge, having their
Estates too into the bargain: The Scholars imitate the others, and have
continually a civil War amongst them, but are seldom punished, lest is might
perhaps be less famous for Anatomy, or that they should forsake the Town which
wholly subsists by them. These Podestas have also the power to lay Tolls, have
the care of Highways, Hospitals, etc. Live in State, attended by Gentlemen;
have their Guards, Coaches, Pages, etc. Are allowed a Council, but their
Government not above two or three years durance.

That the Venetians receive by all sorts of Duties Revenue.
and Impositions on the City and Country, is annually 174224. Duccats.

VICENZA Is a very pleasant Town, in a delicious Vicenza.
Country, stands upon two Rivers, and near agreeable Hills; has many fine
Palaces, most noted is that great one in the Piazza, with the Gardens of
Valmarana, Orangerie, Canal, etc. The Theater built by Palladio, of a
particular manner, and his Triumphal Arch by the Corso. This City and Province
is Governed also by a Podesta, and the Revenue the Venetians draw from it, is
105311. Duccats annually.

VERONA Is very large, stands high, in a good Verona
Air, and pleasantly; is generally well Built, full of People, abounds with all
sorts of Provisions, has the Adice, a noble River runs winding through it, with
four Bridges over it; has five handsome Gates and two Castles; has two Piazzas,
one for Gentlemen, another for Merchants, and an old Amphitheatre, almost
perfect on the Inside, used by the City for several Sports. In the Monastery
of St. George is that Saints Picture, made by Paolo Veronese, so much esteemed
that a Lord-Marshal of England could not buy it for 2000. Pistols. The
Government is as the two former Provinces, and the Revenue to the State yearly
139845. Duccats.

In this Province is a Lake of 36. miles long; and Lago di Garda.
near 14. broad, as clear as Crystal, full of incomparable Trouts and
Carpioni; the Country about it most delicious, affording excellent Moscatello,
and all things that can be wished for: At the end of it stands a great
Peschiera.
Citadel, called Peschiera, regular with five Bastions, through which all pass
they please to permit, and not possible for any else.

BRESCIA Is pleasant, has Walls and Ramparts, Brescia.
is indifferently well built, not so well, nor by much so large as Verona; has
nevertheless several Palaces, one new one with a flat Roof, whose Spouts are
held by the Figures of Women, leaning over, as it were peeping at those that
pass: In the midst of the Town, on raised ground, is an old Castle, and diverse
little Rivelets run through it; it is famous for Gun-Smiths, whose work is
admirable for its cheapness as well as curiosity. The Revenue to the Venetians,
out of this Province, is yearly 203680 Duccats.

CREMA Is a pretty little Town, and well Fortified, Crema and Bergamo.
but worse than Brescia in all respects; parallel with Bergamo, both Frontiers
to the Spaniards, but the latter the most considerable; four miles beyond these
Cities the Venetian Territories end, which hither is 160. miles; a Country like
a Garden, with innumerable Rivelets and Brooks, and so fertile that I cannot
remember I saw one A^re of bad ground in it. The Revenue of this Province
yearly, is 180592. Duccats to the Venetians.

LODINUOVA: The Spanish Frontier to the Venetians Lodi Nuova.
stands upon rising ground, has a River runs by it, is a v^^^ little Town, and
as indifferently Fortified.

MANTOUA has ^ secure, but base Situation, Mantoua.
being environed with Marshes, and a Lake, so that there is but two entrances
to it, and those over Bridges: The Town is inconsiderable; the Duke a petty
Sovereign, of the same force and strength of Parma or Modena, having scarce
400000. Crowns yearly Revenue: His Intrest like the rest, to be of any man's
side that can protect him.

MIRANDOLA is another Principality, whose little Mirandola.
Monarch, with all sorts of Taxes and Impositions cannot make himself a Revenue
greater than an English Nobleman, being at most but 60000. Crowns a year.

NOVARA Is a Town not well Built, but well Fortified; Novara.
is very populous, and the Frontier to Piedmont: nine miles beyond which, the
Spanish Dominions end.

VERCELLI, The Duke of Savoys Frontier Town Vercelli.
to the Spaniards has on one side a little River, and is admirably Fortified to
be on such a Sandy place: The Bastions are all very fresh and regular, and the
watch Towers covered with Tin, which looks very prettily; the second Gate at
the entry from Milan is nobly Built, but the Town very indifferently, yet not
very little: Here every one speaks both Italian and French.

CASAL, a little Town of the Duke of Mantoua's, Casal.
and one of the strongest in Italy; has the River Po on one side, and a great
Citadel on the other, besides excellent Walls, Ditches, and Ramparts.

ITALY in GENERAL, except the Appennines, (which is a fourth part of it) is a
perfect Garden; the Italy in General.
Trees and lusty Vines being every where set in order, most of it fertile,
beyond expression; abounds with Rivers and Crystal Lakes, excellent Pastur^^e
enclosed with Quicksets, Lanes, etc. like England; has the most and the finest
Cities, Church^^* Palaces, Gardens, Villa's, etc. of any Territory of its
extent in the World; and this advantage above all other Countries in Europe,
that it produces all that they do, and that which they have not. Its Wines are
incomparable, and of infinite variety and delicacy, pleasing at once both scent
and taste; The Provisions of all sorts excellent, exceeding England in some
things, and France in all.

The Horses admirable, both for shape and mettle, Horses.
and they ride and drive them very like the English.

The Gentry so courteous and civil, that except in People.
matters of Love, it is impossible to offend them; and to a Stranger they will
almost pardon any thing.

Very constant in their Friendship, but at first Humor.
sight not so familiar as the French, being generally more reserved, and too
wise to be impertinent, or to be any man's Friend, or Enemy, where there is no
reason for it.

Are of such a happy temper, that they can be excellent Temper and Learning.
in any thing they please to undertake, even in Buffonncrie and Fooling,
out-doing Monsieur himself, in whom it is natural; and besides their being the
greatest Soldiers and Generals of all Ages, and excelling too in Politics,
the Mathematics and solid Learning for Architecture, Sculpture; Music, and
Painting, are as much admired by the wisest of the World, as France is by
others, for their Modes of Habit, Speaking, Dancing, Riding, etc.

The Ladies have fine Shapes and Features, rare Women.
Eyes and Teeth, and color generally not inferior to the more Northern
Countries, (excepting some very flaxen Beauties which a too feeble Sun has left
unripe) and have as few ill breaths as crooked amongst them.

Their ^^rtues as great as any Women's, seldom being Unchaste, without
Temptation, and then with such Virtues.
secrecy and caution, (...) is scarce a fault.

Have great Wit, and such variety of Charms, that Wit and Charms.
their Love never cloys; and their incomparable Voices, and sweet Language,
added to the rest, makes Italy a Paradise.

FINIS.

