THE KINGS DISGUISE.
ANd why a Tenant to this vile disguise,
Which who but sees blasphemes thee with his eyes?
My Twins of Light within their Pent-house shrink,
And hold it their Allegiance to wink.
Oh for a State-distinction to arraigne
CHARLES of High Treason against my Sovereign.
What an usurper to his Prince is wont,
Cloister and shave him, He himself has don't.
His muffled feature speaks him a Recluse,
Whose Ruins prove him a Religious House.
The Sun has moved his beams from off his lamp,
And Majesty defaced the Royal stamp.
Is It not enough thy Dignity's in thrall,
But thou wilt transmute it in thy shape and all?
As if thy Blacks were of too faint a dye
Without the tincture of Tautologie.
Flay an Egyptian from his Cassock skin,
Spun of his Countries darkness, line't within
With Presbyterian budge, that drowsy trance,
The Synods sable, foggy ignorance.
No bodily nor ghostly Negro could
Rough-cast thy figure in a sadder mould:
This Privie-chamber of thy shape would be
But the Close mourner of thy Royalty.
'Twill break the circle of thy Gaolcrs spell,
A Pearl within a rugged Oysters shell.
Heaven, which the Minster of thy Person ownes,
Would fine thee for Dilapidations.
Like to a martyred Abbeys courser doom,
Devoutly altered to a Pigeon room:
Or like the College by the changeling rabble,
Manchesters Elves, reformed into a Stable.
Or if there be a profanation higher,
Such is the Sacrilege of thine Attire.
By which thou art half deposed, thou look like one
Whose looks are under Sequestration.
Whose Renegado form at the first glance
Shows like the selfe-denying Ordinance.
Angel of light, and darkness too, I doubt,
Inspired within, and yet possessed without.
Majestic twilight in the state of grace,
Yet with an excommunicated face.
Charles and his Mask are of a different mint,
A Psalm of mercy in a miscreant print.
The Sun wears Midnight, Day is Beetle-brow'd,
And Lightning is in Keldar of a cloud.
Oh the accursed Stenographie of fate!
The Princely Eagle shrunk into a Bat.
What charm, what Magic vapor can it be
That shrinks his rays to this Apostasy?
It is no subtle filme of Tiffany air,
No Cob-web vizard, such as Ladies wear,
When they are vayl'd on purpose to be seen,
Doubling their luster by their vanquished Skreene:
Nor the false scabberd of a Prince^ tough,
And three pil'd darkness, like unto the slough
Of an imprisoned flame, it is Faux in grain
Dark Lantern to our high Meridian.
Hell belcht the dampe, the Warwick-Castle-Vote
Rang Britan's Curfeu, so our light went out.
Thy visage is not legible, the Letters
Like a Lords name writ in fantastic fetters,
Clothes where a Switzer might be buried quick,
Sure they would fit the Body Politic.
False beard enough to fit a Stages plot,
For that is the ambush of their wit, God wot.
Nay all his properties so strange appear,
You Are not in the presence, though the King be there.
A Libell is his dress, a garb uncouth,
Such as the Hue and Cry once purged at mouth.
Scribbling Assasinate, thy lines attest
An ear mark due; Cubbe of the Blatant Beast,
Whose breath before it is syllabled for worse
Is Blasphemy unfledged, a Callow curse.
The Laplanders when they would sell a wind
Wafting to hell, bag up thy phrase, and bind
It to the Barque, which at the voyage end*
Shifts Poope, and brings the Colic in the Fiend.
But I Will not dubbe thee with a glorious scar,
Nor sink thy Skuller with a Man of War.
The black-mouthed Si quis, and this slandering suite,
Both do alike in picture execute.
But since we are all called Papists, why not date,
Devotion to the Rags thus consecrate.
As Temples use to have their Porches wrought
With Sphynxes, creatures of an antic draught:
And puzling Pourtraitures to show that there
Riddles inhabited, the like is here.
But pardon Sir, since I presume to be
Clarke of this Closet to Your Majesty:
Methinks in this your dark mysterious dress
I see the Gospel coucht in Parables.
At my next view, my pur-blind fancy ripes,
And shows Religion in its dusky types.
Such a Text Royal, so obscure a shade
Was Solomon in Proverbs all arrayed.
Come all ye Brats of this expounding age,
To whom the Spirit is in pupil age;
You that damn more then ever Sampson slew,
And with his engine, the same jaw bone too:
How is it he scapes your Inquisition free,
Since bound up in the Bibles Liverie?
Hence Cabinet-untrussers, Pick-locks hence,
You that dimne jewels with your Bristol-sense:
And Characters, like Witches, so torment,
Till they confess a guilt, though innocent.
Keys for this Coffer you can never get,
None but S. Peter's op's this Cabinet.
This Cabinet, whose aspect would benight
Critic spectators with redundant Iight.
A Prince most seen, is least: What Scriptures call
The Revelation, is most mystical.
Mount then thou Shadow Royal, and with haste
Advance thy Morning Star, Charles's overcast.
May thy strange journey, contradictions twist,
And force fair vveather from a Scottish mist.
Heavens Confessors are posed, those Star-ey'd Sages
Interpret an Eclipse, thus riding stages.
Thus Israel-like he travels with a cloud,
Both as a Conduct to him, and a shroud.
But oh! he goes to Gibeon, and renews
A league with moldy bread and clouted shoes.
FINIS.

