CHRISTIAN RVLES PROPOSED TO A virtuous soul aspiring to holy perfection,
whereby she may regulate both her time, and actions for the obtaining of her
happy end.

By her faithful friend. VV. C.

Whosoever shall follow this Rule, peace upon them, and mercy. Galat. 6. v. 16.

But it is not enough to have a good will to do well; unless it be
accompanied with doing well. S. Ambr. lib. de Offic. D. 86.

Renewed, corrected, and augmented by the Author.

M.DC.LIX.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY To his dearest friend Mrs V. CLIFFORD.
Noble and my dearest Friend.
I Presented you with these Christian Rules in a former edition; which being
then unexpectedly, and somewhat hastily pressed from me, were left tho more
vnpersect; as well in regard of the method, as for many other faults, caused
by too much have, which, upon better leisure and reuiew, I have endeavored to
amend in this second edition: wherein I have also made some enlargement. Unto
the cost and pains whereof, I was encouraged by diverse, who assured me that
the former has proved neither ungrateful, nor unprofitable unto many. And
not having now any more copies left wherewith to satisfy the desire of many
good friends, who have demanded them; I have putt on a hopeful confidence, that
though by this my present Retreat, I am become a forrenner to my brethren, and
a stranger to the Sons of my Mother ps. 68. Yet I should not thereby he
rendered wholly unuseful unto my dearest Country: I acknowledge my profession
obliges me to hazard for it what is most precious to me; yea and my very life,
to gain the meanest soul to God. And if this my poor unworthy pains, may by
his gracious blessing, become an instrumental cause to dispose some hearts to
his divine love and service, I shall account my self, with joy, to be rewarded
much more then a hundred fould upon that scor^^. Besides D. N. it needs must be
great comfort to me, when I consider that you are to partake a more then ord
nary share in the good dividend of Gods gracious blessings, for the benefitt
which virtuous souls may receive by these Rules: you who already have so
happily made him the owner of your heart, by the Character of your constant
sufferings for his sake: whereby, in virtuous courage, and true fidelity, you
have not only imitated your noble Ancesters, but far exceeded the president
which they have left you: for as our Chronicles do truly ascribe to them, an
unalterable Constancy in defense of their lawful earthly Sovereigns right: so
you, now the last in your Sex of that self fame noble Family, not degenerating,
do generously conclude your part after a much more honorable manner, by
cheerful and constant sufferance for your true heavenly King, our Sovereign
Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST: from whom, with the great Apostle, you may in
humble hope expect, that these momentary tribulations will work above measure
exceedingly an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. Your joy in this hope, may
well begett virtuous Patience in these your present sufferings; which will
become light and easy, by his divine love, who best can give strength to bear
them for his sack. This holy love is that which gave such invincible courage
to all the blessed Martyrs of each sex and age; as also to the tender and most
illustrious Virgins, so vndantedly to suffer the greatest rage and torments
which their cruel persecutors could invent to exercise upon those innocent and
happy victimes of JESUS CHRIST. This is that heavenly eloquence which now
persuades so many millions of verious and happy souls to forsake all the
alluring pleasures, which this deluding world is able to propose unto its
greatest fauorits; and to embrace the austerity of a religious life: that dying
thereby to all worldly pretentions, they may truly, and entirely live to God.
This divine love is finally that which has replenished the deserts with very
Angels in purity, though invested with human bodies in their mortality. Yea
in the propbanest Courts, and in all sorts of secular callings, what
multitudes of most holy and virtuous persons has this odoriferous ointment
still drawn to true sanctity, in the observance of a most exemplar life, and
virtuous Conversation. The true practice whereof is most fruitfully performed
by proposing to our selves (each one according to his calling) some Rule, and
good method, whereby rectifiing all our actions to the glory of God; and
uniting them in true conformity, and obedience unto his blessed will; the
meanest of our acts, or sufferings: yea even our civil mirth, and conversation
(accompanied with that holy disposition) becomes invested wish true virtue, and
may meritt eternal recompense. And as for your particular. D. N. whose chief
design has ever been the laudable practice of a virtuous Conversation; I
cannot doubt, but you have found the subject of this little treatise, so much
the more pleasing unto you, as it lays open, and treates in a plain and
familiar manner, the practice of those daily virtuous exercises; which a soul
enamored with her divine Spouse, is most fervently desirous to imitate. This
gives me the greatest confidence that my pains herein will be grateful unto
you: and so much the more satisfactory also to my self; as your virtuous
example shall give good proof, that there is nothing in these Christian Rules,
which may not easily be practiced by a virtuous soul, aspiring to holy
perfection, with faithful correspondance to Gods holy grace, in the true
practice of his love.

And this was my true and only motive to propose to you the exercise of these
ensuing Rules, and pious practices (as just, and fit occasion shall be offered
you) by the help whereof I hope you may so regulate your actions, both in
Conversation, and all other employments; as whether you eat, recreate, work,
converse, or what else soever you do; you may purely perform all (as the
Apostle exhorts us) for the honor and glory of God, and in the name of
JESUS CHRIST. that is; in the like disposition, affection, and intention
wherewith he did his actions here upon Earth; and with his spirit of Charity,
of humility, of mildness, of patience, and true conformity: renouncing your
own proper will, and all other self interest, to accomplish the will and
divine pleasure of God: for in this holy purity of intention, consists the
very sum, and highest point of true Christians perfection; and the happy
soul which shall once arrive at this most fortunate degree; will there begin
her heavenly Paradise, even in this world: for she desiring nothing but purely
the will of God; she is always content, and nothing can displease her.

This is the greatest happiness which I can allott unto my own dearest soul;
and therefore, as such, I do also most heartily bequeath the same to yours;
who am yours, as his own in JESUS CHRIST, and in all faithful, and
affectionate service for ever.

VV. C.

THE PREFACE TO THE RENOWNED And most constant English Catholics.
Christian, and dear Catholic Reader.
YOU have here a Rule leading to Beatitude; a work, well deserving a much
better contriner: and far was it truly from my thought to propose this unto
public view, which I judged unworthy the presentment to my particular friend,
for whose private use it was composed: but the persuasion of several persons
(whose judgments had great power over my will) in some sort constrained me to
expose it unto all; upon that conceived hope, that it would do good unto many.

You have therefore here from an unskillful hand, a rude and imperfect draught
of these good Rules for a virtuous life, which I very humbly remitt unto more
able Masters, to be accomplished with their much better coulors of perfection;
as also to amend both the faults, and method, where need shall require.

And although it cost me some pains to compose this Rule; yet to observe it,
will re quireso much the more, as doing is more difficult then saying. But
seeing that true Christian Perfection consists not in words; but in the real
performance of deeds; and is gained by laborious practice, much tather then by
speculation, or by contemplation alone: therefore we must with virtuous
resolution embrace the pains required to obtain the blessed end of our
Beatitude. For one should but in vain expect to satiate his desire in
beholding the curious and delightful objects of foreign countries, unless he
likewise would expose himself to the usual pains, and incommodities required
for such a journey; which by a willing, and curious mind, are most cherefully
undertaken, and endured with pleasure, and alacrity. We see that both the
soldier, and merchant expose themselves to imminent dangers, and extreme
sufferings, in hope of some vain deluding vanity of human honor, or for the
gain of some poor temporal reward: whereas by incomparable less venture,
and by nothing near so great pains, we are taught by these Christian Rules to
pourchace a secure inheritance of eternal Felicity: and observing the good
directions which they give; they will be as an Angel Raphael to preserve us
from many greater dangers in this perilous Pilgrimage of our present life;
then was young Toby in that long dangerous journey by his Angelical Guide. Tob.
12.

You have here (dear Cath. reader) a guide presented you for a much more
important voyage; and though it be not a living Angel, yet is it warranted by
the Lord of Angels, Jesus Christ; being grounded upon his sacred word; as also
upon the doctrine of those holy Fathers and Pastors, whom he has commanded us,
both to hear, and obey, as himself. Luke. 10. yea it has been always
practiced by his greatest Saints: and therefore in following it, we cannot err.

The Angel Raphael would accept from Tobie, neither treasure, nor any other
recompense, in requital of his pains; because then actually enjoying the
beatificall vision of God, he had the full accomplishment of all Beatiude; and
therefore stood not in need of his help in any thing. But I a sinful wretch,
and a most imperfect creature, most earnestly beg your prayers, in recompense
of my pains: to the end that I may so guide my own life, and actions by these
good Rules, which I have proposed unto others, as I may also at last arrive to
that Celestial city of all Bliss.

Let this (dear Catholic Reader) be our mutual prayer in this mortal life:
that we may celebrate together in the other an eternal Iubile of Joy, with
praise, and glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, both now, and for
evermore.

A TABLE Of the chief contents in this Treatise.
THE first Rule, concerning a Pure Intention: and Gods Divine Presence. Page
17. That the memoty of God Divine Presence is a maine incitement to virtue: and
a great curb to all vice. page 28. The 2. Rule regulating all our actions, from
our vprising, until we go to bed. page. 69. A practice before our going to
bed. page. 87. The 3. Rule for the Exercise of Prayer. page. 104. Comfort, and
remedy against inuoluntory distractions in Prayer. page. 125. The practice of a
daily particular examen of Conscience. page. 245. Concerning the holy
Sacraments of Confession, and Communion. page 152. The 4. Rule showing how we
ought to hear Mass. page. 162. A second compendious manner of hearing Mass,
for the more unlearned sort of people. page. 235. An answer to two usual
objections against the Mass. pa. 245. The 5. Rule, for the exercise of
certain select virtues most conducing to Christian Perfection. page 255. A
necessary advertisement for the profitable practice of any virtue which we
desire to obtain. page 259. Of Mortification. page 266. Of Humility. page 270.
Of Conformity to the will of God. page 278. For the practice of Patience. pa.
286. We ought to suffer Persecution, and affliction with joy. page. 296. Of the
love of our Enemies. page 311. How Patience may be practiced in the occasion of
contempt, and disesteeme. page 323. Pious practices, for several occasions in
the day. page. 330. How to prevent disquiet of mind, when crosses, and
laborious obligations befall us; and at the death of friends. page 338. etc.
Against rash resolutions in hard, and d fficult affairs. page 351. How to make
virtuous, and true Christian. visitts. page 354. How to entertain good
thoughts, when walking abroad. page 257. What is required of us for rightly
observing the Fastes, and Feasts of the Church, where, of vigilles, Ember, and
Rogation days. page 361. etc. Of one voluntary days fast, each month; by way
of a spiritual Exercise. page 391. Of the satisfactory work of Alms. page
402. Concerning the observance of Sundays, and other Feasts. page 405. Of
spiritual lecture. page 413. Of spiritual sloth, and Indeuotion. page 417.
The sixth Rule regulating our Conversation. page 421. What conditions are
required for a laudable and true Christian Conversation. page. 423. The best
means to obtain this virtuous Conversation. page 429. Civil mirth, and
cheerful Alacrity are well beseeming true Christian Conversation. page 437.
The lawfulness of moderate recreation in gaming and fitting sports. And of
their abuse. page 442. What abuses in recreation are to be avoided. page 448.
Concerning temperance: and our comportment at the table. page 452. Of
Detraction: Rash-iudgment; and Obloquie etc. page 464. Against Ieering,
Scoffing, and all profane discourse, page 473. Of vicious Loquacity, and ill
government of our tongue. page 481. Of boasting, Ostentation, and
^aine-selfe-conceipt. page 487. Of Contention, and Debate. page 490. Of Anger,
and Choler. page 497. Of vain and affected singularity, and curiosity, either
in dressing, or behaueour. page 505. The virtue of Prudence, is most necessary
for regulating a true Christian Conversation. page 518. Whnt matter, or subject
is best for entertayning a virtuous Conversation, and holy discourse. page 523.
The 7. Rule, showing the great necessity to prepare our selves for Death, in
time of health: consisting of eight pious, and very profitable Meditations.
page 529.
THE FIRST RVLE. Showing both the profit and necessity of a pure intention in
all our actions, as also the practice of Gods divine Presence therein.
TWO things are principally necessary to the workman for making a true, and
perfect building, to wit: his eye, for the choice of materials; and the Rule
or square, whereby to lay them in just proportion, and with right order in the
work. Now Purity of Intention is the eye, whereby directing our actions to the
glory of God, they become meritorious, and true materials toward the happy
building of our Salvation: and Gods divine Presence serves us as the Rule, and
Square, whereby to keep them right with the will of God; whom behoulding, we
shall fear to offend, and thereby advance that happy building in our Souls.
Wherefore, to use the method most conducing to these Rules; I here propose
these two important Exercises before the rest: because the good, or ill of all
our actions depe^ding thereupon; it will be first fit to see, both wherein
they consist, as also how to practice the same.

It is therefore a maine point in Christianity, to know that the Intention
gives to all our actions their true value in the sight of God: for as to give
Alms for his sake, is a virtue deserving eternal recompense; so likewise to
give the same for vanity, and worldly praise, is a sin much blamed in the
Gospel by IESVS-CHR. as likewise is the fast of Hypocrites, who fast, and pray
to gain esteem and honor in the sight of men. Mat 6. True Purity therefore
of Intention is to all our actions, as salt is to meat, and as our very soul
to the body: for without it no action can avail us toward Heaven. It is as
the Kings stamp to the coin, from whence the true value is taken; or as his
seal, which gives to the Patent all it is power and force. For as a right
Intention renders our giving a cup of cold water meritorious of life
everlasting; even so the most glorious Act we can do, will nothing avail our
souls without it. By this Purity of Intention all our actions must be
regulated for their spiritual perfection. And to hitt right upon this happy
mark, we first must level (as does the Archer) by a little pause, to take
aim in the beginning of all we do, to direct it to the glory of God: and as
he also winkes with his left eye, to hinder the dissipatio^ of his sight, and
aims only with the right: so Christian Perfection requires, that we shutting
our hearts to all sinister and vain respects, should place our whole vewe, and
attention upon the honor of God, and for the accomplishment of his holy will;
for what is not referred thereunto, is but lost, and in vain: whereas the least
thought or deed, accompanied with that holy motive, for the love of God, will
have no less the^ Paradise for it is reward; Mat. 10. And therefore with what
care and diligence ought we to practice this fruitful Exercise, and to make it
our first morning act, thereby to consecrate all our thoughts, words, and deeds
of that day for the glory of God; to the end that if vain glory, or any other
ill suggestion shall present it self, we may more easily repel them, as
coming too late, and after so much better an owner has taken his possession
therein.

This general, and habitual intention in our morning practice, must be gently
seconded by frequent like acts in the beginning of all our chief actions in
the day; by briefly offering them to God, and humbly craving that we no wayfe
offend him thereby. For all which a small time may suffice; either by
elevation of the heart unto God; or by devout eiaculations, saying: for thy
sake, o Lord, it is that I do this. That I make this visit. That I eat. That
I pray. That I suffer, or do this action; and the like. And as it was the
primitive custom, so still it continues amongst virtuous people, to begin
their actions with the sign of the Cross, thereby to renew the purity of
their intention, in doing them, as S. Paul commands us, for the glory of God.
1. Cor. 10.

This purely must be the motive, and final end of whatsoever we do; and as it
was the spiritual food of our Sovereign Lord JESUS to do the will of his
heavenly Father, John. 4. So is it to be the first course for the feast of a
virtuous soul, and likewise the middle service, and the last, whereon to feed.

This Pure Intention for the glory of God (by doing his heavenly will) is the
mark at which both Prince, and Prelate; both rich and poor, we all must aim
at it: yea all our employments, whither for gains, or pleasure; whither in a
secular, or in a religious state of life; be it Preacher student, or Master;
be it Magistrate in peace, or be it Soldier, for whatsoever he is to execute
in war; all must be regulated with this unerring Rule of a Pure Intention to
please God, by doing his blessed will. This holy sauce gives a pleasing relish
to the most distaistfull bitts, which either Christians, or religious
Mortification can present to our recoyling nature; this powerful, and divine
ingredience (the love of God) so sweeten's all; as I dare in confident humility
here promise, in Gods behalf; that no Lay-Brother, or Sister in their most
laborious employments; nor yet those of the Quire, by any more painful and
Spiritual labors; nor finally any other, of what calling, or condition
soever, who shall but be faithful in this holy Exercise, will ever perish
under the oppression of so blessed, and happy a burden, which divine Treuth
himself has so faithfully promissed to make both sweet, and light to all
such, as by avoiding sin, shall comply with his heavenly will. This is the
unerring Square, and certain Rule whereby to regulate whatsoever we do: unto
which, the meanest action, which shall be found answerable, will be of
inestimable value; and what corresponds not to this blessed Rule, is but
corruption of nature, and filth for the sink of Hell.

By all this, it now sufficiently appears, of what importance it is to prefix
a Pure Intention to whatsoever we do; that being the form, the soul, and
very essence which gives both life and value thereunto: for according to our
intention, it will be esteemed, either good, or bad in the sight of God, how
deceitfully soever it may appear to the eyes of Men. As truly the gift of a
cupp of cold water may well seem but a very small matter to us; which yet
being given with a true motive of Charity, it will be eternally rewarded in
Heaven; whereas the lofty Pharesies, who cast whole handfulls of money with
vanity into the trunk of the Temple, was nothing (in the esteem of
IFSVS-CHRIST himself) in comparison of the poor widows two farthings, which
she gave with a Pure Intention for the honor of God. Yea most evident it is,
that the Act which we shall do in grace, and by the pure motive of Charity;
far surpasses what either art, wit, or science are able to produce; and is
far to be preferred before any other act; yea though the conversion of whole
Nations, and the eternal Bliss, both of Angels, and Men should depend
thereupon: for all that, in respect of what concerns the glory of God, belongs
to an infinitely inferior order, and can admit no degree of comparison: no the
only sacred name of JESUS religiously pronounced by the Just, and in the holy
Ghost; excells beyond all proportion, the value of the heighest excellency
within the bounds of all created nature.

Wherefore considering now, as well the great profit; as also the precise
necessity of prefixing this holy Intention both to our prayers, and to
whatsoever we do; let us frequently in the day, and at the beginning of all
our chief actions, renew our morning oblation thereof; and directing our heart
unto God; let us renounce our own proper satisfaction, and will, to unite it
to God's; craving humbly his divine grace, that we never do any thing
contrary thereunto.

In fine, all our thoughts, words and deeds must be offered unto God, in union,
honor, and adoration; and in the spirit, Intention, and disposition of all the
sacred actions of JESUS CHRIST; in whose regard they will be made acceptable,
and admitted in expiation of sin.

Take special great heed that no corrupt Intention blast that happy fruit of
your actions; and be very wary of the subtle poison of vainglory,
self-love, and private satisfaction, which is the ruin and destruction of all
spiritual profitt in the soul. Regard not the sight, nor censure of any Man;
but consider that only of God; who both rewards and punishes, not only in this
world, but also eternally in the other. Recall with true sorrow the many lost
actions of your life past, for want of true Purity of Intention; and direct
them hereafter in union of that divine Intention whereby our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST, did honor his heavenly Father in all his actions, during the
whole course both of his life, and death: for he being our Original Prototype,
and divine Model; we ought thereby to frame aur actions, and to imitate them
the best we can.

Examine now well by the premises, how far you have been faulty for what is
past; and with hearty repentance, propose (by God's grace) to be more careful
for the time to come: and endeavoring by many fervent aspirations, frequently
to offer up all your actions to God; crave humbly his heavenly help, that they
may be both begunn, and ended to his greater glory: and that you may be sooner
struck by death it self; then consent deliberately to offend his Majesty, by
any grievous sin.

THE SECOND PART Of this Rule; showing that the memory of Gods divine Presence
is a maine incitement to virtue; and a great curb to all Vice.
PYrity of Intention can nowaise be better seconded, then by the help of this
ensuing part; of Gods divine Presence: for who well considers, that he is the
beholder of whatsoever we do; as it must needs, on the one side encourage, and
exceedingly excite him to direct all his actions to the glory of him, who is so
bountiful a rewarder; so likewise on the other; it will no less deterr him
from offending in his presence, who can punish us, both temporally in this
world, and eternally in the other, without all hope of appeal. I have kept thy
Commandments, etc. (says holy David) because all my ways are in thy sight;
Psalm. 118. He gives the Presence of God, as the true reason, and means, by the
help whereof he kept Gods holy law. This was that strong buckler which
defended chaste Joseph, and Susanna from those dangerous temptations, wherewith
they were assaulted: for much better it is (said she) that by not yealding, I
fall into your hands, then that I should sin in the sight of God. Dan. 13.
This was the Rule which God himself prescribed to holy Abraham; as a
principal means for attayning to heigh Perfection: walk before me, and be
perfect: Genesis 17. as if he had said: remember I ouersee thee in all things; and
thy deeds will be perfect. The reason hereof is most manifest: for as the
beholding sight of a severe Judge does most powerfully restrain us from
offending: so on the contrary, nothing does so much encourage, and incite the
Soldier to generous acts, as does the sight of his King, or General, who can
abundantly reward him. And therefore it well appears, how effectual a means
this holy practice of Gods divine Presence now is, for the perfect and entire
accomplishment of true Christian justice; it deterring us most powerfully from
the great evil of sin; and it as strongly also spurrs us on to do good, by
the practice of virtue; which are the two essential parts of this holy
justice; and are as two wings to the soul; whereof, if either of them be
wanting, the other will little avail her to mount up to her heavenly Bliss.
By all which it appears, both how necessary this holy practice is, to direct
all our actions according to the will of God: as also how needful to curb our
unruly passions: and to moderate the disordered affections of our mind.
Finally it serves as a severe, and awful Master, to deterr the boldest sinner
from offending him, who has such power, not only to inflict all temporal
punishment upon him in this world; but also to condemn him, both body and
soul to the eternal flames of Hell. All which being manifest; it remains
that I endeavor to declare, how this divine Presence of God may be conceived
by us; and by what means it ought to be practiced: for both which you may
observe, that

The first good help whereby to conceive the divine Presence of God, is
firmly to believe with S. Paul; that God is not far from us; for we line, we
move, and we are in him. Act. 17. Yea we so absolutely subsist by his support,
as should be withdraw his sustayning hand, all creatures would return to their
former nothing, from whence he first extracted them: so that we are not only
inwardly replenished with him; but he also encompasseth us on every side; for,
both Heaven and Earth are filled with thy glory. Esa. 6. Yea he is more
intimately present to us, then is our soul; because he is the very essence of
our soul; there giving to it, not only the operations which it makes in the
body; but even the existence, and proper being of them both: for thou, o Lord
do all my actions: Esa. 26. Nor is it I, but the grace of God with me,
(says the Apostle. 1. Cor. 15.) Where attributing his actions much rather to
God's operation in him, then to his own; and therefore by good consequence, he
was there present unto them: as S. Augustine did well conceive, when he so
greatly rebuked himself for having labored to seek God abroad in his other
Creatures, whom he so intimately enjoyed within himself at home.

A second good expedient for this holy practice of Gods divine Presence; is to
contemplate his continual benefitts, which (as the prime and principal cause)
he communicates to us by the isntrumental means of his other creatures; as
light, by the Sun; heat, by the fire; nourishment, by our food; respiration,
by the air; and all the rest, both corporal, and spiritual benefitts; which
as by conueying conduits, we receive from his own bountiful hand: as the same
S. Augustine did likewise acknowledge, when giving his immediate thanks unto
God for that first nourishment, which his divine goodness had so prouidently
conveyed to him, by those tender breasts of his loving Nource And therefore
(with this B. St.) due gratitude also exacts of us, to keep the eye of our
soul upon so continual, a Benefactor; who principally works with his
creatures all the good we receive by the^; though not to be perceived by our
corporal eyes no more then we can behold, either our soul, or the air; both
which notwithstanding be real, true substances, and are actually present with
us; for otherwise we could neither act, nor live.

Thirdly, for the more easy comprehending both the manner, and reality of Gods
divine Presence; some fitly resemble it to the beams of a bright shining sun
upon a clear transpare^t crystal; wherein nothing on any side, either
within, nor without, is hidden from the eye: yea the least mote, or stayne
within the secret'st part of it, appears as clear, as does the exterior
outside of the same. In like condition are all creatures whatsoever, in
respect of God; to whom the darkest, and profoundest corners within the bowels
of the Earth; and the most secret thoughts of our mind, and consciences, lie
as open, as does the shinning sun: which though it may justly give subject of
great terror to the wicked; yet the virtuous soul may much rejoice to be
continually in the view of so loving a Father, and of so powerfully a protecting
Lord.

We being now sufficiently assured of this divine Presence (whereof Faith
permitts us not to doubt) I will here also briefly endeavor to show what
profit may be drawn from this certain treuth (which ought greatly to joy a
good Christian heart) to have for eyewitness of all we do, that souueraigne
Lord who beholding both our thoughts, words, and deeds, rewards the least of
them eternally (it being done for his sake) for this, undoubtedly, must
strongly incite a grateful heart to aspirations, both of love, and gratitude;
as also to fear and reverence; whereby the virtuous soul unites her self
more closely to his sacred Presence, and laboring thus to gain a holy habit of
this divine exercise; she breathes fourth fervent, and affectionate
eiaculations, as fiery darts cast up unto God from an enamoured soul, inflamed
with love, and which craves without art (yet with an ardent desire, and tender
feeling) with the Kingly Prophet; sometimes for pardon of her sins, and for
grace to amend: sometimes to be freed from a predominant vice, from some evil
habit, or unruly Passion: sometimes to obtain such virtues, as may make her
most grateful to God: sometimes by blessing, praising, and adoring his divine
goodness; when abroad in the fields, orgardens, she beholds the Sun, the
Elements, the great fabric of this world, or any other creature, either of
Heaven, or Earth, which that Almighty Creator has made for the use of Man.
Finally by raising her heart unto God in producing holyacts of fervent love; of
detestation of sin; of profound Humility; of perfect Conformity; of willing
Patience: and to conclude, by such other acts of virtue, as occasion, and
divine inspiration may best suggest: for by this good means, the soul
preserues her self in a continual practice of Gods heavenly Presence; she
greatly preuents the worst temptations of her ghostly enemy; and by thus
gaining a holy habit of God's divine Presence; with joy, and great ease she
obtaynes holy grace to practice such virtues, as be most needful for her
perfection in his divine service, and she works her eternal salvation
thereby.

But to reduce this so important a point, to an easy, and very profitable
practice; it is here first to be observed; that the chiefest difficulty in this
holy Exercise, consists in the beginning, and very first practice thereof; and
therefore to gain facility in practicing the lively memory of God's divine
Presence; your first endeavor must be, to have both a good will, and true
desire to obtain it: for a holy desire is both assisted by grace, and is also
a powerful spurr to nature, for the using all fitting endeavor to obtain
what is desired.

2. We must crave it of God, by very hearty, and earnest prayer, as being a
perfect gift, descending from the Father of lights; from which holy fountain
we must expect it, much rather then from any human art, or industry.

But I must not omit here to give you, as a most necessary aduertisment; that
you begin to practice this holy Exercise gently, and by degrees with all
prudent moderation. First calling Gods Presence to mind at each striking of the
clock; then after endeavor the same at the beginning, and end of all your
chiefest actions; for by often iterated acts, habits are begotten; and this
Exercise, which at first seemed teadious and difficult; by perseverance and
practice becomes both pleasing, and very easy to be renewed in all the rest
of your actions; God being ever present in all places; and therefore most easy
to be found.

It is also to be observed; that some, by intemperate fervor, exceeding in
this holy Exercise the due limitts of discretion, and strayning the faculty of
their imagination above it is power; by striving actually to exercise a
continual Presence of God; they much weaken the head, and render themselves
thereby unprofitable for other duties of obligation: which is a most conuincing
argument, that it proceeds not from the Spirit of God; that being truly gentle,
and sweet. wisd. 10. And leads none to such immoderate extremities; which are
but the effects of our own satisfaction, and not of the true love of God;
which is never to be found destitute of solid true wisdom, and Prudence.

You have now here seen, both how necessary, and very profitable this holy
Exercise of Gods divine Presence is for all such as aspire to Christian
Perfection. It remains that I conclude this Rule, by showing briefly, what
exceeding great harm the neglect thereof does cause both to body, and soul:it
being most certain, and manifest, that as the memory of Gods divine Presence
mainely deterres us from sin; so likewise the neglect thereof, is most truly
accounted the very source, and fountain of all impiety: for God is not before
the eyes of the wicked (says the holy King) and therefore all their ways are
defiled with sin. Psalm. 10. For from hence proceeds their booldnesse and
temerity in offending him. To this the Prophet Ezechiel attributes the enormous
wickedness of Jerusalem: and for the selfsame reason a sinner is most truly
qualified by the holy Ghost, a Fool; because in his heart, he says, there is
no God: Psalm. 52. That public sinner Thais, being happily struck by a serious
reflection of God's beholding the foulness of her offenses; she thereupon
forsook her sinful course; and retyring to a penitential life, she ended
the rest of her days in great repentance, and sanctity.

This was the happy effect of Gods divine Presence remembered by that happy
sinner. And doubtless should we but lively conceive this sacred Presence; it
would obleige us to much more reverent, and devout respect at our prayers; as
also to refrain from offending in other occasions, that dreadful, and all
ouerseeing Majesty.

You have now had in this present Rule, the Theory of God's divine Presence;
and by which is only laid the foundation, whereon this next is to build; by
reducing the former to practice; which is the proper subject of

THE SECOND RVLE. Regulating all our actions from our vprising; until we go
to bed.
THE former Rule informing our understanding with that great treuth of Gods
divine Presence: it is but requisite, that, by this, the will should be excited
to the holy practice thereof; in rendering to his sacred Majesty due honor and
homage, by all our actions of the day: for he having so mercifully redeemed us
from eternal thraldom by the price of his dearest blood; both justice, and
gratitude makes all our actions (by an infinite degree) more due unto him, then
any Prince, or Parent can pretend from either child, or ransomed slave.

And to perform our duty rightly herein to him, by the practice of this good
Rule; it mainely imports us to begin well the day; to which the remainder does
so usually corresponde. And therefore with a special care we ought to
sanctify our first vprising thoughts, and actions, by some virtuous practice;
they giving so great an impression to all our ensuing deeds of the day.

First then, so soon as you are fully awake; having taken convenient rest, and
your usual repose: it being also now your time to rise (and no incommodity,
nor indisposition being offered to hinder you) make presently the sign of the
Cross, thereby to inuoke the divine assistance of the most blessed Trinity,
through the merits of CHRIST'S holy Passion: and at the first morning light
appearing to your eyes, salute with all cordial reverence, and devotion that
bright heavenly Son of Justice, JESUS CHRIST, saying: O sweet JESUS the true
light of our souls; illuminate my understanding, I beseech thee, and inflame
my will; to the end that I may know thee, love thee, and serve thee, both this
day, and euer-more.

And for your better beginning of the day; endeavor also to give God your
first action thereof, by a virtuous act of Mortification; shakeing off all
sloth and drowsinesse, that would detayne you with loss of precious time:
which holy Act, you may offer to God, as the first fruit of that new day, most
due unto him, and so very grateful; as it may pourchace a happy blessing upon
all the rest you shall do therein. Finally omit not to acknowledge with due
gratitude this so graciously preserving you that night from all evil: and his
mercy in affording you the good beginning of that day; wherein by his grace,
you may negotiate the most important work of your Salvation; by loving, and
serving him with much more care, and fidelity, then formerly you have done.

Secondly in further thankfulness for his so innumerable great benefitts;
offer your self entyrely, both body and soul, with all their powers, and
senses to his heavenly Majesty; all your actions, both interior and exterior
of that day; to the end that he may wholly dispose of you, both in life, and
death, to his own greater honor and glory. And protest, that together with
all the Saints, and Angels in Heaven; and with all other creatures upon Earth;
you desire to love, to praise, and adore him, by all, and every action
whatsoever: yea by each motion of your eyes, hands, or feet; and by every
breath you draw: for by this holy practice you shall happily associate your
self with all his other both Celestial, and Terrestrial blessed Creatures,
in all their religious actions of love, praise, and homage which they render to
God; to whom, in virtue of that your holy intention, all your actions will be
acceptable; you actually both loving, praising, and adoring him thereby.

And finally, by this virtuous practice, you will unite your poor endeauours
with those who praise him best: and by a special manner communicate with them,
and also contribute to all the honor, and glory which shall be actually
rendered him, both in Heaven, and in Earth.

Thirdly crave his divine grace to preserve you that day from all grievous
sin; and propose firmly, on your part, to avoid all such occasions, as
former frailties may give you just reason to fear. And resolve in particular
most carefully to shun that sin, to which you find your self most
subject; and to exercise the acts of that virtue which most opposes the same.
Add also to this, an act of oblation to God, of a most willing acceptance
(for his love) of all the Crosses, and troubles which may happen that day, and
during your whole life. Renounce all evil temptations to sin; all
inclinations to pride and self-love; all inordinate passions, and unruly
affections, which may present themselves that day to you: for by this act, God
will be glorified in all your sufferings; you having so very willingly accepted
them for his love: and by this means, you may also obtain a divine blessing,
and grace to resist all temptations to those sins, which for his love you did
formerly renounce; and disauow. And in case that by frailty, you shall
transgress against your morning good purpose: yet this renouncing act not
being revoked; your intention stands good, and your transgression inuoluntary;
and thereby, will either not be criminal in the sight of God; or at the least,
the malice of it will be greatly diminished.

Fourthly; raise fervently your heart, and mind unto God, and treat with him
the chief necessities of your soul by holy prayer; which is as needful to a
spiritual life, and advancement in virtue, as is the water to growing plants.
Beg humbly his divine light to understand his blessed will; and to enable you
by his grace to perform the same. Which preparation to your prayer being made

Fifthly compose your self devoutly in the place of prayer, as in the divine
Presence of God; where, upon your knees, first humbly and lowly bow, or kiss
the ground, in acknowledgment that you are earth, to which you must return: as
also in humble, and grateful memory of the most blessed Incarnation of the
Son of God. Adore his divine Presence, who became Man for our Redemption.
Next making the sign of the holy Cross upon your forehead, mouth, and breast
(as sealing, and shutting up thereby the door of your heart against all
profane words, thoughts and deeds for that time) retire your self into the
secret cabinet of your soul; there privately to converse with him alone, as if
there were no other, but only himself, and you in all the world.

Finally conceive that day, as perchance the last that shall be lent you,
wherein to work your salvation; which depending upon that state wherein your
last action shall be done, o of how main importance it needs must be, to make
a serious reflection upon every act which may prove, perchance to be your
last; and whereon your Eternity may depend for an endless weal or woe! This
holy, and most important morning practice is able to make so very deep an
impression in our hearts; and to continue so powerful an influence upon all
the rest of our actions, throughout the whole day; as that no worldly
affection, nor passion, nor any creature whatsoever will be able to disorder
that happy soul, which beginning the day with so whol'some a thought, shall
frequently renew the same cogitation of death: no rather he will despise all
mortal things, who often remembers that he must dye; as S. Hier. by his own
experience assures us. Yea by this happy practice, of beginning the day with a
holy memory of death, we shall be made careful of that dreadful account,
which will be demanded of us at that uncertain hour: and then with joy, we
shall find the Roman Orator most truly to have said; that, it is the heighest
point of wisdom; to do living, that which dying, we would wish to have done:
and this practice would prove a most powerful Antidote to preserve us from
the deadly poison of sin.

Our morning preparation thus made; and our usual prayers, and devotions
performed with due reverence: we must then betake our selves to such
employments as our present condition shall require at our hands: calling often
to mind for what end it was that God did create us, and does still preserve us
in this world: all which being only for his glory, and our own salvation; we
must carefully direct all our actions accordingly; as being to render a most
rigid account for every moment of this most precious time, which God has lent
us to negotiate with our talents for that end.

Now to be faithfully accomptable herein; I conceive it a singular good
expedient, not only to regulate in this manner all our actions of the day: but
also to propose unto our selves a set order, and distribution for the
employment of the whole time thereof, according as our condition, and calling
may both admit and require of us, to Gods glory and our own souls health: for
order is most pleasing to him, who created all things in order, measure, and
weight. Wisd. 11. And it will prevent much idleness, as also teadiousnesse to
our minds; to both which they are exceeding subject, who propose not to
themselves some due method for the employment of their time, and affairs;
which being rightly ordered, they pass with much more content and ease.

Now this right order consists in the fit disposing of all our several
employments for the day: as for our morning and evening prayers; and for all
our other employments, as well spiritual, as temporal, suitable to our
condition, and leisure: regulating the time for our studies, or reading; for
our work, or corporal refection; for our recreation, or for such uisitts; and
conversation, as either ciuility, or charity may justly exact of us. In fine we
must observe an order and set time for all our affairs, so fart as prudence,
and convenient fittingnesse will permit. Nor is it less convenient that we
should stint, and discretly regulate a due proportion; as well for our
domestike expense, as also for all other occasions answerable to our condition,
and ability: allotting also for Alms what may be fitting, in due gratitude
unto God; for this is that order (says S. Aug.) which bringes us to him; that
we do all things decently, and according to order. 1. Cor. 14. And with a pure
intention for the glory of God: for hereby all our actions will become
grateful to him, and meritorious of eternal reward. O let us not therefore
omit to direct rightly our morning Intention; nor to propose unto our selves
some good employment for the day; which must not be consumed in idleness, nor
in the vain and fruitless pastimes of mere prop haine, and worldly
Conversation.

By the first part of this Rule you have direction for your morning actions,
whereby to regulate all the several employments of the ensuing day. But to
conclude the better, what we endeauored well to begin; and to make that our
morning oblation, an entire sacrifice unto God: it will be requisite, that we be
as careful to crown that our mornings well beginning with as holy a good
evening exercise at our going to bed: which I will endeavor to propose unto
you by

THE SECOND PART Of this Rule, to be practiced before our going to bed.
IT is no less necessary to end well the day, then it was to begin it well:
and as needful to consecrate to God our last evening actions, as our first in
the morning, And to this end, before we go to rest, we ought to conclude the
day with this evening Exercise; as it is generally practiced by the best
Catholics; retyring into our Oratory, or the usual place of prayer, so soon
as fit time may require to dispose our selves to our rest: and there alone, or
in company (as may be most expedient to our present condition) we may say the
common Litanies of the Saints, with the ensueing prayers: to which we may also
add such other accustomed devotions, as time, place, or other circumstances
shall require. And finally conclude with abriefe examen of Conscience
consisting of these four following points.

An examen of Conscience, for such as in a virtuous course of life, aim most
at Perfection: and often frequent with devotion the holy Sacraments.
FIrst devoutly upon your knees, and in the Presence of God; adore him in your
heart, and crave his grace to call your sins to mind; and to detest them.

Secondly give thanks for his innumerable benefits; and for his preserving you
from so many dangers: and for those especially of that present day.

Thirdly examine in particular what sins you have committed by Thought; by
Word; by Deed; or by Omission; whereof the World; the Flesh, or the Devil may
be able to accuse you. Whether you have broken any of Gods Co^ma^deme^ts; or of
those of his Spouse, the holy Cath. Church. Whether you have offended by any of
the seven deadly sins: or by any of your fiuecorporall senses. And in
particular; if failed in the duty of your present state, and condition.

Examine what has happened in your Conversation of that day, wherein you may
have offended God; either in Thought. By Vanity. By anger. By Impurity. By
Pride. By Presu^ption. By Revenge. By Rash judgment. By Disdain. By Envy, or
the like.

In Words; either immodest Or impudent. Or Proud. Or Disobedient. Or
Uncharitable. Or Injurious. Or Untrue. Or Blasphemous. Or Ungodly, and the like.

Or finally in Deeds: examining well your Conscience, of all your sinful
acts: and observe with diligence your own vicious inclinations and disordered
Passions, and Affections which most incline you to sin. And principally make
good reflection upon those faults committed against your resolution made that
day in your morning prayer: as also upon such affected venial sins, as
frequently are committed by deliberate, and free consent. Of which sort, are
idle, and unprofitable words. Trifling vntreuthes. Slight Contempt, or
auersion. Small Calumnies, and murmuratio^s against Superiors, or others.
Sloth to refist distractions in Prayer. Negligence, and cooldnesse in
frequenting Sacraments, and all other devotions; doing all rather by custom,
and without fruit, for want of uertuous endeavor. Vanity, and secret
self-esteeme. Too-much inclination, and industry to seek our own ease, and
commodity, neglecting our Christian Perfection. Selfeloue in our actions; and
and the like.

But I must seriously here recomme^d to you this very useful advertisement
for your examen, before confession: wherein although you must be serious, and
very dilligent; yet free from anxious and over scrupulous disquiet of mind.
First carefully examine; whether since your last Confession, your Conscience
accuse you of no mortal sin: and if it be guilty but of venial: then let
your Examen, and Confession also be chiefly concerning your daily, and most
habitual faults, which you are most bound to amend: of which kind those are,
which cause greatest remorse to your Conscience; which hinder your progress in
virtue; and are most contrary to the vocation, and state of life wherein you
live: or those finally, to the Confession of which you find most repugnance,
and whereunto you have greatest affection, and inclination. For it is well to
be observed, that by this manner of examen, and Confession of these our
principally affected sins (taking as by task to amend them) the grace of
the Sacrament is much more abundantly obtained; then if by a long scrupulous
search, and teadious Confession, we should labor to find out all our meanest
frailties, and least venial sins; for thereby we so spend the whole force of
our spirit; as that small attention can be had, to make with true repentance
good resolutions of amendment: according to which not withstanding it is, that we
receive grace in this holy Sacrament; and not according to the time, or toil
which we employ in too unquiet examens, or in long, and scrupulous Confessions:
wherein, though it be not needful to confess all our venial frailties; yet
we must be truly sorrow full for them all; and purpose to amend them; which is
the chiefest point, and best disposition to a profitable Confession: declaring
our sins, not as by custom only, and after one set form, still repeating
the same, and in such general terms; as the greatest Saints alive are not
free. We must therefore accuse our selves only of such things in particular, as
most require correction; expressing them so humbly, clearly, and briefly as we
can: assuring our selves that the longest Confessions are not always the best;
but those which are made with most repentance, and truest purpose of amendment.

Fourthly stir up your self to true hearty Contrition for all your sins:
crave humbly pardon of God for them, proposing with a firm resolution (by Gods
grace) to amend, and to confess them with true sorrow, at the next fitting
time. Endeavor by this means to put your self in that happy state wherein
you would be content to be found at the hour of your death: which may be done
by these four brief ensuing acts.

First by an act of holy Faith, firmly believing whatsoever God has revealed
to his holy Cathol. Church: and as for such, is by her proposed to us, to be
believed.

Secondly by an act of divine Hope, founded in Gods great goodness, and
faithful promises; and in the sacred meritts of JESUS CHRIST.

Thirdly, by an act of true Charity; in loving God above all things, and our
neighbor as our selves.

And finally conclude with an Act of Contrition; detesting all sin; because
it is injurious to so great, and good a God: which detestation of sin, and
hearty repentance (as by very powerful motives) may be stirred up by these
ensuing considerations.

First by well pondering who he is that offends: to wit, a poor abject Man;
a contemptible worm; yea very dust, and ashes.

2ly. Who he is, that is offended: to wit, God omnipote^t, infinitely good
just, and merciful; who has both created, and continually preserues us
pouring down innumerable benefits upon us most ungrateful Creatures.

Thirdly, to consider the ill effects of sin; whereby (if mortal) we loose
Gods grace, which is the life of our soul, and of being the children of God,
we become children, and slaves of the Devil: we forfeit Heaven, and become
liable to the everlasting flames of Hell, the greatness, and horror whereof,
is most extremely formidable, eue^ to imagine, but by a serious thought.

And lastly to consider, for how unworthy a gain, and small a content, in
satisfying some fond curiosity, or sensual and unruly passion; we renounce
our eternal Bliss.

Out of all which considerations may well be framed this following Act of
Contrion; or some such like; as we shall find most moving to our hearts, for
that effect.

An act of true Contrition.
My Souueraigne Lord God and most merciful Redeemer: for that I love the above
all things whatsoever, it grieves me from the bottom of my heart for having
offended thee. I firmly porpose never to offend thee any more, but to avoid
the occasions of my sin, to confess, and to fulfill the sacramental
penance, which shall be enioyn'd me for the same, and I now offer up my life,
and death, my body, and soul, with all the operations of them both, in
satisfaction for all my grievous sins: and I most humbly crave that (I wholly
trusting in thy infinite great goodness, and mercy; and by the sacred merits of
the most precious blood) thou would pardon me (as I do all who any way have
iniuried me) and vouchsafe me thy holy grace to amend, an final perseverance
in the same until my end.

These our devotions before bed, being ended we must retire our selves in that
devout recollection from al company, the best we can, to our quiet repose
without dissipating our heart by any further needless discourse, or idle
conversation: but beginning now to vndress, our selves, and to put off our
clothes, we must call to mind how Death will shortly bereave us of all wordly
things, as honors, wealth, friends, pleasures, and what else soever we enjoy;
we must make here a true virtuous act of perfect conformity to Gods heavenly
pleasure, as a most willing surrender of all which is ours, to be freely
disposed of by him both now, and in all eternity, saying. O when shall I deuest
my self ( dear IESV) and put off the old man, with all my evil acts, and
sinful habits, to the end I may be renewed in spirit; and may put on the new
man which according to God is created in Justice and Holiness of truth.
Thessal. 4.24. Consider that a day will come for your vncloathing never to
reuest your self, when your last infirmity (as the forerunner of death) shall
bring you to your final lying down; when (alas) unless our souls be fonnd
adorned with the holy habits of virtue, we shall then appear (as did our first
unhappy parents) naked and confounded in the divine presence of God; and in
danger to be cast, not only with them out of the Terrestrial Paradise; but of
celestial bliss for ever: which being a thing so justly formidable; let us now
use all fitting industry, for that dark night of death will come suddenly upon
us, and then no more time will be granted to negotiate our salvation; for on
which side soever the tree of our life shall fall, there will it for ever
remain.

A reflection to be made when we enter into bed.
At entering into bed, we may say: In the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST
crucified, I lie down to rest; he bless me; keep me; save me; defend me,
and bring me to life everlasting. Amen; or thus: O dear IESV, the eternal
repose of thy elect; when will come the hour, and time, that my poor soul
may without end receive her rest in the eternal glory. Being laid down in
your bed, think with your self; how sleep is the true resemblance of death:
the bed represents our grave; the sheets, our coffin, and the covering
represents the earth, which shall one day be cast upon our corpse to cover us:
and hereupon making a serious reflection upon your own mortality, most humbly
recommend your self to the divine protection of the sacred Trinity, saying:
God the Father bless me; JESUS CHRIST defend and help me; the virtue of the
Holy Ghost illuminate, and sanctify me this night, and ever more. Amen. After
this compose your self gently to sleep upon this consideration; that once you
must lie down, to rise no more, but by their hands, who bear you to the grave:
nor have we any assurance, but that very night may prove the same; Gods
blessed Providence so dispofing it, that none shall know the coming of that
dreadful hour, to the end that we should always be ready, and prepared for it
with our lamps of holy Faith, replenished with the oil of good works
expecting the call of our heavenly spouse.

A devout Practice to be used in the night, when we cannot sleep.
It is a very good remedy to drive away evil fancies, when we cannot sleep, to
make some elevation of our heart to God, for his innumerable great benefits, and
abundant provision of all fitting necessaries; we having a soft bed, and well
covered, whilst so many poor, and needy souls are forced to repose their
hungry, bare, and wearied carcasses upon the hard ground, or perchance upon
some little straw, without all other defense against the great rigor, both of
hungar, and could; and yet their innocence, and holy merits, may be likely to
deserve much better all these great blessings then we; here let us again raise
up our hearts by some such like fervent ejaculations as these: O IEVS be thou
unto me a Jesus, and save me. O my most merciful Father, and dreadful Judge; am
I now in that condition, and state for my conscience, wherein I should be
content to be found at the hour of my death! O when shall I truly love thee
with my whole heart and soul, or as composing your self to rest at the foot of
the sacred Cross, rehearse these blessed words which JESUS CHRIST pronounced
there to his Heavenly Father: Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Luke
23. Recite this holy Sentence with great fervor, love, and humility; beseech
him so to imprint it in your heart and soul; as that you may conclude your
life, and last breath in pronouncing these sacred words in union of that
intention, and disposition, wherein JESUS CHRIST prosented that his last prayer
to his eternal Father upon the Cross. This done, without any further
straining your mind, compose your self again to sleep, endeavoring that
your last interior act, be ever of the love of God.

I will conclude this Rule with a very serious admonition to all such as it may
most concern; which is that they so regulate the hour of their going to bed;
that having had sufficient time for their rest, they may rise in a good hour
in the morning; not converting day into night, and night into day; to the great
prejudice, both of their corporal, and spiritual health: as also to the
exceeding hinderance of their whole days employment, totally perverting the
natural order which God has ordained us, who made the night for repose; and
the day, wherein to labor and expedite our affairs.

THE THIRD RVLE. FOR THE EXERCISE of Prayer. Shevving how profitable, and
necessary it is: and what conditions, and dispositions are required thereunto:
with a set Exercise for daily prayer.
THE former Rule being properly to regugulate our morning, and evening actions;
due order requires that this should treat more particularly, and at large of
Prayer, which is a needful food, defense, and chief preserver of spiritual
life in a Christian soul; an useful fountain, without which the holy plants
of virtue could neither take life, nor grouth in us; were they not very often
watered with this Celestial dew by holy Prayer; which gives both force, and
vigor to resist the schorching heat of our sensual affections; as also the
unruly passions of our corrupt, and intemperate nature. The necessity and happy
fruit of Prayer, is most excellently expressed by S. Augustine Sermon. de Temp.
226. who calls it the key of Paradise, which opens all the doors and coffers of
Gods divine treasure; and leaves nothing shut, or hidden, to which it makes
not way, and free access: yea and which far yet exceeds all this; it opens
also the door to the cabinet of Gods own divine Presence, and gives us
admittance at all times, and in every place unto his Heavenly Majesty; there
leasurely to confer, and treat with him all our necessities concerning
either body, or soul. This is that golden key of highest honor, and
privilege given us by the Eternal King of Heaven, whereby without control we
approach the divine Throne and Majesty of God; there to contemplate his
greatness, to admire his beauty; to love his goodness; to taste his sweetness;
to represent our own wants; to beg pardon for our sins; to crave his grace,
and to obtain great gifts, both temporal, and spiritual. By this happy key
is opened to us the whole magazin of his Celestial treasures: nor is there any
thing which he refuses to this powerful address of holy Prayer: Whatsoever
you ask, by prayer believe that you shall receive it and it will be granted to
you. Mark 11. The very same he also promisseth, and confirms in Saint John
14. and 16. and therefore it has not been without great cause that Gods
chiefest Saints have ever made so high an esteem of holy prayer which they
have also done in respect of an other great prerogative which it has, in
communicating to our soul supernatural knowledge, and wisdom, by a divine
light immediately from God himself; which does far surpass whatsoever humane
force, or industry is able to obtain: approach ye to me, and be enlightened
(says the Psalmist) Psalm. 33. And from this light it was, that S. Hier. and S.
Tho. of Aquin. confess to have had their greatest help to understand the
hardest and obscurest points, both of the holy Scripture, and Divinity. And by
what other means obtained S. Antony in the desert, S. Simon Stilites in his
stupendous and long penitential life upon a pillar, B. Gregory Lopez; in his
great retirement both from all company, and study of humane litterature. Saint
Cath. of Sienna; S. Theresa, and so many more holy persons, from whence I say
did they draw such profound knowledge of all divine Mysteries; but from this
heavenly help of holy prayer? Nor is it any meruell that those who are taught
immediately by God himself, should by such a lightsee more clearly and
understand more profou^dly, then they who derive their knowledge, but from
their mere humane industry; which is without comparison, much more imperfect
then the light of a candle in regard of the bright shining Sun; since the
Sun being of a far heigher nature, and force; it serves not only to
enlighten; but also to give growth, and life to all whereupon it shines: Psalm.
93. whereas the poor weak, and glimering candle, comes short of all such
effects: and fitly represents to us the weak capacity of man's natural
understanding and knowledge.

Blessed S. Augustine is as efficacious, and clear in declaring to us the
necessity of holy Prayer, as he has been to manifest its happy fruits;
assuring us, that Prayer is as necessary for the soul, as is air, or food for
the body: without which, as it cannot live; so neither can the soul continue
long in its spiritual life of grace, without the holy exercise of Prayer:
which is to her as a furnace is to iron: for that mettle although of it self
it be both hard, stiff, and cold, yet being cast into the furnace, it becomes
hot, bright, and pliable to what form the workman shall please, and remaining,
but a short time out of the forge, returns to its former natural qualities,
and becomes as stiff and cold as before. It is just so with our soul, which
through its deprau'd nature, is both cold, and very vnplyable to virtue, unless
it be heated by the holy fire of Prayer; from which it cannot long be
separated, but it loses fervor, and returns to its former bad inclination,
and sinful habits again.

Having here briefly discourced of the necessity, and great fruit of holy
Prayer; I cannot omit to say something also of the force, and singular
efficacy of the same: and how powerful a means, it is to obtain at Gods
hands all our corporal, and spiritual necessities; as by Gods holy help, I
shall endeavor to prove by several most manifest examples, both out of the
old and new Testaments. As first may well appear in that dangerous, and great
encounter betwixt Amalech, and the Children of Israel; wherein so long as
Moses lifted up his hands to pray; the Israelits prevailed, but if (through
weariness) his arms failed to continue that holy posture; their enemies gained
the advantage so that in Moses his prayers, consisted their strength and
victory. Deuteronomy. 17. And how often he at other times, by fervent prayer with held
Gods hand, even ready to strike a deserved revenge upon rhose rebellious
people, as may be seen in the same chapter.

The like powerful effect had his holy prayers for those sinful people. Exodus
32.10. God there saying to Moses: Pray not for this people, nor hinder me
thereby from punishing them. And Exodus 23. we see how, in a manner, he held Gods
hands, from thundering fourth his destroying wrath upon that rebellious
generation, for their adoring the golden calfe: Suffer me that my wrath may be
power'd forth against them; as if he had held him by force from destroying
him. And Psalm. 105.23. and 24 he said, he would destroy them; if Moses his
elect, had not stood in the way before him, to turn aside his wrath, that he
might not destroy them.

Yea had not the powerful effect of prayer sufficient force to change Gods
dreadful sentence, pronounced by his Prophet Jonas for the destruction of
sinful Niniue; which yet by holy prayer, and penance obtained his merciful
pardon.

Iosue by his prayer, stayed the course of the Sun, until he had accomplished
a glorious Victory over his enemies. Ios. 10. Esa. by prayer, caused the same
Sun, to go back in favor of King Ezechias, ten whole lines of the dyall:
and the same King Ezechias by his fervent prayer, retarded death it self,
fifteen whole years, which was before upon the very point to have seized upon
him. Kings 3.18.

And since the Law of grace, many of Gods Saints, by prayer have raised the
dead. S. Gregor. Thaumaturgus (so called by reason of so great a number of
stupendous miracles which he wrought) dried up a great lake by his prayer, to
reconcile a mortal discord which it caused betwixt two contentious brothers.
He removed a great mountain, to make place for the building a Church. He
fixing his walking staff into the bank of a River, which by its frequent
inundations used exceedingly to prejudice all the territories about, that dry
staff presently sprouted fourth, and grew up to a great tree, and by his
prayers became the limited bounds of that unruly river, which it never
afterward exceeded.

And to conclude; Zonaras relates, that S. Basil by his prayers opened the fast
shutt doors of the Church at Nice; (which the Arrians could not effect by
theirs) in the presence of Valence the Emperor: who had proposed that
expedient to prove, whether the prayers of the Catholics, or those of the
heretic Arians were most efficacious, and consequently which of their faiths
should be esteemed for true.

By all which their prodigious miracles, we plainly see the great power, and
force of prayer, and we shall need no better proof to manifest how strongly it
preuailes with God for whatsoever we shall but rightly demand. And therefore I
will now proceed; and show

WHAT EXTERIOVR preparation is required for prayer: and what interior
conditions are necessary to make it gratful to God, and fruitful to our souls:
wherein consists the chief point of this good Rule, for holy Prayer.
FIrst for the exterior preparation, a convenient place is to be assigned to
prayer, which may be solitary, quiet, and free from noise, and company.

Secondly, certain appointed, and convenient times are to be set apart for
this holy exercise, which (without fitting cause) we must not omit, nor change.

Thirdly, the composition of the body must be modest, devout, and humble: as
bare head, and upon our knees, with joined, and elevated hands, like criminels,
craving the mercy of God.

Fourthly, our words must be also rauerently pronounced, and so leasurely as to
be distinctly understood: for as it would be esteemed an exceeding inciuility
to speak so consusedly fast to a temporal Prince; as that we could not be
understood, so much more sinful irreuerence it is, to speak with the King of
Heaven, in hudling out so fast our words in Prayer, as that, even we our
selves should not know that which we so mutter to Almighty God.

Now concerning the interior conditions required for holy prayer (true faith
being first supposed, without which the Apostle tells us, that, it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11.) the next necessary condition (and required
also by saint Paul) is Charity, without which, even Faith it-selfe (he says)
would nothing avail him. Cor. 13. and for want of which virtue, both the
Prayers, and Sacrifices of wicked Cain were utterly rejected, because he made
his offering with a heart full of rancor, and envy against Abel, his innocent
brother. And therefore, if going to make our prayer, and oblation unto God, we
find in our heart any grudge, or breach of Charity toward our neighbor; our
Savior himself expressly commands us, to lay down our offering; and having
first made our peace, and reconcilement, then to bring our offering, and not
before. Math 5.

The second interior condition is, by purity of intention to seek the true
end of prayer, without which it would be vain and fruitless; now the true and
pure end of all good prayer, is humbly to crave thereby a light from God to
understand his holy will, and grace to perform the same; as also increase in
his love, and advancement in virtue; a true conformity to his blessed will,
with a real contempt and abnegation of our-selues; not seeking our own
sensible gust, or spiritual consolation, but renouncing all curiosity of
spirit, and self love; to seek only and purely Gods glory, and not our own
satisfaction by Prayer: for in that we seek not God, so much as ourselves, and
our own interest; and therefore no marvel, if we find him not.

A third condition yet required for holy prayer, is the virtue of
Mortification; for such is the great connection of these two virtues, as the one
is never to be found in any eminentdegree, or perfection without the other: the
reason thereof is clear, for if the heart be possessed with vain, or sensual
delights, it is not capable of true spiritual, and heavenly contents: and
therefore it is, that we find so few endued with this holy virtue of prayer,
because there are so few, who are truly mortified: for who has obtained the
virtue of mortification, will soon get the virtue of prayer; the first
disposing us unto the second: for since we cannot live in this world without
affection to some content, or other; therefore it is, that if we hate, and
deprive our selves of these wordly contents, we shall easily seek out divine,
and heavenly comforts, by the means of holy prayer; which does necessarily
require

Attention, the third condition, and without which our prayer would be but
plain hypocrisy, and by voluntary distraction, it would become vice, and much
rather provoke Gods anger against us, then appease his wrath: for God being a
spirit, in spirit we must adore him (says saint John 4.) and therefore only
lipp-prayer, without the heart, (according to saint Isidore) is no prayer at
all; Prayer being as saint John Damascen defines it; an elevation of the heart
to God; without which, they are most justly reproached by the holy Ghost, who
praise God with their lips, but have their hearts far from him: Prayer being
without attention, but as the shell without fruit; which, as it would be
rigthly offensive to present to a mortal Prince, with much more reason a far
greater crime it is, to present our prayer to God without attention; which is
as the shell without the kernel; or as the body without a soul: yea mere
verbal Prayer without attention of the mind, is but a corporal action, and no
prayer at all, which requires an elevation of the heart, with pious affection,
and attention of the soul. Prayer finally is properly called a virtue of
Religion, and consists not only in the corporeal, or material faculty of the
body; but chiefly in the powers of the soul, and in the spiritual actions
thereof, which must be interior, and truly spiritual; for otherwise it could
be no true worship of God; and by consequence no act of the virtue of Religion,
it not proceeding from the interior operation of the soul, by which God must
be worshipped, as saint John has told us. c. 4.

It is also here to be noted, that prayer is not the end; but rather the means
unto perfection: and therefore, that our prayer may be profitable, we must
raise up thereby some pious affections; and produce from thence good purposes
and resolutions for the actual exercise of some determinate virtue; or for
avoiding some particular vice; for some certain good act to the glory of God,
or to amend some particular imperfection; or finally to practice some virtuous
act of mortification for the love of God, and the like: for in this consists
the true profit of prayer; and by so praying, it will be both holy, and good;
be it never so insipid, or dry; yea it will be both pleasing to God, and very
profitable to our souls; though wholly past over with, what inuoluntary, and
troublesome distractions soever.

The fourth condition (and the principal) whereby to make our prayer
efficacious to obtain what we ask (and by which, both it and all our other
actions ought to be regulated) is to present it in the name of JESUS CHRIST as
S. Paul recommends to us, Colos. 3. Whatsoever ye do (says he) either by
word, or by deed; do it all in the name of JESUS CHRIST. And he himself also
assures us; that all which we ask of his Father, we shall obtain it
undoubtedly; provided we demand it in the name of his dear Son JESUS. Io.
14.15. and 16. that is; in his spirit, and with such dispositions, and
intentions in our prayer, as he gave us example in this world to do.

And therefore to this end, unite your prayers unto his, perform them in true
love and charity, humility, purity, fervor and attention, the best you can,
and in all those other dispositions, and holy intentions, wherewith our loving
Redeemer was accustomed to pray unto his Heavenly Father, whilst he was here
amongst us upon Earth.

The fifth condition is, to place our selves in Gods presence with profound
humility, and a contrite heart for all our sins: ackowledging our own great
unworthiness to appear in his sight, or to be heard by him; as not being able
of our selves to have the least good thought, nor perform the least grateful
act to God: but relying wholly upon the sacred merits of JESUS CHRIST, in which
humble assurance, we may demand of his Eternal Father, a supply of all our
necessities, both spiritual and temporal; together with all other celestial
graces for his sake.

The sixth condition required for true and fruitful prayer, is an humble
confidence, with constant perseverance and true fidelity in this divine
exercise: for God requires it in very many things, which he will not grant
us, but by constant perseverance, and long demand: thereby the more to
exercise our humility; as also to make his gracious gifts to be the more
esteemed by us.

In fine the qualities, and due properties, accompanying true holy and
fruitful prayer, are these: Respect, Attention, Feruency, Faith, Hope,
Charity, Resignation, and constant perseverance in the greatest barreness and
sterility of all Devotion; yea should we be as it were overwhelmed with great
distractio^s, and dissipatio^s of the mind; wherein perchance the virtuous
soul may greatly be afflicted through fear of offe^ding; whereas by her
patient suffering, and holy conformity, she becomes more grateful unto God,
then by the most fervent prayer, bedewed with many tears of very sensible,
and tender devotion: for in that our nature receives both solace, and reward;
but by holy patience and fidelity in serving God in that insipid dryness,
and want of all sensible consolation; she serves him for pure love, and much
more generously; it being without all present recompense. But now for the
better comfort, and direction also of the timorous soul, desirous to perform
her faithful duty to God, I conceive it very requisite here to add this
ensuing advertisement

Concerning comfort, in inuoluntary distractions in Prayer, and the remedy
against them.
For the comfort of such as are afflicted with importunate and inuoluntary
distractions in Prayer, S. Basil assures us, that God is only offended by such,
as be volunluntary, with sufficient advertisement, and consent, staying
wittingly, and on set purpose in such distractions in our prayer; which is
indeed sinful irreuerence; and disrespect to Gods divine presence, to which
they pretended to approach by Prayer. And therefore (according to S.
Chrysostom) unto such we may justly say: How can thou expect that God should
hear or harken unto thee; seeing that thou do not harken unto thy self? But
if using our best endeavor to resist such evil distractions, they yet
return; and that through our natural infirmity we remain wholly distracted,
and void of all actual attention in our prayer; God is not offended thereby;
but moved much rather to compassion; he well knowing our infirmity, and the
great frailty of human nature. For as a loving Father compassionateth the
natural maladies of his children; much more tender is our Heavenly Father to
all such, as love and serve him: for he well knows of what frail mettle we are
made, Psalm. 108. and therefore he will not be angry in seeing us fall into
those our natural miseries, and imperfections against our will; which we
striving to resist, they are but as a combat to cause us much merit, and to
make our prayer so much the more grateful, by how much we suffered therein
with holy Patience, those troublesome disttactions, whereby Almighty God made
trial of our fidelity: for we make a most excellent Prayer when we offer to
God the amorous affections of our love, with actual sufferance for his sake of
those things which much displease us: yea then it best appears that we truly
love him for his own sake, and not for his comforts, and spiritual gusts,
which he often communicats at other times: and the happy soul which in this
sort shall rise humbly from her prayers (yea though even overwhelmed with such
inuoluntary distractio^s) she may rejoice, and be greatly comforted, for
having made to God so grateful a prayer and more profitable also,
peradventure, then it would have been without the least distraction; God being
greatly delighted with an humble, and resigned will and of this we may make
some little judgment by the practice of a charitable person, who by the humble
and modest perseverance of a poor quiet beggar expecting his alms, is
powerfully moved to relieve him. And now although by this the timorours soul
may be comforted in all her importante, and inuoluntary distractions in prayer:
yet I will not omit to give this one good remedy more, by a fervent
ejaculation, composed in this manner out of the very words of that great
Master of spirituallity, blessed Auila: which the troubled soul, as prostrate
at the feet of JESUS CHRIST, may rehearse. My Souueraine dear Lord; so far as
this my greatest sterility, and distracted mind proceeds from any fault and
negligence of mine; I am heartily sorry for giving the occasion thereof: but if
it has been thy divine pleasure to permit them for due punishment of my sin;
I most willingly receive them, as a most favorable chastisement from thy most
holy hand: only grant me thy grace, sweet JESUS, I beseech thee, that I nowaise
offend thee thereby; nor be deprived of the holy fruit of my prayer. Say this
from a sincere, and loving heart; and doubt not but by your patience, Humility,
and Resignation, perseuering the best you can in holy prayer; you shall receive
both profit, and consolation: nor will you loose your reward which he has
promissed to all them who use diligence, and their best endeavor to deserve it.

Dart up your heart unto God, and say to him in mild and humble cofidence: Jesus
the Son of David have mercy on me, Mark 10. knock your breast, and in the
repentant spirit of the humble Publican, say: God be merciful to me a most
wretched sinner, that I am, and do therefore most justly experience that my
soul is like dry, and barren earth before thee, without one drop of the water
of devotion where with to moisten it: Psalm. 142. And finally in union of that
great dereliction which our dear Redeemer suffered upon the Cross; cry also
out with him for heavenly succor: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me!
Math 27.

And if after all this peradventure you find ^o remedy, nor any increase of
fervor in your soul; be then no further troubled, but faithfully continue
your accustomed prayer the best you can, with a quiet and peaceable mind, in
all true humility; accompting it sufficient happiness for you to be admitted to
the presence of the highest Majesty, there freely to propose your chief
necessities, and to be both heard, and looked upon by him, although he speak
not to you then with such familiar conversation as you desire; that being a
favor not granted to all; but to such, and at such times as is best pleasing
to himself.

Finally let these distractions in prayer be never so importunate, and this
spiritual desolation never so anxious, yea although we should conceive
probably that they proceeded from our own sinful negligence and infidelity,
yet we must not disquiet our heart for them; but we ought rather with true
humble patience to receive them as due punishment of our former sin: for by
so doing we may be certainly assured, in the great mercy of God, that he will
turn all to our greater good; supposing that we faithfully observe these
three following things. First that we take occasion thence to humble our selves
the more. Secondly, that no trouble nor deiection caused thereby drive us from
the practice of our accustomed, and approved virtuous exercises. And thirdly
that we employ out faithful diligence to avoid such faults, as may probably
contribute unto those distrastractions, and dissipation of our mind.

But you will say: how can my prayers be grateful to God, I having my heart and
soul encombred with so many evil thoughts, and perverse inclinations? I
answer, that it is one thing to feel the temptation; and an other to consent
thereunto: give no consent to it, and you are so free from any offense thereby;
as contrariwise it serves you as a good occasion to increase your merit in the
sight of God: and it also confirms you much more in true virtue, and will
finally be sure of a most happy reward. I will conclude with this
advertisement, for the better avoiding these usual impediments of the happy
effect of prayer.

The first is want of reconcilement by charity with our neighbor, which made
the sacrifice of spiteful Caine to be rejected by God, as has been already
observed.

Secondly, hardness of heart to to the poor, is also a sin which much
hinders us to obtain the effect of our Prayer: for how can we hope to have
God bountiful to our selves, when we deny to the poor what they ask of us
for his sake: He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor; himself also
shall cry and shall not be heard. Prou. 21. Give, and there shall be given to
you, for with the same measure that you mete, it shall be measured to you
again. Luke 5.6.

3. The vnfittingnesse of what we ask, is oftentimes a hinderance to the
obtaining it: So Saint Peter asked what was hurtful, when enamored with the
glory of CHRIST'S Transfiguration, he desired to stay in that manner with him
for ever: but God shows his love as much in denying our prayers when they are
hurtefull, as in granting them when they are profitable to us: and therefore we
ought to be as well content and tankefull to God for the one, as for the
other, and never to repine at the not obtaining of our prayers: for if we have
not our desire, we have that which is better for us, if we conform our wills
unto the will of God. And whosoeuet well observe Gods manifest and blessed
providence in denying him some things which he has begged by prayer, will
undoubtedly perceive, yea and be forced also to confess in his heart, that Gods
co^descendence to his petition would have been much to his harm: but God of
his goodness not giuingway to our ignorance for our hurt; grants not that
which we then did imagine to be for our good, but that which he certainly
knows to be best for us.

These now are briefly the chiefest obstacles, which hinder the desired effect
of our prayer; to wit, the guilt of our grievous sin; hardness of heart
toward our enemies, and the poor; want of reverent attention, and devotion in
our prayers; and the vnfittingnesse of what we desire, which would be to our
greater harm, should we obtain the same. Which obstacles may best be
prevented, by purifying our intention in the beginning of Prayer; and by
examining our usual comportement in that holy Exercise; what time we allow for
it? with what fervor, reverence, and attention we perform the same? Alas the
least time which we spend in it seems tedious, and very long; whereas we
think the rest but short, which is consumed in wordly and trifling vanities.
Which being well considered, we ought not to marvel at our gross stupidity,
and little gust in what concerns our spiritual, and heavenly felicity; we
being so very negligent to crave Gods needful grace for that effect, and which
he only grants to such, as humbly, and fervently beg it at his hands.

By all these premises, we may now sufficiently understand the nature of holy
Prayer; as also the fruicts, the necessity, and the force thereof: what
preparation, and necessary conditions are required to make it efficacious to
obtain what we ask; what we must do when assaulted with inuoluntary and
importunate distractions: and finally what are the obstacles which make our
payer inefficacious for obtaining what we desire; wherein though I have been
longer then the breuity of a mere practical Rule might require; yet for that
the right knowledge of a thing which is very precious does stir up a great
desire to obtain the same; therefore I hope my labor will neither be lost,
nor yet prove ungrateful, in laying open thus amply both the nature, and
happy fruit of holy Prayer; whereby a virtuous soul will be moved to be much
more serious and assiduous in the devout practice thereof.

It now only remains, that I recommend to you some set form and order for
your usual and daily prayer; which neuertheless you may change, and to which
you may add, according to your own devotion, and the advice of your spiritual
or Gostly Father, with whom, both virtue and discretion requires that you
should freely communicate all your set practices of piety: and thereby you
will the better understand Gods divine pleasure; and keep your zeal and
devotion much more securely within the bounds of discretion, and true virtue;
by renouncing your own satisfaction in humble submission unto him, whom you
have chosen spiritually to assist, and direct you; and by him, to understand
the will of God.

A Method, or set form for our principal devotions, and daily prayers.
Now concerning this order, or set form for our daily prayer, it might be
sufficient to remit you to the manuel, and other good books of devotion; out
of which your own discretion is best able to make a choice (as I doubt not but
you have already done) most suitable to your present condition, for the which
your obligatio^in particular is very great to God, for his affording you so
gracious a favor of much good leisure, and opportunity to converse so
familiarly with him, both by reading, and prayer: whereof they are deprived who
are of a meaner condition: and therefore, as well in due gratitude, as also the
better to correspo^d with so happy a condition; you may make use of these, or
of some other devotions, as God shall best inspire you; or as some good
spiritual director may advise you by his better counsel.

After your first morning oblation to God, and rectifying of your intention for all your actions of the day: I must in the next place recommend to you, one
little half hour of mental prayer. And as for the method to be practiced
therein, I remit you to the great Bishop of Geneua Francis de Sales of most
happy memory, in his first and second part of his Introduction to a devout
life; where you shall see a short, plain, and easy method for making of
mental prayer. Your meditation ended, hear Mass (if you can) in honor and
adorarion of JESUS CHRIST there truly present in that holy Sacrifice; whereby
the price of our Redemption is applied in expiation of our sin; which does
far surpass in payment of that debt, all other satisfaction whatsoever;
whether by fasting, prayer or any corporal austerity; it being the infinite
satisfaction of JESUS CHRIST, which is thereby applied to our souls. And hence
it is that Satan our mortal enemy, and all his wicked instruments so mainely
oppose the holy Mass; as greatly envying the glory of God, and our souls
health, which is reaped thereby. Say daily our Ladis office, and your beads,
according to the several mysteries thereof: and read toward the evening the
Saints life for the next day; observing with good leisure what virtues you shall
find therein most necessary for your own practice: and make it the subject of
your next morning resolution, to produce some good acts thereof, as occasion
may be offered; and crave humbly that Saints intercession to God, to obtain
you grace for imprinting so needful a virtue into your soul.

There is yet one thing more, which both for its piety, and profit, may well
challenge a prime place amongst our devotions; the Letanies (I mean) of that
most sweet, and adorable name of JESUS, which you have in the Key of paradise,
and other books. Piety demands it, in devout acknowledgement of those divine
and glorious attributes of our Eternal King, and loving Redeemer JESUS CHRIST.
And profit may also persuade us to it, since divine truth assures us, that
whatso ever we shall ask in his name; it will be granted us. John. 14.13. yea,
to him all the Prophets give testimony, that all receive remission of sins,
by his name, who believe in him. Act. 10. nor is there under Heaven any other
name given to men, wherein we must be saved. Act. 4.12 So dear, and, grateful
was this blessed name to the beloved Apostle S. John, as it is to be found 200.
times repeated in his Ghospel. And so sweet was it to S. Paul; as it is
observed by S. John Chrisost. to be repeated by him 200. times also in his
Epistles; yea, and that after his head was struck of at Rome for profession of
the holy Faith of JESUS, it pronounced three several times that blessed name,
as if springing at each time with joy; and at each bound a clear fountain
sprung also fourth, which is to be seen at this day in memory of that his most
happy martyrdom.

This sacred name was also found engraven with goulden letters in the heart of
that blessed Bishop and Martyr S. Ignatius in testimony of his fervent love
and continual thoughts there upon; which had so happily there imprinted it:
and therefore not without much cause the great Apostle has charged us. Coloss
3.17 that, whatsoever we do, in word, or in work, we do all in the name of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST: giving thanks to God the Father by him; whom we both
praise and glorify by all the blessed attributes of these holy Letanies;
raising thereby our hearts both to love and adore him: in whose sacred merits we
must place our whole trust and confidence; as well for remission of sin as
for the salvation of our souls in eternal Bliss.

Now as for the other Letanies of the sacred Virgin Mother of God; as also for
that of the peculiar Saints of our Kingdom, you have them in your manuel, and
other books of devotion, where you may find them. And for the first, I need
not recommende it unto you: for if King Salomo^ entertayn'd his mother with so
great expression of all yealding willingness to her petition; saying: my
mother ask, for it behooves not that I turn my face. Kings. 2.20. How
powerful then may we well believe is the intercession of the most glorious
Virgin Mother of God, and Queen of Heaven with her dear son JESUS, in the
behalf of her devoted servants!

The other Letanies of the peculiar Saints of England, we may confide^tly
believe will also bevery efficacious; seeing we cannot doubt but that the
country, which gave them their birth to that happy temporal life, wherein
they wrought to themselves an eternal, is so peculiarly very dear unto the^,
as they cease not to beg that blessing for it (most to be desired) of a happy
conversion to the only true saving, and holy Cath. Faith; for which we must
join our most earnest petition with them, for the increase of Gods glory, and
for the Salvation of those so dearly redeemed souls.

These three different Letanies may be ordered by your self for several
days, according to your devotion, by placing them inorder amongst your other
daily prayers.

Be not unmindful of gratitude, and due devotion to your most faithful Angel
Guardian; crave his assistance in all your necessities; and thankefu^ly
acknowledge his continual help and favor. Manifest with all confidence your
necessities unto him; that he presenting them to God in your behalf, may
obtain divine favors for your ignorance; good counsel in doubts; needful
succor in your dangers, comfort in your afflictions; protection against all
your ghostly enemies; and particularly divine assistance in the dreadful hour
of your death.

The practice of a daily parti^ular examen of Conscience
THere remains yet that I also recommend to you that most profitable Exercise
for obtaining true Christian perfection, by making daily your particular
Examen of Conscience, much after the method of your general examen before bed,
with this only difference that this is to be made of all your sins in
general; and the other but in particular; and concerning your performance of
the good purpose you made in the morning, either for rooting out some one
determinate vice, or for the practice of some particular virtue.

This special Examen of our fidelity concerning the performance of our
mornings Resolution, and subject of this our particular Examen, is ordinarily to
be made immediately before dinner, and supper, and in the space of saying five
Pater nosters (at the most) taking for the subject thereof (and as a
particular task) either the gaining some needful virtue, or the extirpation
of some determinate vice most predominant in our souls and of most scandal to
our neighbor: purposing to make that day some peculiar Acts of that virtue,
or of opposing that vice, as occasion shall be offerred; and when we offend,
to make some interior aspiration to God, knocking our breast, or making the
sign of the Cross upon our heart, in token of craving pardon, and that we
disauow the sin. All which may be done, even whilst we are in company with
other people (if conveniently we cannon retire) yea although otherwise
actually, and by necessity employed, yet we may retire our selves into the best
interior Oratory of our soul; and there eleuating our mind to God, we may
perform this holy Exercise, both with much merit and profit: as did holy S.
Catherine of Sienna, whilst her parents by corporal employments, endeavored
to hinder her private retreat unto spiritual prayer.

Our Examen thus briefly made of our fidelity, or negligence in that our
mornings good Resolution, we must give thanks to God for the one; and beg
pardon for the other; as our conscience shall best dictate to us: craving Gods
grace to strengthen us in the future occasions of temptations against that our
good purpose; and to prevent all assaults which may most endanger us to offend.

If upon this our Examen we find that we have fallen much more then ordinary
into that imperfection which we proposed chiefly to amend; we must not
therefore be disquieted; nor too much troubled in mind for it: but much rather
let us impose upon our selves some voluntary penance, of prayers, alms, or
some good work, thereby to obtain Gods grace to amend our sin of sloth, of
detraction, or the like, to which we find our selves inclind, and most subject
to fall into.

Lastly we must with true sorrow; crave pardon for our negligence committed in
that good practice, and purpose by the help of Gods heavenly grace to amend.
And by a faithful continuance of this daily particular Examen, the faithful
soul will be greatly strengthened in all solid virtue, and may humbly confide
to obtain a most happy and speedy victory over all dangerous vice: which wi^^
(...) possibly be able to ressist the great force of so holy an Exercise.

Take the advice of your spiritual director, concerning the virtue, or vice
whereof you make choice for the subject of this virtuous practice; as also the
time to be continued upon a particular virtue, or vice: which is usually to be
till you have gained the one; or quite maistered the other. Which done then
take a new subject for that your particular Examen, as before. By which holy
practice, and Gods divine grace, you will speedily arrive at the perfection of
a true virtuous life.

Our morning devotion being ended, we must then apply our selves to that which
our present occasions, and condition requires at our hands: calling frequently
to mind, for what end it was that God, both created and still preserues us;
for it being only for his glory, and our own salvation, we must direct all our
actions of the day accordingly; as being accomptable for every moment of this
most precious time which God has lent us. And there propose to our selves some
good employment for that present day, and not consume it in idleness; nor
permit our heart to be so fixed upon mere wordly employments, as to forget the
divine service of God, or the true purity of our intention; wherewith if we
season them, it will procure us a happy blessing both for a good temporal
success, and also an undoubted recompense in Eternity, due to such virtuous
acts, which are so very grateful unto God.

We must recall often to mind that most important and fruitful remembrance of
Gods divine presence; and very fervently renew the purity of our intention,
both in our conversation, and all other actions; doing them in honor of that
holy conversation of JESUS CHRIST here upon Earth, amongst men, and for
entertainment of true charity and friendship with our neighbor, which is a
thing very pleasing to God.

I must not conclude this third Rule of Prayer without some short
aduertissement for the practice of Confession and Communion; wherein I need not
be long, we having all necessary instructions for them in so many other good
books of devotion, and so very familiar now unto all.

Of the holy Sacraments of Confe^^ion, and Communion.
TO the holy plant of devotion are belonging, as two principal branches,
Confession, and Communion: yea they are as two souueraine fountains of all
grace and benediction, the first reuiues us from the death of sin; and the
second nourishes and preserues us in the blessed life of grace And as for the
right use, and practice in frequenting these a foresaid Sacraments, we are most
prudently advised therein by the Bishop of Geneua, that great Master of a true
spiritual life, in the second part of his introduction to a devout life chap.
19. about Confession. And in the chapter following for Communion: to which I
will only here add for further motives to make often use of the first, the
advantage and great fruit to be gained by the frequent use of Confession;
considering that by each Sacramental absolution, we gain a new degree of
grace and increase of virtue, our soul is cleansed thereby from sin; and
freed from a part of the pain which its former sins had deserved she also
gains forces to avoid future finne to resist temptations, and to practice
virtue: yea the oftener we confess, the better will be our confessions, our
memory being more able to call to mind our offenses. It is also a great
security in case of sudden death, which by this holy practice probably will
never find us in a mortal sin. Other dispositions required to a worthy
confession are these. First a diligent and exact examen of Conscience of all
our sins. 2. true repentance for the same. 3. a firm purpose to amend them
hereafter. 4. an humble, modest sincere, and entyre Confession of them; as well
for the number (as near as morally we can) as also for the mortally
aggravating circunstances which change the nature of the sin.

I will conclude this article, in answering them who to excuse their negligence
and indeuotion, will commonly say; they can find no matter in their
consciences to confess. But this pretended cloak for their seldom Confession
cannot cover their sinful sloth: for if the just man (as holy Scripture
assures us) sin seven times a day; how can we presume to want matter for
Confession once a week. S. Francis thought it a great sin to be distracted
in his prayers; and he confessed it speedily to obtain pardon thereof. S.
Cath. of Sienna confessed daily, and wept with great repentance for the least
venial sin (if that can be called little, which is committed against so
great a God). Sodid S. Charles Borromeus. S. Ignatius of Loyola. S. Theresa,
and many more of these Saints. And can any then have so little shame, as to
excuse and palliate their indeuotion and seldom confessing, by saying that
they can find no matter whereof to accuse themselves. O let them but call to
mind how exact an account they must render to their souueraine and dreadful
judge of each idle word; as also of every moment of ill spent time, and they
will easily find, both by thought, word, and deed, or by sinful omission to
have daily just cause to acknowledge their grievous offenses, and to crave
humbly Gods gracious pardon for the same.

Of the holy Communion.
BLessed Sales that great Bishop of Geneua in the a foresaid Chap. gives us in
few words such ample instruction about frequenting this Sacrament, as I shall
only need here to advertise, how the Council of Florence, and Divines do
generally teach us: that as this holy Sacrament is true food to our souls, so
also (in proportion) it works therein the same effects, with those of
corporal food in our bodies; which are to nourish, to sustain, and to
preserve them from sickness and death; to give force t^ resist enemies, and to
perform such functions as are required; and the like; which are the good
effects of our corporal nourishement, supposed that we be in good health, and
our stomach prepared to digest the same; but being ouercharged by
indisgestion, or full of evil humors; the best food then would cause the
greatest surfeits, and do most harm. It is the very same with this
spiritual food; which being received by ill prepared souls what marvel if
they receive more hurt, then good by their Communion; they having used so
little diligence to be prepared for it, approaching rather by custom, and for
fashion sake unto that sacred banquet, or for some humain respect or wirl
affection unto some particular sin, not with a pure soul, nor humblehart,
but rather destitute of true fervor, and devotion, and abounding with wordly
vanity: and in a word, so cold, so sloathfull, and void of all interior
disposition, or preparation required; as it would be much better, they should
abstain, then feed so unworthily upon this sacred food, which in them has
quite contrary effects to what it works in a virtuous soul, duly disposed by
devout fervor; and fit preparation, stirring up true hungar and desire in
their hearts for to feed of it: for God replenisheth the hungry with good things
(says the sacred Virgin in her Canticle (and without a good appetite our meat
does little profit us; which to procure, a moderate exercise is experimented to
be necessary whereby the stomach being warmed conuerteth to good nourishment
what we eat. So likewise before Communion, we ought to exercise our souls in
holy devotion, to stir up therein true ardent fervor of the love of God,
which will make a most happy disgestion of this celestial food, and thereby
beget increase of grace, and strength in all true virtue and piety.

Briefly the disposition required to communicate worthily, and with profit; is
purity of body by fast; and purity of conscience, from sin, and all affection
thereunto, cutting of all wilful tie or desire to the same; hopeing, and
pourposing by Gods grace to amend. In the next place we are to adore Gods great
Majesty with an humble heart; and acknowledge our own unworthiness, miseries and
poverty. 3. true love and gratitude is required, acknowledging his most
gracious favor to us therein; and we ought to call to mind the holy Passion
of JESUS CHRIST, which this sacred Host truly represents to us. Great
reverence, and actual devotion is requisite to this divine Mystery; as also to
produce with much fervor the divine acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity. And
finally although our devotion be not so fervent as it ought, yet let us stir
up (at least) a great desire to have it; for a faithful good will may supply
the want of our sensible devotion, and God regarding our heart, he will accept
thereof, for our Lord has heard the desire of the poor, his ear has heard
the preparation of their heart. Psalm. 9.17.

You have had here a method for your morning, and evening prayer; and also
concerning confession, and Communion. It remains that now likewise I manifest
in what manner God is to be served by sacrifice; which he has so naturally
imprinted in the hearts of men, as no nation (though never so barbarous) was
ever yet discovered in the world, which had not sufficient light by nature to
make some kind of sacrifices to their imaginary Gods. But that true sacrifice
which God requires of us, you will see by that which follows here in.

THE FOVRTH RVLE. SHEVVING HOW to hear mass. With much Instruction for the
understanding of those holy Mysteries: accompanied also with a pious Exercise
of devotion thereupon.
HAVING in the former Rule showed how to render due honor and homage to God by
Prayer: it is but requisite, that the next should also teach us the like duty to
him by holy sacrifice (that supreme Act of Religion) and whereby we give to
God the highest honor, and such as is proper to him alone; and is offered in
that most grateful Host of the law of grace, which is the sacred body and
blood of JESUS CHRIST, that most pure and immaculate lamb of God: who though
he were but once, and in one only place offered in his own proper form, and
in a visible bloody manner upon the cross, as a sacrifice of satisfaction, and
Redemption for all the sins of the world; yet that very selfsame sacred Host
now daily, and in all places is offered upon the holy altar by the hands of the
priest in an unbloody, visible, and in an other form; not as any new price,
or payment for our sin; that being here only applied in the Mass, which was
already paid upon the Cross: like as the self-same also is applied unto our
souls, both by Faith, Baptism, and the other Sacraments; and therefore is
here but as the real true sacrifice of application, and commemoration of the
very selfsame victime; without any substantial alteration: not changing the
essential verity of the sacrifice, by its visible, or bloody manner upon the
Cross; or by the invisible or unbloody manner of the same, here under the
sacramental forms of bread and wine; (which are but merely extrinsecall and
accidental differences to the substance of the true thing, and sacrifice it
self; and but a several external change in the form of the selfsame
thing) and therefore the victime now offered upon the Altar, and that which was
offered upon the Cross, are in substance but one, and the very same; and in
the manner only different, which can make no substantial alteration, as the
very enemies of this blessed sacrifice must needs confess.

By all which, it remaynes now most manifest, that by the Mass there is daily
offered unto God a most true and real unbloody sacrifice; which is here no
other thing, but to place by Consecration upon the Altar the body of a victime,
in the form of bread; and the blood of it, in the form of wine; and so to
offer them to God, in acknowledgement of his most souueraine excellency, and
power, both over life and death: and good Christians assisting with a religious
presence, and devout attention at this holy sacrifice, do reap most
assuredly, both much instruction and grace. And for this end, they must come
with a pure intention piously to exercise these ensuing practices; for the
which this holy sacrifice, was both instituted, and is now daily celebrated.

First thereby to honor, and to ^ender all souueraine ho^mage unto God, with
acknowledgement of his infinite Excellency, by this supreme act. of Latria (or
divine honor, which is to be given only to him alone. 2. To thank him for all
his innumerable benefitts; from whence it is called, a sacrifice of thanks
giving, or of Eucharist. 3. To crave humble pardon for all offenses, by
application of the satisfaction, and sacred meritts of JESUS CHRIST; and thence
it is truly called, a propitiatory sacrifice. 4. To propose to himal our
necessities, both spiritual and temporal; and to receive his gracious
succor, and divine comfort thereby, either for our selves, or for others; and
it is therefore called an impetratory sacrifice. Finally we must offer it up
unto God, thereby to conserve, and refresh in our mind the memory of the death
and Passion of JESUS CHRIST, which it does most lively represent. Luke. 22. And
for that end expressly the Apostle commands us to do it 1. Cor. 11. it being by
the virtue only, and blessed meritts of the death and Passion of JESUS CHRIST
(which are here most lively represented unto us) that we can hope to obtain of
the Eternal Father, either present grace, or future happiness; nor is there
any other name under Heaven given to men, where in we can be saved. Act. 4.
And how available this holy sacrifice is unto all such as shall devoutly
frequent the same, hear only what the divine, and most devout Tho. de Kempis
says in his Imitation of CHRIST: There is no oblation more worthy (says he)
no satisfaction greater for the washing away of sin; then to offer up our
selves to God purely with the oblation of the body and blood of JESUS CHRIST in
the Mass, and holy Communion chap, 7. lib. 4.

Now as for the substance, and very Essence of the Mass; it was instituted by
JESUS CHRIST at his last supper; when by consecrating bread, and wine, he
converted them into his own true body, and blood; leaving only the outward
forms of these elements; which he giving to his disciples, he commanded them
to do what he had done, in commemoration of him: Luke. 22.19. And therefore
although the ceremonies, and several prayers be added by the Church; yet this
oblation of our Lords supper, or the Mass, is a representative of that his
unbloody sacrifice; and is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sin; in that our
loving Redeemer JESUS CHRIST is there truly offered upon the Altar, by the
Priest, unto his Eternal Father; And hereby are applied to our souls the
price, and souueraigne merits of his most precious blood, which was shed upon
the Cross in expiation of our sins. And further this Holy sacrifice truly
represents to us the Passion of JESUS CHRIST, by force of his own Institution:
Do this for a co^memoration of me Luke. 22.

All which premises first supposed for the better understanding of the verity
contained in the divine mysteries of this blessed Sacrifice; I will now proceed
to the aforesaid holy Exercise, and show, how we may assist with most profitt
and Piety at these maiesticall, and most divine Mysteries.

A needful advertisement for making right use of this holy practice of
hearing Mass.
IT is here to be observed, that whilst we assist at this holy sacrifice; we
ought not to spend our time in reading the declarations of the Mysteries as
here we find them sert down: for by perusal, and well pondering them at
other times, their practice must be made perfectly known, and so familiar to
us; as that we may accompany the Priest with some fervent eiaculatory
aspirations, corresponding to those holy Mysteries, successively as he goes on
in order with them to the end, and as God best shall inspire. Or else we may
use the same petitions, as here we find them set down to the same effect,
reading them very deliberatly; and endeavoring thereby to raise our heart to
some short and pious affections, and fervent ejaculations: for this is the
best, and most fruitful way (without comparison) to assist at this divine
sacrifice; and far surpasses the use of all books, or beads, during the
time thereof.

A good reflection to be used as you go to the Church, or chapel to assist at
this holy sacrifice.
IT being now the time to hear Mass, represent to your self, that you are
called to accompany the blessed Virgin. S. Io. Evangelist, and holy Magdalen
unto mount Caluary there to assist at that dreadful sacrifice, this being the
lively, and true memorial of the death and Passion of our souueraigne Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST, which [togeather with the Priest] you now are going to offer upon
the Altar unto his Eternal Father for the whole Catholic Church, and as well
for your own necessities, as those of all others, both living, and dead; for
whom chiefly you are bound to pray.

It is also here right worthy to be observed, that in these-Mysteries of the
Mass are truly represented [as will plainly appear to whosoever shall but
observe the declarations thereof] the whole series, order, and story, from Man's
first creation, and unhappy fall: together with the blessed means of his
Redemption by our most merciful Redeemer JESUS CHRIST; whose principal
actions throughout his sacred life are here commemorated to us, from his birth,
to his glorious ascension; and till that last dreadful judgment day, wherein
we all must have our doom, and final sentence unto Eternity.

A Reflection to be used whilst the Priest is vesting himself; and as he goes
to the Altar.
WHilst the Priest puts on his ornaments; we may consider how the Eternal
son of God seemed, in some sort, to have bereaved himself of his divine
splendour and Majesty, to cloth himself with the vile and abject habit of our
mortality: Who when he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery,
himself to be equal to God, but he abased himself, taking the form of a
servant, made in the similitude of men, and in shape found as man. Philip. 2.7.
Let us beseech him by the sacred meritts of this most humble mystery of his
Incarnation, that he will vouchsafe to destroy in us the old man, together with
all our vicious habits; and create us anew in him, in true sanctity; that
according to the Apostles command, we may put on our Lord JESUS CHRIST: Romans
13.14. for as many of you as are babtized in CHRIST, have put on CHRIST. Gal.
3.27.

The Priest ascending up to the Altar with that great Cross upon the back of
the vestment; may renew in us a lively memory of that heavy Cross, which our
loving Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, did bear upon his wearied shoulders to mount
Caluarie; there to pay that dear, and painful ransom for our sin: admire
his mostinfinit love, and mercy.

The interior and exterior disposition required to assist fruitfully at this
holy sacrifice.
THe Priest now vested, and approaching to the Altar; we ought in the first
place to procure a right interior disposition, by stirring up in our hearts an
actual sorrow, and contrition for all our sins; and renouncing all affection
to them; hereby purifying our souls from that blemish, which might make our
devotion unpleasing to God, and rather a great irreuerence, if with an impure
heart, and stained soul by any affected mortal sin, we should presume to
offer up together with the Priest, that most pure victime, and holy sacrifice.

We must also conceive a most humble respect, and great interior reverence; by
representing to our selves that souueraigne great nesse, goodness, and
sanctity of God, there present on the one side; and our own great
unworthiness, ingratitude, and most enormous impiety, on the other; for our
little reverence or devotion toward those divine, and sacred Mysteries,
wherein we are assured by that infallible verity of divine Faith, of the real
and substantial presence, both of the divinity, and humanity of JESUS CHRIST,
true God and man, accompanied with all the divine Attributes belonging unto the
infinite Majesty of our heavenly, eternal, and Almighty God.

Secondly we ought there to behave our selves with all exterior reverence; and
very carefully to avoid all needless words, and looks: still keeping the
eyes of our soul firmly fixed upon the Altar; and our minds wholly busied
with devout attention unto these most sacred Mysteries of the life and death of
JESUS CHRIST, which in that dreadful sacrifice are so very lively there
represented unto us; and to this very end it was instituted by him: For as
often as you shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show the
death of our Lord until he come. 1. Cor. 11.

A Prayer to be said at the beginning of the Mass.
DEate JESUS, my most merciful Redeemer; who daily to renew in us both the
happy fruit, and memory of thy most bitter death and Passion, did institute
this holy sacrifice of the Mass: vouchsafe I beseech thee that I may not only
by my presence assist thereat; but also partake of those divine Mysteries,
wherein thou art the unspotted lamb, and grateful victime, offered for the
sins of the world. And grant, I befeech thee, that I may with a true
repentant heart, and attentive reverence, so assist at this great Mystery of thy
divine power, wisdom, and goodness; that I may effectually participate of the
selfsame grateful sacrifice, as it was offered by thee in that bloody form
upon the Cross for the Redemption of the world, to thy Eternal Father: for
this is the infinite treasure wherein only I confide; and the inestimable price
which I offer in expiation of all my grievous sins: and under this shelter of
thy sacred merits, only it is, that I dare presume to present my self before
thee, as a poor captive slave, redeemed with the price of thy most precious
blood; who live and raignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.

What we are to consider at the Priests descending to the foot of the Altar;
and making a low reverence there.
A Declaration of the Mystery.
THe Priest being ascended to the Altar, and having placed there the Chalice,
and opened the book: he immediately descends again to the lower step: to
signify that though by the happy state of our first creation, we had been
united to God in Adam, by the holy union of his grace: yet we were soon
separated from him by sin [which in our very conception we all contract) and
are cast down to the lowest degree of abiection, and become objects of the
wrath of God; as the Priest at the lowest step of the Altar, by his bowing with
profound reverence represents to us. Here in the true spirit of humiliation;
make this your petition as follows.

The Petition.
O Most infinitely good, and merciful God; who to preserve thy traiterous
rebellious and ungrateful servant from eternal punishment did condemn thy
only dear son, to a reproachful death upon the Cross, vouchsafe, I beseech
thee to interpose his most sacred death and Passion betwixt my sinful soul,
and thy most dreadful judgment, both now, and in the hour of my death. Amen.

What is signified by the Priests making the sign of the Cross when he
begins the Introibo?
The Declaration
THe Priest erecting himself again; makes the sign of the holy Cross, in
the name of the blessed Trinity: humbly acknowledging, that by the bitter death
and Passion of our souueraine Lord upon the Cross, we are redeemed; and raised
up again to the happy state of reconciliation, and to the right of our
heavenly inheritance; in humble and assured hope whereof the Priest proceeds
saying with the Royal Prophet: I will appreach to the Altar of my God: to the
God who much rejoices me etc. Psalm. 45. Here disposing your heart to gratitude,
and humble confusion, say.

The petition
MY most gracious Lord JESUS; how often by separating my self from thee by
grievous sin, had I been cast into the lowest Hell; had not thy infinitt
goodness, and great mercy reserved me to rise by holy penance, and to make my
happy peace again with thee. Grant me the sense of true gratitude, and thy
holy grace, so truly to detest all sin; as I may much rather choose to dye,
then by any deliberate consent to offend thee grievously any more. Amen,

What is signified by the Confiteor.
The Declaration.
A Tributing here all good unto God, and nothing but sin, with the just
confufion, and punishment thereof, unto our selves; the Priest makes profound
reverence; and from a contrite and humble heart, he vtters the public, and
general Confession of his sins committed, by thought, word, or deed: which
the people with like contrition (accompanying the clerk) are also to say.
Knock here your breast with the contrite and humble Publican of the Gospel,
saying.

The petition.
GOd be merciful to me a most wretched sinner. Grant me, I beseech thee true
repe^ta^ce; that being purified thereby from sin; I may become more grateful
to offer up to thee, this holy sacrifice; both for the living; and dead.

What is signified by the following verses, until the Priest ascends up to the
Altar, and kisseth it.
The Declaration.
THis humble confession, thus mutually made, both by the Priest and people:
they now likewise encourage each other in the abundant mercy of so great a
God, by these confortable ensueing verses of the Psalm: 86. O God thou being
reconciled to me, wilt give me life: and thy people will rejoice in thee. Show
fourth to us o Lord thy mercy: and give us thy salvation. O Lord hear my
prayer: and let my cry come unto thee etc. And so the Priest ascending to the
Altar, kisseth it in testimony of our happy reconciliation with God, by the
Incarnation of his only son JESUS CHRIST; in whom we are also tobe united by
perfect charity to our neighbor, and all the world.

The petition.
LOrd JESUS, who in thy infinite love did shed thy most precious blood, to
reconcile us ungrateful sinners to thy Eternal Fathers peace: vouchsafe that
we may live and dye in that blessed triple peace; first with thee, by holy
grace: secondly with our selves, by the enioyment of a good conscience: and
thirdly with our neighbor, by imitation, and in honor and hommage of thy
divine and infinite Charity. Amen.

At the Introite, and Kyries.
The Declaration.
THe Introite puts us in mind of the great desires which the holy Fathers, and
Patriarchs had of their Redeemers coming. And the Kyries, of their earnest
cries for his speedy approach. With whom we must join our hearty desires to
the Blessed Trinity, for his speedy coming by grace into our souls; whereby
to be fortified against our three ghostly enemies; the world, the flesh, and
the Devil. And to this purpose say.

The petition
COme Lord JESUS, come and prepare an Altar in my sinful soul; whereon I may
make to thee an oblation of a contrite and humble heart; that grateful
sacrifice which is never rejected by thee: Psalm. 50. It greeues me from the
bottom of my heart for having of fended thee: but grant dear Lord, I beseech
thee, that no sin may hinder thy coming by holy grace unto me, nor ever have
the power to separate me from thy most blessed presence. Amen.

At the Gloria in excelsis Deo.
The Declaration
AT the saying of Gloria in excelsis, imagine that you see the blessed child
JESUS newborn and laid in a manger and to hear the Angels in melodious
harmony to sing the same. With whom we are to join our most grateful
thanks to the glorious Trinity, for all graces, and mercies bestowed upon
mankind; and in particular for all those which we our selves have received.
Salute him with a joyful heart, saying

The petition
ALl hail, o most divine and well-come Babe descending from thy glorious
Throne, to be laid for my sake in a contemptible manger; there destitute of all
humane commodity. Grant me by thy example to despise all worldly, vanity, and
with an humble spirit of true conformity to thy heavenly will, to set forth by
all my actions, together with the whole quire of thy celestial Angels, all
praise, benediction, and glory; all wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, and power
to our God, and to our souueraigne Lord JESUS, for ever and ever Amen. Apoc. 7.

At the Priests kissing the Altar, and saying the first Dominus vohiscum.
THis Dominus vobiscum, signifies Christ his manifestation to the Kings at his
Epiphanie. And the Priest kisseth the Altar before he salutes the people with
those words, to show that he himself is first to take the Benediction from our
blessed savior, (represented by the Altar) from whom all grace, and blessing
does flow. Here with an humble heart address, your fervent petition to him, as
follows.

The petition.
LOrd JESUS, who by manifesting thy self to the Kings did denounce happy
peace to the Gentiles, by their future Faith in thee. Grant likewise, we beseech
thee, that thou remaining ever with us by holy grace; we may not need to fear
the dangerous assaults of our Ghostly Enemies. Amen.

At the Collects, or Prayers: and why the Priest holds his hands open, and
elevated in saying them,
AFter Dominns vobiscum, the Priest returns to the Altar to say one, or more
prayers, according to the office of the feast, or feria: showing thereby, that
by prayer; we are to obtain, both our spiritual, and temporal wants: and
that chiefly, which the present Prayer of the Church there mentions; to which
we must also direct our intention, for the greater glory of God, and for the
universal good of his beloved spouse the holy Catholic Church.

The Priest prays with his hands open, and elevated, to signify; that (as a
public Minister of the Church) he collecteth, and gathers the grateful
offerings of all their zealous Prayers: and with an elevated heart (accompanied
with the rest) he offers them up to God, as an acceptable sacrifice of
thanksgiving, to his honor, and the salvation of our own souls. At the end
of the Prayer he joins his hands; to show the unity of nature in the Blessed
Trinity, to whom we pray, as to one divine power: and also to signify the
union of our hearts in one firm faith of the Catholic Church. And in fine, all
prayers are concluded, through ou Lord JESUS CHRIST; because all benefits are
granted through him, who said; if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he
will grant it you. And therefore in all humble confidence say.

The petition.
OEternall Father of my Lord JESUS CHRIST. I here in perfect union with the
holy spirit of his beloved spouse the Cath. Church, most humbly offer the
selfsame petition, which by this common prayer she presents for thy glory,
and for the chief necessities of all her true childrens souls. Grant we
beseech thee, for thy dear son JESUS his sake, that we may so love, and
serve thee in this world; as by his sacred meritts, we may enjoy, and glorify
thee in the other, world without end Amen.

At the Epistle.
The Declaration.
CAll here to mind S. John Baptist his preaching Penance, and good-workes.
Confound your self for the small profitt, or amendment of your life, after so
many good examples, exhortations, spiritual books, and holy inspirations
which God has so favorably afforded you for your advancement in virtue, and
correction of vice. Resolve to be more careful for the time to come. And say

The petition
LOrd give me grace to follow the happy instructions given me by thy holy
Apostles, and Pastors of the Catholic Church: and not to neglect thy heavenly
inspirations. Incline my heart, o God to thy holy law, and to a detestation of
all cursed sin.

At the Graduell, and Alleluya.
The Declaration
THe Graduell signifies the conversion of the Jews by the preaching of S. Io.
Baptist: and the Alleluya the joy which the Saints receive at the true
repentance of a sinner. Wherefore to contribute on our parts to the joy of
those blessed spirits; we must firmly resolve the amendment of our lives.
Endeavor here to stir up in your heart an act of true repentance; and in the
spirit of holy King David Psalm. 78. say

The petition
REmember not o Lord our old iniquities; let thy mercies quickly prevent us,
because we are become exceeding poor, afflicted, and despised, help us o Lord
our Savior: and for the glory of thy names sake o Lord deliver us: and be
propitious to our sins. Grant us grace to amend, and by deliberate consent,
never more to offend thee Amen.

At removing the book to the other side of the Altar. And reading the Gospel.
The Declaration.
THe transporting the book from the left hand of the Altar, to the right, to
read the Gospel; represents to us the Jews rejecting the holy Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST; which being declared to the Gentiles; they were thereby
transported from sin, to Grace; and from temporal desires to Eternal. We
sign thenalso our forehead; to signify that we are not asshamed to profess
our selves disciples of CHRIST crucified upon the Cross: we also sign our
mouth; to testify, that we are ready to confess our Faith to Salvation: and
by signing our breast; we declare, that with our hearts we believe unto justice;
as the Apostle commands us. Romans 10. and that with affection we embrace what
that holy Gospel does teach us to believe. Raise here your heart to an act of
firm Faith; and with a generous constancy, and humble hope, say.

The petition.
ENlighten my understanding, o Lord, and so inflame my affection by thy
heavenly grace; as that I may be enabled to put in execution thy divine
inspirations; and to follow that doctrine which we are taught by thy holy word.
Deprive me not (I beseech thee through my great unworthiness) of thy divine
and needful favors, whereby to strengthen and support me in the final
perseverance of thy holy grace. Amen.

At the Creed
The Declaration
AFter the Gospel, follows the Creed; to put us in mind of the multitude of
Gentiles, who by preaching, and miracles received the light of faith. Here
eleuate your heart with much fervor to God; and offer him this humble request.

The petition
ILluminate my soul, o Lord with a true knowledge in the divine Mysteries of
our most holy Faith: and give me constant courage in the faithful profession
thereof: yea to the cheerful hazard of my life, and of what else soever may
be dearest to me, for thy sake. Vouchsafe also, I beseech thee, through the
sacred meritts of thy beloved son JESUS, a speedy reduction of our poor
English Nation to a happy reconcilement with his only dear spouse, the holy
Catholic Church. O let not the meritts of his most precious blood be further
frustrated in those so dearly redeemed souls, by this soul destroying
sin, of unhappy Schism, and Heresy.

At the second Dominus vobiscum.
The Declaration
THis Dominus vobiscum immediately after the Creed (or after the Gospel, when
the Creed is not said) signifies the presence of our Lord and Savior upon
Earth, working stupe^dious miracles to establish his holy Faith in the hearts of
his followers. We must here crave, that by the presence of Gods heavenly grace
our life may be answerable to his holy example; and that we contradict not by
our actions, what we profess by the Christian maxims of our Faith.

The petition
GRant me good Lord the continual memory of thy divine presence, since it
belongs only to thee to reward, or punish my thoughts, my words, and my deeds,
according to their due desert. O let me be the subject of thy divine justice in
this world; that I may enjoy thee by eternal mercy in the other. Amen.

At the offertory.
The Declaration
THe offertory, or oblation which is made of the Host upon the paten; and of
the wine in the chalice; signifies the great promptitude, and fervent affection
(proceeding from a deliberate will) which our Savior had during his whole
life, to offer himself unto God his Eternal Father, to suffer his most bitter
death, and Passion for our Redemption. Here now in all due gratitude, we are
bound in union of this most holy oblation to offer our selves to God, most
redily for his sake, to suffer whatsoever his blessed will and providence shall
ordain for his honor, and for the good of our ow ne souls: yea death it
self for his greater glory; if occasion should so require the same and to
this effect say from a fervent heart.

The petition.
ACcept o heavenly Father this holy oblation of the body and blood of thy only
begotten son JESUS CHRIST: which together with all the powers, both of my
body, and soul; I here most humbly present to thy heavenly Majesty, in due
grateful acknowledgment of thy great mercy; and for the expiation of all my
grievous sins. Amen.

At the Lauatorie.
The Declaration.
THe Priest washes only the ends of his fingers; to signify, that in this
divine action he ought to be pure, and free, even from venial sin; for as
concerning mortal (had he been guilty) it is to be supposed he has been purged
from that by precedent repentance: nor is he worthy (says divine S. Dennis) to
be present at these sacred Mysteries, who voluntarily, and with a deliberate
purpose, shall continue in the least venial sin.

The petition.
CLeanse blessed Lord JESUS by thy most precious blood my defiled soul. O
immaculate, and most pure Virgin, obtain me grace, by thy powerful
intercession, so rightly to detest all sin, as that by true repentance,
being entirely reconciled to thy blessed son, I may the more fruitfully
assist at this divine sacrifice, and make more a pleasing oblation to his
Eternal praise and glory. Amen.

At orate fratres etc. and at the secret prayers.
The Declaration.
THe matter for the holy sacrifice now being prepared; the Priest turns to the
people, and desires their prayers, that it may become an acceptable oblation
to God, both for himself, and them.

By the ensueing secret prayers, we are put in mind, how our most mild and
patient Savior was constrained by the malicious Jews to retire himself from
his beloved Jerusalem, to the valley of Ephraim; where privately he informed
the Disciples of his approaching death, and passion. Here say with a
compassionate heart

The petition.
O What incomparable great grief oppressed thy tender heart (o my most loving
and dear Redeemer JESUS) to see thy self most injuriously excluded from thy
beloved Jerusalem, by these ungrateful Jews! From whence by due reflection
upon my self, I have just cause to be confounded with exceeding shame,
considering how often I have by my enormous sins constrained thee to abandon
thy desired habitation in my soul. Blessed Jesus, for thy tender merci's sake,
vouchsafe that I never more be separated from thee: but that in life, and
death, in time, and in all Eternity, thou may be the sole possessor of my
whole heart, and soul. Amen.

At the Preface.
The Declaration.
THe Preface, or entrance into the sacred Canon of the Mass, which is said
with a loud voice, and ends with that high exclamation to Christ's honor and
praise, of Hosanna in Excelsis: signifies the solemn entrance of our Blessed
Savior upon Palme-sunday into Jerusalem, with that general cry, and applause
of all the people; Blessed is he who comes in the name of our Lord, Hosanna
in the highest. Here say with true fervent affection.

The petition.
Let shame, and just confusion ouerwhelme my soul; considering with what joy
the Jews received this our most loving Redeemer, they having had, neither
Faith nor certain knowledge that he was the true Messiah of the law: whereas I
having both, remain yet void of all true fervent love, piety, or devotion
toward this my sovereign Lord, whom the Angels praise, Dominations adore, and
whose heavenly glory the Powers, Virtues, and Seraphins magnify with mutual
gladness: with whom, let us also now join our prayers, and praises, saying:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, the Heavens, and Earth are full of thy
glory: blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosanna in the
highest.

At the Canon of the Mass, which begins at. Te igitur etc.
The Declaration.
NOw follows the Canon of the Mass; so called, because it is a constant Rule,
and order, which the Church observes in the celebration of this her highest
sacrifice: for it changes not like other parts of the Mass, which daily
differ, according to the several feasts, and Mysteries which we celebrate:
but this (being the principal part of the sacrifice) is immutable, as is the
holy sacrifice it self: and it puts us in mind of the bloody agony of our
Blessed Savior in that prayer which he made in the garden, sweating water and
blood the night before his bitter passion, forsaken of all his dearest friends;
but in most perfect conformity unto his heavenly Fathers will. In union and
homage whereof say

The petition.
O My sovereign Lord JESUS, I wholly and entyrely remit my self, body, and
soul, with all the powers of them both to thy heavenly disposition: yea I
abandon and sacrifice them all to thy divine pleasure; as well for life; as for
death. Grant I beseech thee, that I may never have any other desire, nor will,
but thy only good pleasure in all. And that as thou have vouchsafed to dye for
the love of me; so I may both live and dye purely for the love of thee: and
that living, or dying, I may never wilfully offend thee any more. Amen.

What is meant by Kissing the Altar at, Rogamus, ac petimus etc.
The Declaration.
THe Priest saying those words, kisseth the Altar thereby to signify that he
presumes not to demand any thing for his own deserts, or merits: but for the
merits only of JESUS CHRIST, who (as it said before) is represented by the holy
Altar.

Of the three ensueing Crosses made upon the Host, and chalice.
The Declaration.
THe three Crosses made at those words; haec dona haec munera haec sancta
sacrificia. The first signifies the sacrifices offered by the Patriarchs, and
Prophets under the law of nature. The 2. those offered by Aaron, and the
Priests under the written law. And the 3. signifies those, under the law of
grace. The sign of the Cross is made at each one of the^; to show that they
were all made acceptable to God only because they represented that, wherein his
most dearly beloved son, our Savior suffered when he was crucified upon
mount Caluary: from which only, all Sacraments, and sacrifices, both now do,
ever did and always shall derive all their force, and value.

At the first Memento.
The Declaration.
IN this Memento we remember those living persons for whom we intend, and are
most obleiged to pray, and to offer this holy sacrifice. And as by it we unite
our selves in Charity to the living: so by the same, with due honor, and
reverence, we also unite our selves with Gods chiefest Saints in Heaven; the
most blessed Virgin, the Apostles, the primitive prelates, and successors of S.
Peter; together with diverse others, Gods chief favorites now in eternal
Bliss: beseeching his divine protection by their grateful intercession: and
also testifying thereby, in this great sacrament of Charity, the Communion, and
inseparable conjunction between the Militant, and Triumphant Church of God. For
which effect by a holy aspiration eleuate your heart to God, and say.

The petition.
LOrd JESUS, I here offer up to thee thy beloved spouse, the Cath. Church,
together with thy Elect from all Eternity: by whose powerful mediation, I
most humbly crave thy holy grace, that living here in imitation of their
virtues, and in union with all the world by perfect Charity, I may offer up my
self entirely to the glorious Trinity, as a grateful oblation, in union,
honor, and adoration of that most blessed sacrifice of my sovereign Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, upon the Cross. Be mindful good Lord, I beseech thee
to comfort the afflicted, to reward my benefactors, to forgive all my enemies,
grant perseverance to the just; repentance to all sinners; true peace, and
charity amongst all Christians, extirpate all schism, and heresy (and that
especially in our poor afflicted Kingdom, where that contagious Peste of
souls at present so greatly aboundes) grant this dear Lord, for thy most
bitter Passion sake to the exaltation of thy holy Faith, and increase of thy
eternal glory. Amen.

At hanc igitur etc. when the Priest extendes his hands over the Host, and
chalice.
The Declaration.
THe Priest extends his hands over the Host, and chalice to represent to us the
cursed Jews sacrilogiously laying their hands upon our Blessed Savior, whem
they took him in the garden, and bound him with cords, by which they dragged
him with all cruelty to several Courts. And having scourged, and crowned him
with thorns; they finally condemned him to a reproachful death upon the
Cross.

The Priest holds his hands over the Host, and chalice; to signify that he
ioynes himself to that offering, and substitutes it in his place, and ours;
since it is unlawful for him to sacrifice, and destroy himself. And herein he
also imitates the custom of the old law; where the Priests ever extended
their hands over the sacrifice, before it was offered. Prepare here your heart
to true gratitude, and compassion, saying

The petition.
O Mercy surpassing all other bounds, except the infinite goodness of a God;
who to redeem his disloyal and most rebelliously ungrateful servant,
condemned to death his only begotten and most dearly beloved son! I am the
delinquent (o heavenly Father) and must I be ransommed at no less a price,
then with that dear and precious blood of thy most innocent, and beloved
son? my grievous sin has justly deserved eternal punishment from thy
wrath, and must this most innocent, and unspotted lamb be made a sacrifice to
satisfy the rigor of thy justice, by so costly an expiation of my most
execrable sin! o infinite mercy! o ineffable goodness, and love without all
parallel! vouchsafe that this precious ransom prove not frustrate in me thy
most unworthy creature. Amen.

At the five ensueing Crosses, made over the Host, and Chalice.
The Declaration.
THese Crosses made over the Host, and Chalice, represent to us the preparation
of the heavy Cross by the wicked Ministers, who laid it upon the weary and
wounded shoulders of our blessed Redeemer, to be borne by him to mount Caluary.
These Crosses are in number five: to put us in mind of the cruel torments
which our loving Savior suffered in his ^^ue senses; and principally by his
five most precious wounds: as also to profess thereby; that all the force and
efficacy of our Sacraments and sacrifices are derived from the Cross and
Passion of JESUS CHRIST; For with the sign of the Cross we consecrate the
body of our Lord; and whatsoever is consecrated in the name of CHRIST, is
consecrated with this sign, says S. Augustine sermon. 181. de temp. Crave here
true patience and conformity, saying

The petition.
O Loving and divine Redeemer of my soul: were thou my God crucified for my
sake, and shall I refuse to bear my Cross, and follow thee? o grant me grace
to imitate thy blessed patience, and conformity in grateful acknowledgment of
thy many dolorous, and reproachful sufferings, in paying so costly a ransom
for my sin. Vouchsafe, I beseech thee; that I may joyfully embrace all
afflictions and Crosses, either in body, or mind, which thy divine and
fatherly disposition from all Eternity has ordained me for my greater good.
Amen.

At the Consecration, and Elevation.
The Declaration.
THe Priest being now come to the principal action of this sacrifice; to the
end to follow the example of JESUS CHRIST, in what he both said, and did at the
institution thereof, he first blesses and consecrates the bread and wine by
the selfsame words which JESUS CHRIST himself did use. Which done, he eleuates
in those consecrated species, a holy sacrifice to God the Father, and shows it
to the people, to be adored: putting us in mind how our blessed Savior was
lifted up upon the Cross for our Redemption. And by the elevation of the
Chalice, is represented to us the effusion of his most precious blood flowing
from his sacred wounds, upon the Cross.

The Elevation of these two several, and separated species, is a continual
memorial of CHRIST'S holy Passion; and of that dolorous separation of his most
sacred body and soul upon Mount Caluary.

For all which we must offer up to God the Father, with firm Faith, this great
sacrifice and holy Passion of his only begotten son, in satisfaction for our
own finnes, and for the sins of all others, both living, and dead; it being
(after consecration) one of the most essential parts of this divine service;
and signifies that holy oblation, wherein JESUS CHRIST offered himself to his
Eternal Father upon the Altar of the Cross in expiation of our sins. Here
salute the body of our Lord JESUS CHRIST at the Elevation of the holy Host;
saying

The Petition.
Hail, o true body borne of the Virgin Mary, which truly suffered, and was
really offered upon the Cross for man; and from whose pierced side flowed
water, and blood. Vouchsafe to be received by me at the hour of my death; o
most merciful IESV, son of the living God, have mercy on me.

At the Elevation of the Chalice.
The petition.
Hail; o most precious blood, flowing from the side of my Lord JESUS CHRIST:
wash away the foul and sinful stains of all my past, and present offenses;
cleanse, sanctify, and prepare my soul to thy eternal Bliss. Amen.

Of the three Crosses made upon the sacred Host, immediately after the
Elevation.
THese Crosses made upon the consecrated species immediately after the
Elevation; represent to us the manner in particular, how that most sacred Host
was immolated upon the Cross for our Redemption: whereof we are put in mind,
by the frequent making of the holy Cross.

At the second Memento.
The Declaration.
BY this second Memento we are advertised that whilst the body of our B.
Savior remained in the grave, his soul descended into Hell (a place in the
Earth called Lymbus Patrum) to deliver the souls of the Fathers, who had long
expected their happy enlargement from thence. Forget not here your dearest
friends deceased. And say

The petition.
LOrd JESUS as thou vouchsafest to rejoice the long thirsting Fathers in Limbo
by the divine visit which thy most glorious soul made them there: so now
extend I beseech thee those infinite merits of thy most sacred Passion, toward
the solace also of those thy poor suffering creatures in Purgatory, there
crying for help: but especially have mercy I beseech thee upon my dearest
friends, kindred and benefactors: and in particular upon N. N. and upon all
those, for whom I have most obligation to pray: transfer them speedily from
those tormenting flames to thy celestial Beatitude; there to enjoy, love, and
praise thee for all Eternity. Amen.

At nobis quoque Peccatoribus:
The Declaration.
THe Priest somewhat raising his voice, and knocking his breast, at; nobis
quoque peccatoribus; represents to us the repentance of these Jews, who had
been accessory to the cruel death of the son of God; together with the good
Centurion; who at this dolorous Passion, perceiving so many great and wondrous
signs of his divinity; moved with sorrow and admiration he struck his
breast, and very boldly cried out before all those enraged enemies; truly this
was the son of God Math. 27. Dispose now your heart to Contrition, and to true
compassion saying

The petition.
O Stony, and most obdurate heart, so little sensible of those sharp sufferings
of my Lord and Savior for my most wicked sin. O touch it Lord IESV with true
remorse; that in the sense, and fealing of thy love, on the one side, and of
the horror and detestation of my offending thee, on the other; I may in the
humble spirit of that repentant Publican, and from the bottom of my heart cry
out to thee: Lord be merciful to me, a most wretched sinner Luke 18. I have
sinned Lord; and I detest my sin: as the unhappy cause of all thy dolorous,
and most grievous sufferings: but thou, o IESV the son of David have mercy on
me, Amen. Mark 10.

The reason why the Priest makes here again three Crosses over the Host and
Chalice; when he says: cum ipso. and in ipso. and per ipsum.
The Declaration.
IT is to signify, that this sacrifice is available for three several sorts
of persons: for those in Heaven to an increase of their glory: for those in
Purgatory to relieve their sufferings: and for those upon Earth for an increase
of grace, and remission of their sins.

At omnis honor, and gloria.
The Declaration.
THe Priest eleuating the Holy Host and chalice together a little from the
Altar, at Omnis honor and gloria, and then immediately deposing them again
upon the corporal, and covering the chalice with the Pall; represents to us
the taking of our blessed Saviors body from the Cross: which being most
reverently wrapped in a pure clean linen sheet (signified by the corporal)
was placed in the sepulcher, by those devout persons, Joseph, and Nicodemus.
Here craving true purity, both of heart, and soul, say with pious affection

The petition.
GRant me dear IESV, I beseech thee, in all my thoughts and deeds, true purity
of heart from all sinful affection; whereby my soul may become a pleasing
sepulcher to receive thy precious body, and blood; together with thy heavenly
grace to strengten in me the virtue of true humility; whereby to mortify, what
ever may be displeasing to thy heavenly Majesty. Amen.

At the little Preface before the Pater noster.
The Declaration.
BY this short Preface, the Priest in true Humility of heart acknowledges his
own great unworthiness; and that he would not pre sum to call God his Father;
were he not expressly commanded by JESUS CHRIST in this his own Prayer of the
Pater noster: which he here says at the holy sacrifice of the Mass; to put us
in mind of those devout and fervent prayers, which the blessed Virgin, the
Apostles, and the holy women made, during the time that our sovereign Redeemer
remained in the sepulcher. Here we must unite our prayers together with those
of the a forenamed Saints, and with the whole militant Church, saying

The petition.
LOrd grant me grace, I beseech thee that I may rise from the loathsome
sepulcher of my former ill custom of sin, to a new virtuous life; whereby I
may be led to the happy fruition of thy beatificall vision; there to adore,
and praise thee together with thy heavenly Father, in union of the Holy Ghost,
and with the blessed company of all thy celestial spirits, in Eternal
Beatitude. Amen.

What is meant by the Priests dividing the Consecrated Host?
The Declaration.
THe Priest deuides the holy Host: to signify the separation of the blessed
soul of our Savior from his sacred body at his death. He deuides it into
three several parts; which signify the three several states of the Church.
The first represents to us the state of the present life, which he lays down
upon the Altar. The second signifies Purgatory; which he retaynes in his hand.
From this he breaks a third little part, which he puts into the chalice; to
repre sent to us the Church triumphant absorpt in the sacred Divinity; as also
the reunion of his blessed soul, with his body again, after his glorious
Resurrection. Here make this, or some like seruent prayer,

The petition.
PErmit not dear Lord, and my sweet Savior JESUS, that cursed sin may ever
separate me from thee; but that by true repentance, and final perseverance in
thy holy grace, I may be united to thee in glory for all Eternity Amen.

What is meant by the three Crosses which are made with the particle of the
consecrated Host?
The Declaration.
THe three Crosses made with the little part of the holy Host, over the
chalice; signify the three-fould peace, which by the grace of CHRIST'S sacred
Passion, is pourchased for all such, as by faith, and good life triumph over
their three mortal enemies; the world the flesh, and the Devil. Crave humbly
for his bitter Passions sake; that this may be accomplished in you; and for that
end, with a fervent aspiration, say

The petition
GRant Lord, that I may find the testimony of this most happy triple peace in
my soul, by the help of thy three divine virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity;
accompanied with true Christian Penance, and Humility. Amen.

At pax Domini etc.
The Declaration.
AT Pax Domini etc. which immediately follows, we must contemplate our blessed
Savior now risen again from death, both immortal, and glorious; as also his
appearance to the Blessed Virgin; to S. Marie Magdalen, and to his Apostles,
saying: Pax vobis. Luke 24. Here we must crave true charity, and peace for our
souls; which is the most grateful disposition, and best preparation to
receive worthily the fruits of this most holy Sacrament. And therefore in the
spirit of divine love, and true gratitude, say

The petition.
O Most mild and meek IESV; in union, honor, and adoration of that infinite
love which induced thee to shed thy most precious blood, for thy greatest
enemies; and to beg pardon for those who were the cruel executioners of thy
most bitter death; I freely pardon from my heart, and most humbly beseech thee
also to forgive whosoever have any ways wronged me: most humbly also craving
to be pardoned by all such, as I may have any way offended: being ready, and
truly willing to give all just, and reasonable satisfaction to them; and this
purely for thy sweet sake, my dear Lord, and most merciful Redeemer.

At the Agnus Dei etc.
The Declaration.
THe Agnus Dei thrice repeated, puts us in mind how our blessed Savior (that
immaculate lamb of God) reconciled us to his Eternal Father, and to the holy
Trinity by his most sacred death: pourchasing thereby for us the means to make
our happy peace with him for all our offenses, past, present, and to come.
Which blessed peace, the Priest communicates to the people; he having first by
a particular prayer craved it; and by kissing the Altar, received it of
JESUS CHRIST (whom the Altar represents) and then gives it to the Clerk, to be
communicated to all the rest; to recommend thereby true charity; peace, and
concord to all Christian people; as being the Disciples of JESUS CHRIST, and
true members of the self-same mystical body, whereof he is the divine, and
supreme head. Here stir up true detestation of sin, and a firm purpose to
avoid it, saying

The petition.
O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world: vouchsafe I beseech
thee, that no wicked sin may ever break the happy peace betwixt my soul,
and thee; nor hinder the fruit of thy grace, which I may hope to receive by the
near approaching, and most holy communion of thy true precious body, and
blood; that sacred feast wherein CHRIST is received; the memory of his Passion
is renewed; the soul is replenished with grace, and a pledge is given us of
future glory which we expect to enjoy (as sheep of the fould of this holy
lamb) in union with all his blessed saints and glorious Angels in all
Eternity, Amen.

At Domine non sum dignus, and the Communion.
The Declaration.
THe Priest thus prepared, receives the holy Communion auowing his great
unworthiness: and in token of a contrite heart, knocking his breast thrice; he
says as often with the humble Centurion: Domine non sum dignus etc. Math. 8.
And then with all reverence, he receives this divine refection, and consummates
the sacrifice: representing to us thereby the death and Passion of
JESUS CHRIST: For as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this
chalice; you shall show the death of our Lord until he come Cor. 1.11.26.

Here a great subject is given us of perpetual gratitude; seeing that although
our blessed Savior be ascended into Heaven with triumph, and glory; he yet
remaynes with us in this holy Sacrament pouring down upon us all spiritual,
and temporal benedictions: For which dispose your heart to breath fourth
fervent eiaculations, of love, and gratitude, saying

The petition.
O IESV my most loving Redeemer, fountain of all graces both temporal and
eternal communicated to ungrateful man, thy favors to me (my dear Savior)
have been far beyond all measure. I therefore, o Lord, being so far unable to
render thee due gratitude; inuit all thy creatures, both in Heaven and Earth;
with thy Eternal Father, and Holy Ghost; thy most sacred Virgin Mother, and
all the Saints and Angels to praise thee with me, and for me in all
Eternity. O let my body and soul, and all the powers of them both have no
other employment for ever, then to praise, admire, and love thee. O Eternal
Father of JESUS; o holy spirit of JESUS; o immaculate mother of JESUS; o
glorious Angels of JESUS; o blessed Saints of JESUS; o all ye creatures of
JESUS, bless, and thank JESUS eternally for me, and all the innumerable
benefitts, which I (a most ungrateful sinner) have received, from the Father,
and from the Son, and from the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one Eternal
God: to whom be all praise, glory, and thanksgiving, both now, and for ever.
Amen.

At remoouing again the book to the other side of the Altar.
The Declaration.
BY this remoouing again the book to the other side of the Altar; we are put
in mind, of the conversion of the Jews, in the end of the world; when both
Jew and Gentil shall make but one true fold, under one, and the same Pastor,
JESUS CHRIST, for the encreace of whose glory say

The petition.
WE most humbly beseech thee, o heanenly Father, by the merits of thy blessed
Son JESUS, to power down thy heavenly grace upon the rebellious hearts of all
sinners, and heretics; that they may be speedily converted from there sin,
and from all impiety, to a true virtuous life; in the profession, and
observation of thy most holy law. And here once more, o most loving, and
powerful God; we do earnestly implore the speedy conversion of our own most
deplorable country: IESV grant it for thy most bitter Passions sake. O glorious
Queen of Heaven, and gracious Mother of God, England for its peculiar devotion
toward thee was once justly called thy Dowry: O interpose thy powerful
intercession (most sacred Virgin) to obtain that thy due right, and its long
lost greatest happiness.

At the Post-Communion.
The Declaration.
THe Post-Communion, signifies to us the songs of eternal joy made by the
heavenly Choristers, for the glorious Triumph of our Savior over death. Here
send fourth from a grateful heart, your fervent eiaculation also of joy; and
with an humble desire prefer

The petition
GRant us efficacious grace, o Lord, so to conquer sin in this world; that we
may enjoy a victorious crown of everlasting glory in the other. Amen.

At the next Dominus vobiscum.
The Declaration
THis Dominus vobiscum, signifies to us; that though our Blessed Savior be
corporally ascended into Heaven; yet by his faithful promise we are assured
of the continuance of his most true and real presence with his beloved spouse,
the holy Church, sacramentally in the blessed Eucharist, even to the end of
the, world. Math. 28.20. For which in grateful thankefullnes, say

The petition.
IRender thee most humble thanks, o dear Redeemer IESV, for all the gracious
visits, which thou have pleased, of thy mere goodness, to make to my poor
sinful soul in this divine Sacrament of thy most precious body, and blood. I
most humbly crave thy heavenly grace, so to adorn it with Charity, with
Humility, with Patience, and with such fervent devotion against my next
Communion; as that it may thereby be made a grateful guest, at thy divine
banquet. Amen.

At the latter Collect.
The Declaration.
AT this last prayer, or collect we must give humble, and hearty thanks to the
glorious Trinity, for the innumerable great benefitts which we have received;
and most particularly, for having vouchsafed to make us partakers of this
divine sacrifice; whereby are most graciously applied unto us, all the merits
of the life, death and bitter Passion of JESUS CHRIST (if by sin, or want of
due disposition, we our selves be not the hinderance thereof) which to avoid
beg humbly his grace, and say with a religious heart

The petition.
O Almighty, and merciful Father; vouchsafe me grace, that in due gratitude
for all thy innumerable benefitts, I may never by deliberate consent, offend
thee any more. Let this propitious sacrifice of the most precious body and
blood of my dear Redeemer, both obtain pardon for what is past, and so
strenghten me hereafter; that what on my part has been truly purposed for thy
honor; may be faithfully accomplished to my own souls health; through the
same Lord JESUS CHRIST, thy beloved Son; who lives with thee, in unity of
the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

At the last Dominus vobiscum.
The Declaration.
THis last Dominus vobiscum, puts us in mind of the dreadful sound of the
last trumpet; when our sovereign Lord, shall came in the end of the world, to
judge both the quick and the dead, by a final sentence for all Eternity.

The petition.
GRant me Lord IESV I beseech thee, with that blessed Saint and Doctor of the
Church, holy S. Hierome; so lively a fear, and continual a memory of this
dreadful summons to that last judgment day, as by this wholesome fear, I now
avoiding sin; may not then apprehend that dreadful judgment. Vouchsafe me in
all my actions a continual remembrance of the four last things; whereby I
avoiding to offend thee, this fear is also taken away.

At the, Ite Missa est.
The Declaration.
AFter the conclusion of all these holy Mysteries of the Eternal Son of God;
the Priest turns toward the people; and having saluted them with the last
Dominus vobiscum; he pronounces the Ite Missa est: whereby he puts us in mind
of the most dreadful sentence, which our Lord, and sovereign judge
JESUS CHRIST shall thunder out against the damned at that last judgment, in
those fearful words of S. Mat. 24. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire etc.
Crave humbly Gods grace to preserve and exempt you from that unhappy number,
and say

The petition.
LOrd give me grace to practice virtue, and to auoy de all deadely sin, that
only, and most unhappy bar against Beatitude, Vouchsafe me dear IESV true
final Repentance; that so I may be delivered, from all fear of that dreadful
summons to my last Doom. Amen.

Of the last Benediction.
The Declaration.
HEre contrariwise, at this last Benediction (which immediately follows) you
must call to mind that other most joyful sentence to be pronounced there, by
the selfsame Judge unto all the thrice happy elect: Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess ye the Kingdom prepared for you, from all Eternity etc.
Math. 24. whereof to be partaker, say in the spirit of humble hope, and
confidence in the sole meritts of JESUS CHRIST.

The petition.
GRant me, my most merciful Redeemer I beseech thee; that by thy heavenly
grace, my life, and preparation to this fearful, and general judgment may be
such; as by that sentence of, come ye blessed etc. I may be called to the
right hand, with those thy glorious Elect; to partake with them of that
Beatitude, which never shall have end.

Of S. John his Gospel.
The Declaration.
THis holy Gospel recompts to us the eternal birth of the divine word; that
second Person of the most Blessed Trinity: together with the highest, and most
secret Mysteries of his Divinity: showing also to us, that in consequence of
that forementioned Benediction; we are to enter into his heavenly Paradise;
there to know, bless, and enjoy those sacred, and all beatiyfing Mysteries,
for ever and ever: to which ardently aspiring, you may say

The petition.
O Most loving and merciful Redeemer; I finally beseech thee, as well for all
here present, as also for all those in particular, for whom I have promissed
and am most obliged to pray: that by the beatificall vision of thy Divinity;
and by the most glorious sight of thy blessed Humanity (both so plainly
mentioned tovs in that aforesaid divine Gospel of S. John) we may in that
Celestial Jerusalem, and in the company of all those heavenly spirits, and
happy Elect; praise, adore, and glorify that most sacred Trinity; three
divine Persons, and one only God, for all Eternity. Amen.

Here ends this present Exercise upon the holy Mass; which, if perchance it
may seem too prolix for the practice of diverse persons; I shall here add a
much more easy and compendious manner of assisting at this holy sacrifice, and
more suitable, perchance, to their devotion, then is the other way for the
more learned sort. Choose therefore, dear Cath. Reader which may suite best
with your capacity and devotion; and applying the sacred merits of this divine
victime JESUS CHRIST (who is offered in this holy sacrifice) for the
necessities of your soul, forget not mine, who humbly beggs that charitable
favor in total and abundant recompense for all my pains here in.

A second compendious, and easy short way of hearing Mass for the more
unlearned sort of People.
IN this second manner of hearing Mass; consider from the beginning thereof,
until Gloria in Excelsis, the long desires, and earnest expectation which the
holy Patriarchs, and Prophets had for the coming of our loving Redeemer
JESUS; who had been expected above four thousand years to free them from that
great servitude wherein they were deteyned by the prince of darkness; and to
lay open to them the happy way to Paradise.

The Gloria in excelsis, denounces his blessed birth promulgated in celestial
harmony, by the Angels; to the watchful shephards, whom we must imitate in
humble obedience to Gods divine inspirations; and to all good admonitions and
instructions given by our Prelates and Pastors, either by good books, or
counsel.

At the Gospel, and Creed; we may imagine to hear our Savior preach; and
consider with what power he drew the hearts of men to follow him. Here dispose
your affection to produce holy acts of Faith; and beg grace to embrace his
heavenly inspirations.

At the Preface, we may consider with what glory, and great joy the Jews
received JESUS CHRIST into Jerusalem; and yet but five days after, they
betrayed and condemned him unto a most reproachful death. O how often after
our receiving him in the blessed Sacrament, have we as perfidiously betrayed
him, by immediate relapses into our former sin!

Next by that silence, before the Consecration; we renew the memory of CHRIST
his bloody Agony in the garden; his flagellation at the pillar; his crowning
with thorns, and all the reproachful injuries done to him before his
crucifixion upon the Cross: the which is represented to us by the elevation of
the holy Host, and chalice: whereat we must imagine to see him give up the
ghost, and dye, the veil of the Temple to rende in two, the rocks about
Jerusalem to cleave with the force of a strange and fearful earthquake,
accompanied with a formidable darkness spread over the whole earth, by a
prodigious Eclipse; and all this to be caused by the great enormity of our
sin. Here we must stir up hearty sorrow for our offenses; with a firm
purpose to amend; as a good preparation for the approaching Communion.

At the Postcommunion, we must give thanks with the Priest, and calling to
mind CHRIST'S glorious Resurrection; we must purpose to rise to a better life;
and crave humbly Gods grace to perform it.

Finally at the Ite Missa est, and last Benediction; we may consider; that
though JESUS CHRIST be ascended into Heaven; yet he is to come again at the
last dreadful judgment day, to pronounce that most fearful sentence upon the
reprobate Go ye cursed etc. or that other most joyful to the Elect: come ye
Blessed etc. We must therefore endeavor that our life may be such, as with an
humble confidence in Gods great mercy, and goodness; we may be called to the
right hand of his Blessed flock, there to enjoy Beatitude in all Eternity.

A prayer to be said at the end of the Mass.
ACcept o heavenly Father this divine, and grateful sacrifice which we (with
humble hearts, and thankful memory of that bloody sacrifice of thy dear son
JESUS) have offered unto thee, in perpetual thanksgiving, praise, and
adoration of the most glorious Trinity, to the honor of the euer-Virgin Mary
Mother of God and of all the Saints, whose feasts we celebrate for the
remission of all our sins, and for all our Friends Enemies, and Benefactors;
either living, or dead. Forgive, o gracious Lord our great negligences; grant
us grace to put in execution our good purposes, as also to live in thy holy
grace, and to dye with true final Repentance. Amen.

Good Reflections to be used, as soon as Mass is ended.
Mass being ended; call to mind your negligences committed therein; crave
pardon of God for them, and beg heartily his heavenly grace for your amendment,
and for more strength and courage to resist all sin. Renew then also the
morning oblation of all your actions for that day; and confirm your good
purpose to avoid that Passion, sin, or frailty which puts you most in danger
to offend. Finally your devotions being ended; retire your heart very gently
from that holy exercise, to your wordly affairs; retayning as long as you can,
the feeling, and affection of your former devotion. And to this effect, observe
the most sweet, and efficacious aduertisments of the Blessed Bishop, and Prince
of Geneua in his Introduction to a devout life: part. 2. chap. 8.

An advertisement.
YOu have now seen the order, and exposition of these holy Mysteries in the
Mass: the Author whereof (as is said before) is JESUS CHRIST, after his
celebration of the Paschal lamb, the night before his bitter death, and
Passion; when taking bread, he blessed, brake, and gave it to his Disciples
etc. Math. 26. v. 26. and likewise taking the chalice, he gave thanks and
delivered it to them etc. Luke 22.19. saying of each part; this is my body.
This is my blood. 1. Cor. 11. There consecrating, and offering his sacred body,
as a continual, and true unbloody sacrice, under the outward forms of bread,
and wine: Then also instituting the sell same manner of cosecration, and
offering to be used ever after by his Apostles Disciples, and their successors;
to whom he said: Do ye this; that is, consecrate, and offer this, as now I
have done; for so the command Do ye this plainly signifies; changing by the
operative words of consecration, the bread into my body; and the wine into my
blood: which unless really and truly they do, they cannot be said to do that
which our Savior commanded them, when he said: do ye this: that is, to
represent his sacred death, and Passion: by consecrating, and giving his body,
under the accident of bread; and his blood, under the accident of wine; as the
Catholic Faith teaches us to believe, and the Priest daily performs in this
holy sacrifice of the Mass; there being only added some certain prayers, and
holy rites for greater reverence sake: and to increase the peopels devotion; as
are most of of the prayers, the Epistle, Ghosple, and many ceremonies, which
have been added; and may also be changed by the authority of the Church, as
occasion shall require; they being neither of the substance, nor essence of the
Mass it self; whereby it well appears how impertinently our adversaries
demand of us, when it was, or where we find that our Savior, or his Apostles
did ever say Mass; seeing that the essence of this holy sacrifice does chiefly
consist in the consecration, oblation, and consummation. Which was first so
expressly performed by CHRIST himself, at that his last supper; and by his
Apostles, Disciples, and their successors ever after (according to his command)
as you have seen. And therefore we must either deny JESUS CHRIST ever to have
pronounced those operative words of consecration; this is my body etc. (which
would be to give the lie to S. Paul, and to all the other Evangelists) or else
be forced to confess that our blessed Savior said Mass by consecrating,
offering, and eating that holy sacrifice therein: as he commanded his Apostles,
Disciples, and their successors to do the same; and as it is still daily done
by the ministry of his true, and rightly ordered Priests, whereby the life, the
death and sacred Passion of JESUS CHRIST is devoutly represented unto us; as
has been declared, with as much breuity as I could.

The great fruit which is to be gained by assisting devoutly at this divine
sacrifice.
IF we believe S. Greg. the great S. Tho. of Aquin. S. Antoninus S. Bid, and
other worthy Authors; we are assured by them of many gracious great favors
obtained by the devout, and reverent oblation of this most holy sacrifice, both
for the living and dead: and amongst others, not only a most gracious remission
of many venial sins, but also Gods powerful preservation, both from the
occasions of evil, and from many misfortunes, as well temporal, as
spiritual; and (which far exceeds all the rest) our souls become
replenished with much more grace; and appear more beautiful, and far more
pleasing to God; by reason of those virtuous acts, which by his divine help,
it had the happiness there to produce.

An answer to two usual objections against the Mass.
I Will conclude this holy Exercise in answering those two usual objections,
which most trouble the more unlearned sort. First, that it is not said in the
vulgar language, but in Latin, which most do not understand. And secondly,
that the Priest pronounces also some part of it, so secretly to himself, as
they cannot hear what he says.

To the first, this answer might suffice; that those three holy languages,
Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin, having been sanctified by that sacred title upon
the holy Cross; we may well presume, that they remained ever after, more
grateful to God, more venerable both to Angels and Men, and much more
dreadful doubtless to the Devil, our mortal and ghostly enemy then any
other; and therefore, who can justly blame our holy, and prudent Mother the
Cath Church (inspired by the holy Ghost) to teach her beloved children, to
praise and glorify this our dear Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, in her chiefest
facrifice and service in a language, which had served at his sacred Passion to
publish his glorious triumph upon the Cross, and there to declare him to the
full view of the world; that he was; JESUS NAZARENVS REX IVDAEORVM? John. 19.

Secondly I answer, that since the Latin Church was founded by the Apostles;
it has ever used this tongue, both for the holy Scripture, and her lyturgies:
and therefore we may justly conceive her too ancient, and our adversaries over
young, to teach this our venerable, and so aged Mother, now to begin to speak:
this having been the ancient language in England (as S. Bid does avouch) at
the very first plantation of Christianity amongst the English Nation: and
therefore by good consequence, this practice of saying Mass in the latin
tongue, must needs (at least) be full as ancient, as their Christendoome.

Thirdly, even reason it self makes it manifest, that as God himself is one;
and ever the same immutable; and his Church universal, and most truly
Catholic; and not of one Nation, but of all: so also, ought his divine and
public service, to be performed in one general, immutable, and universal
tongue; and not in a vulgar which is not understood perchance two hundred
miles in length; and which every age is very subject to alter: whereas the
Latin tongue is general over Christendoome; and is now the very same, that
it was in Cicero his time, above seauenteen hundred years a go.

Fourthly, should this the public service of the Church be said in every
vulgar language; few Priests would be able to exercise that function out of
their own native Cuntry; as Ministers must needs confess, who travail into
other Kingdoms; although it be where there own religion may be professed (as
they pretend] and therefore, thy must of necessity be silent abroad, or stay at
home: whereas Catholic Priests serve God after the selffame manner in every
place; and all people, in all countries whatsoever find the Catholic service
to be the same; and well know how to serve God thereby.

Moreover, it is most worthy of note; that even the Jews, Grecians; Abissins,
and Russians use one of these three holy languages, Hebrew, Greek, or Latin;
and none of them employ their present vulgar tongue for the public service of
their Church, nether are the holy Scriptures written therein: yea Acts 15.21.
We read that every saturday, the Jews in their Synagogue did read the holy
Scripture to the People in the Hebrew tongue (as all confess) which was much
different from their vulgar; and yet our blessed Savior found no fault with
them for it.

And whereas they object that by our service in Latin, we recei^e neither
edification, nor yet instruction for good life. I answer, that experience
gives all the world a fufficient proof; that our Forefathers were as wise and
devout to God; as faithful, and charitable to their neighbors; as obseruant
of Gods laws: that servants were as true, children as obedient, Magistrates as
just, and Christians as likely to be saved, as in any sect of theirs, which
pretendes to the greatest purity, and best reform.

And though it be not denied, to be both convenient, and very laudable also,
for particular people to say their prayers in the known and vulgar tongue: yet
the Priest, who is the public Minister of the Church; and offers up to God
the public prayer, and sacrifice for the whole universal Church: he likewise
ought to use a general, and universal tongue: as most common to all for whom
he prays, and offers sacrifice: but it is nowayes needful, that all the
common People should understand that tongue: it being the Priest, not they, who
prays in the person of all the rest to God, who understands all tongues a
like.

And therefore I will say no more of this: but conclude with S. Aug. that, to
dispute, or call in question those things which are generally observed in the
Church is a most insolent madness: Epis. 118. c. 5.

Now to their second cavil, against the Priest his praying in a secret, and
low voice, at some certain places of the divine service, whereby they think
themselves deprived of much edification: which they conceive they might receive
by hearing, and saying those prayers together with the Priest.

I answer that our Adversaries migh easily discharge their troubled minds from
this needless scruple: would they but please to inform themselves by our
writers, who treat upon the ceremonies, and service of the holy Mass: whereby
they might be plainly informed how significantly we are put in mind by this
silence, of some principal actions of our blessed Savior his life: as may
appear: first by the prayer, or secret, before the Preface: whereby we are put
in mind of that prayer, which JESUS CHRIST, did thrice repeat in the garden:
there praying privately unto his heavenly Father, prostrate upon the ground, in
that his bitter agony of sweating water and blood, immediately before he was
betrayed by cursed Judas: Luke 22.

And as for that other long silence following the Preface: both before, and
after the consecration: it represents to us that admirable, and prodigious
quiet patience of this divine and innocent lamb, in all the cr^ell torments of
his most painful death and Passion, prophesied of him so long before by
Esaie. 53.7. As a sheep to slaughter shall he be led; and as a lamb before
his shearer, he shall be dumb, and shall not open his mouth. This silence also
represents to us the great fear and terror of his Apostles, and Disciples so
greatly doubting, and staggering in their Faith, from that very time of his
suffering, till the coming of the Holy Ghost; during which space, they all
kept private, and secret out of sight.

The Priest praying secretly also at other times, and with a low voice, puts us
in mind of the several private retreates, which this our most merciful Lord,
and gracious Redeemer JESUS, was accustomed to make in solitude separated from
all company, frequently spending whole nights in private, and fervent prayer.

And therefore you see that silence in this holy sacrifice, is not without
pious Mystery; nor is there any other ceremony in the Mass which serves not,
either for greater solemnity of this most holy sacrifice; or to increase the
peoples devotion; as will easily appear to any, who shall but read the
explications of these devout and holy Mysteries, and seriously observe the same.

THE FIFTH RVLE. FOR THE EXERCISE of certain select virtues, most conducing to
Christian perfection: wherein are also proposed pious practices, for several
occasions, in the day.
THE two former Rules instructing us how to render due honor, and homage unto
God, both by prayer, and by sacrifice; it follows, for the accomplishment of
our Christian duty, that the next should teach us how to pay him the like due
tribute, by the practice of true virtue. For which end you have in this Rule
the several exercises of such choice virtues, as may be conceived most
needful for a virtuous soul, aspiring to perfection.

But before I speak of any in particular: it is to be supposed; that to make
a right choice of the most needful and profitable virtues for your practice:
you must first consider, wherein it is that you find your chiefest frailty and
weakness, on the one side; and secondly, what is your particular state and
profession, on the other. For by this you will easily perceive what virtue is
most needful for your present condition, or by what vice, you are chiefly in
danger to fall into sin, to the end to oppose it: which having discovered,
arm your self strongly against that pernicious enemy, and bend all your
whole force, and diligence to the practice of that holy virtue which most
opposes it. As for example; if you find that pride, Vain glory, or
Self-love, and esteem, work strongly to get possession in your heart; oppose
them vigorously by the diligent exercise of holy Humility, Abiection, and
Contempt of your self. If Intemperance assault you, repel it by the practice
of moderate sobriety, and by mortifying all superfluous curiosity in your diet.
If Choler, and angry Passion shall surprise you, resist it by Patience, and in
the spirit of the mildenes and meekness of JESUS CHRIST. If finally the
dangerous vice of sloth, and tediousnes in your devotions, shall begin to
fasten upon your soul; call presently to God with much fervor, that his holy
grace may soon reen kindle in you the ardent flame of true piety, and
devotion: but above all, be sure never to let sterility, or disgust in your
prayer, prevail so far with you, as to omit your usual, and accustomed
devotions: for patience, and perseverance in your fidelity unto God, will not
fail to obtain you a blessing to your full content and joy.

The like you must also observe in all the rest: choosing ever to prefer such
virtues as are most conformable to the obligation of your present condition;
before such as are most agreeable to your own gust and inclination: for our
perfection (says the B. Bishop of Geneua) consists not in the Exercise of
many actions of Piety, but in the well doing of those, to which our particular
condition most oblidges us, and which best suites with our present, and proper
calling, or office.

A necessary advertisement for the true, solid, and profitable practice of any
virtue, which we most desire to obtain.
BEfore I proceed to the Exercise of these following select virtues, I
conceive it very requisite first here to give you in general this necessary
aduertisment, for the profitable exercise of any virtue whatsoever, and for
the speedy obtaining of that virtue which we most desire: not doubting to
assure you, that the ill observance of this rule, is the cause that so many,
after long exercise, and innumerable acts of such virtues as they most desire
to obtain, profit very little therein, or in any true Christian perfection.

Now the true reason hereof, is this; that each virtue having its proper
spirit; (which is as the essence, nature, and as the very soul, or form
which gives life, and perfects the action) we endeavor not, as we ought, to
frame in our souls (for the right practice of that virtue) such due
dispositions, as the spirit of such a virtue requires: and without which
precedent dispositions, the virtue is but merely superficial and exterior.
Wherefore we ought first to know, and well consider with our selves, what is
the spirit of such a virtue, or wherein consists the essence and true nature
thereof, to the end that we may practice each virtue in its own proper spirit,
that is; to have a true interior feeling thereof; and that as we exteriorly
procure the action of the virtue; so we may practice in the interior of our
heart the virtue it self; without which, the exterior nothing at all auailes:
this interior disposition, being to all virtuous actions, as is the soul to
the body, and as the root from which the tree receives life and nourishment:
yea it is as the very bottom of the soul, the origin and life of all
Christian, and virtuous actions.

This great truth will yet much more manifestly appear, by considering
seriously, how small progress in virtue is made by the only exterior practice
thereof, if the interior disposition be wanting; as by this particular
example, in the virtue of Humility, it may sufficiently appear; and it will
serve as a Rule for all the rest. To obtain them by practice true Humility, it
is first necessary to understand, in what that virtue consists; to the end that
when we would produce the acts thereof, we may do them in the interior spirit
of that virtue, and conformably to our knowledge thereof: otherwise how should
we be able rightly to practice a virtue which we do not understand? or how can
we produce the acts thereof with any feeling, or understanding of that virtue
which we exercise?

And to make this clear in our former example of Humility: we must first place
our selves in the interior dispositions of this virtue (and so likewise of all
the rest at which we aim.) Then secondly we must make an esteem of God above
all things, and think most meanly of our selves; and even desire our own
abiection, and contempt. And this is to lay a true ground, and right foundation
in our soul; whereby, in her exercise of the exterior act of Humility; she
stirrs up in her heart a thought, and feeling of true Humility: and awakeing in
her self the dispositions, both convenient, and proper to that particular
virtue, she accompanies the exterior act of that virtue with an interior
esteem, and pure desire of true Humility, and with a low and base esteem of
herself. And to perform an act of virtue in this manner; is to do it in the
spirit, and in the true and right disposition of that virtue which we exercise.

And therefore whosoever aspires to true perfection, must labor not only to
produce the exterior acts of that particular virtue at which he aims; but
also (and principally) he must endeavor to root out of his heart the opposite
inclination, and evil habit there unto: for little would the exterior act of
Humility avail; if voluntary Pride should remain at the bottom of the heart.
And whosoever gives alms, with a heart possessed with Avarice, and
obdurateness he catches only at an empty shadow, and is deceived by a mere
body without a soul. Yea many falsely conceive themselves greatly advanced in
virtue, by some new punctuality in the observance of exterior practices of
piety proposed to themselves; who notwithstanding after their long and
punctual exercise therein, make very small advancement in that holy
perfection, at which they aimed: and the reason is manifest, and very plain;
because they neglect the interior, and seek not the spirit of that virtue, for
which they so labor but in vain: and consequently they do not practice it
with the necessary conditions which those virtues do require.

All this, now finally, both experience, and reason makes very manifest: for
how can we hope to obtain the virtue of Humility (although we practice it by a
thousand exterior acts) we neither understanding what it is, nor having any
interior feeling thereof: but rather quite contrary dispositions to the same?

It is therefore most necessary to frame in our selves the disposition of that
virtue which we exercise: and before all things else, we must labor to form
our interior, and rightly to direct it; for he who has a defective bottom in
his soul, or a vicious root; he cannot produce good fruit from it: and
therefore to exercise the exterior acts of virtue, without the interior
disposition required, would be but to catch at the shadow of virtue, and to
remain with a reality of the vice.

Thus much by way of needful advertisement for the profitable practice, as
well of these selected virtues here following, as also for all others
whatsoever to be practiced by the virtuous soul, desirous to make progress in
true Christian perfection. And to proceed herein with due order; I must in
first place propose that virtue which is the proper instrument to advance all
the rest, and this is the virtue

Of Mortification.
AFter this general aduertisment so very necessary for the practice of
virtue; it will be now requisite to speak of the proper instrument required for
the right exercise thereof: and this is the very same which you find above
proposed for the condition required to holy prayer; to wit, that most
necessary virtue of Mortification, without which (as it there appears) that no
prayer can be found in any eminent degree; so likewise (and for the selfsame
reason) no eminent pourchace can be made of any other virtue without the help
of Mortification; whereby renouncing our own proper will and the natural
corrupt propension unto flesh and blood, we take up our Cross and embrace
those contradictions of sensuality; dispossessing our hearts of that unruly
appetite for worldly contents; and by a courageous, and mortifiing act, we
subdue our vicious Passions, which both blind the eyes of our reason, and do
also much weaken the will. Which Passions and disordinate affections being
subdued; the understanding becomes truly enlightened to judge what is good; and
the will remaynes freely disengaiged to make choice thereof.

By all which it appears, that Mortification is the very ground of
Perfection, it disposes the way unto virtue, and is as the very means and
needful instrument required to put the same in execution. For as Reason, by
original sin had rebelled against God; so likewise (in due punishment) the
sensual appetite in us rebelled ever since against Reason, and so mainly
inclines our corrupt nature to evil; as unless it be strongly kept in by the
curbing bridle of Mortification (and that rightly managed also by Gods holy
grace) we shall most assuredly be thrown down by temptation into the
destroying precipice of mortal sin: which to prevent, our surest remedy (as
S. Paul does admonish us) will be by always bearing about in our body the
Mortification of JESUS: 2. Cor. 4.10. For it is a virtue as necessary to
preserve piety in our souls; as are the garden-sheeres to keep the borders,
and figures in due order; which without often cutting, and clipping away of
those superfluities which nature does continually produce; no form nor beauty
would be left in the best planted knots in the garden. In fine this virtue of
Mortification is as needful for the planting of holy virtues in our soul; as
is the hammer to frame the fashion which the workman is to introduce into the
iron, now disposed by the furnace, and made pliable thereunto: for be your
mind never so well disposed by holy prayer; yea though enflamed by divine
inspirations, by spiritual lecture, by good counsel, or by any other means
whatsoever to the holy practice of Patience, or of Humility, to Conformity,
Prayer, Abstinence, or to the Exercise of any other virtue whatsoever; we
shall find that Mortification is the needful instrument, and means to put in
execution those good resolutions, against which our corrupted nature will
spurn, and make much reluctance: and unless our good purposes be hammered out
by the strong blows of Mortificaion, all our former fervent good resolutions
will soon become as coold, stiff, and vnplyable, as is the very iron it self
when long detayned from the forge; nor shall we have any application at all to
our former good purposes; which not being then labored out by the hammer of
Mortification, they served for nothing, but rather to obdurate our hearts; as is
the iron by being often softened in the forge, but not wrought by the hammer to
the workmans design. This generally thus supposed; there now follows in the
next place the virtue

Of Humility.
THese premises now serving for the more solid and profitable exercise of true
Christian virtues; I will here out of many, propose some special and select
from amongst all the rest, and which may justly be conceived most requisite for
the practice of a virtuous soul, aspiring to holy perfection. Wherein to make
the more solid building; we must ever begin with the foundation. Whence to
raise the true building of virtue in our souls; we must first beginn with
Humility, the true foundation of all other virtues; yea and the very root
which gives life and luster, both to the flower and fruit of all other virtues
whatsoever; and without which no act of the greatest virtue can be either
grateful to God or aniewayse auayleable to our souls. For as blessed S.
Gregory most truly assures us; to practice other virtues without Humility, is
but to cast dust into the air, Humility being the very foundation, and
conseruer of all other virtues, as Pride is the ground of all sin: Eccles.
10. It disposes, and prepares the soul to receive Gods divine grace; who
resisting the proud, he gives grace to the humble: James 4. Yea it makes us
capable of Gods secret mysteries, which being hid from the worldly learned and
wise; they are revealed to the humble. Math. 11. It does pourchace perfect
peace to our souls; excluding anger, quarrels, and discontent; all which
proceeds originally but from Pride, and self esteem. By all which we now
plainly see, what great and happy fruit is to be reaped by the help and holy
practice of true Humility: and therefore I thought it but necessary, here in
the first place to propose this needful Exercise; least the blast of
vaineglory might carry away, and deprive us of the fruits of our best and
holiest practices. Which to prevent, this Exercise of Humility may serve as a
poyse to balance them against that dangerous blast of Pride, and as a
preserving Antidote from the pestiferous air of vainglory, which destroys
all virtue in the very budd, and hopefuls't flower. And therefore no virtue is
more seriously recommended to us by our B. Savior himself (both by his
practice, and doctrine) then is this which he so expressly commandes us to
learn of him who is mild and humble of heart. Math. 11.

And although unto human deceived sight this virtue may seem but poor,
base, and very despicable; yet by God and his blessed Saints it is highly
esteemed, and may well be resembled to the ciphers in numbering; which though
nothing of themselves, yet placed behind an unity they make tenn; hundreds
behind two; thowsands behind three, and so forward in proportion. In like
manner Humility in it self, though but little esteemed, yet it is that which
gives the true value to all other virtues; yea it is the verre Rule, and
measure of all true sanctity it self; for who is sincerely humble, is truly
holy; and who is most humble, he is also most holy; for accordingly as one
humbles himself; so God does exalte him, and he puts down the proud. Math.
13.11.

Fot this virtue it was that God raised S. Antonie. S. Benet. S. Maur. S.
Francis, and others to be Founders of so many holy Orders of religious persons
in his Church; who though most eminent in all Perfection and sanctity; yet
their Humility was so great, as they durst never admit to undertake that (more
then Angelical) heigh state of Priestly function; which notwithstanding now
(to the great scandal of the Church) is by such sinful presumption sought for
by so many unfit, and most unnecessary persons.

Neither have weomen been wanting in this kind to give most rare examples of
profound Humility; as does well appear in that great servant of God Sister
Mary of the Incarnation, of noble birth; who was so very humble, as
notwithstanding that she was Foundresse of the holy Order of the Carmelites in
France; yet would she never be of the Quire, but always continued a
lay-sister, and a servant to all the rest. S. Francis was also truly humble of
heart, which made him with such feeling sense to esteem himself the greatest
of sinners; because he thought himself above all others to correspond the
worst unto the graces which God had bestowed upon him. This is that true
Humility, which has no other will, but the will of God; to which it renders us
like to the statue in the sculpters hands, to be hewed, and fashioned according
to his divine pleasure, without disquiet, or reluctance: for this Humility of
heart, is the inseparable twinn of all sweetness and peace (says that great
Master of all sweet devotion, Sales the holy Bishop of Geneua) but I mean not
(says he) a complementall rainging of words, or gestures, of kissing the
ground, or lowly inclinations; they being donn (as it often does arrive)
without the inward sense of our own abiection; for such are but vain
abusements of a weak shallow brain; and are rather to be termed, but
extrauagances of Humility, then the true virtue it self; which makes us both
supple to correction, and very prompt and pliable unto obedience.

This true Humility of heart, consists not in the knowing only, and professing
our own great unworthiness, and misery; but much rather, in loving, seekeing,
and exercising of this our baseness, and abiection; and in desiring to be so
esteemed by others, as we do judge our selves truly to be, abject, and
contemptible; yea yet further; to be also content (as such) to be contemned,
and despised by all: for true Humility of heart does love this humiliation, and
reproach, and all else whatsoever which may truly vilify, and abase us. First
by reason of the knowledge which it has of that our original, and interior
source, and corrupted spring whence all our sin and wickedness proceeds;
and secondly in Imitation of JESUS CHRIST, who made choice of all manner of
humiliations, and reproach; thereby to honor his heavenly Father, and to
satisfy for our exorbitant pride and grievous sin: which is a motive
abundantly sufficient to stir us up to all fervent imitation, for so divine
an exemples sake.

A second practice of this holy virtue; which I now also much recommende unto
you, is in not only loving humiliations, and contempt; but also in hating, and
flying the vanity of all greatness, and splendour; yea the very desire of all
human praise, and esteem. Be rather all wayse ready, and with a prepared
mind to be humbled, as was our Lord and souueraing King, JESUS CHRIST, in his
birth and life; and finally in his most bitter Passion, and reproachful death
upon the Cross.

O wretched and ungrateful creatures that we are; how can we so love vanity,
considering how lowly that high God of all Majesty, and our most merciful
Redeemer was humbled for our sake! crave humbly Gods grace to practice this
holy Humility of heart, in the disposition, and spirit of that profound Humility
which JESUS CHRIST has practiced for our love; and that with a true virtuous
courage you may cheerfully endure all confusions, and abiections whatsoever;
they being all so most justly due to a rebellious sinner, and to most abject
sin.

Of Conformity to the will of God: the third Exercise of this Rule.
THis holy Conformity is to the precedent great virtue of Humility, but as a
link of the same chain, and the very true sequel of that blessed virtue;
they being both united in that superior happy tie of the love of God; whereby
this precious chavness composed of the continued linkes of mani other great
virtues, and unites us most happily unto God himself. In fine from true
Humility (as from a most precious root) springs fourth this fair and
grateful flower of virtuous Conformity: for by an humble, and true abject
contempt of our selves, our own will becomes easily conformable, not only to
the will of God, but also for his sake, we submit and subject our selves, even
to the meanest creature alive.

Now in the faithful practice of this heroique virtue consists that true
Christian Perfection, which JESUS CHRIST has not only taught us by word daily
to pray, that his will be done in Earth, at it is in Heaven; But he confirmed
also the same by his own example, telling us: that he came down from Heaven,
not to do his own will, but the will of his Father who sent him. S. John. 6.
and this he esteemed as his nourishing food: Math. 11. Yea and it is most
worthy of observing; that from the time of his return with the sacred Virgin
and S. Joseph from his divine reasoning with the Doctors in the Temple at
Jerusalem (as if he had come down from Heaven for no other design, then to
show obedience and Conformity unto his heavenly Fathers will, in obeying, and
being subject unto his Parents pleasure) he was so exactly punctual in all
dutiful obedience to them; as the holy Evangelist recompts to us no other of
of his divine actions, during the far greater part of all his time, living
hereupon earth amongst us; but only that he Was obedient and subject to them:
the perfect performance of which holy Conformity unto his heavenly Fathers
will, he finally sealed; by rendering himself unto that bitter, and
reproachful death upon the Cross. In imitation of which divine example; we
must be in all occasions so resigned to Gods holy will, as is the clay in the
potters hands, which chooses not its own fashion, or form; but is pliable
and obedient to that which the workman pleases to ordain it unto: for
thereby you will obtain a most happy peace to your mind, and even begin to
enjoy a perfect Paradise.

By this means there is nothing will happen, which can deprive us of true
content and consolation; in which consists the chiefest felicity of Gods
heighest fauorits in this world; who though not exempt from laborious, and
painful temptations, nor from infirmities, and great corporal sufferings: yet
by the help of this holy Conformity, whatsoever befalls them, they preserve
their serenity, and true interior joy: because there whole content, and
pleasure is in the accomplishment of the will of God, which makes all events
whatsoever to be grateful to them, though never so contrary, and displeasing
to flesh and blood: they knowing that nothing can befall them, but by his
divine order and will; whose loving and careful Providence has disposed of
all things for our greatest good; what instruments, and second causes soever he
shall please to make use of for effecting the same: yea no sterility in prayer,
nor the want of all sensible devotion, and comfort therein, will disquiet a
well settled soul in this virtuous practice of Conformity, whereas, who neglect
the same; if they but fail to obtain what they crave by their prayers; they
leave of with disgust, and are greatly discomforted, for failing of the end,
and desire of their own proper satisfaction; Which oftentimes preuailes so
very much with them; as they are strongly tempted, and sometimes overcome so
far, as to abandon their prayers and other virtuous Exercises; which is the
greatest victory their mortal enemy can desire to obtain.

And for these good reasons it was that the ancient holy Fathers did greatly
apply themselves to this important study, and fruitful practice of
Co^formity; knowing that true resignation is altogether in deeds, and not in
words; and in taking all things as proceeding from the hand of God; by which
virtuous Exercise, their greatest adversities were made most pleasing contents;
and their life become celestial upon Earth; yea finally, to live or to dye is
all one and the self same thing (says S. Augustine) when our will is truly
united to the will of God; in whose sight we are, and upon whom our being
depending, we ought wholly to resign our selves to him; with all which we can
either do or suffer; in body or in soul in same, friends, or external goods,
for time, or for Eternity; with a perfect resignation to his divine and holy
pleasure; yea his granting or denying our request, must be to us indifferent;
for we aiming but at the glory of God, and our own, souls greatest happiness
(both which he knowing far better then our selves) we must rest joyfully
content with his divine will, though never so contrary to our own desire; who
know not oftentimes what we ask: and therefore with great love and mercy it
is, that frequently God denies our petition (says S. Augustine) that he may do
us a more merciful favor; nor yet ought we so much to rejoice for obtaining
what we desire, as that it is the will of God which is done thereby: for by
this union, and Conformity with Gods blessed will, we do most truly restifie
our love, and by it we do our truest honor and homage to him: and to our
selves we also pourchance that true content, and most happy repose, which is
only to be found in a soul thus truly subject unto Gods holy will: for who is
he that resists it, and finds peace (says Job. 9.) but be subject to him and
thou art secure to enjoy it. c. 22. Finally by the practice of this holy
Conformity to the divine will and pleasure of God, how ever our affairs shall
succeed, yet our heart will enjoy a most happy and quiet peace; we
acknowledging God to be the soueraign Lord of all; and understanding best what
most conduces to his own glory, and to our souls eternal health.

The fourth Exercise of this Rule; which is for the practice of Patience.
THe great connection of this holy virtue with the two former is most apparent;
for where there is true Humility of heart, and an entire conformity to the will
of God, there doubtless Patience cannot be wanting to suffer with all
cheerful alacrity what Cross or tribulation soever the Divine Providence
shall be pleased to orday ne. This makes up a strong chain of these three holy
linkes of a triple virtue; whereby all our unruly, and disordered passions may
be fast bound in due subjection, both to true reason, and piety.

But to speak now here of the proper fruits of holy Patience in particular (as
before I have of the other two) it may be first observed, that patience is as a
needful bar; and shuts up the door against many sins; for by moderating
the grief and great trouble of mind; it quenches hatred, and preuents both
anger, and desire of revenge; by which are let in a multitude of pernicious
vices; and with much reason it is said by S. Gregory; to be the wide gate to
let in the great sins of rancor, and wrath, of injuries, imprecations,
maledictions, blasphemies, indignations, murders, and the like great evils,
which are usually harbored in a heart oppressed with impatience, bitterness,
and grief: all which being first taken away by the holy virtue of patience,
the soul is left in much quiet, and is also thereby enabled to produce true
virtuous and perfect operations. And for this respect, some (not unfitly) call
Patience the preserver of virtues; for the same being disquieted, virtue cannot
rightly exercise her functions; no nor do any thing well; and therefore she
has great need of Patience to keep Reason free, and the mind exempt from all
Passion; for hereby we are disposed to suffer in quiet peace, all such
afflictions as shall befall us, and to take them in good part.

It also greatly moderates that hurtful passion of sorrow, and melancholy, an
humor above all the rest exceeding dangerous, and hurtful both to body and
soul; unless they be defended by that strong buckler of Patience from the
continual great oppressions of this vicious and dangerous Passion. And
therefore though all virtues be very requisite; yet Patience is most
absolutely necessary for our complying with the will of God, and for saving our
souls; as the Apostle tells us Heb. 10. and the reason is; for that our life
is so replenished with miseries, that without this needful defense of holy
Patience, we shall never obtain the crown of victory: but in your patience
you shall possess your souls; Luke 21. As that holy man well understood, who
being much urged to get some certain rude persons to be severely punished for
having mocked and much abused him; he answered with a smiling and pleasant
countenance: no, no, let them do so still to me (said he) for they do but
help me to get Heaven by the practice of holy patience. This was a virtuous,
and true humble man; for who is humble, is undoubtedly patient; because he
esteems himself deserving of the evil which he suffers; yea and of far
greater also. And if we would but search out the true cause of our impatience,
and ascend but to the source, and true origin, we should find that it
proceeds from mere pride, and self esteem; and this made the holy Bishop of
Geneua to advise us, that we should complain the least we could of wrongs;
because (says this excellent man ( for the most part it is verte true; that
who complains, does sin (he means for want of Patience, and Humility; for
where these virtues are found, there is no complaint, neither for sickness,
loss, nor injury: for their Patience is invincible in all sorts of
afflictions; and Humility judging all to be but answerable to their desert;
they rather rejoice to pay here their debt, hoping to have thereby the less
account for the future. And certainly much truer perfection there is in
suffering cheerfully our crosses and contradictions for the love of God, and
with a conformable heart to his blessed will in the time of our temporal or
spiritual affliction; then in the most sensible comforts of devotion, by
either raptures, or ecstasies in the time of prosperity and consolation. And to
this purpose, that holy Father and learned Doctor of the Church great S.
Gregory says; that he fare preferrs the virtue of a patient man, before that
of working miracles: and his ground for it is evident; because it is the very
fruit it self of the heighest virtue, Charity, which (says S. Paul. cor. 13.)
it patient, is benign; Charity enuieth not etc. is not provoked to anger,
thinks not evil: etc. It suffers all things, and that in good part for
the love of God. This divine love makes the practice of Patience both easy and
very pleasing: gladly therefore will I glory in my infirmity, that the power
of God may dwell in me. For the which cause (says the same Apostle) I please
myself in infirmities, in contumelies, in necessities, in persecution, in
distresses for CHRIST. Thus blessed S. Paul. 2. Cor. 12. Showing us how
Patience for the love of God makes all sufferings and afflictions whatsoever to
be the true objects of great comfort and joy.

All this is clearly verified in the life of that illustrious Virgin blessed
Saint Margaret daughter to the King of Hungary, and a true mirror of all
religious perfection; who grounding the virtue of Patience upon true Humility;
and that, upon the love of God; this noble Virgin, and most humble servant of
JESUS CHRIST did often weep, and was most troubled in her mind; because she
found no practice for the virtue of Patience, wherein notwithstanding she well
perceived her religious Sisters to be frequently exercised by strong
contradictions to flesh and blood; whereas she found herself incapable to be
that ways mortified. And the cause is very manifest; for who desires nothing,
but purely the will of God, is always content with whatsoever shall happen.

But yet for the more facilitating this practice of holy Patience as well
against contempt and injuries, as in all other crosses and troubelsome
accidents which may befall us; I must here recommend to your serious
consideration these ensuing motives, and conuincing reasons for that end.

First that whatsoever is in this world most displeasing and troublesome, is
nothing to a true virtuous, and generous heart; which rather is glad of
occasions for sufferance, thereby to give proof of his foundation in virtue,
and of fidelity to his heavenly Captain JESUS CHRIST.

Secondly consider that these troubles do not happen to us, but by the
particular Providence of God, for his glory, and our greater good; and that he
is a spectator how we play our parts for that crown, which is only to be got
by lawful fight. 2. Tim. 2.

Thirdly consider that there is nothing in this world to be endured, which our
sins have not justly deserved; and that all put together which can be
inflicted upon us in this world, is but a shadow, in comparison of the pains
of Hell, or Purgatory; which yet by patient sufferance here; may be avoided;
and everlasting glory gained. Look not therefore with an angry heart upon such
as shall cause you any trouble, or pain; but much rather esteem them (as
truly they are) those who do you the truest good; and who afford you but
happy occasion to make proof of your Christian courage, of your solidity in
virtue, and of your fidelity to God; who uses these temporal afflictions but
as isntrumental means, thereby to procure you that great happiness which you
gain by those occasions to practice holy Patience; and is (says S. James chapter
1,) a per fect work: for in your Patience you shall possess your souls:
Luke. 21.

Finally endeavor by a serious and frequent contemplation of the great
uncertainty, and little worth of all worldly affairs, to gain an indifferency
to all human casualities; they all happening by Gods special order and
providence; and therefore, most undoubtedly, for our greater good: and why then
should we be troubled, it being Gods blessed pleasure, which we ought most
promptly to conform our selves in all: yea it ought to be a comfort and great
content to us; (says S. Greg.) when any thing happens which crosses our own
desires, considering that so it is ordained by him, who does nothing, but what
is most just and good.

Raise therefore your soul with cheerful gratitude to adore his hidden
judgments in all cross events, which he permits for your greater good.
Persevere with peace and tranquillity of mind; for he has done all things well.
Genesis 7. And what cause then can you have to be troubled; unless you mistrust,
either his power, or his goodness; which yet can never fail.

Hitherto I have spoke rather of the Theory of true Patience, and but as
concerning it in general. It now remains that I also treat of the needful
practice of it more in particular, and in the chief occasions wherein nature
finds mostreluctance in the holy Exercise of this useful virtue. This will be
best performed, by showing that

We ought to love our Enemies, and to suffer persecution with joy.
YOu may now well perceive by the former part of this exercise the great
goodness and important fruit of this holy plant of Patience; the knowledge
whereof, I doubt not, but will give you a desire to make store of so needful a
provision, by the daily and continual occasions which will not be wanting,
whereby you may reap so great profit to your soul. But to avoid prolixity in
so copious a subject; I have thought best to make choice, and here principally
to propose to you the needful Exercise of this great virtue in the two above
named occasions; as being the hardest, and most repugnant to our corrupt and
rebellious nature: for by well maistering them; we shall find the rest but
very weak, and easy to be overcome.

And now first to show that we ought to suffer tribulation with content and
joy; I will only make choice of some few good reasons out of many, which are
sufficient to convince this truth; and may also serve for strong motives to
induce us to the meritorious practice of suffering the cross encounters of
this world, with a willing cheerefullnes, for the love of God.

The first reason for this truth shall be from our divine Rule and Prototype
CHRIST JESUS himself; who not by his divine and sacred actions here upon Earth
no, nor by his so fervent and assiduous prayer; nor yet by his preaching, or
working of so many miracles, did cuerrender to his Eternal Father so great
honor and glory, as he did by his painful death and Passion. From whence it
does plainly follow, and convince in all good reason; that we are not able by
any other means so heighly to honor, and glorify God, as by a willing and
cheerful sufferance of our afflictions, in union and imitation of this our
divine example, and in true conformity to Gods blessed will and all disposing
Proudience. when therefore he shall vouchsafe to try us by any corporal
tribulation, or by the loss of goods, by privation of friends, or of what else
soever most dear to us; we must accept thereof; as an occasion expressly
ordained by his heavenly Providence, whereby we may render to him due homage
and honor; conceiving also that he puts us to such bodily trial, but as a
sweet perfume into the fire; to the end that by a good odor of virtuous
Patience, we may give both good example to our neighbors, and occasion also
for them to glorify our heavenly Father by seeing so cheerful and humble an
acceptance of it for his love: for benefitts are willingly received by all
(says the holy Bishop of Geneua) but to receive willingly afflictions, that
belongs only to perfect love, which loves them so much the more, because they
are not to be loved, but only in respect of the hand which gives them.

A second reason which ought to make all sufferings very welcome to us; is,
for that Heaven, and eternal happiness is bought by them: yea this price it
cost the son of God himself, before he could enter into his glory (though
heir apparent unto the same Act. 17.) And can we then presume to pourchace
this happy inheritance of that heavenly Father at a lower rate, then he sold
it to his only, and dearest son, who both suffered; yea and gave his dearest
life for it. O no, the seruill slave must not expect to be preferred before his
sovereign Lord: it is an excessive favor to be admitted to bear the same
yoke with him. All which but duly considered, might well make us asshamed to
fear any sufferings, or to fly from any cross; seeing that we profess our
selves to be disciples of a crucified God: for is it aniewise beseeming the
member of a head crowned with sharp piercing thorns, to be so delicate, as
to fly from all pain or suffering, which is the absolute, and taxed price of
Paradise?

And therefore, seeing (as the above named holy Bishop of Geneua says) that it
is but in vain to expect to be glorified with JESUS in Heaven, unless we be
first crucified with JESUS here upon Earth; let us most willingly embrace his
holy cross, and not by compulsion only, as Simon the Cyrenean did; but much
rather with S. Paul; let it be far from us to glory in any thing so much, as
in this most honorable livery of our divine Captain, the Cross and sufferings
of JESUS CHRIST: Gal. 6. Yea reason does convince us, that the temporal
punishment is most hapie, whereby we escape an eternal: and such as are here
exempt from them, may justly fear, least their far greater punishment be but
reserved to an other world; there being most assuredly no other way but this to
Paradise for the children of God, but first to pass through this fearful red
sea of tribulation, before they can hope to enter into that happy land of
promise.

The third reason, which may comprehend all the rest; and is a very strong
motive for us to suffer with willing alacrity all manner of adversity is; that
God the sovereign Author of nature has ordained all the crosses and
afflictions which befall us, for the due punishment of our sinful rebellion,
and disobedience; for he had placed man in a most happy state in the
terrestrial Paradise of pleasure and content; until he forfeited that
happiness by cursed sin; and had made himself, and all his posterity
miserable thereby for all Eternity; had not Gods infinite great love and mercy
to men (more then to Angels) accepted for his satisfaction a temporal
punishment from us, in the virtue and merits of the death and Passion of his
only dear son JESUS CHRIST; for whose sake, he vouchsafed to accept of this
satisfaction to his divine justice, by these present afflictions which himself
here imposes upon us for that end; and is ever the chief author thereof, what
other creatures soever he may please to use, as instruments for the execution
of these his fatherly corrections; which are also disposed by him for our
greatest good.

This was acknowledged by holy Job, when after all the great and many
mischiefs which the Devil had done him, in ruining his houses and children by
tempest; in robbing his cattle, and killing his servants by thieves, in
destroying his goods by fire: and finally having covered his body with many
smarting soars, and loathsome ulcers; yet all this, that holy man did
attribute to none but to God himself, and said, our Lord gave, and our Lord
has taken away, as it has pleased our Lord, so it is done Job. 1 21.

Chaste Joseph does as plainly assure us the very same. When his brethren
being much affraied for having so grievously abused him; he comforted them
saying: be not afraid, neither let it seem to you a hard case that you did
sell me into these countries: for God sent me before you into Egypt for your
preservation. Genesis 43.

And finally to allege one more for all: did not our blessed Savior himself
say: John 18. the chalice which my Father has given to me, shall not I drink
it? Here you see plainly that he calls it not the treason of Judas; nor the
persecution of the Jews, Scribes, or Pharisees, but the chalice of his Father;
for all afflictions come from him, and are sent by his eternal order to us for
our good. And therefore this being believed by a Christian (as it ought) how
can we be troubled at the afflictions, and crosses which are sent from so
loving, so prudent, and so good a Father, as most mild and favorable
executioners of his divine justice, and as most wholesome potions from his
skillful and loving Physician, to cure the sinful surfer of his soul?

Finally afflictions, are to us, but as bitter aloes which the nource puts to
her breasts, thereby weaning the child, to make it willing to come home to his
own true mother: for God by affliction makes us to dislike this world, our
nource, and to look home unto him, our only true and careful Parent.

Many more motives might be alleged for us to embrace afflictions with a
willing mind; but it may suffice to remember that it is the best token of Gods
divine love to us and the very badge wherewith he has ever honored and
clothed his dearest friends: to the good he sends it for the increase of their
merit; and to the bad, for their conversion. In fine he impartes it unto all,
as the means for their eternal happiness; and therefore it ought to be
received by all, with a cheerful and willing heart.

But me thinks I hear you to complain, as King David did; Psalm. 54.13. that
your greatest wrongs, are from your nearest friends; and therefore much more
grievous, then would they be from a professed enemy. I do easily believe you:
but yet you must remember that ungrateful Absalon was much nearer to his so
tenderly loving Father David (the true figure herein of JESUS CHRIST) whom he
most ungratefully, and ungraciously labored to deprive, not only of his
kingdom and crown, but also most fiercely pursued him for his very life; as
we likewise see those ungrateful Jews to have done the like to JESUS CHRIST
himself, whom David did but represent. And therefore you having such
presidents for this your sufferance; you ought rather to esteem it a very
great honor, to bear your little share with them.

You may yet peradventure reply: that your chief repugnance, and greatest
difficulty in suffering these Crosses with true patience, is because you
deserved no ill from their hands; nor had done them any wrong, who thus
cruelly, and most unkindly have persecuted you. But neither is this a good
excuse for your impatience; but is rather to be regarded, as the glory of your
cause: for had you first offended them by any wrong or injury; your sufferance
had been but a just punishment of your offense; whereas you being innocent;
your patient sufferance will gain you an incomparable advantage; for nothing
does so much extol innocence, as injustice: and though it be an oppression;
yet (if it be truly looked upon) it is but a pledge from Gods own proper
hand, and as a token of his love, which therefore ought to be received with all
cheerful alacrity.

But he depriues me of my maintenance (say you) and will bring me to much want,
and necessity. This touches indeed very near, and to the quick: yet take
great heed that you do not herein the part of a peevish and angry child from
whom if the loving Mother shall take but some hurtful babble out of the one
hand, it will presently throw down the good meat which it has in the other;
and in a peevish pett, it will stamp and starve for revenge: but the child of
God must not intemperately grieve, nor so disquiet himself for the loss of
what so loving a Father shall take from him, either immediately himself, or by
a friend, or a foe; as that for the loss of some part of his means, he should
there upon, by his impatience deprive himself of the content which he might
fufficiently have taken in the rest which he still enioyes. No we ought much
rather to look down upon the innumerable multitude of those who remain in a
far meaner fortune below us, and who would account themselves exceeding
happy, and obleiged to great gratitude, should they enjoy but some small part
of our remainder; and yet perhaps deserve it much better then we, who forget
that it is sent us from that blessed hand, which disposes all for our best
advantage, if we with conformity but render our selves cheerfully to his
divine will; for if he deprive us here of our temporal content, and
happiness, we may rest assured that he has allotted, and reserues for us
those others infinitely excelling them, and to be eternal in Heaven; if through
our own wilful fault, we be not the unhappy hinderance of them our selves.

This I trust will now be abundantly sufficient to make large scope for your
own better reflections upon this fruitful subject; whereby to pick most
pleasant sweet roses of Conformity, from these sharp pricking thorns of your
many sufferings, toward the composing of a glorious crown (I hope) for your
dearest soul.

But yet for the richer adornement of this your happy crown: I must further
recommend to you the interlacing it with these the richest jewels of Charity,
which are likewise to be gathered in the garden of a virtuous soul, by each
act of the love of our enemy, produced originally from the true Jove of God,
and are the purest, and most elevated acts of Charity above all others; as I am
very confident that you will plainly perceive by the ensving discourse

Of the love of our enemies; the second part of this proposed Exercise of
Patience.
Our most merciful and loving Redeemer in his sacred Gospel Math. 5. does not
only recommend to us the love of our Enemies but expressly commands it (says S.
Augustine sermon. 59. de temp.) and therefore it is a duty properly belonging to a
Christian, to love his Enemy. This our Divine Savior JESUS, has taught us
both by word, and example, and by the whole practice of his blessed life, which
was a continual exercise of love and doing good for evil; as also was his
death the sovereign sacrifice in expiation of their sin; and to give the
happiest life to them, who put him to the cruelst death upon a reproachful
Cross; from whence the very first word which fell from him amidst all those
his piercing torments, was, not to threaten, nor to demand revenge upon those
his sacrilegious Enemies; but to crave pardon for them, who had so ill deserved
it; and alleged the strongest reasons unto his eternal Father for their
excuse; beseeching him to pardon them, because they knew not what they did.
Luke 23. verse 34.

And therefore now still to begin with the surest Rule, whereby to regulate all
our actions as well in this good practice, as in all the rest, it might
sufficiently persuade any good Christian to the true love of his greatest
Enemy; to know that it is JESUS CHRIST, his sovereign King and Captain, who
so expressly commandes it Math. 5. where nothing can be set down in more
plain, or expresser saying: you have heard that it was said: thou shall love
thy neighbor, and hate thy Enemies (so taught the Pharisees, but not the law)
but I say to you, love your Enemies: do good to them that hate you: and pray
for them, that persecute, and abuse you: that you may be the children of your
Father which is in Heaven, who makes his sun to shine upon the good, and the
bad, and raines upon the just, and the unjust: for if you love them, who love
you, what reward shall you have? do not the Publicans also do the same?

And can we now conceive a more clear, or express command then this; to love
our Enemies? Yea not only to love them, but also to do good to them, who hate
us; and to pray for them who persecute, and do us wrong; thereby to testify
that we are the children of our heavenly Father, by imitation of that admirable
great goodness in him toward us, his most ungrateful and sinful creatures.

And that the weighty importance of this so express a command might the better
appear; the Angelical Doctor S. Tho. divinely declares it, assuring us that
tho true love of our Enemy is the most pure, the most divine, and the highest
act of holy Charity which can be performed by man. This great truth is not
avouched without the proof of most evident reason: for there is nothing that
man can do which appears so manifestly to be done by him so purely for the
love of God, as to love his greatest Enemy: for you may love God in desire of
your own good, and to gain Heaven thereby; you may also (and most usually)
love your friend, because he is your friend, or for his good humor, and
sympathy; or for some pleasing quality, or for profit, honout, or the like
which may be reaped by his conversation. In fine you may love an other in
respect of some content, or benefit; and all this is but merely for your own
commodity, as both Turks, and barbarous Pagans do; yea even brute beasts
themselves can love in such a manner.

By all which you will easily perceive that no love is discovered to be so
unfeignedly the pure true love of God, as is the love of our Enemy; for in that
it appears most certain and evident, that there is nothing for you to love
in him, but purely and merely God; nor any other motive to be found whereby
to induce you to do him any good turn, but purely God alone: for in that
naughty man you have no other subject, but of hatred and much dislike; should
not the love of God, and obedience to his holy commandment persuade you to
love him, and to do him what good you can. Which act, as it proceeds from the
greatest virtue, and by which we render to God the most sovereign honor and
homage; so likewise it conferres unto man the highest dignity, whereof any
mortal creature can be conceived capable; making him thereby the adopted
son of a heavenly Father Math. 5. And therefore as this virtue is so very
precious in the sight of God; so ought it to be as dearly esteemed and most
faithfully practiced by us; by loving, and doing the best good we can to our
greatest enemies: it being a virtue, both so grateful to God; and so infinitely
aduantageous to our souls; we having no greater assurance of Gods pardoning
our sins, then by forgiving such as offend us: for that is the very Rule and
measure of his mercy; and we can only expect from him, that he forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: Luke 6. And truly no
Enemy can be so bad, but that for JESUS CHRIST his sake he may be pardoned,
although he deserves it not for his own; nor can his offending us have any
comparison with the grieuousnesse of our offending God, for which we must
expect no pardon from him, unless we also pardon such as have offended us; and
that entirely, and from the very bottom of our heart: all which abundantly
persuades us to embrace this generous virtue of loving our greatest Enemies: to
which I will yet further add some congruous motives, whereby the better to
confirm our resolution for that holy practice, by making good, and serious
reflections upon these ensuing points.

First that we have none so watchful as our Enemy, to observe our faults, and
errors; and to let us understand them; which we should never know from a
friend; nor yet have by his means that good occasion to reform our lives.

We pay wages to Masters, and Governors; and yet none are so carefully
obseruant to let us understand our misde meanours, as are our greatest Enemies,
and that also gratis, without pay. He bouldly tells us true, when our friend
dares not speak; and he serves us as a needful curb by publishing our vice,
and will plainly advertise us if we go amiss: nor dare we do ill in his
sight: whereas a friend seldom preuents any thing of all this great harm; but
rather (and very frequently) he proves a motive, and great cause of our doing
ill.

When a Friend extolls, and highly prayseth us, our Enemy (much more for our
good) does abase, and decryes us down, least we should grow proud and
insolent. Yea when prosperity extolls, and makes us vain, and by flattering
applause puffs up our soul with dangerous pride; our Enemy will keep us
down by persecution; and administers to us thereby the souueraign'st antidote
to preserve us from that contagious sin.

If Enemies were not necessary for our good, God would not permit them; but
they are exceeding profitable to the good, for their exercise of holy Patience,
and of other virtues; for if the Church had not had Tyrants, Heaven would not
have had those glorious Martyrs; and were there no Enemies, we should not see
so many good and holy men: yea daily experience does plainly manifest the
great good which is reaped by Enemies: for avoiding of whose murmurations and
detractions, we are made much more wary, and diligent in all our beheaueour and
actions: yea we must regard them as the Ministers of Almighty God, and as true
promotours of our salvation; and therefore they well deserve our love, as well
as great compassion also, considering what great harm they frequently do
themselves, by profiting us. And such as find so great a difficulty to love an
Enemy, may well conceive it a much more harder thing to endure the eternal
flames of Hell; for compelled we are to choose one of the two; the beloved
Apostle assuring us that who loves not, is guilty of death: John. 3. He means
of that death which is eternal: but now undoubtedly he chooses very ill, who
will rather be damned for ever; then love his Enemy whom under pain of
eternal punishment he is commanded to love: and that, not in word, nor in
tongue; but really indeed, and treuth, says the same Apostle. Epis. 1.3. For
true Charity is a burning fire, active and appearing in all necessary services
toward our neighbor; doing good for evil with a cordial and gracious
affability for the love of God; for what measure we shall use to our neighbor
herein, the selfsame will God use unto us. Math. 7. And therefore who will not
pardon their Enemies; such by saying their Pater noster, and praying God to
forgive them, as they forgive those who have offended them; they do not pray;
but rather dema^de a most heavy curse, and malediction upon themselves: for
they expressly, and in true effect demand that God should not forgive them, like
as they forgive not those who have offended them. Do you therefore your self
that first to your neighbor; which you desire that God should do for you: for
foe shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every one his
brother from your hearts, says JESUS CHRIST, Math. 18. And it is also most
evident that all injuries whatsoever which can be done them by others, are
exceeding small, in comparison of that great hurt which they do to themselves,
in killing their own soul by that wicked sin of hatred and revenge: whereby
they become like unto him, who to tear his enemies garment, he pierces his
own body with a mortal wound; for the wrong from an Enemy concerns but the
body only, or our goods, or good name; but hatred, and unlawful revenge is
that which kills the soul, by depriving it of the grace of God: and moreover
it obleiges us yet further to ask pardon, to confess, to do penance for it;
and finally to reconcile our selves with whom we were angry: in all which,
there is far more difficulty, then had been at the first, in suppressing our
anger; by casting it speedily from our thoughts, as we do spareles of fire
which fall upon our clothes; or by an act of humble patience, conseruing
thereby our selves in true charity and quiet peace.

How Patience may be practiced in the occasion of contempt, and disesteeme: the
last part of this Exercise of holy Patience.
I Must not omit to set you down here one fierce encounter more for Patience,
against contempt, and disdain; wherein this virtue is frequently as hard put
to it for getting off victorious from that dangerous conflict, as from any
other whatsoever; for here we are to fight against our selves; the hardest
combat of all the rest; and for which we are chiefly strengthened by the help
of true Humility; which in all occasions of contempt does serve us as a
sovereign Antidote against the swelling anger, that inflames the heart by
pride; and is abased by pondering

First the miseries of man, and little ground he has for his own esteem;
which had it all the advantage that either nobleness of birth, or any worth
of Auncesters can give; yet never could the greatest Monarch drive up his
Pedigree beyond these three descents of being the son of a Man; the
Grandchild of Earth, and the great grandchild of nothing; which is the lowest
point of any created extraction. Yea such is the great misery of Man (says a
holy Father) as but to think of his beginning, may well confound him; to
consider his present state, may give him just cause to lament; and to remember
his final end, may justly make him to tremble with horrid fear.

I will second the former motive for Humility with this one reflection more,
whereby to strengthen Patience against this strong encounter of contempt; to
which, though Pride has naturally exceeding reluctance; yet if we well behold
our selves but in the glass of human misery, it will be able to compel us
even to contemn, yea and to confess that no contempt is able to exceed what
the baseness of our extraction may deserve; whose conception is but loathsome
impurity; our present state, but a sack of filth; and our pampered carcass,
what is it, but prepared food for the crawling worms?

3. Our very entrance into this world does well prognosticate all our future
success therein; who no sooner borne, but also bound both hand and foot, and
tossed too and fro in a cradle, presaging well thereby the servitude, and
restless disquiet of the succeeding life of Man; wherein his childhood passes
in folly, in fear of correction, and in ignorance: his youth is rash,
passionate, and voluptuous: his manhood is subject to be charged with the care
of a wife, children, and family; from whence proceeds solicitude, and
affliction: and lastly comes creeping old age stealing suddenly upon us,
whereby we receive many incurable wounds, by decay of our senses, and chief
powers of our soul, and our strenght falling us, our hands beginn to tremble,
our spiritts grow faint, our stomakes corrupt, our legs become gowty: our
teeth dropp away: and thus we are perplexed all the days of our life with
grief, care, and calamity, and yet our death must also end in pain and
exceeding horror.

All which now being well considered; and due reflection made upon our great
abiection, and infinitt human miseries: which ways can we cast our eyes
whereon to ground our self esteem, or pride? Yea much rather have we not
great cause to judge that no contempt can be so great as we deserve; and yet
our happiness in this surpasses far all other mortal creatures; that by
enduring with virtuous Patience this small te^porall contempt; we may avoid
the eternal pains which our sins have most justly deserved: and at the
selfsame instant also that we endure here this small wordly despise; God and
his Angels will honor and esteem us in Heaven for the same. Despise
therefore with a true generous courage all momentary vain glory, and the
deceiptfull esteem of men; seeing that by your virtuous renouncing them, you
gain that only true honor and glory in the sight of God, which only is right
worthy of esteem.

But to be yet further encouraged, and with a more powerful motive to be
patient in the greatest contempt; you may please but to cast the eyes of your
consideration upon the whole life of our glorious Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and
there you shall find, that from his birth in the manger, until his death upon
the reproachful Cross, he was in a continual state of abiection, there
suffering contempt and disdain: Yea joy being proposed unto him, he sustained
the Cross, contemning confusion. Heb. 12 and the kingly Prophet tells us that;
he was a reproach of Men, and the very outcast of the people ps. 21. he was
despised and the most abject of men; says Esa. 55. Yea so far he permitted
himself to be contemned, and vilif'd by his ungrateful creatures, that a most
facinerous Barabbas should be preferred before him, and be esteemed much more
worthy to live, then he; Mark 15.

But you will say notwithstanding, that contempt and scorn are pills of a
very rough operation. I cannot deny it: yet as their effect is exceeding
profitable; so also their operation may be made both very gentle and easy, by
mixing them with a serious ponderation of the great folly in all wordly
esteem, and of the vain praise and opinion of Men: calling but to mind how
soon both he that prayseth, and who is praised, and most flattered by him; as
likewise who dispraiseth and who is dispraised, and despised shall be equally
reduced to conte^ptible dust; and how soon they are all to be presented before
that dreadful Throne of God; where sinful malice shall be struck stark dumb
for ever, whilst happy Patience will be honored, and rewarded for all
Eternity. All which but well considered, would free us from the usual great
repugnance which we have to swallow down the mentioned pills of scorn or
injury: yea it would enable us very much to suppress our unruly nature, and
not to look with an angry eye, nor to use any exasperating words to them who
have despised us, but to show much rather all courteous ciuility, and in true
Charity to pray for them.

I have now here proposed to you the practice of such virtues as I conceived
most necessary for a virtuous soul aspiring to perfection. I know one may
expect I should have spoke of many more: Yet these containing the active part
of that Christian duty to which we are most obleiged; I conceive it sufficient
to comply with my design of a practical Rule; and leaving the more
speculatiue virtues to be perused in longer treatises: I will now proceed with
the shortest method I can to

THE SECOND PART Of this Fifth Rule: containing pious practices for several
occasions in the day.
THE malice of our Ghostly Enemy is so great to prevent us of the happy end of
our beatitude; as he setts his trapps in all occasions to draw us into sin:
and therefore to be the better able to avoid the danger of his temptations,
and of our own great frailty in the most obuious occasions which occur; it
will be needful to gain by much practice the good habits of pious
eiaculations, and eleuations of our heart unto God. And because there is no
moment of the day wherein we stand not in need of divine help; so we ought by
this frequent means to dart up our hearts with much fervor, sometimes to
praise his goodness; then to admire his greatness; after that to demand
humble pardon for our sins; or grace to subdue our temptations, and to lead
a more virtuous life; saying with a fervent zeal, in occasion of some vain
glory: O Majesty most sublime, who wast so lowly humbled for my sake, vouchsafe
me true Humility of heart, and rightly to know my self.

At the beginning of any principal action, direct briefly your intention and
heart unto God, saying within your self: It is for thy love and honor, my
dear Lord: that I do this, grant me thy grace, that I offend the not thereby.

So soon as you perceive your self assaulted with any dangerous temptation,
or in occasion of sin; make the sign of the holy Cross upon your heart, in
token that you humbly crave Gods help, and that you disauow the sin; or say:
Lord I suffer violence, answer for me. Isa. 38. Or the like; calling earnestly
to God for help.

In occasion of impatience. O most patient IESV; when shall I by thy holy
example rejoice in suffering injuries and contempt for thee,

In temptation to covetousness. O treasure Eternal, when shall I imitate thy
holy poverty;

In temptation to Revenge: O most mild IESV, who so meekely forgiuest all thy
Enemies, when shall I by thy divine Example forgive the small injuries which
are done against me: and rendering good for evil, shall pray for my
persecutours?

To demand Charity and other needful virtues. O grant me grace, Lord IESV, to
make me fervent in thy love; patient in adversity, constant in well doing:
devout in thy service: and to be in all things conformable unto thy most holy
will.

At your going out of doors; first purifiing your intention (as formerly) and
keeping Gods divine presence before your eyes, and eleuating your heart unto
him, say Show me o Lord thy ways, and direct me in thy pathe: guide my steps
according to thy word: to the end that noiniustice may rule over me. Make
perfect my goings in thy path. Psalm. 118.

These and such like holy aspirations darted feruourously from a devout and
loving heart; do make our actions very grateful unto God; and do briefly
eleuate our heart and mind to him, as meditation does it at large.

When we are importunely interrupted at our prayers, or in any other good
action,
HIs devotion, or good action is never hindered, who regards but Gods divine
order and Providence, which disposes of all for our greatest good, and
therefore as we ought patiently to suffer interior distractious; so also we
must endure the exterior. we may not put our selves in occasion of such
distractions; but if they happen, we must then receive them (as ordained by
God) with all quiet Humility: and then although it chance that they shall
interrupt us, yet Gods order and divine disposition is not interrupted thereby
in us; but much rather is fulfilled therein; if we be but faithful, and
patient.

This is the richest and greatest secret of a spiritual life, and the truest
Paradise upon Earth: for it conserues our hearts in perfect peace; and though
diverse occasions may hinder our prayer, or the practice of some charitable good
work; yet we have always the good opportunity given us thereby to exercise the
true virtue of Patience, and holy Conformity: which in that encounter will be
much more pleasing to God, and more effectual for our perfection, then would
be those our other good actions which we intended to do: because therein our
own will is principally to be found, but in this is the true will of God, by
the denial of our own; wherein all true ad solid Christian perfection
consists.

At the striking of the Clock.
DVring the time of the day; let the stricking of the Clock put you in mind of
that virtue which in your, morning prayer you resolved to practice that day, or
of the vice which you intended chiefly to shunn. Let it be a renewing of the
purity of your intention: an awakeing the memory of Gods divine presence, and
of his innumerable blessed benefitts bestowed upon you: offer up our Lord
JESUS, with his infinite merits unto the blessed, Trinity as the most propitious
sacrifice for your sin. Or finally raise up your heart unto God, by this or
some such like aspiration: blessed be the hour wherein my Savior JESUS became
Incarnate, was borne, and died for my sake. It is a holy practice also to make
then the sign of the Cross upon our heart, offering to him thereby all our
thoughts, words, and deeds, craving his grace that wemay never offend him
grievous ly thereby.

At the Aue Marie bell; or the Angelus Domini.
THis is a verse ancient, and pious devotion generally observed throughout the
universal Church; to admonish us both morning, noone, and night to make an
humble and grateful acknowledgment of thanksgiving unto the blessed Trinity,
for the chiefest Mysteries of our holy Faith; by saying those three versicles
adjoined to the Angelical Salutation and the prayer there added at the end.
which devotion is ordinarily called the Angelus Domini, because so it begins.
And it is to be said in the morning, in humble and thankful acknowledgment of
that most glorious Mystery of the Resurrection of our divine Redeemer: at
noone, in honor, and memory of his most sacred death and Passion: And finally
in the Evening; in homage and adoration of his blessed Incarnation and birth.

This devotion I recommend the more earnestly unto you; for that it being at
the selfsame time so generally practiced by Gods Catholic children throughout
the universal world; you join your self thereby to that holy union of so
many blessed good souls; and making together with them your due oblation of
all humble homage and gratitude; it will be much more acceptable to his divine
Son, our only, and most glorious Redeemer.

How to prevent disquiet of mind for such Crosses, and afflictions, as are
most likely to befall us.
REflect oftentimes upon these crosses; that by foreseeing the occasions most
likely in probability to fall out, you may be the better provided to resist,
and defend your self. Offer them with a cheerful heart to God, in union of
the sacred merits of JESUS CHRIST; whereby they may be made worthy to be
accepted by him, in penance, and expiation of your sin. But if, for all
this, you find your mind begin to be disquieted with them; let reason
convince you, that what is now without remedy, ought not by fruitless
vexation, to increase your harm: whereas by a sweet and mild regard with the
eyes of your soul toward God (adoring his blessed will, and subiecting your
self with a cheerful conformity to his divine and alldisposing Providence)
you would not only preserve a most weet and happy repose of m^nde; but also by
a grateful oblation, and sacrifice unto him of that little Cross; your gains
would inestimably exceed all loss whatsoever could happen thereby unto you.

How to moderate our grief conceived at the sudden newse of the death of
some dear friend.
MOurning for the loss of friends is not to be blamed; nature being allowed to
show its sense and feeling within the limits of Prudence and Reason in so just
a cause. Thus Abraham bewailed the death of Sara his beloved wife. Jacob
deplored Joseph, conceiving him as dead. The Israelits bewailed the death of
Moses 30. days. This JESUS CHRIST himself approoned by his own divine
example, sighing and shedding tears for the death of Lazarus. By all which we
may conclude that moderate mourning for the death of friends is not reproved,
it passing not due bounds, nor to the notorious prejudice of our life, or
health, which God and nature obleiges us to preserve; for the contrary would
offend both God, and the souls of our departed friends; who even in the pains
of Purgatory are extremely comforted with Gods blessed will, and disposition;
even in those their present sufferings. It is therefore much more worthy of a
Man, to let reason prevail with him, for the cure of that, which time would
effect to his greater harm: it being also most certain, that as immoderate
grief does but hurt to the living; so it does no good at all to the dead; it
much hurtes our selves, and is very troublesome to others. We must not lament
(says S. Paul) as the Gentiles do, who neither have assured hope, as we, nor
are comforted with the expectation of an endless Bliss: whereby he forbids
not a moderate sorrow, but only excess, which proceeds either from selfloue,
or from infidelity. And therefore we must take heed (says S. Cyprian) least we
give occasion for Pagans to think that all is but fables which Christians
believe of the other life; as in some sort they might have cause, by seeing us
so excessiuely to deplore those; whom yet by death, we believe to have obtained
everlasting felicity.

When our labors, or sufferings grow teadious, and seem over burdensome unto
us; causing melancholy and sadness of heart: and how to apply the remedy.
IN these occasions we must call to mind the laborious and wearisome pains
which JESUS CHRIST, true God and man did suffer to satisfy for our offenses,
and thereby to pourchace our salvation. For which, due gratitude exacts from
us, that with cheerful conformity to his blessed will, we also embrace, as
well the laborious actions, as also what sufferings soever he shall please to
impose upon us. Crave humbly by earnest prayer that Gods divine love may be the
sole possessor of your heart: for enjoying that, you will have both strength and
courage for all the rest.

But if sadness, or melancholy, notwithstanding this, shall deiect your heart;
you must then with a generous courage, raise it up to praise with pious
fervor your Creator, and merciful Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and in dispite of
that dull heaviness of mind, rejoice with all cheerful gratitude, for that
his goodness has made you capable of so noble and happy an end; for which he
has also afforded you so many great, and easy means whereby to obtain the
same: for this will drive away that evil spirit of Melancholy, with much
confusion. Nor can it chewse but greatly joy that heart and soul, which shall
but well consider his own capacity of so incomprehensible a Bliss. In fine
would you be freed from Melancholy? live then virtuously: for solid virtue and
Melancholy can never lodge long in the same soul together: and when you find
Melancholy most to assault you; then put your self most to employment, and
force nature especially from all drowsy idleness; for Melancholy rests, and
grows strong there only, where sloth is harbored; and it is driven away by
action, which yealdeth not leisure to Melancholy thoughts.

You will say perhaps that for the danger of Melancholy, it is very well
known: but you cannot hinder what nature has ingrafted in you. To this I
answer again, that you must labor, and diligently bestirr your self against
it: for it is an evil which the more you amuse your self thereupon, the more
it will gain an increase upon you. He that perceiving his house to be on fire,
and seeing the flame to break out on every side, and in stead of resisting it,
should stand but looking on, deploring the power of that vnmercilesse element;
he would soon see all consumed in flames, and himself highly condemned for
not preventing it. It is the very same with a Melancholy person, who well
perceiues his harm; but through sloth and willfulness, will neither use
corporal industry; nor yet the spiritual remedies of devotion, whereby to
hinder that melancholy evil; but rather by yealding to the naturally dull, and
pensive stupidity of that idle humor, he casts more fuel to increase the
flame: whereas undoubtedly it is a far greater pain to endure the vexation of
a sloathfull, dejected, and melancholy mind; then it would be to apply the
true remedy (as above is specified) to cure that dangerous disease.

In fine S. Francis had good reason to say to his brethren when he espied any
of them to be sad, brother (said he) who serves God must not be melancholy,
unless he has committed sin: whereof if his conscience does accuse him, let
hime onfesse it, and then return to his former alacrity.

And truly if we rightly consider it; what cause can he have, who loves, and
fears God; to be sad and melancholy; which is an humor much fitter for
Epicures, and mere sensual, and great vicious livers; who well may carry
their Hell about with them, and whereof their evil conscience does make them
guilty: but the child of God, endeavoring to observe his law; what cause has
he to be sad or melancholy? This great folly is best cured by neglecting it:
and if men's company do trouble you; recurre to the better conversation both
of Gods holy Saints and Angels. Or if finally these worldly affairs and
employments be tedious unto you; mount up to Heaven with your thoughts, and
there converse with those celestial Citizens of Paradise: and speak often
with God himself by holy reading, and prayer: by which you shall most easily
avoid this hurtful and dangerous disease of Melancholy: for that conversation
has no bitterness, nor is that company tedious, but full of gladness and
joy. wisd. 7.16:

Profitable resolutions to be made when surprised with some sudden pain, or
infirmity.
SO soon as some sharp pain, or troublesome indisposition shall seize upon
you: regard it as a loving correction from his divine and fatherly hand; who
from Eternity has ordained all for our greatest good. Submit your self to his
all-disposing providence, and adore his heavenly will by a holy, and true
conformity. Imagine by that infirmiti's first seizing upon you, to hear God for
to call, and say to you: render account of thy stewardship Luke. 16. For in
time of health we scarce think to prepare for it! and therefore if death should
but suddenly surprise us: o in how doubtful a case should we be! sickness is
therefore a great mercy of God, whereby to give us warning, and leisure to
prepare our selves for that important reckning, and is but as an other
messenger from God to us: and as a Jonas to the Ninevites, to stir us up to
repentance, whilst time and opportunity is granted.

Secondly, call to mind the great and many sufferings of other people; and
you will easily conceive how very favorably God has been to you. For which
excite your self to true gratitude, and to embrace his blessed will; accepting
cheerfully your present pain, in part of satisfaction for your sin.

Thirdly, remember this most comfortable promise of our blessed Redeemer; that,
as you are partakers of the Passions, so shall you be of the consolation 2.
Cor. 1. yea, it is necessary here first to be crucified with JESUS (says
happy Sales) before we can be glorified with JESUS in Heaven. Take therefore
with cheerful, and holy Conformity this unsavory potion of your present
pain, which being but so accepted of from the hand of God, and tempered with
true repentance, and firm purpose of amendment; it will be an infallible cure
of the sinful malady in your soul. Consider therefore the great advantage
which may be made of these your present sufferings; and do not repine, for a
little unsavory taist, to receive with joy your cure from so loving, and
skillful a hand. O no, let us much rather, and with true Christian courage
cry-out with S. Augustine, to this our divine Physician: here cut, here burn,
spare me not here (o Lord) to the end thou may spare me eternally.

Finally by each infirmity God warns us to make ready for his coming (says
S. Greg.) and he knocks thereby at our door; to putt us in mind of our
mortality. Let us bid him heartily welcome with Hely: for it is our Lord; let
him freely dispose of us as he shall please. 1. Reg. 3. Yeald all to his divine
pleasure, who knows best what is most for our happiness; for by these good
reflections our infirmities will be both satisfactory, meritorious, and much
more easy also to be suffered.

Against rash resolutions in hard, and doubtful affairs.
Counsel is that gift of the holy Ghost, which by a supernatural light
directs our understanding to discern good from evil: and in difficult
affairs, what ought to be done: counsel shall keep the; and prudence shall
preserve thee that thou may be delivered from the evil way, says the holy
proverb. c. 2. Our blessed Savior, (that eternal wisdom) spent 30. whole
years in a retired life at home; and 40. days more in the desert, before he
publicly begun to manifest the great work of our salvation by his preaching
and conuersing with men; not for any need he had of so long and deliberate a
preparation there unto; but merely for our example, and to teach us thereby to
use more wary circumspection, who are by nature so inconsiderate, and subject
to err by too much leuity of spirit, and precipitation in the actions of our
life; wherein (they being difficult, and of importance) we ought ever to
consult with some wise and experienced person before we finally resolve; and to
crave humbly Gods grace for it, at least by a pious elevation of heart with holy
King David saying: direct me in thy trenth, and teach me. Psalm. 24. Holy
Gregory Lopes is a right worthy example to be imitated herein; whose opinion
being asked in any doubtful and difficult matter, he differred to answer
till the next day, saying: to morrow will come, and then we shall be wiser:
giving thereby to understand; that an important buisenesse was not to be
resolved suddenly, or without treating, and very diligently recommending it
to Almighty God, who commands us to do nothing without counsel. Eccles. 32.
For he directs men's actions and resolutions when they use the means of
consultation with such persons, by whose advise we may best understand his
heavenly will; having promissed that where two or three are geathered together
in his name, he is there in the midst of them Math. 18. there is much health,
where is much counsel, says the holy Ghost, prou. 11. and with the good
counsel of a friend the soul is greatly sweetened; says the same divine
wisdom Eccl. 32. I will conclude with the holy proverb. c. 2. which assures
us, that Counsel shall secure thee, and prudence shall preserve thee, that
thou may be delivered from the evil way: he means, which does lead unto
endless perdition. And what more persuasion now shall we need to embrace so
happy, and so necessary a practice: so mainely conducing both to our present,
and eternal felicity?

How to make virtuous and true Christian visites?
IN all fitting visitts (as your occasions shall require) you must be very
careful neither to loose true purity of intention, nor the memory of Gods
divine Presence. You must be no less mindful to auoydeboth tediousness to
others, as also the loss of your own time; calling frequently to mind the
strict account which God will exact for every moment of your actions therein,
which are not employed for his honor, and for your own soul, and your
neighbors good.

If you ask me how you may direct your intention to make it become pure, as it
ought: I answer, that your intention both in recreation, and all other
conversation may be

First to honor JESUS CHRIST conuersing here upon Earth with all sorts of
men; crave his grace, that each stepp you make may be in honor, and homage of
those many long and wearisome walks, and visites which he vouchsafed to make
in this world for our salvation; and that nothing may pass in your
conversation contrary to his divine pleasure, either by thought, word, or by
deed. Beseech the sacred Virgin to mediate also the obtaining for you that
spirit of true charity; humility, and devotion wherewith she made that holy
visit to her Cousin S. Elyzabeth. Omit not to recommend your self (at your
going fourth) to your Angel Guardien for the same effect. And finally make
good reflections aforehand upon what visites you are to make, with whom, and
what about. And prefix to your self some fitting stint of time for them;
thereby to avoid both tediousness to others; as also not to loose your own
precious time for much better employment.

2. Our intention must be, by civil visitts, to entertain charity, society;
and good friendship with our neighbors.

And thirdly that by honest, and fitting relaxation of spirit, we may be better
able afterward to employ our forces both of body and mind, to Gods honor in
the other affairs of our own vocation.

Finally for fitting matter wherewith to entertain the several conditions of
such persons as you shall visit; I remit you to the last paragraff in the sixth
Rule: regulating our conversation; where you may find sufficiently several
heads to serve both for a pious, and grateful subject for your entertainment,
and discourse.

A good practice for entertayning good thoughts, when walking abroad.
AS you walk in the streets, you may profitaby entertain your thoughts in
representing to your self, how JESUS CHRIST was ignominiously ledd along
through the streets of Jerusalem to Annas, and Cayphas: from Pilate, to Herod,
and from him, back unto Pilat again; who having most sacrilegiously condemned
this innocent lamb of God; he was as cruelly draged thence unto Mount
Caluarie; and there to suffer his most bitter death and Passion for our
Redemption.

If walking in the fields, or garden in winter-tyme you observe the trees now
naked, and void both of fruit and leaves, then say: O eternal God without all
chainge replenish my naked and barren soul with the precious fruit of holy
virtues: let all creatures adore thee: these trees in their flourishing spring
represent thy heavenly beauty in Eternity, which no time can ever alter: thy
glorious spring does never chainge; nor does thy fruitful fecundity ever
faide: let us all adore and magnify the, o eternal and unchangeable Bliss.

If in pleasant time of the spring you be walking in a delightful garden;
darte up some fervent aspiration unto God as follows: When Lord shall my
barren soul produce the sweet flowers of virtue, whereby it may be made a
pleasing place for thy entertaynement? Admire in the several grateful
qualities of the flower, the amiable, and great perfection of the Almighty
Creator.

When you observe birds to fly in the air, or the rivers and waters to run
streaming along; consider how likewise our life does also fly and glide away
apace unto its end; yea with much more speed. And that each stepp you make, is
but a new approach still nearer to your death:

Contemplate how all the other creatures which you see, were ordained for the
good of man; and thence you may raise much gratitude for his greatgoodnesse to
you, and confusion also for your much abusing them against his glory, and your
own souls good; that only, and holy end for which he created them.

When you call to mind the present time of the day; make thence some good
reflection also upon the state of your age; whether it be yet, but the morning
of your youth; the noone-tyme of your middle age; or the evening, and declining
unto your end: and conceive there by how little we ought to esteem this
present, short, and uncertain life; whereof, what is already past, is nothing;
and what is to come; is but the same: and all that which we can be said
properly to enjoy; is no more then a very moment; whereon notwithstanding
depends our Eternal weal, or woe. And think now hereupon what reckning you
were able to make unto God for what is past; and resolve to be more careful
for the time to come.

Many more pious and profitable exercises might here be added for your
virtuous practices in several other occasions of the day: but because they are
partly, either contained in some of these Rules in particular; or perhaps may
be better applied by the careful industry of a virtuous soul in the just
occasions offered: therefore I will now proceed to show what is required of us
to comply, as we ought, with those two precepts of our holy mother the
Catholic Church for sanctifiing the Saboth, and holy Fast; which is the
subject of

THE THIRD PART Of this fifth Rule: Showing, what is required of us, to comply
with our obligation in observing the Fastes, and Feasts commanded by holy
Church.
MY chief aim and intention in composing these Christian Rules, being to
propose to the virtuous soul such points as are most requisite for her practice
in that great work, and the only thing necessary, I mean, of working her
salvation: I could not omit to speak of these two precepts, so mainely
conducing to that blessed end. Fasting being the proper remedy against the
great capital vice of Gluttony, that very source of surfeiting, of
drunkenesse and all kind of bestiality. And by the rightly observing the
Sabbath, and other holy days the soul is nourished by virtuous practices, and
getts strength against all the fierce assaults of her ghostly enemies, when
chiefly exposed, upon the other days, about her temporal affairs and most
subject then to danger, and to the greatest temptations.

But now to treat of these two precepts in due order; fasting must have the
first place; it being a preparation, and very properly disposes our souls to
the right and profitable observation of the other: this holy fast and
abstinence having ever been the general practice of all Gods greatest Saints,
and as the maine expedient to dispose their souls to heavenly contemplation;
and to be made thereby more capable of Gods divine grace, and favors; as will
hereafter more particularly appear by the reasons which moved our careful
mother the Cath. Church to institute these fasting days upon the eues, or
vigills of all such great solemn feasts, as are to be most devoutly observed.

And for the better comprehending what now is meant by this holy Fast; you must
here observe that there be three seuerll sorts of Fastes: the natural; the
ecclesiastical; and the spiritual, or metaphorical Fast.

The natural fast consistes in the abstinence from all gustable things; be it
meat, drink, or any physical potion whatsoever, which can morally be
conceived to have descended into the stomach. And this fast (for more
reverence sake) is required for the holy Communion; from midnight before the
day of receiving it; unless extremity of sickness, or some other just
occasion permit the contrary.

The Ecclesiastical fast is a voluntary abstinence from all flesh, and from
eggs, and whitmeate, according to the order of holy Church, or received
custom of the place, And as for the quantity; but one meal a day is allowed,
with a collation at night of bread and fruit; and that also but so sparingly,
as it may more properly serve for preventing harm to our health, then for the
nourishment of our body. And although drinking breaks not this fast (it
chiefly serving but to convey, and distribute the nourishment of our meat to
the several parts of our body; and to refresh the blood) yet by excess
therein the sin of intemperance is frequently committed.

Fasting also, though properly it be an abstayning from certain corporal food
(and that according to the order of the Church) yet by a Metaphor it is also
used for true abstinence from sin, which is the spiritual, or metaphorical
Fast; and which the libertin sectaries of our time, will have only to obleige
us to be observed; decrying the other, as superstitious, for believing our
selves obleiged to that heavy yoke of the law; from which (as they pretend)
CHRIST, by the liberty of their new Gospel, has freely delivered them.

But this their bad pretense does no more free them from the obligation of
obeying their lawful Pastors command of fasting; then it does from obeying the
just laws of their temporal, and souueraigne Prince: and therefore, as the
pleading of such a prerogative to the liberty of their Cospel, would not exempt
them from the due punishment of their rebellion against their temporal Lord;
so neither does it exempt them from being declared by JESUS CHRIST, to be
guilty of a far greater crime, and punishment for their rebellion to the
command of his holy spouse the Church; Math. 18. which being governed in all
things by his own holy Spirit; he will have us both to hear, and to obey it,
as himself. Luke. 10. Yeawe shall not have God for our father, unless we
have the holy Church for our mother, as both S. Cyprian and S. Augustine
assurevs. And therefore this her command of the Ecclesiastical fast, is not to
be neglected; which she ordaynes but as the means and help for the better
observance of the other spiritual Fast; without which, to observe the former,
would little avail us; as wanting its perfection, and truest accomplishment:
which makes it both grateful to God, and very fruitful to our souls:
supposing it be regulated by the true Rule of prudence and virtue, which
require these following conditions.

First, that it be (according to the Apostle: Romans 12. reasonable; that is,
discreet, and without any notable prejudice to our bodily health; but rather
destroying vice, then our body: for sometimes it happens, that by transport
of some sudden fervor, one may be carried unto over violent exercise of
penance, beyond the strength of nature: but such must permit themselves to be
entirely ruled by the advice of a prudent spiritual director; and by no means
be their own guide therein.

2. Our fast must be very sober and frugall; not riotous, nor with such
excess of costly and dainty dishes, as that it may seem to equal, or exceed
our best furnished tables at other times: for that might be justly esteemed but
an exchainging the former dainties of the land, for those much more costly
(perhaps) of the water; which truly is in effect but to delude; and much rather
to make a very mockery of our fast; then to comply with the holy end, and
institution thereof. And whereas we are advised by S. Gregory to feed the poor
with what we spared in falting; we by this ryotous excess, spend much more,
then we should have done without such a fast. And moreover the soul, which by
bodily abstinence should also have been enabled, and made much more vigorous
for prayer, and all other spiritual good exercises of virtue; is now rather by
too much repletion, made far less apt for them both. And though we sin not
by any formal breach of the Fast; yet we sin by breacking the Rule of
Temperance, and offend God greatly thereby, such dilicate full feeders,
observing but the outward form of the fast, comply not with the holy end
thereof; which is (as the lentne Preface tells us (to suppress vice, to
eleuate the mind unto Heavenly contemplation; and to obtain thereby of God
both grace, and reward. But who with dilicate and full feed, keep nature
pampered as before; their Passions as strongly maintained; and their expense so
excessive, as nothing is spared for the poor; what proportion can such fasting
have to the true end of holy Fast? nor are we to wonder that a soul taking
thus disorderly this spiritual physic of fasting, shall find so small a
remedy for her sinful diseases; the badd usage thereof causing more harm then
good.

3. Our fast must be cheerful, and with a willing heart; for God loves a
cheerful giver; 2. Cor. 9. And condemns those Hypocrites of the Gospel, who
disfigured their faces, that they might appear great fasters before men. Math.
6.

It must be holy also, and religious; that is, not wholly consisting in our
abstinence from certain corporal food; but also (and that principally) in our
abstayning from sin, from our unruly Passions, from disorderly affections,
and from all such vicious habits, whereby we were accustomed to offend Almighty
God: for by this blessed Fast, we gain that happy hunger and thirst after true
justice and grace, whereby we shall be filled with that spiritual joy, and
heavenly food, which will nourish us for all Eternity.

Finally, would you have your fasting to be grateful to God; add to it the two
helping wings, of alms, and Prayer. Tob. 12. For they will raise it to
Heaven, and there present it before Gods heavenly Throne.

You have seen now here briefly the chief conditions required for holy Fast:
which if you find repugnant to sensuality, and the inferior part: yet take but
this taste of the happy fruit thereof, and it will make both reason, and the
Superior part to embrace it with much content.

The first good fruit to be gathered from holy Fast, is corporal health, by
consuming and drying up those superfluous humors, which both beget diseases,
and much oppress nature; and therefore it prolongeth life; as experience does
clearly manifest in those holy Eremits; S. Paul, S. Antonie, S. Hylarion, S.
Hierome, S. Romwald, and by so many other abstemious Saints of ancient times
in the desert: and this without pretense of any miracle; it being but very
general, that the greatest fasters, were usually the longest livers; unless
by some other extraordinary austerities, nature happened to be much sooner
consumed in them, then it would have been by their fasting. Nor ought we to
find much difficulty to believe that holy fast prolongeth life: it being
eternal wisdom which so expressly avouches it Eccles. 37. He that is
abstinent shall add to life.

2. (And which is to be esteemed a benefit incomparably surpassing the other by
holy fast, all fleshly temptations are weakened; yea many even extinguished,
and prevented, also oftentimes, from being so much as hatched in the sinful
nest of our corrupt sensuality: for natural reason it self most clearly
conuinceth; that being our sensual motions do principally proceed from
superfluity of nourishment, they must needs be much mitigated by fasting; which
both cools, and dries up those abounding humors, which serve but as true
fuel to increase that se^suall concupiscence, which Gods Saints have so
gloriously subdued by the help of holy abstinence and fast. I humbled my soul
by fasting. (says King David. Psalm. 34.) for the flesh is rebellious to the
spirit; and therefore to be subdued, and humbled, that the spirit may prevail;
and S. Paul assures us of this undoubted truth, both by his word, and practice.
1. Cor. 9.

3. It sharpens and much enables all the chief powers, both of our body and
mind; it also cleares the understanding, and renders it much apter for the
exercise of its chiefest functions; and by consuming and drying up the
superfluous humors both of our stomach, and head, it is called by S.
Athanasius and S, Basil the very mother of health; yea by fasting the said
understanding is far better disposed, as well for study as prayer: and by that
greater purity both of body and mind, the soul becomes much more susceptible
of all spiritual comfort, and of divine illuminations from God.

By all which heavenly and happy effects, you have now finally the taist which
I promissed to give you of the wholesome fruit of true Catholic Fast: which
being but well considered; had not our most tenderly loving Mother, the holy
Church, great reason to use her strongest power; not only by earnest
exhortations to recommend very carefully, this so useful and necessary a
remedy unto her children; but also for more security, to obleige the^ by
special precept and command to make use of it in all fitting occasions. And
hereupon she was moved for our greater good to institute those certain times
of holy Fast, which we see to be now so generally observed through-out the
whole Christian world.

Of the general Fasts of the Church upon what time, and days they are
appointed; and wherefore.
ALl true Catholics observe generally the fast of Lent, the four Ember weeks,
and the vigiles or Eues of diverse principal feasts of the year: as also
abstinence upon Frydayes, Saturdayes, and Rogation days; which partly
introduced by Apostolical tradition; and partly by custom for some pious end,
were commanded afterward to be generally observed by the whole Cath. Church.

And first for the solemn fast of Lent, it has been ever a most constant
practice through-out the universal Church, following herein the practice of
JESUS CHRIST; who sanctified this fast for our example. In grateful memory,
and in imitation whereof, the Apostles themselves did both institute, and most
religiously observe this holy fast of Lent; as S. Hierome assures us Epist. 54.
ad Marcel. and upon S. Math. he declares the very time which they ordained for
this Fast; to wit, the 40. days immediately before that bitter death and
Passion, and glorious Resurrection of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST; that by
fasting, and chastising the flesh, we might be the better disposed to celebrate
those sacred Mysteries; and to preserve thereby a grateful memory of this
consecrated Fast by the Son of God: not for any need he had thereof, but
merely for our instruction; and to show the force it has, and how requisite for
our help to overcome the temptations of our ghostly enemies: whereof some are
not to be conquered, but only by fasting and Prayer. Math. 17. And for this
very reason, the Apostles, following the holy Example of their divine Master;
they both instituted, and also practiced this holy Fast of Lent; which ever
has been most religiously observed by our loving Mother the Church; as is most
evidently convinced by the writings of the ancient fathers, and Doctors through
all ages, even until our present time: which is (I hope) abundantly
sufficient to authorize this holy Fast; and to persuade us to a very willing
and cheerful observation thereof: as being grounded upon so good authority,
and holy motives for their institution; as will appear by this which follows

Of the Ember days; by whom, and wherefore they were first instituted.
THe blessed Apostles themselves first ordained these Ember Fasts; as S. Leo
the great does assure us; sermon 8. de ieiun. 10. men's. though Calixtus, that
holy Pope and Martyr, an. 226. by decree commanded them, for very congruous
reasons to be kept at those 4. seasons of the year. First for to moderate the
4. several humors of our body, at their each predominant season to wit;
Choler in Summer; Melancholy in Autumn: Fleme in Winter; and Blood in the
Spring

2. To pray for the fruits of the earth. In the Spring, when they are sown,
and begin first to grow. In Summer, that they may come to due maturity. In
Autumn, for a seasonable haruist to reap, and to lay them in. And finally in
winter, that we may use them temperately, and without offending God.

3. Because as each quarter of the year contains three whole months: so by
appointing to each quarter these three days of fast; we give unto God thereby
one day of each month in the year; as the first fruits which are most due to
him. Wednesday is one of these days ordained for this fast: because upon that
day the Scribes and Pharisees did meet in Council, and there resolved to put
JESUS to death. On Friday we fast, in memory of the cruel execution of that
their sacrilegious rage. And finally on Saturday we also fast, in memory of
the blessed Virgin and Apostles exceeding great sorrow, and grief during our
Sauiour's lying buried in the grave, till sunday morning, that by his most
glorious Resurrection, he likewise raised their sad hearts to new joy. And by
these two days abstinence our minds are much better prepared to sanctify the
sunday following as we ought

Finally we fast and pray upon imber days, thereby to invoke the grace of
the holy Ghost for all such as are in those times to take sacred Ordres in the
Church; that such only may be admitted unto that holy Sacrament, as shall be to
Gods glory; for the good of souls, and for the edification of his dear spouse
the holy Catholic Church; by the promotion of such worthy persons only, whose
just merit may make them deserving of that sacred Ministry; and to be choosen
fit Pastors, and Prelates for that high, and dreadful dignity, to have the
charge and government of our so deareby redeemed souls.

Of our fasting upon Vigills, and Eues.
YOu have now seen that the institution both of the fast of Lent, and Ember
days was not without a very pious and profitable end: the next is to show
both the cause and motive, wherefore the Eues or Vigiles were also appointed to
be observed fast.

For which it is to be noted, that they were first ordained in imitation of our
blessed Savior his frequent night watchings in prayer; ^s we may read in S.
Luke. 12. And many other places of the Gospel: and likewise for a better
preparation against the ensueing f^ast; in disposing our minds thereby more
fittingly to celebrate the same.

But afterward by length of time, and great increase of Christianity; and
chiefly by decay of that first primitive holy spirit amongst the Christians:
many great abuses were committed by those night meetings in the Church: and in
stead of prayer, and piety, the ruder and deboister sort; did make but
gaimesome sportes, and iuncatings; whereof S. Ambros. being advertised by
devout S. Monica; he caused thereupon those Vigiles or night watchings, to be
changed into fasting days: thereby the better to prepare, both our hearts and
minds to holy prayer, and purity, for the more worthyly celebrating of the
ensueing feast. which custom the Church has both approved, and practiced
ever since.

Of the Rogation days.
THe Rogation-dayes are so called, because upon those days the Church has
ordained that in public Processions we sing the Letanies; which Litaneia (a
greek word) does signify the same, as Rogation, or supplication does in
Latin. This devotion of the Letanies, or Rogation is a very antient-custome
in the Church, as S. Basil witnesses epist. 63. And in the time of S. Greg.
Thaumaturgus, about the year 240. that devotion was in use; though afterward
renewed, (and with fasting and procession adjoined to the Letanies) they were
more solemnly practiced by S. Mamertin Bishop of Vienna in France, about the
year 452. he commanding those afflicted people to join repentant hearts, and
fervent prayers with the intercession of all the blessed Saints, to crave Gods
Mercy, and to free them from that just punishment of their sins, by most
horrid Earthquakes, and by woolfes, and other rauanours beasts, which came by
flocks into their towns, and denoured all sorts of people. These Rogation
days appointed to be upon the 3. days immediately before the Ascension of our
Lord, are called the less Rogation; because it was ordained in a lesser, and
much meaner place; as also by a much inferior Prelate, then is the Rogation,
upon the day of S. Mark, which was appointed by S. Gregory the great, and in
the most famous City of Rome, upon the apparition of an Angel on the topp of
Moles Adriani (for that occasion now ever since called Castle Angelo) there
sheathing his sword in testimony that Gods angry wrath was appeased; which had
immediately before stroock dead so many thowsands suddenly as they were
sneezing, or yawning. From whence begunn the custom; that so soon as any was
hard to sneese all then who were near, runn presently to assist him; saying;
God help, or God bless you; as ever since the custom has continued, when any
sneese, to say: God bless you: and also to make the sign of the Cross upon
our mouths, in yawning, as they also did.

This devotion of the Letanies, with procession, and abstinence first
institut^d upon the occasions, as you have heard; was recommended, and
commanded also afterward by the holy Church, to be generally observed by all
her faithful children for other good ends and motives; those days falling out
about the very season that Armies are then usually preparing for the field.
The thunder and lightning is then also most frequent; which like Gods fiery
darts, fly threatening us over our heads. The fruits of the earth, are then
generally in their tender growth; and therefore very subject by many several
casualities to take much harm. Finally it is the time that both men and
beasts are very subject to sickness, and mortality: all which being but the
lamentable effects, in due punishment of our sin; therefore our pious and
careful Mother the Cath. Church; grounded upon the self same judgment with S.
Paul, reprehending the Corinthians of his time, for provoking God to anger by
their irreuerences, and unworthily communicating the body and blood of our
Lord; for which he there declares, that God severely punished very many of
them with several sorts of diseases, and with death it self: 1. Cor. 11:
therefore (I say) the holy Church has great cause to command this devotion
upon Rogation-dayes by prayer, abstinence, and Processions; to stir up her
children to penance and to cry for mercy in time; and by those Letanies to
crave the intercession of all the blessed Saints and Angels unto God for us:
which being the end, and only motive of her ordayning these Rogation-dayes: and
withal considering both the venerable antiquity, and great authority of this
devotion in the Church; it might well suffice to stopp our modern Sectaries
from their inueying, without all reason, against this so holy and devout a
custom.

We have now seen our obligation to obey this just command of Fast, and
abstinence; as also the many conuincing motives to induce us thereunto, for
our own great corporal, and spiritual benefit. Yet for that our love unto
flesh and blood is so tenderly feeling (even of conceipted prejudice only) to
our bodily health; as that upon the least pretense, this wholesome fast must be
neglected (which notwithstanding is the true food of virtue, and the most
needful nourishment to the soul) therefore I thought it not unfitting,
briefly to recompt to you out of Nicephorus: lib. 17. cap. 31. what happened
about eleven hundred years ago; and does well manifest the religious and
great veneration, wherewith the zealous Christians, of those more happy times,
observed the holy Fasts.

In the time of Justinian the Emperor there was so great a dearth, as he
caused the shambles throughout all the City of Constantinople to be opened,
and flesh to be freely sold unto all, in the second week of Lent: yet such was
the devotion, and zealous piety of the people toward the observation of that
holy custom, and time; as that there was not one person amongst all that
numerous multitude, and several sorts of all conditions of people, who would
make use of that free, and lawful dispensation, so much as once but to taste of
the least bitt of flesh, during the whole time of Lent; although so greatly
pressed unto it, by such an urgent necessity.

O how far is now our carnal and sensual age from this great virtue, and
most laudable Christian temperance! we now are glad of any pretended, yea even
of a half seeming cause, to press and importune for many needless
dispensations; wherein neither the spiritual, nor yet the corporal Physician
can well find any sufficient probability, to warrant their giving license
unto those froward and stubborn children; who oftentimes (though to their
prejudice both of their corporal, and spiritual health) would never be quiet,
nor pleased, but by the gaining their own froward will: which is so very
nice, as it cannot endure the least mortification of their own sensual, and
unruly appetite; neither for the love of God; nor for the satisfaction of their
innumerable, and most grievous sins.

But the sensual Sectaries, and great enemies of holy Fast, will tell you,
that JESUS CHRIST himself assures us. Math. 15. that, not what enters into
the mouth, defiles Man: and therefore our fasting is but in vain.

If this be so understood; I would then know of them, from whence it was that
our first unhappy Parents were so fowly defiled, and all their posterity in
them, by their only eating of that forbidden fruit in Paradise? They say it was
the transgression of Gods command to them, which made their eating to be
sinful. And we say the very same in all transgressions of holy Fast; and not
that the creature which is eaten, is in it self worse one day, then an other;
but only our action is made sinful by our disobedience unto our holy Mother
the Cath. Church, whom JESUS CHRIST so expressly commands us (and that under so
severe a punishment) to obey. Math. 18.

But this discourse intending only instruction, and exhortation to the true
humble and obedient child of the Church, and not disputation with the libertine
despisers of what may be a curb unto their sensuality. I will conclude with
exhorting you to imitate his divine Charity, in offering up your hearty prayers
for the conversion of these obstinate contemners of the obleiging orders of his
beloved spouse; who vouchsafed even to pray for them, who were the sacrilegious
executioners of that most bitter death, which he suffered upon the Cross for
the salvation of us all.

The singular great profit to our soul; by joining Prayer unto voluntary Fast,
one day in each Month for our private devotion, and by way of a spiritual
Retreat.
THis is a devotion practiced by many virtuous persons, to their great
progress in holy Perfection; and therefore I most seriously recommend it unto
you. For by thus ending the one Month in repentance for all your former
offenses; you may begin with fervor to amend them in the other. The last
Saturday in each Month will be most convenient for this devotion, it being a
day of abstinence; and auoyds thereby both the trouble of diet, as also of
observation.

You having made choice of the day: the next is to resolve to set all worldly
business (for that time) aside; and, so far as your present condition will
permit, you must be retired from all company and conversation, which may be
occasion to dissipate and distract your mind from true heavenly thoughts:
withdrawing your self by a true spiritual Retreat into the quietest place
for your better union with God, and as to a happy solitude; there heart to heart
alone, to treat with him all your corporal, and spiritual necessities. This
is so great a grace, and so singular a mercy, which he most favorably affords
you; as had it been granted to many, who are now without redemption in Hell,
they would thereby have made themselves happy for all Eternity. Bless
therefore, and adore Gods infinite great goodness to you, for so gracious a
favor: and resolve firmly to make good use of it, by spending that day in
thanksgiving for his so innumerable great benefits of your Creation, and
Redemption, and for so many powerful means to bring you to that happy end of
Bliss, for which he made you. And endeavoring to employ that day, as if it
were to be your last: dispose your self to a preparation required to dye in
the happy state of Grace.

Consecrate that day in honor of the holy retreates which JESUS CHRIST so
frequently used to make in prayer, and solitude with his heavenly Father: and
let your comportment and conversation be, as in the divine presence of God: in
imitation, and adoration also of that great modesty, recollection, silence and
fervent prayer of our said souueraigne Lord.

You must not pass the spiritual exercise of this devout day, without the
choice of some fitting subject for mental prayer; for which, and for breuity
sake, I must referr you to those short, but most solid and devout meditations
of that holy Bishop of Geneua, in his Introduction to a devout life. part. 2.
chapter 9, of Man's Creation etc. or to a meditation upon the 4. last, to wit;
Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven; which may be also a very fit and a
complete employment for this day: or the like (as your ghostly Father is best
able to direct you) which being seriously, and devoutly pondered, they will
stir up in your soul such affections as may produce the fruit of generous
resolutions for your increase in virtue, and for vanquishing of your evil
habits contracted.

Besides these Meditations (which you must distribute for several times of the
day) you may also make use of some spiritual lecture, out of the Imitation, or
following of CHRIST; out of the Memorial of Granada, or some other spiritual
good book. And finally for the last, and principal point of this days holy
exercise; I recommend to you (above all the rest) that you employ it
principally to make a very serious reuew of the present state of your soul,
and what account you could give to that dreadful Judge, were he then instantly
to demand of you the reckoning for your stewardship; and for all the talents
both of nature, grace, and fortune, which he has lent you till that present
day, to be employed for his greater glory, and for your own souls health. Call
to mind how faithful you have been herein; and what satisfaction you were able
now to render him for all your thoughts, words, and deeds; what progress you
have made in virtue, and what unruly passions, or sinful habits you have
maistred; or rather have you not been guilty, and much to blame, for the
contrary, in them all? In fine you must make a very careful and diligent
examen of Conscience; and especially, wherein you have most offended God that
Month. Endeavor to stir up true sorrow and repentance for them; and make a
firm purpose to amend for the future, and to avoid the occasions of your
sin; and finally to embrace the means which may be most efficacious to
obtain such virtues, as be very effectual to tha^ end: for by true
preparation to an entire and contrite Confession, you rightly dispose to the
next days holy Communion; and to receive thereby the happy effect, and grace
of those divine Sacraments, which will much strengthen your soul to begin the
next Month with new fervor; and you will be exceedingly enabled also to amend
your former faults, and to serve God much more faithfully for the time to come.

But if upon this diligent reuew, and strict examen of your self, you shall
perceive any spiritual amendment of your former life; give then most hearty
and humble thanks to God, and beseech his divine assistance that you may still
amend.

If yet some (not acquainted with this devotion) shall demand, for their
further fatisfaction; wherefore this manner of spiritual Retreat is to be
practiced; I answer; that one but indifferently versed in the holy practice of
that other longer spiritual Exercise of eight, or tenn days space, will very
easily perceive the inestimable and heavenly treasure, which is to be reaped by
this the true abridgment of the other; and which contains in brief, what the
other does much more amply, and at large: and therefore it were exceedingly to
be wished, that all Christians (who have good leisure, and opportunity) would
make use of so powerfully a conducing help to their own eternal salvation;
as sometimes to take the longer spiritual exercise of eight or tenn days
space; it being a most singular means to obtain Gods heavenly grace to live
as we ought, in that present vocation, to which his divine Providence has
called us: it is also a very sovereign remedy to cure our evil inclinations,
and to subdue our strongest, and most unruly Passions: it greatly helps us to
root out our evil habits, and is the truest physic, whereby to purge our
souls from sin, and to establish it in the state of grace: it is a singular
good means to renew the former fervor of all our good purposes; and to
rectify all the affections of our mind. All which celestial benedictions, as
they are sufficiently experienced to be reaped by those longer spiritual
Exercises; so they may well expect a proportionable share; who shall monthly
make use of the shorter, or of one day, as an abridgment of the same devotion;
especially they being made as a preparation to death, and a disposing our
selves to that happy state, wherein we would desire to be found at the summons
of a dreadful Judge.

Finally your intention for this holy exercise must be to learn thereby Gods
blessed will, and to crave his grace for a constant resolution to accomplish
the same: resolving, by that heavenly help to amend your former faults; for
the best purposes not put in execution, are but as blasted flowers which never
give fruit; it being in the practice only, wherein the true profit of all solid
devotion consists; and Heaven (it is glorious reward) is obtained by deeds: and
not by any purposes, or desires alone: yea the speediest way to the happy
science of true perfection is to study little, and to do much: for the much
study to know perfection, and the little labor in the practice thereof, is
the true cause that so few obtain it.

Fail not to make your confession, as if it were to be your l^st, and so
manifest to your ghostly Father the true state of your conscience; that he may
be able to give you counsel, as well to amend your faults committed, as also
to prevent them for the time to come: for hereby you will be the better
prepared for your following Communion, and to receive much grace thereby.

This your good day of a spiritual Exercise being ended; you must be careful
not to precipitate your self too suddenly into your former worldly affairs,
without first rectifiing your intention to the glory of God, and for avoiding
of all wilful sin proposing ever here with all a careful memory of Gods
divine presence in all your actions: for as one newly come out of a sickness,
does not rashly expose himself to the air, but by degrees, for fear of a
more dangerous relapse; so ought not our heart (recollected by holy devotion and
prayer) over suddenly to divert it self unto exterior and world ly actions;
least our good purposes be stifled even in their birth, or first conception,
Consider therefore first well with your self, what you are that day to go
about, and with whom to deal, and converse; for thereupon you must firmly
propose (and that with a true Christian resolution) to do nothing unworthy of
Gods all-ouerseeing view, nor of the true child of so loving and celestial a
Father.

I having formerly spoke at large of Prayer, and now here of holy fast (the two
principal satisfactory works) I must not omit in the next place to say also a
word or two of the third; which is

Of the Satisfactory work of Alms
PRayer is good with Fasting, and Alms, rather then to lay up treasures of
gold: because Alms delivers from death, purges sin, and makes to find
mercy, and life everlasting says Tobias. c. 12. by which we see so well
declared both the excellency, the fruit, and necessity of this great virtue; as
it ought very powerfully to excite us to the practice of the same; which by S.
Paul is called a sweet odor, and a most acceptable Host to God. Phil. 4. yea
it preuents our souls descending into Hell. Tob. 4.

The reason is given by the Holy Ghost himself; who tells us, that, as water
quenches fire; so Alms does extinguish sin. Eccl. 3. o how exceeding a
comfort will it be to those thrice happy souls; to hear it pronounced in
their behalues, at the last dreadful day: come ye blessed of my Father;
possess ye the Kingdom etc for I was hungry, and you fedd me. I was dry, and
you gave me to drink: I was naked, and you clothed me. etc. And what a
hart-breake, on the contrary to those other uncharitable and covetous wretches,
to see themselves condemned to the eternally tormenting flames of Hell; who
might have pourchaced at so easy a rate those happy keys, which would have
also opned unto them the gates of Paradise! but I was hungry, and you did not
feed me. I was dry, and you gave me not to drink, I was naked, and you did not
cloth me. etc. and therefore, go ye cursed into eternal fire etc. for you
refusing it to my true members, the poor, you refused to do it to my self. O
how happy, and truly wise are they, who, by right use of their wicked Mammon,
make friends with it in time, by releeuing the poor: for thereby they put it
out at use to God himself, with most advantage for their own endless
felicity. Prou. 19 17.

But some poor man, perchance may reply, and demand; how he should either feed
the hungry, or cloth the naked, who has not where withal to supply his own
necssities? I answer, who has not means to relieve his neighbors want; let
him have charity to commpassionate them, and by prayers and counsel to assist
them the best he can: for there be several sorts of Alms (says S. Augustine)
whereby our sins are pardoned; and (of them all) the best is to pardon
injuries freely from our heart; to love our Enemies; to do good for evil; and
to pray for them who hate us: for this is Alms of the heighest esteem with
God; whose heavenly grace enables the poor to practice it, as well as it does
the rich: and therefore none must pretend to be exempt from the practice of
giving Alms, when either corporally, or spiritually our Christian duty shall
oblige us thereunto.

Read the 4 chap. of Tobias; where you shall amply see expressed both the
effects, the obligation, and circumstances of giving Alms: to which remitting
you; I will proceed to what I intended to propose in the

Several virtuous Exercises; whereby to regulate our actions for the better
observance of Sundays, and other Feasts, commanded by holy Church.
BEsides the daily and precisely requisite nourishment which necessity requires
for entertayning our corporal health, and vigor for performance of such
duties as God requires of us; the practice even amongst the holiest Christians
in the primitive times allowed some mutual inuitations to their little feasts
called Agape, or charitable banquets, whereby more firmly to establish true
love and charity amongst themselves, and also to relieve the poor with what
was left. So in like manner both God, and his holy Church have provided for the
spiritual nouriture of our souls; that besides the ordinary, and daily food
for them by prayer, and other usual exercises of holy virtue; upon Sundays,
and other festival days, we should feast our souls by more plentiful
variety of their true spitituall nourishment.

And for this end, it is first to be observed; that we ought to be much more
retired, and far more assiduous at our devotions upon these days, then at
other times; the other days being allotted to provide for our corporal
necessities: but these are appointed expressly, both by God, and his Church, to
be employed in his divine service, and for the spiritual necessities of our
souls, which is the end, and motive of their institution; thereby to afford us
good leisure, and opportunity to feed upon the grace-conueying Sacraments, which
we ought at those times more devoutly to frequent, according as each several
condition may require. And for further direction therein, I remit you to B,
Sales, in his Introduction to a devout life part. 2. chap. 19. about
Confession. And to the chapter following for frequenting the holy Communion.

Wherefore they do not sanctify the Sabbath day, who spend it in feeasting,
sporting, or in mere idle conversation: for the precept says not, thou shalst
feast, and sport the Sabbath day: but thou shalst sanctify the Sabbath day;
that is, by virtuous exercises, to ma^e that day more holy then the rest: for
it is not the day that sanctifies the works which are done in it; but the
works do sanctify the day, and makes it holy. Nor is one day more holy then
an other, but because it is spent in more holy and pious employment: and
therefore, as virtuous actions do sanctify the day: so vicious, do prophaine
the same. And hence it is most evident that God did not forbid the Artificer,
or laboring man their honest, and industrious labor upon the Sabbath day, that
he should dance or sport, and spend that day in sloth, or sinful
conversation: no doubtless he forbid those seruill works (which are good in
themselves) to the end we might have leisure to employ the day in spiritual
and holy Exercises for his glory, and the greater good of our souls; by
frequenting the Sacraments, Sermons, spiritual lecture, and other devout
exercises of virtue. And yet if we examen but the practice of most men's actions
of this sinful age; we shall find, that the chiefest difference which the
Libertins now give to the Sabbath, and other holy days above the rest;
consists but in better clothes, greater cheer, and much more idleness, then
upon other days. So that, whereas the institution of those solemn feasts
were first to purge our souls from sin, contracted by the secular
negotiations of the week edayes past; we much rather defile our selves, as
swyne wallowing in the mire; to whom God speaks by his Prophet Amos. c. 5. I
have with detestation rejected your solemnities: and truly with great cause;
for to solemnize the holy days after so sinful a manner, is much more
beseeming the sensual Epicures, and the faithles Atheist, then true Christian
Catholics: nor is God so heighly offended in any other days of the week, as
he is upon these; wherein there is given so great occasion of much more sin
by the usual excess of good cheer apparel, and idleness; the three proper
instruments, for Gluttony, Luxury, and of several other sorts of sensual
vice; supposing (as I said) that sinful excess be committed therein: for both
better cheer, and apparel: may be then virtuously used, as well in due honor
of the day; as also by friendly hospitality, to preserve true love and charity
with our neighbor.

Nor do I here intend to cry down with the ouer-tyranous Precisian Sectaries
all honest and public recreations upon these days, in the afternoon (the
Sermon, and Euen-song being done) No they having spent well the morning; and
done also their afternoons duty to God in the Church, he will be far from
taking offense at honest and innocent recreation; whereby poor servants, and
others, now dulled with the whole weeks work; may then have some little
freedom for relaxation of mind and to revive, and cheer up their spiritts,
to begin with fresh courage again their accustomed labor. And to hinder them
of this innocent pastime does much rather resemble Puritanicall cruelty, then
any virtue, or true Christian devotion; which coming from the holy Ghost,
cannot be in that severe spirit of cruelty and rigor; but in his spirit, by
whom all things are sweetly disposed. wisd. 8.

Now as concerning your ordinary devotions (if leisure, and good commodity will
permit) after your daily morning prayers and other usual devotions, make some
more then ordinary spiritual lecture: say your Even song also after dinner,
and hear some good exhortation (if opportunity be offered) and let not the
whole day pass without some good work; as in visiting some sick person, or
to comfort such as either corporally, or spiritually may most stand in need of
your help: or finally, to exercise at the least some one of the holy works of
mercy. Take more time on those days for reading spiritual books, and make a
diligent examen of your last weeks comportment toward God: whether faithful
in your good purposes for the amendment of your life; or if not rather worse by
continuing and increasing your former bad habits. Whereat confound your self,
and renew with great fervor your former Resolutions of amendment, and with the
next new week, begin also a new reformation: for there is no better way (says
holy Sales) to end happily a true spiritual life, then daily to begin the
same: and it is greatly nourished by this ensuing help

Of spiritual lecture; a proper Exercise for all festival days.
Spiritual lecture is a holy Magazen which does furnish both our memory and
understanding with pious thoughts for heavenly contemplation, whereby to unite
us to God: it excites us to the practice of virtue; and therefore, though it be
daily necessary for the virtuous soul; yet principally to be practiced those
days peculiarly dedicated to the divine service of God, to whom we speak by
prayer, and by spiritual lecture God speaks unto us. Which two holy Exercises
have great connection, and are mutually maine helps each one to the other: and
as meat and drink are both needful nourishments to the body; so these are as
necessary for the soul.

Omit not therefore daily to give your soul this necessary spiritual food, at
such times as you find the best leisure for it. Your reading may be in the
Imitation, or following of CHRIST; in the Saints lives; in some of Granada his
works; in the Introduction to a devout life; in the Spiritual Combat; in the
Holy court, or the like, But to perform your spiritual lecture with best
profit, a good method therein is very necessary, for which you may briefly
observe as here follows.

First, placing your self in Gods divine presence (as in prayer) raise
lovingly your heart to him, and humbly crave his grace to make profit of what
you are going to read.

2. Read leasurely, and not as if you desired to see quickly an end of the
book: but meeting with some good point for your instruction; pause there, and
consider it with leisure, and good attention, as if it were God himself who
should speak thereby to you: which done, then go on, and still practice the
same.

3. Read not for curiosity, but for devotion, and thereby to learn the true
practice of virtue, and to inflame the will to embrace it; much rather, then to
inform the vnderstang what it is. Stick not to read the same book (if it
like you well) twice, or thrice over; for it is the leasurely, and perfect
disgestion which breeds the purest blood.

4. A quiet and reposed mind is necessary for the reaping profit by reading:
for as vnquiiet water reflects such broken and confused species of the shadow
which is cast upon it, as one scarcely can perceive any true proportion
thereof; so likewise it is the very same with an unquiet, and troubled mind
with any passion; which is incapable then to make any profitable conception
(or but very imperfectly at the least) with the best spiritual books; by
reason that it being disquiet in it self; it needs must reflect but broken and
confused conceptions of what is read.

Finally with a recollected and quiet mind, in reverence and devotion, let your
reading be not so much by way of study to know; but rather in the spirit of
true piety, to draw from thence some spiritual profit for the good of your
soul: and fail not also to draw from your reading some good point in
particular, which may incite you to the holy practice of piety; standing ever
most carefully upon your guard against it is greatest enemy, that pernicious
Sloth; which once getting root in your heart, it will endanger the greatest
virtue in your soul. This dangerous vice of spiritual sloth, and teadious
unwillingness to all exercise of virtue, I will endeavor to destroy by the
ensuing article

Of spiritual Sloth, and Indenotion.
THis vice is properly a languishing of the soul; a dullness of the mind, and
an vnpleasingnesse of the will toward all spiritual devotion, which declines
us from pious exercises, and makes us negligent and unwilling to the practice
of virtue, it inclines us to give over our accustomed prayers; or at least to
perform them but very negligently, and only by halues.

The great danger of this sin is sufficiently declared by those words of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 7. the tree which bears not good fruit shall be cut
down, and cast into the fire; and it is never so predominant, as upon these
festival, and consecrated days to Gods glory, and our own souls greatest
good. Against which Capital vice and source of so much sin; our sovereign
remedy must be to have recourse to God by frequent and earnest prayer; that he
vouchsafe to enkindle in our hearts the ardent flame of devotion, and the true
fervor of Piety.

Observe punctually the accustomed times for your prayer, so far as
conueniency will permit. Quitt not your former usual holy exercises, though
they seem never so barren and dry: yea though your fancy does persuade, that
they nothing avail you; yet be but faithfully patient with true humble
perseverance, and God will at last not fail to bestow both comfort, and his
holy blessing upon you.

It is also a great help against this spiritual Sloth, and indeuotion, to
read the lives of Saints; and to consider attentively therein, the great
fervor and devotion wherewith they served God. And above all it might
abundantly suffice to cure our sinful sloth, by considering the incessant,
and most painful labors, which JESUS CHRIST, the eternal Son of God did
take for our Example, and salvation; he spending frequently whole nights in
prayer to his heavenly Father in our behalf: what wearisome iourneis through
several Provinces made he to instruct, and to cure the infirm, both in body
and soul. It may well confound us also to consider with what faithful
alacrity the Apostles made their continual pilgrimage about the world to plant
the holy Gospel for the salvation of souls, and with what cheerful constancy
they gave their lives for the glory of God. Finally by what other way have so
many glorious Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins obtained their immortal crown
of Bliss; but by conqueringe sloathfull sensuality in the common combat
against flesh and blood; whereby this dangerous enemy, (Spiritual sloth, and
indeuotion) being overcome, Gods holy will commands, and our corrupt nature is
sweetly subdued; and then takes pleasure to obey.

Hitherto, having in first place proposed Gods divine Presence, and true purity
of intention, as the two eyes whereby to direct all our actions to their happy
end: the next was; how we ought to regulate all our actions, from our rising,
until that we go to bed: after which I showed how God was to be honored by
Prayer, by sacrifice, and by the practice of other principal virtues; and
lastly by the right observance of the Sabbath, and other festival and fasting
days. It therefore now remaynes, that the next Rule should be to regulate both
in general, and particular our Conversation; which is so over spreeding a
tree, as it extendes unto all the rest of our actions, by the multiplicity of
its several branches; whereof some being superfluous, others defective, and
many very hurtful and vicious: therefore a particular instruction is here
necessary, to teach us how rightly to rule and cultiuate this unruly plant;
which, by Gods helping grace, shall be by

THE SIXTH RVLE. Regulating our Conversation, as well in general, as in
particular; and recommending to us what is laudable therein; and dissuading
from what is vicious.
MAN being by nature a sociable creature; must needs be pleased with
conversation and society; God having given him understanding to learn, and
interiourly to conceive; as also speech exteriourly to communicate the same
unto others; and therefore we see that he has not imparted to all men equally
the same perfections, and talents; but some to one, and some to an other; to
the end that by a mutual communication, they might help one an other; as he
also shows by the very fruits of the earth which are differently produced,
according to the several Clymats of the world: that by a mutual exchange (as
need should require) Men might be forced to understand the dependence which one
has of the other; and thereby be induced to mutual love and assistance.
Conversation therefore being ordained by God, as natural to man; the right use
of it, is both necessary, and very laudable, and only the abuse thereof to be
avoided; which being the task here undertaken by this present Rule; let us
examine wherein it is most subject to fail: and endeavor to apply some good
remedy thereunto. For which I can conceive no better way; then first briefly to
declare, what is required for a true laudable Conversation. Then secondly to
show how it may be obtained: and lastly to make appear in particular, wherein
it is both sinful, and vicious.

What conditions are required for a laudable, and true Christian Conversation?
Converse ye worthy of the Gospel of CHRIST (says the Apostle: Phil. 1. our
Conversation must be answerable unto the spirit and Gospel of JESUS CHRIST:
that is, holy, humble, mild, pure, affecting eternal things, and despising
temporal; aiming at the Imitation of our most perfect and holy original, the
Incarnate Son of God: who being our form and true model; our Conversation
ought to be drawn thereby, as coppies in imitation of his, the best we can.
Our Conversation (says holy Sales) must be modest, without affectation; free,
without austerity; sweet and pleasant, without ostentation, gentle without
contradiction, except to good purpose, and with great modesty. Finally it must
be sweet, modest, and mild in words, and behaueour; avoiding all vehemence,
and choler, sharpness, bitterness, vanity, insolency, and rudeness; which
may be displeasing or troublesome to any: as also, all immodest, or unseemly
discourse; all imperious gestes, and tone of command must be avoided, they
being offensive to others in company, as is also all melancholy or distasteful
sadness; we must use affable and courteous carriage toward all: yielding, and
accommodating our selves unto others (says S, Ambros.) with moderation in
command; with affability in discourse; with respect, and ciuility in words;
with patience in harkning without interrupting; with modesty and good grace,
and with a cheerful countenance All which has incredible power to draw and
gain the hearts and love of men: for sweetness, good grace, and civil
affability are as the flowers of a true virtuous Conversation and they set it
out with so pleasing a luster, and produce so great fruit of edification
thereby; as it is most admirable to be read of S. Lucian that blessed Martyr;
whose winning and attractiue power was so very great in his outward modesty,
comely comportment, and good grace in his conversation; as the very sight
thereof had force to move the persecuting Pagans to embrace the Christian
Faith: and Maximian the cruel Tyrant (who put him to death) understanding with
great admiration, what had happened; he desired, out of vain curiosity, to
behold the man: but fearing too much influence of so powerful an object to
conquer his malice, and to command his affection to the Cath. Faith: he caused
a curtin to be drawn; that lookeing confidently through the same, he might
satiate himself with the aspect of that blessed Man: as you may read at large
in Surius. January the 17.

You behold in this comely mirror of true modesty, it is power in Conversation
to gain the hearts of all people; how grateful it is to God, and his Angels,
and how much it is honored by men; as may well also appear in what we read
of S. Bernard, who by his example of this virtue had brought his Religious to
so perfect imitation; as Pope Eugenius, and his Cardinals coming to
Claraualle; they could not abstain from pouring out many tears of
consolation, to behold the very exterior carriage, and so edifying a
comportment amongst his religious brethren.

In sum, true Christian and laudable Conversation, is a mean betwixt two
extremes; neither inclining to the one of a mere secular iollity, nor yet
bending to the other of an imprudent austerity; but rather (as best becomes the
testimony of a good conscience, and a true Christian, and modest liberty) it
must consist in the mean of a sweet, well-pleasing, and humble modesty; well
tempered with a cheerful countenance, and with affability of speech always
willing and ready to do what good we can for any; for the very manner of
doing a goodturne is frequently of much more power to gain love, then is the
thing it felfe which is done. And to conclude: true perfect, and right
Christian conversation must be answerable to the notion which is given by S.
Paul; by being an example to the faithful in our speech, and comportment; in
Charity, in faith, and in Chastity. 2. Tim. 4. with edification to all, but
chiefly to the enemies of the holy Cath. Church: having your Conversation good
amongst the gentiles (says S. Peter) an example in good works (adds S. Paul)
in integrity, irreprehensible; that he who is on the contrary part, may be
afraid, having no ill to say of you. 2. Tim. 7.

This is the conversation which JESUS CHRIST; and his Apostles require of us;
and which is ever to be accompanied with these 4. requisite circumstances.
First, with choice of good company 2. with a right intention. 3. with
innocence. And 4. with moderation: for by excess we are cloyed, eue^ with the
honny comb. Prou. 25.

Let finally all your discourse be well seasoned with prudence (says the
Apost. Coloss. 4.) that you may know, how, and with whom you are to converse,
and to comport your self with every one according to their talent, and
several condition; whereby accommodating your self unto all, you may keep
charity with all, and become grateful and pleasing unto every one. To
conclude: the best conversation in this world, is that which most resembles
what is amongst the Saints in Heaven; which only consists in praising, and
glorifiing God. Psalm. 149.

The means, and best expedient to obtain true Christian and laudable
Conversation.
BY the premises you understand what conditions are required for a laudable
and virtuous Conversation; but because it is not so much the knowledge, as the
possession of what we know, which makes us happy; therefore you may here expect
some good expedient for gaining the practice of such a conversation. Wherein
for your satisfaction, I conceive no humane means more powerful to beget in
Man a virtuous and grateful Conversation; then to converse with such persons,
as frame theirs according to the former conditions; for they are to us as a
true lookeing-glasse; wherein beholding our defects, we are moved by a
wholesome confusion both to hate, and to amend them. This is so well experienced
a truth, and so truly consonant to reason; as thereupon that common proverb is
well grounded which says: tell me what company thou keep, and I will tell
thee what thou art. Yea the holy Ghost assures us, that who walks with the
wise, shall be wise but the friend of fools shall be made like. Prou. 13.

The exceeding great power which conversation, and company keeping has to make
not only deep impression in the heart; but even to change the strongest
inclinations of nature it self, most manifestly appears, not only in Men, but
also in brute, and the savage beasts: as is plain to be seen in the ravenous
woolfe, and in the fierce and cruel Lion; both which by the company, and
continual habitation with men, become gentle and very familiar. And therefore
if company and society have so conquering a force upon natures of so quite a
different kind: how much more powerful must it needs be, to work upon a
subject of the selfsame nature, wherein, by reason of a Sympathy and
nearenesse of condition, mutual impressions are made with far greater
facility. And this experience daily teaches us, since we see the great good
which is gained by frequenting virtuous and civil company; and on the
contrary, daily sadd examples make but too manifest, how extremely dangerous
it is to frequent persons of deboist and sinful conversation; and what a
multitude of unhappy souls perish eternally thereby: for it strikes their
souls with a mortal infection more pestilent, and contagious, then is the
greatest plague.

O Parents be ye therefore very careful with whom your children converse;
and take no less heed to the example which you your selves shall give them:
for your comportment being their Rule; if that be virtuous; it will give them
undoubtedly a much better impression to virtue, then any verbal instructions:
for to virtue (says Seneca) the way by example is short; but by words it is
very long: and we believe our eyes, much rather then our ears; which gave S.
Gregory good cause to call Example, a living lesson, because it is perswasiue,
above all the rest.

This great power of persuasion had S. Austin our Apostle, and his fellow
brethren, by their virtuous life and Conversation in that happy work of
converting our first English Auncesters from Paganism to the Cath. Faith: our
Chronicles mentioning that it was their holy life, and religious behaueour
which first disposed King Ethelbert to a good opinion of that Religion, which
had taught them the practice of so great Charity and contempt of all worldly
commodities: which pious opinion of the holy Cath. Faith, being soon after
perfected in him by Gods divine grace; he became a most zealous good Christian,
and endeauored all he could to promote throughout his Kingdom, the blessed
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

To this good means of example for gaining a virtuous Conversation, you must
also adioyne a great vigilancie over all passionate motions which may happen in
the unexpected, and exasperating occasions of that day; wherein foreseeing the
danger; you may in quiet peace and mildenes, more easily prevent the malice,
both of your ghostly, and worldly enemies.

2. It will be of great importance, that we propose to our selves, as a
Pattern, some Person in particular, who is endued with this perfect
Conversation: go to Campagnia, and imitate Paulin, said S. Aug. as giving
counsel to some who desired to advance themselves in this perfection. But our
chief Pattern, and best Model which we are principally to imitate (as near
as we can) is the conversation of our divine Original, the eternal Word
Incarnate, here conuersing upon earth with so great mildness and hnmblenesse
of heart amongst Men. This is the lesson he so expressly recommended to us to
learn of him: Math. 11. where it is to be observed that he ioynes these two
virtues, Mildness, and Humility together; because they cannot well be
separated; Humility being properly the interior sweetness of the mind; as is
Mildness the exterior expression of the same: the former is grounded in a
true Christian heart, and the latter dwells upon his contenance; which having
its dependence upon an humble heart; no Choler can make impressio^ in such a
countenance; nor any sign of anger can rest upon that eye: no complaint can
be hard from that mouth, nor any bitterness from such a tongue: no schowling
frown appears in that brow, but all is sweet and amiable both to God, and Man.

You have seen what conditions are required for a virtuous and laudable
Conversation; as also the best expedient whereby to obtain the same. It now
follows in good method, that I declare which are the vicious branches most
destructive to Christian conversation; that they first being cut off, and
separated; our conversation may become, grateful both to God and Man, and
produce in our souls most blessed fruit for Eternity.

But to prevent in the beginning a common objection, wherewith the enemies of
all holy Conversation endeauourto possess the sensual Libertins and thereby
to deterr them from embracing it: we must here first observe how they would
have all to believe, that honest recreation, and civil mirth are incompatible
with this virtuous and laudable Conversation; then which nothing is mote false,
as by what here follows will very plainly appear.

Civil Mirth, and cheerful Alacrity, are well beseeming true Christian
Conversation.
ALthough alacrity in Conversation, cheerfulness in countenance, and mirth in
fitting recreation are exceeding commendable, and by no means to be excluded
from true Christian conversation: yet the Devil, and his impious instruments
would make us believe, that virtue, and mirth, piety, and cheerful
recreatio^, can by no means be associated together; which is a most malicious
falsity; for God commanding his children to serve him with, joy. Ps. 99.
forbids all sadness, and Melancholy; yea mirth with a pure intention may be
meritorious, as well as our prayer.

Blessed Sales (that great Father of spirituality in his time) had a most
pleasant and winning sweetness both in his words, and behave our. S. Antonie
had so very cheerful a countenance, as in a multitude he was easy to be
known, even by such as had never seen him before. Yea Palladius recompts that
one might have beheld those holy Fathers of the Desert, by their only outward
aspect, to have manifested abundantly the inward purity of their happy souls;
and to have enjoyed upon Earth far greater felicity, then the whole world had
been able to afford them; no melancholy heuing power to ceise upon their hearts,
which were so truly united to God himself. This makes them truly joyful, and
their faces cheerful like to the Saints, Indith. 16. By all which we now see
that Saints have not sadd, nor melancholy, or pensive countenances; but
joyful, cheerful, and merry, as become their happy consciences. And by this,
I hope, you sufficiently perceive, that cheerefulnes in aspect, and a pleasant
countenance do well accord with true virtuous Conversation.

And now that innocent harmeles mirth, and grateful alacrity, is nowayse
unbeseeming the same, neither examples, reason, or authority can be wanting to
make manifest so apparent a truth: no for true piety and right Christian
devotion exclude not affability, nor do they hinder fit recreation or honest
and innocent mirth, (wherein modesty refraynes all vicious excess) but much
rather require the same; for a cheerful alacrity, with a pleasant modesty, is
most commendable; and frequently gains much more upon sinners, for their
amendment; then too severe, or a rigidly composed conversation; which being so
austere, would become unpleasing; yea cause auersion, and but discredit true
devotion and piety; which is sweet, pleasing, cheerful, and full of content;
and thereby becomes attractiue, and is neither tedious, nor difficult.

Many Saints have been of this pleasant humor and full of innocent and
pleasing iestes in their discourse. S. Greg. Nazianze records of those two
great Saints, and most illustrious Prelates. S. Basil, and S. Martin, that they
so seasoned their Conversation with pleasant and grateful speeches, as they
were able thereby to have dissipated the darkest cloud of melancholy from the
most dejected heart: the happy effects of which grateful alacrity, the said S.
Basil having well observed by experience; it gave him just occasion to wish
that other holy persons would also mix their Conversation with the like
innocent, and true spiritual mirth: wherein that most renowned Heroes of our
Cuntrye Sr. Th. More, in all his Conversation did excel in facetious innocent
mirth, which even sweetens devotion, and by it undoubtedly, many souls have
been gained to God, as well as by serious exhortations, and the strongest
discourse. S. Ignatius of Loyola was also far from severity herein: nor did he
approve in his brethren the practice of too rigidly a composed Conversation,
which much more probably, may terrify men's minds, then gain their souls.
Many Saints have been of a pleasant, and iocund humor, and yet of interior
great virtue and perfection. Yea undoubtedly (and even experience makes it
manifest) that a good word of devotion being delivered with a cheerful
countenance, and with an open and friendly heart, it penetrates the soul, as
does a note of harmonious music, the ear; and taking by that means a true
possession of the heart, it works strong effects in producing good practices of
virtue; supposing (as it is ever to be understood) that the ieastes be always
religiously modest, and the intention good; it being unlawful in all
Conversation, and discourse whatsoever, to use either scurrilous, or uncivil
words, and much less profane, or irreligious ieastes: or finally so carelessly
to let loose the raines of temperance to unfitting liberty; as to forget
thereby Gods divine Presence, or due reverence thereunto, Briefly nothing ought
to be said, or done in such Conversation, which may be unbeseeming, either the
modesty, decency, Person, time, or place. And now true Christian Conversation
thus iustifi'd against the former calumnies: it remains that I also show

The lawfulness of moderate recreation in gaming, and fitting sports: and
wherein the abuse of them consists.
WHilst God by so miraculous favors conducted the Israelits into the fruitful
land of Promise, there wanted not malicious Spies, who by the many false
reports which they made of the unwholesome air; badd qualities of the country,
and of the barbarous fiercenesle of the Inhabitants, so terrified all the rest
of their brethren; as had it not been for faithful Calib, and Iosue (who
manifestly refuted the falsity of their calumnious reports) they would rather
have returned to their Egiptian captivity, then exposed he^selues to such
insufferable difficulties as they were made to conceive. Number. 13. The Devil
and his instruments have ever, in the self same manner, endeavored to
persuade the world, that in a religious, and virtuous life, there is nothing
but deep sadness, and melancholy to be found; no mirth, nor any alacrity to
be enjoyed; no other exercise but prayer, fasting, hare-cloth, and continual
solitude; whereby those persons who addict themselves to devotion, must needs
become (say they) peevish, stupid, and verse infirm. And upon this false
persuasion; they endeavor to make men to fly both their example, and company.

But to show both the malice, and great ignorance whereupon they ground this
false calumny of Devotion, and of a virtuous life; it may suffice to show, how
both S. Thomas and Aristotle, and with them generally all Divines agree; that
to use honest and fitting recreation, is an act of the virtue which they call
Eutrapelia, and may properly be interpreted, Alacrity; or Mirth, which is not
only laudable, but also necessary for Man; whose vigor, and spirits being but
limited and very weak; it is impossible for him to be so continually busied
in serious occupations, but of necessity he must have both ease and relaxation,
whereby to refresh and give new strength to his spirits by this virtue of
Eutrapelia, or fit recreation; which virtue consists in the mediocrity,
betwixt these two extremes; of an excess in retyrement from all fitting
diuertisement and company, on the one side: and of spending unworthily our
whole time in idle pastimes and play, on the other: but this middle way, is both
lawdable, and very necessary for all such as aspire to a virtuous life, after
the usual mean.

2. Even reason it self conuinces the necessity of this fitting recreation.
For as man's body requires sleep, meat, and repose, whereby to repair his
decayed forces: so likewise his spirits have no less need by some cherefull
relaxation to be refreshed and restored. This is verified by the practice of
that great Evangelist S. John; who recreated himself with a partridge; whereat
a certain huntsman tataking scandal; was instructed by the same S. John, how
needful that innocent relaxation was for regayning new force to be employed in
the service of God. This is that holy intention which makes our recreation
meritorious, as well as our Prayer; and which God by the mouth of his Royal
Prophet has so frequently recommended to us; that we should recreate our
selves in him, with joy: Psalm. 67. rejoice ye in our Lord; and be will grant
you, your hearts desire. Psalm. 36. Now we truly rejoice in our Lord, when our
intention, with due circumstance, inuites us to serve him by those actions
which we do; and because we conceive it to be his blessed will: which being
the religious motive of our recreation, it needs must be meritorius, and
pleasing to God. In which sense it is that K. David bids us to serve God in
joy. Ps. 99. As truly we have great cause; seeing that we enjoy this happy
means to sanctify all our actions at so easy a rate. Give therefore this
great value, by a good intention, to all your lawful and fitting pleasures:
rest not in giving satisfaction merely to nature; but raise it to that higher
motive of Gods divine will and pleasure; whereby you may recreate your self in
this assured joy; that it will produce you hapy fruit for Eternity.

Yet for all this, as there is nothing in the world but may easily be viciated
by man's abuse; so also recreation, which of it self is indifferent, (and
rightly used, is an act of the aforesaid virtue) escapes not to be frequently
blemished by vicious circumstances, with the foul stayne of sin: which the
better to avoid, take these ensuing aduertisements.

What particular abuses in Recreation are principally to be avoided?
FOr better preventing the great harm which so usually happens to our souls,
by the sinful abuse of Recreation; we must here first observe; that it ought
to be used with discreet moderation; not making it our chief employment, nor
preferring it abusiuely before the affairs which either Justice, Charity, or
Religion may require at our hands; nor spending more time therein, then both
Prudence, and Reason will allow; least we expose our selves to that shameful
reproach, which divine wisdom has pronounced against them, who make their
life but a mere pastime, and play. wisd. 15. And neglecting their other
obligations; they spend whole nights and days in gaming; and pervert thereby
the true end of all right Recreation; which is but to refresh our wearied
spirits by some necessary pastyme: and not to weaken them the more, as those
people do, who turn recreation into toyling vexation; and play into pain,
both of body and soul; as at last they will be likely to find, when rendering
their account to God; they must make satisfaction for many great sins,
occasioned by their disordered gaming, besides the loss of their precious time,
and temporal means; both which were lent them by God for a far worthier end.
O how many Priests will be deeply condemned upon this very schore, for
neglecting their Church-duties and other obleiging offices! How many Masters
and Mistresses, who abandoning the due care of their families, by their excess
in play, and other pastimes, bring total ruyn upon their estates, and children
I How many Physicians, permit their poor patients to perish, whilst their
inordinate gaming gives them no leisure, either to study their diseases, or to
assist them in due time! What satisfaction will the negligent and careless
Advocate be able to render to their sorrowful Clyents, who are reduced to ruyn
and despair for loosing their subsistence, and so just a cause, by their fault
and negligence; who might have procured them due justice and equity; had they
but taken more leisure for it from their play? It is the like with any Prince
or Prelate, and with all other conditions whatsoever, who by excess in gaming
neglect the charge which God, and their place requires at their hands.

In the next place the sum is here also to be considered which we hazard in
play, since it must be always moderated according to our condition and means;
and never amount to such a quantity, as to disable us to perform what either
due debt, or fit maintenance of family may justly require at our hands, both
which by excess, and too deep play, may very probably be hindered; to the
great wrong of creditors, to the desolation of wife and children, and finally
io the restless torment of a guilty conscience which permits neither content,
nor repose.

It is lastly to be observed that gaming, or fit Recreation, is not here
blamed, that being indifferent in it self, yea laudable with a right and
moderate use; the excess and great abuse of it is only reproved in them, who
spend their whole time and thoughts upon play: neglecting what concerns both
their spiritual and temporal obligations, and give free scope to their
Passion therein. From whence proceeds swearing, cursing, and quarrels, yea and
frequently their final perdition both in body and soul. And ought this to be
called Recreation and play!

Thus much concerning both the use, as also the abuse of Recreation, upon
occasion of the connection which it has with human Conversation: and to
proceed with order in the aforesaid Rule for regulating also in other occasions
our Conversation: I will in the next place speak likewise of the usual abuse
in eating and drinkeing and what comportment is to be used at the table: for
which take this aduertisment

Concerning Temperance: and our comportment at the table.
Our body being given us by God, as a servant to assist the soul in her
operations for Beatitude: we are bound to nourish it: yet so as it may be
without all prejudice to that our happy end. We are therefore to be careful
that under pretext of satisfing the necessity of nature, we satiate not the
sensual appetite thereof: but rather by a virtuous moderation in diet, enable
our body to perform the functions which God requires at our hands; and by that
means, to sanctify even our corporal food: for virtue (says S. Basil)
consists not in eating, or not eating; but in the intention wherewith we eat.
Our corporal and natural actions are indifferent of their own nature; yet by
applying them to a good, or bad end, they take the quality, either of virtue,
or vice: and therefore, whether you eat, or drink, (says S. Paul) or do
any other thing, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.

And truly who barely considers the meere-action of feeding, may well be moved
to great humility thereby: since it is but an imperfection, and troublesome
defect, of nature, forcing man to leave the noble exercises of higher powers in
his soul (whereby he conuerseth with God, and his Angels) to spend time and
cost in supplying this his natural infirmity, wherein he resembles only the
brute, and unreasonable beasts; and whereof the vain delight is no longer
enjoyed, then whilst the tongue is turning it in the mouth; for the wine is no
sooner swallowed, but it is delight is past; Joel. 2. O how unworthy then of a
rational, and Christian soul is it to offend God for so base a content; or to
hazard her beatitude upon so small an enioyment: especially if we consider that
very meat, (be it never so dainty, costly, and pleasing to our taste) is no
sooner chewed, and sent down the throat, but it becomes most loathsome, and
abominable to behold, as experience will force us to confess; when by any
infirmity we find our selves obliged to ease our stomakes of what we had eaten
but immediately before.

These and the like reflections made Job, and many other virtuous people, even
to sigh before their meals; wherein notwithstanding mere sensual men (like
very beasts) place so great content and pleasure, that by sinful excess
they of tentymes most grievously offend, and endanger the loss of their
souls: becoming also by surfeit and drunkenness much worse then the brutest
beasts, and wholly incapable of the noblest functions of Man.

Now besides this great cuill of Intemperance, by surfeiting, and drunkenness,
considered in quality of sin: it is also a great enemy to the life of Man,
far more dying by it (as Solomon assures) then by the sword, and whereas
eating and drinking is ordained by God to preserve, and prolonge our life;
sensual persons abuse it to the contrary, when they strive not to govern, nor
moderate their disordenate appetite, nor to subdue it to the Rule of Reason.
And for this very cause it is, that rarely a glu^ton lives long: or if some
one chance so to do, yet his body will be made subject to so many
infirmities, as he will be forced to confess, that he pays dear interest for
all the pleasure of his former excess, and gluttony.

S. Augustine may be an admirable example for us in this virtue of temperance:
who tells us that God had taught him so to moderate the taking of his food
(and even his affection thereunto) as one takes physic, which is with that
considerate moderation, as he would not exceed the proportion conceived
necessary for his health. But this must be done without all pensive
scrupulosity, or unpleasing sadness, which (according to the Royal Prophet)
is to be banished from the table of the Just, where in the sight of God, they
must rejoice with alacrity. Psalm. 67. All quarrels must there be laid aside,
and detracting discourse of the absent; employing rather all our thoughts, and
conversation in praise and grateful thankfulness to God; who gives meat in
due time, and opning his hand, the fille every creature with blessing. Ps. 144.

In danger of excess, you may do well to call to mind the bitter gall and
vinagre given to our blessed Savior when he wanted refreshment, by reason of
his great thirst upon the Cross, and to remember the great and virtuous
abstinence of his chiefest Saints. Raise firmly your heart to God, and rectify
your intention in eating; that thereby you may be the more able to serve him.
Say with a holy Eiaculation from the interior of your heart: O when shall I
feed upon the happy food of Angels in eternal Bliss; upon that beatificall
vision in company of his glorious Saints and Angels without end! And by this
means you may feed spiritually your soul, as corporally you do your body;
and your very refection may be made thereby as pleasing to God, as the saying
your prayers.

Being now set down at the table with a sharp and hungry appetite; make some
little reflection thereupon: as considering with how small an appetite, or
desire, you usually feed your soul by prayer, or by the practice of virtue;
which notwithstanding ought to be much more pleasing to us, then the daintiest
feast.

Let the memory of Gods divine Presence be a bridle to our unruly appetite;
let it also refrain us from all unfitting, and detracting discourses; for our
corporal refection by this means may be made as profitable to the soul, as
it is necessary for the body: it being taken by us, not for pleasure, and
delight; but only as the remedy which natural necessity requires at our hands.

Be not too curious, singular, or hard to be pleased in your diet; since it
little imports whether the sensual, and greedy appetite be content, or no.
Moreover, what good sign can it be, that we truly love God, and are willing to
suffer for his sake; if we cannot overcome our selves, and sensuality, in so
small a matter; as not to be able to endure some little unpleasing morsel of
meat; which also being speedily to become so loathsome and foul an excrement,
what imports it (says S. Hierome) of what matter it be made. It was the saying
of a holy Man, to check thereby himself, when be found his taste disgusted with
some ill relishing meat: how must they be content (said he) who would be glad
of a hard, and unsavory crust of the coursest bread for all their cheer; and
thouart not content, nor grateful to God for such variety of good, and costly
meat; which by the sweat of other men's brows is so plentifully prepared for
thy table? Take occasion to confound your self thereat; and command that some
part of it may, (in satisfaction) be reserved for the poor, and sick.

Call also to mind, that it is your mortal Enemy which you pamper: and
therefore be very wary that you make him not too strong for you, by putting a
dangerous weapon into his hand, whereby he may work your destruction. He is
now your slave, but will soon become your Master, if you pamper him too
daintely. Satan having ouerthrown man, and all his posterity by this
temptation of gluttony, continues daily to assault us with the selfsame
battery: he knowing well, that if he can get us once but to place our affection
upon this excess of sensual Riot, he shall afterward very easily divert us
from all other chief occupations, which most concern the health of our soul.

Make good reflection, and ponder well at your meal (especially if at a feast)
how many pledges you have there of Gods fatherly bounty, goodness, and great
love to you: they being as many as there be sever all dishes of meat upon the
table: and how many harmless creatures have lost their lives, that you might
feed upon them. O suffer not at such a time so gracious and loving a Lord to be
offended, either by scurrility, detraction, surfeits, or by any kind of
profaneness. Call often to mind what will shortly become of that frail
flesh, which is now so daintely fed: when with Job we shall say to corruption:
thou art my Father, my mother, and Sister to worms. Job. 17.

Finally to avoid this dangerous excess, by moderating the vicious sensuality
of our unruly appetite, whereby we are so greatly prejudiced; we must make
serious, and frequent reflections upon Gods divine presence, which is a bridle
both to our greedy appetite, and petulant tongue, Psalm. 67 Our eating must be
accompanied also with a pure intention of nourishing our body, to the end it
may be enabled for the better service of God, by assisting our soul in
exercising her actions of virtue: and above all; let our refection be taken, in
honor and homage of the refection which JESUS CHRIST here used upon Earth
amongst men; that by the infinitt merits thereof, ours may be so sanctified, as
that we offend him not thereby: for by this means, and by a serious reflection
upon the premises, our corporal nourishment will become pleasing to God, and
meritorious of eternal reward.

You have bard what conditions are required for a virtuous conuertion; as also
what fitting comportment ought to be observed by us: as well at recreation in
Company, as at the table. It remains that I also show the defectiuenesse of
several other parts of our Conversation; that by foreseeing the danger of
their harm, we may avoid the great prejudice which they usually cause, both
in body and soul. Of this sort of vicious actions, (proceeding from an ill
regulated Conversation) are principally these, whereof (as most harmefull) I
intend briefly to speak; to wit: Detraction, Rash-iudgment, Obloquie,
Choler, Contention, Iearing, Mocking, profane Mirth, vain Singularity vicious
Loquacity, and disorder by the tongue. Of all which now here briefly in order.
And to beginn with the first

Of Detraction, Rash-iudgment, and Obloquie, with aduertisements and good
motives to avoid them in our Conversation.
DEtraction, or Obloquieis, when we speak ill of any person in his absence,
thereby diminishing his reputation, and the good opinion which had been
formerly conceived of him, by those to whom the detractor speaks. This is an
usual vice in Conversation; and more souls perish by it, then by any other
sin. Granada thinks that half the world are damned for it; and S. Bernard
says that nothing administers more matter to the fire of Hell, then
Detraction. Many are very careful to fly most part of other sins, who yet
make little scruple of this. Most are too forward to say what they hear, or
see; and others are as content to give both willing care; and conntenance
thereunto; but as the Detractor carries the Devil in his mouth (says S.
Bernard) so he who harkneth to it, carrie's him in his ear. Few rightly
confess this sin, or conceive due sorrow for it, whereby to gain their
pardon of God; and fewer make due satifaction to their neighbor for the wrong,
by repayring it. This made wise Solomon to cry out: who will give a guard to my
mouth, and a sure seal to my lips, that I fall not by them, and my tongue
destroy me. Eccl. 22. for the tongue of a murmurer is worse then Hell, which
only hurts the wicked, and those who deserve it: but the tongue of a murmurer
hurts both the good and bad; yea most spite it has against the good and
virtuous.

The enormity of this sin is known by the greatness of the harm which it
procures to our Neighbor; and the good whereof it depriues us, is the measure
of that harm: Now it is declared by the holy Ghost, that the reputation, and
good-name, where of the detractor bereaues us, surpasses all worldly treasure;
and therefore he commands us carefully to preserve it; have care of a good
name; for this shall be more permanent to thee, then a thousand treasures,
precious and great. Eccles. 41. And therefore to prejudice the good name, and
reputation of our neighbor is a far greater wrong, then to take away his
life, or goods, and consequently, as we would not be accounted thieves, or
murderers; so we ought carefully to avoid this dangerous crime; whereby we
become both the one, and the other in the highest degree; by robbing our
neighbor of his good-name (which surpasses all worldly wealth) and by a
double murder committed with one, and and the self same act of detraction; for
thereby we both spiritually kill our own soul, and destroy the moral life
also of our neighbors reputation, which is so very dear to him. And
therefore without restitution of this honor, so unjustly prejudiced by
detraction, neither absolution, nor salvation can be expected: and how hard a
soar that is to heal, which is made by detraction; is experienced by any, who
have but endeauored to make that difficult cure, in repairing so great a wrong.
And moreover it is a great injustice, and breach of charity, rashly to account
a man vicious for his former vice: for he may be amended, and have obtained
grace. Holy Magdalen had been a great sinner, and long continued in that
unhappy state; but yet she was become Chiist's fauorit, when the rash Pharifie
proclaimed her to be a sinful woman; Luke. 7. The other was no less sinsully
mistaken, when he made so uncharitable a judgment of that humble Publican of
the Gospel; for he was then iustifi'd, though immediately before he had been a
noted sinner: Luke. 18. Ananias who esteemed S. Paul to be a fierce and cruel
persecutor; was told from God, that he was then become a holy, and chosen
vessel. Act. 9.

By all which we are sufficiently admonished to take heed of rash judgment; and
very carefully to abstain from detracting censures; for Man's will often
changes and as of a great Saint, one may become as great a sinner; so also the
contrary may fall out. Moreover the great injustice of rash-iudgment is very
manifest; for, who art thou (says S. Paul) that iudgest an other man's servant?
to his Ma^ster he stands or falls; his Lord is to judge him, to whom he must
render an account of his actions; and why then presume we to usurp that office
which belongs only to him, before whose dreadful Tribunal we all must
appear. Romans 11. And it is here well to be observed, that though the ill
reports of an other may be true, yet if the sin be secret, and unknown; it
would be great detraction to reveal it to them who know it not; for although
the secret crime have wounded the sinners soul before God, yet it has not
deprived him of his good name, and reputation in the opinion of Men.

It would be therefore much more Charity, and to far better purpose, by due
fraternall correction (when ocasion requires it) to acquaint the offender in
the spirit of lenity with his fault; and not by detraction in absence, to hurt
greatly both himself and his neighbor; and yet to cause no amendment thereby
at all.

Be very careful also to permit no blaming discourses of such persons whom
you least affect, or who have aniewaise disobleiged you; for detraction will
there easily slipp in; whilst others by flattery speak ill of them; and you as
contented to give ear thereunto. In such occasions endeavor to turn by that
discourse the best you can; considering that if for such little faults those
persons are so much to be blamed; what then might we our selves deserve, if all
the great crimes, whereof God sees us guilty, were laid open to Men. Let us
eleuate interiorly our hearts, and crave humbly his divine grace for the
amendment of our own great faults; which being so very many, we have small
cause to busy our selves in looking after those of our neighbor: and yet
quite to the contrary, none usually do look more narrowly into other Men's
faults and lives, then they who make least account of their own; nor do any
so severely examine the actions of others, as those who are most licentious,
and have least care to amend what belongs to themselves. Be therefore very
careful to avoid all detraction in your own discourse, and discreetly
endeavor to prevent it in others: at least seem not well pleased thereat; or
retire your self discreetly, and with the least offense you can from the
company.

Avoid as much as may be, all discourse about public, and state affairs;
experience well teaching us, that through a seeming zeal of the common good,
we are precipitately push't on to rash judgment, and beyond the due respect we
owe to sovereign powers, and to their chief Ministers; whom oftentimes we
notoriously iniure, as also our own souls; and stand thereby by engaged to
much more satisfaction, then we can well conceive which way to acquitt.

Finally speak evil of none, but your-selfe; neither busy your mind with
other Men's faults; but much rather about the mending of your own; and if by
some detracting calumny you shall be injured; I recommende to you the virtuous
moderation of that morally divine Plato, well deserving to be imitated by any
good Christian herein: who once being told by his friend of a notorious
detraction, whereby his Enemy had greatly prejudiced his good name; he made
this modest and very lawdable reply: I will endeavor to live in such sort
(says he) as the world shall not believe that to be true which he has
reported of me.

To conclude, if you hear any speak ill of their neighbor, say with a holy
Man in the like occasion: O how much are we bound to God for his grace, if we
be not much worse our selves! And therefore who well knows but himself, will
never speak ill of an other; but rather abhor Detraction, as an infectious
poison to all good Conversation; for which the precedent discourse now
sufficing, the next shall be

Against Ieering, Scoffing, and all profane discourse.
THe next near adjoining vicious branch to Detraction, and Rash-iudgment, is
Ieering, and uncivil discourse; which being so common, and very hurtful to
all humane Conversation, I will endeavor briefly to give you here a character
of this vice; whereby beholding it is sinful deformity, you may the more be
moved to detest the same.

And for the better understanding hereof; it is to be observed that there be
two sorts of evil Iesters, or Ieerers. The first are such as mock and scoff
at holy things, and make but a jest of our Faith, or Religion; of Sacraments,
Ceremonies, and preaching etc.: yea they profanely sport, and make mirth with
the sacred Scripture it self. Of these the Prophet Hieremy much complained,
chapter 20. saying; that the word of God (which he preached) was made but a jest,
and laughter. Of this sort are such, as ieering, and laughing will say: God is
an honest good Man, and will not be so hard to please. The Devil is not so
black, as they paint him, Heaven is great, there will be place enough for us
all. These and suchlike sacrilegious scoffs, and mocks are most odious to God
(says the holy proverb, c. 1.) and his many dreadful punishments, as
likewise his angry and most fearful threats to deride them also at the
doubtful hour of their death, ought to be a sufficient warning for their
speedy amendment; as may be seen in this sadd example (well deserving a flood
of bitter tears) related by Doctor Sanders in his Schism of England
concerning K. Henry the eight; where he attributes the deplorable destruction
of Catholic Religion (as a maine cause, amongst the rest) to those profane,
and sacrilegious scoffings, and blasphemous ieasts of Sir Francis Bryan, the
Kings bosom friend, and of the Bullins race; who thus in nature of a pleasant
scoffing ieaster, labored to please the Kings licentious and luxurious humor,
by pernicious scoffs, and ieares at all things which were sacred in the Church.
One amongst many others (not the least for impiety) was this; when being
demanded by the wanton King, what manner of sin it was, to lie with the
daughter, after he had abused the mother? it was just the same (quoth this
wicked Bryan) as first having eaten the hen, to feed afte wards upon her
chicken: at which the King very lowdely laughing: ha Bryan (said he) and art
thou not rightly indeed my infernal Vicar! For so his accustomed blasphemous
ieasting to the King had given him generally that name: and after this he was
commonly called by all; the Kings Vicar. of Hell.

By these sacrilegious and pernicious Ieeres he so fedd the Kings vicious
humor, as he also freed his libidinous, and sinful mind from all remorse; so
that by little and little, his voluptuous heart became void of all scruple for
his most horrid sacriledges; which though this irreligious Sycophant, by his
deriding scoffs, had made now to seem ridiculous to the King; yet we have felt
their sadd effects, and have had leisure above sixcore years to deplore them;
and the unfortunate King much more; who being come unto the very point of his
unhappy death; he called for a cupp of white wine; and as taking his last
farewell of that his most impious fauorit; he dolefully pronounced those
disparing words: O Bryan all is lost! and so immediately dyed: leaving thereby
for our instruction a sufficient warning against scoffing, and all manner of
jesting at holy things.

The other sort of evil iesters, are such as scoff and Ieere at the defects
of other Men; as did those ungracious children at the Prophet Elizeus for his
bald head; whom God presently revenged by wild bears, who devoured them every
one. 4. Kings. 2. This scoffing and ieering is very usual at natural
defects: as at want of wit, want of comeliness, of riches, or some corporal
sense etc.

Others much more sinfully mock at devotion and virtue: calling Piety,
Hipocrisy, Patience, Simplicity and Cowardlinesse, a good Confcience, they call
Scrupulosity. Affability, silliness: and finally there is no virtue which has
not by them it is taunt, and ieere: for the simplicity of the just man is
scorned (says Job. c. 12. but let them beware in good time, and not be
deceived; for God will not be long mocked by them, (says S. Paul) and Michol,
K. David's wife, experienced her just punishment by a perpetual disgrace of
sterility, for ieering and deriding that holy King, when she beheld him in
great humility meanly clothed, dancing, and playing music up pona harp
before the Ark of God 2. Kin. 6.

But some will tell you that they mean no harm; it being only for merriment
sake. Yet such laughter is not to be approved, since it resembles that of
Apes; who seem most to laugh; when they are ready to bire: yea such laughter
is oftentimes much more pernicious then the greatest injuries; and the
damnation of these ieering scoffers at virtue, is undoubtedly very great; for
they draw multitudes from their piouspurposes, and good-life, by reason of
their quips, and ieeres; which oftentimes have more force amongst young people,
then the greatest persecution would have had, they much more fearing to be
confounded by those ieering wits; then to suffer torments at a Tyrants hand.
And thus these impious scoffers, both neglecting all virtue themselves, and
deterring also others from the practice thereof, are doubly guilty of a great
crime. We must not therefore mock, nor gibe at any person whatsoever: for it
is but great simplicity (says the Bishop of Geneua) if we think we may mock
or scoff at any, who will not hate us for is. S. Tho. of Aquine being asked
what was the best mark whereby to know a right virtuous and spiritual man, If
you observe (answered he) a Man much given to ieering and gibing in discourse;
and to take pleasure in silly and childish sopperies, either in his talk, or
behaueour; esteem him no spiritual person, although he should do miracles:
because (says S. Thomas) his virtue is without connection; he being seemingly
serious at some exercise of piety; and yet so light and defective soon after
in other occasions.

The precedent discourses of Detraction, Profane talk, and scoffing, do
sufficiently manifest those great abuses in Conversation to proceed principally
from the ill government of our tongue. And because there are yet several
others of the selfsame nature whereof I am to speak; it will be most proper
in the next place to represent to you in particular the great harm of
Loquacity: that seeing the danger thereof, we may by due moderation of our
tongue, endeavor as well to remedy these abuses, whereof I have already
spoken; as also to prevent the others, which are here immediately to follow
this present discourse

Of vicious Loquacny; and the much harm caused by the ill gouerument of our
tongue.
THe great mischief, and many dangerous evils which proceed from this
pernicious vice are to be seen at large in the 5. chapter of S. James. And to
prevent them, the holy Ghost in very many places of the sacred Scripture
exhorts us to have a special watch and guard over our tongue; for who keeps
it: keeps his soul; but who is unadvised to speak, shall feel evils: Prou.
13. No savage, nor enraged beast can be so cruelly mischievous, as is the
tongue; for they c^n only tear in pieces, and destroy the body; but an
unbridled tongue assaults the soul, and depriues it self of the life of grace
by the mortal wound of sin. The Royal Prophet well she weth his great fear
of this cruel beasts breakeing loose, when he said; Psalm 140. Set o Lord a
watch to my mouth, and a door round about my lips. And what necessity there
is of shutting up, and close keeping in this unruly rebel, the great Author of
nature, God himself, has sufficiently admonished us by enclosing it within a
double fence, of teeth, and li^pes; which also are most usually to be shutt;
who having also given us two eyes, two ears, two hands, and but one only
tongue; does sufficiently instruct us thereby, that we ought to speak but
little; and to hear, see, and do far more. The wise Man was anciently
called, a Man of four ears; signifiing that he harkned much, and spoke
little; which is a quality observed in the wisest men: as on the contrary,
experience makes it manifest; that who greatly abound in words, are ever
barren in wisdoome; like as trees which produce most leaves have usually but
little fruit. So children, and simple people talk and prattle most; because
they want judgment and reason whereby to rule and moderate there tongue; which
the wiser sort enjoying, they are much more silent: for the prudent man, before
he speaks, considers many things (says S. Ambros.) as first; that which he
is to say, and to whom he speaks; where he speaks, and to what end: for
herein it is that the holy Ghost has putt the difference betwixt the wise Man
and a fool (that a fool says all which comes to his mind, but a wise man
speaks only what he has well considered. Eccl. 21. We must take much more
content in harkning to others, then in speaking our solues, for by hearing
others, is gained knowledge, and wisedoome; but much talking is followed by
repentance. The reason is evident; for who speaks much, he considers and
ponders but little; and therefore must needs commit many errors by talking.
Finally it is the spirit of all treuth which tells us (and experience
manifest's it to be true) that where there is much talk, there it ever great
scarcity, and barennesse (he means both of judgment, and wit) Prou. 14. and
yet vanity, and desire of esteem, still itching at the tipp of the tongue,
requires much force and violence to contain it within due moderation; which
gave Solomon just cause to say; that Man's greatest labor was in his mouth,
Eccl. 6. Because his hardest difficulty is to govern his tongue. Socrates
allows two only seasons wherein it is proper to speak: the one, when we
speak that which we well understand. The other, when it is needful, or very
convenient to speak; and that at all other times, it argues wisdom to be
silent; and want thereof, to be forward in talk: for when we find a coffer
without a lock; it is a great presumption that it has no treasure within; and
empty vessels and shallow rivers make ever the greatest noise.

By all which we may now clearly see how much it imports us, to govern our
tongue, the holy Ghost assuring us that both life and death are in the power of
the tongue; Prou. 12. that is, both our salvation and damnation (says S. lo.
Chrysostom) depend thereupon. And therefore several of the ancient Saints
considering well the great danger of sinning by the tongue; they have spent
their whole lives in laboring to govern, that dangerous and unruly instrument:
the right order ring whereof, imports our human actions no less; then right
ruling the stern, does a shipp; which though but small in bulk; yet as the
skillful Pilot guides by it the greatest vessel through the most boisterous
storm; so likewise a prudent and virtuous Man, by Reason, and the fear of God
(keeping a strong guard upon his tongue) preserues his soul from danger of
being ship wrack't by sin in the fury of unquiet passions, raised by
injuries, or by any cross encounter whatsoever.

These being part of the bad effects proceeding from vicious loquacity; to
which many more might be adjoined, which experience teaches them to their
cost, who are much given to this great defect in their Conversation: I will
speak in the next place of an other vicious branch, which sprouts from the
former, and is principally nourished by the same: I mean the ungrateful vice

Of Boasting Ostentation, and vain conceit of our selves.
SElfe-praise is ungrateful to God and Man; let an other praise thee and not
thy own mouth (says the holy proverb. c. 27.) and what is more offensive
amongst Men, then a vain braging boaster of his own worth, and actions; who
though he seeks honor and esteem thereby; yet usually he pourchases but
scorn and contempt. Quarrels and many other great mischeefs commonly
accompany a vain braging and boasting proud humor; which proceeding from an
inward pride, must needs be greatly prejudicial to our souls; as being
directly opposite to Humility, which is the foundation of all true virtue. I
deny not but that worth, and true merit well deserves to be praised; yet so,
as who enioyes the gift, ought to give the whole glory to God; who is both the
Author, and owner. 1. Tim. 1. and therefore it is sinful to glory in any
thing, as our own, for it is not he who praises himself, that is approved,
but whom God does commend. 2. Cor. 10. Yea none are less virtuous, then such
as desire most to be so esteemed. This sinful Folly of Self-esteeme, is
sufficiently decryed in the Example of that boasting Pharisie in the Gospel;
who presumptuously glorying in his own good works, and rashly censuring and
dispising his poor neighbor; was most justly condemned by JESUS CHRIST
himself; whilst that humble Publican, by the repentant acknowledgment of his
sin, was iustifi'd in the self-same time, and place Luke. 18.

It is also to be observed, that ordinarily (as in the former example appears)
the greatest vanters, are usually dispisers of all other Men; whereby they
raise incensed enemies, who both contemn and laugh them to scorn: whereas if
by humble modesty they would refrain their vanting braggs of the good gifts
which they sometimes enjoy above other Men; their abilities would be highly
commended, and themselves much honored for the same: for experience makes it
manifest, that the humble minded man, whilst he thinks better of all others,
then himself; he will be both loved and esteemed by all; whereas the proud Man
preferring himself before all others, will be hated and contemned by every
one. The best means therefore to obtain true honor and esteem, is to
pourchace them by good works, as CHRIST himself has taught us: Joan. 8. Leit
my works be judge (says he) the works which I do, sufficiently give
testimony of me; nor boast ye (said our Savior to the proud Jews. Joan. 8.)
in that you are children of Abraham; but let your glory be, to imitate his
goodworkes; least proouing degenerate children of so noble a Parent, in steed
of the glory you seek; you find confusion: for true merit will never want
praise; but all pride is despised, as the true mother of sin. Vain boasting
is the eldest daughter of Pride, and increases her wicked race; by producing
that common and pernicious vice in Conversation; whereof I will now next
treat, by the name

Of Contention, and Debate.
COntention, Contradiction, and Debare, being so very obuious in our discourse
and Conversation; and for that usually they geeatly ^ea^en both friendship, and
true charity; these following aduertisments are here proposed for the better
preventing of so pernicious an evil.

And to this end; it may first be observed as a good mark, and sure sign
which wise Solomon gives us, whereby to know a wise man from a fool; that a
fool will engage himself in many quarrels, and provoke others also to the
same: whereas the wise man, on the contrary, appeases them by meek and gentle
words. S. Augustine most lively and truly expresses this mere frivolous verbal
encounter, and obstinate contestation in dispute, saying, that to contest in
words is not to regard so much how error may be discovered by treuth: but
rather how thy own opinion, and saying may be preferred before that of an
other person.

To avoid this contentious Debate, first we may observe; that it is directlly
contrary to the very end it self of all good Conversation: which ought to
nourish true friend ship, and mutual amity, for the more solace and comfort of
each other, amongst the many tedious trubles of this present life, whereas on
the contrary, by these wrangling contentions, and ungrateful debate, many
offensive words, and injurious taunts; yea affronts with much contempt
sometimes, and dispising expressions, are uttered with no small signs of
auersion and ill will, and thereby love and friendship is greatly weakened, which
should rather have been increased and confirmed in true Charity, by Company
and Conversation. S. Paul his earnest dissuasion of all Christians from this
pernicious vice, and spirit of Contention, is of great force and efficacy:
Phil. 2. If there be any consolation in CHRIST (says he) etc. accomplish ye
my joy by your agreement withone an other, in love, mutual Charity, and
consent: Do nothing for vanity, but esteeming, and preferring in true Humility
others before your selves; regard not so much your own content and interest,
as the good and fitting satisfaction of your neighbor. Thus the blessed
Apostle. In which words are contained a most sovereign and powerful Antidore
against all contentious debate, and which is able to give a perfect cure to
that ungrateful spirit, if we obtain but grace to make happy use thereof.

It is also to be observed: that it is a very great victory, to permit our
selves to be overcome in this contentious combat of wrangling words; it being
the game of Ganapierde, wherein the winner must loose: nor ought we to think
it dishonor to yeald to a contentious Man; since we are assured by the holy
Ghost; that it is honor to fly contention; Piou. 20. And we avoid thereby,
both much scandal, and sin Eccl. 28. Yea, a man's wisdom is known by his
patience says the holy proverb. and, the servant of our Lord must be mild
toward all 2. Tim. 2. If you knock two earthen potts one against the other,
you undoubtedly will break them both; but stricke them against wool, or any
soft yealding substance, and neither of them will receive any harm: so to a
meek and patient man; harsh, or cholerike speeches, will make no breach or
quarrel; for the one yealding, the other will be confounded, or at least
appeased; and most unfortunate truly is that victory (says S. Bernard) wherein
tryumphing over Men, thou sinkest under, and yealdest to vice.

Be not forward to contradict an other person in discourse (especially in
matters of small impor^ance) to show your own knowledge thereby: and if you be
contradicted by others, in the like occasion grow not angry thereat; but only
modestly, and mildely make answer, that, this is your opinion. Let charity be
there preferred before all frivolous disputes; and a holy amity with your
neighbor, before so vain a satisfaction: as is the seeking by too earnest
contestation to gain a frivolous advantage, and that also with prejudice to
your own soul: for who obstinately maintains his own opinion, shows
plainly that he preferres his judgment, and reason before that of others which
savors of much pride, and self esteem. But when just occasions requires that
you should oppose the opinion of an other; be then very wary that it be not
with any presumption, or heat: but having mildly proposed your reasons
modesty desist in all friendly affection; and rather framing your discourse in
favor of your opposer, taking all in good part, and so far only arguing the
matter in all quiet temper, as that without offense, the treuth may thereby
appear. Be exceeding wary that no passion nor earnestness in discourse,
move you to any chol ricke expressions, or injurious words: for besides the
offense to God; you will thereby weaken your own reputation, it being
generally esteemed much weakness of judgment, and want of good reason, to
defend a cause by passion and offensive language, whereas one only good reason
alleged for it, is of much more force with a prudent man, then a thousand
sharp biting, or injurious words.

Finally let your mind be never troubled nor disquieted for any contradiction
which shall be framed against your discourse, for such trouble, and disquiet,
would easily manifest the good opinion you conceive of your self; as if
forsooth, all your sayings were to be received as Oracles, and to be
contradicted by none. True Humility would soon correct this odious vice of
self esteem, and preventing all sinful contention, it would render our
Conuerfation meritorious, and very grateful, both to God, and Man.

You have seen sufficient motives to hate all Contention and Debate, and
carefully to anoyde the same in your Conversation. The ensuing discourse will
show what evil fruit proceeds from that pernicious root, which begets in our
souls the dangerous, and brutall vice

Of Anger, and Choler.
CHoler is a principal producti^^ of Pride, and so pernicious a Fassion, as
the very best of our actions are much endangered to be quite spoiled thereby,
since it not only depriues them of their merit, but also renders them sinful
and vicious. The holy Ghost by the mouth of S. James assures us that, the anger
of Man works not the justice of God c. 1. And daily experience makes it
manifest, that in Choler, no action is laudable: for who corrects his child in
anger, will exceed the due limitts of discretion; and to reprehend a servant in
that intemperate passion (yea though for a very just cause) is but to cast a
reproach upon him, and to provoke him to further disobedience. The same is to
be said of all other actions whatsoever, this unbridled humor corrupting, and
rendering them ungrateful to every one: and this brutall passion sometimes
possesses the mind so entirely, as what is impious and outrageous in it felfe,
being beheld (says S. Greg.) with these false spectacles of an inflamed anger;
appears to be just, and reasonable.

But the true folly of this ill governed Passion, is soon discovered, and
bringes much repentance, for the great harm which it causes, both to body and
soul: for servants not long able to endure so outrageous an humor in a
Master, they depart, and leave him alone. Children become dull, stupid, and
neglectfull of such a Father. The comfortless poor wife is bedewed with
perpetual tears. All friends abandon such Persons, since they are no more
sociable, neither is there more contentment to be found in their Conversation,
then in that of Savage beasts The violence of this dangerous passion is so
great, as it frequently breaks out into strange effects, which are as the
Symptoms of it. Behold a person in fury, and you will see his face red and
swelled, his eyes will be inflamed, his ears perform not their fu^ctio^, his
mouth foames, his heart pants, his tongue sta^mers, his voice is shrill and
ungrateful, his words inconsiderate: finally his whole body trembles as in a
fever. The force of fury, and rage has broken veins in some persons, stopped
urine in others, and diverse have dyed so daynely, in the hight of this passion.
All which you may see at large described by that great Father of the Church S.
Io. Chrysostom. orat ad pop. Antioch. Nor is there a more vrgratefull and
deformed object to behold (says he) thon a passionate, and angry man.

If then this bruish passion cause such pernicious effects exteriorly in the
body, what disorder may we well imagine that it also procures inwardly in the
soul, for having deprived her of judgment and reason, it then setts all on
fire, and fills her with sumes of distempered humors, and with much obscurity
and confusion; like one who abrusting the Master one of doors; setts fire on
the house, and burns himself within it.

This Passion of Anger, is a vice which the very light of nature in Pagans
has taught us to hate, and eschew: for it was most truly said by ^eneca; that
the Anger conceined for an injury, does much more harm, then the injury
receined And therefore he had good reason to say: that the end of our anger,
will be but the beginning of our repentance: and yet no angry man will
acknowledge (says S. Augustine) nor conceive his own anger unjust.

A good means to avoid the great harm of this unruly and pernicious passion,
is, to consider that it has four several stations, wherein it principally
appears in Man: in the heart, in the face; in the tongue, and in our deeds. If
now we perceive it to have already got possession in the first; we must use
all speedy diligence to hinder that it enter not into the second: but if it
have likewise gained entrance there; then let us at least endeavor, all we can
to keep strong hold and fortify our tongue against it; which if it is
outraging force, and fury shall in like manner conquour, yet let us labor with
all possible and faithful resistance to prevent the fourth, to the end that by
no means this brutall, and ourregious passion appear in deeds, and in actual
revenge, which God reserues wholly to himself, and most expressly forbids us to
be usurpers of that his most sovereign right. Romans 41.

An other good motive to suppress this choleric and angry humor, when any
offends us, will be, to consider seriously with our selves, how often, and how
grievously we offend our Lord, and loving Redeemer: who in steed of she wing
anger or revenge, he continually powers down his gifts, and great benefits
upon us: drawing us thereby to repentance, and to love him, that so we may be
capable of his eternal glory.

Consider this, and confound your self, if any passion of unruly Choler shall
transport you to impatience against your servant, or any other person for some
small offense. Remember how great an ingratitude it would be toward God, to
use with so little respect, those his creatures, which both in nature, and in
the end for which they were made, are equal with your self: who^ not
withstanding he has subjected to do you service though he might as well have
placed you in a far meaner condition, then they are. Reflect also upon your
self, and upon your own infirmities, and whither, if in their place, you
should not have been likely to have done much worse then they, with whom you
are so angry, and disconrent.

It is also very worthy of observation; that to be choleric and full of
Passion, is no sign of a generous courage, but rather of great weakness, and
want of true magnanimity of heart: for it is plain by experience, that sick,
and aged people are most subject (through the great dobility of their spirit)
to peevish Choler and Passion, whereas true courage, and a generous heart
conquereth, and subiecteth them to reason, and to the law of God.

Finally a man of a mild, sweet, and gentle conversation, is both honored,
and served with much love by all: but the cholerike and peeui^h person, is
generally both despised and hated of every one. herefore to conc^ude, the best
way to prevent this hurtful flame of Anger, is to extinguish it in the
beginning, and very first sparcle of the least affron thereof, which shall be
kindled in us: for if we once permit it to prevail; it will be very hard to
quench it though we would.

You have now seen the several infirmities of this diseased body of an ill
regulated Conversation: all which proceeding generally (more or less from the
corrupted humor of a soul infected with pride; the holy virtue of Humility
must be the Antidote, and sovereign cure of them all; as well, as of this one
more also, which I will not omit here briefly to adioyne to the rest; whereby
we may the better avoid that ill beseeming vice

Of vain, and affected singularity, or Curiosity; either in excess of
dressing, or in our behavior.
THis vain and affected singularity, must needs be vngrafull; in that we may
seem by it to prefer out own judgment before that of all others: and
although we may think that in being like nobody else, we become wiser then
other Men; yet we shall herein find our selves so far deceived; as on the
contrary, we shall be ce^sured by all of too much self-opinion, and pride. And
therefore, to be too exotike, or singular, either in behavior, or apparel, or
in any other action whatsoever; is unpleasing, and savors but of vanity and
self-esteeme: for it is truly said, that though fools bring up fashions yet
wise me^ will be obleiged to follow the^, it being co^me^dable prudence to
conform our selves to what custom (in an indifferent matter) has made to be
generally the practice of all: and by a civil condescendency to accommodate
our selves to an indifferent, and common practice; much rather, then to be
thought by our declyning it, to vnderualew all other men's judgments, by
preferring our own.

But I intend not here to advise you to a punctuality of observing all changes
in fashions: no; far is my thought from it: for some may be either so
immodest, or others so very extrauagant; as they are not to be used by any
prudent and virtuous person. Nor is it necessary for you to be amongst the
first in fashion, and mode; or to change immediately from one extreme to an
other: for as you ought not, on the one side, to be singular in your fashion;
so neither is it laudable, on the other, to be amongst the first, and in the
hight of that new guise: but let a civil, and prudent modesty be your Rule,
both for your cost, and fashion; remembering that we are admonished by the holy
Ghost, to avoid herein all vanity and excess, Eccles. 11. In apparel do not
glory at any time. For what can be more fondly vain; since apparel is but
the very badge of our greatest misery, and was ordayn'd only to cover our
deformed nakedness, and shame; together with other infirmities contracted by
our sin: and therefore to take pride in apparel, is as impertinent, as for a
beggar to glory in the base rags, wherewith he couers some foul and loathsome
ulcer.

Yet here it is to be observed; that by this sinful vanity in apparel, is
only to be understood the excess therein; either above the condition, or
means of the person: for rich attire, or costly ornaments were never unlawful
in themselves, but only in their abuse, as is manifest in that renowned Judith
c. 10. who putting off the garments of her widdow-hood, washed and anointed
her body with sweet oil; she plaited the hair of her head with curiosity,
and clothed her self with her garments of joy (which she had accustomed to
wear upon solemn festival days) she took rings, bracelets; lillies and
earings, and with all her ornaments she adorned her self; to whom our Lord
gave also much beauty; because that all this trimming was for no motive of
sensuality, but of virtue; and therefore her intention being good, it was
rendered grateful to God, and was blessed by him: as was also Queen Ester for
her like lawful industry; whereby she gained the goodgrace of K. Assuerus,
and obtained the preservation of her condemned Nation. c. 5. Chaste. Ruth is not
blamed, who being unmarried, amde use of sweet oils, and of costly attire,
thereby to render her self gracious to Boos, and soon after became his
lawful wife. chapter 3. By which examples it sufficiently appears, that rich
dressings, and costly attire, (being regulated by a good intention) in due
circumstance, and without scandal, or prejudice to any, ought nowayes to be
condemned; their ryotous excess is only to be blamed; that is, when they
exceed the quality, and condition of the persons who use them; for all ought
not to be equal in attire, but each one according to his several degree: the
Prince, the Gentleman, the Magistrate, and the Merchant, the Rich-man, and the
Peasant, all differently adorned, and within the limits of their calling in a
decent modesty, both well-beseeming, and distinguishing also their condition
from the rest: for rich silks are not for all sorts of people, nor is the
rusticke leather fit clothing for a King; comely neatenesse and fitting
decency is not to be blamed in any condition whatsoever; but rather much
neglect of it deserves reprehension.

What therefore in this vanity may most be blamable, is the immoderate
application, the excess, and great loss of time: which gave occasion to that
incomparable worthy of our nation Sr. Tho. More, to say; that many might gain
Heaven with half the pains they take in going to Hell. And he once beholding
a young Lady very industriously painful in dressing and trimming herself; O
Madame (said he) how unjustly will God deal with you, if he give you not Hell,
for which you take such extraordinary pains! But for Heaven these people
scarce find leisure to intertayne one serious good thought; for whilst their
whole industry is bent upon that vain outward bravery for the body, their
soul is left inwardly naked of its true ornament of virtue: and whlist by that
costly attire, they aim at much honor and esteem; they will be but hated of
their needy poor servants, and creditors, who greatly suffer for want of their
due pay. They will be cursed by the poor, who receive no relief in their
pressing necessities; and all other people will but scorn and despise their
great and sinful folly, for placing the chief affection of their heart, and
their principal employment, upon so unworthy an object, as is this mere
outward covering of a poor contemptible carcass, with so much pomp and
bravery; which by Augustus Caesar (though but a Pagan) was termed, with much
reason; the great stand art of Pride, and the very nest of Luxury.

To this sinful excess in apparel, is also frequently adjoined an affected
vanity, no less savoring of pride; and as worthily to be condemned as the
former, in all such as by painting, and black-patching, would endeavor to
chainge; or at least to better the proper handy-worke of God: and yet should
that divine workman so fix those their best contrived patches, as to remain
ever immovable, they would soon be ashamed to appear with such disguised
deformities; and all would then esteem them (as truly they are) but a mere
disfiguring of what they so vainly intended to beautify, and amend.

In stead of all which vain and sinful industry, the virtuous soul may much
more happily (by the help of a pure intention) adorn and beautify her self
with such ornaments of true virtue, as may render her most grateful in the
sight of God; if when putting on her garments, she humbly crave that her soul
may be adorned with the true charity of JESUS CHRIST. If when she makes use of
sweet powders; she endeavor to refresh the memory of man's base extraction
from dust, and to which he must return. Genesis 3. If when using any perfumes,
or sweet oils; she excite^ her soul to implore Gods grace; that by
imitation, she may run after the sweet odor of the blessed virtues of
JESUS CHRIST. Cant. 7. Finally if when beholding her self in a glass; she
implore divine grace, to behold the true state of her soul by a due examen of
Conscience; and by hearty Contrition to expiate, and to obtain pardon for her
sin.

I conclude this discourse in condemning likewise all inordenate affectation to
vain singularity, both in behaueour, and in all other actions; it being a vice
no less ungrateful then the rest, and seems yet to relish rather more of the
aforesaid vanity, and desire of esteem; whilst we so apparently strive to do
more then does well beseem us; either by oueracting, to excel all others; or
by imitating an other person out of some vain end, and flattery; like as we
read of Aristotle his scholars who affected stuttering, to resemble their
Master: and the disciples of Plato went crooked in the back, in imitation of
his imperfection. Others by soothing flattery, become no less ridiculous: as
were those Court-fauning clawbackes of the heretical Emperor Constantius
Copronimus (which surname was given him because he fowled the Font when he was
christened; and it well might seem to pronosticate his inclination to all
filth, both in body, and mind) who was so delighted in the smell of horsdung,
as he would usually be all besmeared with it: and his collogueing Courtiers, to
please the Emperor by imitation of that his most nasty fancy, did all strive,
who should most bedaube their best apparel with that bestiall perfume.

In fine vanity is the ground of both these errors in Conversation, and true
humble, and virtuous simplicity of heart is their cure, and will make their
Conversation very grateful both to God and man: whereas affectation, and
singularity makes them unpleasing to both.

Much more might be yet said of our Conversation, concerning both morality, and
virtue, which I rather remit to the prudent reflections of a virtuous soul upon
occurrant occasions: recommending only to her, that she keep a continual
fixed eye in all her chiefest actions upon the two former so frequently
mentioned good guides which are best able to regulate them, and to render her
Conversation most grateful to God: to wit, Purity of intention, and the
memory of Gods divine Presence. These two are most sovereign Antidots against
all kind of sin; and have power to make even our meanest actions meritorious
of a glorious reward in Heaven. Finally they being steered by these two guiding
poles to Eternity; and helped also by that prosperous gale of Gods divine
grace, you may conceive an humble confidence to sail securely through all the
dangerous storms of this mortal life; and at last to arrive at that
thrice-happy, and most secure port of eternal Beatitude.

You have heard what is required for a true Christian Conversation; as also
what is laudable, and what worthily to be blamed therein. It now only remains
that I propose to you a faithful guide, by whose unerring dictamen (if you
shall faithfully regulate your actions) you will be secure from all dangerous
error. This needful guide is (...)

The virtue of Prudence, most necessary for the right regulating a true
laudable, and Christian Conversation.
PRudence is a directing virtue to all our actions; and is no less needful to
them, then is the steerne to a shipp: yea it gives them their right course, as
does a by as to the bowl, to bring it to the mark. This great virtue of
Discretion is so generally necessary, as that all other virtues whatsoever,
require to be seasoned with it; yea, and without which, even the best of them
would become blameable and degenerate into vice; as S. Greg. and S. Bernard do
both affirm. This is the toarch which gives light to the obscurity of our
understanding, to the end it decline not from the right path of a just
moderation. It is the virtue most proper to Man; and to be destitute thereof,
is to fall into the rank of fools, and to be esteemed incapable of any
worthy employment, or office amongst Men: for who are destitute of Discretion,
resemble but mere brute and savage creatures; since by reason only we are
distinguished from them: and by Discretion (which is the operation thereof) we
are known to be rational Men.

The nature of this virtue consists in keeping a watchful eye over all our
actions; and so rightly to regulate them by true Christian Justice as to fly
sin, and to practice virtue in all we do: for Gods glory, and Beatitude
being our last and only end; true Prudence requires, that deliberately we do
no voluntary act which may be contrary thereunto.

That great Master of Morality, wise Seneca, gives us this prudent Maxim for
our Conversation: that we converse with friends, as if one day they were to be
our Enemies. And with our Enemies, as if they were assuredly to prove our
loving Friends: for Man's mind is unconstant (says Job. c. 14.) and what it
hates to day, it may love to morrow: and therefore, as in our disaffection we
must be very wary, neither to say, or do, what upon future friendship might
cause us confusion: so likewise we must be as prudently circumspect in our
love, and forbear to communicate in time of friendship, what by after
disaffection might cause us to repent. In fine true Prudence requires that we
so converse with all, as that we avoid the danger of all reproach, and
confusion from either friend or foe: for this is a heigh point of true Prudence
in so corrupted an Age, and wherein friendship is so fickle, and very hard to
be found amongst all sorts of men.

Many good dictamens of true Christian Prudence for a virtuous Conversation
might her be inserted; but breuity obleidges me to conclude them in this one,
for all the rest: that our Conversation ever tend with a pure Intention to the
glory of God, to the edification of our neighbor, and to the profit of our
own souls; in a holy conversation, and Godliness (says S. Peter) and that
it be in Heaven (says S. Paul. Phil 3.) yet so to be tempered with Prudence,
as that we carefully avoid all tedious importunity; which may be done by a
pleasant, and cheerful glancing now and then toward devotion, as fit
occasion may be offered; and taking opportunity from the great variety, and
different ends, and operations of these mortal creatures; we may sweetly raise
our hearts to gratitude, and admiration of the eternal Creator both of them and
us. By this means, God in all things will be honored, as S. Peter commands;
and we shall imitate the industrious Be, which out of all sorts of flowers
extracts that most pure sweet honey for her provision; whereby she afterward
subsists, as also does a religious soul upon the happy grace of God, which is
gained by the practice of those several acts of virtue; and is the happy price
whereby to pourchace glory in Eternity.

You have seen what is required for a true virtuous and Christian
Conversation; as also what ought to be avoided therein. It only remaynes, for
the final accomplishment of this Rule, as also for a further help to a
virtuous soul, desirous to put in practice what is required therein, that I
here finally show

What matter, or subject may be best: for entertayning this virtuous
Conversation, and holy discourse?
FIrst concerning the matter in general for our Conversation, no immodest nor
unseemly words must fall from our mouth (as the Apostle admonishes: Ephesians. 4.)
our discourse must be good; and profitable to the hearers, nor must any
uncleanness be so much as named (as becomes Saints) nor foolish talk, or
scurrility, etc. Ephesians. 3.

2. Our discourse must be answerable both to persons, time, and place; and
ought in all occasions to be good, or at least indifferent; that by a good
intention, it may be rectified, and made grateful to God.

3. It must be also suitable to the end of our present Conversation: for it
would be great imprudence to make preaching discourses in time for civil
recreation. S. Luis, and S. Charles Borromeus would permit no studious or
serious discourse immediately after meals; it being then a time to give some
relaxation to the mind by innocent, and cheerful pastyme or talk; and to do
otherwise is to mistake the very end of all honest recreation; wherein
familiar and dialoguelike discourse is only proper; and all earnest disputes,
or over serious conferences are very unseasonable in that occasion.

This being first observed concerning our couersatio^ in general; we may now
descend to particulars: and since it is most manifest that Conversation should
tend to perfection, and to the edification both of our selves and others; we
ought to frame all our discourse to that end.

To comply with this obligation, we shall find ample subject in the lives of
Saints; for they being happily arrived at that secure Port to which we tend; it
behooues us to follow their steps, as most secure guides; and diligently to
inform our selves of the manner of their conversation, and to make it the
model of ours. Frequenting good sermons, and spiritual lecture will likewise
afford plentiful matter to a virtuous soul, both for pious, and profitable
Conversation. Gods various, and wondrous works both in Heaven and Earth (for
the use of ungrateful Man) may also administer very ample and full scope at
all times and occasions to admire, and to discourse of his great power and
goodness. Other considerations may be; the innumerable miseries incident to
the frail nature of Man: the shortness of his life, and the great incertainty
of the same. The two different Eternities which depend upon this present fickle,
and so very doubtful a moment. What pain and punishment shall follow an ill
life, and what joy and reward is reserved for the Just. The negligence amongst
the most part of Christians to frame their lives according to Gods
commandments; and the little provision they make for Eternity, though that be
the one only, and necessary thing to which we ought to attend; and which so
particularly is recommended unto us all, by JESUS CHRIST, in the person of S.
Mary Magdalen; Luke. 10. The vanity, and folly of seekeing with so vehement an
application the honors, wealth, and deceiptfull pleasures of this world; for
the most unworthy pourchase whereof, many employ their whole time, thoughts,
and industry. The great hazard and pains to which Soldiers, Merchants,
Courtiers, and all worldlings expose themselves, for obtaining these vain, and
poor unworthy transitory things. The great beauty and pleasure of virtue, and
the only true solid worth and happiness which is to be found in the practice
thereof. The great deceiptfulnes, and misery in serving vice, or our
disordenate appetites, and unruly passions. The means how to attain to
virtue; and how to avoid vice. The Devils great malice, and diligence to draw
us to our eternal misery; and our good Angels care, and continual help to
assist us toward our endless Bliss. What, and how many sovereign means
are provided us by God, whereby to obtain that our final happiness, which we
so shamefully neglect, and most sinfully abuse.

Now from these so many several heads (or the like) we may easily gather
sufficient matter of good discourse, which God will not fail to suggest to a
willing soul desirous of his glory, and her own eternal good: Yea all our
Conversation may be rendered both pious meritorious and very profitable, nor
can we want conuincing arguments hereby to bless, and to adore the infinite
goodness and great mercy of God; as also to condemn our own ingratitude, and
sinful rebellion against so souneraigne a Lord, and most loving Redeemer.

Hitherto concerning Rules, whereby to regulate the actions of our life. I must
now finally conclude with one more, which may dispose us to a happy death. This
I shall (by Gods holy grace) endeavor to perform, by what shall here be said
in

THE SEVENTH RVLE. Showing the great necessity to prepare our selves for death
in time of health: with a profitable Exercise, by way of a spiritual Retreat,
serving for that end.
THIS is a point so mainely importing us, as but to fail therein, would
frustrate all our former pains. And therefore to prevent the danger of so
great an evil; the best expedient which I can recommende to you; is a careful
observance of these former Rules; it being manifest, that the most assured way
to dye well, is to live well; yea the one is but the Echo of the other: and
much folly it would be, to hope for a happy death; and yet to fly a good life,
whereof the other depends. Many will say with Balaam: o let me dye the death of
the Just, and be may end like unto theirs. Numb. 23. But they ought rather to
say: o let me live the life of the Just that my end maybe like unto theires. He
lives well who spendes his life in learning to dye well; and who learnes not
this is truly ignorant, though for all the rest, he be as wise as Plato, or as
learned as was Aristotle; who upon the point to dye, cried out: I entered into
this world in poverty; I lived therein with misery, and finally, I dye in
ignorance, of that (he meant) which most imported him to know; for he had not
learned the art of dying well; wherein the only true wisdom, and knowledge
does consist.

This happy, and most needful Art is best learned, by dying first in mind to
the world, before we can live rightly to God; yea we must dye very often in
mind, to dye once truly well.

This was the practice of holy S. Augustine, when he said: let me dye, to the
end I may not dye; he means, that by often conceiving himself as a dying man,
to make familiar, by frequent practice in the time of health, the exercises of
those necessary acts which are to be used at the time of our death: for who
learnes not in time of health to practice the holy acts of virtue, and to
resist the temptations most incident in that dangerous extremity; how shall he
do it well at his death; when the battle will be more furious, and he much
weaker to resist; yea by pain and other impediments, in time of sickness (and
chiefly when near to our end) we are many ways hindered from performing the
duty which we then ought to render unto God. And therefore it greatly imports
us, so to practice them in time of health; as if we were then actually at the
very point of our death: which being seriously, and frequently performed; it
will produce a true contempt of the world, and a holy disingagement from the
creatures thereof, and will also make the practice of those acts much more
easy to us at the time of our death.

This holy Exercise may best be made by way of these eight ensuing Meditations;
which you may take for the subject of a spiritual Retreat, for so many
days: or for half the time; as occasion, and your spiritual Director shall
best advise you. And for the method of your Meditations, you may use the same
which I formerly mentioned in B Sales. Part. 2. chap. 2. in his Introduction to
a devout life. The substance of this exercise, I have collected partly out of
the R. F. Eude a Missionary Priest; and a most pious Author: the which I
earnestly (yet once again) recommend, and very heartely exhort you to make
use thereof, once a year (at the least) And if your occasions will so permit,
no time is more proper for it, then the holy week.

The first Meditation.
Of submission, and Conformity to Gods divine will, concerning our death.
The Preparation. 1. Place your self in the Presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you with his grace. 3. And (which serves as a general advise for this,
and all the ensueing Meditations) you must endeavor so to behave your self
therein, as if they were to be your last. And therefore labor to procure such
interior affections in your soul, as ought to be wished, were you assured to
dye that present day.

Considerations.
FIrst here consider your self as present before your Sovereign Judge,
pronouncing that just sentence of death against you, in those words to Adam;
Genesis 1. (and in him against all other men ( dust thou art. and into dust thou
shall return. 2. With what infinite love, and profound humility, JESUS CHRIST
(that innocent, and immaculate lamb) did accept from wicked Pilate that cruel
sentence of a reproachful death upon the Cross; thereby to satisfye the
justice of his Eternal Father for our offenses.

In due honor and homage whereunto we must cheerfully submit our selves to
the just sentence of death; acknowledging that our grievous sins most justly
deserves it.

Affections, and Resolutions.
O Divine and loving Iesv; who being the source and fountain of all true life;
yet didst-vouchsafe to dye so painful a death for me! in humble and grateful
acknowledgment thereof, I accept from this instant with a willing heart, that
suffering state, which thy divine will has ordained me, in adoration of thy
sacred sufferings: as also in honor and union of that thy naked poverty, and
being so forsaken upon the Cross; I here now render my self to what want, or
misery soever thy heavenly justice, and holy pleasure have ordained for me, be
it by persecution, by calumny, scorn, confusion, or by any other injury, or
sufferance from any creature whatsoever: all which I humbly accept in
expiation of my sin; and yeald my self most willingly to suffer all pains
and infirmities, by thy divine will allotted me; my agonies, and death it
self. All which, and what else soever they be, I accept thereof in honor,
union, and adoration of thy most dolorous death, and cruel torments, for which
the Prophet Esa. so justly has called thee, a Man of sorrows. cap. 53. and I
most entirely submit my self to dye in true conformity to thy holy will; be it
without the comfort of my friends, or senses; that I dye this year, or this
day; this hour, or moment; where, or in what manner thy divine Providence
shall ordain; vouchsafe but o Lord, that my desire may ever be: thy will be
done, and that my heart accompany it with true contrition, and perseverance in
thy grace. This grant me dear IESV, for thy bitter Passion sake, and then let
death assault me in bed, or in the field: by lingering pain, or by sudden
accident; be it natural, or violent, honorable, orignominious: be it but thy
blessed pleasure, and welcome: yea Father, for so has it well pleased thee:
Luke. 10.

Grant Lord IESV, I beseech thee, that as thou vouchsafest to dye for the love
of me, so I may both live, and dye purely for the love of thee; and that
neither living, nor dying, I may ever any more offend thee. But that finally I
may breath fourth my soul in cheerful conformity to that most holy
obedience, wherewith thou did render thy blessed spirit upon the Cross into
thy Fathers hands.

O glorious Trinity, I wholly abandon my self unto thy heavenly will; vouchsafe
to dispose of me both in time, and Eternity to thy own greater honor and
glory.

The Conclusion
1. Give God thanks for the good resolutions, and affections which he has
given you. 2. Crave his grace to put them in execution. 3. Implore the
assistance of the Blessed Virgin, and holy Saints. Pater. Aue. Credo.

The second Meditation.
About making our last will, and Testament.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in Gods divine Presence. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you 3. Conceive your souueraine Judge, as thus calling upon you: render
an account of thy Baylifship: Luke 16.

Consideration.
A Will, or Testament, is only a protestation of justice, by which is given to
every one their due. The body, to the earth and worms: debts unto creditours:
the inheritance to lawful heirs: our alms to the poor; and our soul unto
God; to whom we being to render a most strict account for the use of all the
Talents which he has lent us, to be employed for the increase of his glory; as
also for every moment of our life; and for each thought, word, and deed
therein: O what a folly, and madness is it, to differ this important reckning
to the last day of our life; when the pain of our sickness; the fear of this
account, the weakness of our senses, and other powers, and finally the great
importunity of many, then ordinarily about private interests, will hardly
permit us to do any thing as we ought, either for the glory of God, or for
our own souls good, nor yet to our friends satisfaction: but frequently with
such confusion, and so very imperfectly; as we leave thereby occasion for
quarrels, and very much strife, causing breach of charity amongst our nearest
friends, when we are dead, and no small prejudice also to our souls.

To prevent all which great evils I conceive it a good expedient, that we in
time of health make use sometimes of this good Exercise, that in rendering
thereby familiar these holy Affections of a spiritual Testament; we may be
inspired also how to dispose a forehand in good time, of our temporal trust,
according to true justice, and piety.

Affections, and Resolutions.
Dear IESV, who in thy last Testament gave all entirely to me, dying poor
and naked upon the Cross for my Redemption; without reserving what might have
covered thy naked, and wounded body: yea all, and to the very last drop of thy
most precious blood. In humble gratitude whereof; I here bequeath to thee my
life, my death, my body, my soul, and all the powers and operations of them
both. And as the chiefest legacy which thou bequeathed'st to thy Apostles, was
that new Commandment of mutual love. John. 11.34 In honor, and homage of
which, I here humbly crave thy grace to fortify me in that holy virtue of
Charity; whereby I most cordially embrace, (in union of that thy most loving
Commandment) all against whomsoever my corrupt nature may, or ever has
conceived any auersion.

And as upon the Cross, thou there did reco^mend thy sacred Mother unto thy
beloved Apostle; John. 19. and, in him, us all unto her: so I here, Lord Iesv,
now reco^mend most humbly unto thee, all the necessities of thy dear Spouse,
our holy Mother, the Cath. Church; and of all my dearest friends, and greatest
enemies; to assist and protect them in all their necessities, both of body and
soul: and to bring us all finally to that eternal Bliss, there to praise, to
love, and to glorify thee for ever.

This Lord IESV, is my present will and Testament; which I here willingly sign
both with my heart, and hand. Vouchsafe thou to strengthen, and confirm the
same, by putting to it the seal of thy heavenly grace; that no sinful malice
may ever change this holy resolution.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good. Affections, and Resolutions. 2 Implore his grace
to make good use of them. 3. Crave Pardon for your negligence in Prayer. Pater.
Aue. Credo.

The third Meditation.
Of Confession, and Satisfaction which we ought to make to God for our sins.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in the presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you. 3. Conceive your self as a guilty criminel before your just and
Sovereign Judge.

Considerations.
FIrst calling to mind Gods innumerable benefits, and rendering him humble
tankes for the same: it is fitting in the next place to acknowledge our many
grievous offenses; and (craving most humbly Gods divine pardon) to resolve upon
due satisfaction for them. And to this end, it is very requisite to make a good
Confession; and that with more then ordinary diligence; and with as careful
preparation, as if it were to be our last: conceiving our selves, as if in the
case of K. Ezechias, when God sent the Prophet Esaie to warn him to prepare
for death: who presently thereupon be thought himself for the state of his
Conscience; and as one awakened at that message of death, he said: I will
recompt to thee all my years, in the bitterness of my soul. Isaie. 38. Do
you now the like, and prepare your self by true repentance for your offenses
past, with a firm purpose to amend: resolving to make restitution (if cause
require it) as also to depose all ill will and enmity; to put away all imminent
danger of mortal sin. And finally stir up your heart to true fervent
devotion, by these enfuing affections, and resolutions, or the like.

Affections, and Resolutions.
THou have created me, o God, to love and serve thee, who are most worthy of
all service and love. My obligation to thee is infinite; and yet how often, and
how grievously have I offended thee, by thought, word, and deed; by my
corporal senses, and by all the powers of my sinful soul: yea by the abuse
of those very creatures, which thou so carefully have ordained for my use!

Ah how enormous is my ingratitude, and infidelity! O my most dear Redeemer
IESV; I cast all these my detestable sins into that immense Ocean of mercy,
still flowing from thy most precious blood: purify me thereby, o Lord, and
confirm my present resolution, rather to dye, then by the like, to offend thee
any more.

O that my heart could melt into true sorrow, and grief, for my detestable
sin; and into tears of blood to wash away my heinous crimes? What cane I do
great God in reparation of so infinite a wrong, but only to offer unto thee that
inexhaustable treasure of the sacred Passion of thy divine Son JESUS; which I
here presentto the glorious Trinity in satisfaction, and expiation of all my
sins committed from the instant of my first use of reason, until this
present time. In union of which dear ransom, I here entyrely now give my
self to thee; I accept, and most willingly embrace all the pains, both in
body, and soul which thou have allotted me, either for this world, or the
next. Admit thereof, sweet Lord I beseech thee and of this my present
resolution.

The Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good Affections, and Resolutions. 2. Crave grace to put
them in execution. 3. Beg humbly pardon for all negligence, or irreuerence in
your prayer. Pater. Aue. Credo.

The fourth Meditation.
Of the holy Communion.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in the presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you. 3. Endeavor by internal fervent Acts of Faith, Hope, Charity,
and of other virtues, to prepare your nuptial garment, as an invited guest to
the solemn feast of the great King of Heaven and Earth.

Considerations.
THe holy Communion being a sovereign means, whereby we prepare our selves to
a happy death: it will be requisite to take one day in this Exercise to dispose
our selves with all due preparation and devotion to this holy action; and that
with as much care and diligence, as if it were to be our last, and at the
dreadful hour of death. The manner of this important Exercise may be taken
out of Granada his Memorial; or from some other good treatise concerning the
same. And in particular, endeavor to produce some fervent eiaculations from
your heart, of thanksgiving and love accompaniing them also with these ensuing
acts, or the like.

Acts of Oblation.
I Most humbly offer unto thee, dear IESV, this holy Communion, as if my last,
in thanksgiving for all the effects of thy divine love; and in particular,
for that thy great Charity in giving thy life, that I might live eternally.

Secondly in satisfaction for the dishonor which has been done by all the
sin committed from the beginning of the world, and which shall be till the
end.

Thirdly I entirely resign my self to thee, my dear Redeemer, in thankful
gratitude, for having given thus thy self to me, by this ineffable manner in
the most blessed Sacrament. I most humbly crave thy powerful intercession, o
immaculate Virgin mother, and glorious Queen of Heaven. Intercede also for me,
o ye beloved Apostles of JESUS, O happy Magdalen, S. Mary of Egypt, and all
ye glorious Saints; that I may partake of your humility, fervor, and love,
where with ye happily performed your last Communion of this celestial food.
Vouchsafe good Lord, that being united now to thee by grace; I may never more
be separated from thee by any mortal sin.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good Affections. 2. Crave grace to make good use of
them. 3. Beg humbly pardon for all your negligence in Prayer. Pater. Aue.
Credo.

The fifth Meditation.
Of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
Preparation. First place your self in Gods divine presence. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you with his grace. 3. Conceive your soul, and body now upon the point
of separation; and all worldly concernements at an end.

Consideration.
BEcause we are not certain of being in capacity to apply our selves to God,
when this Sacrament shall be given us; therefore it is very expedient here to
design one part of this exercise, whereby to render him that duty, which we
should then be obleiged to do. And by this means to prepare also our selves
aforehand, to make good use of this Sacrament, by the practice of these
following acts.

Affections and holy Acts of thanksgiving, and adoration.
O Loving IESV, I adore thee as the Author and institutor of this holy
Sacrament, and as the living source of all the grace therein contained; and in
all the other Sacraments, which thou have pourchased for us, by the effusion of
thy own most precious blood; and thereby have merited all the happy effects of
grace received by ungrateful Man. Grant me, o merciful Lord, the gracious
favor, to receive this needful Sacrament at the end of my life: or in case I
be deprived thereof, that my soul may then receive, by thy favorable
goodness, the grace which it should have had by this holy help of Extreme
Unction.

Lord IESV, who a little before thy bitter death, vouchsafed to receive that
grateful unction from holy Magdalen; as also by Joseph, and Nicodemus, when
they laid thy sacred body in the Sepulcher; grant that I receiving this holy
Sacrament, and my last unction, in honor and union of those acceptable
unctions; I may receive the divine unction of the holy Ghost in that measure of
heavenly grace, as shall be needful for my soul, in the last dreadful hour
of my death.

Endue me dear Lord with all ^^tt dispositions for the fruitful receiving of
this Sacrament: and work in me, I beseech thee, those happy effects of grace,
there signified by the exterior ceremonies thereof. Behold me prostrate at thy
feet, and before all thy celestial Citizens, humbly confessing the sins of
my whole life; and craving pardon with a repentant heart; wherewith I offer
here to thee in sacrifice, all my corporal senses, together with the
spiritual powers of my soul. Anoint me sweet IESV with the holy, and sacred
oil of thy divine grace and mercy: Accept in satisfaction I beseech thee, that
blessed use which thy sacred humanity, thy immaculate Mother, and all thy other
thrice happy Saints have made of all their said senses, and powers, in stead of
my ill use of them: and grant me thy grace hereafter to use them to thy greater
honor and glory.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good Affections, and Resolutions 2. Implore his grace
to put them in practice. 3. Crave pardon for your negligence in prayer. Pater.
Aue. Credo.

The sixth Meditation.
Of our agony, and hour of death.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in the presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you with his grace. 3. Conceive your self now speechless, ready to
expire; and upon the very point of separation from all worldly designs,
possessions. and friends for ever; immediately to appear at Gods dreadful
Judgment to give a most exact account of all the thoughts, words, and deeds of
your whole life. And thereupon to receive your final doom to an endless
Bliss, or misery.

Considerations.
1. COnsider how different are the thoughts of a dying Man, from those which he
has usually in time of health: and make a firm resolution to begin thence
forward to do that presently, which certainly you shall then wish to have done.

2. Consider this day, as if the last of your life; and therefore labor to
behave your self with diligence and devotion, to negotiate therein your
eternal salvation. And for this effect, you ought to apply all your thoughts,
and endeauours of this day, to contemplate, and adore IESVS-CHRIT, as if in the
last day, of his life in this world: and to do all your actions therein, with
the like disposition, and intention (the best you can) wherewith he
accomplished his last actions whilst he remained here upon Earth. Beseech him
to endue you with some proportion of the affections, and dispositions required
to dye in that spirit of divine love, of Patience, Charity, Humility, and
Conformity, wherewith he rendered up his blessed soul into the hands of his
heavenly Father upon the Cross.

Affections, and Resolutions.
LOrd IESV, I adore there in that very article of thy bitter death and agony;
in union whereof, together with that holy agony of thy dear Virgin Mother,
and of all thy blessed Saints; I here offer to thee my last expiring breath:
most humbly beseeching thee, that the article of my death may be blessed and
sanctified by this my true desire, and good intention of union unto thine, and
theirs; and that my life be sacrificed in those sacred flames of divine love,
wherein they have so happily ended theirs.

O immaculate Virgin Mother, O thou beloved disciple of our Lord; and thou, o
happy and repentant Magdalen; ye who had that special honor to accompany my
Lord JESUS at his dolorous death; and there to assist at the foot of the
Cross, whilst thereupon he paid the dear ransom of our Redemption;
vouchsafe ye also to assist me by your powerful intercession, in that last
passadge to my Eternity.

It would be also very expedient this day to read the Passion of
JESUS CHRIST; and the 17. chapter of S. John; which contaynes the last words,
and the prayers of JESUS CHRIST before he came to the Cross: as also to read
the prayers of the Church for an agonizing soul: for they are very pious and
efficacious. Nor do we know, whether at the day of our death we shall be able
to make use of any such preparation: let us therefore so read them now, as we
ought to read them then; and with the selfsame dispositions, and affections,
as if in that last article of our death.

Lord Iesv, for thy great mercy sake, grant me this happy grace, to consecrate
the final instant of my mortal life to the honor of that sanctified moment
wherein thou did expire upon the Cross, and that my last breath may yeald
fourth a fervent act of divine and pure love of thee, which may persevere with
my soul eternally.

This is, sweet Iesv, my true hearty desire, and firm resolution: confirm, and
so strengthen it, I beseech thee, in holy grace; as that by final
perseverance, I may perform it to thy glory, and my own eternal felicity.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good affections, and Resolutions. 2. Crave grace to put
them in execution. Beseech him to pardon your negligence in prayer. Pater. Aue.
Credo.

The seventh Meditation.
Of our particular judgment, at the hour of death.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in the presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you with his grace. 3. Reflect upon that joyful sentence: come ye
blessed etc. And upon the excessive horror of that other: Go ye cursed etc.
and prepare your self in time, by a good life, to avoid the same.

Considerations.
1. We must consider our selves now, as at the point of death; and
Jesus Christ, as if appearing to us in quality of our sovereign Judge, come to
pronounce our final sentence, to an eternal life, or death, without all
further appeal. Let us yeald to him, in quality thereof, all honor and
homage; laboring by true love, and repentance to renderhim propitious tovs,
against that dreadful hour: that hour, after which no moment more of time
will ever be given us: that deciding hour, which will determine us to joy or
misery for all Eternity. O let us therefore entertayne our most serious
thoughts, affections, and resolutions hereupon, whilst that both time, and
mercy is afforded for the same.

2. Consider the immaculate lamb, the Saint of Saints, and essential sanctity
it self, JESUS CHRIST infinitely far from all blemish of sin and yet laid
prostrate in a bloody agony before his heavenly Father in the garden: and
soon after at Pilats feet; there charged withal the sins of the world,
becomme the voluntary suerty, and the accepted caution for all sinners
whatsoever. And therefore it was; that the eternal Father did so severely
exercise his divine, and rigid justice upon that sacred Humanity, and made it
to undergo the judgment which was due to wicked Man: permitting his most
innocent and beloved son to be condemned to that reproachful death upon the
Cross. Which judgment he accepted with most perfect submission to his heavenly
Father; and ardent love to Man.

In honor, union, and adoration whereof; here prostrate your self, as at the
feet of JESUS CHRIST; and there acknowledge, and adore him as the sovereign
Judge, both of Men and Angels without appeal. Raise up your soul to true
love, and gratitude, by these ensueing Affections, or the like.

Affections, and Resolutions.
O Divine IESV, I honor thee in this thy particular coming to judge me at the
article of my death. And I here adore what thy eternal decree shall there
dispose of me. Enlighten me, I beseech thee, that I may so discover the
enormity of my sins; as I may behold them now in the self-same manner, as
they would appear to me at the hour of my death: to the end I may by true
repentance, and satisfaction, make here my happy peace, before I fall into the
final zeal of thy dreadful justice; when all time will be past for any
favor, or mercy.

I therefore now, detest from my very heart, and renounce for ever all my
finfull offenses: and at the sacred feet of thy divine mercy I resolve most
willingly to accept what punishment soever thy justice shall ordain me; nor
can I hope for any other means whereby to expiate my grievous sin, but
merely by thy mercy, and merits of thy most precious blood.

O merciful Redeemer, who did for my sake permit thy self to be ledd
bound, and in all disgraceful manner, to that profane tribunal of Pilate;
and there with all malice and scorn to be presented, and judged before him;
thou being thy self the supreme and sovereign judge, both of the living and
dead. Grant, I beseech thee, that all those indignities suffered for the love
of man (obtaining pardon for my sins) may graciously preserve me from that
unhappy number, who shall neither love, nor praise thee during their cursed
Eternity. And though most unworthy I be of this blessed effect of thy great
mercy; yet, behold o God our Protector, and look upon the face of thy Christ.
Psalm. 83. thy divine and only begotten Son, ^ eternal Father, being adiuged
to that dolorous death for my offense, may beg my pardon; and thereupon is
grounded all my hope and humble confidence.

O Mother of mercy, and faithful advocate of all who crave thy powerful
intercession, sacred Virgin, and Mother of God. O all ye blessed Angels, and
Saints of Paradise, vouchsafe ye to intercede for me unto the most glorious
Trinity, and offer up, I beseech ye, your holy sufferings for his sake, in
part of satisfaction for my sin: and pray ye for me, that he dealenot with
me according to the rigor of his justice; but rather answerably to the
multitude of his infinite mercy; to the end that I may love, and praise him with
you all, world without end.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your good Affections, and Resolutions. 2. Crave grace to put
them in execution. 3. Beseech him to pardon your negligences in prayer. Pater.
Aue. Credo.

The eight Meditation.
Of the state of our death, and burial.
Preparation. 1. Place your self in the presence of God. 2. Beseech him to
inspire you with his grace. 3. Conceive now your soul, and body separated. The
first to appear before Gods dreadful Tribunal, to render him a most rigid
account. The second now laid in the grave, to be food for worms; and being
reduced to most loathsome putrefaction; must there return to it is first
extraction, earth, and ashes.

Consideration.
COnsider, that as our blessed Savior JESUS has pleased to pass through all
the several states of human mortality; thereby to honor his eternal Father
in them all, and to sanctify them particularly for our greater good: so
likewise we ought to honor this our most loving Redeemer, in all the states
wherein we have been, or shall hereafter be.

And therefore having now adored him, as in the last instant of our life; by
dedicating it as a sacrifice to his honor and glory: it now follows that we
honor and adore him also in the state of our death wherein he himself
remained for three days space, all which may be done, as follows by these

Affections, and Resolutions.
O IESV eternal life, and the original source from whom all life does spring:
from whence proceeds it, that I thus behold thee brought under the dark shadow
of death, by that dolorous separation of thy divine body, and soul: and
thereby also separated from thy most sacred mother from thy dear Apostles,
Disciples, and all thy beloved friends: and this (on their parts also) with the
greatest, and most sensible grief to be imagined.

O divine and dear Lord; I adore, praise, and glorify thee herein. I offer to
thee all, the honor which in this state has been rendered to thee by thy
blessed Mother, by the penitent Magdalen, by all thy holy Apostles, Saints, and
Angels; and by all, which thy whole Church, both militant and triumphant does,
and shall ever render to thee for this thy infinitt love, and most profound
humility. In union of which blessed company, and in true honor and homage to
thy said sorrowful separation; I likewise offer, (most loving IESV) to thee,
that state, whereby one day I must by death be also separated both from friends
and kindred, and from all that, which in this world can aniewise be dear to me.

O IESV, in adoration of thy sacred death, and separation of thy body and
soul; I make thee now a most willing sacrifice of mine. I offer also unto thee
my burial in honor of thy three days lying buried in the monument: in due
adoration whereof, I here most cheerfully bequeath my body to the earth, there
to give worms their due; and, it being reduced into dust; I desire that each
several grain thereof may be as a tongue, and voice to praise, and glorify
continually thy holy burial, with all the other blessed Mysteries of our
Redemption; that so with thy kingly Prophet I might perpetually sing: all my
bones shall say; Lord, who is like to thee? Psalm. 34.

Most merciful, and loving Lord; destroy utterly in me I beseech thee, that
cursed life of the old Man, all wicked sin. Make me to dye perfectly to the
world, to my self, and to all whatsoever is not thee. Mortify so my eyes, my
ears, my tongue, my hands, my feet, my heart, and all the powers both of my
body and soul: that I may no more see, nor understand, nor speak, nor do,
nor love, nor think, nor will; nor use any other faculty, corporal or
spiritual of my body or soul, but according to thy holy will. Grant I may so
dye to my self; as that my life may be hid with CHRIST in God. Colos. 3. O
hide, and bury my tepidity and indeuotion in the fervor of thy divine love;
and all my other vices and imperfections, in thy perfections and virtues: that
as the earth consumes the corruption of the body; so may the sinful
imperfections of my soul, be consumed by the operations of thy heavenly grace
in me.

O most pure Virgin, and beloved Mother of my Lord JESUS CHRIST, vouchsafe me
thy powerful intercession, I beseech thee, that by my death and burial, I may
render due honor and homage to that his dolourous death, which did so deeply
pierce thy tender heart; and also to that doleful state in the grave, which
kept both thee, and all his dearest friends in three sadd mourning days for his
bewailed absence. O holy Angel, my faithful Guardian. Blessed S. Joseph. S.N.
and all ye glorious Saints, and Angels of Heaven, pray ye to God for me,
that I be strenghtned by his holy grace to comply with all my present good
purposes and desires of doing well. Obtain ye for me, by your powerful
intercession, that I may so serve, love, and obey him in this life; as that I
may enjoy praise and glorify him with you for all Eternity in the other.

Conclusion.
1. Thank God for your affections and Resolutions. 2. Crave grace to put them
in execution. 3. Beseech him to pardon your negligence in prayer. Pater. Aue.
Credo.

You have seen now the order of this needful preparation in health, whereby
to dispose your soul to a happy death. The reasons alleged convince it is much
conducing to that maine point whereon depends Eternity. The profit of which
anticipating Exercise was experienced by S. Gertrude: who testifies to us, that
she having once practiced it, our blessed Savior himself assured her, that
her devotion therein, was so very pleasing unto him; as he even then did
presently accept thereof for the hour of her death, as she desired.

It therefore now only remains (Christian, and dear Cath. reader) that I
conclude, exhorting you to make good use of this important Exercise, (as also
of all the former Rules) which though I doubt not but by your devout perusal,
will produce very pious affections and laudable resolutions in your soul: yet
you must be very careful not to rest only in them: they being but merely
helps and dispositions unto the true end, and fruit of holy prayer, which is
the accomplishment of the will of God, by mortifiing for his sake, our unruly
passions, and disordered affections, whereby our stubborn Will is made pliable
to virtue. And as the iron, first softened by fire, becomes so yealding to the
workmans hammer, as it may easily be fashioned to what form he desires: so I
do much confide, that this little treatise will prove a furnace of holy
devotion, so to inflame your heart with the fervor of true piety; as you will
find it very pliable to put in execution, those holy Affections, and good
purposes of your former devotion; wherein consists the very perfection of all
good prayer.

And to the end that you may reap in much more abundance this the happiest
treasure of true Christian sanctity; I cannot omit here finally to exhort you;
that when you desire (and fit opportunity shall inuit you) to make a
spiritual exercise upon these Meditations of a preparation to death: that
then, after your devotions upon each several Meditation, you also write down
your Resolutions, and best affections which moved you to such resolutions, as
you conceive most fitting to be observed for your future life and Conversation.
And having done the like in every Meditation, th^oughout the whole time of that
your spiritual Retreat; I then again as earnestly once more exhort you, to
draw from thence a prefixed Rule, which may serve you as a constant set order
for all your actions; and as a distribution also for your time, as may best
agree to your condition, and present occasions. All which you having with
freedom and confidence communicated to your ghostly Father, and had his advise
and approbation for your more securely proceeding with true prudence and virtue
therein: I would then wish you to observe it, as your Rule, with all convenient
punctuality.

And what now lastly I desire of you, is, that you please to accept in good
part this my ill polished work, drawn from some notes upon former
observations, as they then conduced to my own practice upon several
occasions. Your virtue, I hope, will make much better use of them, then I have
done, because the fault was mine, and not the Rule; which being right, it
cannot fail. And if such as use it, shall draw but the line of their
Conversation thereby, it must needs be right, both in the sight of God, and Man.

Finally my proposing this Rule to you, may prove I hope, not void of my own
proper interest; whilst by renewing my former reflections with some more
seriousness for your sake; a better impression may be made in my own soul,
to live my self hereafter with more conformity to these holy Rules, which I
here propose to you: and whereby (if we shall but truly regulate our future
lives and actions) we may humbly confide (Gods holy grace assisting us) that
they will rightly direct us through the perilous labyrinth of this mortal
life, unto the secure port of Eternal Felicity. For which, I once more, beg
heartily your prayers; and thereupon conclude with what blessed S. James the
Apostle recommendeth unto us. c. 5. that we pray one for an other; to the end
we may be saved: through the blessed meritts of his most dear Son JESUS; and
by the grace of the holy Ghost. Which God of his infinite mercy grant.

FINIS.
Ianuier 10. Anno Domini 1659.
Praised, and for ever glorified be the most sacred Trinity.
Courteous Reader, these devotions not being permitted to be printed at home;
no diligence in the Corrector was able to avoid the many faults which the
Printer (not understanding our language) must needs be very subject to commit.
His ignorance deserves pardon; and my pains your prayers; which I do heartily
crave; submitting entyrely all the rest to the correction of the holy Cath.
Church: and desire you to amend by these following corrections of the
principal faults, what you find most amiss in the book.

Errors in the Print.
p 20. l. 25 Christians cor, Christian Pa. 97. li. 16. sell cor. selves pa. 111.
l. 22. him cor. them pa. 130. li. 10. woe cor. no pa. 131. li. 1. leasing cor.
pleasing pa. 135. li. 26. hat cor. that pa. 141. li. 26. is cor. it pa. 157.
li. 25. and without cor. and as pa. 189. li. 25 light cor. right pa. 194. li.
2. or cor. for pa. 201. li. 2. it cor. it is pa. 204. li. 14. saying cor.
laying. pa. 212 li. 23. ccessary cor. accessory pa. 251. li. 26. orme c.
inform pa. 261. li. 18. themc. then p. 275. li. 26. biection c. objection pa.
295. li. 11. which cor. to which pa. 358. li. 2. treasures cor. creatures pa.
374. li. 4. careful cor. carefully pa. 382. li. 25. fleckes cor. flocks pa.
384. li. 26. aae cor. are pa. 400. li. 15. hereby cor. thereby.

APPROBATION.
We underwritten Doctors of Divinity of the university of Paris, do
certify, that having read over this pious treatise, entitled, Christian
Rules, proposed to a virtuous soul aspiring to holy Perfection etc. written by
W.C. we have not only found, that all things therein contained, are consonant,
and conform to the Divine Faith, and Belief of the Cathol. Church: but also
we hope that it will very much contribute to the great advantage of Christian
Piety, and edification of such devout, and religious souls, as shall read,
and practice it. In witness whereof we have here unto subscribed our names, at
Paris this 9. of December. 1655.

H. HOLDEN. E. TIREL.



