THE CRY OF A STONE, OR, A TREATISE; SHOWING WHAT IS THE RIGHT Matter, Form,
and Government of the visible CHURCH of CHRIST.

How, and wherein the present Church of England is wanting and defective, both
in the body of the Land, and in the Parochial branches thereof, With diverse
Reasons and Grounds taken from the Scriptures, to persuade all that fear GOD,
rather to suffer any afflictions at the hands of men, than to submit to man's
carnal policy and humane devices in the worship of God, or be deprived of the
sweet fellowship of the Saints in the right order of the Gospel.

Together with a just reproof of the over-strained and excessive separation,
contentions and divisions of such as commonly are called Brownists.

By Robert Coachman.

Jer. 15. 19. If thou take the precious from the vile, ^^ou shall be as my
mouth.

Ezra 4. 3. It is not for you, but for us to build an house to the Lord God of
Israel.

Psalm. 50. 16. 17. What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing tbou hate nurture?

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter, and are to be sold at the
Stationers, 1642.

A FORE-SPEECH To the READER.
IT is neither to get moncy nor credit, gentle Reader, that I have undertaken
this task, and written this Treatise; for I am neither in name nor in truth so
famous as to gain either of these by writing, but even simple necessity, and
the violent conviction of truth and mine own conscience has drawn me
thereunto; and I know, that if I have any reward in this world, it will be none
other then to be reckoned and rewarded amongst thieves and malefactors, but let
God do what him pleases.

It grieveth me much, that no man of greater eminence and learning will take
in hand this task, that could have done it better, and also with much better
acceptance then ten thousand such as my self is; but what shall I say? since
they all hold their peace, let this be accounted as the confused murmr, or
Cry of a Stone, which utters a vehement Luke 19. 40
(though unknown) language, when they that tread upon it with high looks,
are both deaf and dumb.

Indeed, these matters concerning the right gathering, constituting and
governing the Church, are in our days matters of great difficulty, and deserve
the greatest care and pains of the deepest wits, and greatest learning that is
amongst us; though not in it self more difficult then other points, but because
of the strong opposition of the times, which has long striven to darken the
clear light of the truth in these points, and to uphold humane devices and
traditions, which in stead of truth, take up place in our time: That as the
preaching of the death and resurrection of Christ was to the Gentiles (that
doted on carnal wisdom) foolishness; so in Cor. 1. 23.
our time, when more state and glory is used for the gathering and governing of
the Church, then ever Christ or his Apostles appointed, what marvel is it,
though it seem a base and foolish thing, to speak of gathering the visible
Church of Christ by here and there a man out of countries and cities? when it
is now no great matter to bring a whole Nation, consisting of diverse millions
of men and women, to be a visible Church of Christ in one day. And indeed if
such wonders could be wrought, as are pretended, our Savior Christ had a
needless fear if he should come in our days, that made question whether he
should find faith on the earth, or not? For all our Luke 18. 8.
Nation is faithful, and we need not cry out with David for help to God,
because not a godly man is Psalm. 12. 1,
left, but may rather stand forth and challenge the powers of hell, and say,
bestirre thee Devil, for here is scarce an ungodly man left.

But if after all these loud boastings it be yet as hard to find faithfulness
and sincerity as ever it was, and that our stately Religion, be (in the most
part) rather a superstitious custom to breed security, then any matter of
weight or worth to rejoice in; and that Gods people are still few, and scarce
one of a hundred; if this be true, as heaven and earth knows it to be true,
then no man should adventure upon the bare applause of the times, or common
customs of the multitude; but should try himself by a more better and sounder
rule, lest he run with the multitude in the broad way that leads to death.

But whom shall I appeal to for judgment of this book? it is an old maxim,
and a new Oracle; that the judgment of the vulgar is worth nothing, so as if
it have no approbation of Divines, it may be carried to the furnace.

And as for the most part of our formal Scholars, who have set Divinity in
the pillory, and wrote over it, The Church of England, and make it their
deepest study to set times and truth at unity, having by long custom so
clipped the holy tongue, that they cannot pronounce Shiboleth, but setting
only a Judge. 12. 6.
face upon Religion, have like Watermen gone backward so fast from it, till
they come between the consumption of grace, and the assumption of preferment;
from such I must appeal, as no fit Judges in this controversy, expecting
rather that they should be tormentors and butchers of all such as call any of
their formal courses in question, then be patient hearers of any thing that
strikes at their outward glory.

Also for the Reformists, though their grounds I use these names only for
distinction, not affecting it.
look the same way that mine do, yet many of them have suffered their eyes so
to dazzle upon their formal neighbors (who with a little yielding to the
times, sit warm in their nests, and live more like Princes than Apostles) that
now they begin to call their own wisdom and soundness in question, and
rather suspect that their own hearts have deceived them, then that the truth
has overswayed them, and are mucb more willing to embrace any counsel that
may procure them fleshly liberty, then lend an ear to ought that shall
persuade them to a stricter or better course, and therefore I dare not permit
them for Judges therein. Neither indeed is there any whom these times will
acknowledge for a Divine, which is not more or less tainted with the
corruptions of this age, but if he be scrupulous, and will not swallow up all,
and hold his tongue at that for whlch his heart smites him, he may as well be
canonized for a Saint in Rome, as registered for a Divine in England, but shall
pass under the term of a puney or busy fellow, notwithstanding any gifts of
learning or other endowments, that so the Argument of the Jews against Christ,
John 7. 48. may always be in a readiness to stop the mouths of the simple.

And as little hope is there of any equal sentence from any of the strict
separation, seeing if a man agree with them in all points, save one only
(though it be but about hearing a Sermon in an old Temple) they will account
him as bad as the worst; If any shall like this project, they must surely be
men of name, whatsoever they be of nature; and therefore I may well say, I will
appeal to no body, but only to him that judges without respect of persons.

And in the mean time, I must account it my great cross, that I must thus
differ from so many learned and godly men in these points, and loath I was to
do it, but that necessity constrained me, and the more, for that I see many
Christians entangled in the boughs of the tree, which never observe the cause
that lies in the root, being assured that if they lived in a Church that in
the body thereof were the fear of God, those abuses and corruptions would
soon be remedied, but being otherwise, you may as well rob Micah of his Judge.
18. 24
Idols, and hear no complaint, as you may strip them of their corruptions,
and hear no clamor.

Three things there are required of him that shall oppose these evils of our
days: First, integrity great and weighty points of the Law, before he
contend Mat. 23. 23.
with others for matters of lesser moment, yea, and though he use never so
great wisdom of words, or weight of Argument, yet no great blessing of God,
nor reverence of man can be expected upon his labors, who preaches not as
well with his conversation as with his lips.

The second thing required, is an experimental so shall he be more sensible
of the corruption and bondage which is in these Assemblies, and more settled to
love and maintain the purity and liberty of the Gospel in the right order
thereof.

The third thing required, is, to count the Luke 14. 28
cost, and to have the price ready to lay down whenever it is called for, be
it goods, be it liberty, be it life; for should a man be never so able to
dispute, and had never so much experience and sincerity in him, yet if also he
be not of a resolved disposition to suffer and endure all that man can inflict
upon him, and to seal with his blood what he has written with his pen, or
practiced by his course, it will not much avail, though it be never so clear
and evident: Besides, the Lord does wonderfully advance his glory and Gospel,
by the sufferings and blood of his servants, and gives a blessed memorial of
them; but as for the timorous and fearful, that in all their professions must
make a fair show in the flesh, though Gal. 6. 12.
they have the tongues of men and Angels, yet the 1 Cor. 13. 1*
Lord never much honors such a prefession.

Now, how far my self shall be found approveable in these things may be
questioned; and for me to speak in praisc of my self, were worst of all; and
it is ten times easier to give good counsel to others, than to follow it ones
self; and confident and conceited men are more often foiled when they come to
examination and trial, then those that retain in themselves some fear and
doubting.

As touching my life and conversation, though But God be merciful to me a
sinner; Luke 18. 13.
yet since by his grace I have been kept in all my wanderings and temptations,
from putting forth my hand to iniquity, or running into any Psalm. 125. 3.
scandalous evil, to the wounding of my conscience, and slander of Religion;
why should the operation of this grace be buried in oblivion, and not rather be
acknowledged to the eternal praise of his power and goodness unto me?

And as for my experience in the right order of the least of the least of all
Ephesians. 3. 8.
the members, and from whom by simple necessity I was forced to depart; yet I
was neither so idle 2 Pet. 1. 8.
nor unprofitable amongst them, but that the things which passed there, made
some impression in me, which I trust shall not be worn out whilst I live;
neither am I so ungrateful to my friends, or unmercifull to my Contrymen,
or so careless of the honor of Christ, that I should bury in oblivion 2 Timothy
1. 4.
those worthy things which I have learned and seen, and which would at one
instant put an end to many endless controversies and intanglements wherewith
my Christistian contrymen are snared, and know not how to get out of them.

And although there be many more fitter to handle these things, and more able
to suffer for all our sufficiency is from God, I despair not wholly of my
self, but trust that 1 Cor. 3. 15.
for the furtherance of his glory, his power shall be perfected by my
weakness, and that I shall be made able through him with patience, yea, Heb.
11. 35.
with joy to suffer the spoiling and loss of all that in this frail state is
lent me.

And though the time is come that judgment must begin at Gods House, I trust
that I shall 1 Pet. 4. 17.
be content to be one of the first that shall lead the way to the shambles,
and not fear to give my self to him that lent it me, and Psalm. 44. 22.
to lay it down for his glory on earth, which gives me eternal glory in
Heaven, which that I may do in a right manner, and for a right end, as well as
in a just cause, I earnestly entreat the fervent supplications and prayers of
all the Saints night and day for me, that I may indeed rejoice, Acts 5. 41.
that I am counted worthy to suffer for that part of the Gospel, which this
stately age will not endure to hear of.

I have written very short and brief, partly for that this age having been so
long dulled with tedious volumes and discourses can now brook nothing but what
runs post, and that which is brief and various, partly that I might spend
little time in writing, and avoid great charge in printing; but principally
because I find, that things are easiest understood, when they are set down
shortly, and when there is no enterlacings or surplusage of words, more then
barely to express the thing intended. I have endeavored for a plain and
familiar style, and yet avoided light or affected phrases; I have traduced no
man's person, otherwise than as the things bear witness against them, I have
given all the honor to men that I may, with fear of my Maker: And if yet
either the Job 32. 22.
matter or manner be defective, or any thing out of joint, remember still it is
but the Cry of a Stone, which never learned to speak either Latin or English
in any School whatsoever: And take heed of stumbling over the truth, for some
balkes in the way: but if the thing aimed at be the right settling of the Saints
in the order of the Gospel, otherwise than the vain ostentation and pomp of
this age will permit, rather set thy self to help the Author to bear his
cross, Luke 22. 28
and follow Christ in his temptations, then like Mat. 19. 28.
a Sycophant, to sit down and scoff at his wants of learning and eloquence.

The Lord of his mercy pardon all our aberrations and failings, and give us
grace to seek him earnestly in love and sincerity, that our true comfort may
increase here, and our eternail comfort remain hereafter.

Thine in the Lord, Robert Coachman.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
TO the end that the ingenuous and godly design of this Author (of reconciling
these differences between those Christians of the English Parishes, and those
of the Separation) may not miscarry, observe, that in blaming the Church of
England, and the Ministry thereof, he does not mean the personal Graces,
Knowledge and Learning of any Christians there; but he blames the confused
manner of gathering Churches by house rows of all sorts: and by the Ministry,
he means the external office conveyed to them by that authority which he
does justly oppose.

And when he speaks of the Separation, he is not against the cause, much less
the moderate way of the Churches of the Separation, nor their rejecting of the
profane world from those privileges, proper and peculiar to a visible Church;
as seals, censures, etc. but he speaks against those personal errors of some
who profess separation and their erroneous opinions, who deny all visible
Christians in the parish assemblies, and thereupon leave them in personal
communion; as Prayer, Preaching, Conference, etc. Now the God of all grace and
mercy so dispose of all his servants, that the great affairs of Jesus Christ
may not miscary in their hands, but that they may at last so discover errors,
that they may attain both peace and truth, Amen.

The CONTENTS of the BOOK.
OF the essential marks and notes of the visible Church. pg. 1 2. The visible
Church has right to all Gods Ordinances* pg. 4 3. The Church or Churches of
England cannot be justified. pg. 8 4. What Ordinances of God may be used in the
parish assemblies, and what not. pg. 10 5. It is no wrong to Gods people, when
the carnal multitude is taxed, and they persuaded to leave them. pg. 12 6. It
is best for wicked men to be kept from the comforts of salvation until they
repent. pg. 14 7. It is in vain to seek the reformation of a Church, when the
Materials are naught. pg. 16 8. It is a matter of great weight and necessity
for Christians to live in a right ordered Church. pg. 18 9. The reformed
Churches are not condemned but admonished by this strict practice. pg. 22 10
The prohibition of the Magistrate, though he be a Christian, may not hinder our
obedience to the Gospel. pg. 23 11. Moses example in building the Tabernacle,
was no ordinary rule for after times* pg. 25 12. The examples of the Kings of
Israel and Judah, in restoring Gods Worship, do not bind to any fashions in
Religion, but Christ's. pg. 26 13. A comparison of the pattern of Christ's Church
with the Church of England. pg. 27 14. A proportionable application of the
Jews State, unto our times. pg. 28 15. The submission of the Jews to the
Heathen Kings, about building the Temple, is no imitable practice about the
Church. pg. 30 16. The only way to establish the Gospel and the pure
Ordinances thereof is to suffer persecution for it. pg. 31 17. The time of
suffering is now come. pg. 32 18. Other motives to persuade us to suffering.
pg. 33 19. It is no strange thing for Christians to be persecuted of
Christians. pg. 35 20. The scandalls in the separated Churches is no Argument
to condemn their practice. pg. 37


The second part.

21. THe rigid Separation overrun their course in their first onset. pg. 41 22.
The general Ohjection against hearing in the Parish assemblies answered. pg.
43 23. What preaching it* and who may preach: as also where, and to whom. pg.
44 24. Of the liberty that the Word of God ought to have. pg. 45 25. The
particular objections against hearing in the Parish assemblies answered. pg. 47
26. Other objections against hearing answered. pg. 50 27. They that go about
to justify the Ministers in England in their office, drive men from the Church
altogether. pg. 54 28. The strict separation cannot hold together amongst
themselves. pg. 56 29. There are some sins that must be borne in the Church.
pg. 58 30. What kind of sins and sinners they be that may be borne in the
Church. pg. 60 31. Three cautions concluding the Doctrine of forbearance. pg.
61 32. The Conclusion and Sum of all. pg. 63


The CRY of a STONE.
Of the essential marks and notes of the visible Church.
THere is nothing that can rightly be described by any SECT. 1.
special Ornaments or privileges thereof, but he that will make a true and
proper definition of any thing, must describe it by such properties as are so
essential to the thing, as that being there, they make it to be that it is,
and being absent, it cease to be any more the same.

The Church is often compared to a house, yea, called Gods 1. Tim. 3. 15.
House: Now, no man can describe a house by the ornaments and furniture
thereof, but only by the matter and form; both which being together, there is
indeed a house, but if either be absent, the house cannot be.

Indeed, when materials are framed, we sometimes say, there is a house, though
no form appear; but such speaking is improper, and it may rather be said,
there is stuff for a house, then a house indeed: so in regard of the true
materials of the Church, the people of God. whose hearts are framed to
holiness and sanctity, dwelling here and there in the world, and never
combining into a body, nor, perhaps, knowing they should so do, may yet be
said in an improper kind of speaking, to be the Church of God; but this cannot
be said, but of the Church in general and universal, combined and knit
together by one spirit, partakers of one hope, and expecters of one glory.

For touching the visible Church, which presents it self to the outward eye,
the case is otherwise; and we may not account all visible Christians a visible
Church; for by a visible Church* we mean a company or congregation assembling
together. Now, a man may be a visible Christian* and never come at such an
assembly, much less be a joined member in the policy thereof.

Neither do we mean that every assembly or congregation is the Church of God,
though the word be indifferently used; for there is Psalm. 26. 5. Act. 19. 41.
the Church of evil doers, and there is a Church of tumultuous railers.

In a word, the visible Church of Christ, is a company of people externally The
visible Church described.
holy, or called Saints which combine and meet together, intending to perform
the whole will and worship of God, according as it is or shall be revealed to
them.

I say they are a company; for one man cannot be a Church, but two or three at
least, and not above such a number, as Matthew. 18. 20.
may ordinarily meet together, and these must be externally holy, that is, such
as by their faith and conversation appear unto men to be elect; for of the
heart only God must be the judge; and if the profession be sound and the
conversation honest in the outward appearance and manifestation, we have not
to do to 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 7. 1 These. 1. 4.
examine any further, but ought in charity to judge men to be such as
outwardly they appear, leaving secret things to God.

I say further, that these Saints must combine and assemble together,
voluntarily covenant and 1 Cor. 14. 26. Psalm. 110. 3. Heb. 10. 25. 1 These. 5.
14. Tit. 1. 9. 10.
gather together to perform with heart and tongue the whole will and worship
of God for the building up of themselves in all the known ways of God,
comforting the feeble minded, helping the weak, rectify the stragler, and
convince the opposite.

I say (intending to perform the whole will of God) for they Mat. 20. 22.
of God, and yet be the Church of God: for it is with a Church in her minority,
as with a Christian at his first conversion, who has only a general
resolution to do the whole will of God, but the particulars Acts 9. 6. and 10.
33.
of that obedience, he performs by steps and degrees, as he comes to
learn and understand them: so a company of godly men may become a Church, and
perform with sincerity and modesty, such things as they know and understand
at the first, and when God gives them further knowledge and means, to proceed
to other practices, as the Christian women in Philippi, who at the first
assembled together, having (as it seems) no other exercise but Prayer, and
yet afterward there was a very complete and famous Church of Acts 16. 13.
Phil. 1. 2.
Saints, having both Bishops and Deacons.

Wheresoever therefore there is an assembly of godly men knit together, and
performing the worship of God (though but in part) it may truly be said of
them, as Jacob said of the servants of God, when he saw them marching so
diligently, this is none other then Beth-el, Genesis 28. 12. 17.
the house of God, this is a proper visible Church.

And wheresoever other assemblies are, then of faithful Christians, whatsoever
ordinances of God they have, yet they stand them in no more stead then
circumcision did the Sichemites, but so often as they Genesis 34. 25.
take up the name of God, and perform any religious service unto him, whilst
they hate to be reformed, so often they are guilty of usurpation Psalm. 50. 16,
17.
and intrusion upon that which appertains not to them, and are manifest
takers of Gods name in vain, whom he will not hold guiltless. Exodus 20. 7.


They therefore are much mistaken, who describe and mark out the Church by the
Ordinances; for as circumcision availed not the Sichemites, nor the Ark of God
the Philistims, even so the most glorious 1 Samuel 5. 4, 9.
Ordinances of God being used by such as are not his children, are as a Parable
in the mouth of a fool, and so far they are from making wicked men Gods
Church, as that the more they use them before they Prove. 15. 8.
have faith and grace, the greater is their sin, and the further off they are
from being either Gods Church or children.

The preaching of the Word can be no mark of the visible Church, otherwise than
as it is an effectual instrument to prepare men thereunto; 1 King. 18. 19. 25.
and 22. 19. Acts 17. 22, Io^. 3. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
for it was preached amongst Baals Prophets, and amongst the Athenians,
Ninivites, Babylonians, etc. yet were neither of these Gods Church or people.
Noah preached powerfully to the old world, yet were they not Gods Church. The
Turks and Indians have had the Word preached to them, yet no man will say they
are the visible Church of Christ, neither can the Sacraments be any mark of
the Church at all, since they make nothing to be which was not the same before,
but only The Word and Sacraments no marks of the visible Church.
confirm something which before was. A Spanish Friar with a scoupe baptized a
thousand silly Indians at one time, which were drawn together by a stratagem,
were these now any thing the more Gods Church; and if he should have given them
the other Sacrament also, had it availed any thing the more, or if in stead of
this Friar there had been one of the most godliest Ministers in all Europe, had
it not been all one, so long as the people had not faith nor grace? so that it
is plain, that holy people, and not holy ordinances give the being to the
visible Church, and it is no more an argument to prove a company of carnal and
irreligious people to be Gods Church, because they have amongst them his sacred
ordinances, then a true man's purse in the hand of a thief is an argument to
prove a thief a true man.

The visible Church has right to all Gods Ordinances.
IT is then a society of religious and faithful people, that have right SECT.
2.
to Gods spiritual Ordinances, and such only may, and must use them, so far
as they are able. They are all of them to strive to attain the best gifts, and
especially to prophecy, yea, and if it were possible, 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2. Heb. 5.
12.
to be Doctors, and that not in bare conceit, but in truth and soundness, and
such amongst them as excel in gifts and graces they are much to love and
reverence, and also to encourage them to the orderly use of the 1. Cor. 16. 18.
grace they have received, without hiding their talent, that so all may learn
and receive comfort. and 14. 29. 30. 31


And because all good men have not one and the same gift, therefore every one
is advisedly to consider, what his portion is, and what he may take to, and
where he must stay, that none run beyond their line, presume above that which
is meet. 1. Cor. 10. 16. Romans 12. 3.


Some have the gift of utterance, and are fluent in speech, others a gift of
discerning to judge of that which is uttered: some are excellent 1. Cor. 12. 4.
5. 6.
in prayer, others are sweet in singing, some are apt to move profitable The
gifts of the Church.
questions, others prompt in answering them, some can dispute very profitably,
others can receive much help by disputation, etc.

And many times they which are of little manifestation, and least seen to
meddle in public passages are most holy and strict in their conversation,
whose examples do often times preach as profitably as if 1 These. 1. 7. 8.
they had the greatest fluencie of speech that could be.

Neither must the Saints be envious against one another, because they have not
one and the same gift: for one and the same spirit works diversely in all the
members of the Church, that this spiritual body may be complete, and perform
all spiritual offices; as the natural body has diverse members, and all for
several offices, much less may any hide their talent, because it is not of
the same measure with others; since he which had but one talent was required to
traffic Mat. 25. 26. 27.
as well as he that had five, and all the servants are commanded to watch as
well (though not so much) as the Porter. Mar. 13. 24. 27


This visible Church of Saints stand bound and tied each to other, and purging
of sin and sinners that break 1. Cor. 5. 7.
out amongst them into any enormous or scandalous practice.

For as in cities and corporations, each member carefully observes whether his
neighbor observe the rules of the Charter whereunto he The power of the Church.
is sworn, and upon default in matter of weight, the party offending is
either disfranchized, or otherwise corrected civilly; so in this brotherhood or
spiritual policy of the Church, each man observes, as himself, so his
fellow members, that if any find his brother to transgress against the
heavenly Charter, and Covenant made with God and his people, he reproves and
admonishes him lovingly betwixt them two alone, and if it be any capital or
scandalous evil, and that Mat. 18. 15. 16 17.
he will not repent of it, then the brother offended, takes with him one or
two, to help, convince and reprove the sinner, and to witness both the fact,
and the due proceeding thereabout; and if he will not hearc them so as to
repent, then to complain to the congregation, whereof he is a member, that so
being rebuked of many, he may 2. Cor. 2. 6.
yet at last be ashamed, and give God the glory, and so receive forgiveness of
God and men. But if he will not hear nor regard the Church, nor in reverence
to that sacred means of his recovery, repent and humble himself for his
sin, then the Church with humble and sorrowful hearts must cut him off as a
decayed member, and deliver him unto Satan, that so that proud and corrupt
flesh may be destroyed, and the spirit saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1.
Cor. 5. 5.


Provided still, that all these proceedings be in love, lenity and compassion,
and that no man be brought to the Church, much less 1. Cor. 16. 14.
censured; for infirmities and failing in judgment, or for matters in our
times doubtful and controversall, but for matters of weight, and such evils
as being persisted in, do out of doubt, shut the party out of heaven, of which
more hereafter*

And for their more better and orderly proceeding in the use of all the
Ordinances of God in the Church, they are as soon as any, fit 2. Tim. 2. 2.
Tit. 1. 6. 7.
depend, for the dispensing of the Word, Prayer and Sacraments; as also to
rule, guide, and go before them in their consultations decrees, and execution
of Discipline, and all other public business.

These Bishops or Elders may not intrude themselves into their offices John 10.
1. 2. Ministers election. Act. 6. 3. 5. and 14. 23. Ordination of the
ministers. 1. Tim. 5. 22.
and ministrations, by any foreign or civil power, but must be chosen by
that Church and society of Saints in which they are to administer.

Their ordination or putting in possession, must be with giving a charge to
them, with some sign, either of giving the hand, or laying hands upon their
heads, which may be done either by the Elders of some other Church, who as
brethen may assist and help their neighbors, so far as they can; or rather
by some principal man amongst No succession of any universal Ministry now.
themselves: since it cannot be imagined with any show of reason, that there is
any universal Ministry since the Apostles days, neither any that can execute
their office out of that particular flock whereof the holy Ghost has made
them overseers, no more then the Lord Major Act. 20. 28.
of London may go and execute justice in the City of York, of which more
hereafter.

And although in the Commonwealth, a Lordly and Imperious Ministers no Lords 1
Pet. 5. 3.
rule may be tolerable, yet the Ministry of the Church is of another nature,
and may not be imagined to be any matter of State, or to stand for any carnal
pomp, but is a matter of meet service, and they 2 Cor. 4. 5. 1 These. 5. 12.
Act. 6. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 16. 2 Cor. 4. 2.
are constantly to labor in spiritual works in all humility and patience,
giving themselves wholly to their ministrations, and studying to approve
themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. Neither is their
office for name and form, but for the preservation of order and comeliness in
Church Ordinances, that all the rights and privileges of the Church may be
used and continued in a grave and comiy manner, as they are excellent in their
substance and matter.

And as these Bishops or Elders are to preach constantly the Word, The
Ministers must still preserve the liberty of the Saints in the Church.
and to administer the Sacraments in both kinds upon the members of the Church,
as there is occasion; as also to execute and declare the public decrees,
determinations and censures of the Church: So they are not any way to infringe
the liberty of the Saints, or ingrosse their privileges, but still to foster
and cherish all those several gifts and graces which are in all, or any of the
members. They must still uphold and maintain in the Church the stool of the
Prophets, and to have in great esteem Prophesying or preaching by men of gifts
and 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2.
aptness, though not in office, that so all may learn and increase, that so
fit and able men may be bred up in the Church, whom the body 2 Timothy 4. 5. 6.
may appoint into office of Ministry in after times, or when any of their
officers shall any way fail.

Neither may the Elders deprive the Saints of their lawful and Christian
liberty in their elections, rejections or determinations in 3 Ioh. ^. 10.
the Church by any fore-stallings, repressings, insultings, or preventions, but
contenting themselves with meek and grave counsel to go before the rest in
their proceedings; and if the body of the Church shall not agree to that which
the officers shall think best, that yet the officers think it no
disparagement to their eminency, or honor to be overswayed, and led beside
their minds and purposes sometimes by the body of the Church, whose servants
they are, knowing, that where the honor and order of God is observed, no man
can truly receive any damage.

And as the visible Church must continue their assembling and The Churches
benevolence.
no wise be neglected, whilst this frail life lasts, which communion in
giving and receiving, though it be no religious action in it self, Philip. 4.
15. Iam. 2. 22.
yet is it of such simple necessity and affinity thereunto, as that it may no
more be severed from religion, then good works may be severd from faith; and
for their more easy, and substantial doing these duties, and relieving the
wants of their brethren, they are o look out wise and trusty men, from
amongst themselves, whom they are Act. 6. 3. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 10.
to choose and appoint to this business, and to whom they must commit their
money and treasure, and to whose wisdom and faithfulness The Deacons office.
they must refer the distribution and disposing of those temporal things.

And in this contribution the Saints whom God has blessed with 1 Cor. 15. 2.
Romans 12. ^.
any portion of this worlds goods must accordingly extend their merciful
liberality with all cheerfulness, yea, and if need so require, to sell even
their lands and goods, and whatsoever they have to relieve Act. 2. 45. Luke 12.
33.
the wants of their poor brethren, without any murmuring or discontent,
remembering, that the life of a Christian is more precious then any thing else
in this world.

This distribution of the Churches benevolence, must be to the Elders that
toil in the Word and Doctrine, as also to the poor, aged, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1
Cor. 9. 11. 12. Gal. 6. 10.
sick, and helpless persons, especially those of the household of Faith, that
so the will of God may be done, and all comfort and encouragement given to the
poor Saints, as also all murmuring complaints and outcries prevented, by which
it may be said, (and that not without Act. 6. 1.
cause) that the Church has piety, but no pity.

Neither is the widows office to be forgotten as a needless thing, The
widows office.
and grave widows who are loosed from the bands of wanton youth, and have age
upon them as a crown of glory, being yet healthy, cheerful, and strong, the
Church is there to choose and appoint them for Deaconesses, Prou. 16. 31.
or tenders of the sick, and to allow them such relief and maintenance, 1 Timothy
5. 9. 10 Romans 16. 1. 2.
as is needful and fit, knowing that in sickness there is required much
labor and pains, and most need of comfort and encouragement.

And thus the Church and people of God, go hand in hand, both in sickness and
in health, in poverty and in wealth, in adversity and prosperity, rejoicing
together, weeping together, and being of like Romans 12. 15. 16
affection, in a sweet and heavenly sympathy, holding out in adversity 2 Cor.
6. 8.
without shrinking, and persevering in prosperity with all moderation.

The Church or Churches of England cannot be justified.
ANd if this be the right pattern of the visible Church of Christ, SECT. 3.
according to the Gospel, then let us turn our eyes upon our selves, and see
what resemblance there is amongst us of these Apostolic orders, and upon
notice taken of our defects, let us see if they may not be amended.

And first, whereas the materials of the Church of the Gospel are none other
then a company of converted people gathered out of Nations, Acts 10. 35. Ioh.
17. 9. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 18. 11. 1 Cor. 4. 15. and 11. 2. 17.
and from the world, our nation, and our world is all one with the Church, and
he that is of one, is, or must be of the other; the Apostles first preached
and converted men, and afterward united them into a Church; but we first unite
the whole nation into the Church, and feed them all with the pledges and seals
of Gods love, and then go about to convert them, afterward by preaching
judgment to Our Churches defective in their matter.
them; but this is rather to scatter then to gather with Christ, and is more
like the Papists pomp, then the Apostles plainness; and although God did once
choose a whole nation, which first were in the loins Genesis ^5. 5.
and family of Abraham, yet that nation being broken off from God, no nation
can now succeed them, nor can challenge that right Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 7. 6, 7.
to be Gods people, otherwise then they are found converted, and believe and
obey the Gospel, which that a whole nation consisting of many millions of
people, should do in one day should be strange and miraculous, and the way to
heaven must cease to be strait, if so many can walk in it at conce.

And if any shall think otherwise, let them show when the general England) was
better then now they are, yea, and now after sixty years preaching the
Gospel, whether the greater part be not yet apparently in their sins, and
unconverted, and do not indeed apparently oppose and fight against such as are
sincere and faithful, contemning and despising all admonition and counsel,
and serve not the Lord, but serve Satan Ephesians. 1. 12.
and their own lusts; and therefore the general multitude of this nation
cannot in any sense be said to be Gods people, or the true and proper matter of
the visible Church.

And if we shall descend at once to the parish assemblies, which are the
branches of this national Church, and look upon them indefinitely, The parish
multitudes unconverted.
preaching, are much more reformed then others; but taking them one with
another, they are for the most part of the people ignorant, profane and
scandalous, being common swearers, liers, drunkards, quarrellers, wantons,
Atheists, and even as their own Prophets have truly complained of them: and
as he that travelleth amongst them Tit. 1. 12.
about his affairs shall find them, and whilst the most of them are such,
who can justify their estate, but he shall make himself abominable to God;
and every time he goes about to justify them, as Prove. 17. 15.
Gods people, and Church, his own heart shall give him the lie neither
avails it to say, they are baptized and profess the true Religion; for if
they have all the Baptismes and Ordinances that ever were or are, and professed
never so much truth in words, yet whilst they 2 Pet 1. 19. 20. 21, 22.
are wicked in their deeds and lives, they are but so much the more the
children of hell for their knowledge and profession, and the heathens and Turks
are in far better case then they. Secondly, indeed they profess no Religion
at all, nor may in any sense be called Professors; when do they profess or
speak of any Religion or mention the name of God* unless it be in their
swearing or vain talking: their profession is the service of the Devil, who is
their father, and under John 8. 44.
whose tutorship they are notable Scholars. Thirdly, if any thing make them
Professors, it is their coming to Church now and then, to lend an ear to some
instruction, and such professors might a company of Turks be, if they were in
England, and would either for fear of Law, custom or fashion, come sometimes
to the assembly, though still they returned to their old vomit, and never left
off their old sins 2 Pet. 1. 9.
and vices; so that whatsoever can be alleged for them, until they repent and
turn from their wicked courses, all such pleas were as good be never a whit as
never the better.

4. Neither can the goodness of some few that are in the parish help to salve
the matter, no more then Lots being in Sodom could justify the Sodomites: for
those godly are amongst them but as a condemned or despised people, which
scarce dare show themselves in their pious arts, but are overtopped and held
under by the vain multitudes in all places. Indeed, temporal punishments may
be withheld, for the righteous sakes, as in Sodom, but that the spiritual
State of the carnal Genesis 18. 38.
multitude should be good because of the presence of some few good men is no
more like then that Ioram and his accomplices were justified, 2 King. 3. 13, 14.
by the presence of Elisha and Iehosaphat.

Neither will the badnesse of the Jews S^ate in Christ's time and before under
the Law, justify this confused Church of the Gospel. For, first as it is a
bad plea to justify one evil by another: secondly so we must still remember
that God now chooses no more whole Nations but selecteth his Saints out of all
nations: thirdly* the covenants Genesis 17. 7, 8.
of the Jews were absolutely temporal and spiritual, and the promises to be
believed for this life properly* but our covenants that God makes with us, are
only spiritually absolute, and the promises for this life, are only
conditional: Fourthly, Gods face, and the seat of Romans 8. 28. John 4. 21. 23.
Mat. 18. 20.
that Church was to be sought in the Tabernacle or Temple: but now there is no
place privileged or exempted, but where two or three are gathered in Christ's
Name, he is in the midst of them.

To conclude, as the Kingdom of Satan is every where in this world, and as the
Lord by outward manifestation differenceth his chosen ones from the world, and
them within from them without: so Acts 15. 9. 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13.
must we every where put difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, and
beware of saying to the wicked, thou art righteous, or giving Mat. 7. 6.
holy things to dogs, or partaking with them, or joining to them in their
devouring pearls, or afford them our fellowship, when they usurp Act. 8. 21.
upon such ordinances as are peculiar to Gods Elect and Faithful.

What Ordinances of God may be used in the Parish assemblies, and what not.
YEt so long as life lasts there may be some hope of recovery, neither are we
to despair of any, though never so vile, but SECT. 4.
that they may be converted and turned to God; And therefore were are still as
with patience to suffer the evil men, so to prove always, if at any time they
may be brought out of the snare of the 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. The Word may be
preached to evil men.
Word be amongst them both publicly and privately, if they will but be brought
to it, and have the patience to hear themselves reproved and convinced by it;
for as we know it to be the only ordinary means for their conversion; so
also we see that many are daily by it converted and brought home unto God, and
so far I Romans 10. 14.
am from disliking the preaching of the Word to them, as that I would have them
hear it where it is most purely and powerfully taught, and wish, that where
there is one such Preacher, there were a hundred.

But until they do convert and turn* none of the seals must in Acts 9. 26.
27. Psalm. 50. 1^, 17. Isai. 1. 13. 14.
(...) to ^each any thing to others* nor take up the name of God, (...)
^blations or sacrifices to him* until they have cleansed (...) ^^^^ntance much
less are the faithful to partake with (...)s ^^ophaning of the Sacraments.
But if by (...) his strength they have gotten a custom T(...)
(...) sacred ^^^inances and b^es(...) to their customs, nor have ought to do
with them in their taking the Name and Ordinances of God in vain; for the
proper ends of the seals are to confirm and comfort the faithful, and such as
groan under their sins; but how can the seal be set, or the assurance given
to Mat. 11. 28.
them that have not faith, neither are wearied with their sins, but love and
delight in them. And how can any godly man consent in, or say Amen to such an
holy action, when it is jointly done by such as for the most part are Gods
enemies; for the spiritual supper of the Lord is not like other civil
banquets wherein civil fellowship and 1 Cor. 12. 13.
natural refreshing is properly aimed at, but the fellowship therein is
spiritual, and they that feast at it, must be united to Christ by one spirit,
but now carnal men have not the spirit, and so can be no guests at that
banquet.

This banquet is even the nearest fellowship that the Saints can have in this
world, and most resembles heaven; and it is not only a sure pledge of their
fellowship with Christ, but also a demonstration of their unity together, as
the Apostle teaches. But what a many 1 Cor. 10. 17.
lying signs and deceiveable demonstrations do such Christians make, that
communicate they care not where, nor with whom, but think if they examine
themselves, it is enough, forgetting that it is an act of communion, and so
called by the Apostle, and though the Verse 16*
term of a holy thing be given to it, yet if we sever the word Sacrament from
communion, we put out Gods terms, and place in our own.

Many dislike that the godly should be civilly familiar with vain and
irreligious persons, but to be strict in that, and allow them to banquet with
all manner of persons at the heavenly supper of the Lord, is even as current
counsel, as theirs who said, it was nothing to swear Mat. 23. 16, 17.
by the Temple, but to swear by the gold of the Temple was a trespass; for if
there be any act in this world that declares Christian ami^y, peace and sweet
friendship in the grace of the Gospel, this does it, when we sit and feast
together with Christ at his Table, and eat his flesh, and drink his blood.

As Christ therefore preached the Gospel to all sorts of men good and bad, but
when he administered the supper, he drew out such as were apparently faithful
and godly. So now, the Word may be preached Luke 22. 11. 14. Ioh. 13. 30.
and heard amongst the worst miscreants that are, but when we go to sit with
Christ at his Table, let us know (as far as we can by outward appearance)
what guests go with us.

Neither may these wicked men have any censure of excommunication executed upon
them, much less execute it upon one another: The power of excommunication
belongs not to the parish multitudes.
for, they were never in covenant with Christ, and so have b^oke ^o covenant,
nor can be punished for any breach of covenant, but were ever as they are,
naught from the womb, and downeright unbeliever^ still* Secondly, what have
they to do to censure others, when they are as ill themselves? May one
adulterer or drunkard or swearer, cast Ioh. ^. 7.
a stone at another, when he is as bad himself as the worst? Thirdly, if they
should so do were it any more then a mockery: as if the thieves at Gods hill
should hold a session to hang the cut-purses, which were an only way to make
sin to be counted a trifle, and a jest, rather then to be feared and trembled
at: it is only the Saints that may bind them that are mighty in evil, and
none other have this Psalm. 149. 8, 9.
honor.

Fourthly, seeing excommunication is for the destruction of the flesh 1 Cor. 5.
5.
(supposing the person to have the spirit, though overwhelmed by the corruption
of nature, how can it be exercised on them which still were and are* altogether
flesh? For if their flesh be destroyed, the whole man is destroyed.

It is no wrong to Gods people, when the carnal multitude is taxed, and they
persuaded to leave them.
IF now upon these and the like considerations we leave the general SECT. 5.
and carnal multitudes in the parish assemblies, in all such Iehosaphat, when
Elisha in his presence protested against Ioram, as against one between whom
and God, he 2 King. 3. 13. 14. Mat. 15. 14. Luke 12. 52. Mat. 23. 27. It is no
fault to tax wicked men, and forbear communion with them.
would not intercede? what hurt was it to Christ's Disciples* when their
natural friends the Jews, were taxed by Christ, and called blind guides, and
blind leaders of the blind, dissemblers, hypocrites, etc. So when we tax here
the multitude of carnal people, and protest against them that they are not
Gods children* nor that they have no right to his sacred ordinances, nor to
come near his altar* nor use his name and word, until they repent. But that
those holy and consecrated things belong only to the faithful Christians of
which there are many in the assemblies, whom we tell that they are not in their
proper place, nor right fellowship, but ought to withdraw themselves from that
society Act. 2. 40. 41. 44. 47.
in all such actions as are proper to the Saints and unite themselves in the
fellowship of godly men, with whom they may freely and comfortably participate,
in the sweet mysteries of the Lord; do we in this speak blasphemy? and are
we worthy for such words and practices, to be taxed and traduced in print and
pulpit; for wicked and damnable Schismatiques? For what Christian man is there,
that had not rather converse with godly men then ungodly? are not It is no
fault to associate only with the godly in the Sacraments.
the presence of faithful Christians sweeter to a Christian, when he comes
to power out his prayers, and offer his oblations than the society of carnal
men? Well then, what is the matter, that we for holding and practicing these
things, must be thus tossed about and abused? Why must we be put in prison,
confiscate goods, go into exile, and death for holding and practicing no
otherwise than every Psalm. 16. 3.
Christian soul in heart desires? we would begin our heavenly harmony here
and our delight should be only in the Saints* and it is custom, Tailor on
Titus, page 691.
wit and art, that fights against grace, conscience and Scripture; and it is
they out of their idle visions, that persuade to give holy things to Dogs, and
mingle light and darkness, Christ and Belial together; and 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15.
and 5. 10.
though times favor these abuses, and punish us for our right grounded
assertions, yet anon we shall come before a most just Judge, and then we shall
see whose righteousness and just judgment shall be Psalm. 37. 6.
brightest, and who has gone the rightest course.

We labor to justify the righteous, and condemn the ungodly, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
10. 11.
men, given to swearers, liers, drunkards, oppressors, slanderers, etc. but
would have them know, that as they live and delight in sin, and hate to be
reformed; so no comfort, no privilege nor favor belongs Psalm. 50. 16.
unto them in that estate, but till they repent and break off their ungodly
courses, no peace can be to them, nor no fellowship in the seals and badges of
Saints can be had with them but as they are of the world, so we must account
them, and under the kingdom of darkness, Ephesians. 2. 2. Ezra 4. 3.
and it belongs not to them, but unto us to build an house to the Lord our
God, unto them belongs no promise of any favor till they repent, but only the
Law, thereatnings, judgments, comminations and sharp rebukes, which they are
always to hear, both publicly and privately, upon all occasions, but nothing
must ever be said or done to them, by which they have any cause to think they
are in Gods favor before they turn from their sins; for if the 1 Pet. 4. 18.
most righteous scarcely, and with much ado, be saved, where shall such wicked
and sinners appear, and what hope is there for them?

And seeing in the things of this life they have their ease, pleasure and
privileges above the godly, what are then the privileges of the Saints? Psalm.
73. 2. 3. Job 21. 9. 10.
if also in spiritual ordinances and heavenly prerogatives they are equallized
with them; alas, the men of this world feast and laugh, and dominere in their
purple, scarlet, and fleshly wantonness, when many 2 Samuel 15. 23. 30. 1 Cor.
4. 11. 12. Romans 5. 2. Ephesians. 3. 12.
of Gods dear children weep and mourn in secret before the Lord, and are
feign to pinch hard, go thin, lie in prison, and sometimes go to the
shambles, that they may be tried as gold in the fire, and all the privileges of
the Saints, is their free access to God, their fellowship in their Sabbaths,
Sacrifices, Prayers, blessings, seals* and new songs of praise, in all which
they meet with Christ their Savior, Psalm. 99. 1. Phil. 1. 21.
and so gather new comfort and refreshing daily, amidst the many crosses and
troubles of this transitory world.

It is best for wicked men to be kept from the comforts of salvation, until
they repent.
IF wicked men be offered no means whereby to apply comfort or SECT. 6.
the favor of God to themselves, then they are driven presently into Table as
well as others? Luke 22. 30.
and why their fellowship is shunned in such exercises wherein we draw nearest
unto God, and converse familiarly with him? Why their seed may not be
baptized, nor themselves accepted as the Lords guests, but are excluded from
all such things as may encourage and comfort them, being, as it were, bound
hand and foot, and may Mat. 22. 12. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 7. 10.
hear of nothing but of the Law, judgment and threatening against them: and
in this, every man's heart shall answer him, and he shall say; it is, because I
walk in fleshly liberty, and give my self to vain and evil courses; I am a
common swearer, a liar, a dissembler, a wanton, a drunkard, a griper after the
world, or some such evil, for which, as God has said, I shall not enter into
his Kingdom; 1 C^^. 6 9.
so his people shun me, and get them from me, and had rather have my room
than my company, I must know nothing of the Lords secrets, Psalm. 25. 14.
because I fear him not, they will tell me nothing of their sweet comforts, but
I languish about temporary toys, and fleet up and down as the world favors
and frowns, and the height of all my comfort is, but to have my cattle, my
corn, my trade and my wealth increase; or if these fail, to cheer up my
heart with a cup of strong Psalm. 4. 7.
liquor, or to hear or see some Tragedy or merry conceit, and if these things
help not me. I am left remediless; but I see there are others that can
comfort themselves in God, when the world fails them, and can rejoice in
tribulation, and mock the world, as scorning to 1 Samuel 30. 6. Romans 5. 3. Job
1. 21.
have their hearts moved much with any such transitory things.

Now surely these men have found some extraordinary matter to rest Gal. 1. 22,
23.
go only with a few (...) idle dreams, and walk up and down as a thief
with a halter condemned of God and his people, and if death seize on me in this
estate, before I amend, as I am excluded from all fellowship of Christians
here, so shall I for ever be shut from them in the kingdom of glory, and if
there be a hell, surely I shall fall into it.

And this will work repentance in many, and in others a restraint, and as for
Atheists and Hypocrites, which are in league with hell, and Job 21. 14.
have sought against the light of reason and conscience, till they are past
feeling they will hereat the more discover themselves, and foame out Ephesians. 4.
19. Jude. 1. 13.
their own shame, that the faith, patience and sincerity of the godly may the
better appear, and be approved, and the condemnation of the other the more
just.

Whereas contrariwise, when all manner of graceless men are fed It hinders
wicked men's conversion to give the Sacraments.
privilege and highest prerogative with the most godly in the Church, and that
it is daily told him, there is the body and blood of Christ given for him, how
presumptuous do they grow? and how confident of their own excellency? how
audacious in evil? and how scornful against Psalm. 14. 6. Psalm. 123. 4.
men of a strict and sober life? no reproves nor counsel, nor exhortation can
take effect with them, nor scarce have an ear lent it. Tell them of wicked men
and damnation, they will send you to Rome, or Turkey or India, amongst the
Heathens or Papists, for why? they are Protestants, and have a sound Religion,
and are borne, baptized, and brought up in a Christian commonwealth and
Church, and eat the John: 6. 53.
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, in whom they say, they trust to be
saved; though they never imitate his examples, but notwithstanding all 1 John
1. 6. Hebr. 12. 2. Acts 8. 23.
their presumption, they have not stroke one true stroke at sin, nor begun
the work of mortification, nor crauled one foot from their corruptioins, much
less are they entered into the state of Regeneration, or begun the life of
grace, but do make the Gospel, and the seals thereof in the abuse thereof, a
cloak for their sin and as a charter to bear them out in all their evils,
like those rebellious Jews, who brought oblations and cried, The Temple, The
Temple, when their hands Ier. 7. 4. 8, 9. Isay 1. 13.
were full of blood, and their ways fraught with all wickedness.

It is in vain to seek the reformation of a Church, when the materials are
naught.
THe Church being a building or house, if it so fall out that the SECT. 7.
maine pillars and materials are rotten, and that it is founded but upon
Briers, brambles and rubbish, how shall this house ever be mended or made
sound, otherwise then by a quite demolishing of the frame, and building another
of other and sounder stuff?

Many have sought diverse ways to reform and amend this Church, but all
helps not, except the matter were more sound and solid.

Some cry out vehemently upon the Prelates and Governors of the The Bishops in
England better then the general multitude of the Land.
how much they are deceived, appears in this: first, The Prelates are not
worse, nor in any sense so evil, comparatively, as the general multitude is,
either for ignorance, profaneness, inhumanity, etc. so as there were ten
times more reason to desire to be freed from the general multitude then from
them: secondly, Neither is it possible to govern this rude and unbroken
multitude by an Eldership, or Presbyteriall policy; for they would laugh them
to scorn, and except Christian Elders must have no carnal weapons.
they had secular power conferred upon them, or attending on them (which were
the way to make every Parish a high Commission) their counsel, admonitions,
and censures, should be in as base esteem as Lots counsel was among the
Sodomites; so that the Prelates Genesis 19. 9.
government is the best that can be for such a tumultuous and unbroken
multitude.

Others there are, that would feign cry down the Ceremonies; as Cap, Surplice,
Cross, kneeling, etc. and persuade themselves, that if they might not be
urged, all would be well. And most true it is, they are matters neither
commendable nor useful, but might well be spared, without any danger that I
know of, but what shall we say? they are The ceremonies are fit ornaments for a
carnal multitude.
such ornaments and jewels, as this multitude and their forefathers brought
with them out of Egyptian darkness and they are still good enough for a
people, whose Religion stands more in forms and figures, then in truth and
substance* and if there were no wiser then 2 King. 17. 33. 34
I, they should keep them still, and be half Protestants half Papists, which
is just neither* until they had reformed their moral vices, which are against
the clear light both of Scripture and Reason, and as for the godly and right
informed Christians they should in their Church estate, be far enough from
such vain assemblies or vain ordinances.

Others there are, who think, that if every Parish might choose The Parish
assemblies not fit men to choose their Ministers
freely given them, and that the body of the multitude might come together to
cast up their caps at such an Election, there were like enough to be
entertainment for all the loose and idle Scholars and black Coats, that any
of our well governed Schools should spew out, of which, though some now be
entertained shamefully, yet then doubtless many more would be, else how could
there be like Esaias 24. 2. Hos. 4. 9. John 8. 7.
people like Priest? secondly, What have such men to do, to give voice or
sentence to choose or refuse any man about the service of God, who care not for
God, neither know either him or themselves? thirdly, with what comfort could
any godly man stand Minister unto them, to whom in equal proportion (since
they have chosen him) he must prostitute the holy things, whilst they remain
disobedient and unfaithful?

Some others there are, who stumble at the Ecclesiastical Courts; Ring in
marriage; some are troubled about the cross; others at the surplice; some will
not have their The parish multitude worse then any ceremonies.
wives Churched; others will not kneel at the Sacrament, etc. and so one in
one thing, and another in another thing, even as they affect and have set their
minds, stumbling at a straw, and leaping over a block, like Jonah, who was
angry to death for the Goard, but the Ion. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11
death of a thousand people never grieved him: or like little children which
leave open the doors, that thieves may come in, and then cover them under the
bed clothes. Alas, what safety is there in amending these trifles, when the
body is naught, and can brook no person or thing that is good? were not he a
foolish man, that having a rotten carcass, ready to drop in pieces, would yet
send for some furbushing Surgeon to take off the warts, and help the wrincles
of his face; can any such thing make an evil tree an evil man, or an evil
multitude Mat. 7. 20.
good? If all humane inventions were taken from them, and all Gods pure
Ordinances executed among them, were they any thing the better; or were they
not indeed so much the worse, and the further in the guilt of taking Gods name
in vain?

And therefore I conclude, it is a sequestration, and not a reformation that
will heal us, help us, and give us a right Church estate for to join unto.

It is a matter of great weight and necessity, for Christians to live in a
right ordered Church.
BUt some, perhaps, may think it a small matter, and a needless SECT. 8.
thing for a man to come into any other Church estate or order, but that in the
midst of these confusions, he may content himself Sermons in the assemblies,
and catch here and there a piece, in reading, hearing and conferring, by which
he may not only become a true Convert, but also be confirmed and stablished in
grace, and have his soul fed and nourished to life eternal; and if salvation
may be had in that estate, what need is there to come into any other Church
order?

I answer, that it is not denied but it is possible that men may be visible
Church to be so privileged as that none out of it can be saved; for we receive
men into the Church, whom we deem faithful, and in Christ before: And the
right use of the Offices and Acts 2. 41.
Ordinances in the Church are properly to build up, and keep men in the faith
and obedience of the Gospel, rather then to bring them to it; The Church is a
spiritual corporation, wherein the subjects of the heavenly King are kept in a
more comely order and better obedience, Faith and Salvation is not tied to the
visible Church.
but the incorporating or joining to the Church does not make men subjects of
Christ, which before were not; but it is an ignorant vanity, to hold that
unconverted men may be received into the Church and fellowship of the Saints,
under hope of converting them. We therefore grant, that conversion, faith,
grace and salvation, may possibly be had in many of these assemblies* yea, we
know many who have the true signs thereof* who yet live and converse in them.
Acts 11. 17.


But what then? Will men use the utmost liberty they can, that they may also
please the flesh and the world, and avoid persecution, if they may but be even
threadbare Christians, and in the end be saved? surely I would not have any
good man have such a thought, since it is so near of kin to hypocrisy; for
even Hypocrites will serve God Mat. 19. 16. Psalm. 119. 6.
for wages, and would do so much good as might bring them to eternal life*
but sincere and conscionable Christians use to have respect to all Gods
Commandments, and to such further degrees of obedience, as Acts 10. 33. and
19. 25, 26. 1 John 2. 3. 4.
God from time to time shall reveal unto them; for otherwise their faith and
obedience may of themselves be questioned, whether it proceed from the love of
God or themselves, seeing they can do nothing further then may barely pleasure
themselves?

And as God saw it not good for man in innocence to be alone, and Genesis 2. 18.
Saints out of the world by here and there a man, he has also sanctified
fellowships, and Churches, which must neither be despised 1 Cor. 11. 22. Hebr.
10. 25.
nor forsaken; and this brotherly fellowship of the Church has been so longed
after, and loved of Gods servants, as that they have compared Phil. 4. 1.
it to the most pleasant dew and sweet ointment, the one ravishing Psalm. 133.
2. 3. Numb. 24. 5.
the eye, the other delighting the smell, yea, even Balaam that Sorcerer was
content to commend the comely harmony and order of the Tents of the house of
Jacob, and how excellent and pleasant a thing it is, to see the Saints and
servants of God communicate together in his The beauty of the visible Church.
sacred Ordinances, and how fruitful and profitable such courses are, has in
part been showed already, and shall more fully hereafter. And I must out of
mine own experience confess, that the living in a society of Christians set
in the right order of the Gospel, is one of the greatest helps we have in this
world, to the obedience of the 1 Cor. 11. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Gospel, yea, and so full it is of sweet and sound comfort that it even
ravisheth the Angels, and is indeed next to heaven it self, if things be
carried with holiness, wisdom and love.

For in such a Church all the gifts and graces of the spirit are freely The
profit and sweet comfort of the Church.
in by policy, tradition, custom, etc. the utmost extent of Gods revelations
to the sons of men, are there openly displayed, and the highest strain of
pure affections are there showed; if you have a word of wisdom or
exhortation, there you may utter it. If you would 1 Cor. 14* 29. 30, 31.
learn any thing, there you may ask and receive freely; If you have cause to
weep and mourn, they will mourn with you; or have you cause of joy? they will
rejoice with you; stand you in need of instruction, exhortation or comfort?
they are ready to give it you; do you Verse 3.
stumble or fall, either by error of judgment, or failing in conversation?
why, they will help both to raise and hold you up; have you Gal. 6. 1.
need of some, gentle rebukes, as a balm to your soul; or of some sharp 1
These. 5. 14. Psalm. 141. 5.
and severe threatenings to beat down your proud flesh; yea, need you ought
either for soul or body? why, there it is to be had freely; and whatsoever is
wanting in the outward glory, is supplied seven fold in the inward grace, yea*
and I may say of it as Sabaes Queen said of Salomons wisdom, It was not told
me the half; nor it cannot be expressed 2 Chronicles. 9. 6.
either with pen or tongue, what wonderful pleasure and sweetness there is in
a Christian fellowship.

And out of doubt, if we were not fuller of carnal policy and sensuality
then we are of spiritual grace and soundness, we would rather choose to
endure afflictions and death, in such a society, Heb. 11. 25. 26.
then to live in the Courts of Kings, yoaked with infidels and evil livers.

And if at the last day the righteous shall scarcely be saved, and that 1 Pet.
4. 18.
many shall go so far, as to preach Christ, and do many great works in his
Name, and yet shall be shut out of the Kingdom, what Mat. 7* 21, ^2.
great care had there need to be to search and sound our hearts and to use and
improve all the helps and means which God has left for our growth and
stablishing in grace, and for provoking and encourageing Ephesians. 4. 13.
of us to proceed from one degree of perfection to another; and if men did but
know how much it stood them in hand to regard and love the conversing in a
right ordered Church, they would give their souls no rest till they were in
it; but for want of experimental knowledge thereof they dote upon their Syrian
waters, as Naaman 2 Kings 5. ^2.
did upon Abanah, and Parphar; but if they had tasted the pleasant Eze. 47: 1.
2, 3. Psalm. 84. 10.
streams that flow from this Sanctuary, they would rather be doore-keepers
therein then dwell in the tents of the ungodly.

Yea and we see daily, that even the corruptions and frailties of men David,
who was in a 2 Samuel 12. 2. 3. 7
sweet dream, all the while that Nathan propounded his general Parable, but
when the Prophet told him that he was the man; he began to look about him: so
we have diverse that have made some progress The necessity of the discipline of
Christ.
in Religion, and yet stick in some evil practice or other in conversation,
and can smile upon the Preacher, and go merrily home, thinking, because he
named them not, that he has given them leave to go on in evil, and so they
do, and there is no further means to pull them out.

But in a society of Christians, under the policy of the Gospel, the Word of
God follows them home to their doors, and in o their callings and
conversations, yea, into their chambers and secret places, and the brother
offended at their swarving from Christ, reproves, exhorts, and persuades to
obedience, and if gentle admonitions will not prevail, he uses sharpness;
and if the sin be notorious and scandalous, and that the person will not
humble himself and repent, he proceeds to open rebuke and censure thereof
(as before is showed) that if it be possible the offender may be recovered and
saved, and if Sect. 2.
not, yet that the fellowship may be purified and purged, and scandal removed
from the professors of the Gospel and way of God.

Besides, the revolting and backsliding of many Christians, even cries out
for this help; many professors of Religion are often drawn covetous, prodigal
or wanton in fleshly liberty, and in this doing, they have 2 Samuel 13. 5. Psalm.
49. 18.
many of their parish members to uphold and favor them, and what Romans 1. 31.
means use the Christian professors to recover such? do they any more then
talk of it one to another; and say such a one has done this, and he has done
that, tossing the evil about without fear, and glorying in their own gifts,
eminence and integrity, speaking bitterly 1 Cor. 5. 2. 6*
against them; but other means to recover the offender, or remove the scandal
from the Gospel, they have none, nor none they look after, except some
unadvised man run and fetch a sentence from some who had need to be first
censured themselves.

Whereas, if they had the right use of discipline amongst them, no doubt,
thousands of such might be recovered, to the great joy of themselves and
others, whereas now, going on without this means, who can tell, whether ever
they return out of the snare of the Devil?

And truly, even the most godly stand need oftentimes to be helped by
particular rebukes and admonitions, and it is no small privilege for them to
live in such a society, as where the eyes of their brethren are so lovingly set
upon them, that they will not suffer them to go on in sin; and though it
often seem grievous to our nature, to be rebuked, yet upon second thoughts,
and serious deliberation, they count themselves happy men, that ever they lived
in such a society, as would not suffer them to transgress, yea, and though
many Christians be so mortified, that they cannot fall into any scandalous
sin, yet their faults may be great in hiding their talents, and not improving
their gifts and endowments for the glory of God, in which, though themselves
think all is well, and please themselves in a kind of modesty; yet others of
their brethren see it to be a great fault in them, and give them no rest till
they have drawn them to set their light upon the Table.

And what pity is it to see so many gifts and graces of God to lie hid and
asleep, for want of opportunity and provocation to use them? all which, if
they were in a society and Church of faithful and zealous men, would be
brought forth, and made use of to the glory of God, the benefit of others, and
the great comfort of such as have and use these graces: And thus we see of what
necessity it is for all Christians to join themselves unto, and converse in a
society of faithful men, walking visibly in the order of the Gospel.

The reformed Churches are not condemned, but admonished by this strict
practice.
SOme object, that this Profession and practice, in admitting no Religious
fellowship with wicked men, condemns all reformed Churches in France, Belgia,
Helvetia, etc. since they are very defective in their people and companies for
the most part.

To which I answer, first, that these are but popular and needless exceptions
to make a noise in the world, and to bring us in the more contempt: secondly,
the reformed Churches are not so well known unto us, as that we can pass any
sentence upon them, simply to justify them or condemn them: thirdly, so far
as we do know them, we find them separated and distinguished from the vain
world, and so are not ours: fourthly, the things they do in the worship of God
are voluntary, and without compulsion, so are not ours: fifthly, their officers
are chosen by the congregation, so are not ours: sixthly, their worship is
only the Word of God, and the lively graces of his spirit; so is not ours:
seventhly, their government is by an Eldership or Presbytery, so is not ours;
And all these things sorting together, considered, we are far from condemning
them, and are far nearer them in our practice, then the parish assemblies are.

And if yet by reason of their great popularitie in some Cities, where diverse
thousands are of one Church, (and so meet in sundry several places) and so
cannot possibly be known of their Officers, or of one another, but that many
corrupt persons may lurk amongst them, and not be found out, and so scandal
is brought upon them: secondly, or that by long custom, and for fear of
inconveniences, all private rebukes are used only by their Elders and
Officers: thirdly, or that for fear of some men, or through error of judgment
they baptize the Infants of all manner of wicked parents, that are of no Church
or Religion, being brought unto them; If I say for these and the like failings
we reprove and exhort them, and desire their amendment, and practice otherwise
our selves, yet it does not follow, nor is true, that we condemn them.

Neither is a man bound to determine of other persons then himself, for the
certainty of their estate, nor of other Churches then that where he lives, for
their external obedience: first a man is bound to see that his own estate be
good with God; next, he is to look to it, that he live in such a Church and
Society, where all the means and helps are to continue him in that estate; but
for other persons and Churches, all meddling with them should be sparing and
modest, and except some presumptuous evidences appear, and that a man be
justly called to show his judgment, the less he speaks of them, the more
honesty and wisdom he declares.

And were it so, that we should condemn the reformed Churches, (which God
forbid) and therein do foolishly and rashly, what were that to the
justification of the Church of England; or for the hinderance of our exceptions
against it; except you will frame this consequence, that because we are in one
thing, therefore we are in all, which is too hard a sentence to stand for a
maxim.

Neither do we say, that the Church of England is no Church, or the parish
assemblies, false Churches, nor care for those big and loud censures of
Antichristian, Babylonish, false, etc. they are but words and terms of
provocation, which we can well spare; and it is enough that we find it not
settled according to the order of the Gospel, but by humane authority and
compulsion, and that it is one with the world, and that there is not in it all
the means to stablish, comfort confirm and build up every soul in the ways
of God: these and the like are sufficient motives to persuade men that fear
God, to find out a better and safer way to walk in, and a Church that is more
near the Apostles pattern.

And as for strangers, and Churches in foreign nations, as they are not of our
language, so we cannot know them as our own; for he that knows strangers and
forraigners, as well as his own neighbors and countrymen, it is a sign that
he is very unsociable, or else his eyes are not where they should be.

The prohibition of the Magistrate, though he be a Christian, may not hinder
our obedience to the Gospel.
SOme object, and that not without color, that since we live under a Christian
Magistrate, we must be contented, and thankfully accept so much liberty in the
Gospel as he will allow, and that it is a sign of great unthankfulness and
disloyalty to him, to alter or add in Church matters, and public worship, or
to do more, or otherwise then he commands or allows.

I answer, first, that when the Magistrates are Christians, we are Magistracy
and civil power is one thing, and their Christianity and Religion is another.

Secondly, the same reverence and conscionable obedience were to be given to
the civil power, as Gods Ordinance, though the person which has this power,
were a Turk, or an Infidel; but not the Romans 13. 1. 2.
same love in the fellowship of the Gospel and communion of grace.

Neither does the Scripture provide for any other kind or measure Magistrates
(when any such should arise) then for such as were Heathens.

Fourthly, neither can I ever conceive, how this should become a Christian
Magistrates commands may not stand against Gods.
requires, because the Magistrates are Christians, and forbid it, except it
follow also, that we must also forbear it if they were Heathens; unless a man
should hold this position, that a man is in more bondage under Christian
Governors, then under Heathens, since the question is not concerning
suffering, but concerning doing: and if any Christian Magistrate shall by any
acts or laws political, hinder the practice of Gods Laws; as his
Christianity cannot excuse him in the Court of heaven, for misleading, so much
less can it excuse us, when we follow him in evil; and whatsoever the power
be, or the person which has it, if it fight against Gods Injunctions, we may
answer with them Acts 5. 29.
that said God is to be obeyed rather then man; and if we should be forbidden
to pray or to preach, or to love brotherly fellowship, etc. yet these 1 Pet. 2.
17. Dan. 6. 7. 10.
things must still be done in the most ample manner we can.

Fifthly, neither is it any disloyalty to Princes and Governors at Mat. 10. 28.


Sixthly, and in the things wherein we must differ, we endeavor Obedience to
Magistrates may be in suffering as well as in doing.
course with joy, and not be ashamed of his baseness, who suffered a shameful
death to advance us to a glorious life: and we protest in the sight of God,
that we can make no other answer or excuse from the Magistrates Christianity,
except we should flatter him, and deceive our selves.

Moses example in building the Tabernacle, was no ordinary rule for after times.
MOses the Man of God, a good Governor did appoint all things for the
Tabernacle and public service of God, without consulting SECT. 11.
either with Priest or people, and had the wrath of God Exodus 34. 32. Numb. 16.
31. cap. 12. 2.
must have an eye to the godly Governors to see what they command, and see
that they practice it, without imposing, infusing or practicing otherwise in
any thing then he allows.

I answer: first, this shows what godly Magistrates are to do Priests or
people might have done, if Moses should have been defective, is yet
questionable.

Secondly, Moses, as he was a Prince, so he was a Prophet, and the Prophet that
ever was, except Christ, and he had his familiar Deuteronomy. 34. 10.
talk with God, for all matters about the Tabernacle, and was by him Exodus 33.
11.
immediately directed; so that for any to go about to direct and order him in
those things, had been high presumption and undoubted evil. But now, no
Magistrates that I know of, are such Prophets, or have Moses Magistracy
singular.
any such immediate Revelations, but learn of God according to the common
order of other men; yea, and stand in as much need of counsel and advice (that
I say not more) as any other men of any calling whatsoever; and therefore till
they have Moses learning, how shall they use Moses teaching?

Thirdly, neither did the Princes of Israel afterward take upon them this sole
direction, but were contented to be reproved and counseled Prophets and
Priests, both for their failings in their conversation, and for their
establishing the worship of God, as we may see in 1 Chronicles. 17. 4. 2 Chronicles. 19.
2. 2 King. 11. 17. 2 Chronicles. 34. 23. 24.
David, Asa, Iehosaphat, Ioash, Josiah, and the rest, yea, and all the writings
of Isaiah, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and the rest, are so many sermons of direction and
advice to the Kings of Israel and Judah: Now, if these godly Kings did thus, who
can think that any now can be privileged so far as to be sole Lawgivers for
the Church of God?

Fourthly, the Revelations of Moses were delivered with such heavenly Majesty,
Signs, Miracles and wonders from heaven as no man could Exodus 20. 18. and 40.
38. and 24. 8.
doubt or call in question, of the immediate finger of God, in the establishing
of them; but never since, nor now neither, are there any Laws or Precepts of
Princes confirmed with that heavenly Testimony, but that doubt may be made,
whether the King of heaven ratify them or not?

Fifthly, When Moses wrote Laws, no man had ever written any Magistrates make
their Laws different, for the Church and Religion, and if we may not amidst
them all, and without disparagement to any man, cleave unto the Laws of
Christ, who infallibly has given the Laws for the Church as did Moses for the
Tabernacle, Heb. 3. 1. 2. 5.
and is become our everlasting Priest and Prophet for ever, and must reign
over his alone; we shall presently have as many forms of Churches, as there
arise Governors, and as many Church Laws as the unsettled minds, and
uncertain capacity of frail man pleases to make.

Sixthly, If Moses example in giving the Law for the Tabernacle Lutheran Arian,
or Popish Princes? for it cannot be denied, but that they are Christians? And
what folly and ignorance was it in the Martyrs aforetime to lose their lives A
dishonor to Martyrdom.
so many of them, and expose themselves and theirs to such slavery and misery,
if in the Court of heaven, and before God, they might have been excused, so
long as they had followed the Laws of their Christian Governors?

The examples of the Kings of Israel and Judah, in restoring Gods Worship, do
not bind to any fashions in Religion, but Christ's.
IT is further objected from the Kings of Israel and Judah, as David, SECT. 12.
Asa, Hezechiah and Josiah, etc. who restored Religion, repaired the 2 Chronicles.
30. 1. and 35. 1. 2, 3. 1 King. 8. 1.
any advice or consultation of the people; and so now, the Kings as agents to
appoint and command the people as patients to suffer and obey that which is
commanded, etc.

I answer, first, all this still shows what forwardness there

For it cannot be imagined but it had been lawful to have read Law of God,
though Josiah had not commanded it; as also the Priests might have cleansed the
Temple, and have offered the sacrifices, and the people might have eaten the
Passover, and brought their oblations, though the Princes had forbid it, since
these Statutes were Exodus 12. 24. 25, and 27. 21.
nor given only to the Kings, but to all the House of Israel.

As the Kings of Israel and Judah were types of Christ, the eternal Moses, and
they only which most strictly followed Moses, are most approved and commended
for their faithfulness; but now the succession of Moses being 2 King. 23. 25.
cut off by a more perfect and better Lawgiver, there is now no Law or policy
that can be devised for the gathering and ordering of the Church that deserves
any commendation, but only Christ's, yea, and whosoever is not with Christ
therein, is against him, and be he what he will, he is rather a scatterer than
a gatherer with him.

So that as the Kings of Israel looked into the Laws of Moses for direction to
build, repair and stablish the Temple and Ordinances of God, then; so now, if
Princes will establish Religion, and settle a Church, whither shall they go
for a pattern but to Christ?

A Comparison of the pattern of Christ's Church with the Church of England.
CHrist, though he had all power in heaven and earth, yet, he SECT. 13.
raised no forces nor pitched no fields to compel Nations and Ambassadors Mat.
28. 18, 19. Luke 14. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Acts 17. 34.
and Messengers unarmed in any carnal weapons, to pass through Kingdoms and
Countries, with intreatings and beseechings, to gather here and there a man to
him, and such as by preaching would believe and by voluntary submission would
obey, of them only he became the Captain and Head: secondly, when he had
gathered his Church together, he fed them not with dead decrees, nor carnal
Devices Ioh. 6. 51. 53 1 Cor. 12. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
but with his Word, Flesh and Spirit, which nourished to life eternal:
thirdly, he governed them not by any stately or pompous power, but by such
rules and regiments as their necessities required, and themselves desired. 1
Cor. 5. 4.


And if now by glittering swords and sounds of trumpets, Churches be gathered
by thousands, and that we are grown to such pomp and swelling in words, that
we can talk of a Catholic visible Church of a Christian world, of a
National Church, etc.

Let the multitudes sound as loud as they will, I fear me heaven will have
never the more of them, but when all is done, his Word will stand that says,
Few find the way to life, and Christ chooses not Mat. 7. 13. 14.
a world, but a remnant out of the world.

And yet, whilst proud flesh and carnal policy thus vainly presumes how do
men struggle and strive by wit, policy and learning, to make that stand for
truth, which only times have hatched, and to make true Religion stand with all
the fair show in the flesh that may be* but in the mean time, what
scattering, scambling and contradicting there is, and how men are plunged and
fumbled to bind the truth and the times in a bundell, that even the most wisest
and ablest have even lost themselves about it.

A proportionable application of the Jews State, unto our times.
TRue it is, that when the Kings of Judah commanded the Ordinances SECT. 14.
of Moses, the people were bound to obey them even in Religious rites, but if
they should have varied from Moses rule, the question is, whether the people
might have followed them without sin, though even David or Josiah should have
done it.

First, as for example, whereas Moses gave his Statutes to Israel, if David
should have compelled the Edomites or the Ammonites, or the Philistims whom he
conquered, to have come into the Temple, with offerings and oblations, being
Gentiles and uncircumcised; whether the Priests might have offered their
offerings, and the people have prayed for a blessing or not?

Secondly, if he would have made Priests of any other thcu of the Aaron;
whether the people might have brought their offerings to them or not?

Thirdly, if other matters then Moses Law had ordinarily been Synagogues;
whether the people must have come to hear it or not.

Fourthly, if among the Judicials hanging had been used in stead of Exodus 22.
1. Deuteronomy. 22. 18. and 25. 9.
stead of pulling off the shoe; whether the people must still have executed
accordingly.

First, But our assemblies are compact in a manner of black Ethiopians,
Edomites, mocking and deriding Amonites:

Secondly, our Priests are made by an invented form* and must Acts 14. 23.
grace, and therefore election of the people.

Thirdly, and we have other teaching and service than the Word and Spirit of
Christ, viz. by Hom. Canons Apocrypha prayers etc.

Fourthly, and in stead of a Christian conviction and censure of Comminations
read in Lent, and process coming out of Courts, which are bought and sold,
and fly in and out according to the purse rather then according to the
offense; and what shall we make of all this, if we put it together, surely we
may compare it to a leprous body, in a painted paper coat, which neither has
soundness within, nor solidnesse without.

But here is the question, whether the godly must contentedly submit to all
this patcherie, and putting out that light, and discerning that they have in
these things, may bless their souls, and say it is only the fault of our
Governors? or whether all Christians are not bound to keep the pattern left
by him who was more faithful then Moses, 1 Timothy 6. 13.
without regarding what any Prince or Potentate does to the contrary.

Fifthly, Indeed whatsoever abuse or neglect there had been of the Temple in
Jerusalem, by the Kings, yet the people might not without special command have
built another, but that Legal restraint was not by occasion of any Kings
command, but by a Statute of the Lord, who only there had put his Name, and
for a time it might not be altered; but now since mount zion is every where,
and that God is no Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 1 King. 8. 29.
respecter of places or persons but is in the midst of two or three of his
servants, gathered in his Name, I see not how the Church in any sense can be
bound or tied to the pleasure and liberty of any mortal man whatsoever.

Sixthly, and if Vzziah, being a godly King, was not only withstood, burned
Incense, but even thrust out of the 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. 19. 20.
Temple when once he became a Leper. And since sin was typed out by
Leprousie, and is so much more material then it, as a substance is of more
value then a shadow; I see not, but if wicked rulers now should offer to join
to the Church, they may be refused, and then how much easier may such Subjects
and servants of theirs be refused, as are wicked and naught on whom the
Leprousie of all viciousness clears and shows it self in the behavior,
countenance, words and actions* notwithstanding their own desire, and the
desire of any friends that love them not aright.

The submission of the Jews to the Heathen Kings about building the Temple, is
no imitable practice about the Church.
SOme others object the example of the Heathen kings, as Cyrus and SECT. 15.
Darius, without whose leave the Jews could not build the Temple, and
therefore how much less may we that are under Christian

I answer first, That the time of building the Temple according to Prophets
predictions was not come before they set about it; for if it had, they must
have gone about it to their powers so soon as the Hag. 1. 1. 2.
commandment had been forth.

Secondly, The building of the Temple was a matter of great charge Nehe. 2. 8.
Captives, neither had, nor were able to accomplish, so that there was an
impossibility in it.

Thirdly, they were servants, yea, captives and prisoners to those heathen
Kings, and must not without a special dispensation from God, (as was that of
robbing the Egyptians) have left their Masters Exodus 12 35. 36
and places, under whom by Gods just order they were captivated.

Fourthly, It came of the Lord, that those heathen Kings should (after they had
for a time corrected his people) become their friends and Nehe. 2. 4.
and at Gods appointed time, provoke and strengthen them in building the house
of the Lord God of Israel, and these things considered, what force can there be
in this example?

Fifthly, And how comes this far fetched type, to be so blindly Magistrates
which were in those parts? No surely, neither did the Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Apostles and servants of Christ, when they went to and fro preaching the
Gospel, and stablishing Churches in Samaria, Phenice, Antiochia, Act. 8. 5.
and 11. 19. and 18. 1. Tit. 1. 5.
Corinth, Galatia, Crete, and the rest, ever so much as ask leave of any of
the heathen Governors to publish and stablish the Gospel there?

Sixthly, And if the alarm of the Gospel must first be sounded observations,
we may sometimes wait long enough, since the Luke 17. 20.
Gospel, the subject wherereof is salvation, by a poor abject Carpenter,
Mark. 6. 3. Act. 26. 28.
is too base a matter ever to be set by in such places for the most part,
otherwise then some parcells thereof may be received, so far as it may
procure outward safety and glory.

The only way to establish the Gospel and the pure Ordinances thereof is to
suffer persecution for it.
BUt now, seeing this age will go no further than they are, nor SECT. 16.
endure no other courses in religion than that which is by Law established, how
shall we do? Must we spend our money,

I answer, Do not thousands die in their beds of Fevers, Fluxes, redeeming
and recovering that liberty of the Gospel which this age refuses to hear of,
and which fights against the confusions and corruptions of our times? Heb.
11. ^^.
O that some Christians rightly informed in these things would stand forth and
suffer, and would not be delivered, but would rather die, then live to see Gods
Ordinances so basely contemned and thrust out of place, and humane traditions
upheld with strong hand.

Secondly, who sees not that for want of resisting unto blood, all assayes
Heb. 12. 4.
many have set on upon a purer practice, in diverse places and so long as things
could be carried secretly, they went well on; but as soon Gal. 5. 7.
as it began to be noted and talked against. Some would fly off presently. And
if they were once called in question by authority, and threatened, there was
presently a scattering; and if some two or three were more stout then the rest,
then to prison a while they were sent; and then their friends and acquaintance
would resort to them; some with compassionate complaints, others with big
speeches, but all in carnal reasons, till at last some mincing under hand
acknowledgement, There must be no yielding in the cause of Christ.
or some equivocating Protestation must be framed and showed to their
opposites* and so they should get out with great charge to take heed of
factions, schisms and conventicles; and so there lies the life and soul of
that begun practice, and the parties afterward either become conformable, or
else keep themselves very close.

And what construction can be made of this, but that either it was not truth
they stood for, or that they were not rightly informed in it: but fell lightly
and wantonly upon it, and so left it as lightly again; or else that they made
not conscience of doing the will of God in the things revealed to them:
whereas, if they had stoutly stood out, and borne their cross with patience
even to bands and death; some other The day of suffering for Christ is a day of
honor.
events would have followed, and besides their precious and honorable death,
they should have given some furtherance to the glory and truth of God, whereas
by their cowardly yielding, the arm of flesh exulteth, and reproach and
scandal is cast upon the sincere profession and practice of Gods Ordinances,
and themselves commonly languish for losing the day, and are as men livelesse
amongst their neighbors, and comfortless within themselves.

The time of suffering is now come.
ANd such is the carnality of our times, even of the professors of Religion,
that they are never weary of ease, pleasure and SECT. 17.
plenty, nor fear the taking of too much thought for the flesh, neither will
they ever have the time come for judgment to begin Romans 13. 14.
at Gods House, much less with the Apostle Paul will they take pleasure in
afflictions and persecutions; belike we are borne in the time when men must die
in their nests, and go to heaven in feather-beds; and the 2 Cor. 12. 10. Job
29. 18.
gate to heaven is grown so wide, that men may run in at it with all
invented formality and fleshly liberty that can be invented or desired.

Some there are, who will pray earnestly, that the abuses in the Gospel really
discovered, and that the Saints may rejoice together in the sweet fellowship of
the Church, and it is well they do so; but in their prayers they look the
wrong way for it ever to come in, they look it should be done with sound of
Trumpet, by decrees of Parliaments, John 18. 36.
by Edicts of Princes; alas, the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, he
gains his glory here, by abasement, and they that will do any good in his
cause, must cast away all carnal helps* and henceforth know Christ according
to the flesh no more, but walk close with 2 Cor. 5. 16.
him in his temptation.

And what doctrine is there in the Scriptures more clear than this? Did not
Christ himself by death vanquish sin and Satan, 3. Luke 24. 26.
and so enter into glory? and was his whole life here any other then a
continual suffering? and were not these his sufferings as well imitable as
meritorious? Are not we to look unto him who is the Author and finisher of
our Faith, and follow him in his temptations? Heb. 12. 2. ^.
and are not all his promises made with the condition of the cross? Did not
Paul desire to have fellowship with Christ in his Mark 10. 30. Phil. 3. 10.
afflictions, and to be made conformable to his death? Well, how comes it to
pass, that we never examine our selves by these things? nor think of
suffering afflictions, but imagine that the common pace and prevailing course
of the times and multitude will serve the turn to bring us to glory? What
privilege have we above Christ, above Paul, and the Christians in the
Primitive time? Belike no Prophet nor good man can perish, or be wronged in our
Luke 13. 33.
Nation; but we are borne in the day, in which he that is most godly is the
most secure.

Well, if it be not so, I would it were so, but it is rather to be feared we
join too much carnal liberty with our Profession, and Gal. 6. 1^.
too eagerly desire to make a fair show in the flesh, and measure Gods favor
too much by temporal blessings; and we think, because we build us fair
houses, and make us costly apparel, and eat our A vain conceit.
meat merrily, and lie and turn upon our feather-beds, with our brains full
of roving thoughts, and train up our children according to the fashion, if
withal we lend our ears sometimes to a Sermon, and confer sometimes
cursarily of the Scripture, and sometimes use a form of Prayer in our
Families; we think God is wonderfully beholden to us, and we are some rare
instruments of his glory, and notable pillars in his Church; for we sit fast
and Acts 26. 24.
quiet, and are not moved with errors, nor schisms; but when other busy and
giddie headed men that can never be quiet, rove and range about, troubled in
mind, and distempered in affections, and foolishly pulling trouble upon
themselves, and beggary upon their wives and children; we live at wealth and
peace and die quietly in our beds, and are honorably buried amongst our
friends, and leave behind us a pattern and patrimony to our children.

Other motives to perswadeus to suffering.
BUt surely, if we had that zeal for the glory and house of God SECT. 18.
which David had, we would not dwell in our seeled houses, Psalm. 132. 2, 3.
nor give our selves to sleep and slumber, and see the house of the Hag. ^. 4.
Lord lie waste, and the stones thus scattered amongst the rubbish, which Psalm.
102. 13, 14.
must not now be understood of any material Temple, but of the spiritual
building of those lively stones, the souls and bodies of the faithful 1 Pet.
2. 5.
into an holy Temple in the Lord; And this holy Temple lies yet wast, and the
stones hid in the dust and dung of the earth; And although Ephesians. 2. 21. 1 Pet.
1. 12.
the Lords time be come to delight in the fellowship of his Saints, and the
Angels stand ready to rejoice in the beauty of this House, and Christ desires
to walk amidst the Candlesticks, and to take Rev. 2. 1.
his repast with his beloved at noone. And yet here is all asleep; and taking
care for their wives, children, cattle, farms and merchandise* etc. Caut. 1.
6.
and they cannot come to this Supper of the Lord, to which they are invited,
Luke 14. 18, 19.
for fear of losing some worldly toys and trifles.

Some will not trust their own judgments, others will not control their
betters; some are right in judgment* but are too cold and drousie to come to
action: others are fearful and timorous, some run lightly and foolishly
without their errant, others are so wise, 2 Samuel 18. 22.
that they can do nothing. And thus by all and all, there is not that done
that should be: many labor to hew, polish and prepare stones, and timber for
the building, but there is no sound frame yet reared, or right form appearing.

And it were well if yet at the last hour of the day we could set our selves
to this work, and bring our souls and bodies into this holy house, in which a
days dwelling were better then a thousand elsewhere; Psalm. 84. 10.
and truly, if we had but tried the excellency of this house, we would
think nothing too dear for it. And what if it should cost us our precious
lives? can we bestow them upon better terms? can we live ever? or can we
pass the time that God has Acts 2^. 13.
set? will not death as well find us in our beds, as in the Iaole, or at
Tiburne?

And who can tell, whether we by carrying our selves humbly, modestly, and
conscionably before God and men, without depraving or abusing them in
authority, may not cause our haters to become Psalm. 106. 45.
our lovers, and our enemies our friends, when our righteousness is brought
forth as the light, and the judgment as the bright shining noone, Psalm. 37. 6.
yea, if it be best for his glory, we are sure he will deliver us from the
oppressions of men and strife of tongues, prolonging our days, and Dan. 3. 17.
18. Psalm. 66. 12.
honoring us with gray hayres, as a Crown of glory, being found in the way of
righteousness, notwithstanding all the oppositions of the times Prove. 16. 31.
and violence of men. But ^^t if he will not, but say he has no pleasure in
us, nor that we shall not see the glory of his house, but shall die in 2 Samuel
15. 26.
the very endeavoring of it, let him do what he please; and let it be enough,
if our children may build this house, and enjoy the fruit of that which our
lives paid for.

And if we must honor God with our bloods; let us do it Our lives are not
too good to be given for Gods truth. Act. 5. 41. Gal. 1. 16.
cheerfully, rejoicing that we are found worthy to suffer for his name and let
us cast off this nice flesh, and idle vanity, consult no more with flesh and
blood, but forsake our selves in that kind, and if we will talk of heaven,
let us contemn the earth, and be content to lose lands, goods and life for
Christ and his Gospels sake; for else in looking after Mark. 8. 38.
heaven, we do like the sluggard which lusts, but has naught; and as
children which gape for all their parents wealth, but will take no Prove. 13. 4.
pains to please them.

Away with this self-love, that will have heaven and earth too, where is our
love to Christ, that purchased heaven, since we will not Mark. 8. 36.
part with one dram of ease, pleasure or profit for the furtherance of his
Gospel? And how can we be said to honor him that will rather cease Mat. 13.
20, 2^.
our obedience to him in the things he requires then part with a few worldly
toys and trifles.

It is no strange thing for Christians to be persecuted of Christians.
BUt this is a very grievous thing, when a man shall not only be SECT. 19.
opposed and cruelly dealt withal at the hands of ignorant and vain men, but
when many wise, Religious and godly men shall set themselves against one, and
be instruments of ones ruin and destruction? Me thinks it cannot be, that
such good men should be deceived and misled as they are if I be right?

I answer, first, Did not good Asa put faithful Hanant in prison? David
dispossess true hearted Mephibosheth of his lands? 2 Chro. 16. 10. 2 Samuel 16.
4. 2 Chronicles. 24. 23. Genesis 37. 28. Job. 19. 2. 5.
Did not reforming Ioash, cause zealous zachariah to be stoned? Did not Joseph's
fellow Patriarchs sell him into Egypt? Did not Jobs wife and godly friends,
vex and torment his soul more than all his other crosses? Was not the holy
Saint of God, Paul, despised and derided, even of his spiritual sons? yea,
sometimes Manasses eats Ephraim, 1 Cor. 4. 3. 10. 15.
and Ephraim Manasses, and therefore it is no strange thing, to see one Isai.
9. 20. 21.
Christian abused, reviled, and cruelly handled at the hands of another.

Yea, and if it were ever in any age, it must needs be in ours, since greater
strictness and censoriousnesse was never found against one Mat. 22. 23.
mint and annis.

And if men be not borne all in one day, and brought up all in one School, or
enured to one Preacher, or that one man have learned a little faster or slower
then his fellows, and begin to speak either more plainly, or more darkely
than ordinary, he is by and by distasted and talked with, to see if he be not
some Arian, Anabaptist, Familist, Brownist, Puritan, etc. and if any one of
his allegations look toward The image of our times.
any of these Sects (as it were marvel if some should not) then the opponent
has somewhat to busy himself and his friends about, and there is a rare
piece of work done, an infected sheep discovered, and now he must be worried,
and hunted, and where shall the instruments be had to chase this creature? not
from the rules of Divinity or logic, except once or so, for recreation; but
the weapons must be fetched out of the Cutlers shop that must cut the throat of
those errors, ad bring this Irregular fellow to a non plus, and the next news
A notable wcapon to repress errors.
he hears there is a pursevant at his back to carry him before authority, but
when he comes there, some informers, (richer in clothes than in grace) have
been before him, and told his tale for him, so as there is nothing for him to
say, except he will swear he knows not wherefore, and make answer he knows
not to what, and after short work the man with the keys must become his Host,
and with him he must eat hard meat, till either his withered Carcass fall in
the dust, or be drawn upon a hurdle to Tiburne.

And thus has many a worthy Christian been served, and brought Many good
Christians abused, and lose their lives for trifles.
to his end, and what sound and zealous Christian is there more, which can say
he is sure he shall not be so served? For though the things they hold have a
good ground, and an honest intent, and the differences are rather about forms
of words, than matters of weight; yet we live in such a strict and zealous age
as will have a conformity, even betwixt the tips of men's tongues, and amongst
such notable wise men, that can spy a fault where there is none.

It is reported of Bishop Grindall, that though his love to honest Bishop
Grindal.
was suspended from his Bishopric before his death; yet even in the midst of
this his large love and lenity, by the instigation, and forestallings of some
Parasites and idle bellied Priests; he put to silence, one of Mr. Strood.
the most famous and worthiest Preachers that ever was in that Dioces.

I have also heard of a very excellent Preacher in Canterbury, who was both a
lover of goodness and good men, and yet (partly by his Master T. W.
own mistaking, partly by others provocation) he persecuted an honest
religious man, and one of his Parish, causing him to be put from his office
which he had in the City, then to be deprived of work G. G.
or any relief from honest men, afterward caused him to be imprisoned, where
he lay above a year, till himself, his wife and children were almost starved;
and had starved but for some secret course, by A lamentable example.
which they were relieved, and afterward coming out of prison, he caused him
to be banished the City, and often threatened him with fire and faggot, and all
for a trivial controversy* wherein there was ten times more heat of blood
than weight of difference.

And until our Preachers and Professors have better learned the The true cause
of cruelty for Religion.
doctrine of forbearance which hereafter God willing, I will treat of, and have
made their Canons for uniformitie a little larger, but especially till they
better know themselves, and are affected with their own ignorances, errors and
mistakings, they are fitter to Lord it over their brethren, then bearing their
burden to serve them in Love, 1 Cor. 1. 24.
and can with more ease set themselves to butcher one another, Gal. 6. 2.
then to inform, cherrish and comfort one another, and until this spirit is
abated, and this inordinate zeal quenched, we must look Judge. 8. 3.
for afflictions and persecutions at the hands of those that are partakers of
the same grace with us, and wait for the coming of the Lord Jesus from heaven
as well as we.

But what shall we say? even this the Lord does, that he may try profane
wretches may revile, accuse and wrong us, but even our familiars and known
friends, which have familiarly and sweetly borne us company in Gods worship;
and Psalm. 55. 13, 14.
even they which should be comforters are tormentors. They which are begotten
by one word, and quickened by one spirit, crush one another to hell, and this is
no small trial; for that there should be continual enmity and spiritual
war betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed Genesis 3. 15. 16.
of the Serpent is no wonder, seeing they are as contrary as light and
darkness, but that even the seed of the woman should be at such enmity 2 Cor.
6. 14. 15.
amongst themselves is strange and wonderful, and shows the greatness of
Satan's malice, the strength of man's corruption, and All works for the best.
the mavelous operation of Gods grace, which prevails even in spite of all
misorders, and brings great light out of the blackest darkness.

The scandalls in the separated Churches, is no argument to condemn their
practice.
I See no such excellency, or perfection in the separated Churches SECT. 20.
more then in others, but they often run into many scandalous evils and are
full of jarres, emulations and contentions; so that 2 Cor. 12. 20.
except they were otherwise then they are?

I answer first, As Lot fell into a more grievous sin, when only cave, then
he ever did when he was Genesis 19. 33. 34.
in the midst of the Sodomites: And as David in his great advancement committed
a more foul fact then ever he did in his former abasements; so there is no
estate in this world free from temptation and 2 Samuel 11. 4.
danger neither is our enemy idle, or slothful, to take his opportunities,
from our estates, occasions and condition, but follows us, to Job 1. 7.
the gates of heaven, that he may either get us, or cause us to scandalize, by
which means he may get some others.

When therefore we speak of such glorious things in the Church, Angels, or of
men free from corruption and Temptation; for were it so, it needed no
ordinances, The visible Church has no Angelical* perfection.
nor means to help, recover and uphold it, but as I said before, even
therefore is a Church Fellowship appointed of God to prevent frailties and
offenses, and to purge out such as grow wilfully scandalous in evil; and such
as will except against all such Churches as in whom they find failing in
manners, must go seek the Church in heaven; for whilst we are here, we are
frail men, and some frailties will still appear in us, though by the grace of
God, many are kept all their life from scandalous evils.

The Papists with like color object against the Protestants, that they The
frailties of men no argument against a Religion.
whoring, drunkenness, theft, etc. But he that is acquainted with both* can
tell, that even the Papists in the greater part of them are more frequent in
such vices than the Protestants, and by their leave, they that will condemn
another for an evil, must be clear of it themselves, else their own mouth
will accuse them.

But both will object against the separated Churches, and say you

I answer, first, when Christ had culled out his wedding guests, wedding
garment; so though those Mat. 22. 11.
men be culled out, yet some hypocrites will lurk amongst them, though they be
never so poor and contemptible; as Judas did adhere The separated Churches are
not free from hypocrites.
unto Christ: for though they profess a separation from the open wicked, yet
they profess no separation from Hypocrites, neither may, nor can, till they
are discovered.

Secondly, Hypocrites, that turn the Grace of God into wantonness, are Jude
4. 19.
most forward of all to separate themselves from others; and therefore how

Thirdly, it is a punishment of their former hypocrisy to be discovered where
they looked for greatest esteem, and so being disappointed Acts 8. 19. 20.
come to Repentance, then in living amongst a company as ill as themselves,
where their visard should not have been plucked off.

Fourthly, true it is, there may be less evils amongst the separated, then
amongst the parish multitudes, and so I am sure there is; for The separated
Churches not so evil as the parishes.
whereas three Scribes in a few sheets of paper did note and discourse of all
the evils and scandalls that fell among the separated in many years. If in the
Parishes all the evils should be noted and chronicled; there had need at
every fifth house to dwell a Scribe.

Fifthly, And though I love not to make comparisons, to cause England which
Many Christians in the parishes excellent in personal grace but not in Church
order.
are of a very godly life and conversation; and some that go as far therein,
as any I ever saw in my life. And if I should prefer any of the separated
before them in conversation, I should speak against my own conscience, but in
the Church state and order I must prefer the other before them.

Sixthly, And yet if a man had a mind to breed and foster Atheism, scandalls,
which noted men, both Preachers and Professors in the Parishes have fallen
into, in a few years, but why should we make work for wanton ears? let us
rather fear our selves, and let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
1 Cor. 10. 12.
he fall.

Seventhly, It is a fault of the professors, that the Churches of separation
are no better; they have lingered, and refused to bring their Temple, whilst
Sanballat and Tobiah Ezra. 4. 1. 2.
have been building there, whose separation has rather been from grace than
from corruption; and these creeping in under a show of Jude 1. 4.
godliness, have filled all with scandal, contention and division; whereas if
those that had been sound and sincere men, and grounded and experienced in the
knowledge of God and themselves, would have been gathered together, and filled
the Sanctuary, there would have been no room nor use for such instruments:

Wherefore, hereafter do not you sit still and control others, and It is the
fault of the professors, that the separated Churches are no better.
do just nothing your selves; for I tell you, it is a work well befitting and
beseeming the most holiest and godliest people that are in the world, and
altogether unfitting and unlawful for such whose lives and conversations are
not otherwise answerable.

Eighthly, Admit that all the separated Churches have hitherto but Israel
ranged about diverse years in the wilderness and effected nothing, Deuteronomy. 1. 4^.
except it were to dig each others grave, yet was their general aim Judge 20.
18. 21. 25. 35.
good.

The eleven tribes made two sallies out against the Benjamites, and lost the
field, yet was their cause good, and in the end they prevailed; The failings of
the separated Churches, serve to teach them that now are to begin to do better.
errors in actions are best found out, when they are really discovered: and if
you have seen these men's failings you owe the more diligence. if you find your
own Church estate not right; does that help you to talk of the Brownists
contentions? Are you borne to find fault with others, and do nothing your
selves? rather you should mend it where they have failed, and when you are come
into the right order of a Church, then let other men's harms teach you.

And where you have seen the separated Churches to be contentious, be you more
quiet; where they have been full of divisions, cleave you close together; If
they would bear nothing, yet bear you one another burden; If they have
been too censorious, be you more charitable; If they have lived loosely, live
you strictly; If they have been An excellent imitation.
cold, be you zealous; If they have been fearful, be you more stout; If they
have revolted, stand you fast; And if you think all they have done is in
hypocrisy, take heed all that you do be in sincerity. And thus much for the
first General part of this Treatise, tending to direct and persuade all
Christians to come into the fellowship of the Saints in the order of the
Gospel.

THE SECOND PART OF THE TREATISE; WHEREIN THE TWO MAINE FAILINGS OF the Rigid
Separation are reproved, and their Objections answered.
The rigid Separationo verrun their course in their first onset.
NOw, that I may not be unjust nor partial, I must SECT. 21.
turn my self to the other side, to the strict separation, who are even as
much beyond the mark, by their over-strained grounds and strait affections, as
the Professors in England, are short, by their timorous formalitie; so as if
the one would come a little forward, There would be an excellent harmony, if
the separation and the professor could reunite.
and the other step back, and meet both a^ the mark, what a sweet harmony
might there be; but who shall live to see this done? yet to them both, as my
loving friends and brethren, I must speak, and let God do what he pleases.

The first thing they are faulty in is, that they not only condemn Idol
worship, and all that use it Idolaters, notwithstanding any holiness The
separation have gone too far.
or sincerity which the persons have; but how unjust their accusations of the
godly people in the assemblies are, is evidently showed in a Treatise published
by Master I Robinson, so that of that I need say little.

Indeed Master Barrow, and some others being under oppression, Solomon says
makes a wise man mad; did harshly and hastily tumble up all things together
esteeming the fruits and effects Eccles. 7. 9. H. Barowes discovery, page 112.
A dangerous sentence.
of their preaching, with all the comfortable feelings and inward rejoyeings in
the spirit obtained in the parish assemblies, to be nothing else but a delusion
of Satan, to betray their souls.

But words spoken or written in hasty passion of the mind and inordinate
zeal, must not stand for Oracles; for, even the holy Prophets of God
themselves have recalled such speeches, and chosen rather to confess their
own frailties in using them, then adventuring them upon the Church in
succeeding ages, for a further and remediless Numb. 20. 10. 12. Psalm. 116. 11.
Psalm. 73. 22.
danger; as we may see in Moses, David, Asaph and others.

Though then we esteem Master Barrow and the rest (who first set upon a second
Lutheran course) otherwise good men, and are doubtless at rest with the Lord,
yet this must be accounted their error. And no man must think it any dishonor
to them, though they were as good as Paul himself, if we cease to follow them,
where they 1 Cor. 11. 1.
followed not Christ.

So that leaving the Justification of the forward and better sort of people in
England, to the things written of them in M. R. book, I come to take a view
of the ordinances which are in the parish assemblies, to see if there be none
among them that is Gods, and is used without mixture of humane traditions; and
though it were a round and ready course, to make wash way of all; yet even Iehu
had 2 King. 20. 23.
so much care when he destroyed the Prophets of Baal, as to enquire if none of
the Lords Prophets were there.

So then, though we be careful when we come to the worship of God (as we
ought to be) that we neither submit our selves nor our bodies to human
traditions; so neither must we condemn all for humane traditions, which is not
comprehended and kept within the limits of a right Church state; for as some of
the Lords Prophets were ^ King. 18. 13.
in Samaria, even in the height of Ahabs wickedness, and some holy 2 Chronicles.
36. 18.
vessels in Babylon, in the depth of captivity, so whatsoever may be said of
the Church estate in England, yet there are some of Gods Ordinances Ezra 1. 7.
there, which even in the midst of iniquities has wrought effectually for
the salvation of many.

And although all things amongst them have been so mixed and wrapped in
amongst men's inventions, as that the good and bad can Preaching in England Gods
Ordinance.
hardly be severed; yet there is one thing; which in my judgment, stands for
the most part clear from any evil or abuse, and that is the preaching of the
Word in the assemblies of England.

Yet not all preaching there, by every Rhetorical Ridler, or pra^ling What
Preachers in England may be heard.
Parasite, of which there are too many, but such honest and sincere handling
the Word of God, as by some few there is used, whose aim properly and mainly
is to beat down sins and corruptions, and to build up and stablish in true
grace and godliness; and who can deny this to be the work of the Lord, and
his ordinance to save his elect? The efficacy of sound and zealous preaching.
though even the best of these Preachers be in some other things awry and
misled through the corruption of the times, against all which evils and errors
of theirs, I am as ready as any to protest and bear witness, but they must
give me leave to spare their graces, when I condemn their corruptions.

The general Objection against hearing in the Parish assemblies answered.
THe general objection is, that all Gods Ordinances are given SECT. 22.
to his Church, and so if their Church state be not good, what have they to do
with any of Gods Ordinances, it is out of Sion, that the Law must go, and such
as are of the world have nothing Mich. 4. 2.
to do to meddle with it.

I answer, first, Preaching is not an action that is proper to a visible All
Gods Ordinances are not peculiar to the visible Church.
Church must be no ingrosser, nor the world no obtruder; a covetous impious
wife is more hateful then a free hearted servant.

And though the Law went first out of Sion; a proper place, yet now mount Sion
is every where, and every Christian is both the Temple of the Lord in a sense,
as also a little mountain of holiness, from Ioh. 4. 21, 23. 1 Cor. 6. ^9.
whom the Law of God and his Will must flow out upon all just occasions, to
neighbors, brethren, contrymen, strangers, etc. yea, to any, good or bad,
that will give attention, and so far are godly Preachers in England from
blame, because they preach, as that I rather blame them that give over, and
desire from my heart, that where The increase of godly Preachers in England is
a thing much to be desired.
there is one of these plain and powerful Preachers, that there were a
hundred, and that not only their Temples, but even their houses, and all
places where people might hear, were filled with the voice and Word of God,
and though this might suffice, being rightly considered, to answer this
objection, and to show that preaching may not be engrossed by the Church, much
less by the officers of the Church, yet because a word is not sufficient to
those that make these objections, I willa little more distinctly open and
prosecute the difference.

What Preaching is, and who may preach; as also where, and to whom.
PReaching is a reverend declaring of the Will and Word of SECT. 25.
God in many words or in few; or an effectual evincing and Preaching what it
is. Job. 3. 4. Acts 2. 22. 36. Luke 12. 42.
speaking to the heart and conscience, without fearful withholding the
portion from any, or immoderate lashing out that which belongs to none.

I say it is reverend declaring, etc. For, every Scripture phrase and good Mat.
4. 6. 1 Samuel 28. 18. 19
be done with premeditation, and due consideration of the Author (God) of the
matter (his Word) the end (his Glory) and the salvation of the hearers. 1 Cor.
2. 17.


Of the Will of God; we must not preach our own wills, or empty our stomaches
against such as personally oppose us, lest it be Act. 10. 27. Job 42 7. 8.
God is told, that is properly preaching.

In many words, or in few, I do not say that a speech of an hour long a few
words, ten words, five words, a word in his place, being seasonably spoken, may
be an effectual Sermon, a pithy Acts 9. 20. 1 Cor. 14. 19. Prove. 25. 11. Luke
9. 60. 61.
exhortation; and whether the speech be long or short, if the Will of God be
reverendly declared, and rightly applied, it is preaching.

Secondly, it is demanded, who may preach? And for that I affirm, that every
Christian, which has received any Talent or gift of God, Who is a Preacher.
Luke 19. 13. 11. 1 Pet. 4. 10. 22. Romans 12. 6, 7. Acts 8. 1. 4. and 11. 19.
minister the gift he has received, as a good disposer of Gods secrets,
without hiding his talent, or withdrawing himself from the Lords barvest, but
when a door is opened, and an occasion given, let him that has a word of
exhortation, say on; And this must be done with Christian discretion according
as the talent is, some men, as they travel and labor in their affairs, to
fill with gracious speeches and counsel, such as they are sorted withal:
others more eminent and fluent in Act. 18. 26.
speech to do it more publicly, as they can, amongst the multitude, where
they dwell or travel, at such time and occasions, as people meet together, and
are willing to hear them.

Thirdly, It is demanded, where preaching must be? And for that I affirm, that
as there is now no holy or unholy place, so there In what place preaching may
be used.
in one place as in another; and may as lawfully be done in Faires,
Marketplaces, Passage boats, Fields, and dwelling houses; as in any Acts 17.
17. Mark 4. 1. Mat. 5. 1.
Churches or Temples, provided the place be convenient, and the audience silent
and attentive.

The fourth question is, To whom preaching must be used, and for that Adam,
whether Jews, Who they are, that may be preached unto.
Turks, Indians, Nigers, Papists or Protestants, religious or profane, one or
other, provided, the Preachers matter be suited to his audience, and that he be
such a workman in handling the Word of God, as that Acts 17. 22. Romans 13. 11.
2 Timothy 2. 15.
he give each his portion thereof, whether terror and judgment, or compassion
and comfort, taking heed still of that sentence used by the Holy Ghost against
such, as either justify the wicked, or condemn the righteous.

Now, the sum of all this is thus much, That every Christian Prove. 17. 15.
that has received a gift of God, for that purpose* may preach the Word, and
so consequently be heard, in any assembly, where there may be audience, and
upon these grounds, which I take to be sound, I intend to frame these ensuing
consequences.

Of the liberty that the Word of God ought to have.
ANd though now both the Papists, and some ignorant Protestants SECT. 24.
would have no Word of God sounded forth by any, but their No Church nor
officers may ingrosse the word of God.
selected Clergy; and also the Brownists would ingrosse it into their secret
assemblies, yet the same key which unlocked the old Catholics Latin box,
wherein they kept all the Lat^ie from the Letter of the Scriptures, must now be
used to free the preaching thereof out of the prison, wherein these ingrossers
have bound in chains the very Gospel of our Lord Jesus, that if there should
rise up a man as learned 1 Cor. 14. 18.
and eminent as Paul; yet, except he would come into their order, he must
remain silent all his life long.

But the Word of God must not thus be bound, nor the graces of his servanrs
must not be buried in silence always* but the light must Luke 11. 33. 2 Cor.
3. 18.
be set on the Table, and the glory of the Lord must be showed, though vain
man be forced to couch under board, neither is it much material, Ioh. 3 30. 31.
though the greatest that is borne of woman, do decrease, as long as the
Savior of the world increases.

First, then here falls to the ground that opinion of theirs which No
universal Ministry now.
within the limits of their particular flocks, and the succession from the
Apostles, is none otherwise now, then in doctrine, faith and grace, so as now
it is not possible that a Church should ever enjoy a lawful ordinary
Ministry; which is raised or made by any other then themselves; and therefore,
if preaching may not be without Preaching must not be tied to Ministers.
an ordinary office of Ministry, how shall there ever be faith or grace, or
matter prepared for a Church, except such Christians as have the knowledge and
fear of God, may publish and spread the same amongst their neighbors for
their edification and conversion?

Secondly, from these grounds we see how absurd the opinion of separation is,
that tie all preaching and publishing the Gospel to such as are of their
handful, which are few in number, and less in ability; and this of all other
would make the miserablest scarcity: for whereas in some whole Shires of this
Land, there is scarce one of them, Preaching not tied to the separated Churches.
and in other places two or three in some towns, and those for the most part,
such as scarce know well their principles? What a misery should all the people
about them be in, if no Word of God, nor sound of the Gospel must be heard, til
they were able and willing, and could intend to preach it; but let not the Word
of God be thus bound.

Thirdly, by this ground also, that every Christian that has a gift Gospel may
still sound in families, and from neighbor to neighbor; and also if there be
any that cannot or will not come Though public preaching become vain or
frail, yet private must not. Hest. 4. 14. Luke 19. 42.
to public preaching, or that the public preaching begin so to be fraughted
and stuffed with policy, eloquence, and vain ostentation, as that it becomes
unprofitable, etc. Yet still the word of God is not bound, but help comes
another way, and when they hold their peace that should speak, the mouth of
the very stones are opened.

Fourthly, it follows from these grounds, that Kings and Princes Eccles. 1.
4. Fox in Monument. page 100. 110. Edw. 3.
Solomon, and Oswaldus, King of Northumberland, but also it teaches them to
approve, protect and maintain by their civil power, the preaching of the
Gospel, and spreading the knowledge of Christ, by all means, and by all them
to whom God has given a gift thereunto, It is a work becoming a King to
preach the Word.
whether they be Lawyers, Physicians or other mechanical men that are able and
do it orderly, and to be so far from tying it to a place or hour, as that
they should rejoice to have it sound in private houses, Ferry boats, Faires and
Markets, being done without civil disorder And good government must promote
preaching all manner of ways.
order and detraction from men of greater eminency, remembering the example of
that godly Magistrate, Moses, who was so far from forbidding Eldad and Medad
to prophecy, (though Joshua, a good man requested him) as that he also wished
that all the Lords people could also Numb. 11. 29.
prophecy.

And lastly, according to our proper intent, If every gifted Christian may
preach where they can have audience; then if any of the Preachers in England be
Christians, and have a gift to preach (both or any of No gift may be los^.
which to deny, were shameful) they may then preach the Word in any place
where the people are assembled of what kind soever, or for what cause soever,
and consequently in their parish Churches where the people of the parish meet,
to use Divine service, and other Rites established by Law, I say, when all is
done, if yet they will give their attendance, to hear a message from God, and
that there be one of Judge. 3. 20. Job. 33. 23.
a thousand there so fitted, he may and ought there to declare his Word of
exhortation, and it is lawful and good for any godly man to come and hear
him. Act. 13. 15.


The particular objections against hearing in the parish assemblies answered.
NOw though these grounds and consequences do clearly SECT. 25.
evince the truth of this point, and also we know that so long as the ground
and foundation of a thing stands, there is little good to be done against the
thing by other working, yet because this age is fuller of catching wits to
cavil against some appendixes and leaves of the tree; then of solid and able
men to undermine and wade into the root of things, therefore I will apply my
self to go a little aside from the current of the matter to answer their
exceptions.

The Preachers in the assemblies receive an unlawful office from Prelates, and
they which hear them approve of their office, since they preach by it.

I answer, first, this and a thousand such exceptions cannot remove Prelates,
and a further sin to execute the office, as he does in the customs and rites
of the Church, but no man can say this sin makes him cease If any of the
Ministers in England have gifts, and be Christians, they may preach.
to be a Christian, so long as in his general course and carriage he shows
himself honest and conscionable, but we are in charity to esteem it an
infirmity in him which the times sway him to, and no more, and we are to cover
it in his other virtues, and love and respect him still for the good he has,
and not cast him off for some failings, lest we be served so our selves.
Indeed, if for every such error and failing we will rank them amongst those
which hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
we may then conclude apace, that they may not take Gods covenant in their
mouths.

And yet were they such (as they are not) yet so long as their gifts Scribes
and Pharisees, and Mat. 23. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 3. 14. 15.
the evil and corrupt teachers in Corinth; for though themselves sin by using
the Name and Word of God, whilst they neither fear nor obey him, ye till God
takes away their gifts and faculty, I see not but an use may be made of it.

And seeing a man of knowledge, judgment and utterance with Apollo, whether he
have an office or no office, a good office or an evil office, Act. 18. 24. 25.
An office no argument to prove or disprove a man's preaching.
it is to no more purpose to bring in his office, to prove the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of his preaching, than to allege against a man the unlawfulness
of his marriage, to disprove his workmanship in his Trade, and as absurd it is
for to enquire into the office of him that is to preach before we hear him, as
to enquire into an Artificers marriage, before we will either acknowledge him
for a worke-man, or employ him in any business.

And when a man is to make any good and profitable speech, eithe in Law,
Phisique, or divinity, he is like to prove the wiser man, that asks what he
says rather then whence he is.

Neither can any man be said to approve of their office, except he Preaching
accidental to the Priesthood in England.
it, which may be wanting, and yet the Minister a full officer in the order of
Priesthood, and though he never preach whilst he lives, yet the Law cannot tax
him for not performing his office; and thus God has even provided of purpose;
that his own ordinance of praying, should not be bundled up in the bedroll of
humane rites, but be refused of the builders, as a needless thing, that his
own honor might be the more, when the power thereof is seen.

But both Ministers and People here profess, that they preach by

They also profess, that all that will not join with them in their Learn
wisdom by other men's absurdities.
their Preachers preach by vertve of their offices, and err about it, I must
not err with them, since I know, that all the offices in the world cannot make
a man a Preacher, an office indeed, if it be right makes him their Preacher
which have chosen him, but he is still a Preacher, and preaches only by
virtue of his gift.

But they take a license from the Bishops to preach, and therefore

I answer, first, if the license they take of the Bishops be only or nothing
to say against it, but wish they also would license the separation to assemble
together, and use the Ordinances freely and without The Bishops license no let
to preaching.
danger; and I would be sorry any man should be any thing the more afraid to
use that liberty, because they had licensed it.

Secondly, it is not meet that every one should hand over head go

Thirdly, If the license enjoyne them any unlawful thing, they

Fourthly, Admit it be their sin to take this license, yet since they

Fithly, And what if no man should be suffered to use conceived

Sixthly, The Bishops, or their substitutes do also give license to Physicians
and Schoolmasters, yet I never heard of any that held, that the taking
physique from one, or learning from the other, was any approbation or
supportance to the Bishops unlawful power.

Seventhly, As Peter was both Satan and an Apostle of Christ, so these men in a
sense may be said to be the messengers and Ministers, Mat. 16. 23.
both of Christ and the Bishops; of Christ in preaching his Word according to
the measure of grace given them by him, and of the Bishops in taking power from
them, and performing humane rites and Traditions enjoined by them.

Other objections against hearing answered.
BUt many of these Preachers are of evil life, and preach nothing SECT. 25.
but verbal Sermons, fraught with oftentation and pomp of

It must needs be confessed* that not one of twenty of them that Humane
learning makes not a man a Preacher.
not natural parts and graces of modesty and humility, whereby to overshadow
and swallow up his humane learning, he rather seems vicious then virtuous in
any thing he does, and it is one of the evils of this age and that which
drives many to Atheism* that all University Scholars that will but profess
Divinity may step into pulpits as Apprentizes into Trades, though they have
neither grace nor wisdom, nor any natural abilities, but having read over,
and got by heart some Antiquities, partly Divine partly Philosophical, and
partly fabulous; they can sometimes power them out together, and so get a name
of fine Scholars among the carnal multitude; but all these verbal discourses
of such fine Scholars, being used year after year, Many preach, but do no
good thereby.
and joined with a carnal and dissolute life, serve for nothing but for
ostentation and name, never converting or drawing any from their sins, but
rather lulling them fast asleep in the cradle of security, wherein they are
carried to hell, whilst neither themselves nor their blind watchmen are aware
of the danger. Mat. 15. 14.


But such straglers and striplings I will not persuade any man to hear,
especially since there are others who are no runners to this Ierem. 14. 15, 16.
Ierem. 23. 21.
work without their errant, who even in zeal of God, and in desire of the
salvation of men, being endued with the gifts of Knowledge, Wisdom,
Utterance, Gravitie, and authority of speech; as also of a godly and sober 1
Cor. 12. 8. 10. Tit. 2. 7.
life* set themselves to shame all vices and work out the corruptions out of
the vain heart of man, and to drop into them, and draw them into the grace and
fear of God, whose careful and effectual labors are not in vain, but they
do daily wound and weaken the Luke 10. 18.
Kingdom of Satan and Sin, and advance the Power and Scepter of Christ, at
least in the hearts and conversation of many, and leave such an impression in
the hearts of the most obstinate, that they savor the sentence of their
condemnation daily from them, and go up and down 1 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
as men condemned with their halters about their necks; and such kind of
Preachers only would I persuade to the hearing of, without respect to towns
or parishes; but let civil order give place to spiritual Civil orders may
not annihilatc Gods Ordinances.
necessity, and rather bear a civil mulct, then neglect a spiritual
Ordinance.

And the exception concerning the shallow and insufficiency of the other,
makes no more against them, then the trifling Prophets, who Ierem. 23. 21.
ran before they were sent, were a just objection against the Prophet Jeremy,
who was sent of the Lord.

But the Preachers in the parishes preach not the whole truth, but

I answer first, It is not meet to preach all truths to all men, but doctrine
of faith and repentance, and have reformed their ways, were even just as if
one Heb. 6. 1, 2.
should give a man an oration in Latin to construe, which knew never a letter
of the Book, and where such teaching is ordinarily used, you have a number
that can spy out faults in others, but very few that are truly reformed
themselves.

Secondly, Niether can it be expected of any Pastor or Preacher in Who knows
the errors of this life? and who can Psalm. 19. 12.
wonder; seeing the formal state has here so long prevailed (and that with
such prosperity and applause) if even some of Gods holy Prophets, at some time,
say even as they? Psalm. 73. 2, 3, 13.


But if there be any who make it their drift and custom to propound and
maintain evil practices and unsound grounds, and to inveigh against the
faithful servants of God, such are to be taken heed of, but such, whose drift
and common course, is soundly to interpret and apply the Word of God, beating
down man's corruption and stablishing them in grace and holiness (though in
some things they swarve from the rules of truth) yet they may and must be heard.

Thirdly, Errors must sometimes be let fall, even in the purest and 1 Cor. 11.
19
the discovery of Hypocrites, that the love of the truth in the one may the
more gloriously be displayed and the want of love to the truth in the other may
be punished with strong and constant believing of lies 2 These. 2. 10. 11.
so that it is better for a man to be soundly grounded in the truth and settled
sincerely to love it, that so he may discern and resist errors, rather then
once imagine he can live where none is taught.

Fourthly Neither may we nourish in our selves a persuasion that England preach
and declare those Construe all things in the best part.
unsound positions and unwritten verities, for fleshly ends; as favor of men,
love of advancement, and the like; but rather charity should teach us to impute
it to their ignorance, fear and humane frailty, which is more or less in us
all, remembering, that they which make Genesis 42. 21.
such evil constructions of other men's actions, are again afterward paid
home with like measure.

Fifthly, Neither are we bound to reprove always every error and 2 Cor. 2. 12.
for if we cast admonitions abroad at all adventures, without considering
these circumstances, we rather expose our selves to scorn, and the Word of
God to reproach and scorn, then do any good at all.

But though it might be lawful to hear the Preachers in England,

I answer, To be offended at a thing in the Apostles sense, is not What it is
to give offense. Romans 14. 15. 21.
staggereth and stumbleth so at another practice; as that he is drawn by his
example, to imitate him, contrary to the judgment and persuasion of his own
heart and conscience, but such offenses (in this particular especially) do
hardly any of the strict separation take, but 2 Cor. 8. 10. 11.
the worst hurt it can do them, is but only to anger them.

Secondly, Offenses are always given, either in things evil, or Mat. 18. 7. 1
Cor. 8. 13. Preaching and Hearing the Word are no actions of indifferent nature.
neither evil nor indifferent and least of all can it be thought indifferent,
but an action wherein the name of God is so much used as it is in that, must
either be a proper part of his service, or else a horrible blasphemy; and
taking his name in vain, which far be it from us to think.

Thirdly, Admit it were indifferent (which cannot be) yet in offense in matters
indifferent, we have respect only to the weak, of which there are thousands
in the assemblies in England, which by our example in refusing to hear their
Preachers, are often drawn so to refuse both them and their teaching, as that
they have It is only the weak that take offense.
even been left without all help means and to repent and believe the Gospel,
for the souls of whom the strict separation have much no answer.

But it were a great disparagement and shame in the separation, to plead
weakness; and sure I am, they are strong enough to hold the conclusion in this
and many other points, how weak soever they may prove in their grounds, or
prosecutings and practice of the things they hold.

Fourthly, Experience has taught, that the most part of such as in England,
have had little esteem of preaching amongst themselves, but have had more
delight to busy themselves in trivial controversies to try their wits then to
have their hearts wrought upon by sound 1 Timothy 1. 5. 6.
and wholesome doctrine; the event of all has been, that they have had no
peace in themselves, nor brought no profit to others.

But we see what comes by giving way to hear Sermons in the service
ceremonies and Sacraments* yea join in all their corruptions, and at last turn
profane and loose in their lives and conversation also?

I answer, first, this may be true, and for it the Churches of the separation
Sermon in the Parish assemblies, to confess it to be a sin, and manifest
repentance for it, or else exclude him quite from their society and The
Churches of the separation are faulty in the going away of their members.
fellowship, and so some of their members, out of a good affection, having heard
some Sermons, and not been convinced of evil in it; have undergone their
censure, and afterward walked alone* as desolate men, catching here and there a
crum where they could catch it til at length by persuasion of friends and
weakness in themselves, they have been drawn into some practices apparently
evil* whereas if they had been lovingly borne with in their suspected evil:
no doubt many of them would either have returned to the society whereof they
were, or some other like, or else still have retained in themselves a reverend
respect and longing after the pure order and ordinances of the Gospel.

Secondly, what if some have made it a pathway to serve their Absalom made
sacrificing a cloak 2 Samuel 15. 8. 12.
for his rebellion, was sacrificing any thing the more to be disliked in those
days? Yea, what evil is there almost that goes not with some pretense of
good apparently? It shows indeed the vanity, lightness Prove. 7. 14.
and unstability of some men, who neither had distinct rules and grounds to go
by, nor were conscionable, nor careful to attend on God for his direction; but
as they ran lightly to separation upon some humor or discontented motion, so
again they left it as wantonly, Ephesians. 4. 14.
when a new toy took them in the head again.

Thirdly, And indeed, even this very thing should make the The Br. make an
Idol of seParation*
though he have all other points and parts of Religion to learn and seek,
yet he may even for it only be admired and advanced amongst them; but if he be
not wholly separated, but will retain some love and respect to some persons
and things in the Parish assemblies, had he all the holiness and Religion that
else possibly he could have, yet he must never be admitted amongst them, but
held out as an Idolator, and one under the power of darkness, and of Satan's
kingdom. And though for this their unreasonable dotage they have been beaten
sore with their own rods, when they that came to them with censorious mouths,
against all practices in the Parish assemblies, have within a They have been
beaten with their own rod.
few years returned, railing worse at them; and though they have been advised,
not to measure men by one particular practice, but have an eye to the general
work of Gods grace in them, yet all in vain, for they will not hear not
regard, charm the Charmer never so wisely. Psalm. 58. 4, 5.


Fourthly, their going to the holy Supper in the assemblies, shows Communion
in the L. supper a Church action.
where, nor regarding any more with whom at the Table of the Lord they feast,
then amongst whom they stand to hear a good speech; since the thing is plain,
that those that keep that feast together, must be united to Christ, and one to
another by the spirit; but they that together 1 Cor. 10. 17.
manifest no more then the patience to hear, there can be no just scruple,
though amongst a hundred, there are not two that have any sign of grace or
holiness.

Fifthly, At a word, as Jacobs Posterity might lawfully enjoy that blessing
which their father got of Isack, by lying and deceit, and as a Genesis 27. 19. 20.
poor man may receive and use that money which is given him by one that got it
by extortion or bribery; so, though even all and every The Preachers in England
sin, to get liberty to preach.
of the Preachers in England do some evil that good may come of it, and
submit themselves to humane traditions, which they ought to shun, that they may
preach the Word, yet the good they do, being at any time severed from the
evil and their preaching from their Traditions they may then be heard, and
reverently respected, and the Lord in his merry pardon their evil, and heal
them, whose hearts are upright 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20.
with him, though many failings have been in their courses.

They that go about to justify the Ministers in England in their Office,
drive men from the Church altogether.
ANd now I will say no more at this time for the justifying SECT. 27.
of hearing in the Parish assemblies, till I see this ground taken a way, and
the answers to these objections over-turned, which if they could be with
evidence of truth, let the Lord be a gainer, and let me be a loser.

I am not ignorant, that the common way which is used to persuade The office of
the Ministry in England is not ^ight.
men to hear them, is to defend and justify their Calling and Office of
Ministry to be of divine institution.

And to prove it, some descend to their parents which set them to

Others there are, who will fetch a successive Ministry from Adam Paradise,
lineally to reach to this day, others come lower and fetch They that plead for
succession cannot satisfy the conscience.
the pedigree from Christ and his Apostles, and will have those holy functions
to leap over all the Popes heads and be borne up with both their shoulders for
a thousand years and upward, till in the days of Queen Elizabeth, a piece
thereof fell to the A^c^bishop of Canterbury, from which wind-fall bough all
those thousands of spiritual functions now in England have sprouted and spread
themselves, until it is become a Protestant Ministry, and defies those many
fathers from whom their branches took life, and will now be of themselves, and
contest with See D. Masons Book of consec.
the Pope, from whose chair their authority is derived.

Others more ashamed of that old dunghill of Romanists, will go Luther for
their pedigree, whom they fancy to be some new Apostle, and so might create a
new Ministry; but as neither the soundness of Luthers doctrine, nor the
temperature of his affections, Succession from Luther a fiction.
was Apostolic; so he neither did nor might create any universal Ministry,
whose Dioces could reach into this Island, and if he should, yet still it must
be of the nature, (though not of the name,) with that of the Romish race, and
not one jot nearer to Christ's institution.

Others will have their very office and function to stand in the consent

But, first, as the parishes are unfit and incapable of making a Minister, The
approbation of the parish no part or parcel of the Ministers office.
so they do nothing at all therein, but are as mere patients, to suffer whom
the Diocesan pleases to put in or pull out.

Secondly, and indeed, who knows not that all the parish Vicars and Parsons
in the Land, do solemnly receive and take their charge, Bishops and their
adherents, before they may come to administer in any parish whatsoever.

Thirdly, they stand at the will of the Bishop; so as if he bid them be 2 These.
2. 15. Ast. 5. 2^. 28. 29 1 Cor. 9. 16.
and unconstant are they with God that at the word of a mortal man dare
neglect that calling of the Lord?

At a word, when men shall scruple at hearing their Sermons, and they can
satisfy them no other way, but by alleging their office and function, which
neither is agreeable to Scripture, nor to it self, but hanged together by
vain suppositions, and popish assertions, which serve ten times more to stain
and blame it, then to justify it; what can they look for in the event but to
see themselves despised and contemned It is best to cover the deformity of the
Ministers office.
for pleading so lame a case, and whither shall men be driven hereby but to
separation and Anabaptisme, or else to worse matters?

But when this law and lawless office is passed by, and covered in a serious
love of their graces, (as the Lord, no doubt, covers it in Christ Jesus)
every man will lay his hand on his mouth; for in their gifts and graces of
preaching, no man can deny the Lord to be in them indeed, and in such actions
as God eminently shows his grace, we 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.
may be evidently present in person and affection.

Neither can there be any other succession from the Apostles and Primitive
Churches, otherwise then in faith, gifts and graces, since their 6. Succession
is only in faith and grace. 2 Timothy 3. 10. Phil. 4. 8, 9. 2 Pet. 1. 11. 12, 13.
office is wholly ceased, and he is now the lineall successor of Peter and Paul
which comes nearest to them in gifts, graces and holiness; And what in this
world can be more absurd, than to make every popish Priest and idle Dunce,
(which has got only an up start ordination of some antiquity) to be the true
successor of the holy Apostles, when they have neither grace in their hearts,
wit in their heads, or honesty in their conversation: and if the office be that
No grace, no succession.
which must be pleaded to justify all their ministrations; even all these
blind Priests and verbal Teachers have as good reason for their standing as
the best.

The strict separation cannot hold together amongst themselves.
ANd as these men have been too extreme and censorious in their SECT. 28.
separation, so are they in their Church covenant and combination, by means
whereof they need no other persecutors then The separation eat up themselves.
where, and if they had, and should have such spirits in their civil
judgments, as they have in their spiritual censures, the one half of them
had need to become hangmen, but it is only in regard of their extreme worrying
one another, for every difficult question and controversall practice, in
solemn and vehement charges, quarrelsome and captious invectives, short and
sudden excommunications, in all which they have so wearied and wasted
themselves, that a man may truly say of them, that no society under any
persecution (war excepted) did ever decrease and ruinate as they do.

And as the professors in England are justly taxed for living in confusion,
gifts and the discipline of Christ to their own shame and ruin, and to the
dishonor of Christ, the peaceable Lawgiver of his Church.

And although for the ancient of them, who now live (as also English
Anabaptists, who harp all upon one string) if I had the tongues of men and
Angels, yet have I no hope to change their 1 Cor. 13. 1. 2.
minds, or moderate their affections, since no counsel, warning, or
experience can teach them any thing, but still bitterness is in their hearts,
and violence is in their tongues; and they will rather quarrel with ten men
for one triffe, then lovingly agree with any man in any thing.

Yet, to prevent such as shall come after, from running their course,

It is held and practiced amongst them for a maxim, That they A dangerous
opinion.
must suffer no evil, in any man, nor no appearance of evil; but every one
that is of them must jump with them in judgment and practice, and he must not
go a foot before them, nor come one inch behind This rule they ordinarily
follow, but not always.
them, but must in all things say as they say, and do as they do, and if he
swarve from them in any thing which they think to be truth, they will solemnly
admonish him, and if he will not repent, they will forthwith excommunicate
him, be the evil never so small and doubtful, and whatsoever other graces or
holiness be in the person, or whatsoever bands betwixt him and them either in
grace or nature, the unreasonablenesse whereof I will reprove by these reasons
following.

There are some sins that must be borne in the Church.
EXcept some sins may be borne in the Church, why speaks the SECT. 29.
holy Ghost thus to the Churches? Bear ye one another burden, Love covers
a multitude of sins, forsake not the fellowship, but exhort one another
daily; Why rather suffer ye not wrong? If he had meant to Gal. 6. 2. Heb. 10.
25. 1 Cor. 6. 7.
make such short work as these men do, he would have said bear with no man,
love no man that is faulty, suffer no wrong, but abandon every fellowship and
person that has any evil in him not reformed.

If no evils in the Church may be borne, then why did not Paul Corinth, to
cast out more offenders then the incestuous man, seeing there were those that
wronged their brethren, and 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2, 3. and 6. 6. 8. and 10. 12. and 11.
22.
went to Law with them amongst the heathen rulers, others that went to the Idol
feasts, and are said to have fellowship with devils others that schismed in
their love feasts, and inordinate cleaving to their Sectory teachers, despising
Paul, yea, and some whose emulations, contentions and wantonness, was not
repented of in a long time; and yet he gives no order 2 Cor. 12. 20. 21.
for the excommunicating any more then he which had committed a sin. which the
very light of nature condemns.

If no sins might be borne in the Church then Christ, when he sins and
sinners, would have used the same word which Paul does, which signifies
infirmity, or feebleness of Math. 18. 1^. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 7. 1 John. 2. 10.
1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. 1 Samuel 26. 2. and 27. ^0. 2 Samuel 3. 29. and 16. 4. and 19. 29.
1 Samuel 12. 14.
mind, and not that which John uses, which signifies a scandal; for both
Christ in the rule, and Paul in his direction for practice, speak of such
evils as are notorious and scandalous. Secondly, David is never taxed for
scandal in all the infirmities he showed at Nob, Gath, and in the matters of
loab, ziha, Mephibosheth and others. but only in the matters of adultery and
murder, with Bat^sheba and V^iah, he is said to scandal, or lay a stumbling
block.

If no sins in the Church may be borne, how could David say, Who can tell the
errors of this life; or how often he offends? and again, The righteous falls
seven times a day, and rises again; and that of James, In Psalm. 19. 12. Psalm.
143. 2. Iam. 3. 1. 2.
many things we sin all, etc. We may not think that the Prophets and
Apostles were either ignorant of gross evils. or fell seven times ^ day into
them but that they had their continual failings in inferior and doubtful
things, and having so, if they were now alive, belike they were not good enough
for the strict separation, that fall so often, and into so many things as they
did.

Indeed, the example of these holy men thus complaining may lead us all to a
more through search of our selves; for if they pronounced such a sentence upon
themselves, much more may we if we look well to it; and what mad men are we to
quarrel and strive with our neighbors and brethren for their infirmities when
we have such in our selves, for gross and scandalous evils indeed, we may and
must strive, for all good men have not such in themselves.

If no sins must be borne with, then no two men in this world could Some things
amiss in the best men.
cold in family duties of instruction, prayer, etc. Another too sluggish in
hearing, Sacraments and other public exercises; one man is too full of
worldly cares, another is too careless in his worldly affairs; one man even
kills himself with hard labor: another spoils himself with too much
idleness; one man is too talkative and busy, another is too mute and silent.
At a word, in all men there is to be seen some partiality, some pride, some
conceitednesse, some self-love, some folly, some ignorance, some error and
unsoundnesse, some anger and impatience, all which are evils, and will more or
less appear in men, whilst they live, notwithstanding all admonitions ad
censures that can be past upon them. And therefore except we will by
excommunication cast the Church out of the Church, we must cover their
infirmities in love, as they must also ours; and bury them in a loving delight
in their graces, exhorting Ephesians. 4. 32. 33.
and persuading them, but not provoking, biting or censuring them, but freely
forgiving them, as God for Christ's sake freely forgiveth us.

If no sins must be borne, then there must be perfection, even in this No
perfection in this life.
other men's again, seeing it is worse then beast-like, not to give love for
love; indeed, one man has a more prying and piercing eye to see into his
neighbors faults, then his neighbor has to see into his, and so he is apt to
please himself, as if he were not as other men are, but he whose infirmities
are most of all ripped up and raked into, is 1 Timothy 5. ^4. Luke 1 and 11. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 10. 15.
oftentimes rather justified before God, then the other, to whom nothing is
spoken; and indeed, he which truly examineth and searches into himself,
cannot possibly be void of charity toward others.

What kind of sins and sinners they be that may be borne in the Church.
THat some sins then may be borne and covered in love in the SECT. 30.
Church and amongst Christians, is out of question, and that some other sins
may not be borne, is also certain, but to set down every particular sin which
is to be borne, and every particular for which men must be abandoned without
repentance, were impossible, and mere trifling; for when we oppose godly men,
and wicked men, we do not mean that they only are godly which never do A
godly and an ungodly man described.
nothing but what is godly; nor they only wicked, which never do ought but
wickedness; for there is no man so good, but that he sometimes falls into
some evil, nor none so wicked, but he sometimes stumbleth upon some good. It
is indeed the common and customary course in practicing gross evil, and
refusing to do good, that proves a man to be wicked, and the frequent
performance of good duties and ordinary abstinence from evils, that shows a
man to be Godliness and wickedness are two several trades.
godly; for as one says, evil men can do good by accident, and good men by
accident fall into evil, but the common trade of a godly man is to do good,
and of a wicked man to do evil.

Indeed, such sins as under the Law were death, as Incest, Adultery, Exodus 21.
12. Levit. 18. 29. and 19. 1^. and 24. 14. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. 1 Cor. 5. 13. 1 Timothy
1. 20. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
they repent, they may, and must be cast out, but otherwise, except they be
such as the light of nature condemns, or such as the Scripture in express
terms forbids, and threatens to shut out of Heaven for them, men should be
wary how they excommunicate for them; and although by this rule few would be
excommunicate in Churches that are made of fit matter, and the fewer the
better, so long as gross wiekednes is not there harbored; for it is better to
offend in too much lenity, then in too much severity; better to let some tares
stand, then to pluck up the good wheat; for though Christ have Mat ^3. 28. 29.
given that sharp and severe censure into the hands of his Saints, yet they
must take heed they be not too busy with it, sharp instruments must be
skilfully and warily handled; and though Christ have promised to bind in
Heaven, such as his Church binds on earth, yet this promise must be
restrained only to such cases as wherein the censure Mat. 18. 18. 19.
is deserved, for else the Church rather binds over it self to the wrath of
God for wronging his servants, and abusing his ordinances, and taking his name
in vain, then commits the person either to Excommunication must be used warily.
Satan or Gods wrath; so that we must be sure to see that the case be just
before we censure; and if the Word of God have not said, that such shall be
shut out of Heaven, we must moderate our zeal, and restrain our passions, and
not think to make Christ follow us, but we Luke 6. 36.
must follow him, and be merciful as he is merciful.

And as in civil judgments, death is never inflicted justly, but Men must not
be hanged for trifles.
of the Church, excommunication, which is the most severest censure that a
Church can have, should not be administered upon any, but for such heinous
evils, which being persisted in, do bar a man for ever out of Gods Kingdom.

Indeed, some peremptory and presumptuous men have got such a Job 11. 2. 6.
Peremptory censurers dangerous members.
they fling the fire brands of h^ll at every one whom they deal against,
though the matter be small, and sometimes also doubtful and disputable, and it
is well such kind of men keep not the keys of heaven gate for if they did,
none but themselves should come there; and if also they had civil power, I
know not what havocke they would make amongst some men that are better then
themselves.

Many of the separation complain (as they may) of oppression by Unjust
excommunication more evil then civil oppression. 2 Chronicles. 28: 9.
by which often they are imprisoned, banished, and sometimes put to death. And
surely, though these things are done by their opposites in a rage that goes up
to heaven, which the Lord, no doubt, will one day call to reckoning; yet it is
also just with God to pay them home wiih bloody and bodily cruelty, which spare
not to rack tear, and turmoyle the souls and consciences of their brethren
by opprobrious and bitter speeches, and violent and dangerous censures
undeserved.

Three cautions concluding the Doctrine of forbearance.
TO conclude, we must always bear in mind, that the Scriptures SECT. 31.
have in them in all places a double sentence and determination of such things
as they treat of, the one clear and certain, Rev. 1. 13. 14* 15, 16. 20.
the other probable and doubtful.

In the things which the Scripture it self clearly determines, we may boldly
proceed to profess and practice accordingly; but where there is but a bare
probability in the Scripture, we must be wary what we do, for a hundred
probabilities do not conclude a certainty: neither is it sufficient that we
have some rever^n^ men's glosses and No Expositor sound but the Holy Ghost.
guesses to go before us; for when all is done, if the Holy Ghost be not both
Text man and Comment, and conclude the point some where, either in plain
words, or ordinary examples, we are as far off from the matter as before, and
do rather bundle up more ignorance with our ancients in taking things from
their mouths and pens then bring any honor either to the truth or them.

And for a man to use either wit or learning, to make the Scripture seem to
speak that which it does not indeed speak, is rather a vanity than a virtue,
and how much was Christ offended for Peter's snatching at a doubtful word; as
also what a fearful sin did those witnesses run into that came against
Christ, by wresting an ambiguous John 21. 22. 23. Mat. 26. 61.
phrase to their own advantage?

In things therefore probable and doubtful, it better becomes us to seem
ignorant, then to grow presumptuous, and rather conclude against our selves,
that we know nothing as we ought to know it, but 1 Cor. 8. 2. 13. 9.
have our knowledge in part, as is our obedience, then presume above that which
is sober and mute, or imagine that we know and can determine Romans 12. 3.
all things.

And as we must be sparing and modest in determining such points, as wherein
the Scripture is doubtful, so we must be much Polygamy amongst the Fathers,
and Fornication among Deuteronomy. 21. 15. 1 Cor. 6. 18. Acts 15. 29.
the Churches of the Gentiles, though thou must retraine it thy self in
conscience of God yet must use no violent words or practice whereby to force
all others to do like thee.

And so* if thy neighbor or thy brother, hold or practice any thing which thou
judge amiss, except thou have an express Scripture, 3,
whereby to strike the matter dead, and out of which thou can say, Thus says
the Lord, it is better to be silent then to use much disputing; Numb. 9. 8. 9.
10. 13.
for witty and Logical disputes serve more often to feed light and corrupt
affections, then to settle a sound judgment, yea, and men upon a little snatch
therein, are apt to let their wits a plodding about every nice and trivial
question whilst better things pass by them, or are stolen and lost out of
their minds; Besides, except the reasons brought against an opinion be clear
and strongly backed by evidence Subtle disputes more dangerous then profitable.
of Scripture, they rather strengthen the persons in their opinions then draw
them from it, neither will ever the truth and Church of God be settled and
stablished, either by outward violence or subtle disputes, but if a certain
and express word cannot be brought, to put to silence a man's contradictory
opinion the only way is to let him alone, and to go on lovingly and brotherly
with him in the fellowship of his other graces, till God reveal further,
putting Phil 3. 15.
aside all occasion of speech about that wherein the difference lies, lest
from talking you fall to chiding, and from chiding to bitter strife, Gal. 5.
15. Acts 15. 38, 39.
hatred and heart-burning, to the weakening of your comfort with God, and the
hindering of your favor and respect with men.

The Conclusion and Sum of all.
NOw although I have written much, and that with all plainness SECT. 32.
that I can, yet I live amidst so many sleepers and drousie Christians, that me
thinks, I hear some starting up about Ben. Sirach. cap. 22. 20.
mine ears, and asking me what i^ is I have said, and what I would have, and
therefore I will sum up all my aim in a word.

First, I find in this world two sorts of men, wicked and godly, and world,
but not in one Church. 1 Cor. 5. 10. John 17. 14. 16. Act. ^. 44. 4^. 47 2 Cor.
6. 16. 17. Col. 2. 8. 23 John. 4. 23. 24. Acts 6. 5. and 14. 23. 1 Cor. 5. 4.
12. Acts 21 13. 14. Heb. 10. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Acts 2. 42. 44. Psalm. 15. 1. 2.


The godly I would have to gather themselves together, and combine in a
spiritual fellowship, apart from the vain world, and wicked therein a
bandoning all man's inventions, worshipping God only by his Word and Graces,
choosing their own Ministers, executing Discipline amongst themselves, and
rather lose their lives, then lose this liberty; but to continue feasting and
feeding together in the fellowship of Gods sacred Ordinances all the time of
their dwelling in this Tabernacle, even till they are translated to the mount
of glory.

Secondly, And because the policy of the times will allow no such things, but
compells as well the uncircumcised Philistines, and the black mouthed
E^hiopian, to the Temple and Sacrifices, as the sons of Abraham, Exodus 12. 48.
Romans 21. 27.
and Israel of the Lord; imposing also upon them other officers, governments,
Traditions and Ceremonies, then ever the infallible writings of Christ or his
Apostles mentioned:

Therefore I have exhorted all that fear God to resolve to suffer with patience
and courage all such oppressions and persecutions, as for their abstinence from
the aforesaid evils, or practicing the contrary good shall be imposed and
afflicted upon them by any authority Luke 14. 27. Acts 16. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 4.
12. Acts 7 90. Mat. 25. 44 45.
whatsoever, and as meek and gentle Lambs to go with Christ to the Cross,
and with the Apostles to the prison, even with gentle entreaties, and earnest
prayers for their opposites that so advancing the glory and name of Christ here
in this world, they may sit for ever in glory with him in heaven.

Thirdly, And seeing the straggling opinions and opposite practices A harmony
indeed.
separation may be mitigated and ordered; and the sluggish conformity of the
professors awaked and revived, that both may reunite together, and converse
sweetly in one Church, as the Lord has prepared for them one heaven.

Fourthly, And because the vain heart of man is subject to be Doctrine of
forbearance, by many infallible grounds; and have showed, that it is the duty
of all Christians to serve one another in love, and continue their fellowship
in the free and Phil. 3. 14. 25. Romans 14. 1.
familiar use of that knowledge and gifts wherein they agree, without entering
into any tedious and doubtful controversies, to disturb and provoke one
another, much less abuse, revile and abandon one another, 1 Cor. 14. 36.
remembering that the Word of God came not to one Church or person alone, but
others have understanding as well as they, and the most confident speaker is
oftentimes more awry than he that keeps Job 12. 3. 1 Samuel 1. 13. 14. 1 Cor.
13. 1. 2.
silence, however the largest knowledge must have the largest love, lest
whilst we think to teach, we do nothing but devour and make havocke.

FINIS.

