(...) OR The Innocent Love-Feast.

Being a SERMON Preached at S. LAWRENCE JURY in London, the sixth day of
September, Anno Domini 1655. On the public Festival of the County of HERTFORD;
And published this present May 1656.

By WILLIAM CLARKE.

1 Samuel 9.12, 13. V. 12. For Samuel came to day to the City, for there is a
Feast of the People to day in the High-place:

V. 13. -- The People will not eat until he come, because he does bless the
Sacrifice, and afterward they eat that be bidden.

LONDON, Printed for William Lee at the Turks Head in Fleet Street. 1656.

(...) The Epistle Dedicatory.
Providence has so ordered, that my Firstborn should be within my own Tribe:
which, notwithstanding is a privilege I truly value, yet I must confess, the
means of obtaining it, are so contrary to my private spirit, that had it not
been for those importunities which frequently assaulted an easy nature, I
should rather have chosen to have died childlesse, then to have endured the
hazards and inconveniences that attend posterity in an Evil Age: But having
neither obstinacy nor ill manners enough, to deny the solicitations of my
Contrymen, especially of them that were the Prime Masters of that days
Ceremony; I have at last suffered my self to be overruled against my own
inclinations: And now, like a modest Woman in her first teeming, I am ready to
Blush at my Burden, and am afraid of the dangers of my travail, being as
sufficiently sensible of my own weakness, as of the affronts and rudeness of
a Censorious Generation.

Which is a work yet more fearful to my thoughts, when I consider, that by
appearing after this manner to the World, all those blemishes which might happily
be overlooked in the Current of a swift delivery, must now be exposed, as
standing objects, to the view of Learned, Serious, and, perhaps, severe Judges:
Unto which disadvantage I may justly add also, The weakness which commonly
accompanies a Dead Letter, when it is parted from the life and power of a
Ministerial dispensation; Especially considering (for my own part) that if I
have any personal endowment worth the owning, I may say without vanity, it lies
rather in my Tongue then my Pen, my Hand (like Jacob in his disguise) being
much rougher then my voice.

All which inconveniences (Dear Countrymen) I have named upon no other
design, but to let you see, that I value the Service of my Country, beyond my
own Reputation; and that there is nothing too hard for me to grant, wherein you
appear to be the suitors.

And now if in review of this Meditation, you shall meet with any Doctrine,
Precept, or Exhortation, that may enform your Judgments, quicken your
Obedience, or put a fervor into your Affections, let this Little Good expiate
for all the imperfections of the Work, or infirmities of the Workman; bearing
this in mind, That it will be a very great disorder to your design, to be
offended at a Feast of Love, and to be censorious upon a Subject that pleads
for Kindness and Forgiveness. Let me therefore receive this as the
First Fruits of your Obedience to the Doctrine of Love, That you can receive
with meekness, the plainest truths of Religion; and that you will think any
Doctrine well worth the Printing, which is worth your Practicing; which as it
is the main End of all our Ministry, so let it be the happy effect of this poor
and unworthy Dedication, presented you by the hands of him that is

From my Study at North Crawly in Bucks. Dec. 10. 1655. Dear Contrymen Yours
in the service of Love W. CLARKE.

Stewards
William Thomson. John Berresford. John Ellis. Dr Robert Waller Robert Brisco.
Thomas Bateman Richard Mead. Joseph Sible. William Robinson.
The Innocent Love-Feast. OR, A Sermon preached at S. Lawrence Church in London
the 6th day of September, Anno Dom. 1655. On the public Festival of the County
of Hertford.
1 Peter 4. the former part of the 8th Verse. And above all things have fervent
charity among your selves.


THere was no solemn Feast under the Law without a Sacrifice annexed: to show
Israel, that, as Gods honor was the end, so Gods Grace and Benediction was the
life of all their public Festivals. Chazkuni.
And whilst (as the learned Rabbis observe) private or personal Oblations
were offered in silence; yet at the public and solemn Feasts of Israel, the
sons of Aaron ever sounded the silver Trumpets of the Sanctuary. Number. 10.10:
Psalm. 81.3.
Thus though the Charities and Hospitalities of private Families, are not
accompanied with these public Invocations: yet how decent it is to sound the
Trumpets of Gods Sanctuary at the Festival assembly of a whole Country, I
need not ask you, who so laudably practice it? And seeing I that am one of the
meanest of the sons of Aaron am called to this religious Office, it will ill
become me on this good day, to sound in your ears the Alarmes of War; but
rather, (as best answering the end and design of this Christian Convocation,)
The Triumphs of Peace, and caresses of Christian Charity. Which I cannot
perform from a better hand nor in better words, then in this pregnant
Exhortation of the Apostle, now read unto you. And above all things have
fervent charity among your selves.

The Contexture of which words with the precedent and following verses is not
easy to be discerned; yet upon diligent observation, we may find this Chapter
to be a complete Platform or Scheme of the whole course of a Christian, through
which he must run in this life; even from his new birth, to the goal of his
death and dissolution; for so it begins, and so it ends. The first steps he
takes in this Race, are in the duties of Mortification, which is that Suffering
in the flesh, mentioned in the fifth verse. Not meant of the Outward suffering
in the Body by distresses or persecutions; for these sufferings are toward the
end of the Chapter, where he speaks of the Fiery Trial, etc. But the Suffering
of the flesh is here the inward suffering, 1 Cor. 9.27.
and bringing the body into subjection (as S. Paul speaks) by duties of
mortification; the effect whereof is a negative holiness or ceasing from sin,
which he enlarges to verse 7. It suffices that we have spent the time past of
our life in wantonness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable idolatries, etc.

Now although this ceasing from sin and negative holiness may carry us along
the former part of our journey, through the duties of mortification; yet after
this progress made, we must hasten toward the End, by a motion of another
nature, Isa. 1.16.
to wit, not only of Mortification, but of Vivification; not only ceasing to
do evil, but learning to do well, by increasing spiritual graces in us, in all
their variety and excellency; unto all which the Apostle speaks from ver. 7.
to the end of the Chapter. Exhorting to the practice of holy duties: For (says
he ver. 7.) now the end is at hand, ye are not in the beginning of your
journey, and therefore you must not rest only in Ceasing from sin; for the end
is at hand, therefore you must do good and holy duties, of Sobriety and Piety,
verse 7. Be sober and watch unto prayer; of Love ver. 8. Ahove all things have
love or charity; of Hospitality verse 9. Be harborours one to another; of
ministering mutual Consolation and Instruction verse 10. As every man has
received the gift, so let him minister, as good Stewards of the manifold grace
of God; and verse 11. If any speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God -- that
God in all things may be glorified; of Constancy under persecutions, from verse
12. to the end of the Chapter, Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial;
verse 16. If any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed; verse 17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God, etc. And lastly of the ultimate
resignation even of their souls in suffering for Gods cause, verse the last,
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him
in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

And thus you have seen how this Chapter contains an exact platform of a
Christians race; in which my Text points at one of those good duties, which the
Apostle requires, of them that are not only to cease from sin, but to work
righteousness, and that not of the least account neither; for after duties of
sobriety and piety it comes in with a But, (...), But above all things have
fervent charity among your selves.

Which (if we may make Divisions in a Text of Love,) may be divided into Four
Parts: 1. Here is the Duty it self enjoined, and that is Love or Charity, Have
Charity. 2. Here is the Importance of that Duty, (...), Above all things have
charity. 3. Here is the Qualification or Complexion of that Duty, (...),
translated, Fervent Charity. 4. Here is the Reciprocation of that Duty, (...),
Among your selves. But above all things have fervent charity among your selves.

First the Duty it self enjoined is Love or Charity, Have Charity: which is not
in this place 1. That Cardinal Grace (as I may so call it) so highly extold by
S. Paul 1 Cor. 13. which abides in Heaven even after Tongues, and Prophesies,
and Knowledge shall fail, and which is preferred before Hope, and Faith it
self; which in that place, is a comprehensive name, including in it the
perfection of all Graces and Duties both toward God, and toward our
Neighbor, in which respect it is said To. 13.10. That Love is the fulfilling
of the law. Neither Secondly, is this Love only and merely a Moral Love,
arising from a complacency in a present good, found in Heathens and
Unbelievers, and mere Natural Men, mentioned by our Savior Matthew. 5.46. If ye
love them, that love you, what reward have you? do not even the Publicans the
same? which is a Natural affection and not a Christian grace, a Humane passion
and not a Religious duty. Neither Thirdly is this Charity a bare Eleemosynary
Charity, of Alms and Good deeds, which in a strict sense is usually called
Charity, by attributing the inward affection of the mind to the outward action
of the hand; mentioned 3 John 6.

But this Charity in my Text is a Divine grace and a Religious duty, whereby we
are to extend our bowels of love and Christian compassion one toward another,
not under the narrow relations of Kindred, Friends, or Benefactors, but unto
all in the common capacity of Religion, and that not upon any humane or natural
designs, which love is merely a moral passion; but only for Pious and
Christian ends and considerations; which turns Nature into Grace, and a Humane
Passion into a Christian Affection.

Which being thus described unto us from the Original, the Object, and the End,
by treating briefly of each of them apart, you will know sufficient of the
whole duty it self.

And First for the Original of Christian love; It is the grace of Gods holy
Spirit: Indeed Love 1. As it is a passion of the Soul, arises merely from
Nature; which is an affection placed originally in Man by the great Creator,
whereby he takes complacency and content in the good things of the Creature
which God has made for him, without which all the blessings of this life were
but in vain created, and were no more delicious to Man then to a Stock or
Stone: That the pleasant acceptance therefore of all Gods good things might
not be lost, did he indue Man with this natural affection of Love. But Love as
it 2. is an inordinate passion arises not from Nature Qua talis, but as
corrupted and depraved by Sin, whereby the soul is Praeter institutum naturae,
carried beyond the mediocrity of natural appetite toward the creature, and
created blessings. While Man only loved the Creature, according to the Law of
Nature, and God, according to the Law of God; then he loved it in a mean and in
a moderate subordination, to the love of God; who was to be loved with all our
Might, Heart, and Strength. But when as by sin Man's heart forsook his God,
then that earnest and zealous love Ad ultimum posse before bestowed upon the
Almighty, was irregularly added to that mean and moderate Fountain of love of
the Creature according to the Law of Nature; which great addition coming to the
force of natural love, makes the souls of all corrupt unregenerate men run
over their old banks toward the Creature, in a most inordinate measure and a
most irregular manner, loving the Creature from two violent inforcements, one
from Nature, the other from Lust.

Wherefore to endeavor to reform this violent passion, only by Precepts of
Morality, or Rules of Depraved Reason, or the like Philosophic aides, will
prove as great a folly, as to set obstacles in the midst of a strong torrent to
prevent Inundation: they may perhaps give a check for a time, and make lust
suspend a while the actual exercise of her inordinacy; but in the mean while
she gathers strength, and will, as soon as ever those violent restraints be
remitted (which cannot be perpetual) overflow our souls with the greater flood
of concupiscence, and carry our hearts without possibility of resistance down
the stream from God toward the World. So that there is no means left to weaken
this torrent, and to keep it within its due limits, but by dealing with the
Fountain; the Heart must be changed and renewed, and the inclinations and
desires of our souls must be altered, which thing is neither in the power of
Nature, nor Reason, but only of the grace of Gods Spirit to effect, which is
able to re-inkindle that religious love in our hearts, with which Man at first
loved both God and his Brother: which was the ground of S. John's exhortation, 1
Ep. 4.7, 8. Let us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that
loves is born of God; God is love, ve^. 8. The original then of this religious
love is Gods grace, which is the first part of the description.

Secondly, consider the Object of this love, which is said in the description
to be extended, not only to Kindred, Friends, or Benefactors, but unto All in
the capacity and latitude of Religion. The generick Object of all love is one
and the same, and that is a present good either real or appearing: the vilest
wretch yet never loved evil Sub ratione mali, not as evil, but at least under
the appearance of good: But the Specific Objects are vastly different, nay, to
show the wonderful power of Grace over Nature, their Objects are contrariant,
and directly opposite one to another, Matthew. 5.43, 44. In old time it was, thou
shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thy Enemy; this is the voice of Nature, and
of the Old Man in the old time; But I say unto you, verse 44. which is the
voice of Grace and Christ, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, and
do good to them that hate you. Hence is it that the Scripture makes no
difference in Offices of love and mutual relief, between Friend and Foe; but he
that in one Precept is called our Enemy, in the recital of the same Precept in
another place is called our Brother, and both to be loved and served alike, as
appears Exodus 23.4. compared with Deuteronomy. 22.1. In one place it is, If thine
enemies Ox or his Ass go astray, thou shall surely bring it back: in the
other, which is the recital of the same Law, it is, Thou shall not see thy
brothers Ox or his Ass go astray, but thou shall in any case bring him back:
So that, whether he be Enemy, or Brother, it is all one in the eye of Religion,
and both to be alike beloved, assisted, and relieved.

Which although it be very severe to Nature, yet the Christian Law of love
requires it at our hands, never seeking to comply with, but to overruled all
our unregenerate affections; in so much that a new man at his first conversion
is in nothing more an Ephraimite, like a young Heifer unaccustomed and
struggling under the Yoke of Grace, then in respect to those impulsions and
checks which Gods Spirit imposes upon man's Affections: For indeed if you
observe the Law of Grace and the Gospel; this contrariety is not found only in
this one affection of Love; but all the rest of the passions, by the power and
constraint of Grace, are not only diverted but inverted, and turned clear
backward in their motions to objects diametrically opposite to their former.
Thus for our Hatred, We must hate Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brethren, and Sisters, and our own lives also, or we cannot be Christ's
Disciples, Luke 14.26. Next for our Joy, We must joy in persecutions,
reproaches, calamities, and be exceeding glad, Mat. 5.13. Nay, Leap for joy
((...) is Christ's word in S. Luke chap. 6.23.) when men hate you and reproach
you; and so in all the rest. Which although it may seem to be a very sharp
usage of Nature, yet is it not without sufficient reason and abundant
compensation; in regard that by virtue of the divine Chimistry of Grace, Good,
even spiritual good is brought out of natural evils; according to S. Paul's word
of consolation, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to
them that love God. Even enemies, reproaches, and persecutions. Which is a
Paradox to Nature, because it is beyond her Ken or Comprehension: the Back
cannot feel any good in cold and nakedness, nor the Belly in hunger and
emptiness: and on the other side, they cannot apprehend there is any Evil in
food and raiment; and as they judge, so they love and so they hate: But Grace
comes and finds Wantonness in fullness of bread; and Pride in gorgeous
apparel: and on the other side, it finds Humility in rags; Chastity, in hunger
and abstinence; it finds Patience under afflictions; triumphs under
persecutions; and thus they work together for the good of them that love God.
And thus much of the Object.

Thirdly, consider the End of Christian charity, which is said in the
Description to be, Not upon any humane or natural design, but for pious and
Christian ends and considerations. There are three Stages of all Man's actions,
Himself, his Brother, and his God. Now 1. to love merely for a man's own good,
self interest, is basely Carnal, nay it is Ethnic; Do not even, the Heathen,
the Publicans the same? Nay, it is Brutish, for the Beasts love their Feeder for
his food; but if he withholds his hand, and hunger begins to gripe those
Savages, Exasperatur mitigata torvit as, they fly in his face that nourished
them, and make a prey of their Benefactor. And, Brothers sake, at best is but
moral, in which respect though Man even under depravation excels the bruit
Beasts, whose love (if I may so call it) reaches no further then the first
sort, loving all things as they are agreeable or serviceable to their own
sensitive appetites: whereas this moral love in Man, admits not of such mean
mercenary reflections, and is bestowed upon no other considerations then the
goodness, virtue, and merit of the person beloved, as a debt due to his worth
and goodness, which is the love of Philosophers, and that which is called Amor
Amicitiae or Benevolentiae; the love of Friendship and Good Will: yet is this
love as far below the duty of the Text, and the affection of true Christians,
as it is above the lust of Beasts and brutish Men. Thirdly therefore, there is
another own sakes, nor our Brothers, but for Gods sake, and that not only in
obedience to Gods Commandment of love, which is the Evangelick Law, and the New
Command; nor for the conservation of the peace of Gods Church, which is
fortified by love; but also and principally, when it is bestowed in
consideration of that spiritual relation which our Brethren by grace have to
God, as instruments of his praise, as Members, or as Ministers of his Church;
as parts of the household of faith, etc. This is to love our Brother for Gods
sake: Or in our Saviors phrase, when we love a Disciple in the name of a
Disciple, Mat. 10.41, 42
and a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, and a righteous Man in the name of a
righteous man. That is, when we love them under that relation in which they
stand toward God and Religion, which ought to be so predominant in every good
heart, that it should give Law and Rule to all inferior relations whatsoever,
whether Natural or Moral; in so much that if ever their interests stand in
opposition, these subordinate indeerments ought to be utterly superseded and
neglected, which is the reason our Savior says, That unless we hate father
and mother, etc. we cannot be his Disciples. There are but three sorts of
inferior indeerments imaginable: Either the natural endearments of Blood; Moral
of Friendship; or Politic endearments of neighborhood, and commerce: and, as
if the Holy Ghost had designed to show at once, the supremacy of this spiritual
endearment of God and Religion above them all, I find all these Three expressly
superseded in one verse for the Interest of Religion and Honor of God, Exodus
32.27. When the people sinned in the matter of the Golden Calf, Moses from God
required the sons of Levi to gird every Man his sword to his side, and Slay
every man his Brother, every man his Companion, and every man his Neighbor.
Every Man his Brother, there is the natural endeerment of Blood; every Man his
Companion, there is the moral endeerment of Friendship; and every Man his
Neighbor, there is the pol^tick endeerment of Neighborhood or Commerce, and
all to be superseded for the interest of God and Religion. Neither yet is our
profession (composed of such severe Precepts) to be called either Cruel or
Unnatural: Because this Supreme and Divine Relation does not cancel and destroy
those that are inferior, but only suspends their virtue and influence, like
the Star in the presence of the Sun, they are though they appear not; and so
soon as ever this Ruling light of Religion is withdrawn, and the Interest of
Gods glory is not concerned to the contrary, then have these lesser inducements
their proper and allowable light and influence upon our affections: which is
the reason why that Rigid passage in S. Luke, Cha. 14. v. 26 Cha. 10. v. 37.
which seems to require an utter stifling of natural affection, in S. Matthew
pleads only for a qualifying and subjecting it to Religion; and whilst Christ
says in the one Evangelist; that Unless we Hate Father and mother, etc. we
cannot be his Disciples, he says in the other Evangelist, He that loves
father and mother more then me is not worthy of me, pleading for no more but a
due preference of Religion before Nature: Like holy Abraham's love to his son,
which, whether it was the love of Nature or Religion, he knew not so well, as
he did, when God put that severe command upon him, of offering his dear son;
and by that ready submission his heart yielded to the will of God, he knew
assuredly he loved his child, not so much with the fondness of nature, as
with the true affection of Religion, and in subordination to God and his
Honor. And if God, at any time, in mercy denies us these costly trials, and
will not show us what is our love of our Children, Brethren, or Friends, by the
loss of them, there is yet a less chargeable way to try the truth of our
love, and that is by our anger. Do thou conceive a Religious displeasure
against thy Brother, when thou see him run into sin, and dishonor God, and
break his Laws, even then when all other considerations hold out as amiable as
ever? then if thy Anger be religious, its a great sign such is thy Love also.
But on the contrary, Art thou not more angry with him, for denying thee a
reasonable courtesy at thy need, or for doing thee some conceived injury, or
revealing some entrusted secret, or the like; then for being drunk, or
profaning Gods Sabbath, or blaspheming Gods Name, or for violating Gods
Ordinances? if so, its an evident sign that this Love is but Carnal, and not
that heavenly and divine affection which ownes no end or consideration above
that supreme end and interest of God and Religion; which is the last Branch of
the description of this Duty, to wit, the End of our Charity, not for our own
sakes, nor for our Brothers, but for Gods sake.

So that (to reunite that description we have thus dismembered, that we may see
the full nature of this duty in one Prospect) we learn from what has been
spoken; First, for the Original, That true Christian Love is a stream derived
not from the lower springs of Nature, nor lowest of Lust, but from the upper
springs of Gods grace. Secondly, For its Object, That this stream must not only
water the pleasant Medows, and fruitful Valleys; but must also glide upon hard
Rocks, and barren and unsavory Bogs: For we must love our Enemies, and do good
to them that hate us, and pray for them that despightfully use us. And Thirdly,
for it its End: we learn first, That as this current of Divine Love of our
Brother, must have no Back Stream, no Mercenary Reflections upon our own
interest, for this is basely Carnal: And as, Secondly, it must not pour it self
solely and finally into our Brothers bosom for his own sake; for this is a
Cistern of our own hewing, and will hold no water when God accounts with us, it
being at best but moral. So Thirdly we learn, That as Water In tantum ascendit,
in quantum prius descendit, it rises exactly as high in the Conduit as it fell
from the Fountain; even so true Christian love, as it is a stream derived from
Gods grace, so it must end in Gods glory and for Gods sake: which is the full
nature of Christian Love, the Duty it self enjoined in this Text; Above all
things have charity.

But Secondly it is not more lovely and heavenly in its Nature, then
considerable in its Importance, for so says the Text, Above all things have
charity: Whether we consider it in its Precedence or Pre-eminence, both
evidently intimated from the difference between the Latin and English in the
translation of the Original: (...) Ante omnia says the Latin, Before all
things have charity,; There Is the Precedent of the Duty: (...), Above all
things says the English, there is the Pre-eminence, both speak the importance
of it.

First, (...), Before all things have charity. The love of our Brethren is a
precedent and preparatory Grace, that puts the Heart into a fit temper to
receive all other graces and instilments of Gods Spirit, and also to perform
all other Duties and offices of Religion. Tria sunt omnia, these All things
here of a Christians duty, are either such as relate to our selves, or such as
relate to our God, or such as relate to our Neighbor; (there cannot be named a
Fourth) comprehended under the three titles of Sobriety, Piety, and Charity.
Titus 2.12.
The Apostle exhorts to the practice of the two first Duties in the 7. verse;
Be sober, watch unto prayer; but by a religious (...), as if he had forgot
himself, he seems to correct his mistake with a But as in the Original, (...).
But before sobriety and Piety, that is, Before all things have charity.

First, Before Sobriety. We cannot perform our duties to our own selves as we
ought, nor acquire nor preserve that Christian calm temperature and due
consistence of our own spirits, before we first allay the storms of variance,
discord, and injustice toward our Brethren. Patience, and Temperance, and
Meekness, and Humility, and Contentation, and the like, are all Domestic
graces, that constantly keep house in ordering the private and particular
affairs of our souls: Justice and Charity are public graces that walk abroad
in ordering our affections, and conversations toward our Brethren: and truly
if we practice instead of Justice and Charity, Oppression, Malice, and Revenge
toward our Brethren; our souls can enjoy no more inward and domestic peace
in respect to the other graces of Sobriety under such public oppressions and
revenges, then a private family can expect in the midst of a Civil War; the
public blood, and violence, and rapine upon the innocent in City and Country,
take away all the quiet and security from a man's own house: and it is no
otherwise with a man's soul in respect to his Brother, if he once raises the
storms of wrath in his heart, he must expect Fluctuations and Fomings upon the
waters; and therefore (...) do as Christ did. First, rebuke the winds, and
then the Sea will soon be calm. First allay thy tempestuous spirit toward thy
Brother by the duty of Love and Charity, and then thou may expect all the
tranquil graces of sobriety in thy own soul: Patience, Meekness, Temperance,
Contentation, and Humility, are gentle graces that grow only under the Wind and
Sun, the tempests and blusterings between Brethren soon wither them. How did
Ahabs choler against Naboth turn his own stomach? 1 Kings 21.4.
He could not eat bread, says the Text, he was sick because he was angry, and
he lost his love and his health together: And truly as was this natural effect
of wrath in him, such is the spiritual effect of it in every Man; it turns the
uncharitable Man's soul into a distemper, and as to those private and personal
graces of sobriety, his constitution is thereby clearly altered, being truly
(as we may say) soulsick, verifying the Wise man's Proverb in a spiritual sense,
Prove. 14.30. That envy is the rottenness of the bones; so was it with Ahab
naturally, so is it with every malicious Man spiritually; it rots his soul, and
corrupts and poisons all his domestic graces of sobriety: that whilst he
endeavors to work vengeance on his Brother, by the violence of his own
impetuous spirit, he disquiets and distempers, and therefore destroys his own
soul. As the Philosopher said of Charybdis, that it was Ipsius maris
naufragium, and quis ibi salvus ubi ipsum mare perit, a Gulf, where the waters
moved with such violence, that it seemed to be a shipwreck of the Sea it self;
and what ship can be safe there, where the Sea it self is drowned? and truly
such is the violence of the malicious spirit; it is Ipsius animae naufragium, a
torrent so violent, that it is a shipwreck to it self, shattering and
destroying him that would destroy his Brother: if therefore thou would have
thy own soul prosper in the personal graces of sobriety, let thy spirit glide
gently in all Offices of Love and Charity toward thy Brother. This is the
first, (...), Before all things, that is, Before all duties of Sobriety have
Charity.

Secondly, (...), Before all things, that is, Before all duties of Piety, watch
unto prayer, verse 7. But before all things have charity. I need name no other
place of Scripture for proof, but that very express doctrine of our Savior in
his Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew. 5.24. If thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there remember thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, First, be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift: Forbear to tread in Gods Sanctuary, and to approach
his Altars, until thou come with feet shod with peace; all sacrifices without
this grace are like Cains that slew his Brother, a stink in Gods nostrils.

Its a proper trophy to bring Goliahs sword into Gods house, 1 Samuel 21.9. The
spoils of Gods and his Churches incorrigible enemies, are matter of triumph
and praise to God in the great Congregation: But to hang our Brothers sword
over Gods Altar, and to bring evil dispositions of malice and revenge against
our Brother, when we come to crave mercy for our selves, what an unwarrantable
presumption is this? and how expressly and sadly do we sue for our own
condemnation, whilst we pray, that God would forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us? First therefore be reconciled, then
come and offer thy gift: And in the Apostles order, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace,
and then holiness; first, Peace with thy neighbor, then Holiness to thy God.
Malice is such a Sour Leaven that it sowres the whole lump of Religious
Duties; purge out first therefore that Old Leaven, and then thy Hearing, and
Reading, thy Meditations, and thy Prayers, and all will be according to the
preparation of the Sanctuary: Which is the reason S. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.7. exhorts
Husband and Wife, to that degree of mutual love, correspondence, and
cohabitation, That their prayers be not hindered. And if I should say that even
Martyrdom it self were but a vainglorious blaze, and a fruitless
fool-hardinesse without Love, I should say no more then S. Paul has said
before me, 1 Cor. 13.3. If I give my body to be burned and have not charity, it
profits me nothing.

God spoke the same thing in Analogy to holy David, 1 Chronicles. 22.8, 9, 10. when
he told him that he should not build Gods house, because he had shed much
blood, and made great wars; but his son shall be a Man of peace, his name
shall be Solomon (peaceable) and he must build Gods house; If God would not
esteem his material Temple well built by hands dipped in blood, can we imagine he
will accept of the spiritual and most sacred Duties of Religion and Divine
Worship performed with a heart stained with malice and revenge? He that is
acceptably conversant in these holy things, must be a Solomon, a Man of peace
and love toward his Brethren: therefore again, first, be reconciled before
thou buildest Gods house, Watch unto prayer, but before this, and before all
things have Charity. Thus you have seen how Charity goes before both duties of
Sobriety toward our selves, and duties of Piety toward God, which is the
first part of the importance of the duty, to wit, the Precedence of it,
gathered from the Latin translation of the Original (...), Before all things
have charity.

Secondly, come we to the other part of its Importance, to wit, its
pre-eminence, drawn from the English Text (...) Above all things have Charity,
or, if you think this Good greek but ill translated in this sense, take the
same doctrine in indubitable words from St. Paul Col. 3.14. (...) Above all
things put on Charity; when it cannot be denied but the Apostle does preach up
the pre-eminence of this duty above all that went before.

Psalm. 133.
And truly when I consider that holy David has spent a whole Psalm, 1 Cor. 13.
and St. Paul a whole Chapter, upon no other subject then the excellency of
this duty of Charity, I cannot think my self able to perform the same work in
any Competent measure in a small part of a Sermon; yet since it is fallen in
our way, according to my time and talent, I shall show you the pre-eminence of
this duty above all others in these Four particulars. In the perfection of its
acts; In the sweetness of its nature; In the Universality of its Influence, and
lastly, in the Duration of its Being.

First, it is above all in the perfection of its acts. 1 Cor. 13.13.
Now abides Faith, Hope and Charity, these three; but the greatest of these is
Charity; The advancement of this grace will prove a very easy work if we can
set it above Faith it self; and since the holy Ghost has said it, we must
make it good, and that in two particulars. First, Charity is greater then
Faith, in respect to the Efficacy of their acts, For Charity gives life, at
least it gives activity to Faith, and therefore is greater; read this assertion
at large verified by St. James Chap. 2. from the 14. to the 23. Faith without
works is dead; if a brother be naked or want Food, and ye say be be warmed and
filled but give him nothing, what does this profit? Faith is dead if it be
alone; for the Devils believe and tremble, and v. 22. he says that Abraham's
faith wrought by works, and by works faith is perfect: And St. Paul makes up
St. James's argument by the specification of those works which actuate faith.
Faith works by Love Gal. 5.6. It is love then which actuates, yea, which in
St. James his phrase, perfects faith; thus Charity is greater then Faith:
first, in the efficacy of their acts, it actuates, it perfects faith. Secondly,
it is greater then faith in the Absoluteness of its acts, Faith qua talis in
its own nature implies imperfection, not only in matter of degrees (for so
Charity also is imperfect in this life;) but even in its own kind; the most
perfect act of Faith, if it be but Faith, has this imperfection in it, to wit,
the Absence of the object. For says the Apostle, It is of things not seen;
whereas charity is the grace of union, Heb. 11.1.
and it is the caressing of the heart in the actual Fruition of the object, and
therefore is perfect in its own kind; For which reason it abides and Fails
not with Faith hope and other imperfect graces, which by reason of their
imperfections, are unfit for Heaven without a charge; as also are all those
that imply misery in others, such as pity and compassion, etc. which in the
very natures of their acts, forespeak themselves unfit for that state where
there is Fullness of joy for ever more; whereas this grace of Charity abides
the same in Heaven as on Earth in its kind, (though in degrees it is more
perfect) and for no other reason, but because the acts and operations of
Charity, even as they are performed here on Earth, do not imply any Essential
inherent imperfections, which as you see, are to be found in all other graces:
Therefore Charity is Above all others, First in the Perfection of its Acts.

Secondly, In the sweetness of its Nature, There is no duty of Religion that
comes so near to the delight of nature, as the duty of Brotherly love; as man
is naturally a sociable creature, so consequently must he be as naturally a
loving and affectionate creature, Love being the congregating and uniting
passion of the soul, whereby the object is drawn close to the affection: so
that Love simply in its own nature is the most consonant to our natural
inclination, even above all other duties of Religion whatsoever, which the
Psalmist plainly intimates when he cries out Psalm. 133.1. Behold how pleasant a
thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity: Faith, repentance,
self-denial, taking up the Cross, and all duties of mortification, instead of
pleasure hold, in their very acts rather a displeasure and contrariety to
nature; but how pleasant is unity among Brethren? wherefore above all other.
Secondly in the sweetness of its nature.

Thirdly in the Universality of its influence, Charity transfuseth an universal
virtue through the whole body of Gods worship and service in all the duties of
the same, if they are performed as they ought to be: whereas other duties are
particularly stated within their own limits. Meditation is a distinct duty from
hearing of the word preached; and Hearing is a distinct duty from prayer; and
Receiving the Sacraments distinct from both; but the duties of Love and Charity
must have an universal influence in all. Charity being among the Graces much as
Justice among the virtues: 1 Cor. 16.14. The Apostle particularly exhorts the
Corinthians to Watchfulness, to magnanimity, to Constancy, in their particular
and distinct natures: but v. 14. he enjoins Charity as an Universal requisite
to the performance of these and all other particular duties whatsoever: Watch
ye, Stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong, here are the
particular duties; and in the next verse Let all things be done with Charity:
like as it was under the law, an abundance of sacrifices there were of proper
and distinct kinds, some of Sheep, some of Bullocks, some of Lambs; some for
peace, some for praise,, some for sin; But all were kindled by the same holy
fire, that was kept always alive upon the holy Altar, for these several
services; And even thus is it with the grace of Charity, it is that holy Fire
which is ever kept alive in the Altar of the good man's heart, whereby he
enkindles all his evangelical sacrifices which he offers unto God; and
therefore he that comes with his gift to the altar, before he be reconciled to
his Brother, in effect expects to offer a burnt offering without Fire; let him
leave his gift; First Fetch this Fire, then let him kindle his Sacrifice, and
perform the whole state and series of the duties of Religion, quickened with
this common Catholic grace: which is to the other inferior duties of Gods
worship, as the Sun is to the lesser Stars, though they have a native beauty
and light of their own, yet do they all borrow the chiefest part of their
luster from this great ruling light of Charity. I need no better evidence of
the universal influence of this grace, then the resemblance the holy Psalmist
gives us Psalm. 133.2. where he tells, us that the love of Brethren is that
precious ointment of Aaron, which was poured upon his head, and ran down to his
beard, and descended even to the skirts of his garments, and so gave a pleasant
tincture to every part of Aaron from head to foot: this diffusive ointment,
says he, is the love and unity of Brethren, which gives a tincture to all the
parts of Aaron, to the whole body of Gods worship and service in all the duties
of the same; not only to the participation of the great mysteries of our
salvation in the Sacraments, which is the Head of Aaron; but also to every
quotidian meditation upon God, to every frequent admonition of our Brother, the
skirts of Aaron, even all must smell of this precious ointment of charity;
wherefore it is above all others thirdly in the universality of its Influence.

Fourthly, In the Duration of its being, 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity never fails,
but whether there be prophesies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they
shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away: All other both
Gifts and Graces must suffer a kind of dissolution before we can enter heaven;
but charity never dies, continuing as immortal as the soul that bears it:
Indeed we may say of the duration of all other graces, as S. Paul spoke of Man's
Mortality, 1 Cor. 15.51. They shall not all die, but they shall be changed:
Faith shall be changed into vision, and Hope into fruition, Patience into
triumph, Penitence into praise, etc. But Charity shall not so much as undergo
this change; for it shall be the same in its kind, though greater in its
degree, in Heaven as it was on the Earth; so that it is a grace that receives
Enochs Translation, without S. Paul's Mutation, passing into Heaven with us, and
that without a change; no other graces do the like, and therefore above all
others lastly in the Duration of its being.

You have seen the Precedence and also the Pre-eminence of charity, and in both
the Importance, which is the second part of the Text from these words (...),
Before or above all things have charity.

Come we now to the Third part, to wit, from the Importance to the Complexion
or Temperature of the duty, in these words (...) translated fervent charity. It
is not every flash of friendship, nor formal fit of courtship that is the
charity; extold by the Apostle, but it is (...) fervent charity; which if we
will take the advantages of the original without restraining our selves to the
translation, we shall find it as fit a word for our purpose, as can be found
in the whole treasury of the Greek tongue: For it is one word, which, in the
force of the several constructions it usually bears, gives us all the most
requisite Dimensions or Admeasurements of Christian charity, to wit, both the
Extension, Intention, and protension, (...) being used frequently in all three
senses, as you shall see in the pursuit of each particular. 1. It intimates
that Christian charity must be an extended charity toward all for the Breadth
of it. 2. That it must be an Intended or intense, or fervent charity proceeding
from the sincerity of the heart, for the depth of it. 3. That it must be also a
protended (i. e.) a lasting, a continued charity, not discouraged by any
personal disobligements whatsoever, for the Length of it: as if Providence had
fitted it only for this place, as if it were an Adjective made on purpose for
this substantive.

First, if our charity must be (...), then it must be an extended and an
enlarged charity even unto all, which we must needs confess is the native and
most literal construction of the word, which is originally compounded of (...)
and (...), signifying literally to Extend or enlarge in breadth, or to stretch
forth to a great distance; in this sense is it used by S. Luke Acts 26.1. Then
Paul (...) stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: so is it
likewise used by S. Matthew. 14.31. suddenly Christ (...) stretching forth his
hand, etc. saved Peter from sinking: Answerably therefore if true charity is
(...), it must be a stretched forth and an enlarged charity. True Christian
charity therefore enjoined in this Apostolic precept is not a limited nor
enclosed affection, impaled only within the bounds of narrow relations either
natural or contracted, as of Country, Friends, Benefactors, Kindred, or the
like; but it is a Campaigne and a Common Grace, knowing no other bounds or
limits but the universal relation in which all men stand toward God, who is
the common cause in whom all concenter and agree: and this is (...) extended
charity, practiced to the full by our Savior Christ, who set us copies as well
as imposed precepts, and taught us by his Example as well as by his Doctrine;
in whose life I know not any generation of people whom he excluded from the
charity of his miracles: The Centurion, a Roman; the Woman at the Wellhead, a
Samaritan; the Woman, that interceded for her Daughter, a Dog a Syrophenician;
the churlish Gadarene; the scandalous Publican; the Lepers; the Demonaick; the
Deaf; the Dumb; the Blind; the Lame; the Sick; and the Dead: all nations,
sexes, conditions, and ages of Men, did partake of the benefit of his extended
love, giving in these outward Evidences, Symbols of the love of Christ
spiritually to mankind in the salvation of their souls; Tit. 2.11. The love of
God has appeared unto all men: and Chap. 3. verse 4. The love of Christ
toward Man appeared: he was (as Themistius says a good King should be)
neither (...), nor (...), but (...); not a friend only to the house of David,
nor yet to the house of Abraham, not to the Jews his Brethren after the flesh,
these are too narrow relations for such a boundless charity; but his Love
toward Man appeared, which is a specific denomination applicable to Turks, to
Negroes, to Indians, to all that own the title of Reasonable Creatures; even to
all the Genealogies of our Ancestors from Adam to this Age, Rev. 1.4.
that now lie buried in the land of forgetfulness, for Christ is the (...),
the God that was; to all that now breathe upon the face of Gods earth; for
Christ is the (...), the God that is; and to all that ever shall be to the last
dissolution, for he is the (...), the God that is to come.

But Secondly, his precept of Love is as large as his practice. Its true, the
tenor of the Law in S. Luke 10.27. is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, as if Strangers and Enemies were excluded from the Obligation of this
Precept: but S. Paul, the best Interpreter of Christ's Doctrine, rehearsing the
same Law, Romans 13.8. says, (...), He that loves another has fulfilled the
Law: it is not (...) but (...), not our Friend, our Companion, or Familiar, but
he that loves another man, any Man. It is not private interest, party, nor
faction, that can impound Christian charity within any particular state or
condition of Men, but it loves all in the capacity of God and Religion,
swallowing up into its immensity all the lesser and limited channels, of love,
arising from the narrow endeerments of nature or conversation, such as are
Kindred, Friends, or Benefactors, etc.

But Thirdly, if you would see both Doctrine, and Practice in one instance, you
may find them in Matthew. 12. where when it was told Christ that his Mother and
Brethen after the flesh stood without to speak with him, he answered verse 48.
Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? alas you speak after the manner of
Men, and make an enclosure of that affection within the limits of Nature, which
I intend should be a Campaigne and a Common Field even for the benefit of the
whole world, through the universality of grace; and therefore (...), says the
Text, yes and (...) also, he stretched forth both his Hand and his Heart
toward his Disciples (says S. Matthew,) toward the whole multitude, says S.
Mark,) and said even of this multitude, Behold my mother and brethren: why and
how so? Whosoever does the will of my Father, the same is my Brother, Sister,
and Mother; there is little question but in that crowd there were some of very
different and remote conditions, and perhaps of different climates; seldom a
crowd in Christ's time, but was such, by reason of the mixture of other nations
with the Jews, under the Regency of the Romans: yet whether they were
Barbarian or Scythian, Bond, or Free, Jew or Gentile, Christ is all to, and in
all: Col. 3.11.
That spiritual relation in which they stand to his heavenly Father, by an
upright life and due obedience to his will, adopts Christians of the most
remote conditions to be his Mother and Brethren. There being very little
question but Christ's (...) in this place is of the same latitude as S. Paul's
(...). Wherefore if we will either obey the command of Christ; or imitate the
practice of Christ, our charity must be universal and extended according to his
who has required us to love one another, even as he has loved us. We read of
somewhat a strange argument which the Apostle uses to the Hebr. 13.2. to
persuade them to a common hospitality of strangers; For thereby (he says) some
have entertained Angels unawares: If we consider our neighbor in that
condition he stands toward God, even so all Men are strangers unto us; and
unless we had the perusal of the Book of Life, we know not who will make a
vessel of Honor, or who of Dishonor. Let me therefore exhort you in the
Apostles phrase to entertain into your affections all those that are so much
strangers to you, lest you chance to shut out of your charity one of Gods
Angels, one that has the secret signature of election upon him; and then
Christ come at last to you, and say as to those unkind and uncharitable
wretches in the Gospel, Matthew. 25.45. In as much as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me. Therefore let your charity be in the first
place, an extended charity.

Secondly, if it be (...), it must be a deep, intense, and fervent charity,
such as proceeds from the very bottom of the Heart, and the integrity of our
Souls; (which being the main part of the duty, and withal the express language
of the Text, it will be necessary that we insist longer upon this construction,
then upon either of the other two.) I confess I find this word not often used
in this sense elsewhere in holy Writ: But (...), which is an Adverb of the same
Verb is frequent in Greek Authors, signifying Impense, vehementer and totis
viribus; to do a thing Earnestly, Vehemently, and with utmost Industry, which
is in effect the same with Fervently in the Text; expressing that true zeal and
sincerity of affection which one Man ought to have to another. True Christian
charity is neither a cold neighborhood, nor a formal courtship, nor a
vainglorious beneficence; but it is the entire and zealous affection of the
very soul. Expressed by S. Paul, Romans 12.10. in a phrase beyond the reach of
our English tongue, (...), where he requires that one Man should love another
with the same (...), with the same natural tenderness, as a Mother loves the
child of her own bowels, which in our translation we call a kind affection,
Be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love: which though it
fall far short of the Original, yet speaks enough to tell us that the Heart is
the principal Requisite in charity; and that that Philosophers compassion was
no better then Stoical hypocrisy, who whilst he allowed his friend to
contribute sad looks and language to the distressed and miserable, restrains
him with a (...), Epicter.
Be sure take heed lest thou suffer any inward compassion for him; turning this
most tender affection of the heart, into a formal counterfeit compliance of the
outward behavior, clear contrary to the nature of Christianity, which is of
such a pure and spiritual extraction, that although we read of rewards upon the
performance of no duties more, then for works of Charity, such as relieving the
oppressed, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, bewailing and comforting the
miserable, and other the external acts of charity; yet is neither this, nor any
other duties of Religion accepted or rewarded by God for their own sakes, but
only according to the inward affection of the soul from whence they proceed.

Indeed a man might think, that if there were any outward acts of obedience
accepted for themselves, they should be the outward offices of Charity toward
our Brethren, and the plausible reason might be; Because how ever they may
proceed from a wrong Aim, yet they do unfallibly hit the right mark, and
fulfill the immediate, and indeed, the principal end of those acts, and that is,
the relief of our needy Brother: For doubtless the Bread and Wine and Sheep
etc. would have yielded David and his men as wholesome refreshment had they come
from the hand of Churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.18.
as they did coming as the present of a cheerful and generous Abigail. So that
operative Charity consisting in that order it bears to our Brothers good; if
our needy brother be benefited by the outward act, it is accidental as to the
End of Charity, whether that act proceed from an inward principle of Grace,
Nature, or Lust; wherefore, I say, if any outward acts of obedience were of
themselves acceptable, one might think they should be those of Charity toward
our Brother: For as for those of piety and worship toward God; such as
Watching, Fasting, Praying, Hearing, Communicating: and the like external acts
of Religion, the entire order that these hold in the state of our obedience is
only to spiritual ends and purposes; and therefore although we are required to
worship and glorify God in our Bodies and in our Spirits which are Gods. 1
Cor. 6.20. Yet God himself being a most pure spirit, unto which all these
outward acts of piety and worship tend, and in whom they fully End; it is
therefore very improper to the nature of them, that they should be accepted in
and for themselves, but only as they derive a devout influence from, and have
an original dependence upon the sincerity and zeal of the Inner man, and the
spirit from whence they proceed. For doubtless that argument of our Savior
drawn from the nature of that God we serve Joh. 4. 24. is unanswerable when he
says, That God is a Spirit, and therefore must be worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth. Wherefore, to return to our purpose, although Relief and Brotherly
supply is the whole End of operative Charity consisting in the outward offices
of Love, which is sufficiently satisfied if those offices are performed, yet if
we take the duty of Christian charity in the whole state of the duty, and not
by parcel-meals, we shall find that operative charity is not the half part of
that required in this precept of Love; for this, as all duties of the Second
Table, has a double respiciency in it, the immediate respect is toward our
Neighbor, the ultimate respect is toward God: which is a consideration that
makes the duties of love to become offices of piety to God as well as of
charity to our Brother.

Now looking upon this duty in its immediate respect to our Neighbor, I
confess if Gods Law were to be considered no otherwise then the Statute Laws
of the Land, which for the substance of the precepts forbid the very same
particulars as are expressed in the Second Table, as Rebellion, Murder, Theft,
Adultery, False witness, etc. and enjoynes also the same duties of Justice and
Charity to our Brethren: Now, I say, if Gods Law reached no further then Man's,
operative charity would fulfill the whole duty, Man's Law looking no farther then
to the restraining or enjoining the outward act.

But seeing Gods Law ought to be considered, as the first Law written in our
hearts, and the Law of Nature as well as of God; in this consideration the
inward principle of those offices of love from whom they proceed, must be
considered as well as the external acts themselves; for as much as God at the
first did so absolutely and to all purposes instruct and furnish our natures,
that look whatever outward duty he required at our hands, he placed an
answerable principle in our hearts to incline and carry us through the
performance of that work required of us; as conceiving it to be too severe a
usage of man, above all other works of the creation besides, to require him to
do that duty, unto which God had not first imprinted a propension in his
nature, as to command him the outward offices of Society and Hospitality
without giving him the inward principle of love; or the duties of succouring
the distressed, or relieving the needy, without the inward principle of pity
and commiseration, and so in all the rest.

And truly, though I deny not, but many a good alms has been given for
vainglory, to be seen of Men; many through the importunity of our needy
Brother; and many through custom; yet these are not natural, but equivocal
productions of charity; much like the generations of Frogs and Flies, and other
Insects, which are often engendered of putrefaction, and not from their own
kinds, which we call Imperfect Generations in Philosophy: Even such unkindly
productions are such sorts of good works in the Law of Charity, that come
besides the common order of Nature: God therefore originally not only enjoining
the Act, but administering the proper and univocal principle of that act in the
spirit of Man: By the Law of Nature rectified, we are required to take both
into consideration; and not only to be hospitable to our Brethren, but also to
love them; not only to help the miserable, but also to pity and compassionate
them; so that the inward fervency of the spirit in works of charity is
necessary in the first place Nec^ssitate principii, as Natures proper

But Secondly, if we look upon charity as reflecting upon God, we shall find
yet more cause why this fervency of the heart is requisite in this duty.
Because in this capacity it is a duty of piety, as all other duties of Religion
and worship are, which have their outward acts (as I have said) purely in order
to inward and spiritual purposes, and grateful only as they proceed from
sincere and spiritual principles. Now that charity bears such a reflection upon
God, and therefore becomes as it were a duty of the First Table, is intimated
by the Wiseman Prove. 14.31. where it is said, That he that oppresses the poor
reproacheth his Maker; not only by his act of disobedience against the positive
Law of God, who by adding to this duty his divine sanction, made that moral
which was at first natural, whereby you see the Heart is likewise necessary in
this duty. Secondly, Necessi^ate praecepti; but also reproacheth his Maker, in
respect to that order and relation in which they stand toward God, having a
supreme interest in all men, but especially in the poor and needy, and of these
chiefly in them, who together with their outward indigencies are poor in spirit
also; of whom Christ says, Matthew. 25.40. In as much as ye have done it unto
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Now if offices of love
and charity to our Brethren be performed to God, and to Christ himself; we
knowing whom we serve, know likewise our charity must be affectionate and
fervent as well as operative, and that as you see Necessitate medii, as a
proper means of service answerable to that God we serve.

Negative Friendships, and Cold Neighbourhoods, no wrong, and offer no
violence, and are not professed Enemies: alas, this is too cold a disposition
for this hot climate of Love; true charity is a grace that puts the heart of a
Christian into a fermentation, and a fervent working of the bowels upon our
Brethren: for Love leavens the soul, as well as Malice, and there is a heat in
both, only the one is by a fire from Hell, and the other from Heaven: But this
cold indifferency hangs between these two fires, like the middle Region between
Heaven and Earth, in a perpetual frost, having neither celestial grace enough
to inkindle the kindly warmth of love; nor infernal malice, nor mischief
enough, or at least not courage, or opportunity, or provocation enough, to blow
up the fiery combustions of wrath and revenges. And yet with shame we may speak
it if we look into City and Country, we shall find this degree of charity to
be all that is practiced in obedience to the whole precept of love; Nothing but
a bare Non-enmity, and a Negative friendship, not fighting, not revenging, not
provoking, not injuring, and this is all: which is a disposition that gives to
Man but one remove from Wolves, and Bears, for we cannot love one minute or
scruple less then this degree, but we must degenerate into plain Savages, and
exercise professed acts of cruelty and hostility one against another. And yet we
think, if we can speak in the Pharisees dialect, Not an Extortioner, not a
Murderer, not an Enemy, we shall be justified in this law of love, and that we
are friends sufficient to our Brethren.

Which is the more to be lamented, because it seems to be not only a defect in
our practice, but also an error of our judgments, as appears by our behavior
in most solemn and sacred severities, to wit, in those great administrations of
Religion which call for an exact view and examination of every Man's soul, such
as are the holy Sacraments: Wherein Men do employ all their spiritual labor to
approve their Faith to be lively and efficacious, and their repentance to be
truly contrite and humble; their mortifications to be truly mental in subduing
their lusts, and not only in disfiguring their faces, and using corporal
severities. But in this spiritual surveigh, when they consider themselves in
this duty of charity; perhaps if they are at open defiance and professed
variance with any Man, they will think it fit to skin over this festering sore
with a false formal reconciliation; but if you examine their charity as to the
rest of their Brethren, they will say, They bear them no ill will, they never did
them any injuries or wrongs either in person, goods, or good names, they never
meddled nor made with them, and they are enemies to no Man living; and this is
the cold negative account they give of their duty toward their Brother, whom
God commands them to love with as fervent an affection as they love themselves:
whereas if they should be thus negative in the accounts of their other graces,
instead of coming with their wedding garments to Gods Table, they would come
stark naked. If thy Faith should be only a belief, that thou should be
saved, not by Baal, not by the Idols of the Heathen, not by the Turks Mahomet,
not by the Jews Talmud, not by the Papists Legends and Traditions: And thy
Repentance should be only a temporary forbearance of the acts of sin, a not
being drunk, or not swearing, or not stealing, or the like. But whilst thou
art sufficiently convinced in thy judgment, that thy faith should be positive
and lively, and a firm belief that Jesus Christ is thy Savior, relying with a
bold and lively affiance of thy heart, upon his promises for life and
salvation: and also that thy repentance should be truly humble and contrite,
both a compunction and sorrow of soul for sins past, and a pious purpose of the
heart never to commit the like sins again: yet in this fervent duty of charity,
if thou can say I have done no Man wrong, and bear them no ill will, and am
an enemy to no man living, thou think in thy own judgment that thou have
said enough: we may call this indeed a putting off of malice and professed
enmity: But it is not, as the Apostle requires Col. 3.14. A putting on of
charity; but it is a miserable and a forlorn denudation of the soul, and a
stripping it stark naked: whereas charity, if it be well put on, is a Garment
that keeps him warm that wears it; that heart shall never feel the chillness of
negative friendships, that is truly furnished with the grace of fervent charity.

charity of the Tongue, practiced in Court and Country, by all who are more
liberal of good words, then either of good wishes or good deeds, who when their
brethrens necessities require either their purse, counsel, favor, or interest
to help them out of their present distress; presently (in the Apostles phrase)
they fall to tuning their tinkling Cymbals, 1. Cor. 13.1.
and give them a liberal acknowledgement of all former favors, and how joyful
they should be to make a grateful return of so much kindness, and profess
their readiness to do them any service that lies within the compass of their
powers; with much more of this French charity. But when it comes to the point
of assistance, they begin to bewail their unhappiness that they are not able
to serve them in this one request, either their money is out of the way, or
their favor is eclipsed and interest abated, or twenty pretended occasions of
importance draw them another way: and thus they stretch out the expectation of
their needy brethren, with nothing but the wind of fair words, and leave them
as helpless as they found them: Nay, perhaps at that very time are contriving
and meditating secret stratagems, how to overreach or undermine them in those
very affairs in which they craved their assistance: which is no new piece of
Courtship among great ones, that use more flatteries to their friends then
Fucasses to their faces; whereas indeed the one can be called no more true
charity, then the other true beauty: Holy David was troubled with such
Courtiers, Psalm. 55.13. Mine equal, my guide, my acquaintance -- His words were
smoother then butter, and softer then oil, when war was in his heart, verse 21.
Which practice is so far from fervent charity, that it is fervent malice and
fervent envy.

Others there are, guilty of a more harmless sort of charity, that will give
nothing but the cheap alms of good words to him that asks and needs out of the
chargeableness of the duty: like S. James's Eleemosynaries, James 2.16. that
say to the naked and to the hungry, be ye warmed, and be ye filled, but neither
give food nor raiment; alas what do words profit them? Breath indeed is a
cheap dole, but it is cold and comfortless, it may cool the naked, but it
cannot clothe him: and wind may swell the hungry with a false expectation, but
it cannot feed him. There are no words that perform the ends of charity, but
his, who spoke the word and Israel had bread from Heaven, and garments that
were not old by wearing; even the word of him that feeds the Ravens, and
clothes the Lilies, by whose Word we live more then by our own bread, Matthew.
4.4. Let us therefore love not in word nor in tongue, but in deed, and in
truth, 1 John 3.18. In deed, that our charity may be profitable, and in truth,
that our charity may be sincere and fervent. Therefore away in the second place
with the comfortless charity of the Tongue.

Thirdly, if true charity must be fervent, Away with the extended charity of
the Hand, the charity of Scribes and Pharisees that give only to be seen of
men; who although many a poor soul may have been refreshed by their Alms, and
clothed in their Liveries, and recovered by their Physic; yet at the last
account they will find, they had as good never have given at all, as have given
at the sound of a Trumpet for vainglory and applause, without any true sincere
charity in their souls. ^ar be it from me to speak against the poor man's
interest; God knows he lives in hunger and rags, notwithstanding all ^e
incomes of charity, yea, though we take in those also which ^portunity or
custom, which pride or vainglory, or any other ^arisaical motives of
beneficence may bring into the poor man's Storehouse. I only tell the rich the
best way to husband their charity, and that they may at the same rate, purchase
to their own hearts and consciences, the true satisfaction of Christian and
religious benefactours, as they now give to buy only the air of a good name
and the vain reputation of munificence. It is but only altering the
disposition of the Heart, the Hand has already learned its duty. And unless
the heart be changed, you may call it vanity and ostentation, but you
exceedingly wrong this sweet and spiritual grace of Christianity to call it
charity.

And if this seems a mystery and a soloecisme against the common dialect of the
World, to deny almsdeeds to be charity, go and learn the meaning of S. Paul's
Paradox, 1 Cor. 13.3. That a man may give all his goods to feed the poor, and
yet have no charity: Judges 4.
Or what think you of Jaels kindness to Sisera? who brings her Milk and Butter
in a Lordly D^sh to the faint and the weary Captain, and gives him house and
harbor, entertainment, and lodging; if we did not see the Nail and the Hammer
we should be ready enough to call this pure compassion: but when we read of the
fatal effect of this kindness, how should we wrong the integrity and
simplicity of this lovely grace, to give to such usages the name of charity?
And when I consider how many Jaels favors are bestowed in the World, only upon
a design to work in Men the greater confidence of their fidelity, that so they
might destroy with the greater assurance and advantage, I cannot but think it
high time to preach up the charity of the heart: and to tell you that the
liberality of the hand alone, is nothing but the price of hypocrisy, nay,
perhaps, it may be the very pretexts of treachery, a piece of charity which the
Devil practiced, who had good nature enough to offer Christ the glories of the
world, when he suffered hunger and solitude in the waste wilderness: and the
same foul spirit that once thought to make Job curse God by Taking, Job 1.11.
Chap. 2.5.
now tryes whether he can make our Savior bless the Devil by Giving. And even
such, and no other, are the deceitful charities of the Hand, where the Heart is
not sincere and upright: and thus much for reprehension.

Exhortation; if Charity must be fervent, Be ye then (...), kindly
affectioned one toward another with brotherly love; Romans 12.
rest not in the cold formalities of vulgar freindship, nor in the outward
complements, or uncertain offices of Love; but let your hearts erne over your
brothers necessities, and fellow-feele in all their miseries: doutless Religion
makes Charity a very secret and mental grace, when it is called in Scripture by
the name of Bowels, Col 3.12. Put on therefore (as the elect of God holy and
beloved,) Bowels of mercy: and in another place, to show us whence every
outward act of Charity should proceed, the denial of assistance to the poor
and needy is called a shutting up of our Bowels. 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this
worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? the holy Ghost in
this place takes no notice of any of those equivocal productions of Charity,
which may proceed either from custom, importunity or vainglory; accounting no
ourward office of Love worth naming, but what proceeds from open bowels, that
is, from a Christian tender compassion of our Brethrens needs. If ye will but
change the name and call Charity, Love; you will soon see the necessity of the
heart in this duty: love being an affection ever naturally fixed and seated
there; and it is as improper for men to love with their hands, or to love with
their tongues, as it is to see with their ears, or hear with their eyes. Which
secret and sacred seat of this divine grace, the holy Apostle evidently
discovers, 1 Timothy 1.5. Where he calls it Charity out of a pure heart, a good
Conscience and faith unfeigned: Outward offices of love, where they are found
alone, are but Charity's out of unclean hands, but the true Apostolical
Christian Love, is Charity out of a prue heart: Excellently expressed by God,
Isa. 58.10. where he calls it a drawing out of the soul to the hungry; it is
not so much a drawing out of our treasures, our cruise, and our Barrel, but we
must set our souls on broach, and draw out even the secret compassions, and
ernings of our own bowels over the necessities of our needy brethren; and by
this means how slender and narrow soever thy share is of the good things of
this World, thou shall discover a rich fountain of Love, sufficient to answer
all the necessities of thy brethren; for whereas treasures may be exhausted,
and the cruise may fail, and the barrel cease, but the overflowing Fountain of
Christian pity, and compassion in the good man's heart, shall never be drawn
dry; for so says the Text, v. 11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,
then thou shall be as a spring of waters, whose waters fayl not: which leads
us to the last construction of (...) protended or lasting Charity.

Which is the third dimension of this grace, to wit, the length of it. True
Christian Charity to our brother, does not live and die with our own ends and
interests, it does not last till our turns are served, nor cease upon any
personal indignities or disobligements, but it is in the Philosophers phrase,
pertinax bonitas, Senec.
a grace, which as no worldly inducements wrought in us, so no worldly
discouragement, can blast, but it is (...), lasting and perpetual Charity;
which construction of the word, I need not crave aid of profane Authors to
justify, though Suidas and others frequently use it for jugis and assiduus;
but I can give you express Scripture for it, Act. 12.5. Peter was kept in
Prison, and (...), etc. it is not translated fervent prayer, But Prayer without
ceasing was made by the Church to God for him: and if (...) be Prayer without
ceasing, surely (...) may be translated, as well, Charity without ceasing, not
concluded by our own interests or our Brothers discourtesies, but it ought to
be a perpetual and a durable duty, like our Saviors, who when he loves us
once, he loves us unto the end, Ioh. 13.10.

natural bodies arises from the fighting and victory of contrary principles,
which is the reason we say in Philosophy, That God who is a simple being must
needs be Eternal. Now though natural charity like natural bodies, is destroyed
by contraries, by an unworthy reproach, or an ungrateful return, or an uncivil
affront, or any other personal injury; yet that charity which is a Christian
grace, is exercised and improved by such trials; it can take pleasure in
reproaches, and joy in persecutions; it can love enemies, and bless
persecutors, and pray for the spightful and malicious (...), and therefore the
next word is (...), 1 Cor. 13.7, 8. It suffers All things, it endures All
things, and therefore it follows, Charity never fails: and how can we
imagine that any thing can destroy that which even Enemies improve.

But secondly God and Nature seem to have conspired to Religions we say Nulli
sunt taliter discrepantes, etc. No Men are of such different opinions, but they
agree in some common principles, out of which arguments may be drawn to bring
all at last to unity of judgment in the same truth. Thus the Christian and the
Atheist agree in the Book of Nature; the Christian and the Jew in the Old
Testament, and the Reformed Christian and the Papist in the New Testament: and
so long as there is a Third thing wherein they agree, there is at least a
possibility of union. Even after the same manner has God provided for the
working and perpetuating the unity of affections by this grace of charity; in
as much as there cannot be any sort of people of such an alienated estate from
us, but there is some Relation in which they agree with us, and so long as any
relation continues, even so long our love must endure.

But thou will say it is true, such or such an one was once my Brother in
sincere and holy profession, but now he has broke that relation and turned
profane and dissolute: yet love him still, for he is thy Brother-Protestant:
Nay, but he has further Apostatized even to Papal superstition, and so has
broken that Relation also; yes, love him still, for he is yet thy
Brother-Christian: Nay, but he is as bad as bad may be, he is degenerated into
plain Atheism, and so has violated all Relations; yes, love him still, for he
is yet thy Brother-Creature, nay, thy Brother-Man, and has more of the
lineaments and image of God in him then all the unreasonable creatures of the
world besides; and whatsoever is of God in him, even in that he is thy Brother,
and in that the fit Object of thy charity.

This argument is excellently pursued by the Stoic, (...), as every thing, so
every person has two handles, or two capacities; and if thy charity cannot lay
hold on the one, yet may it easily on the other: as for instance, says he, Thy
Brother has injured thee; in this case do not take him in that relation as he
has wronged thee, (...), for thus (as we say in our English phrase) thou
take the Pitcher by the wrong ear, and thy Brother in that capacity in which
thou can not bear him, (...), but rather under this relation as he is thy
Brother, born of the same Mother, nursed with the same Milk, disciplined in the
same family, (...), etc. and so shall thou receive him in that capacity in
which thy charity will well bear him.

But Thirdly true charity is durable, because it has the discerning faculty to
distinguish between the person and the fact: so that all disobligements that
are committed against love, are received, not as the effects of the person, but
of his evil disposition, and proceeding not from his nature, but from the
corruption of his nature: By which means all the provocations offered against
the endeerments of charity, are received as extrinsick to that relation in
which we love our Brother, and therefore can do no prejudice, nor offer any
violence to the integrity or constancy of this affection.

Marc. Anton. 18. Sect. 11.
Which was a consideration that served to pacify the passions of a Heathen
Emperor under the ungrateful and perverse usages of evil Men, when he
considered that they had such depraved apprehensions of good and evil, of
pleasures and grief, of honor and ignominy, of life and death, (...), I shall
not wonder (says he) nor think it a strange thing, if such a man commits such
evil actions, to wit, of injustice or violence, of intemperance or riot, of
indulgence or pusillanimity, (...), Its a shame for a man to be affected with
wonder and amazement to see a Fig Tree bring forth figs: (...), and it is no
less shame for a Physician or a Pilot to be amazed, when the one meets with
Feavours, and the other with storms. And even thus if we do but consider that
the disobligements of charity are no other then the necessary effects of Men's
evil dispositions, and that such corrupt affections do as naturally bring forth
such fruit, as the Fig Tree does Figs, we shall find little cause to be angry
with our Brother: But like good Physicians, we shall respect and love the
person whilst we seek to cure his disease: and like good Pilots in a Tempest,
we shall not fret at the cause, but shall consider how to bear up our selves
with meekness, wisdom, and security under it: and by this means our charity
toward our Brethren will become very constant and durable. Which is much
according to our Saviors doctrine, Luke 17.4. who teaches us, that though our
Brothers behavior be never so unworthy toward us, yet we must continue to
love and forgive, even as often as he offends. But if we once begin to stint
our affection, and come to S. Peter's seven times, Matthew. 18.21. it is an
evident sign that our love is but moral, or rather base and mercenary; and not
that noble, free, and generous grace of Christian charity in the Text, for that
is (...) a protended and a durable Grace.

And thus have we finished the Third part of our Text, the Qualification of the
duty, showing you out of this one word (...) both the extension, intension and
protension of Christian Charity.

The Fourth and Last particular, is the Reciprocation of the duty (...) Among
your selves: The Love of Gods children is no single solitary act, but it
consists in returns and mutual commerces: Let us love one another. 1 John 4.7.
Be kindly affectioned one to another, Romans 12.10. This is the message that we
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another: 1 John 3.11. and so
again v. 23. and indeed, where is not reciprocation required where ever the
holy Ghost treats upon this subject of Love? The Apostle calls it Col. 3.14.
The Bond of perfection, even such a bond that knits the whole world together,
and the world to God; with whom we cannot say wherein a reciprocation is
allowable, but only in Love; If he chastises us, we are humbled, and
reformed; if he loads us with his blessings, we praise and give thanks; if he
Threatens, we tremble; if he commands, we obey,; But if he loves us, he
desires nothing more, then that we should love him again. And as is our love to
God, even such should be our love to our neighbors, ever answered and
cherished with grateful reciprocal returns: God has not placed us in
Societies, like stones in a heap, where there is nothing but reservedness and
confusion; but like coals upon a well built Fire, not that we should retain a
churlish, stupid and reserved morosity, to our brethren, and be no more
communicative then senseless stones; but the fervency of our Charity should
help to enkindle the same affection in our brethren, and so conspire into one
glorious flame of divine love. Never say, that some men are not combustible by
this holy fire, through the churlishness of their dispositions, and the
uncompliance of their natures, whom no kindness can win, nor courtesies oblige;
but follow Seneca's counsel, and try the event, cinge ingratum Beneficiis, ut
quocunque se vertit memoriam tui fugiens, ibi te videat: besiege such a one
round with favors and instances of Love, if one courtesy will not gain him, try
a Second, and a Third and fourth, till thou have so beset him with the
testimonies of thy love, that he shall be able to turn himself no ways from
thee, but even there he shall find thee. Et vincit malos pertinax bonitas, and
thou shall find that a resolute obstinate goodness, will at last overcome the
most perverse disposition: Methinks the holy Apostle gives us the very same
encouragement under the same allusion, Romans 12.20. If thy enemy hunger, feed
him, if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of
fire upon his head (that is) in the sense of some Expositors, by multiplying
acts of kindness upon thy adversary, thou shall at the last enkindle in him the
same kind affection toward thee, as thou have toward him, and so mutually
conspire in this holy flame of love.

But stay a while, methinks (...) speaks more then a bare reciprocation; and
rather exhorts us to an Especial and Appropriate reciprocation; Before, to wit,
in the 3. verse, the Apostle spoke of their conversation, in times past among
the Gentiles, when they walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine, etc.
but here he speaks of them, as received in to the faith of Christ, and
admitted into the Church of God, and now be sure you have Charity among your
selves; Sons of the same Father, members of the same Church, sprinkled with the
same Baptism, nursed by the same M nistery, sucking the milk of the same
Word, sanctified by the same Spirit, saved by the same JESUS; Be sure have
Charity among your selves: With the world, Romans 12.18. It comes in with an If
it be possible, and as much as in you lies: but as to the holy Church of God,
without any If's at all, be sure, and Above all things have Charity among your
selves.

Gods Church and People next and immediately under God himself, are the highest
and most precious interest in the world; And as for the preservation and good
of the common being of nature, the God of nature has ordered, that every
single b^ing, shall upon occasion forsake its own proper inclination for the
benefit of the natural Universe: so in a higher degree, to show the prerogative
of the sacred body of Saints in the region of Religion, God has made even the
Laws of common Nature, to be superseded for their behoof and service; Thus
did he when he made the Rock flow, the Sun return, The Sea divide, the fire
not to burn, the Lions not to devour, the Viper not to sting, and many
instances of the like nature to show us, how even by the institution and secret
instinct from God, the mere sensitive and inanimate Creatures, do with all
readiness forsake their own natures and inclinations, to love and serve the
more sacred Interest of Gods Church and People: And shall the Rock give water
to Israel? and shall we, more obdurate then Rocks, deny a cup of cold water to
one of Christ's Disciples? Shall the raging Seas be a wall and Bulwark of
protection to Gods People? and shall Torrentes Belial, the flood of wicked men
betray and overwhelm them? Shall the savage Lions be a guard to Gods Daniels?
and shall more cruel man devour them? what a strange, wild, savage Creature is
this Beast called man? that is less concerned in the good and welfare of Gods
Church and People, then either Rocks, or Seas, or Lions.

I find St. Paul, Philem. 12. call Onesimus (Pbilemons servant) his own Bowels,
and even such is every Christian to his Christian Brother in the womb of Gods
Church, and therefore uncharitable divisions among such brethren, are no better
then spiritual convulsions in our own Bowels, which many times prove as
mortal, as painful Diseases, even to the ruin of that Church that endures
them: I am not come hither to be an unwelcom Prophet in a day of gladness; I
shall only tell you what I find in the Gospel, Matt. 24.12. where one great
sign of the destruction of the Temple, is the coldness of Charity, The love of
many shall wax cold; and truly, I know not a more sad fatal presage of the
danger of Religion, and downfall of a Church, then the unnatulal fomenting of
Schisms, Factions, and animosities between Brethren of the same faith and
profession; when these things come to pass, then down goes the Temple, The
sincere profession of Godliness trodden under-foot, and Religion made no other
use of, but to engage Parties, and give names to factions.

Wherefore to conclude all, if we bear good will to Sion, if we tender the
honor of God, or welfare of Religion, or the Peace and quiet of our own souls,
let us pursue with all holy and devout Zeal, after this grace of Christian
Charity (if it be possible) with all men; but above all things, amongst our
selves. And then what ever our corporal provisions shall this day be, it is
this holy Love that will be our good Cheer. Whereby our Feast will deserve the
same Encomium which Hugo de Sancto Victore gives of the Feast of a good
Conscience; It will be Titulus Religionis, Templum Solomonis, Ager
Benedictionis, Hortus deliciarum, gaudium Angelorum, Arca foederis, Aula Dei,
and Habitaculum Spiritus Sancti. Hugo Victor. de Anima. lib. 3. cap. 11.
It will be as the Title and prospect of Religion, the Temple of Solomon, the
Field of Blessing, the Garden of Delights, the joy of Angels, the Ark of the
Covenant, the Court of God, and the habitation of the holy Spirit; unto whom
with the Father and the Son be ascribed all honor, glory and Praise, Obedience
and adoration, now, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
P. 2. l. 18. for fifth r. first. Ib. l. 22. for of r. in. p. 11. l. 12. for
precedent r. precedence. p. 14. l. 32. for when r. where. p. 15. l. ult. for
charge r. change. p. 32. l. 2. for but r. yet.


