A SVVEET PROSOPOPEIA OF THE SPEECH OF KING CLODOVEUS, TO THE BISHOPS AND THEIR
OPPOSERS, AFTER HE WAS CONVERTED AND BAPTIZED.
MY Lords; (for so you style your selves) you remember what promise you caused
me to make unto you, before you would Baptize me. Now I declare unto you that
it is since manifested unto me; that those vows which you then caused me to
promise, to defend with all my force, are litigious. For your tenets you hold
them one way, and your opposers an other, yet neither you nor they utterly deny
them; both you, and they confess them, but herein you differ. You affirm
that form wherein you stand, that faith, that Church to be the very same;
which was received of the Apostles; well thus you plead, and I perceive that
howsoever the succession of Bishops have held it, and wheresoever it has been
dispersed, yet this I now do understand; that the receipt of the Apostles from
Jesus Christ himself is the first principle, and ground of my vow, which I
promised to persist in, and to defend with all my force, and all the other
Circumstances of my promise are but depending upon this. Know therefore this,
that this I chiefly aim to keep; and so far to assist you, as you ground
upon this. But on the contrary, your opposers do aver, and on their part
maintain; protesting to affirm, and prove that your faith and Church is not
that faith, and Church, which the Apostles received and delivered, but is
utterly degenerate, and swarved from it. Look ye therefore to it; be not ye
your selves the cause to make me break that promise, which you made me vow.
You see that these oppose you, therefore do you justify your selves how you
can, of what they object against you, to clear your one cause as you can, to
confute them. And you the Bishops adversaries, on your part, my desire is, that
you on the other side, should lay down your proofs, (the best you can) to
defend the faith and Church, which you maintain; and if your reasons be
better grounded then theirs, I shall defend you; otherwise I shall impugn your
form, and defend theirs against you.

Now because the proceeding therein shall be just, and equal, both toward the
plaintiff, and defendant, neither you, nor your adversaries shall have any
voice on either part to judge; neither in your testimony northeirs, for thus to
do to one werepartiality, to the other injustice. And to avoid all suspicion,
I my self (whom the matter both for my office, and glory more concerns) In
regard of my vow, which makes me a party in the cause, will therefore be no
Judge, but an indifferent hearer of you both.

Me thinks it should be no difficult matter to clear this controversy,
because you both admit the Scriptures to be the word of God; and the Apostles
faith, and the Apostles Church be so manifestly recorded in the Scriptures; and
Christ himself wills us to search the Scriptures.

Know ye therefore, that without partiality your faiths and Churches on either
part shall be compared to, and levelled, by that platform which shall be
found there apparently expressed.

Therefore expect no other trial; but that as the Scripture shall strike the
stroke between you, even so will I be led to minister justice, and maintain
my vow; and will (with all my force) defend that faith, and Church; which
shall there be found to be received from the Apostles, and will extirpate
(with all my force) that faith and Church; which is degenerate from it.

FINIS.

