REMARKS On the Giving Vomits IN FEVERS. In a Letter to a Friend. BY H: C: M.
R. Car: II.

EDINBURGH, ^^^nted by James Watson, for Thomas Carruthers in the
Parliament-Closs. 1700.

SIR,
I was scarce entered the Limits of Scotland, when I was by a young Nobleman
entertained with the Relation of a Printed Controversy about Vomiting in
Fevers, betwixt two Physicians of Edinburgh, (which being a Practice I have
always approved, as having been transmitted to me, both by the Instructions and
constant Example of my Father and Grandfather, who were Men deservedly Eminent
in their Profession, and could have no design to deceive me; and since
confirmed by my own Experience in near 50 Years plentiful Employment) I was not
a little Curious to peruse; and accordingly I no sooner arrived there, than I
procured their Papers. I Confess, I have not the good Fortune to be known to
either of the Gentlemen, as I remember: But that did not Discourage me from
putting Pen to Paper, since my Opinion may therefore pass for the more
Impartial, at least with respect to their Persons; and since I am not
accustomed to consider so much, who Writes, as what is Written; For Amicus
Hippocrates, Amicus Galenus, sed magis Amica Veritas: And this being a Subject
of no small Moment to Men's Lives and Healths, the best of Wordly Enjoyments: I
conceive my self Obliged not to pass it over in Silence, but to Communicate my
Thoughts, with Submission to better Judgments.

The occasion of this Paper War, seems to be a Scandalous Report, supposed at
least to be industriously spread through Town and Country by the Ordinary or his
Abetters, That Dr. Oliphant had Killed a Patient with a Vomit; And that giving
Vomits in Fevers was an Innovation in Medecin never heard of before. Now, least
this should affect the Drs. Reputation, he thought it necessary to Vindicat the
Truth and Himself, and to mantain his said Practice by Reason and Authoritys,
as well as by a Faithful Relation of the Fact: And in order thereto he Prints a
short Discourse to prove the Usefulness of Vomiting in Fevers etc. which his
Adversary endeavors to Refute with his Melius Inquirendum, or an Answer to Dr.
Oliphant's Discourse, etc. in which it does not plainly appear, that he denis
the greatest part of the Relation, but only quarrels at some Trifling
Omissions, which he therefore supplys in his Melius Inquirendum, (viz. the
frightfull consequences of the Operation of the Vomit, with the number of his
Vomits of Lukewarm Water, etc. and of his Bleeding, Purging, and Clystering
the Seven days before: And then proceeds to refute the Dr's. Reasons, and to
show his mistakeing, misunderstanding and misapplying the several Authoritys,
he quotes, all which is loaded with a few Quibles and Reflections; and then
concludes.

Now with the Ordinary's leave, I Will begin with the consideration of the
question, on which he seems to lay the greatest Stress. Which is this,

Whether the giving an Ounce of Emetick Wine, mixed with Three Drams of Syrup
of Buckthorn, on the the 9 th. day of a Fever, to one who had been Blooded
twice Vomited thrice, Clystered several times, all in Seven Days time, which
Vomit wrought so violently 8 or 10 Hours together, that the Patient was reduced
to the last Extremity, his Hands and Feet cold, his pulse quite gone,
Spasmodick contractions through the Body, be a Practice agreeable to right
reason, the rules of Art, and the Practice of the best Physicians both Ancient
and Modern.

The first thing herein, which offers it self, is the Dose of the Emetick Wine,
which cannot well be adjudged, unless the Preparation or Pharmacopaeia, by
which it was dispensed, were known: For I remember, there were two Eminent
Apothecaries Shops in London, of which both the Masters are since Graduated
Doctors, and of no small Esteem, and in the one of them half an Ounce was a
large Dose, and in the other two Ounces was but a moderat one, tho generally,
according to the common Preparation of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum in
London, an Ounce and half or two Ounces, is a fit Vomit for a Man, to be by a
fourth or fifth part increased or lessened, according to the Strength or other
Circumstances of the Patient,

The next Remark is, Whether it was proper on the 9th. day of a Fever? I
confess, times in Fevers, before they were better understood, used to be
Religiously observed: But of late the proper Season to give Vomits is, whenever
there is an Indication for them, whether the First, Ninth, or Fifteenth Day,
sooner or later, provided there is no material Contra-indication. Of this I had
a late instance in this Country upon my Lord Tullibardine's Page, who had
languished with a Fever about 40 days, most of which time he had faint Sweats,
with burning Heats, little Sleep, great Ravings: The Nerves of his Tongue and
of many parts of the Body frequently affected, in so much that he often lost
his Speech, and had no use of his Limbs, for Weakness and Trembling, besides
other Symptoms, as Coughs, etc. He was reduced to a Skeleton. This Gentleman in
this deplorable state, took about 10 or 12 Drams of Infusion of Crocus
Mettallorum, which wrought very kindly, and from that Minute recovered plainly
to all men's sense, and in less than 24 hours all the Symptoms vanished:
Afterward he took 3 or 4 times the Decoetum amarum cum senna, and in a Weeks
time he was able to walk abroad, and in few days enjoyed his perfect Health.

Thirdly, The Patients having been twice Blooded, Purged, and thrice Vomited
with Whey or warm Water, etc. was not a sufficient Argument against giving of
Emetick Wine, if there yet remained a proper Indication for a Vomit; because if
the first, 2 d. and 3d. Exhibition were reasonable, because there was an
Indication for Vomiting, I am humbly of opinion, that as long as the same
continued, the same measures ought to be pursued, and perhaps with more vigor
than before.

Fourthly, Tho all this was done in seven days, yet, if the Nature of an acute
Disease require it, not only Evacuation ought to be repeted the eight Day; but
probably it was a great Omission, that more had not been done in Number, Power,
or both, within the first seven Days.

Fifthly, The Operation as related deserves a place here also, being a Material
part of the Question, which says, that the Patient was reduced to the last
extremity (tho by the sequel it did but seem to be so, for the Patient is very
well) that the Medicine wrought by Stool 8 or 10 Hours together, which appears
to be no more than necessary, to expel such a quantity of pernicious Humors,
and to save his Life: But how are we certain it was the Medicine, and not a
concurrent Crisis, made so large an Evacuation? For I have known, that a
Medecin has been blamed for the like, when it would naturally have rather
hindered, then provoked it. Next the Patients Hands and Feet were Cold, his
Pulse quite gone, and Spasmadick Contradictions affected his whole Body: These
truly seem Frightful, but yet are never Dangerous in the Operation of a Vomit:
And beside, the Dr, in p. 5. or his Defense, denies, they followed the
Operation of the Vomit; but, in case they had, it must have been very difficult
to distinguish, whether they were the Effect of the Vomit, or of the Distemper;
they frequently attending Distempers, and but rarely Vomits: And I pray how can
it be known, whether these Symptoms might not have been much worse, if no Vomit
had been taken, and whether the Patient might not then have dyed in earnest,
who now only to the Ordinary seemed to be a dying? And here the Question comes
to be sum'd up: Whether this be a Practice agreeable to right Reason, the Rules
of Art, and the Practice of the best Physicians both Ancient and Modern?

This indeed deserves a serious Consideration, tho, if it should but agree with
right Reason and the Rules of true Art, it is no great Matter, whether it has
the Concurrence of the best Ancient and Modern Physicians; Reason and Art being
very sufficient, though Authorities were wanting.

A few Reasons may therefore be here added to the Consideration of the
Impartial, as

First, May we not reasonably believe, that neither the Dose, nor time it was
administered, did any ways prejudice the Patient, since not only he recovered
after, but thousands have taken larger Doses at that, and all other times of a
Fever, both without Injury and with wonderful Advantage; and possibly it will
be no easy Task for the Ordinary, to produce an Instance of any Patient, that
certainly suffered only by the like Dose or time.

Secondly, May we not rationally suppose, that, if the previous Evacuations,
being proper, had not effected the Cure, they ought to be rejected: Or that, if
improper and too weak, more proper and powerful should be applied, and
continued, till the Indication ceased.

Thirdly, May we not fairly presume, that the Continuance of the Operation 8 or
10 Hours, and the terrible Symptoms mentioned, if there were any such, were
rather caused by the Violence of the Sickness, then by the Vomit, because so
small a Dose rarely, if ever, works above 4 Hours, and because such like
Symptoms frequently occur, where no Vomit has been given: And because it is
probable nothing, but the remaining Vicious Humors, put in Agitation, could
produce such new Symptoms, and keep the Patient ill so many days after; Non
Causa pro Causa makes most Mistakes.

Fourthly, May it seem unreasonable to conclude, that ill Humors are the only
Cause of all Fevers, as well as they are of other Distempers: And that, so long
as they continue moving in any Quantity, so long the Patient must be
disordered, if not in Danger: And therefore, that they ought, by all proper and
speedy Methods to be expelled, till when there can be but small Hopes the Fever
should be extinguished.

Fifthly, May it not be consonant to right Reason to think, that, if Vomits and
other Evacuations are given to expel the offending Humor, being the only true
end of all Medicaments, they could neither prejudice nor weaken the Patient
near so much, as the Disease, either let alone, or trifled with.

These Particulars, it is hoped, may serve to show, Reason is not so much a
Stranger to this Sort of Practice: Let it now appear, how much some Rules of
Art may support the same, by the following approved Maxims. As

Ablata causa tollitur affectus. Ubi ad animi defectionem educere expedit,
faciendum id quoque, si aeger par esse possit. Obsta principiis, sero medicina
paratur. Extremis morbis extrema remedia convenient. Purgandum in valde acutis,
si turgeat materia, eodem ipso die, differ enim in talibus malum. Praestat
anceps remedium quam nullum dum natura movet, move; quo natura tendit, tend,
etc.

I must now go to the next Paragraph, where the ordinary Censures the Dr. for
Laboring in Vain, since it was never denied, that Vomits in Fevers is no
Novelty: but then its strange, he had not sooner ordered one more effectual,
than Whey and Lukewarm Water, which scarce deserves the Name of Vomits,
bringing seldom much more off the Stomach than themselves, and rarely if ever
the peccant Matter. Then he implys, that Antimonial Vomits murder Men, Women
and Children, and that the Practitioner deserves to be accordingly punished.
Truly unless the Ordinary has murdered any with such Vomits, I must be so
uncivil, as to disbelieve his Suggestion; for I have given, and known given
some Hundred Thousands, and do not remember, that ever one of them could be
justly taxed for having in the least caused, or hastened the Death of one
Pateint, that must not certainly have died without. But this is the Misfortune,
that when a Patient dies under the Cure, tho by the Ignorance or Neglect of a
pretended cautious Physician, who prescribes plentifully comfortable Cordials,
he shall seldom, if ever, be blamed, but extolled for a safe tender Hearted
Doctor, cujus contrarium; etc. But on the other side, if it happens, that a
Patient die in the hands of an honest Skilful Physician, who follows effectual
Remedies, tho plainly off the Distemper, or for his being called too late, it is
Odds, but the Wise and tatling Gossips damns him for a rash and dangerous
Physician, because he directed few or no Cordials, but only Powerful Medicines,
fit to combat and expel the Disease, which indeed are more uneasy to the
Patient, and frightful to the Ignorant bystanders in their Operation, and less
grateful to the Pallat, tho much more safe and effectual than the pleasant
comfortable Cordials, so much applauded by persons of slender Understanding in
such Matters.

In the 6 and 7 Pages, the Ordinary says, the Patient had been purged more, had
not the Dr. by his Rashness prevented it, and brought the Patient to so low a
Pass, that no Place was left for any thing, but Cordials and gentle Opiats. I
am glad to find here, he could have continued Evacuations longer, and hope, for
the future he will proportion them in Number, Quantity and Power to the Discase,
or else, tho never so proper, he will certainly faill of Success, as the Sequel
proved, his Vomits of Whey did. But further, if the Disease be still rampant,
tho the Patient was very low, yet was there more room for Evacuation, than
Opiats and Cordials, to expel the Cause of the Disease, and whenever that shall
be removed, a little Milk Pottage or Gruel would have procured rest and
Strength sooner, than either Opiats or Cordials: For that being taken away,
which obstructed Sleep and Strength, Nature without other help, will very well
perform her own Duty.

Reasons are not wanting to prove every Assertion, but that it would swel this
Letter beyond the due Limits, and it is hoped, that what is not proved, is so
self evident, that 'twould be superfluous to add any further.

In the same 7 th Page, after an Exception at a triple Dose in stead of a
quadruple, he affirms that every Physician, acquainted with Emeticks, knows,
that two Drams with a little Oxymell will evacuat considerably: If he means
five or six Ounces of Oxymel by that little, I believe it may, but otherways I
never heard of less than an Ounce of the said Wine, was ever given to a grown
Man, and seldom so little, except in the Shop abovementioned.

It is a probability next a Proof, that, if so much of the peccant Matter had
not been carried off with the Dr's Antimonial Vomit, the Patient, who was after
so bad with the Remainder of the Disease, could never have subsisted under the
Burden of the whole, therefore the Dr's Conjecture does not seem to be so
Groundless: The Reason offered by the Ordinary, can never support his
Assertion: For, where Nature proves too strong for the Fever, and throws all
the vicious Humors out by Vomit, Sweat, or otherways: The Patient certainly
recovers, not only without Vomits but without Physician, or Medicines; And of
this there are Multitudes of Instances in all Ages: But yet, even in these
cases where Nature is thus Victorious; The Skilful Assistance, according to
Natures indication of an Honest Physician may be very Convenient to render the
Cure more certain and speedy, tho his principal Duty be to rescue those out of
the Jaws of Death, for whose Nature, the Disease would else have been too
powerful.

In Page 8, he allows Vomits in Fevers, if administered by wary and skilful
Physicians, to which I readily consent, for no other ought to be admitted to
Practice, and in such hands edge Tools are better then blunt ones; Fools and
Knaves ought not to profane so sacred a profession. But what provision is made
for a fair Trial of Physicians abilities: The University seems not the most
fit; for they rather prepare them to be made, than make them Physicians.
Physicians Colleges wherever they be constituted, are Partys; and Apothecarys
are too much biased by their interests to such Drs. as Write longes^ Bills,
and can Spin out a Cure from a Week to above a Month, and the Vulga^ tho most
concerned, are the least capable common fame, for the most part a Liar* and
their own Passions and Affections always blinding their judgments, if they
have any.

In the same Paragraph the Ordinary promises, what I do not find he has yet
performed, and what I would gladly see, viz. that the taking the Vomit had
almost killed the Patient, when it seems rather to have been the Disease, that
had almost killed him, and in all probability certainly would have done it, had
he not taken the Vomit, But non causa pro causa makes all or most mistakes in
the World.

In the last Paragraph of the same Page, the Ordinary gives an account, that at
first the Vomit wrought pretty well both Upwards and Downwards, and then the
Dr. goes off, but a little after the Patient began to purge so violently. etc.
Now a good Homward person might have thence concluded, and it may be more truly
that after the Operation of the Vomit was quite finished, Nature, being in part
thereby relieved, rallyed her scattered Spirits to make a Critical Evacuation
of the remainder; for, he says, the Patient began again to purge: And that all
the Symptoms then appearing were no other, but what every experienced
Physician knows to be very usual in such Evacuations of like Matter, where only
the Crisis, without any Medicine whatsoever, proves Naturam Medica^ricem.

What the Doctor prescribed, in concert with an other Physician, to help to
Compose, and to Suppress Vapors, was not amiss; since Nature, without some
Intervals of Rest, is unable to bear the Fatigue of discharging all the
preternatural Humors at once.

Page 9th. It is a little wonderful, the Ordinary at his Return should be
surprised at so great a Change in 48 Hours, when in acute Distempers all
Practitioners, how mean soever, cannot but know, there may be much greater in
12 Hours time: And the Abatement of the Fever, till all the Morbifick Matter
was spent, he ought not to have expected; for oftimes the last Fit of an
Intermitting Fever, when most of the Saburra is expelled, seems to be the most
violent: Therefore there was more reason for him to be pleased, that it
continued in order to expel by the Pores, what still remained, which seemed to
be their joint Opinion: For, if they had not thought, there had still remained
some ill Humors, it had been a great cruelty to have tormented a weak Patient
with blistering Plasters, in order to draw them out.

In Page 10 th, The Ordinary takes notice, That on Saturday, being the 6 th day
after he had taken the Vomit, the Symptoms began gradually to decline, which
was reasonable to be expected, Nature having then finished the Expulsion of
such peccant Matter, as still remained after the Operation of the Vomit.

In Page 11 th. there is this Passage: Whose Temper and Constitution he was not
in the least acquainted with, and who had undergone so many Evacuations before,
since there could be no hazard of giving a less Dose: As if forsooth, in an
acute Disease, which requires the speedy Assistance of the Physician, nothing
should be done by him, under Pretense of not being acquainted with the
Constitution of the Patient, and so let slip the Opportunity of saving his
Life: Neither do I agree to his Opinion, that there is no hazard in giving a
less Dose, for every Cure, which comes short of the Disease must be very
hazardous, by subjecting the Patient to its Power with such small Assistance;
Diseases being ever dangerous, when Remedies are rarely so, unless very
unskilfully administered.

Page 12 th. he is pleased to call Weakness a Contra-Indication to Evacuation,
which is certainly true, where there is no Diseased Matter to be Evacuated:
But, where there is, nothing can strengthen such weak Patients so much, as the
removing that Matter, which at first caused it, and, if continued, will
certainly increase it.

I can as little approve his Commendation of such a wary Physician, who is
backward to prescribe strong Evacuations, especially by Vomit; for, when strong
Medicines are necessary, it is as great a Fault to omit them, as to give them,
where they are certainly not wanted: But, if he means such strong Medicines, or
large Doses, as no Man of Sense ever gave, I must agree with him, that its a
dangerous Practice to blow up a House to dislodge an Enemy, which, tho it be a
frequent Military Practice, seems here but an improper Simile. To proportion
justly the Strength and Dose of a Medicine to the Power of a Disease, and to
triffle away no time with too gentle Methods, is not only the Duty of a
Physician, but an evident Demonstration of his great Skill and Judgment; as the
contrary would be of his Weakness.

The difficult Problem left undetermined in the 13 th. Page, whether these
Evacuations should precede or follow Blooding, I think may be solved by common
Sense and frequent Practice, without the help of Euclid's Elements; for every
House-Wife can tell, that, when an inner and outer Room are to be made clean,
it is best beginning with the inner; for, if you should first clean the outer
Room, you cannot avoid fouling it again, when you go about cleaning the inner.

Now, If Vomits and Purges cleanse the Primae viae, whence the Blood is
supplied, as none denis, its fitter to begin there, lest, after the Blood is
lessened in quantity, it should be again defiled by the Supplies it must
receive from the Primae viae.

Page 14, The Ordinary affirms, that the Dr: would not have failed to have
killed outright, if either the Dose had been a little stronger, or the Patient a
little weaker, which was to sail too near the Wind. Suchlike Supposals may be
made in all Cases, where Malice or Friendship is concerned, which may be as
easily answered, that the Dr. judging exactly his Patients Strength, so
proportioned the Dose of the Emetick as to be neither too strong for his
Patient, nor too weak for his Fever: And thus by sailing so near the Wind, a
Prize may be taken, which might else escape.

Tho I had resolved not to meddle with the Authorities, yet I could not let
them slip without this remark, that, if these Authors had never seen, or had
like Occasion to make such Reflections, as our modern Practitioners may have
had, Posterity must be condemned never to grow Wiser: Whatever was well said or
observed by these Authors, was only so far so, as consisted with right Reason
and Experience: And, if both the same be the Guides of this present Age, I know
not, why a wise and true Saying or Observation of this present Generation, may
not be as authentic as of any of the former.

Page 17 and 18, The ordinary drawing toward a Conclusion affirms, that not
only Physicians, but all Men in their right Wits, must condemn a Practice, that
reduces Men to the last Extremity, and brings them to the brink of the Grave,
especially when there is no necessity: This surely may be granted by all Men,
but has little regard to the Case in hand: Where its manifest, it was not the
Dr's Practice, but the Disease reduced the Patient to this Extremity, and it
was so far from being unnecessary, that without it, in all Probability, the
Patient must most certainly have died; but there is the Mischief of non Causa
pro Causa.

In Page 19, The Ordinary seems to grant all that is desired, ( viz.) That
Fevers both with and without Vomits and other Evacuations may be cured,
restraining Antimonial Vomits only to greater circumspection, and this he
supports with Riverius his Opinion; but, if none but skilful and circumspect
Persons were permitted to practice, as no other ought, then sharp Knives and
Swords ought not to be neglected, Skilful Persons knowing full well how to use
them to the best purpose.

This in brief is faithfully my Opinion, a^ it naturally arises from the
several Tract^ published in this Case; And if any person whatsoever, perusing
this Letter, will please to show me the mistakes by right Reason and fair
Experiments: I shall be so far from being offended, that I will both confess my
Error, and acknowledg^ my Obligation to him: For I can never think my self too
Old, nor too Wise, t^ learn, tho I presume I shall never, jurare i^ verba
Magistri, Authorities unless agreeable to common Sense and Matter of Fac^ tho
never so highly applauded by other^ have but a very slender Influence on m^
Mind, which notwithstanding is ever readily submitted to right Reason, tho
without any Authority.

I fear by this time I may have tyreed your Patience with my long Scroll; ^
shall therefore conclude, leaving the f^^^ Consideration of the Authorities to
such ^^ have leisure, and a mind to compare bo^^ sides.

FINIS.

