A SERMON PREACHED At St. Michan's Church in Dublin, February the 23d 1700.

Upon Receiving into the Communion of the Church of England, The Honble Sir
Terence Mac-mahon, Knt and Barnet and Christopher Dunn, CONVERTS From the
CHURCH of ROME.

Wherein is an Account also of a late Controversy, betwixt the Author and some
Romanists.

By John Clayton, Praebendary of St. Michan's.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row,
over against the Tholsel.

To His GRACE NARCISSUS Lord ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN.
MY LORD,
I Presume to Dedicate This to Your Grace, upon many Accounts. As having
received my First Education, at the University of Oxford, under Your Lordship's
Care; and am now again Happy, in having Your Grace for my Metrapolitan. It was
Your Lordship, that did me the Singular Honor, to recommend Sir Terence
Mac-mahon to my Instruction, when my Lord Inchiquin brought him to Your Grace.
And it is Your Lordship's Great Learning, that can best Protect, Aid, and
Assist Me, and Secure the Cause that it Suffer not, through my Defects, and
Infirmities, if any Subtle Adversary should Assail me. This is Printed at the
Request of several Persons of Quality, and Others that were my Auditors, and
persuade me that it may be Useful to the Public; and therefore having after
all, Your Lordship's Approbation, I could not deny to gratify Them, when
thereby also I might make an open acknowledgement of Your Graces Great and
Manifold Favors.

Who am Your Graces Most Humble and Devoted Servant John Clayton.

A SERMON
On Matthew. XVI Verse. xviii. And I say unto Thee, that Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will baild my Church: And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.
I Having this Day Received into Our Church, Two Persons, Converts from the
Roman Communion, wherein they were Brought up: The Occasion seems to require
and claim a Discourse that has some Reference thereto. And I do not doubt, but
that it is expected from all here, that I should expose some of the Errors and
Falsehoods of the Romish Doctrine; To show how reasonable this their
Renunciation is, and both to confirm them, and others, in the true Faith. But
it may be fruitless, and in vain, to offer Rational Arguments on this Head,
till one main Point be Established. As, Whether we are to be guided by
Scripture, and confirmed by the Practices of the most Primitive Christians, and
be governed by clear Arguments of Reason, deduced from thence, or no? For if I
must give up my Religion, and Reason, absolutely and entirely to the Church of
Rome, simply to be governed in Matters of Faith and Fundamental Doctrines,
according to their Pleasure and Directions This is a common Preface to the
Decre^s of the Council of Trent, Sacrosancta Oecumenica and generalis
Tridentina ^ynodus; in Spiritu Sancto ligitime congregata. And then some of
them end thus; Quap^opter cunctis Christi fide^ibus interd^cit, ne post hac de
ijs, aliter vel credere, vel docere, vel predicare audeant. quam est his
Drecetis explicatum atque definitum; vid. Council. Trent Sess. 13. C. 1. Sess.
21. C. 1. etc.
. Upon this Principle, That that Church is Infallible, and cannot Err. It is
such a Subterfuge for Error and Ignorance, as stops all Controversy, and
invalidates all Proofs, and the clearest Conviction of Reason. This, therefore,
I take to be one of the most material and leading Points, and that which ought
to be first discussed. This is as the main Fortification that surrounds their
whole Camp; and if I can break in upon them, and force this Intrenchment, the
rest will be an easy Conquest, when we are got once within them, and come to a
fair Engagement, having cut off their common Retreat and Coverture.

Indeed, the Affirmative being on their part, the Proof lies on their side;
which should be clearly, fully, and infallibly Demonstrated by them, otherwise
it is the most precarious Principle of all others; being only established on
its own Authority. And according to their Tenants, it cannot be built on any
other. For if this be the only Infallible Guide, and all other things Fallible;
unless we allow the Authority of its own Assertion, it can have no other then a
fallible Proof and Testimony; and it follows then, that they may be deceived
and mistaken, and that their Church may not be Infallible, unless it
demonstrate its own veracity by a continued series, of Infallible Truths.

And upon this score it is, that the Controversy enters betwixt us, about the
Certainty or Incertainty of this Infallibility. Which it is requisite to
examine by such matters of Fact, as may give the fullest demonstration thereof,
that the nature of the thing will admit.

And yet before we come to this part, they commonly take us up with several
delusive Arguments, and spend time about some Expressions that have a
surprising Sound, as if they favored their Assertion, but when they come to
the Test, have no reference to any such matter.

We allow and hold the Scriptures to be the undoubted Word of GOD, and
therefore an Infallible Word of Truth. If therefore they can prove by
Scripture, an Infallibility conferred on their Church, it is a sufficient
Refutation as to us; nor would I Cavil about the various Contradictions it
meets with, in the rest of their Principles. For I am fairly for the Truth, and
would have all Trifling laid aside. And hereupon then, as to this point, I dare
Engage the whole Body of their Clergy, and of all the Roman Party.

They use then Three sorts of Arguments, brought from Scripture, to prove their
Infallibility.

Either from such Words, as are here contained in my Text, that refer (as they
call it) to the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, being conferred in particular on
St. Peter, and so on his Successors in the Church of Rome.

Or from Words more generally spoken, as Matthew 28. 20. And Lo! I am with you
always, even unto the End of the World. So John 14. 26. But the Comforter,
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach
you all things and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you. And John 16. 13. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you
into all Truth. And so likewise the last Words of my Text, singly, and by
themselves applied, are brought to Chime in amongst the rest. And the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it.

Or Thirdly, from a parity of Reason, betwixt theirs, and the Jewish Church,
This Argument the Papist Misrepresented and Represented makes use of, and ^o do
most of their Authors: Belarmine urges he^eupon* Exodus 28 Jubet Dominus in
Rationali Pontificis summi pom Doctrinam, and veritatem and D^ute^on. 17. Qui
indicabunt tibi judicij veritatem. Bell. De. Romano Pont. L. 4. C. 3.
which they say was Infallible, and would prove it from Matthew. 23. 2. Where
(say they) for this reason, our Savior commanded the People to have all strict
regard to the Scribes and Pharisees, that sat in Moses Chair, all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe, and do. And then they urge, that
the Argument holds stronger as to the Christian Church, for now is our Faith
built on more sure, and established on better Promises, and on a more firm and
complete Word of Truth, according to Hebrews 8. 6.

To all which, our Church has given very full Answers, and shown how Mean,
Trivial and Trifling a way of Arguing they Use. In that they wrest the plain
sense of these Texts, to a quite different meaning, then ever was intended.

I will indeed allow them, that if the Jewish Church was Infallible, then the
Romish Church is also Infallible. But if the Jewish Shanedrim knew not, nor
owned the Lord of Life, but erred in the main Article of their Faith, relating
to the Messiah and Crucified Christ: If Pontius Pilate put Him to Death, at the
Instigation of the Matthew. 12. 22.
Chief Priests and Elders. And if Caiaphas John 11. 49
who was that Year the High Priest, was particularly in the Conspiracy, and
Ringleader Matthew. 26. 3, 57.
thereof. Let them boast of their Parallel Principles, and Arguments of more
Validity, I shall take them to be what Christ called those Scribes and
Pharisees, but Matthew. 15. 14. 23. 16.
Blind-Guides, and Men of the worst Principles, Blind, Leaders of the Blind.
And that it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of
Judgment, then for them.

And Secondly, Then as to those general Promises they instance in by those
several Texts of Scripture before cited, they prove nothing against us, if they
were allowed to refer to this matter: For being spoke indefinitely to the
Church diffusive, there would be nothing determined thereby, but the
Controversy would still remain. Whether our Church? or their Church? or some
other amongst the various Sects in the World? were thus Infallible? These were
Promises made to all the Apostles at large, to St. James, and St. John, as well
as to St. Peter, that he would give them the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost,
to reveal to them all necessary Truths, for the Establishment of his Church,
which afterward he would accordingly preserve to the end of the World, so as
that it should never cease to be a Church, that there should never cease to be
a true Christian Church here on Earth. But there is no Promise that does
Import, that he would preserve it from all Errors, so as to render it
Infallible. The truth of these Revelations, and of Christ's Church is
preserved; and I doubt not hereupon, but it will be preserved to the end of the
World, in the Scriptures and Apostles Creed, and so forth, and in a certain
number of faithful People, that shall hold and stand firm in that Faith,
throughout all Ages. And so in the darkest times of Ignorance, About the 10th
Century called Saeculum Obscurum.
which was when Popery was most prevalent, there were still a Remnant of God's
People, of whom it might be said, as of those of old, when there were a Remnant
of several Thousands left that bowed not the Knee to Baal, which latent numbers
of Orthodox were the true visible Church on Earth; and St. Paul makes
application of this Text, 1 Kings 19. 18. to the same use, Romans 11. 4.

Therefore to come to the Third sort of Proofs, whereby they would prove a
particular and singular Grant, Assigned by Christ to St. Peter, and to his
Successors of the Church of Rome. This, indeed, if it could be made clear,
would be to the purpose. But there are a great many Propositions and Parts
contained herein; that if Critically Examined, would more than puzzle them to
make out. But taken in gross they are so confused, and fluctuate so very
strangely in their Opinions, and Assertions, as to this matter, that there is
no fixing of them, or binding of them to be Determined thereby.

My Text is one of the strongest of this Nature that they produce, which
therefore I shall Answer. And for this I need not particularly Expound the
Words. For at once I shall give a plain Answer to all that can be said on this
Text, and all others they produce of the like nature.

For these Words must be either spoke directly to St. Peter in particular, or
else to all the Apostles in general. If to all the Apostles, then according to
this Interpretation, all the Apostles, and all their Summa potestas
Ecclesiastica non solum data est Petro, sed etiam alijs Apostolis Bellarmin De.
Romans Pontif. L. 1. C. 9. Omnes fuerunt Capita and Pastores Universae Ecclesiae,
Ibid. C. 11. But then he adds. Sed Petro data est ut Ordinario Pastori cui
perpetuo succederetur; aliis tanquam delegatis quibus non succederetur. Fuit
enim in illis Ecclesiae primordiis necessarium ad fidem toto Orb Terrarum
celeriter disseminandam, ut primis praedicatoribus and Ecclesiarum fundatoribus
summa potestas, and libertas concederetur Mortuis autem Apostolis, Apostolica
authoritas in solo Petri successore permansi^. This is Answered by the Bishop
of Granada, and the Bishop of Paris, when the same was urged in the Council of
Trent. That it was an Audacious Saying without Ground, Authority, or Reason,
Invented about 50 Years before by Cajetan, to obtain a Cardinals Cap, but had
been Ignomini^usly Censured by the Divines of the Sorbon since, and was unknown
to former Ages, being inconsistent with the 20th of Matthew. Verse. 20. vid. Hist.
Council of Trent, by Pietro Polano, October. 13. 1562.
Successors, have an equal pretense to Infallibility, as St. Peter, and his
Successors have. Which confounds their Notion, and the grand Authority of their
Church, which therefore they will not allow. Therefore on the other Hand, if
these Words were directed to St. Peter in particular, then the Pope of himself
must be Infallible, without the assistance of a Council, which is contrary to
the Tenants of all the Persons of the Romish Church I meet with; for they
utterly deny it, and when they can be got to declare themselves on this Head,
they say, it is the Pope, together with his Council that is Infallible, but not
otherwise.

And hereupon it is, That they rarely put stress on any Scripture Proofs as to
this point, but (...) mostly to Tradition, as giving them the largest Scope,
and being most beyond the Capacity of the Vulgar. And for which they can bring
a company of their own Forgeries and Authors, and so never want a Proof. So far
at least as to invert the Order of Dispute, and like subtle Attorneys, to make
us become Plantiffs instead of Defendants. Yet our Case is so Plain and Good,
that we never refuse thus to join Issue, if so that they will but first fix
their Principle, and declare where it is, that they place this Infallibility.

And hereupon, in a ^a^e Dispute, that I might not spend time in vain Proofs, I
desired that they would lay down some single positive Assertion as to this
Infallibility, which accordingly was done. That they held the Pope and Council
together to be Infallible.

Hereupon I made this Position. That if I then proved one Pope and Council had
made final Decrees in Fundamentals of Faith, and that other Popes and Councils
with as full Authority had decreed the direct contrary, as to the said
Fundamentals of Faith and Doctrine, it must be notorious that one of them had
Erred, and the Notion of Infallibility be destroyed and proved false. This was
allowed, and agreed to, and this I the rather undertook, because it utterly
destroys Infallibility, wherever it be be placed. Whether in the Pope solely,
or in the Council solely, or in the Pope and Council conjunctly.

And hereupon I drew up the following Instances in Writing, and gave them to be
shown to their Priests, or to whoever would undertake to Answer them.

My first Instance was in the Constantinopolitan Council, held by Pope
Vigilius, the Account whereof briefly is this. The Nestorian Heresy that
denied Christ to be God, being revived by Theodorus, Bishop of Mopsvestia; and
by Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, against Cyril; and in the Epistle of Ibas,
Bishop of Edessa to Maris; which were called the Three Chapters; Fierce
Disputes arose in the Church, whereupon the Emperor called a Council to
Constantinople to settle this Affair; but Pope Vigilius could not be brought
over to join with them, but called another Council of himself, of Affrican,
Illirian, Italian, and other Western Bishops, and with extraordinary
Application and Diligence they Composed a large Decree, This Council is Extant
at large in the Concilia Maxima, Paris e Typographia Regia 1644. Tom. 11.
containing Sixty Pages in Folio, that it might in every Respect be
Correspondent to the Gravity and Authority of the Pope and such a Council; and
that likewise it might be Satisfactory to the Emperor, Quatenus habito Deo
auxiliante, tractatu, definitionis nostrae, constituto die Scripto, sententiam
diceremus: Ad Fratres Coepiscopos nostros, a quibus similiter de eadem causa
responsum vos flagitare dixisti. Vid. Constitutum Vigilij Papae de tribus
Capitulis.
and that other Synod that was Assembled by him; and also as it is Worded, to
the whole Catholic Church, as a public Direction in Faith to them all,
calling it a Constitution, a Statute, a Decree, and a Definitive Sentence, and
as such was Subscribed Juvante Deo and per ipsius gratiam Vigilius Episcopus
Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae urbis Romae huic Constituto nostro Subscripsi.
by Vigilius himself, and by all the rest of the Bishops and Deacons, which
were as many as were in several Assemblies of the Grand Council of Trent. The
Sum then of this Constitution, or Decree, was the Defense of the Three
aforesaid Chapters, and in effect a downright Vindication, and assertion of
Nestorianism, that (as is aforesaid) denied the Divinity of our Savior, which
Heresy had been condemned by the General Council of Chalcedon before, and by
many Councils since. So that here is Pope and Council, against Pope and
Council, making solemn Decrees point Blank contradictory in Matters of Faith.

Hereunto were added other Instances, as in Pope Liberius, Sozomen. Lib. 4.
Cap. 14. Hierom. de Script. Eccles. in Fortu natiano. Epist. Liberij Episcopis
Orientalibus. Liberij Epist. Ursacio yalenti and Germano. Et ad Vincentium.
that confirmed Arianism, and in Pope Honorius, Council. Constant. General. 6.
Action 13.
that established Monothletism.

That the Sacrament should be received in both Kinds, was the constant Doctrine
of the whole Church many Hundreds of Years, confirmed and established in
General by all the Popes and Councils, until those late Councils of Council.
Constable. Sess. 13.
Constance, Council. Basil. Sess. 30.
Basil and Council. Trent. Sess. 21. C. 2.
Trent. And therefore either all the Popes and General Councils, for at least a
Caslander Confut. Art. 22. P. 981.
Thousand, or Twelve Card. Bona Rerum Liturg. L. 2. C. 18. P. 862.
Hundred Years, Erred, or else later Popes and Councils Erred, and whether
soever it be, it destroys Infallibility.

There was a Council held at Braga, Habitum anno 4. Bambae Regis tempore
Adeodati Papae A. D. 675. Aut integra Sacramenta accipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur. Gelasius Majorco and Johanni Episcopis, apud Ivon decret. part 2. C.
8, 9. Excommunicari illos praecipit Gelasius Papa Microlog. Cap. 19.
about Dipping the Bread in the Wine, and so Administering it for the whole
Communion, which Custom some Persons offered to introduce. But the Council
Condemned this Practice, because (say they) it is repugnant to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and to the Custom of the Church, and to the Institution of Christ
the fountain of Truth, who gave the Cup by it self, saying, Drink ye all of
this: And likewise he took the Bread by it self, saying, Take, Eat, etc. And
thereupon they Anathematize, all that abrogate, or alter this Institution. And
the Council of Itaque Sancta ipsa Synodus, a Spiritu Sancto (qui Spiritus est
Sapientiae and intellectus. Spiritus Consilij and pietatis) edocta, atque
ipsius Ecclesiae judicium and Consuetudinem secuta, declarat ac docet, nullo
divino praecepto Laicos and Clericos non Conficientes, obligari ad Eucharistiae
Sacramentum sub utraque specie sumendum: neque ul^o pacto salva side dubitari
posse, quin illis alterius speciei Communio ad salutem sufficient. Nam etsi
Christus Dominus in ultima Caena venerabile hoc Sacramentum in Panis and Vini
speciebus instituit and Apostolus tradidit. Non tamen illa institutio and
traditio eo tendunt, ut omnes Christi fideles statuto Domini ad utramque
speciem accipiendam adstringant^r. Council. Trident. Sess. 21. Cap. 1. Whe^eupon
several Canons were made, as, Si quis dixerit ex Dei precepto, vel necessitate
salutis, omnes and singulos Christi fideles utramque speciem sanctissimi
Eucharistiae Sacramenti sumere debere Anathema sit. Canon. 1.
Trent, Nullatenus ambigendum est, quod non sub specie Panis Caro tantum, nec
sub specie Vini Sanguis tantum* sed sub qualibet specie est integer totus
Christus. Council. Basil. Sess. 30.
Basil and Concilium S. Generale Constant^e^se in Sp. Sto. legitime
congregatum, declarat, decernit, and definit, quod licet Christ^^ sub utraque
specie, etc. -- Et similiter, quod li^et in primitiva Eccle^^a hujusmodi
Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie -- Tamen a Laicis
tantummodo sub specie Panis suscipiatur -- Qua propter dicere hanc
Consuetudinem, aut legem observare sit Sacrilegum aut illicitum censeri debet
erroneum and pertinaciter asserentes oppositum praemissorum tanquam Haeretici
arcendi s^nt and graviter puniendi -- Quod nullus Pre^byter sub paena
Excommunicationis, communicet populum sub utraque specie Panis and Vini. Item
ipsa Sancta Synodus decernit and declarat super ipsa materia, ut effectualiter
puniant eos contra hoc decretum excedentes, qui communicando populum sub
utraque specie Panis and Vini exhortati fuerint, and sic faciendum esse
docuerint, and si ad paenitentiam redire non curaverint, animo indurato, per
censuras Ecclesiasticas per eos ut Haeretici sunt coercendi Council. Constant.
Sess. 13.
Constance, command That they be Excommunicated, who, contrary to their Decree,
Exhort the People to Communicate in both kinds, of Bread and Wine, and do take
upon them to Administer the Sacrament to the People after that manner, and
requires, that they be treated as Heretics, if they persist in so doing
without Repentance.

The Council of Binius ex Baronio Not. 1. in Laodicen. Council. Hoc Concillium
antiqua nobilitate celeberrimum, Graecorum atque Latinorum Scriptis celebri
memoriae commendatum fuit*
Laodicea excludes those Books, commonly called the Apocripha, from the Canon
of Scripture. And the Canons of this Council were received into the Code Canon.
de Libel. Distinct. 20. Cod. Can. Ecclaes. Univer.
of the Universal Church, and confirmed by the Council. Chalcedon. Act. 4. Act
11. Act. 13.
4th and Council. Constantinop. in Trullo. Can. 2. And by Imperial Law of the
Emperor Justinian. Novel. 131.
6th of their General Councils, which is directly contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, settled by later Councils.

The Council of Basil deposed the Pope Eugenius IV. Constituted Amadeus the
Duke of Savoy Pope, viz. Felix V.
Pope, and condemned the Council Jac. Meyerus in Annalibus Flandr. Lib. 16.
Basiliense and Floren^ium adeo nihil Concordiae habebant, ut utrumque alterum
Synagogamque Satanae nominaret.
of Florence.

The Lateran Council under Sess. 40. habita Maij 4. Anno. Dom. 1515. Concilium
Constantiense ubi definit Concilium esse supra Papam, reprobatum est in
Concilio Florentino and Lateranensi ultimo. Bellar. de Council. L. 1. C. ^.
Leo. 10. decreed Infallibility to be in the Pope alone, and that he had a
Superiority and Supremacy in himself alone, above all Councils.

The Councils of Sess. 45.
Constance and Council. Basil Sess. 2. apud Binnium, Tom. 8. p. 22. Sess. 18. p.
55. Sess. 33. p. 95. Sess. 38. p. 101.
Basil decree the Superiority of a General Council above the Pope, and that
they have Authority to Decree matters of Faith without him.

And one of their Decrees runs thus. Council. Basil. Sess. 23. 37. Consil.
Constable. Sess. 39
That for the future every one that is to be chosen Pope, shall in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with Heart, and Mouth, profess to God
Almighty, and to blessed Peter, firmly to believe and hold, as long as he shall
live, the Holy Catholic Faith, according to the Traditions of the Apostles,
and the General Councils, and in particular of the General Councils of Lateran,
Lions, Vienna, Constance, and Basil, and to keep that Faith, to a tittle
unchanged, and to Preach, Confirm and Defend it with their Life and Blood. And
the following Popes, till after the time of Eugenius the IV. made this
Profession.

They Decreed also, Council. Basil. Sess. 2.
That General Councils have Authority immediately from Christ, and that the
Pope himself is bound, and obliged to stand to the Declaration and Definition
of these Councils. And further says, This is a Veritas fidei Catholicae Council.
Basil. Sess. 33. Censendus est haereticus -- sine interitu salutis. Idem.
Truth belonging to the Catholic Faith, which, who Pertinaciously resists is
to be deemed a Heretic, being an Article of Faith, which cannot be neglected
without the loss of Salvation. These Decrees were Established by Pope Vid.
^inn. Council. Basil. Sess. 29. Sess. 38.
Martin V. and by virtue hereof John III. and Benedict XIII. were deposed, and
hereby Eugenius IV. was made Pope.

And yet Popery, as they have newly Modeled it, advances a third Position,
that Infallibility is in the Church somewhere; which my Adversary very
Heartily, to save a fruitless Search, fixed in the Pope and Council together.

So that here are Three Positions contrary one to another about this
Infallibility; and place the Infallibility where you please, there is
accordingly an infallible Determination that there is no such Infallibility in
any of them. For when they have said all they can on this last Point, which
seems the strongest, and let them set it off with as much Pomp and Ostentation
of Words as possibly they can, the aforesaid Instances can never be answered;
and it is further manifest that this is only a Collusion and Mask to convey the
Pope's Infallibility into the Hearts of the People. For when they say the Pope
is Infallible, General Councils are Infallible, the Church is Infallible; it is
plain they never meant to make three distinct Infallibilities, but one
Infallibility, which must rest virtually in the Pope, for otherwise the Church
would be always without an Infallible Guide, but when a Council sits. To evade
this, they say at other times, the Church and Council is virtually in the Pope,
who, by a Synechdoche, is Infallible. Then the Pope is always Infallible but
when a Council sits, and hereby is a fresh occasion given for that Flout that
was past on the Council of Trent, about the Pope's sending to them the Holy
Ghost in a Port-Mantue. And thus there is nothing more plain, then that they
Center this Infallibility in the Pope simply. But the Papist Misrepresented
and Represented In the Chap of the I fallibility of the Church.
says, He Believes, That the Pastors and Prelates of his Church are Fallible.
What, without an Equivocation? Does he herein include the Pope? Honest Men
deliver themselves as plainly as they can possibly contrive, especially in such
Matters. But this seems Equivocal, for otherwise, why does he lay the
Foundation of this Infallibility on such places of Scripture as my Text, and
the like? For there is not one Tittle or Word that can refer to placing an
Infallibility in St. Peter in Council only; but if their Infallibility be
derived hence, and founded hereupon, it must be in St. Peter simply, and yet as
if it were out of a Divine Prescience, to determine such Disputes and
Controversies, and Pretensions, the very next thing that follows, shows that
St. Peter was so far from being Infallible, that he so grossly Erred, as to
cause the same Gracious Lord Jesus Christ to say within Five Verses of my Text,
unto the said Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16. 23.
thou art an offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of GOD,
but those that be of Men. And so St. Paul found him in a great Error, when he
met him at Antioch, and withstood him Gal. 2. 11.
to the face, because he was to be blamed. And indeed he was so great an
indulger of that Error and Faction, which the Grand Apostolic Council was
called to Reform and Correct, that he may be said to be one of the Principle
Ringleaders thereof, till God showed him a particular Vision, to reveal to him
his Error, a little before that Council was held. It is certain, they have been
much at a loss where to fix this Infallibility, and therefore have invented
these several Positions, to place it sometimes in the Pope, sometimes in the
Council, sometimes in the Pope and Council, all which (I think) I have proved
absolutely False, and that this Uncertainty is because it is really no where.

So that the Doctrine of Infallibility, instead of being so advantageous to
their Church as they pretend, is the greatest distracting Principle imaginable,
it is the Mother of Error, a Cloak for Ignorance, an Abuse and Cheat, and only
an Artificial Contrivance, to deceive and captivate silly poor Souls; and never
was started, thought on, contrived or heard of in the World, for above a
Thousand Years after Christ's time.

This was the Purport of what I gave in Writing, and it was showed (as I
understand) to several of the Roman Clergy in this Kingdom. And all the Answer
that I got in some Months time, was, That they were the Crabbedest, or
Knottiest Instances could have been pitched on, and that they had not the
convenience of Books to Answer them. It was then sent for England, (as I was
informed) and after a long time came a most tedious Answer, which I could never
get a Copy of. I had indeed the Perusal of it, and made Answer it would be too
great an Avocation for me that have so great a Cure, to reply to every thing I
thought Faulty therein; and would too much distract the Dispute, that the
Conclusion would not be so evident. But, If they would pitch upon any one
Instance, that would clearly decide the Controversy, I would be bound to be
Determined thereby; thereupon the first Instance was chosen, that I was urged
to make a Reply to; that about Vigilius.

The Answer owned, That there was such a Council or Assembly, and according a
Constitution or Decree Extant, made by them and Vigilius, which contained
Erroneous Doctrines in points of Faith, but said this was made when Vigilius
was a Pseudo-Pope.

And gave an Historical Account of Vigilius out of Platina, or some of their
Authors; telling how Vile a Person Vigilius was at first, and laid on him a
load of Infamy; telling by what corrupt Dealings, and by what profane Interest
in the Empress Theodora, he Usurped the Seat of Pope Sylverius, and got to be
Pope; during whose Lifetime he was therefore a Pseudo, or false Pope, and it
was then, that he made this Decree.

I shall make no Reply to this Obloquie, being therein they only vomit forth
their own Shame. But, says the Answer, after Sylverius' s Death, the Spirit of
God came upon him, and he immediately receded from his former Election, till he
was chosen again, and then became a true Pope, and a Holy Father of the Church.
This I suppose was added, to insinuate what a Divine Inspiration of
Infallibility there is at the time of their Accession to the Chair, when they
are duly and regularly made Popes. But to be short, and come to the stress of
the Point in Debate; which was laid herein. Whether this Constitution was made
before Sylverius' s Death, or no? That is, Whether it was made whilst Vigilius
was a false, or a true Pope? It is a plain single Point, and I will venture the
whole upon it. For, If I do not prove, that this Council was called, and held,
and the Decree made several Years after Sylverius' s Death, I Will turn Papist;
if my Adversary will but as fairly engage to turn Protestant, if I prove it
very fully. Datum pridie Idus Maij imperante Domino nostro J^stiniano perpetuo
Augusto Anno 27. post Consulatum Viri clarissimi Anno 12. in
Constantinopolitana Civitate.
The Date then of this Decree runs thus. Constituted the 14th Day of May, in
the 27th Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the Emperor Justinian, and in
the 12th Year after the Consulatship of that Renowned Man Basilius, in the City
of Constantinople. This is Extant at the end of the Decree in the Paris Edition
of the Councils, at large, eTypographia Regia, 1644. But Binnius, and some
others, have purposely (as I suppose) omitted the Date and Subscriptions,
though they have all the rest of the Decree at large, yet at the beginning, he
has in the Margent, set a Note, that Baronius has placed this in the 553 d.
Year of our Redemption. 13 Years after Sylverius's Death.

Observe then here is a double date; one, that it was the 27th Year of
Justinians Reign; the other, the 12th Year after Basilius Consulatship; and
what is further remarkable, that I would have you Note, that Basilius was the
last Consul, and so the Ephoca, or manner of dating is altered the Year after
Basilius was Consul, for whereas before they Dated things from such a Year of
the Emperors Reign, and when such, and such Persons, were Consuls. They then
changed the method of Dating, to such a certain Year after Basilius was Consul,
all which clearly denotes there could be no accidental mistake in the Date.

Let us now see then what Year Sylverius Died, and for this I take their own
great Author Jesu Christi Annus 540. Vigilij Pap. Annus 1. Justiniani Imp. 14.
Vitigis Reg. 4. Qui sequitur Annus Quadragessimus supra quingentessimum
ascriptus fastis reperitur consulatu solius Justini tu addas Collegam Paulinum,
Juniorem dictum. -- Quo Anno Sylverius Papa in Insula Palmaria releg^tus
confectus aerumnis, consumptusque inedia diem tandem clausit extremum Duodecimo
Kalenda^ Julij. -- Quod autem aliqui nec duos Annos cjus sedi concedunt, inde
id evenisse liquet, quod absurd admodum numerent ejus sedis tempususque ad
Vigilij intrusionem tantum, cum ipse Sylverius e sede expulsus est at vero
usque ad consummatum Martyrium semper ipsum legitimum perseverasse Pontificem*
Baroni Antv^rpiae ex officina Plantiniana 1603. Tom. 7.
Baronius. And he places the Death of Vigilius in the 14th Year of the Emperor
Justinians Reign, and in the Consulatship of Justinus, and Paulinus, who were
immediate Consuls before Basilius.

So then, Sylverius Dying the 14th Year of Justinian, and the Date of the
Constitution, being the 27th Year of Justinian, it is plain Vigilius, if ever
was a true Pope, and had been so 13 Years, and so also by the other Date. For
Justinus and Paulinus being Consuls the Year before Basilius, and the Date of
the Constitution being the 12th Year after Basilius was Consul, in like manner
confirms, that it was 13 Years after Vigilius was a Right Pope. Nothing in the
World can be more plain and positive, and though I have delivered this in
Writing above Half a Year since, I hear nothing in return, and therefore I
shall not add any thing more hereto, for if I would have Enlarged, I could have
shown that the greatest Share of that Story about Vigilius, and the Empress, is
a late Invention of their Authors, and Historians, purposely contrived, to
conceal and cloak this matter. Now Mortal Men have such Imperfect Reason, that
they may be liable to Mistakes, for so only GOD is True, but every Man a Liar,
that is, they are subject to Error. And therefore I do not contemn or hate any
Man on that Account, if I could but think he had Candor, and a good Conscience,
that he were sincere, and honest in his Principle. But when Men plainly see
they are in an Error, to have them forge Untruths, for Religion's sake, to coin
New Histories, forge New Inventions to deceive themselves, and others, it is
such a Pia Fraus or Religious Cheat, as is most Impious, and Abominable. What a
strange Current there is in Men's Natures to Vice, that Men should ever think
to serve God with Falsehood, and Forgeries, and be begotted to Principles that
they themselves Invent, for no other end, but to enslave themselves with all;
such is an unhappy Zeal. Whereas to contend for the Truth, with Candor and
Honesty, to be Zealously affected for Righteousness with Simplicity and
Singleness of Heart, is true Piety and Zeal, as well as hearty Religion. For
God loves a Tenderness of Conscience, as well as a Flaming Affection, but the
Conjunction of one with the other makes the Blessed Temper of a Christian. Let
us therefore show forth our Faith by our Works, for such are the most prevalent
Arguments; for the greatest part cannot but be under jealous Apprehensions,
that we have the Truth on our sides, if we had but the Testimony of good Works
to Illustrate our Profession. Let us therefore with Holy Lives, with the
confounding Evidence of Moral Principles, as well as of an Orthodox Faith,
endeavor to Convert and Gain many more Proselites. For thus God may perhaps
make us the Blessed Instruments of turning many to Righteousness, and to the
acknowledgment of the Truth. So as that they may recover themselves out of the
Snare of the Devil, and though we should fail of preserving theirs, we may be
sure to save our own Souls. But, Turn Thou them O Good Lord, and then will they
be Turned, Be favorable be favorable, O Lord to that People, out of Thy Great
and Tender Mercy. For Thou art full of Compassion, Long-Suffering, and of great
Pity; nor would the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be Converted
and Live. Have Mercy therefore upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics,
and take from them all Ignorance, hardness of Heart, and contempt of Thy Word;
and so bring them home to Thy Flock, that they may be saved amongst the Remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one Fold under one Shepherd. Jesus Christ
our Lord, who Lives and Reigns, with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, one God,
World without End.

Amen.
FINIS.

