The CLAVSES chiefly objected against in the Act 14o of Charles II. about
Printing, are These,
I. THAT which subjects the Houses of Peers to be searched for Unlicensed
Books, by Warrant from a Secretary of State, upon the bare Suspicion and
Suggestion of a Messenger of the Press, without Oath.

II. (This other Clause) And be it farther Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Person or Persons shall within this Kingdom, or elsewhere, Imprint or
cause to be Imprinted, etc. any Copy or Copies, Book or Books, or part of any
Book or Books, or Forms of blank Bills or Indentures, for any of his Majesteis
Islands, Printed beyond the Seas or elsewhere, which any Person or Persons, by
Virtue of any Letters Patents Granted or Assigned to him or them, or which
shall hereafter be Granted or Assignd to him or them, Or, (where the same are
not Granted by any Letters Patents) by Force or Virtue of any Entry or Entries
thereof duly made or to be made, in the Register-book of the said Company of
Stationers, etc. have or shall have the right Privilege, Authority or
Allowance solely to Print, etc. upon the Penalty of Forfeiture, and also 6 s.
8d. for every Book or Part, etc. and punishment of the Party as an Offender
against the Act. Whereby,

1. If any Man has a Property in any Copy, which falls within a Patent Granted
(or to be Granted) he is subject to the Penalties though his Book be Licensed.

2. If any Entry be made in the Register-book (in such Form as they count
[Duly] no Man shall Print his own Copy, after it has been Stolen from him and
Entered as another; which has often happened in Fact: Whereby the right Owner
is deprived of Remedy or Reparation by any other Law.

3. There being no sufficient Provision, for destroying the Forfeitures, it
has been an occasion, for the Company, to seize Foreign Books, and sell them
again (to the prejudice of the English Printers and Booksellers, and
Destruction of the English Manufacture) and to re-seize them, toties quoties,
in the Hands of those Persons, who have bought them of the Company or their
Agents, which appears to have been their frequent Practice.


