CERTAIN ANNOTATIONS UPON CLEMENT: Intended as well for the asserting of this
Epistle, against some Exceptions, in respect of the Author of it, and his
manner of writing; as for the preventing of others:

But especially for vindicating it from Mis^allegations, and wrong citations,
urged out of it, in regard of some points concerning Chu^ch-government, in
controversy at this day.

Containing also some other Observations, whereby the Author is illustrated.

C. Lucilius apud Cic lib. 2. de Orat. PERSIUM non curo legere: Laelium Decimum
volo. LONDON, Printed by J. Y. for J. P. and O. P. in Paul's Churchyard, in the
Year of our Lord, M.DC.XLVII.

A SUMMARY of chief Matters contained in these Annotations, observed out of
this EPISTLE.
1. THe Equality as well of Churches themselves, as of their Governors, in the
first Age. Clement and Linus, what kind of Bishops. The cause of the
disagreement among Writers concerning the Order and Succession of the first
Bishops of Rome. Bishop and Presbyter, common names at that time. The humility
of them in those times.

2. At what time, as is most probable, this Epistle might be written. Baronius
commended for collecting the Fragments thereof.

3. Of the Schisms and Factions among the Corinthians, when Paul wrote his
first Epistle to them.

4. A place in Clement cited by Clemens Alexandrinus.

5. (...) in Clement to be understood of the Civil Magistrate, though meant of
the Ecclesiastical Governors, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, notwithstanding
the likeness of style, which is said to be in both these Epistles.

6. The Epistle of Polycarpus the Martyr has several passages out of Clement.
Whether it may not be thought genuine.

7. The manner of citing places out of the Old Testament into the New: Which
also is to be observed in Clement.

8. The LXX. Interpreters generally followed by the Apostles. Then less
corrupt then in after ages. Now not so much to be respected. The old Latin
version of the LXX. in ancient use here in Britain.

9. Clement excused, in his instance of Aaron's and Miriam's being shut out of
the Camp.

10. Clement, speaking of Peter's Martyrdom, says nothing of his being at
Rome, much less of his Bishopric there, and Prerogative. Whether he were ever
there, or no, is discussed. His was the Apostleship of the Circumcision. A
deplorable breach in Church History from the Acts to Trajan's time. Whether
Paul, as well as Peter, might not from Clement's words be thought to suffer
under some Provincial Magistrate, rather then at Rome.

11. Whether Paul ever performed his journie into Spain: Or were ever in
Britain. Peter's being there, and ordaining Bishops, confirmed by our English
Romanists, either from very slight, or forged Authorities.

12. Clement's manner of urging Scriptures.

13. A place in him out of Clemens Alexandrinus.

14. (...). The several acceptions of it.

15. The Pillar of Salt, into which Lot's wife was turned, remaining in
Clement's time.

16. Clement's citing a place in Luke.

17. A sentence of Clement's restored out of Jerome.

18. A place in Matthew not so well rendered by our English Translators.

19. Moses cited for David. Clement excused therein by many places in the New
Testament. Josephus, Scriptor Christianus, Graece, (...). Christ's division of
the Books of the Old Testament.

20. Mr. Young's conjecture confirmed. (...), i. e. The unpassable Ocean, meant
by Clement of the British.

21. (...), i. e. The Worlds beyond it, thought to be the Islands called the
Britannies. A discourse endeavoring to make it good.

22. The Phoenix, an Emblem of the Resurrection among the ancient Christians.
The Resurrection taken for a new Deity by the Philosophers at Athens. How far a
belief of the truth thereof possessed the better sort of Heathens.

23. Of what is possible, or impossible with God. His Power always accompanies
his Will. We ought to speak reverently of his Power.

24. Clement is defended about a place, which he is said to cite out of the
Wisdom of Solomon. Of the Author of that Book, and the credit thereof. Paul
himself urges Heathen Writers: Menander the Comedian, etc.

25. Clement absolutely condemns the Doctrine of Merits, and Justification by
Works.

26. The happiness of a Christian Church in Clement's judgment.

27. Clement is falsely urged to prove set-times for public Prayers in the
Primitive Church, which they call Canonical Hours.

28. Clement is not truly and faithfully alleged, to prove, that in the first
Age there was a distinction between the Clergy and Laity. Neither does it
appear by any genuine authority of Ignatius, who is defended from
contradicting of Scripture, whereof he stands accused. Laicus and Catholicus,
of what use in the first Age. Christian Presbytery from the Jewish; and what
that was.

29. (...), what they were. Henr. Stephani Glossarium Latino-Graecum emendatur.
Victimarum probatio. Aruspex.

30. Bishop and Presbyter; whence the Apostles borrowed these names. No
distinction in matter of office, to be found of them in Clement. Nor any single
Bishop of the Corinthians in his time: Both which notwithstanding are pretended
out of him.

31. The Name of Episcopacy in Clement. Vocabulum honoris, quod Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit, in Austin. Bishops excepted against before these times. Chrysostom's
riding on an Ass envied at. Not lawful in his opinion for Bishops to ride on
horseback. The small maintenance and poverty of the ancient British, Irish,
and other Country-Bishops. The ambition, excess and cruelty of the Roman taken
notice of by an Heathen Historian. (...), how taken in ancient Authors.

32. The Apostles power in constituting Bishops and Deacons conveyed unto
others. Yet such choice of Ministers, according to Clement, is ineffectuall
without the general consent of the people. A difficult thing to know who, and
what kind of Bishops were first instituted by the Apostles. Eusebius his
confession to that purpose. Most Records of the first times utterly lost.

33. A sentence of Clement's severally interpreted by six very learned men.
Some of their various readings of it upon conjecture.

34. Clement not faithfully dealt withal. A transitive note added on purpose
in the translation of a passage of his into English, the better to make it
appear, that Bishop and Presbyter are distinguished by him: Which
notwithstanding appears not out of him.

35. PAUL's Gospel. What in Clement is to be understood thereby. S. John's first
Epistle cited also under the Title of (...). No alteration of Church Government
caused upon the Factions and Schisms of the Corinthians, as is urged. Jerome
is therein defended.

36. Whether there were another Cephas besides Peter. The place of Paul, 1 Cor.
1.12. understood of Peter by Clement, against some Interpreters.

37. A place of Clement's urged by Clement of Alexandria.

38. Another place of his also to be found in his writings.

39. A place of Clement's translated by Jerome.

40. Epiphanius mis-applies a passage in Clement. Chrysostom's imitation of the
same place; and his golden Resolution.

41. Clement excused, for urging the story of Judith, by the example of the
Apostles: who in their Epistles cite several Apocrypha of the Jews, beside
Heathens.

42. A place of some ancient Gr. Tragedian perhaps alluded to by Clement.

43. The practice of Presbyterian government only asserted by this Epistle. The
weightinesse of the charge: and what care the people ought to have in the
choice of such as are to sustain the burden thereof.

44. A sentence of Clement's, perhaps restored to this Epistle where the lacuna
is, out of Basil the Great. Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians cited by the
Author of the Questions ad Orthodoxos. It is not Justin Martyrs. The antiquity
and authority of the Sibyllin Verses.

45. (...). This word borrowed by Polycarpus out of Clement.

46. Clement, speaking of Christ, is defended against the censure of Photius,
the Patriarch of CP.

47. Their names who carried this Epistle from Rome to the Church of Corinth.
Fortunatus. Biton. The holy forgery of the Primitive times. Apocryphal Gospels
and Epistles under the Apostles, and other holy Men's names.

ANNOTATIONS.
THe Church of God which so journeth at Rome, to the etc.] I.
Two things may be observed from the very Inscription of this Epistle. First,
The equality that was as well between these two Churches themselves, as the
Governors thereof, called Elders of the Church, and Bishops; there being at
this time no Superiority or precedence, which notwithstanding the Bishops of
Rome have since then affected. Secondly, That the Elders of both by themselves,
without any extraordinary Bishop placed over them, did govern as well the
Church of Rome, as that of Corinth; it being very unlikely, that the names of
them should have been concealed in this Inscription, had either of the Churches
had any one at that time in such eminency of place, or power, above the other
Rulers. For Clement was not now any singular, or As he was not formerly at
Philippi See H. Grotius upon the following Scripture. Phil. 4.3. 2 Timothy 4.21.
only Bishop of Rome, nor placed above the Presb^tery thereof. But one of
those Ministers, whose help the Apostles used in founding of Churches, Paul
calling him his fellow-laborer; as was Linus also without question, whom he
mentions too; and both whom the Ecclesiastical History makes Bishops of Rome,
some placing them both before Anacletus, and of the two, Linus first; some
making Clement last of the three; but others again put him before either of the
other two. Cl. Salmas. dissert. de Episcop. and Presbyt. cap. 4.
Which confusion the learned S^lmasius conceives to proceed from no other
cause, then that they were not particular and only Bishops, as the most would
have them to be, but some of those many Presbyters, who were appointed to
govern the Church of Rome with equal and joint power. And truly the Reverend
BP Usher Dissert. de Ignatii, etc. scriptis, cap. 18. in addend. p. 137. q^um
ista scripsit Clemens, Epis. and Pres. communia adh^c videantur fuisse nomina.
Nicol. Vedel. Exercit. 8. in epist Ignat ad Maria. 11. ca. 3.
acknowledges, that when this Epistle was written by Clement the names of
Bishop and Presbyter seemed to be common; as indeed thereby it appears: though
Vedelius, the Professor of Geneva grant that this distinction was already jam
invaluisse.
grown for some good while to be in use in Clement's time: which how it can be,
Clement's banishment, nay, Martyrdom, happening very presently upon the
writing thereof, as is most probably v. Dn. Ju^ium in (...) in Notas ad
Clementem.
conjectured, I leave to others to consider of. However it is a very good
observation which the learned Mr Young makes, that Clement being to exhort the
disagreeing and factious part of the Church of Corinth to compliance and
brotherly condescension in love and humility, he makes no use of any power from
his own, but gently entreats them through the whole Epistle in the general
Name of the Church of Rome, never mentioning himself, or his own authority any
way: So unfitting a thing did those holy men of the Primitive times conceive it
to be, [(...),] that I may use Clement's own words, imperiously and arrogantly
to advance themselves over the flock and people of Christ, allowing such no
part or portion at all in him: contrary to what we have seen, and have been
very sensible of in our days.

II.
The calamities and sad accidents which have happened unto us.] All antiquity
being wholly silent about the time when this Epistle was written, learned Mr
Young from these words, as also from a main circumstance in Clement's relation
of Paul's suffering, does make a probable conjecture that it was sent by him in
the time of his banishment to the Church of Corinth, which was about the
beginning of Trajan, or not long after, some two years before his martyrdom.
Baron. ad An. XCV. 1.
The great Annalist refers the writing of it to the twelfth year of Domitian,
some six, or seven years sooner: But his Eminency pleases not to vouchsafe any
ground or reason for his so doing. Yet his industry is very highly to be
honored, for that despairing ever to find an entire Copy, he first attempted to
collect out of the Fathers writings, and set together, the unvaluable relics
of this (...). Eusebius. l. 3. c. 12. Eccl. Hist. (...). Niceph. Call. lib. 3.
cap. 18.
admirable and (...). Iren. li. 3. c. 3. apud Eusebius.
absolute, (for so it was esteemed of old,) and withal, Valde utilis. Hieron.
in Catalog. Script. Ecclesiast.
most useful Epistle; as it were the fragments and shattered parcells of some
inestimable, but almost decayed statue; being not the less to be respected,
for that it had undergon the same fate, which, by the means of bad times and
worse hands, many an excellent and choice piece has met with, to the
unspeakable loss and damage of posterity.

Abominable and ungodly sedition.] III.
Baronius makes the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, wherein he taxes
them for their 1 Cor. 1.10. (...).
schisms and 1 Cor. 3.3. (...).
factions, Ad annum LVII. 2.
to be written near forty years before this of Clement. It should seem very
strange, that notwithstanding the earnest endeavors of the Apostles, and their
ministers in the Gospel, for settling of peace and unity in this Church, their
divisions should revive and again get head, with more strength and obstinacy,
and grow more inveterate, as appears by this present abominable and ungodly
sedition and breach among them; (...). Clem.
so soon did the enemy that evil one, begin to sow his tares even in the purest
times and Congregations, and so unhappily they thrived. Eccl. hist. li. 3. cap.
12.
To work them to an agreement was this Epistle purposely written, as Eusebius
tells us out of Hegesippus, a very ancient writer, (not the supposititious that
is extant,) and Irenaeus lib. III. cap. III.

For who has ever sojourned among you, that etc.] IV.
This whole passage, and others following, are cited from hence by the other
Clement of Alexandria, who lived after this Clement, (...).
I mean flourished, somewhat above CXX. years.

V.
Them that are Governors over you.] The word in Greek is (...). Eccl. hist. l
III. cap. 32. Catal. Scrip. Eccl.
Eusebius, and out of him Hierom observes that not only the character of the
phrase in this Epistle is like that in the Epistle to the Ebrews, but that many
even entire senses, and very same words are here borrowed from thence. So that
Eusebius dare hereupon almost undertake, that Clement was the Translator of
that Epistle out of the Ebrew (in which language it is vulgarly thought Paul
wrote it to his countrymen,) into Greek, as we now have it, rather then Luke.
Yet however, this word has a differing sense here from the use and
signification of it in the last to the Ebrews, where it is taken for the
Presbyters, or Elders of the Church, as most plainly appears by the
inspection, Ebr. 13.7.17.
and comparing of the 7. and 17. verses. For in this place, and through the
whole Epistle, where it is to be found, I am sure seven times at least, we must
understand it of the Civil Magistrates, and their power, called (...) in
Paul's language, to whom he bids every soul to be subject: Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1.
Imperatoribus. Jun. Praefectis. Salmas.
and of whose suffering, and death, Clement making mention, he does tell us in
this following discourse, that it was (...), under the Emperors, or their
Governors. Neither signifies it otherwise in the other places. And so in like
manner neither is the Presbytery of the Church intended by (...) in the words
next following, but the elderly sort only, as opposed to the youth: which
whole sentence of Clement is well illustrated by what we read in the Proem to
the Laws of Charondas of Catana: Inte^r Fragm. Pythagoreorum.
(...) (...).
(...). himself elsewhere also joining together (...), and (...). i. e. The
Rulers, or Magistrates; the aged sort; and the young men: And yet the Order it
self is abundantly asserted by him, as in opposition to solitary Episcopacy, in
this Epistle, as you will hear in what follows.

VI.
Unblameable and pure conscience, loving their own husbands.] These very
expressions, as also many others besides, as may be seen in what follows, are
borrowed out of Clement by Polycarpus, that ancient and faithful witness of
Christ, and the Scholar of John his beloved Disciple, in his Epistle to the
Philippians. This note is added, to this end and purpose, not only to prove
this Epistle to be genuine, and of that antiquity which we believe it to be of,
(which notwithstanding is sufficiently already made to appear;) but also that
a certain authority, and respect, given to it in time of most remote antiquity,
(for in after ages it was publicly read in Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 12. Epiphan.
contra Ebionitas. Hieronym. in Catal.
Congregations, and Churches,) may be observed, and taken notice of. For to
question the Epistle of Polycarpus for spurious, and a supposititious birth,
none, that I know of, have undertaken to do it. What passages Hist. lib. 3.
(...). Photius Patr. CP. in Biblioth. number. 126.
Eusebius, and that diligent Greek Patriarch in his Bibliotheque long-ago cited
out of it, are yet to be found in it. And the Church Historians of Madenburg,
refer us to the diligent antiquitatis scrutatores, themselves having little, or
nothing to any purpose, to say against it: especially if we do consider the
simplicity and plainness 1 Cor. 2.1.4. Andr. Rivetus Crit. Sacri li. 2. ca. 3.
edit. ultima.
of the Apostolical times, and style. They had better hearts; we indeed better
tongues, and pens. But neither does the judicious Dr Rivet, that singular
ornament sometime of Leyden, take upon him to censure it. As for that Greek
copy of it, only mentioned by him, Edit. Ignatianae, p. 243. and Not ad
Polycarp. number. 1.
what the Incomparable Dr Usher observed concerning it, and the credit it might
have, all that perished in the late great schath-fire at Oxford, accompanied
with other rare parcells of Church antiquity, to the no small grief of all
them, that make search and enquiry after matters of this nature.

The beloved has eaten, and drunken, etc.] VII.
This short passage is the sum of three whole verses out of the XXXII.
Chapter of Deuteronomy. It is the manner of Clement, and indeed of the Fathers
after him generally, to cite places of Holy Scripture, not always in their own
words and sentences, as they are conceived there; thinking the authority of it
sufficiently enforced upon their hearers, or readers, if, keeping still close
to the true meaning and intention thereof, they did not constantly render the
very language of the Text, but sometimes make use of expressions, though not
disagreeing, yet not the same (...) and (...), or, as we say, word for word. D.
de legib. l. Scire leges. and l. 2. C. de Comm. legate.
For the great Lawyer tells us, Leges non ex verbis, sed ex mente
intelligendas. And if this will not be enough to render them excusable, the
very Apostles themselves, (examples fittest to follow, and ablest, if any, to
justify,) in unquestioned writ have done the like, as both Mr Young has well
observed upon this Apostolical Writer, and every one knows who has been but
diligent to compare with the Old Testament places quoted thence into the New.
They did likewise, not without the same warrant, to make up one perfect sense,
or period, collect, and heap together pieces or portions taken from several
places and passages of Scripture, as if they had been there joined together,
and followed one another. And this our Lord Christ himself does, Matthew. 21.5.
Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee, meek, and
sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass. For the former words,
Tell ye the daughter of Sion, are taken out of Isai. 62.11. what follows is to
be found in Zech. 9.9. To have noted thus much, will serve, as a sufficient
(...), to prepare the ordinary and less knowing Reader, and withal prevent his
being troubled, if he find not all quotations, alleged here in what follows,
just agreeing with those Bibles, which we have commonly in our hands. And they
that do not observe this, Exerc. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Fieri non potest quin impingant, says the excellent Heinsius.

VIII.
If thou offer aright, and do not divide aright, etc.] They, that only turn
over the English Bibles, will the less wonder at this reading, when they shall
understand, that not only Paul himself, the Evangelists and Apostles, with all
the antientest Fathers of either language; but even the learned Jews
themselves, which lived presently after Christ, and at the time of the last
Captivity, used for the most part that Greek Translation, which is commonly
called, The Septuagint, from whence this Text is taken. To instance in one or
two places of an hundred: In the Gospel, where it is said, that Christ came to
Nazareth, and according to his custom went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath
day, and stood up to read; and that there being delivered to him the book of
the Prophet Esaias, he opened it, and found the place where it was written.
Luke 4.18. Isai. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. These words, and what follow, Luke
delivers to us according to the Septuagint, though it be most manifest Christ
read them in the Ebrew; now that version, for what we read out of Ebrew [and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound] has, (...), and recovering
of sight to the blind: to which Luke adds (as if it followed) out of Chap.
58.6. (...), to let the oppressed, or broken, go free. But you will say Luke
was no Jew; and therefore could not well interpret out of a language he
understood not. And we dare not peremptorily determine that every one that had
the Spirit, had likewise the gift of languages. For Paul then, who was one, he
in the Epistle to the Galatians proving, against the Jews, that were the
Children of the Freewoman, and not of the Bondwoman, Gal. 4.27.
cites a place out of the same Prophet, after his usual manner, according to
the Seventies Gr. edition; as Hierom has observed it. Nay, Phil. 3.5.
being an Ebrew of the Ebrews, and writing to his own countrymen (for he is
verily thought the Baron. ad An. LX. 42. 43. etc. vide Lamp. Alard. Epiphyl.
lib. 1.
Author) he does exactly (whether he writ it in the Ebrew, or no,) follow
Hieron. ^n Isai. cap. 6.
the sense and words of the very same Translation; except any one can surmise,
that his scribe, or Interpreter (be it whether it will be) durst be so bold, as
to deliver that again according to the LXX. which himself had first conceived,
and dictated, after the Ebrew verity. Sequutus est author hujus epistolae LXX.
Interpretum editionem, says the all-knowing Joseph Scaliger; The Author not
Translator: and there are other reasons would make a man conjecture that it was
originally Greek. Though not in this perhaps, yet in many other things of this
kind antiquity has foully imposed upon our belief. However, certain it is, that
two of Paul's own countrymen, and the learnedest of the Nation after him, the
one Philo, esteemed by antiquity the Plato of the Jews; the other Josephus, a
Pharisee by his own report; whom though I will not compare with Paul for
exactness of observance in his sect, (which himself sticks not to make boast
of, even after his conversion, Act. 22.3.26.5.
) yet undoubtedly was he most exact, as well in the Language, as laws of his
own people: Notwithstanding that, both these are observed to make use of this
version of the 70. Elders, rather then themselves to interpret out of their own
Books, and Language, (which they were most absolutely able to do, it being
native to them; and their Gr. only acquired by study,) as often as occasion
offered it self. Praefat. ad (...). and contra Appion. lib 1.
And indeed it is to be wondered at in Josephus, that he should so do;
especially in a matter of that moment, as the computation of the years from
the Creation, in which he makes choice to follow the Seventies account, which
indeed as far disagrees with the Ebrew Videsis Mich. Glycam Annal. part 2.
, as the Samaritan comes not near either of them. And whether Nennius, the old
Britain, follow him, Hist. Britonum. cap. 1.
in his Translation by Ruffinus, in reckoning the same years, or else the old
Latin Translation out of the Seventy, is a question needs not here much to
trouble us. Now all this is said, not with any intent to prefer the broken
cisterns of Translations, before the fountain of living waters contained in the
Original Ebrew: but to show in what esteem, and how generally received the
Seventies Edition was in the Apostles age, and those next following: and we
must needs say with Jerome; Ep. ad Damas. in 4. Evang. Illa vera interpretatio,
quam Apostoli probaverunt. v. ejus praef. in J^rem.
that that is a true Translation which the Apostles approved of: Only it were
to be wished, we had it now in that purity, Si 70. Interp. pura, and ut ab eis
in Gr. versa est editio permaneret, super flue, mi Chromati, impelleres, ut
Ebraea tibi v^lum. Lat. sermon transferrem. Hieron. prolog. in Paralip.
according as the Primitive Church enjoyed it: Of the restoring of which, in
some good sort, Mr Young (a man born for public good, and advancement of
better literature,) has given the Christian learned world, not only good
hopes, but also some assurance. In the mean while, having it no better then we
have, who can patiently bear with that too magisterious censure Rich. Montacut.
Ep. Norwic. Orig. Ecclesiast. tom. 1. part. poster. 54. p. 36.
, of one, who otherwise indeed had learning enough for two honest Bishops:
Magnam habere (...), says he, debet interpretatio 70. and in iis quae ad
Christi condescensionem ((...), and in carne suscepta (...)) spectant, majorem
apud me habebit, quam Hebraica, quam tantopere quidam ampullantur, veritas, ut
appellant. And yet he had told us not long before, that it was but a miscellany
version, non pura puta 70. ex Aquilae, Symmachi, aliorum versionibus constata.
He was a man J. S. de DIs Sir. Synt. 2. cap. 16.
Graece sane and Latin doctus; and of the two Languages, which it pleased the
Holy Ghost to make use of, becoming an exquisite Master in the one, contempsit
alteram. As for this very Text, De Gestis Aelfredi R.
Asserius Menevensis (he was BP of Sherborn about the year DCCCLXXX.) has the
reading of it after the Gr. of the 70. out of the same Latin version thereof
before mentioned, and generally in use of old time in these Kingdoms, before
the vulgar Latin came either to be admitted, or enforced: Si recte offeras,
recte autem non dividas, peccas. And what follows here in the next words; And
Cain said unto Abel his brother, Let us go along into the field, (...),
according to the same LXX. although it be wanting in the Ebrew, yet it is to be
found in the Samaritan Pentateuch. Of which also Quaest. Ebr. in Genesim.
Jerome took notice: Superfluum ergo est, says he, quod in Samaritanorum and
nostro volumine reperitur, Transeamus in Campum. See incomparable Mr Seldom
praefat. ad Marmora Arundelliana.

Aaron and Miriam had their habitation out of the Camp.] IX.
We must here read Clement warily, and favorably. Aaron is not said in the
Text to be shut forth; but Miriam only. Neither was their murmuring against
Moses the immediate cause thereof; for then had Aaron also been put out: But
Miriam's leprosy, Levit. 13.46.
(according to the Law;) it being the particular and single punishment
inflicted upon her by God, and that for particular reasons not here to be
discussed, for her speaking against Moses. See Deuteronomy. XXIV. 9. But Clement may
be excused by great examples. Paul tells us in his I to the Corinth. that
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.5.
after he rose again, was seen of Cephas, (...), then of the twelve. A perfect
number for an imperfect. For indeed there were not at most above eight, if so
many: Judas having hanged himself; Peter, with the beloved Disciple, being
absent; as appears by passages in John, and Luke; Neither indeed was Thomas
there. Joh. 20.10. Luke 24.34. Joh. 20.24.
And from Paul's following words we may gather James was away too. Now these
words are meant of his first appearance to his Disciples. So that they, (and
some of them are of the ancients,) do nothing, who have mended the place,
[(...), eleven,] when as neither so the account will stand good. Many such
instances may be brought also out of the most ancient and best Heathen writers;
but this is not a fit place for them. This shall be enough.

He passed unto the due appointed place of Glory.] X.
Gr. (...). Polycarpus in his Epistle to the Philippians makes use of this
expression, (which he borrowes from Clement) concerning Paul and other holy
men; only the Verb (...) is from this place to be restored thither Patr.
Junius Not. Critic. in Polycar. Ep. Oxon. edit. a Dn. Usserio. 1644.
: (...), etc. And the whole passage of that part thereof is transcribed by
Eusebius. But in this mentioning of Peter here, there is nothing of his
Prerogative and Primacy; Eccles. hist. lib. 3. (...).
nothing of his universal Episcopacy, and unlimited Jurisdiction bequeathed to
his Successors; no not any thing of his own being Bishop of Rome; or appointing
Clement after him to succeed in a single prelaticall power above the other
Presbyters. Not a word of all this in him, from whom, had there been ever any
such thing, we might best expect it. Nay his very being at Rome, whether ever
at all, or no, is questioned, I and denied too, by men of unquestionable
learning, Tract. super ea re apud Melch. Goldast. Tom. 3. Monarch. Romans Imperii.
Vlricus Velenus, Math. Fl. Illyricus, Dav. Pareus, Jos. Scaliger, Sibrandus,
Salmasius, and diverse others. And indeed that he never saw Rome, for about some
XX. years next after the Ascension of Christ, may be demonstrated by very
evident places of Holy Scripture: where notwithstanding they will have him to
be crucified about some XXXVII. years after that time; having sat Bishop there
above XXV. of them, and VII. more before that at Antioch. This, I say, if we
prove, that Peter was so far from being at Rome for the first XX. years, (and
we will see what may be done afterward for the other XVII.) that indeed he was
at Jerusalem, or in places a great deal more remote then it, in the East for
all that while, we shall wondrously trouble their account, and indeed shake the
whole foundation and fabrique of their ill-contrived Roman Ecclesiastical
Monarchy, which they pretend to derive, (but upon most uncertain proofs,) from
Peter's residence, and jurisdiction, there. (...). And thus we do it.

For the I. year after the Ascension, Peter preached daily at Jerusalem,
either in the Temple, or in private houses, notwithstanding his former
imprisonment, and the Order of the Council to the contrary. Act. 5.42. After
the Martyrdom of Stephan, which happened in the II. Baron. ad An. XXIV. 301.
year after the Ascension, he was sent with John to them of Samaria, whence he
returned to Jerusalem, Act. 8.14.25. The IV. or perhaps the V. year, and the
third after his own conversion, St Paul sees him at Jerusalem, and stays with
him 15. days. Gal. 1.18. The sixth year after he cures Aeneas of the palsy at
Lydda, and from thence goes to Joppa, where he tarried many days. Act.
9.34.43. The VII. year he baptizes Cornelius the Centurion at Cesarea. Act.
10.48. where he tarried certain days; and returning to Jerusalem, he is found
fault with for going out to men uncircumcised, that is, the Gentiles. Act.
11.3. And upon this check received, it appears by Gal. 2.8. that he meddled
not any more with the Gentiles, but effectually laboring in his Ministry to the
Circumcision, as is most likely, he staid thereabout till the XI. year, in
which he was imprisoned by Herod, and miraculously freed, Act. 12.4. And this
is the time say some he went to Rome. But they say it only. Besides, how can
this agree with his sitting at Antioch VII. years before his coming to Rome,
which they tell us of? Now he has not been at Antioch yet, nor will not be
till anon. And we find him again at Jerusalem. For the XIVth year after S.
Paul had seen him at Jerusalem, (before mentioned,) which makes the v. Hieron.
in II. ad Gal.
XVIIIth after Christ's Ascension, and in the IX. year of Claudius he meets
with him again in the same place, and leaves him to the Circumcision, himself
and Barnabas departing to the Gentiles, according to an agreement made among
them. Gal. 2.9. Which agreement being put into their hearts, without all doubt,
immediately by the Holy Spirit, as being President of their Council, we cannot
piously, or with Charity, imagine, that Peter would break the Order thereof, or
so much as a compact agreed upon among themselves; especially if we consider
how wary he must needs be in dealing with the Gentiles, by reason of the fear
he stood in of them, who were of the Circumcision, Gal. 2.12. and to the
ministry of whom he was deputed by the Spirit, not only at this Assembly; but
formerly also: for his was (...), The Apostleship of the Circumcision, Gal.
2.8. Well; after this Council, held, as is said, about eighteen years after
Christ's Ascension, Paul meets him yet again, (it is not very likely it should
be presently after,) and that at Antioch, far enough out of the way from
Jerusalem to Rome, where he withstands him to his face, and frights him from
meddling any more with the Gentiles, as being wholly contrary to their compact
and agreement. Gal. 2.11. From hence he withdraws and separates himself. Gal.
2.12. But whither goes he? To the Jews, or Christians, in Rome? At this time
there were none to be found there. Orosius Oros. lib. 7. c. 6.
out of Josephus: Claudii anno nono expulsos Vrbe Judaeos, refert Josephus.
Suetonius: In Claudio, cap. 25.
Judaeos impulsore Christ. So called by the Heathen.
Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit. Claudius had banished thence all
the Jews, before Peter could get thither; that is the Christians as well: Adi
Arrian. in (...). lib. 2. cap. 9. parum heic intellectum ab Interpret. 1 Pet.
1.1.
for as yet they were not so quite discriminated by the Romans; so that Orosius
needed not so much to have troubled himself about this place of Suetonius. Most
certainly he went then to the strangers scattered in Asia. etc. (...). whose
Metropolis was Babylon, and from whence he wrote his First Epistle. 1 Pet.
5.13. The Church which is at Babylon elected together with you saluteth you.
That Babylon here is meant of Rome, it is not Eusebius out of fancifull Papias,
or Jerome out of him, that can persuade us without better reasons. Ad An. XLV.
17. Nec me imprudenter dicturum existimo. etc.
For the conceit indeed of Baronius, that Peter should give a false name to the
place, because he would not be found out where he was, truly it is not
altogether irridiculous; though himself thinks he speaks somewhat prudently
therein. We know the difference between Epistolicall, and Prophetical,
expressions; and confess we deserve to be laughed at, if we should believe him,
that it was usual with the Apostles, to change men's names, as well as the names
of places, for particular ends and advantages; as we have seen the Jesuits do
with us, the Cardinals very friends, and greatest Champions for Peter's Primacy
at Rome. By this time it appears to every ingenuous understanding, that will
not suffer it self (...), to be led by the nose by whatever authority it is,
which can but plead antiquity, that Peter for some XX. years after Christ's
Ascension never so much as saw Rome. (...) quod erat demonstrandum.

Let us now speak to the other XVII. years.

We have seen, that during the Reign of Tiberius, Caligula, and even unto the
end of Claudius, Peter has never been at Rome. Nero is next. Let us hear what
the great Jos. Scalig. ad Joan XVIII. com. 31.
Amender of times will say: A Christi in coelum receptu ad IV. annum Neronis
certo certius est Petrum Romam non venisse. You hear how peremptory he is. He
tells us certainty it self is not more certain, then that Peter never came to
Rome before the IIII. year of Nero. Whether he did after that, or no, remains
to be examined. About the end of Claudius, or at least the beginning of Nero,
as is generally believed, some two or three years before his own coming
thither, Paul writes his Epistle to the Romans, though Pareus would have it
later. In the last Chapter thereof he salutes, besides others, by name near
upon thirty Romans 16.2.
Saints, men and women, of that Church. Now res ipsa clamat, says Calvin,
Institut. cap. 8. 101.
non debuisse Petrum praeteriri si Romae fuisset. Not Christian charity, but
common ingenuity may wonder, that Peter should be omitted, had he been at Rome.
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? So fervent sure was S. Paul's love to all the
Saints, that he could by no means neglect, much less hate, him whom he had
once thought worthy of his chiding, and reproof, at Antioch. Or had he left
Rome by reason or the Edict of Claudius, as Baronius Ad An. LVIII. 51.
pretends, but having no Testimony in the world for it, (and yet this is all
the reasons he allegeth for Paul's not naming him, though he makes show of
more,) so great a light of the Church being missing from his own Orb, might
have seemed worthy of S. Paul's enquiring after; especially writing to the
place where he is conceived to have had such power and preeminence. But some
few years after Paul himself comes to Rome. There was store then of Jews, and
Christians, in the City. Does he then find Peter returned? No such matter set
down by him that tells us the story; and it is not probable that Peter's name
at least, in case he were come back to Rome, should have wanted setting down by
him, that was otherwise very studious of his actions; and who tells us that many
others resorted unto Paul, while he dwelt in his own hired house, Act. 28.30.
for the space of two whole years together. None, no not any the least mention
neither of his being at Rome, is to be found in those many Epistles written
there by Paul, to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Timothy,
Philemon, after his long continuance in that place. He acquaints the Gal.
1.18.2.11.
Galatians with his seeing him at Jerusalem and Antioch: and could no accident
happen at Rome, that might minister him occasion to mention his seeing him
there, (if perchance he did so) in his Letters to none of the Churches? He
gives testimony to the Philippians concerning this Clement, then with him in
Rome when he wrote his Phil. 4.3.
Epistle to them; and would he say nothing of Peter, by whom they will needs
have Clement constituted to be his successor in the Bishopric of Rome? He
tells the same Philippians, he had none with him so equally affected like
himself as was Timothy for their good, all others seeking their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's. Can this aspersion light upon Peter? Can
Timothy, but a son of Paul's nurtering, and a mere novice in comparison of
Peter, have a greater care of the people of Christ, then he that forsooth must
be Universal Bishop of all the Churches? S. Paul tells the same Timothy, that
at his first answer at Rome none stood with him, 2 Timothy 4.16.
but all men forsook him. High shame for Peter, if so be he were then at Rome!
Nay, in the same Epistle (which they tell us was written in the last Henr.
Bunting. Chron. Eccles. etc. 2 Timothy 4.6.7.8.10.12.11.
year of Nero, and is that of both their Martyrdoms,) S. Paul signifying unto
him, with a prophetique spirit no doubt, his departure being at hand, the
finishing of his course, and the obtaining of a Crown; he acquaints him withal
what way Demas, and Crescens, and Titus, and Tychicus had taken: And out of a
consideration of his own solitude, he lets him know moreover that of all the
Ministers of the Gospel Luke only was with him. And was not Peter's errand
whithersoever worthy the giving Timothy notice of? Or if they, whom he names,
were all, who had departed from him, what becomes of Peter then, when Luke
alone is found remaining? Where now shall we find Peter in the time of Nero? or
where has he bestowed himself? Menander in Hypobolimaeo.
(...). I like not these straggling gods, said the Comedian of old. A Bishop
never resident; never at home in his own Diocese; but always (...), 1 Pet.
4.15.
quite contrary to his own rule and precept? An il president sure, and example,
to the Bishops of after ages; and too much (the whole world is witness)
imitated, and observed. But though we cannot find him alive, and exercising his
Jurisdiction, in this great City, the public (...). Marcian. Heracleot.
Junior. (...).
Star of the whole Earth, shall we find him dead there? Neither does that
sufficiently appear. Certainly a most strange fate, that the manner of his
suffering ( Joh. 21.18.) should have clearer testimony given of it, then the
place where! The understanding Reader by this time cannot be ignorant, why we
have so vehement a suspicion of the truth of that common relation concerning
Peter and his martyrdom at Rome. What is to be done then? To forsake slight,
and, as is manifest, forged authorities, and in stead of them to fly to
conjectures, will afford us but small help for the finding out of the truth.
And yet me thinks Peter's writing of his Epistle from Babylon seems to me to
confirm that most probable one of Scaliger, Scal. d. l.
who thinks he rather suffered under some Provincial Magistrate (...) Asiae,
where he preached to the Jews scattered far and wide in Pontus, 1 Pet. 1.1.
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. However his argument out of Tacitus
is not good to prove that he was not crucified at Rome under Nero, because,
says he, in that only Persecution under him, the Christians were burnt in
public, wrapped up in sear-cloth with pitch and other combustible stuff, being
tied upright by the necks to a stake, and all this to give light to his night
pastimes and sports; when as Tacitus indeed as well confesses that some were
crucified, and also wurried to death in beasts skins by dogs. Tacit. Annal.
lib. XV.
Pereuntibus, says he, addita ludibria, ut ferarum tergis contecti laniatu
canum interirent, aut crucibus affixi; aut flammandi, atque ubi defecisset dies
in usum nocturni luminis urerentur. To say no more; the resolution of Calvin,
speaking of this same business, is very grave, and moderate: Instit. c. VIII.
102.
Res illius temporis ita sunt opinionum varietate implicitae, ut non temere
adhibenda sit fides, ubi aliquid scriptum legimus. Et tamen propter hunc
scriptorum consensum, non pugno quin illic mortuus fuerit: sed Episcopum
fuisse, praesertim longo tempore, persuaderi nequeo. And the truth is, that the
Christians of the more ancient Ages, perceiving a great flaw or defect in the
History of Church affairs from the end of the Acts of the Apostles to Trajan's
time, took upon them, perhaps with no bad intent, to make up, with supplement
of their own pure invention, that Chasm, or breach in the Story: Herein, as
none of the worst parcels, I mean, (as it happened out,) not of the least
advantage to after times, was Peter's coming to Rome, his Episcopacy there,
with his Martyrdom, and Successors. They had read perhaps in d. l.
Tacitus or Suetonius of the persecution of Christians under Nero, which was
indeed the first, In Ner. c. 16. Id. in Claud. c. 25.
Claudius only banishing them the City as is aforesaid: Hence they strait made
a conjecture that Peter, and Paul, might then suffer; though truly they kept no
exact observation of the time.

But that this indeed could not be so, if it has not already been sufficiently
proved, let us hear what Eutychius the Patriarch of the Orthodox Christians at
Alexandria tells us, a writer, who for his Age and Authority may very well be
heard, and in whose late published Arabice edit. a Clariss. Seldeno.
Antiquities of his own Church you may read; Occisus est Petrus sub annum XXII.
post Dominum nostrum Christum, which falling in with the beginning of Nero, how
could Peter suffer in the Persecution begun by Nero so long after, as he is
said in the common account? Notwithstanding, he retains the commonly received
tradition of Peter's being at Rome, and that there forsooth he writ Evangelium
Marci, cum Marco, lingua i. Graeca, ita Arabib. dicta. v. Seldom.
Romana. Yet he acknowledges him not to have been ever Bishop of Rome; but
says plainly that Linus erat primus Patriarcha Romanus.

That Paul also suffered under some Provincial Magistrate, and not at Rome by
the command of Nero, I could suffer my self easily to be brought to believe, by
reason of these words of Clement (...), under the Governors, whether
Presidiall, or Proconsular, I know no more, then I am determined to strive
against the violent current of all antiquity. For I know how impatiently the
ulcers of inveterate errors suffer themselves to be handled, and searched into.

XI.
And made his way to the utmost bounds of the West.] Does he here mean his
going into Spain, his resolution for which journey himself has set down in the
Epistle to the Romans in these words? Whenever I take my journey into Spain,
I will come to you: Ro^. XV. 24.28.
for I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward
by you and a little after. When therefore I have performed this and have sealed
to them this fruit, I will come by you into Spain. Which whether he ever
performed has hitherto been disputed: This place of Clement seems much to
confirm that he did. Some very learned Papists would utterly deny it, as Ep. ad
Decentiu^ did. 11. cap. Quis nesciat.
Innocent III. P. In Romans c. 15. (ex Gelasio apud Great. did. 22. q. 2. cap.
Beatus.)
Thomas Aquinas, In Romans c. 15. ad l.
Dominicus Soto, etc. But Baronius Ad An. LXI. 2.3. etc.
inclines to believe it; in whom you may find the testimonies for it collected
out of the Gr. and Lat. Fathers, among whom Theodoret tells us, (though this
place be omitted by the Cardinal) In Ep. ad Romans cap. 15. ad l.
spiritu prophetico eam profectionem praedictam, and idcirco necessario
implendam fuisse. Nay, he goes farther, and says; In Psalm. 116.
In Hispanias pervenit, and insulis quae in mari jacent utilitatem attulit; in
which place by his [Insulae in mari] he understands undoubtedly the Britannies;
as he seems to interpret himself De Car. Graec. affect. lib. IX.
elsewhere, telling us that among others, (...), he means Paul, did persuade
(...), the Britains and Gauls, as well as other Nations, to receive the Laws of
Christ crucified. And for farther witness, the very same is affirmed by
Sophronius Sermon. de Natal. Apost.
, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, (not he whose spurious, and counterfeit book we
have inscribed Fragment. Peregrin. Petri and Pauli,) and by Venantius De vita
Martini. lib. 3.
Fortunatus, a very ancient Christian Poet, whose is this: Transiit Oceanum,
vel qua facit insula portum;
Quasque Britannus habet terras, quasque ultima Thule.


But you will say his testimony is in verse; I say little to that: But dare be
confident that that is but Poetry, or making, which the Rob. Person. de 3b.
Convers. Angliae part. 1. cap. 21. Rich. Vitus Basi^s^^ch. hist. Brit. lib 4.
Jo. P^th^us Relat. de reb. Anglicis. Praefat. de Antiq. Eccles. Brytannicae.
etc.
Papists, our countrymen, would delude us with about Peter's being here, his
constituting Churches, and ordaining Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons among us;
(for they would have little good done any where but by him;) and all this upon
very unsound, or to speak better, upon false and forged authorities. For as
for L^b. 2. ca. 40.
Nicephorus Callistus, their best Author, neither he, Niceph. Gregoras or any
other of the name, are of any antiquity almost to speak of beyond yesterday;
therefore not to be credited in a business of this kind: and Baronius himself
confesses, that this is delivered Ad An. XLIV. 38.
absque aliquo antiquorum testimonio. For Dorotheus In Synopsi.
, the writing, which bears his name, Salm. de Ep. and Presbyt. Rivet. Crit.
Sacri lib 3. ca. 13. Rob. Cocus Censur. p. 115.
is most certainly supposititious. And their third man is the very Jacobus de
Voragine, or if I could say worse, of the Greek Church: I mean Sym. Metaph. ad
diem XXIX. Junii.
Symeon Metaphrastes, who whereas he cites Eusebius for what he says, I am
afraid he does but put a false die upon us. No such thing appears in his
History of the Church, where it should be found, as in its most convenient
place: if it were in some part of him, which is not come to our hands, we can
say nothing to that, but, Quod perisse videmus, perditum ducimus. These are
all. Yet we could help them to a fourth man, my Lord of Arundel's Gr. Anon. MS.
Apud Dn. Junium in Not. ad Clement.
of the Travels of Peter and Paul: I might have thought him the forged
Sophronius before mentioned, but that I see him to be but a gleaner at best out
of Symeon the Translater: and in this business of Peter's being in Britain he
is transcribed by him verbatim. Let who so will see for better satisfaction
Fran. Goodwin, de Convers. Britan. cap. 1. p. 7. D. Vsser. de Britan.
Ecclesiar. Primordiis, cap. 1. p. 8. Jerome Catal. Scriptor. Eccl. in PAULO.
(who translated this Epistle into Latin above CC. years ago) seems to have had
this place of Clement in his mind, when he wrote these words of Paul:
Evangelium Christi in Occidentis quoque partibus praedicavit; which, says he,
he did after his first dismission obtained at Rome from Nero; whereof himself
makes mention II Tim. IV. 16.

Repent ye house of Israel, etc.] See Mr Yong's Notes ad page 11. XII.
edit. Graecolat. and what is observed here Number. VII. and IIX. of the joining
of many places of Scripture into one sense, or period; and of the differing
readings from our ordinary Bibles.

XIII.
Let us fasten our contemplation, etc.] This passage, and those that follow,
are transcribed hence by Clemens Alexandrinus in his 4. Stromat.

XIV.
Preached the instauration of all things to the World.] He means the
restitution of what perished in the Flood, by the increase of those creatures,
which in the following words he tells us God saved in the Ark. Gr. (...). The
word is used in Matthew for the second coming of Christ in his Kingdom and
power to judge the world, Matthew. 19.28.
Apoc. 21.5.
when he shall make all things new. For Matthew's language (...), is expressed
(...) by Luke, Luke 22.30.
speaking of the same promise of Christ to his Disciples, that they should then
sit upon XII. Thrones judging the XII. Tribes of Israel. But later Christian
Writers of the Gr. Church take it, some for the general Resurrection at the
last day; others for Regeneration, or the New birth which is by Baptism. It is
needless to heap hither their autorities.

XV.
Pillar of salt, remaining even unto this day.] Gr. (...). Josephus witnesses
as much, who moreover tells us, that he saw it (...). lib. 1. cap. 12. But Lot
's wife, as they retired thence, looking back toward the City, and more
curiously beholding the destruction thereof, contrary to the Commandment of
God, was transformed into a pillar of salt, which I have seen; for it remains
even until this day. Now Clement and Josephus were Synchroni. Tertullian
witnesses it was to be seen in his time; that is, not an hundred and fifty
years after them. Which we may the less wonder at, when as besides Burchardus,
and diverse others, our late English Travelers into those parts affirm that it
is still undissolv'd, and standing. Sulpicius Severus 300. years after Clement,
calls this Pillar only molem Hist. sacr. l. 1.
, omitting to set down both the form, and substance or matter it consisted of.
But his, not omissions only, but manifest departing from the exact verity of
the Holy Text, may frequently be observed. Otherwise he tells the story
hansomly, and like himself: Sed mulier parum dicto audiens, (humano malo quo
agrius vetitis abstinetur,) reflexit oculos, statimque in molem conversa
traditur.

Be ye merciful, that ye may obtain mercy.] CLEMENT'S Gr. XVI.
(...). Luke's Gr. (...). But see once for all N. VII.

Although he could do all things.] Gr. (...). Hierom, XVII.
as is before observed, turned this Epistle into Latin, which we may fear is
now quite lost. His copy seems to have had (...), missing here; reading it
thus: (...). For so accordingly he translates this period, yet to be found in
his writings upon the LII. Chapter of the Prophet Esaias. Sceptrum Dei Dominus
Jesus Christus, non venit in jactantia superbiae, cum possit omnia, sed in
humilitate. I have followed him. It is far the more clear reading; yet Jerome
does not render (...) after (...), Christ the scepter of the majesty of God: I
know not whether it were wanting in his book.

Because he has a mind to him.] Or, Because he delights in him. XVIII.
Gr. (...). With this very passage, taken out of Psalm. XXII. the Chief Priests
and Elders mocked Christ upon the Cross. Matthew. XXVII. 43. where also it would
be better rendered, if he take delight in him, [(...),] then as it is in our
Bibles, (seeming rather transcribed from our English Reading Psalms, as they
call them, out of the Vulgar Latin, [quoniam vult eum,] then translated out of
the Gr.) if he will have him. The same Interpreter in this place of Matthew
seems to have read, or at least, to have understood the Gr. thus: (...). for he
translates it: liberet nunc eum, si vult. omitting the former (...), and then
mispointing the words. And so quite alters the meaning. The Ebrew word
signifies indeed the same that (...) does, as well as (...), which occasioned
the LXX. to turn this place, (...), for (...). And it is formerly observed, how
generally they were followed. Otherwise Matthew, expressing the very same thing
and sense elsewhere in his own words, uses the verb (...). Matthew. 3.17.
in whom I am well pleased, or, delighted. And though the Vulgar here in this
Psalm. agree with the 70. yet in other places he leaves them, and comes nearer
the signification of this later verb in rendering the Original word. For
whereas they have (...). 1 Samuel 18.22. 2 Samuel 15.26.
and (...). that Interpreter has places Regi, and non places. But it may be
gathered from the preface to this version of the Psalms, that the (...), or
former edition, was translated but out of the 70. only here and there amended
by comparing it with the Ebrew Text afterward.

XIX.
I am as the reaking of a pot.] The learned Publisher of this Epistle, finding
this place no where in the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses, under whose name
notwithstanding it is here cited, refers us to a very ancient Gr. Josephus,
sive Josippus, Scriptor Christianus, in (...). v. James in Eclog. Bibl. Publ.
Cantabrig. n. 243. and Cl. Seldom. de Anno Civili Judaeor. cap. 8. p. 43.
Author, not yet set forth; (whom, with many Aliosque eximios Graecos nondum
editos; quos parum vexari ab iis puto qui in illis Collegiis degunt: A me certe
non raro reviserentur, si ibi adessem. Jos. Scalig. Ep. 234. ad Ri. Thomps. de
Biblioth. Angliae.
others, that have not seen the public since the admired benefit of Printing,
he, with some few better souls, suffers not to sleep, and gather dust, in our
Libraries, or rather Bibliotaphs, either through egregious laziness, or want of
convenience, and encouragement, I know not whether: but I am sure to our no
small shame; they beyond the seas taking notice of it, and envying us such
treasuries as we make no use of:) This Author in one Quaest. seu cap. 120.
part of his work has collected together those places in the New Testament,
which seem to be taken or quoted out of the Old, but appear not any where
extant in those books thereof, which it has pleased God to continue to his
Church. As for these words here, Clement seems to have them out of the 119.
Psalm. v. 83. naming Moses for David, perhaps with the same liberty, that he
sees Christ use Joh. X. 34. where he urging a place out of the Psalms calls
them the Law, in these words: Is it not written in your Law, Psalm. 82.6.
I said, Ye are Gods? And the people seem to imitate him to his face doing the
same in the Chapter next save one following, Joh. XII. 34. The people answered him;
We have heard out of the Law, That Christ abides ever. Which words it is
apparent are taken out of Psalm. CX. 4. See also Joh. XV. 25. and Psalm. 35.19.
So Paul likewise terms the Prophecy of Esaias the Law too: 1 Cor. XIV. 21. In the
Law it is written: now the place he intends is Esaias 28.11. It is worth looking
upon the learned Heinsius his Sacred Meditat. on this place of Paul's. And from
this unquestionable example and authority it is, that the Fathers many times by
this word, (...), The Law, do understand the whole Old Testament. And yet
Christ seems plainly to divide it into the Law, Prophets, and Psalms, as
appears by many places, but especially Luke XXIV. 44. All things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms, concerning me. The Apostles, and Fathers most an end, followed also
this distinction. And the Jews divided it not much otherwise, as we may find in
Jerome; After the Law, says he, secundum Prophetarum ordinem faciunt. In prol.
Galeato.
Tertius ordo (...) possidet: Et primus liber incipit ab Job: secundus autem
David, quem etc.

That unpassable Ocean.] XX.
The learned Editioner by these words understands the British Ocean. Sure very
rightly. For the very same, or like, expressions did the writers not only
about this age, but in the following also, use concerning it. To confirm this
more then probable conjecture, take the pains to read these verses, Jos.
Scaliger primus edidit in Catalect. etc.
penned most certainly about Clement's time; and they are of Claudius the
Emperors Expedition into the Island: Oceanus nunc terga dedit, nec pervius ulli
Caesareos fasces, Imperiumque tulit.
Al. Semoto.
Semota, and vasto disjuncta Britannia ponto,
Cinctaque inaccessis horrida littoribus.
Quam pater invictis Nereus vallaverat undis,
Quam fallax aestu circuit Oceanus.
Aspice confundit populos impervia tellus:
Conjunctum est, quod adhuc Orbis, and Orbis, erat.
For two reasons Antiquity conceited this Sea most dangerous, and unpassable.
First, for the great abundance of huge Sea Monsters believed to be bred
therein; which not only Lib. 4. od. 14.
Horace intimates in these words: -- Belluosus, qui remotis
Obstrepit Oceanus Britannis;
But Juvenal also in his X. Satyr, Quanto Delphinis Balaena Britannica major.
Festus Avienus In Oris Maritimis.
, who lived under Theodosius, and is mentioned with good credit by S. Hierom,
borrows the former expression, speaking likewise of the Ocean Sea; Non usque
navibus turbidum late fretum,
Et belluosi gurgitem Oceani secant.
And I may well think both places were in his mind, Jac. Syncer. Sannazar. Ecl.
Piscator. V.
who wrote that gallant verse, (and such are all his,) Sensit Arar, sensere
maris fera monstra Britanni. A singular ornament indeed he was to the last Age,
and ancient poetry it self; -- Hic ille Maroni Synce^us, Musa proximus, ut
tumulo. Petr. Bembus Cardinal.
who as he enjoyed, not only the Dwelling, but the Muse also, of the Prince of
Poets while he lived, so had he the happiness after he was dead to lie nearest
to his Relics. The second reason was, not only unexpected Tempests and storms
suddenly arising thereon, but the unusual violence also of the Tides, which if
we hear Pytheas of Marseils in Pliny Nature. Hist. lib 2. ca. 97.
, (for Strabo Geogr. li. 1. (...).
has utterly exploded his credit in what he relates of the Britannies) make it
swell fourscore cubits higher then the land. Mare, attolli horrendis aestibus
adsuetum. says Histor. lib. 27.
Amm. Marcellinus speaking of it. Caesar Com. de bell. Gallico, lib. 5.
himself had dear experience of the roughness of it, when he near lost his
whole navy upon our coast. Com. de bell. Gallico, lib. 5.
Maxima coorta tempestate, prope omnes naves afflictae, atque in littus
ejectae, quod neque anchorae, funesque subsisterent, neque nautae,
gubernatoresque vim tempestatis pati possent. and he found to his charges, to
use his own words a little further, Ibid. lib. 4.
Long aliam esse navigationem in concluso mari, atque in vastissimo ac
apertissimo Oceano. And yet certainly the danger which he conceived, and feared
might happen, either in or after his passage, made him very wary, and provident
in making choice of a fit season for it; which indeed (...). lib. 5.
Appian tells us he did. Neither did time, or improvement of skill in
Navigation, lessen this fearful apprehension with after ages concerning the
certain peril and hazard which they underwent, that sailed this Sea. Basil the
Great calls it Homil. 4. in Hexaemeron.
(...), which S. Ambrose renders, Lib. Hexam. cap. 3.
magnum and inausum navigantibus, atque intentatum naut is mare, quod
Britannias Oceanus barbaris fluctibus fremens. Paulin. de eodem. vide Geograph.
Nubiensem.
frementi includit aequore, atque in ulterior a and ipsis fabulis inaccessa
secreta se porrigit. Libanius also the famous Sophist, and Master unto Julian
called by some the Apostate, living in the same Age with S. Basil, and
describing with what jeopardy Constantius the Emperor crossed this Sea into
Britain, he calls it (...) (...) Panegyr. Constantio.
, (the very word that Clement uses here,) unpassable; esteeming more danger to
be in this passage, then in a Sea Fight elsewhere; and the performance thereof
with safety to deserve no less then a Tropee. Plus est transisse ad Britannos,
says Hegesippus De Excid. Hierosolym.
, (not he whom Eusebius formerly cites,) quam triumphasse de Britannis. And
well might he think so, when as that stupid Caligula, affecting some great
design against Britain, with an army, as appears out of Dio, of 250000.
fighting men, being come to the shore, durst hardly look the British Neptune in
the face, much less trust him. Yet that he might not be said to come so far to
no purpose, himself, with some few more, Dio, and Aur. Victor. ex edit. A.
Schotti.
lanches out in his Gally, but fear makes him instantly put in again. However
to make something of it, upon the sounding of a charge, he commands his army,
which stood in Battalia all the while upon the shore, to gather shel-fish, (for
it was upon an Ebb,) and therewith to fill galeas and sinus, Sueton. in
Caligula, ca. 46.
Spolia Oceani vocans, Capitolio, Palatioque debita: calling them Spoils of
the Ocean due to the Capitol and Palace. The Bravado of Claudius, next after
him, was not much more tolerable: For counting it not enough to triumph for
reducing a small part of the Island, (which indeed he entered with some success;
but I remember not whether with any danger in the passage,) after his return,
he caused to be placed upon the top of his Palace a Naval Crown, as if he had
tamed and subjugated the Ocean, like another Xerxes, in despite of the power
of God appearing in that fierce Element; for which he is deservedly scoffed at
by Seneca, In (...).
in that mock-Deification, which he wrote for him, in these words, -- and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Jura securis
Tremere Oceanum.
But what shall we say to Jul. Firmicus, a Christian Writer, (shame on such
flattery,) who would seem to persuade Constans the Emperor, and Constantius
his Brother, that they might expect little less then a Triumph, only for their
bare ventring over into the Island: Hyeme Lib. De Errore profanar. Religionum,
sub fin.
, he tells them, (quod nec factum est aliquando, nec fiet,) tumentes and
saevientes undas calcastis Oceani Britannici, sub remis vestris incogniti jam
nobis pene maris unda contremuit, and insperatam Imperatoris faciem Britannus
expavit. Quid amplius vultis? Virtutibus vestris victa Elementa cesserunt. Thus
much of the British Sea. And because Mr Young thinks the Irish may as well be
here meant by Clement, you shall have what Solinus says of that sea too, and
there also the word (...) not unfitly expressed. Polyistor. ca. 35. vulg. 22.
Salmas.
Mare quod Iberniam and Britanniam interluit, undosum, and inquietum, toto in
anno non nisi [ Deest Salmasio.
aestivis] pauculis diebus est navigabile. Clement's (...) is non navigabile.

That unpassable Ocean, and those Worlds which are beyond it.] This pericope,
or passage, is much taken notice of by the Ancients; Clement of Alexandria,
Origin, Hierom, and Photius, who reckons it among those things in this Epistle
which might be quarreled at: Phot. Patriar. CP. Biblioth. number. 126.
(...). One would find fault with him, says he, for making a supposition of
worlds to have their being without the Ocean. Comm. in 2. cap. ad Ephesians.
Hierom does but play with it, and makes use of it only to show his wit in
descanting upon this Text, Ephesians. 2.2. Ye walked according to the course of this
world. But Origin (...). lib. 2.
is more learned. He forsooth interpreting 2 Pet. 3.13. where there is mention
of new Heavens, and a new Earth, takes them to be those Heavens, and that
Earth, which our Antipodes, (he calls them (...),) generally they of the other
Hemi-sphear, do inhabit; and to back this his conceit, (every one knows his
wild fancies,) he cites this place of Clement. I am not ignorant that the
opinion, that there were Antipodes, got footing and credit among the learned
Romans both before Cic. Acad. qu. l. 4. Virgil. G. lib. 1.
, (yet Lucretius De Not. Rer. lib. 1.
explodes it,) and in the Mela de situ Orb. lib. 1. cap. 1. Senec. epist. 122.
Plin. l. 2. cap. 65.
age of Clement. But whether the Christians then living had given it any
entertainment, is a great doubt; nay it may well be denied, if we consider with
what earnestness in after Ages it was opposed by Divin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Lactantius, De C. D. lib. 16. c. 9.
Augustine, and others. And shall we think that what Clement had once maintained
this way, should be by one of his successors, namely P P. Zachary, about the
year 745. condemned for an Heresy, in Vigilius, upon the accusation of
Boniface, (if my Author deceive me not,) our otherwise learned Contryman, the
Apostle of the Germans, and first Bishop of Mentz. It seems not then very
probable, that by these (...) (mundi) he intends; or aims at the Antipodes.
Does he then by this word at random mean any parts whatever of the then
habitable world, (perhaps of difficult access,) as Propertius does in this
verse: Lib. IV. eleg. 3.
Cogor and e tabula pictos ediscere mundos? It does not appear so neither, by
reason they were Trans Oceanum: And I dare say when he wrote this Epistle, he
had no thought (...) of any new discoveries, though Seneca his contemporany
would make us believe by his Medea. Act. 2. sc. Audax. fin.
Venient annis secula seris, etc. that he foresaw what posterity should detect
of the yet unknown world in future ages. What shall we say then? Si praecedens
nostra conjectura vera est, says the Editioner, Britanniae intelligendae
veniunt. If we were right before, that Oceanus (...), is the British Ocean;
(for Libanius where he describes it, as you heard before, gives the very same
Epithet to it,) then by undeniable consequence the Islands anciently called
Britanniae, (this that we live upon, being one, and by far the greatest,
distinguished from the rest by the name of Albion Plin. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 16.
,) must be understood by (...), i. The Worlds beyond it. Neither let any man
wonder at the insolency of the expression, when he shall (vice versa) read in
holy Writ, all Europe, a third part of what was then discovered of the World,
and whatever was on this side the Mediterranean, called Genesis X. 5.
Insulae Gentium, i. The Isles of the Gentiles. For we may as well almost call
our Islands Worlds, as a third part of the World, (of so great a continent,) is
called Islands. But to confirm this more then probable conjecture, I will first
bring a place out of the Tragedy of Octavia, written by one of her own
domestics, and while Clement was yet alive, and flourishing. The Author makes
her speak these words of her father Claudius the Emperor Act. 1. Sc. 1.
: Modo cui totus paruit Orbis
Ultra Oceanum; cuique Britanni
Terga dedere;
Ducibus nostris ante ignoti
Jurisque sui.
What I pray you is Orbis ultra Oceanum (by which you see she means Britain,)
but Clement's (...); The World beyond Sea? The number need not trouble any one;
that may easily be answered for. And the languishing style of this Tragedy, or
whatever else it stands accused of By Lipsius, and Jan. Rutgers. Var. lib. 1.
cap. 15.
, takes nothing either from its antiquity, or authority. Besides I could tell
you, a better Scholar then any that except against it, gives very good words
of it: Jos. Scalig. epist. 247. and 414.
nec inepta est, neque futilis auctoris. Optimum poema est. And he craves
pardon for that he cannot herein, without doing wrong to his own, yield to any
others contrary judgment whosoever he be. Another place for confirmation
heerof shall be out of Manilius: (he lived under Augustus, somewhat before
Clement:) Astronomic. lib. I.
Tuncque in desertis habitabat montibus aurum;
Ignotusque novos pontus subduxerat Orbs.
Jos. Scaliger, out of the written book Ex Biblioth. Monast. Gemblacens.
which he used, reads it Immotusque n. p. adding, Non frustra dixit novos orbs
propter Britanniam paulo ante sua tempora a C. Julio Caesare detectam, quam
Novum Orbem vocabant. But ignotus would have stood well enough. Firmicus before
calls it Mare incognitum; and in the Tragedy but now cited the Britains are said
to be ante ignoti, and their Seas Act. 1. sc. Fulgore.
Ignota freta. Scaliger indeed was one, who (spite of the obloquy of the
Jesuit Scheinerus Christoph. Schein. in Rosa ursina, seu de Macul. Solis, lib.
4. part. 2. cap. 29. p. 761.
, and his fellows, the sometime fatui nova numina secli,) deserved admirably
well of Manilius: Yet where he had it, that Britain was usually called Novus
Orbis, I am at this time to seek. In my poor Adversaria I find no such thing;
but that it was called Alter Orbis, many testimonies. The curious Reader will
not think it a trouble to take a view of some of them. Servius, the ancient and
learned Grammarian, upon that of Virgil Eclog. 1.
Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos: Britannia, says he, est Insula sita
in Oceano Septentrionali, and a Poetis Alter Orbis Terrarum dicitur. What
Poets? You had this verse erewhile upon Claudius conquest of it, and annexing it
to the Empire: Conjunctum est quod adhuc Orbis, and Orbis, erat. But Claudian,
that excellent courtly and neat Poet, some deal more plainly, and to our
purpose; In Stilicon. Pan^g. III.
Nec stetit Oceano, remisque ingressa profundum,
Vincendos alio quaesivit in Orb Britannos.
And that Britain was Mundus alter he intimates in this: Paneg. 8. in Cons.
Manlii Theodori.
-- Germanaque Tethys
Paruit, and nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
But better writers then Poets say as much; and therefore, that Britain was
termed another World, proceeded from no lenocinium of their Art; for it was
verily thought to be so. And this conceit was it that made the Roman soldiers
so unwilling to follow A. Plautius Dio, lib. 39.
in his expedition hither, taking it to be some service out of the World: so
did they imagine concerning Britain. There is a passage in K. Agrippa's speech
in De bello Jud. lib. 2. (...). Lat. 16.
Josephus absolutely for our turn, and which much illustrates this place of
Clements. He tells the Jews there, that the Romans [(...).] sought for Another
World [(...)] beyond the Ocean, and carried their arms as far as the Britains,
who before that time were unknown, or, had hardly been made mention of in
History. The Author of the Panegyrique to Constantius Chlorus the Emperor, who
died at Eutrop. lib. 10.
York, (it is falsely inscribed in the ordinary books to Maximian) does thus
accost him: Gloriare Tu vero, Caesar invicte, Alium Te Orbem Terrarum
peperisse; and Romanae potentiae gloriam restituendo navalem addidisti Imperio
terris omnibus majus elementum. And a little before he had said: Britanniam
Caesar, ille auctor vestri nominis, quum Romanorum primus intrasset, Alium se
Orbem Terrarum scripsit reperisse: tantae magnitudinis arbitratus, ut non
circumfusa Oceano, sed complexa ipsum Oceanum videretur. I do not you see
presently heerupon (which yet some have done with little thanks for their
pains) make question whether Caesar was the Writer of those immortal
Commentaries, which we have under his name, because no such passage appears
there extant: Vide Clariss. Vossium de Historicis Latinis.
much less do I fear there has been here any spongia deletilis from the hand
of Julius Celsus, whom, by reason of his Recensui in the MS. Copies, (no
sufficient (...) to pass such a judgment by) other Philologers without calling
for the suffrages of the Critical Senate, have resolved to be if not the
Author, yet at least the Interpolator of those excellent writings. I could far
better, considering Caesar's manner of relating in those books, imagine that the
Panegyrist took his scripsit rather out of some other piece, as perhaps his
Epistles, which were in many books, his Orations, or Anti-Catones, or
especially out of his Ephemerides, which were extant, as appears by Servius In
li. 11. Aen.
, after this Panegyrist's age, but are now with the rest, to the irreparable
damage of humane literature in this respect, perished by the same fate, which
many other good writers have sustained, through the malice, shall I say, or
laziness rather, of bad men, and times? But though there appear no such
expression any where at this day in Caesar's own words, yet I can help you with
as much as that comes to, concerning the same Action and exploit of Caesar's, in
a most polite Historian of the next Age, who composed an elegant Breviary of
the Roman affairs under Hadrian Vid. Cl. Salmas. in Spartian. p. 44. ubi Flori
editionem promittit.
, at whose expedition into Britain he has a fling, and is as well answered by
the Emperor in Spartianus. It is L. Florus De Gest. Romans li. 3. c. 10.
. Caesar, says he, omnibus terra marique captis, respexit Oceanum, and quasi
hic Pomp. Sabin. legit Orbis Romanus, and alium.
Romany Orbis non sufficeret, Pomp. Sabin. legit, Orbis Romanus, and alium.
alterum cogitavit. Class igitur comparata, Britanniam petit. When first I met
with this place cited under the name of L. Annaeus, by Pompon. Sabinus In
Virgil. Ecl. 1. Et penitus toto, etc.
, Professor at Rome in our Great-Grandfathers memory, I supposed it might have
been out of Seneca; but upon recall of my memory, and more diligent enquiry,
you have the right Author, who was also of the Annaean Family, and called L.
Annaeus Florus, though Stadius that writes a prolix Commentary upon him,
observes it not, as I remember. And yet Lactantius Divin. Instit. lib. 7. cap.
15.
may seem to have mistaken Seneca for Florus, reckoning up the several Ages of
the State of Rome, if at least Florus had not that observation from him, which
Not. in Frag. Senecae.
Lipsius rather thinks to be true. And I suppose also he had this expression
here from Velleius Paterculus, in whom concerning Caesar you read, Histor. li.
2.
alterum paene Imperio nostro, ac suo, quaerens Orbem.

What need I now after these witnesses to allege the forenamed Hegesippus De
Excid. Hierosol. lib.
the expilator v. Scal. Elench. Trihaer. c. 4.
of Josephus, in whom we read: Britannia Alter Orbis, remota a confinio
Terrarum? Or Solinus, whose words are: Polyhist. c. 35. Salm. 22.
Finis erat Orbis ora Gallici littoris, nisi Britannia insula (...).
non qualibet magnitudine, nomen pene Orbis alterius mereretur. But for all
this could you think this style and language concerning Britain should be
retained so many Ages after Clement, (near about XI.) and that by one of his
Successors in the Sea of Rome; Anselmus, says the Author Gervas. Dorobern.
Imagine. contra Rob. Abb. S. Aug. MS. in Cottoniana.
, ab Urbano PP. Pallium suscepit, and tantum ejus gratiae habuit, ut eum
Alterius Orbis Papam vocaret. It is well it was so long ago that this special
Grace was granted to the Archbishops of Canterbury. In these our days we need
not now stand afrighted at the dire influence, of what some feared might happen
from thence, except we will cum Larvis luctari, (...). But (...). --

Now that which gave Britain the credit to be thought so, was not only the
Ocean's separating it from the other parts of the World, but the greatness
also, and large extent thereof: For some Writers, says Dio Hist. Romans lib. 39.
, (before the Roman fleet under Agricola Tacit. in vita, and Dio, ubi supra.
doubled the Cape of Ptolem. Geogr. lib. 2. (...).
Virvedrum, or Dunes-bay, that enorme spatium procurrentium terrarum Tacit. in
vita, and Dio, ubi supra.
; in Tacitus Language) brought it into controversy whether it might not rather
be called a Continent, as resembling that more, in the expression of Stephanus
Steph. Byzant. in (...).
[(...),] then an Island. That indeed in Josephus is spoken very high: Pene non
minor quam noster Orbis: Yet may it be excused by the general mistake of those
times; for when he wrote, it was not certainly discovered to be an Island, and
therefore they might say what they would of it. L. De Reb. Geticis.
Cujus magnitudinem olim nemo, ut refert Livius, circumvectus est, multis tamen
data est varia opinio, de ea loquendi, says Jernandos. Agricola, as is said,
under Domitian, was the first Roman that by trial found it to be so. However,
either the reputed greatness before, or the known vast circuit of it, after it
was discovered, made it generally to be called THE GREAT ISLAND. You have in
Aristides Orations, speaking of it, In Aegyptiaca.
(...), and Panegyr. in Romam.
(...), which in Catullus is, Epigr. 26. ubi Scaligerum adisis.
-- ultima Occidentis Insula. And Salmasius, the most flourishing Philologer of
these times, and generally a very learned man, for qui ad Romanam Insulam
Proconsulem mittat, in Vopiscus, does read, Casaub. and Salm. in Fl. Vopisci
Florianum.
Magnam Insulam; though Casaubon rather Britanniam Ins. There indeed Britain is
undoubtedly meant. For Procopius De b^llo Vandal. lib. 1.
terms it, (and every body knows it,) (...). by far the greatest of all
Islands without Hercules Pillars. (...), says Dionysius -- (...). Dionys.
Alexandr. in (...).
of the Islands of Britain, the greatness is extraordinary, or very famous, as
Eustath. interprets it, which he does not restrain neither, or confine, in
comparison of any other whatsoever, within the same bounds that Procopius does;
which may be perchance, because he was more ancient. Read him as Priscian, or
else Rhemnius Palaemon, have rendered him.

But the Reader will say, More then enough of this subject; it becomes tedious,
and troublesome. Yet nothing ought to be thought so by us, which may any way
tend to the honor and glory of this our Island, the Empress of the Ocean, the
Admired, and chiefly to be esteemed Fortunata -- Qua meta Britannis, Littera
sunt aliis. -- Non altera eredam Arva Beatorum potius dignata fu^sse Nomine,
jam longo quanquam decus iflud ab avo Intervertit Iber, and seris addidit
undis. Hugo Grotius Inaugur. JACOB. R.
, whose Command is only limited with the shoares of the Continent, being, (to
speak of Her, after so many foreign ancient Testimonies, in the words of one
of Her own Sam. Daniel.
Poets,) A WORLD within Her self with wonders blessed. I will refer therefore a
more exact discourse heerof to another time, and a more fitting place; and the
Reader likewise, if he think not well of this Interpretation of Clement's
words, to Plutarch L. De facie in Orb Lunae.
, where he discourses upon Homer's (...). and d.
(...); and to Kepler, that Atlas of the Astronomicall Heavens, in his learned
Notes upon him.

XXII.
A Bird called a Phoenix.] St Paul being to prove and make good the
Resurrection to the Corinthians, instanceth in grain 1 Cor. 15.36.
, which being sown, first dies, and afterward is quickened. But his Scholar
Clement, further to clear and illustrate the same doctrine unto them, makes
use here of the then late renewed, and much admired Story of the Phoenix, with
the discourse thereupon, certainly believed by the many. The flight thereof
into Egypt is reported by Tacitus Annali VI. A. a conditu LI. DCCXXCVII. Paullo
Fab. L. Vitellio. Coss. A. Christi. 34.
, and others, (yet with some difference,) to happen under Tiberius; about the
time I presume, or not long before, Clement was born; And Solinus Polyhist.
cap. 46.
tells us, that, being taken some thirteen years after, it was by the command of
Claudius shown in public at Rome, and the whole matter registered forsooth
among the public Acts of the City. Could I see those Acta he speaks of; or
could he tell us that himself saw it, or Pliny rather, (who well might, had it
been at Rome; and whom he does for the most part but transcribe,) I would say
something: Till then only this; The p^eple of Rome, or else he himself, had a
more coming belief, and easlier to be worked upon, then I have; except I were
better satisfied in respect of some doubts; one of which arises from a passage
in Pliny himself, where he tells us, that Hist. l. 8. c. 21. Adeo naturae nihil
placuit esse sine pari. v. Tho. Brouni r. Cl. Pseudodox. Epidem. lib. 3. ca. 12.
Nature would have nothing to have a being without a Fere. However I could
easily give way to be persuaded, that Clement had a conceit of the truth of
this pretended wonder. The simplicity indeed of the primitive Christians
suffered their belief with ease to be abused, and themselves, as may be shown by
almost infinite instances, to be deluded with any thing that savored of
Miracles, the memory of those yet remaining fresh, which were really performed,
and truly such. And they thought well of this their credulity, as ushering in
an acknowledgement of a divine and unlimited power in the handy-works of God.
If he believed it not, then reckon it, if you will, among those piae frauds
they talk of; and conceive that he knew well enough, how much new fangles, and
teratologies, could work upon the Corinthians, as well as upon their fellow
Grecians Praebuit materiem doctissimis Graecorum multa super eo miraculo
disserendi. Tac. ib.
, for Christianity had not as yet wholly cast out their old leaven.

And yet the Fathers in the following Ages, longo agmine, have either borrowed
it out of Clement himself, or else received it from hand to hand, without the
least questioning of it. This we may see by Tertullian, Origin. Lactantius.
Eusebius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Ambros, Nazianzen, Jerome, Epiphanius, Synesius,
Vide Joan. Gazaei (...), a pud Jan. Rurgers. Var. l. 2. c. 7. p. 114. (...).
etc.
and others; who all have followed him, or certainly the more ancient of them.
So that Anno^. in Tertull. lib. de Resurrect. c. 13.
Pamelius, and Prooem. in Diatax.
Bovius, and Prooem. in Diatax.
Turrian the Jesuit are very much mistaken in affirming so peremptorily that
Cateches. 18. Vide D^. Armachan. Dissert. de Clem. and Ignat. scriptis, cap.
10. page 66.
Cyril and Tertullian took this instance from the Apostolical Constitutions; as
will appear by comparing them two with Clement; out of whom Tertullian has
al^o some of his other arguments and evidences for the Resurrection. Nay, the
very Author himself of those Diatax^s (for Clement's they are not,) is
beholding to him for it: Only he has enlarged the narration, and by some
circumstances, which he has added, made it come nearer a fable then it was
before, and so the less to be believed. Now the Fathers indeed, having to deal
with infidels and heathen-men, who granted the story of the Phoenix, induced
from thence a persuasion of the Resurrection; that b^ing as it were a principle
and position, received among themselves. For to say truth, the Resurrection was
a strange and uncouth discourse among them, and no way reconcilable with their
reason, and intellectuals. And therefore S. Paul, having preached, and, no
doubt, sufficiently declared the doctrine thereof at Athens, yet those
Philosophical peeple, the Act. 17.18.
Epicureans and Stoics, and the rest of that learned rabble there took
Resurrection.
(...) to be such a piece of curvum Graecum, that they were presently almost
about to enshrine it, and rear an Altar unto it, with an Inscription, among
those foreign Numina, which they knew not what to make of them. Neither ought
it to be any wonder, if they had very little sentiment of the Resurrection, or
indeed none at all, unto whom the Great God of Heaven and Earth, he Romans 8.11.
who raised up Jesus from the dead, the 1 Cor. 15.20.
first fruits of them that sleep, was no better then (...), The unknown God, as
appears by that Epigraphe Act. 17.23. Adisis Scriptores in hunc locum. I sid.
insuper. Pelus. epist. 69. lib. 4. and vitam S. Martialis Lemovicens.
, which Paul took notice of in the same City: and who by the Romans themselves,
having the eyes of their mind veyled with the same thick mist of ignorance and
unbelief, was termed but Pompeius apud Lucanum: Cappodoces mea signa timent,
and dedita sacris Incerti Judaea Dei, mollisque Sophone. lib. 2.
Incertus Deus, and Trebell. Pollio in M. Val. Claud. Imp. ubi de MOSE ei sermo.
Numen incertum.

And yet for all this I may very well observe in this place, that there were
even among the Heathen themselves, some of better Souls, who, by the mere light
of Nature, (for I do not believe that God did reveal unto them the riches of
his bounty herein any otherwise then in an ordinary way,) had a shrewd guess,
or rather some good ken, though at a distance, of the Resurrection. Not to urge
that verse of Phocylides, And strait we hope to come out of the earth unto the
li^ht. But he is thought a Christian by some.
(...). Nor those of Virgil; (for you will say they were both Poets:) Aeneid. lib.
6.
O Pater, anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum est
Sublimes animas? iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora? Quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?
And a little after: Rursus and incipiant in corpora velle reverti: I will name
two others of better credit: First Democritus, a Grecian, who though he were
born Vervecum in patria, crassoque sub a^re Juvenal. sat. 10.
; -- yet through the glimmering, and foggy light thereof, he could make a shift
both to discern, and promise to himself and others also, a time reviviscendi,
when as this life should be iterated, or renewed, by death. Thus much Nature.
Hist. l. 7. c. 55. iterari vitam morte, etc.
Pliny of him: who indeed seems to have had a more redundant and petulant
spleen then Democritus himself, in that he laughs at him for maintaining of
that, which he cannot confute, I am sure does not, any otherwise then those
scoffing Philosophers before mentioned in the Acts, Some mocked, etc. a thing
unbeseeming the gravity of a Roman, and the wisdom and authority of so great a
man. The other is a Roman, the very Sireno-phenix of better Philosophy, Marcus
the Emperor, whose words are these: M. Antonin. (...). lib. XII. 6.
(...), etc. How comes it to pass, says he, that the Gods having ordered all
things in a fair and loving respect to mankind, they have overseen this one
thing; that, whereas many very good men, and such as have given evidence of
their service of God, and have become very familiar with him by their religious
exercises and performances, after they are once dead, return no more, but are
extinguished for ever? Now, (if indeed it be so,) know for a certain, that they
would have ordered it otherwise, if it had been fitting to have been otherwise,
etc. This he speaks in a kind of condescension to the common received error
among the Heathen in opposition to the Resurrection: But by this clause, or
Parenthesis, (...), that is, if indeed it be so, that they restore not good men
to life again; and by another that follows in the same discourse, (...), that
is, if it be not so indeed, that good men return again to life; it seems to me
most apparent, that this most divine man for his own part had a deep conceit,
and a strong apprehension of the Resurrection of the body after death. Such
excellent illuminations had these gallant spirited men beyond what the Stoa, or
Peripatus, ever dreamt of.

As for this passage of the Phoenix, the Emblem of the Resurrection, here in
Clement, we find no bodies exception against it, either before or after Photius
the Patriarch of CP. he indeed expresses his dislike, [(...), Biblioth. Number.
126.
] that the Author should use this instance as an example of absolute truth. But
if he had, as he was a true learned Critique, so also considered when it is
that the Ancient writers of the Church do speak (...), that is doctrinally and
seriously, and when (...), (as their own expression is,) that is, as
subservient to their purpose, and by way of Rhetorical ornament, perhaps he
would have spared his censure. Yet he does not therefore abdicate this Ep. from
Clement, as some do, who think he would never in so serious a discourse make
use of the flying talk of his own Age, and a questionable report that had no
eyewitness for the Author of it, a mere Pageant brought but the other day upon
the stage; not remembering perhaps that the tale of the Phoenix is of far longer
standing, mentioned by In Euterpe.
Herodotus, and others, many ages before either Paullus Fabius and L. Vitellius
were Consuls, or Clement himself born; So that I needed not so much as to have
named Ovid Metamorph. 15. Geo. Sandys Interpret.
, had not his description so nearly agreed with Clement's, or been indeed the
very same. I will add it here therefore to close up this discourse, and the
rather, because the whole business being accounted Poetry, which is but plain
fiction, it will show a great deal more hansom in verse; especially being
translated almost as well to the envy, as admiration of the Reader. This is it:
One only foul there is in all the Earth,
Called by the Assyrians Phoenix, who in the wain
Of age repaires, and sowes her self again.
Nor feeds on grain nor herbs, but on the gum
Of Frankincense, and juycy Amomum.
Now, when her life five ages has fulfilled,
A nest her horned beak and talons build
Upon the crownet of a trembling Palm:
This strewn with Cassia, Spiknard, precious Balm,
Bruiz'd Cinnamon, and Myrrh; thereon she bends
Her body, and her age in odors ends.
This breedings Corpse a little Phoenix bears,
Which is it self to live as many years.
Grown strong, that load now able to transfer,
Her Cradle, and her Parents Sepulcher
Devoutly carries to Hyperion's town:
And on his flamy Altar lays it down.


XXIII.
For nothing is impossible for God to do, except it be to lie.] Clement does
here, no doubt, allude to two several places of Scripture, Tit. 1.2. where it
is said, God cannot lie: and Ebr. 6.18. where we likewise read, that it was
impossible for God to lie, [(...),] which the learned De Jure Bell. and Pacis,
lib. 2. cap. 13. 3.
Grotius rather renders fallere, then mentiri; as Beza, We, and generally all
Interpreters do. But some of the Fathers, Tho. Aquin. part. 1. qu. 25. art. 3.
and 4.
and the Schoolmen specially, affecting such manner of expressions as these,
whereby the Power of God may in some sort seem to be restrained to bounds and
limits in respect of certain particular actions, not only forgot the reverent
awe and esteem they ought to have had concerning the extent, and Almightiness
thereof; (for how little a portion Job 26.14.
, says Job, have we heard of it? the thunder of his power who can understand?)
But even the Hethen man's rule; Cicero.
Homini de potestate Deorum pauca, and timide, sunt dicenda. And but good
reason; whenas to Kings, (but mortal Gods,) and concerning their power, (which
is indeed, in respect had to the Divine, not so much as a poor punctum to the
immense Universe,) one of the wisest of nature's Solon, Plutarcho. X^nophanes,
Hesychio Illustrio. Aristot. aliis.
Sons advised to speak, (...), or short, or sweet. For how much more is the
Lawyers language to be approved of, then Jerome's, that great Divine, yet both
expressing the same thing? His words are, in one of his hot fits of his
immoderate dotage upon Virginity: Epist. 22. ad Eustoch. de custod. virgin.
Audenter loquar: Cum omnia possit Deus, suscitare virginem non potest post
ruinam. The others far more moderate, and mannerly, though saying as much: C.
de rap. virg. l. Unic.
Virginitas corrupta restitui non potest. I will not so much as name the Hethen
Poets, who enslaved their Gods to the observance of conditions from a fatal
necessity of the Destinies, which to alter they would have not more unlawful
for them, then impossible. And the Philo^ophers (the most I mean) were little
better, if not worse: So that Jupiter in In Timone. (...). etc.
Lucian, hearing the blasphemies, and the unreverent Speeches of Timon
concerning the divine Providence, and Power of God, made no question of ground
enough from thence to conclude him a Philosopher; though truly he was no such
man. Yet some more general expressions of theirs that way may be excused, if
withal we understand God's Will by his Power: as that of Plutarch; Alluding I
think to A^atho's verses: (...).
(...). It is impossible for God to render that undone, which has been done.
Because neither does he will it should be so. For Psalm. 135.6. Psalm. 115.3.
he has done whatsoever he will both in heaven and earth. And indeed Plato
tells us, that [(...).] God cannot will to alter himself. By which perhaps Attic
Moses, (for so Antiquity called him) meant nothing else but [(...), Ebr. 6.17.
in Paul's Language,] the immutability of the Counsel of God. For having in
his Commonwealth De Rep. l. III.
given leave not only to Physicians, but unto Magistrates also upon occasion,
to tell a lie; yet will he by no means permit it unto God, as being a note or
sign of infirmity and weakness; he by so much the more thereby asserting and
vindicating the divine and unlimited power of God. And here, before we have
done, let us observe, that Clement, making it a thing not possible in God to
lie, does in the foregoing words assign the reason thereof to be his own Will:
God, says he, that has commanded others not to lie, much less will he himself
lie: following therein St Paul, who lays as one of the grounds of the same
impossibility, the immutability of Gods Counsel, or Will; as appears by the
forenamed places. And so the Stoics also (the very best of Philosophers) do set
the Will of God as it were a limit or bound to his power, and always join them
together. Hence are those expressions out of their School: Sen. de Ira, lib. 2.
c. 27.
Dii immortales, nec volunt abesse, nec possunt. And; Erras, si quis putat eos
nocere velle; non possunt, nec accipere injuriam queunt, nec facere. And Id.
ep. 92.
again: Sua illis in legem aeterna voluntas est. statuerunt, quae non mutarent.
Id. de Benef. l. 6. ca. 23.
Itaque non possunt videri facturi aliquid, quasi ut nolint; quia quicquid
detinere non possunt, perseverare voluerunt: nec unquam primi consilii deos
poenitet; and what follows in that divine and high discourse. Read Pliny, l.
II. cap. 7. ad finem.

XXIV.
Who shall say unto him, What have thou don? etc. A very learned Gentleman, Dr
HA.
and my good friend, among some other doubts concerning the antiquity, and
Author of this Epistle, makes his quoting this place out of the Wisd. 12.12.
and 11.21.
Wisdom of Solomon to be one: (for thither is the Reader referred in the
Margin of Mr Yong's Graeco-latin. edition, p. 37.) and thus he reasons, if we
mistake him not:

Philo the Jew, by the learned in Antiquities in former ages, is generally
thought to have written that book; now he being cotemporary with Clement, or
not much antienter, it is not very probable that Clement should make use of his
authority; as not needing to prove so undeniable a Truth, to descend to so
inferior and late a testimony as his; that Book being not urged by the ancient
Christians ad auctoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam, as Jerome
tells us: For indeed Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis,
Caussa eget. --


Therefore this Epistle may seem not to be of such antiquity, as to have
Clement for the Author thereof.

For answer whereunto, not to be troublesome in telling you, that the Jews had
another Book under this Title, Secretiori lingua compositum, etc. (for it is
nothing to our purpose; and we should therein but rely upon the credit of Jo.
Picus in Comment. super Genesin.
one, who does not say himself ever saw it;) We may in the first place question
it very well, whether Philo were the Author of this we have; for there is
neither vola, nor vestigium in his own works to prove it to be so, or indeed in
any ones else antienter then Jerome, that I can now tell of. And we know full
well how his (...) failed him in this point, to instance in no more then So
that he puts Seneca among his Eccles. Scriptores.
Seneca's Epistles to Paul, and his back again to Seneca, so much approved of
by him to be genuine. Now whereas he cites others authority for it, he should
have named them: but therein too he varies from himself; for one while he tells
us the Jews Prolog. in li. Sap.
affirm it; another while that some of the ancient Writers. And for that piece
of Criticism of his [Graecam eloquentiam redolet, Praefat. in Libros Salomonis.
] it does not so absolutely (for I take not upon me now to examine it; or how
near the style is to Philo's,) conclude that this Book was never extant in the
Ebrew, though lost it seems before Jerome's time; which might perhaps have been
occasioned by this Greec version thereof by some of the Hellenists, or Jews of
Alexandria; it may be Philo himself. For Philo's Legation to Rome was under
Caius Caligula the Emperor, and unto him, in behalf of his Countrymen; before
which many years he might have published that Book in Gr. (if ever he did it)
yea by far the greater part of an Age before this Epistle was written. But
neither do learned men of later times incline to believe that it is of Philo's
writing. To name only the most learned Hugo Grot. de Satisfact. Christ. c. 1.
p. 20.
Grotius for all. He indeed acknowledges him, whoever it was that wrote it,
Praestantissimum Scriptorem; and although not in the Ebrew Canon, Venerandam
tamen habet antiquitatem, and apud Christianos SEMPER in pretio est habitus. To
say freely what I think: Why may not Clement in this place allude to the 9.
ver. of Esaias XLV? as it is probable enough the Author of the Wisdom of Solomon
might. For before these words we see no It is written.
(...), nor The holy Word says.
(...), or yet He says somewhere.
(...), or such like; usual terms most an end with Clement, when he cites, and
does not only allude to, certain Scripture. Or why might he not have in his
mind his Masters words, Romans IX. 19.20? the very (...).
verbs are as well there used by St Paul, as the Author of that book, and
Clement in his expression has no more out of either of them. Now we have told
you before his manner of quoting Scripture. But by the same reason that Clement
is said to cite this out of the Wisdom of Solomon, I may say also that St Paul
does as well borrow that instance of the Potter and clay from the same book;
because there we read: Wisd. 15.7.
The potter of the same clay makes both vessels that serve for clean uses, and
likewise such as serve to the contrary. And so might Clement be justified (in
case he had this place thence) by an example beyond all exception: yet we
conceive Paul rather had his eye upon the fore-quoted place of Esaias, or that of
Jeremy XVIII. 6. Now what if Clement did cloth his sense and meaning in that
Authors words? yet he cites them not for Scripture, no more then S. Paul does
an Iambick verse 1 Cor. 15.33. (...). Evil communications, etc.
out of one of Menander's Comedies, without naming the Author of it. And I hope
also that Clement's elsewhere referring us to Hethen Histories Page 69. (...),
etc.
, and mentioning likewise the Story of Judith for an example, may not prove
more offensive then the same Paul's alleging the testimonies of Act. 17.28.
Aratus the Astronomical, or Tit. 1.12.
Epimenides the Epic, Poets. Though there are I know a sort of men even at this
day in the world that start at all that is not Canon, and call for the firing
of all books, but Propheta mandabat nequis lib um haberet praeter sacra Biblia,
reliqui flamma absumpti. Sleidan. Com. lib. 10.
Bibles, and Almanacs. For all the mad men met not at Munster.

XXV.
Are not justified by our selves, or by our own wisdom, etc.] Those Papists
sure, who shall light upon this place, will not (except they run to their
usual (...), or starting-hole, The Heretics have corrupted it;) any longer cry
Antiquity for their Doctrine of Merits, and Justification by wo^kes: as they do
in all other points controverted between us, and them. Clement, the antientest
Writer of the Church, next the Apostles, you see knew no such Doctrine: And Id
sanc notandum, Crit. sacri lib. 1. cap. 8. p. 143. ult. edit.
as Rivet says very well.

XXVI.
Let not the strong despise the weak; let the weak reverence them that are
strong.] What Clement here desires in the Primitive Christians of Corinth is
said to be the rare felicity (but that we cannot believe that courtly
Historian's flatteries) of Tiberius age somewhile before: Vell. Pater. cul.
Hist. l. 2.
Antecedit, non contemnit, humiliorem potens: suspicit potentem hum^lis, non
timet. Let these words bear a Christian sense, and Clement cannot be better
gloss'd upon; though I must confess the Gloss is somewhat antienter then the
Text it self.

But at set times and hours.] A late The use of daily public prayers. printed
1641. p. 5.
Writer of our own, XXVII.
to maintain set times for Public Prayers, which they of the Church of Rome
call Canonical Hours, allegeth this place of Clement: It seems, says he, by
Clemens, that no small part of that (...), or good order required by St Paul
(whose mind he might best know, as one of his Disciples,) 1 Cor. 14.40. does
consist in the due observing of those times and hours limited and prescribed by
authority for our prayers and devotions. But I desire his own words may be
looked upon, page 52. 53. Well: we have looked upon them, and at first sight
perceive that the Author of that Treatise would have us to find, what indeed is
not to be found there. (...). So that certainly himself either read this whole
passage with a great deal of oscitancy and heedlesness; and so understood not
Clement's drift therein; or else, which is far a worse shame, he has dealt
mala fide, and stands guilty by the Cornelian Law as a falsary, in urging a
testimony (which is as bad as forging one,) that witnesses no such thing, as
he takes upon him to prove; namely, that the ancient Christians had any set
hours or times appointed for Public Prayers. In a word, this is the manner of
Clement's reasoning: As under the Law God ordered that Oblations, and other
duties of his Worship should be performed at determined seasons, set times, and
hours, as also in the due place appointed, and by such as were ordained
thereunto, according as God had commanded; So likewise should every one of them
who were now under the Gospel, give thanks unto God with a good conscience, and
(...), etc.
not exceeding the prescribed rule of their ministry do those things [(...)]
that the Lord ordered them to do; and that with the same cheerfulness, and
diligence, as the Jews performed their Observances, and servic^s, under the
Law. For it is plain to any attentive Reader that by [(...)] he means only
the observation of times and seasons according to Jewish Ordinances: The John
4.23.
true worshippers of God in Spirit and Truth, being now no more confined Gal.
4.10, 9.
to observe days, and months, and times, and years, (being part of those Gal.
4.10, 9.
weak and beggarly rudiments of the Law,) then we are, God be thanked, in
respect of place, bound to go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; John 4.20.
sometime notwithstanding the only seat of his public Worship.

XXVIII.
But the Layman is bound to the observation of Lay-ordinances.] CLEMENT, in
the words next going before, does set down the degrees of the Jewish Hierarchy,
consisting of the High Priest, the Priests, and the Levits; calling all the
rest Laics, or Laymen, as we now term them: that is, more obscure, and less
noble. That here he only means and mentions the Orders of the Jewish Church,
is most plain and evident: for those of the Christian he names not till anon in
what follows, where you shall hear of them. By how much the more I wonder, that
a man of that great learning and gravity, should with such assurance and
confidence urge this place to confute the Episcopacy by Divine Right, part. 2.
11. p. 75. 76.
weak suggestions, ignorance, and Cavils of Vedelius, and others, (as he
pleases to speak) denying, that in Ignatius's time (somewhat after Clement) any
distinction in the Church, as of the Clergy and Laity, to be on foot: as he
does likewise understand the sentence, save one, next before this, [(...), etc.
So the Priests have their own place, or office, assigned them:] of Christian
Priests, or Presbyters. For Priest and Presbyter are the same with him. And to
back this Authority alleged out of Clement, (none at all in effect to his
purpose,) he brings as bad a one, or worse, out of Ignatius his Epistle to the
Church of Smyrna: Let the Laymen be subject to the Deacons; and so forth: (and
so forsooth they shall have a fine time of it.) It Is true indeed, that, in
those six more genuine Epistles of his, there is Ad Smyrn. and Magnesianos.
twice mention of Laymen. [(...).] But there are infinite interpolations, and
additions, which have by bad hands been intermixed there, and interlaced in the
current of time; and this mentioning of Laics is one of those patches which
have been sowed to the old garment, as appears by comparing the later Greec
copies with the ancient Latin Translation out of the yet not corrupted Copies
in Greec, or at least not with that boldness and liberty, as they have been
since, to the unspeakable wrong, as well of antiquity, as posterity.

And this being observed, will, with the Readers good leave and patience, give
me occasion to do Ignatius a piece of right, for which indeed he is especially
beholding to that true Bishop Dr Usher, whose learning it were an offense to
praise or admire, his piety being such, and the holiness of his conversation.
There is a passage in one of his Epistles, at which Guil. Perkins in Probl. Jo.
Milton, etc.
very learned men have taken great offense, and very deservedly. It is that to
the Church of Smyrna, where we find in the Greec edition: (...). Prove. 24.21.
My son, says he, honor God and the King: But, I say; Honor God indeed as
the Author and Lord of all: and the Bishop, as the High Priest: and after him
we ought to honor the King. This they say, and truly, does in plain terms
contradict the Spirit of God in Solomon: From which presumptuous gainsaying to
excuse Ignatius, we may take notice that this is but an adulterate piece, and
foisted in of late, which for very shame the greatest friends of Episcopacie
forbear to urge in their behalf, and it is utterly wanting in that ancient
Latin Interpreter of these Epistles, never published, till within these two
years by that most reverent and godly Primate.

But to return to these Laics. Of the two witnesses we see urged, to prove a
distinction between them and the Clergy, in the first age of the Church; one of
them says nothing to it; the other is spurious, and supposititious. That the
word (Laic) might indeed be in some use in the most primitive times, we may
grant, because we find it here; Yet then was it but as one of those words,
which the Grammarians call Quae semel tantum ab aliquo auctore usurpatae sunt,
v. Eustath. ad (...).
(...). and to this day it has not gotten any room in our common Lexicons.
Neither hear we any more of it after this, (except in Acula the Jews Gr. who
translates the 1 Samuel 21.6.
Shewbread (...), as Theodoret witnesses,) till Tertullian's time, and the
Compiler of those Canons and Constitutions, which they call Apostolical: both
who undoubtedly had it from hence, (but applied it otherwise,) as they had the
business of the Phoenix likewise, before mentioned, and other things also. So
in like manner was Dionys. Halicarn. Plin. hist. li. 2. c. 17.
(...) a known word to the world in the Apostles time; yet not so applied by
the Primitive, that we can any where read of, as it was by the Church in after
Ages, when she called, not only her self, but the Epistles also of James,
Peter, John, and Jude, Catholic. But the word it self being no more rife at
that time then it was, the thing then assuredly could not be in any very common
use, or practice. Now in Clement himself, where it is only to be found in that
age, (...) signifies no more Christian Lay People, then in Quintilian, (who
lived when Clement) Instit. li. 2. cap. 13.
praecepta (...) signifies the Catholic commands of the Church. For indeed how
could it? that difference in persons (as we may well conjecture, and not be
laughed at for our weakness,) being not yet observed: And we know that names
are not altogether of as ancient birth as things themselves are. I said but
conjecture: But Salmasius Olim omnes Presbyteri erant Laici. De Pres. and Ep.
ca. 5. p. 396. 398. etc.
, (...), will tell you aloud and peremptorily, that there was no distinction at
all; that the Presbyters, or Clergy, as we call them, and Laymen, were all one.
For the Christian Presbyter Vid. Clariss. Seldom. Com. in Eutych. n. 9.
being derived from the Jewish, they were no more separated from the peeple by
any priestly holiness, then the Presbyters among the Jews were; who indeed had
nothing of the Priest about them, save by accident, which might distinguish
them from the Laity. * * * * * * * * * * *

It appears then, by what has been said, that, although after ages did admit
of this distinction of Laity and Clergy in the Church, yet no such difference
is to be proved out of Clement, or Ignatius, as has been pretended and urged,
but indeed too peremptorily, not to say any more.

XXIX.
After an exact view taken thereof.] Gr. (...). The Verb signifies to examine
what blemishes there were, or what was perished, in the sacrifice, as Mr Young
has taught us out of Philo, the other Clement, and Chrysostom. In Polycarpus,
who had it from this Clement, it was corrupted, till my L. of Armagh restored
it. This I find in Lucian's language, (...). First to search and examine the
sacrifice whether it were perfect and entire, or no. It is ill rendered
therefore in the Lexicon's, reprehensoris animo confiderare, vel observare. And
let me by the way mend a place in the learned Latin-Greec Glossary printed by
Harry Stephans. Aruspex, (...). read (...). The ancient b was very like m,
only it wanted the tail, fashioned thus m, and that in some printed books, as
in Callimachus by Frobenius for example, and diverse others. So the mistake was
easy: Or if not so, Altar.
(...) seemed to the Calligraphi, or Transcribers, to have nearest relation in
their judgment to the Priest, and so took it for the former part of the
composition of this word, rather then (...). The emendation is justified by
Donat. In Ter. Phorm. Act. 4. sc. Geta.
the Grammarian: Haruspex ab haruga nominatur: nam haruga dicitur hostia, ab
hara in qua concluditur and servatur. And Velius Longus almost in the same
manner, but that I think the one may be mended by the other. Arispex ab ariuga,
quae esset hostia. Which is confirmed by Dionys. of Halicarnassus Antiq. Romans
lib. 2.
(...). because he did (...), take a view of the sacrifice, that it were not
defective. Gloss. Haruspex, (...). This was called by the Romans, Plin. l. 8.
c. 45.
Victimarum probatio. Hence we read Cic. 2. in Rull.
hostiae probatae, and exta probata. Tertull. Apologetico: Tibul. lib. 3.
Vt mirer cum hostiae probentur penes vos a vitiosissimis sacerdotibus.

To be Bishops and Deacons.] XXX.
As to express the gravity of those Governors, which they had constituted over
the Christian Churches, the Apostles called them (...), Elders, borrowing the
name from the 70. in the Old Testament. So likewise to signify their office,
Clement here intimates in the following words, that they styled them, (...),
Bishops, taking also the denomination from the same LXX. Interpreters, Esai.
60.17. where we read out of the Ebrew, I will also make thy Officers
Praefectos. Tremel.
peace, and thine exactors righteousness. But the Vulgar: Ponam visitationem
tuam pacem, etc. Now visitatio is (...). Clement in this very Ep. (...). In the
visitation of the Kingdom of Christ. That in Clement, Bishop and Presbyter
signify the same Order, is most manifest to any attentive Reader: and it may
be gathered from this very place: to spare others more evident for it till
anon. For if by Bishops here Clement did not mean Presbyters, it may be
inferred very well, that Presbyters were not instituted by the Apostles in
their preaching up and down, and constituting Churches and officers, (...), in
several Cities and Countries, as he tells us: For why else are they omitted by
him, whose business it is here to set them down, and that as exactly, as he had
done a little before the Jewish Hierarchy? But it is more manifest by what
follows. For Clement reasons thus: To turn out them, who have unblamably and
in holiness performed the office of their Episcopacy [(...)] is no small sin;
But ye, Corinthians, have turned out your Presbyters, (so he calls them they had
turned out,) Ergo. For to say that Episc. by divine Right. part. 2. 10. p. 60.
belike they ejected their Bishop, and Presbyters too, were to say that which
were not, and Clement never intended.

XXXI.
That strife and contention would arise about the name of Episcopacy.] I think
the time is now, says Collect. of Speeches. p. 76.
Sr Edward Deering, urging this place. And yet he will not allow Bp Hall,
though Clement tells us that Bishops were constituted by the Apostles, both in
the foregoing, and following words, to prove from thence his Episcopacy by
Divine Right. Now whether by the name of Episcopacy in this place we mean the
bare Title only, or else the power residing in the person and office of a
Bishop; as we understand (...), and Romanum nomen; the learned Knight I think
did not amiss in taking these words by way of a prophecy: For Episcopacy, as
we take it at this day, some will tell you has had shrewd girding at it many
ages Perantiqua, and celeberrima quaestio de Ordine Hieratico. Seldom.
ago, (and that not by Aerius only,) before either Martin-mar-Prelate was
born, or this present Parliament was summoned. In Epist. ubi se cum Hieron.
confert.
Austin himself tells us that it was but vocabulum honoris, quod Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit. And in ancient times, which is most to be wondered at, it was not the
silly state, and train, such as it was, of some Bishops, which was so much
excepted against, and exposed to censure, as their very want and poverty.
Chrysostom got envy by it, when, but to ease his aged and impotent limbs, he
rode up and down the streets upon a poor Ass, as often as his occasions called
him abroad in that great Constantinople.
City: Himself will tell you what the peeple said of him; Whoh! say they, he
has servants to attend him Homil. 1. in Titum.
, and rides about upon an Ass: why is he placed above us? Now that you may
understand his retinue was not great, no more then for his necessary uses,
himself again in Homil. 9. ad Philip.
another place, makes going into public assemblies with a multitude of
followers, and to ride on Hors-back, two pieces of State by no means to be
tolerated in a Bishop. And such was the poverty of the British Bishops in the
fourth Age, that being called by Constantius to the Council of Rimini, hodie,
ut Leander, and alii.
Ariminum, they had not wherewithal to carry themselves over sea, much less to
keep them; but were fain to be maintained out of the Emperors Exchequer; Which
though Sulpitius Severus Hist. sacrae, lib. 2.
highly commend in them, yet he that gave him the relation, did it quasi
obtrectans, to their disgrace, and upbraiding them with their need and
exigency. How they were provided for at the Council upon the Emperors cost, I
cannot tell: But it seems at home their allowance was not much better then
those Irish Bishops, which was no more then three milch Cowes, and in case any
of them became dry, the Parishioners supplied them again; as their own relation
was to Adam of Breme in Germany; whom they took in their way from Italy
homeward. I may fit both with that excellent character of those poor
countrey-bishops of Italy in Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. 27.
, an Hethen Historian: Quos tenuitas edendi potandique parcissime, vilitas
etiam indumentorum, and superc: lia humum spectantia, perpetuo Numini verisque
ejus cultoribus ut puros commendabant and verecundos. Not but that then there
were swaggering Bishops, and far unlike these; for in the same place he tells
us, that the competition and contention about the Papacy between Damasus and
Vrsicinus was so violent, that the carcases of 137. men slain in the quarrel
were drawn out of one Basilica Sicinini.
Church, and Viventius the Lieutenant to the Emperor was forced to make his
retreit into the suburbs, till the rage of the peeple, and their strife was
ended. And the impartial Historian makes the reason and grounds of these
contentions to be their immoderate wealth, ease, and honor, after they were
thus settled; being then enricht with the gifts and presents of great Ladies,
they rode in Coaches through the streets, they were choicely suited in their
apparel, their diet dainty, in so much that their feasts outwent the ordinary
provision at Kings Tables. And that Marcellinus does them no wrong heerin, the
studious Reader may see by the Constitution L. 20. C. Theod. de Episc. Eccl.
and Clericis.
of Valent. Valens, and Gratian, directed to the same Damasus, forbidding all
Ecclesiastical persons, or such as belonged to them, to visit widows houses,
etc. to receive any thing from such kind of weemen either by donation, or
Legacy. If they did, that it should be forfeited to the Exchequer, etc. And
Damasus was fain, though full sore against his will, to give order for
publishing of it in all the Churches of Rome. But (...). enough of this.

Now the contention about the name, or power, of Episcopacy, was never so
great, but the acceptions of the word before the Apostles time were as various.
In (...).
Eustathius tells us that it was sometimes taken for (...), (...).
a spy, or scout. Elsewhere in Homer I find it for a protector, or defender;
and in this sense Hector is called by his wife (...).
Episcopus Trojae; The defender of the Trojans, their wives, and children. It
was an office, or Magistracy rather, among the Athenians, of which Suidas, and
(...).
Aristophanes Scholiast, besides De Rep. Athen. ca. 35. v. Guide. Pancirol. de
Magistr. Municipal. c. 13.
Postel, or rather Possardus; but especially see Meursius in his Attic
Antiquities. Cicero tells us that Pompey would have him to be, Ad Attic. l. 7.
Epist. 10.
quem tota Campana, and maritima ora habeat (...), ad quem delectus, and summa
negotii referatur; by which words you see what power he had. And in the
Pandects Arcadius calls them Episcopos F. de muner. and honor. l. fin. item.
qui praesunt pani, and caeteris venalibus rebus quae Civitatum populis ad
quotidianum victum usui sunt; which is just as much as Clarks of the Market.

XXXII.
The forenamed officers.] Gr. (...). That is, Bishops, and Deacons. The
Apostles appointed Overseers and Ministers unto them that should believe, as
well in the Churches of Rome and Corinth, as elsewhere. Where, by the way, take
notice, that Peter's parts, and authority, in that business, were no more then
any ones else beside: for Clement speaks generally (...), and (...), The
Apostles, and Our Apostles. Secondly, we may gather from Clement, that not
only the Apostles themselves, but (...).
others also taken notice of for their prudence, did constitute Bishops, and
Deacons; but it was with the general consent and agreement of the whole
Church; [(...),] otherwise, they were not thought lawfully called, or chosen to
their office; and so might not challenge any subjection, or respect, from the
peeple.

Now in defining what kind of Bishops these were, which the Apostles
constituted; and in assigning every first Bishop his particular place, or seat,
I conceive Antiquity did not a little mistake; not to say they dealt too
peremptorily and presumptuously therein. That I may not be thought to take too
much upon me in so high, and seemingly arrogant a censure; I shall, as-well for
the Readers satisfaction, as for mine own excuse and defense, allege a very
notable place out of Eusebius, esteemed generally the Father and fountain of
Church History, who directly acknowledges it a thing of great difficulty, to
set down who were left by the Apostles the Bishops of several Churches,
confessing all the light he had heerin to come from the Acts of the Apostles,
and Paul's Epistles. The place is Eccl. Hist. lib. III. cap. IV. whither the
Reader may have his recourse at pleasure. Now for us to make our boasts of
Antiquity, and to ground our discourse, in the point we have in hand, upon the
testimony and traditions of the ancients, when as Eusebius himself, one so
ancient, and that made such diligent search and enquiry into this business,
freely confesses, that all the certainty of his knowledge thereabout was from
mere Scripture, is a thing in my conceit of extreme lightness and vanity. Not
to add here, what I formerly took notice of, how great a flaw and breach there
is in the history of the first times of the Church next the Acts, which indeed
did set the invention of after ages on work to write a Supplement in place of
those true Records, which most likely perished, at what time the flame of
persecution devoured the Christians themselves not more, then their particular
Acta, and Memorials.

For the future gave them moreover in command.] The Gr. XXXIII.
(...). I translated it as you see, having then in my mind what Plato's (...)
signified; and being now in have, I let it pass so. Perhaps upon advice with
some to advertise me better, I shall alter it. Mr Young had turned it; ac
descriptas deinceps ministrorum officiorumque vices reliquerunt, reading by
conjecture (...), for (...) in the Copy. Dr Usher: Eumque ordinem deinceps
praescripserunt. Salmasius: Et interim etiam praeceptum dederunt. Dr Hall: and
gave thereupon a designed order or list of Offices; coming nearest Mr Young. Dr
Turner of Merton College would have it read (...), Vide Dn. Armachan. de
Ignat. script. ca. 18. p. 137.
ut continuatio Episcopatus ab Apostolis stabilita significetur; and this
reading is confirmed for him by a place in Nazianzen: What the Lord has,
ordained by his Apostles, those things remain good and firm.
(...) speaking of the Apostles constituting of Bishops. It is in his Epistle
to Dracontius, who had forsaken his Episcopal function: So that Graham, late
B. of Orkney, was not the first that voluntarily took upon him such a Penance,
as is averred. Mr Bois of Ely had a thought it might be read (...), by which
choice, or Election is understood. We see with what disagreement this short
sentence is interpreted. It remains therefore only that we cry out with the
Poet, -- -- (...)! And yet let me further observe for the more curious Readers
sake, that this very word (...) has occasioned little less trouble in one of
Constantinus Porphyrogenneta the Emperors Constitutions, where it is read
scarce with any good sense: (...), etc. as Leunclavius set it forth, and
translates it, Quum restitutio fit in possessionem, si quidem in caussa
pauperum, etc. But the learned French Lawyer Carolus Labbaeus in a later
edition thereof, which I now use, mends it thus out of his written book: (...).
rendering it Possessione autem in solutum data, or, In possessione facta
solutione.

XXXIV.
-- their Episcopacy. Blessed are those Elders. -- ] The Gr. (...). etc. Which
the Author of Episcopacy by Divine Right translates: -- these offices of
Episcopacy. And withal, blessed are those Presbyters. You see what he drives
at by adding de suo this Nota (...), [And withal,] wanting in the Original.

XXXV.
In the very beginning of his Gospel.] He means Paul's I to the Corinthians.
Paul himself Romans 2.16. according to my Gospel, that is, my (...), or the
doctrine which I preached, as Chrysostom interprets him: Not that Paul is to
be thought ever to have written the history of Christ's (...), or conversation
in the flesh. Ex his, Exercit. sac. lib. 6. ad dict. ad Romans I.
says the accurate Heinsius, similibusque locis profluxisse videtur, ut
antiqui (...) nomine scripta Apostoli citarent; alleging this place of Clement:
And he adds moreover, from the word going before, [(...), in the beginning,] Ex
hoc suspicari forte quis possit, primam ordine, quae prior nunc est ad
Corinthios, tunc habitam. Mr Young likewise brings a place out of Contra
Apollinar.
Gregory Nyssen, where he citing this sentence out of the Epistles of John; 1 John 5.19.
The whole world lies in wickedness; bestows likewise upon them the Title of
(...), The Gospel. Clement refers you to 1 Cor. 1.12. Every one of you says, I
am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas. By occasion of which words I
might here take upon me to make a defense for Jerome, whose words, urging this
place of St Paul, some do force to such an interpretation, as if by it he would
prove, that ever since the time that these words were cast out by the
Corinthians, the equality among Presbyters ceased, and that thereupon one was
placed as a Bishop, or Overseer, above the rest. But this matter is v. Salm.
contra Petar. de Episc. cap. 4.
already ab aliis occupata. And although Jerome had written so; (which he does
not, as will appear to any one that shall diligently examine his words,) yet
this Epistle written by Clement to the Corinthians, near about XL. years after
that of Paul's unto them, evidently shows that the same Idea and form of
government remained still among them. Not to tell you, which I have done
before, that Jerome was very well acquainted with this Epistle, as who took the
pains to translate it into Latin: and so the less likely to think or publish
any such thing, finding so great proof and instance to the contrary, as in the
reading heerof he needs must have done.

For your siding was with Apostles.] Observabis hic, XXXVI.
it is the learned Salmasius his observation, Cepham in Epistola ad Corinthios
de Petro Apostolo Clementem intellexisse, cum quidam interpretum de quodam alio
Cepha acceperint. Sure those Interpreters he means were such, as did not like
to see Peter rankt after Apollos, or Paul himself, so much it stood against his
pretended Primacy. And yet the Ancients talk of another Cephas, that should be
one of the Seventy Disciples, of whom Clem. Alex. in Eccl. hist. lib. 1. ca.
123.
Eusebius. and the counterfeit Dorotheus. But for satisfaction hear Jerome In
Epist. ad Gal. cap. 2.
, who tells us, Alterius nescio cujus Cephae nescire nos nomen, nisi ejus qui
and in Evangelio, and in aliis Pauli Epistolis, and in hac quoque ipsa modo
Cephas, modo Petrus inscribitur. Now that which Clement tells the Corinthians
here, is this; That, whereas in the former schisms and factions they followed
and adhered to such as were either Apostles themselves, or else one that had
extraordinary testimony from them, they now had for the ringleaders of their
sedition a few persons of far inferior quality; and therefore their offense
was the greater, and themselves left the more inexcusable.

Seeing then there are many Gates.] This pericope, or passage, XXXVII.
is transcribed, as you find it here, by Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromat. lib. 4.

XXXVIII.
Say one be faithful, etc.] So likewise is this cited by the same Clement, in
the same book, and also in the VI. but with somewhat more difference in the
reading.

XXXIX.
Who is able to express the bond and tie of Gods love?] This sentence we find
translated in Jerome, who makes use of it in his Comment. on the IV. Chap. to
the Ephesians. Cujus res, says he, and Clemens ad Corinthios testis est, scribens;
Vinculum charitatis Dei quis poterit enarrare?

XL.
I will depart, I Will go my ways, whithersoever, etc.] Epiphanius Lib. 1.
Haeres. 27.
, writing against the Carpocratians heresy, mentions these words of Clement's,
but with some difference: and besides, he applies them to another occasion and
purpose, then to what Clement uses them here. For telling you that Clement
received imposition of hands from Peter, yet refused the Bishopric of Rome,
until such time as Linus and Cletus were dead, he adds this reason; for he
says, says he, in one of his Epistles, (...) etc. I depart, I go my ways;
only let the people of God have rest and quietness. Which words Clement here
prescribes to be used by the Corinthians, in case troubles or contention did
arise in that Church through any of their means: Is any one bravely spirited
among you? etc. let him say, If through my means this sedition, or contention,
or these schisms proceed, I will depart. etc. Chrysostom has a passage, (for
which, if for any, he richly deserved the title of Golden-mouth bestowed on him
by antiquity,) which while he penned; Mr Young conceives he had his eye upon this
of Clement: His words are; (...), Homil. 11. ad Ephesians.
etc. If you conceive or suspect these things of us, we are ready to depart,
and to deliver up our power to whomsoever ye please: only let the Church be at
unity within it self. A rare temper! and not to be found among the men of this
Age. Now because Clement, in what immediately follows, does commend the earnest
endeavors and undertakings of Hethen men for the conservation of the peace and
quiet of those States they lived in, I will parallel this place of Chrysostoms
with one ascribed to the most eloquent of the race of Romulus; as he was
esteemed of all the Christians: Vtilius duxi, Declam. in Sallust. Ciceroni
tributa.
quamvis fortunam unus experiri, quam universo populo Romano civilis essem
dissensionis caussa.

XLI.
Many Kings and Governors. etc.] He means such as Codrus, and Lycurgus, among
the Grecians; Genucius Cippus, and M. Curtius, among the Romans; with others,
in both Histories, endowed with the like brave and gallant spirits for the
Public, not so generally taken notice of. Next after he brings in Judith, who
hazarded her own life to save the City wherein she dwelt; an Apocryphal story
among the Jews. That Clement thought it so, his placing it after mention of
Hethen examples, though he instance in no particular, may serve for an
argument. For there is scarce any Greec or Latin Historian of better note,
that is not to be preferred, in matter of truth, before it, the Macchabees, or
any other historical piece in that (...), or collection of writers. Now if
enough has not been already said, in what goes before, for defense of Clement
in this behalf, Number. XXIV.
let the studious Reader take notice, that not only Peter and Jude cite the
Apocryphal writings of Enoch, and the latter the book also De dimissione
Mosis, or of his Death; (though indeed, as the admired Jos. Sealiger has well
observed, those Fragments we now have of Enoch are more corrupt by later
additions and interpolations of the Jews, then they were formerly in the
Apostles times;) But Paul himself likewise has made use of diverse places in
his Epistles, taken out of other Apocrypha of the Jews, as has been observed
by the Fathers of the Gr. Church. In the I. to the Corinthians out of the
Apocrypha of Elias; in that to the Galatians, out of the Apocrypha of Moses; in
that to the Ephesians, out of the Apocrypha of Jeremy. Not that it follows from
hence, that the Apostle approved of all he found written in these books, any
more then he approved the several love-toyes, and amorous passages, in
Menanders Comedies; an Iambic sentence out of whom notwithstanding he
borrows, as you heard before. See the incomparable Exercit. sacrar. lib. 18.
cap. 2.
Heinsius upon 1 Pet. 3.19.

In time of a raging pestilence, XLII.
upon answer received from the Oracle.] I do not more readily remember any
example of this kind, which I could think CLEMENT might intend to, then that of
Oedipus. I conceived at first our Author might have had this out of some Gr.
Tragedy of him. Examining Sophocles his Oedipus (...), as most likely, I
received not so much satisfaction in my search, as in the excellent Latin
Oedipus, which my learned good friend Mr Farnaby adjudges to L. An. Seneca, the
very Siren of better Philosophy, against the judgment of Heinsius, from whom
yet in other things it is not his custom to dissent. In that Tragedy conceive
the Thebans afflicted, and only not consumed, with a grievous pestilence. The
Oracle consulted, returns Answer: Mitia Cadmeis remeabunt sidera Thebis,
Si profugus Dircen Ismenida liqueris hospes, etc.
meaning Oedipus; who being acquainted therewith, to stop the current of this
destructive evil, whereof his incest had been the cause, he strait sets forward
to a voluntary exile, and is brought in bespeaking his languishing Citizens
with this sad farewell, yet such as did bid good cheer and health to them after
his departure: Act. 5. sc. Been.
Quicunque fessi corpore, and morbo graves,
Semianima trahitis corpora; en, fugio, exeo:
Relevate colla; mitior coeli status
Post terga sequitur. quisquis exilem jacens
Animam retentat, vividos haustus levis
Concipiat. Ite, ferte depositis opem.
Mortifera mecum vitia terris extraho.
This example suits just with Clement's purpose, but that you will say the story
is merely poetical. Let it be so: yet those words of Oedipus -- fugio, exeo:
remember me again of Clement's (...). i. I will depart, I Will go my ways.

XLIII.
Become subject to your Elders.] Besides what has been observed before;
Clement tells the Corinthians, that for one or two factious persons sake, their
Church had raised a sedition against their Presbyters: He tells them in another
place, that it should be the only and earnest resolution of every noble,
merciful, and charitable Christian among them, forgetting and forsaking their
own private aims and interests whatsoever, (...).
to endeavor the Peace and quiet of Christ's flock and peeple, and of the
Presbyters placed over them. And in this place he advises those that had begun
these troubles, and whose the groundwork was of this sedition, (...).
to repent, and by changing the pride of their tongue into the humility of
heart, to become subject and obedient to their Presbyters. And read I say the
whole Epistle over, and tell me then, whether solitary Episcopacy has any
ground therein, or any practice thereof can be proved from thence; or that the
Church, either of Rome, or Corinth, were governed any otherwise, at that time
when it was written, (at least so far as may be made to appear from any plain
passage thereof,) then by Presbyters: which notwithstanding has been pretended
more then once; and among others, as our Brethren of the Church of Scotland can
bear witness, by one, who was sometime (...) among us, with a great deal more
confidence, then success.

Now what remains there, but that the peeple of God, taking serious notice
unto whom they owe obedience and subjection under Christ, in those things that
belong to God, should with all readiness and cheerfulness undergo and perform
the same. And withal, (...). Clem.
having the Charter of their liberties and privileges restored unto them
again, as it were postliminio, and so evidently asserted in respect of their
particular prerogatives in the election (as it is in all reason and equity a
thing indeed most fitting) of those Ministers and Officers, to whom they are to
become subject; it becomes them to be very wary and prudent, and exceeding
circumspect, that they neither admit any, or submit themselves unto such, who
have yet remaining upon their souls that (...), that servil capillitium, as
Socrates expression is in Plato of some Magistrates made choice of at Athens.
That they do not I say place such in eminence above them, and as it were at the
Helm, who, if a right examination were taken of their life and qualities, would
scarce be thought fitting to have a place assigned them at the very sink, or
pump. They should providently bethink themselves what parts, what endowments,
what conversation, what knowledge, what singleness of soul, what command of
affections is required to such an employment, to so weighty an undertaking; it
being indeed, (...), a business, which, if any other under Heaven, challenges
exact managing and steerage.

But if, through want of care and foresight herein, they chance to prove
remiss, or, which is worse, shall be ready to receive (without questioning
them,) any whatever they be, that shall affect dominion over them and their
consciences, they will therein but sin against their own souls, in betraying
and giving up that Christian 1 Cor. 7.23.
liberty of theirs, which cost so dear, to the insolency and merciless tyranny
of no better then mere idiots; who as they are themselves altogether (...), so
would they debar others of those means, which lead to the knowledge of
heavenly mysteries; and not so only, but like the Pharisees in the Gospel,
Matthew. 23.13.
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; neither going in themselves, nor
suffering them that are entering to go in.

XLIIII.
* * * * * * *.] Concerning this lacuna, or hiatus, see Mr Young in the end of
his Notes. I could think a small parcel of that which is swallowed up, and
lost therein by the injury of time, might be recovered out of Basil the Great
De Sp. S. ad Amph loch. cap. 29.
: (...) -- But also the more ancient Clemens says; (to distinguish him from
Clem. of Alexandria:) The words he cites out of him are these: (...). i. God
lives, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and that Holy Spirit. It is not to be
thought that Basil would cite this out of any suspected writing of Clement's;
and we know that none, which now go under his name, were accounted genuine by
the ancients, except only this Epistle we have in our hands. So likewise once
I thought, that Clement's urging the authority of Sibylla for the judgment of
the wicked by fire in the end of the world, might have been a portion of this
breach, or of what we here see lost; for which he is alleged by the Author
Resp. ad Quaest. 74.
(commonly Justin Martyr,) of the Questions ad Orthodoxes, (...), in his Epist.
to the Corinthians. But the learned Dr Usher Dissert. de Clem. and Ignat.
script. cap. 10. p. 65.
would have this passage taken out of Clem. II. Epist. unto them, which
antiquity generally abjudicated from him; and the rather, because those Extant
apud Lactan. l. de Ira Dei, c. 23. vide Casaub. Exerc. contra Baron. de
Sibyllinis.
Sibyllin verses to this purpose are since Clement's time, and written by the
Christians; and so could not be made use of by him; though indeed Hethen men,
Ovid, Seneca, and others before him believed the worlds final conflagration.
Neither is it likely that Justin Martyr, being of that standing, and
extraordinary learning, should suffer his belief to be abused with forgeries.
Such impostures cozened and deluded after times; and in his, only began to
breed. So that I may use the citing of this passage out of Clement, as an
additionall argument to those many others, to prove this writing to be none of
Justins; notwithstanding that Dr Homes Animadver. against M. Tombs
Instant-Bapt. cap. 13. p. 110. 111.
religious and learned Gentleman, troubles himself so much to assert and
vindicate it to be his genuine work; which yet he will never persuade the
learned world of men to believe. Hierom's Latin Translation, could it be but
found, would clear all.

God the Beholder and Descryer of all things.] Gr. (...). XLV.
A word only to be found here, and in Polycarpus his Epistle; who had it
hence. The Holy Spirit is called by Nazianz. (...).

Our High Priest, and Ruler.] XLVI.
The learned and industrious Critique Photius, Patriarch of CP. me thinks is
too Critical in his censure of Clement for these expressions. The third thing
that he takes exceptions against in this Epistle, is, that Clement calling our
Lord Jesus Christ Our High Priest and Ruler, he does not withal bestow loftier
titles upon him, and more beseeming his Majesty, (...). Certainly his
mentioning of Christ in several places is in very honorable terms; such as
these; Christ Jesus our saving health; the High Priest of our Oblations; The
Guardian and Succourer of our weakness; By him we look up to the Highest
Heavens, etc. By him it pleased the Lord to give us a taste of immortal
knowledge, who being the brightness of his (...), which Ebr. 1. is (...). see
ver. 3.4. whence Clement has this, and what follows next.
Majesty, is by so far greater then the Angels, etc. Our Lord Christ Jesus the
Scepter of the Majesty of God, etc. But indeed in the following sentence
Photius bites in his words again; (...). and yet he does not, says he, any way
openly therein defame the name of Christ. Which I pray who could ever imagine
that Clement would do?

Claudius, and Ephebus, and Valerius, Biton, and Fortunatus.] XLVII.
By the hands of these five persons the Church of Rome conveyed this
Pareneticall Epistle, or Hortatory to peace and mutual condescension, to their
Brethren of the Church of Corinth. I find nothing recorded of them by the
Ancients; so that had it not been for this mention of them, they, together with
their memories, might have perished in utter oblivion. It has fared better
with several Saints of the New Testament, for whom ingenious Antiquity has
coined Bishoprics, beside other fortunes. The memory of them however deserves
respect, though but for this only employment in Gods Church. Three of their
names here are merely Roman. Whether one of them, Fortunatus, might be he, whom
1 Cor. 16.17.
Paul mentions, and by whom, with Stephanas, Achaicus, and Timothy, his first
to the Corinthians is said to be sent unto them, I dare not say: much less,
that it was that Fortunatus, whom, in Antiq. l. 18. cap. 9.
Josephus, Agrippa sends to Rome to make complaint to Caligula of Herod the
Tetrarch; The time in neither respect will well bear it. Ephebus, is a Grecian
name; as is also Biton; For we find one Biton, a long while before Clement's
time, who was (...) to Alexander the Great, or the Measurer of his journeys in
all his foreign Expeditions, whom Lib. 6. cap. 17.
Pliny mis-names Beton. I have MS. Gr. in Biblioth. Colleg. Magdal. Oxon.
seen also some pieces of one Biton among the Greec writers of Mechanics, or
about Military Engines, usually joined with Male Athanasius dictus Th. Jamesio
in Ecloga MSS.
Athenaeus, an Author of the same subject, still extant in the armaries of some
Libraries, but as yet unpublish't.

CLEMENT'S II. Ep. is yet remaining in some good part of it; but being rejected
by the ancients, as Eusebius, and Jerome out of him; and accounted
supposititious, as Photius tells us, I have neglected therefore the Translation
of it. Those other writings also, which go under his name at this day, are no
better thought of by such as are most able to judge of things of this kind. No
body will wonder that the holy forgery of former times made so bold with
Clement, who does either already know, or shall hear of, not only so many
Apocryphal Gospels under several Saints names; of Paul's Epistle to the
Laodiceans; of the Extant lingua Armen. v. D. Armach. in Ignat. Ep. ad Trall.
not. 84. and Joan. Gregor. in Observat. etc.
Corinthians Epistle to St Paul, and of his III. Extant lingua Armen. v. D.
Armach. in Ignat. Ep. ad Trall. not. 84. and Joan. Gregor. in Observat. etc.
Epistle to the Corinthians in answer to theirs; of Seneca's and Paul's
Epistles one to another; (wherewith good S. Jerome himself was deceived;) But of
Aristotle de Pomo, Plato de Vacca, Ovid de Vetula, and others; in which
writings, there is not only honorable mention of Christ, but of the Virgin
Mary likewise. The well meaning Christians of ancient times had a pretty
conceit in them, that by this fine cozenage they should with more ease win the
Hethen to embrace their Religion, when they should see the Author, and chief
professors of it, well spoken of by such great names as those before mentioned.
But good men (as some error is still incident to all forgery) they usually
offended therein against the true account of Times, and as fowly, as at this
day the Turks do in their wild Chronology, making S. Qui est ipsorum Chederles.
vid. Busbeq. epist. 1.
George one of Alexander the Great's Commanders, and Alexander himself
Salomon's General; as they do likewise (which to hear, and bear with it, we
had need to have as well pity, as patience,) make Job the Controuler of his
HOUSE.

The End of the Annotations.
To be amended, or altered.
PAge 21. lin. 7. for, in them, read, they. p. 26. l. 14. for, of his beauty.
r. of the beauty thereof. p. 44. l. penult. lege (...). p. 45. l. 5. f. that
were. r. that they being called were. p. 49. l. 7. f. in, r. is. p. 50. l. 19.
lege (...). p. 51. l. 27. r. Clement, taking the mark from before the word
(Epistle) in the next line. l. 28. for, then with him, r. himself then being.
p. 55. l. 32. f. CC. r. M. and CC. p. 58. l. 20. f. seems to have them out of
the. r. seems to have had in his mind the. p. 67. l. 14. r. Jornandes. p. 72.
l. 19. r. breeding. p. 73. l. 29. lege (...). ibid. for Attic. r. this Attic.
p. 80. l. 31. lege (...). p. 81. l. 10. after hostia, add, And not from Ara,
as some would have it. p. 84. l. 11. r. Campania. There may chance to be some
other mistakes either from the Transcribers pen, or the Works themselves.

In the Margin.

Preface, page 1. read editas. p. 17. lege (...). p. 48. r. Monarch. p. 52.
(...). p. 54. r De Car. r. Cur. p. 55. for Pitheus, r. Pitseus. p. 67. r.
(...). p. 68. place XXII. after (...) and d. ibid. f. r. Cl. r. V. Cl. p. 69.
r. Gazaei (...). p. 70. r. Sophene. p. 86. for, I. r. l. p. 87. for Petar. r.
Petav.


