MAJESTAS INTEMERATA.

OR, THE IMMORTALITY of the KING.

Plowd. 177. The King is a name which shall endure for ever, as the Head and
Governor of the People, as the Law presumes, so long as the People shall
remain: Because where there is not a Ruler, the people will be scattered.
Thuan. 370. Miseros principes, quibus nissoccisis, de conjuratione non
creditur. Doct. and Stud. 12. He that does against the Law, does against
Justice. Printed in the Year, 1649.

John of Lidgate, l. 4. c. 18.
OTher praefects there were also I find,
Which held the people in full great servage,
Till Sandrocottus a man of low lineage
Cast he would redress their outrage
Of intent poor people to restore
To their franchises that plained on them sore.
Sandrocottus auctour of this workyng
Behight the people throughout all countries
When he by sleight was crowned King
Them to restore to their old liberties.
But when he had received these dignities
All his behests made with a fair vysage
Turned after to thraldom and servage.
Thus when a wretch is set in high estate
Or a beggar brought up to dignity
There none so proud, so pompous, nor elate,
None so vengeable nor so full of cruelty
Void of discretion mercy and pity
For churlish blood seld does recure
To be gentle by way of his nature.
He may dissimule and for a time fain
Counterfayte with a fair vysage
Out of one hode show faces twain
Contrary of heart double of his language,
Still of his port, smooth of his passage
Under flowers like a Serpent dare
Till he may sting and then he will not spare
He vexed people and troubled regions at all preues Sandrocottus.

Cherished no man but robbers and thieves.
THE INTRODUCTION.
WHo can point at the wildness and follies of the Age, and escape the note of
a Man-hater? Who is not startled, to find in the Church, profane Confusions
made up from Quicksilver and Rashness? Extremes in love with Extremes?
Passion sometimes overbearing the Foundation, which yet (starting out to ruin)
overwhelms the Malcontent in his own Mine. Every Altar smoaks more from
Sulphur then Perfumes: The fierce Novatian Empire exceeds the Roman. And
although there is much kindness in the charity, yet he that undertakes to
become the Conciliator of the Universe, shall find enough to do. We read, a
modest Jesuit protesting he Fronto D^caeus.
took none for good Christians (though some of his Party making within the
Pale, not so fundamental; good Believers might have served the turn, and the
Turks Deruts, Saracens Assassin, the Malabar Brachman, the Cathari of al Faiths
might have come in) but his Society and our Puritan. Let us read too his
order, resolving it none of their Articles to believe ( Loiolas Consecration
being denied) the eighth Clement the Successor of S. Peter. And comparing them
with contrary violences, such as the term of Consubstantiation, which so vexed
the Lutherans they would to Rome again, rather then part with that sense, and
accept Calvin's Stoic fate. Then, the driving of the Geneva Consistory (like
enough to borrow the Leyden Crescent,) and that uncircumcised desperate
Aphorism, Turca magis quam Papa placet, were they summoned to shut the
beautiful eyes of that Bellona, their Presbytery, (every Family choosing rather
to be known, from the faction of an Osman or an Haley perhaps, then from the
Head, from which every John of Leydens Di^ciples say, the Pope and Luther were
both false Prophets, of the two Luther the worse.
late Prophet divides;) Who can (I say) consider all these Furies, and forbear
to wander his own mazes, and not set up as some new Seekers have done, some
pretty, new, short, Religio Laici for himself: If not with a Paradise, and the
ful-eyed Wenches in it, yet composed of some Articles, every whit as sensual,
and more easy to the Musilman, or Professor? For the result of all, it will
come to this; Every Man must please his fancy, and form his Creed to the
design: Nor will any thing prove truly religious, but our own ends. Beckets
rebellious Salvo honor Dei, is but for the opinions sake, and there shall be
no impiety or Atheism, but that which thwarts advantages, or a magisterial
Pastors dictate: These Corruptions and their Cures, I grant should be left to
their care who have the skill and the commission. I have recited them only as
causes of the Contagions, which have distempered the whole Body, and which
(owing the service of a Subject every way) my duty binds me to desire the
lesse-wary to avoid. Another reason too why I have dealt so much above my own
Sphere, and which carried me into the throng of these Prophets is this: The
King a most sacred Name (who finds no peace in the grave, whose ghost is
persecuted, by the blasphemers of his life and passion) is reproached not to
have enough assisted those of Rochel, and their rebellion; a generation whose
good or ill-fortune no doubt is much indifferent to M. Cromwell: and all this
urged with a witty Apophthegme uttered in a Dialogue betwixt M. Deodati and M.
Ironsides servant or (after the French expression) Varlet then; though times
and that Serving-man are much changed since; yet I may take leave to reply,
there is little or no divinity in his Pastors, We must forgive our Enemies, but
not our Friends, to the calumny it self the Duke de Rohan the freest from
impetuous censures, and Piae Frauds, and most honorable of the side by much,
does rather acquit then censure him; the Kings own Historian Sieur Bern. lov.
13.
and Lewis himself indeed censure him, That he would protect the subjects of a
Brother in law, in the obstinacy of their disobedience; They both confesle that
by orders from our King (which fell into the French Kings hands, and were
copied by me, says the Historian,) the Earl of Lindsey was commanded to open
his way, and fight through all Enemies; but Providence and his own wisdom could
not suffer him to obey; could he See Mr. Howel his o^ lov. 13.
have cut the Palissade which shut up the ditch, and so barred the avenues to
the Town, which (considering the huge Woods fastened there, and the Ships
employed to block up*) had been the reversed blow of a Romance, yet two
miracles more had been necessary; the wind which brought them in must have
been changed instantly full contrary, to have blown them back again (though in
so much of Winter a wind for the first purposed was more then could be
promised in some days) there being no safety amongst the French Forts, and the
Navy been locked up in that Nook, the Commanders would have bin thought as mad
as those they went to relieve* whose Principles have ruined all Europe,
plucking up Obedience and Piety together, have more torn, and maimed
Christendom in little more then 30 years, then the Turk in an 100.

For the rest, and that I may give some account of my Subject most intended by
me, my order (much of which has not been used, in the most of these kind of
Discourses, which it has been my chance to meet with) is such, as a rash choice
of Notes would suffer, to manfest the Grandeur, Antiquity, and firmness of the
Kings Prerogative, which no Common Law, Parliament, nor Violence, but such as
Masters the Christian Faith, and Worship together, can violate; that
Parliaments are limited, to just and right, the trial I examine, and some other
things, made litigious against common sense; then I would free the King from
force, I mean as his Right may be concerned, I deny he can destroy himself, and
the interest of his Successors, and supposing election, save him from what
might be inferred from thence, I declare his tenure, and at what price, his
life, which these objections seek for, is valued in the Law,; and if this
golden thread be struck, by any Parricides blow, what his Successor must go
for: the strength and purpose of a Coronation; and what could not but be more
worn, the sense and duties of Allegiance; what claim shall be needful if the
Heirs or Successors rights be refused; and how much it may prejudice in title,
that he is a Lackland, and suffers the afflictions of a Desterrade, without the
Ceremonial outside or show of a royalty (which all yet proceed from the wrong
of the first injurers) I note the vanity and hypocrisy of Rebellion, and but
glancing at the undoing CAUSE, conclude with Hist lov 13. The Hugon. styled the
profession and practices of their Church La Cause.
the fullest acceptance of a Prince, and his Posterity, the fullest admittance
of the inheritance, and descent interverted, that ever any Parliament or People
yet made; which therefore I reserved for this place, the posterity of those
makers, it seems will needs be wiser then those Laws, then their Fathers that
voted them: but if an uninterested judge shall consider, what ruins they have
made, in a Church the most Orthodox, and most glorious, of the Christian world,
in a royalty the most just and most easy that ever people were blessed under, so
pious and so This made the Romans in all necessi^ies of affai^s. rel^e upon
the certain remedy, by a Dictator. Live. 51. 148. 177. 175. 182. 190. 191. 196.
199. 201. 202. 204. 205. 206. 209. 112. 212.
honest they will never be thought to be; nor so wise neither, may that rule
hold, That in all troubled estates, the most present remedy is ever found, in
the principality of one, (The spreading and growth of the Roman Empire being
attributed to the virtue and prudence of her six Kings Verul. Aug. a^^. ^. 6.
Live. l. 2. p. 78. Brut ^ pessimo pu^li^o ^d factarus fuerit. si libertat^^
immature cupidine. priorum regum ^li^ui regnum ^xtorsi^et, quid enim futurum
^uit, si ple^s illa transfuga sol^ta regio metu agitari capt^ esse^ tribuniti^
procellis* etc.
:) and I am sure, none was ever offered, so complete, as the heir of holy
Charles the first, a King whom all Rights Divine and Humane, do as an
illustrious Sun, after the curse of a long darkness, commend.

But since the Basis of my Discourse to follow must be the Law, That a King or
no King must appear there. (For I hope we are more civil then to return to the
bed of Nature, where like Beasts, the stronger took all, and our SAVIOR gave
Caesar his due, and disclaimed the judgment of inheritance:) One request then I
am to make to the Reader, who may stand of my left hand, That since Every Art
or Science is allowed its Principles, which must not be disputed L. Coke 1. 10.
140.
; (For else Divinity it self were not safe) which prove themselves and are
never proved Id. 1. 3. 40.
. That he would let that rule hold, which commands that we should not recede
from the words of the Law Rep. 5. 118.
, and if it be unjust, to become judges in our own cases R. 8. 1^.
. And many Men, neither the most knowing, nor most conscientious, cannot submit
to the authority of those Laws, (which the experience and happiness of so many
Ages have found to agree best with the constitutions of this Kingdom:) yet how
unreasonable must it be, that the whole Nation, must let in, these private
spirits, and allow the conceits of such Men for Laws, who out of ambition, or
arrogance only, have torn asunder these just bonds, which as they never
permitted any absurdities R. 9. 2^.
, so did they never will things impossible Ibid. 7^.
, vain, or improfitable; being made up of such sanctions, which did ever bid
things honest, and forbid the contrary R. 1. 131.
, excelling all Laws for certainty, coherence, and Harmony Dav. 1. Preface.
, and for equity too. For neither did the King make his own Prerogative, nor
the Judges the Maxims, nor the Commons prescribe Ibid.
their liberties; but long experience, and many trials of what was best for the
commongood, did beget the Commonlaw; it being for the fundamentals above a 1000
years old; and so much more reverend it ought to be, (were we in our wits) then
any Apronmans Revelations, any Troopers New-light; and he that shall consider,
that his life and estate, and all that is dear upon earth, are held (by an
unheard Stamf. Mis^^a servitus est ubi jus est vagu^n aut incogni^um.
of tenure) of M. Cromwels spirit, and of his Wife and Heirs or Successors,
that all he enjoyes are subject to his Arbitrary power; who but an Earl of
Pembroke without a soul, in this condition, would think otherwise? Let factious
men, admire the adventurers, the happy ill-doers, the Davi which trouble all
things, yet the Kingdom is not like to be safe and blessed, while one obscure
Family of Love, or Rebellion, can do more then the King and the ^. ^.
Laws, Non aliunde magis floret resp. quam si legum vigeat authoritas. The
Abol^shing or alteration of laws present, confusion will fall upon the whole
s^ate. Stat. 1 Jac. c. 2.
Commonwealth cannot flourish unless the Law flourishes too. It has been
observed, that the often change of Laws, is a prodigy which certainly foreruns
the destruction of a Commonwealth: therefore the L. Cook has these words, The
alteration of any Maxims of the Law is most dangerous 2 Inst. 21 c,
: this made our ancient Barons protest in a Parliament, Nolumus leges Stat.
Met. c. 9.
Angl. mutari, we will never suffer the Laws of England to be changed. I will
end with the judgment of the most knowing Author many Ages have produced: Our
law incult as she is, is the most noble Lady of all Municipal Laws whatsoever,
being replete with all justice, moderation, prudence, and sublime judgment.
The Law then it is most reasonable should be to us, the rule L. Dn. Hen. Spelm.
and arbitresse of what is just and tight.

MAJESTAS INTEMERATA.
IT would require a History, and more then a common strength, to deduce from
the Original, the sad causes of the calamities, the Christian World for these
last Ages has groned under; not a little terrible are the Earthquakes which an
innovation of worship brings with it, for being the greatest sin, the greatest
judgment must follow at its heels; and as often as this holy anchor is
loosened, the ship of the Commonwealth flotes; Religion being like the heart
in the body, full of the vital spirits, yet the least rude touch dissolves the
whole frame. It Is most true, the superstition of a faith too, is as
mischievous, and infatuates every where betwixt errors opposites, the causes of
erring being common, and the same reason being found in all contraries, for
that we may not make only criminal, the many heads of the Verul. nov. organ.
se Lysi^. Nican. Knoxe and Buchanan, Mariana and Bellarmine, the Papist and
Puritan agree, in placing all power in the people, in resisting, deposing, and
murdering Princes.
new Religions, we shall find the same discord and rage among the Roman
Orders, the same disposition and propension to be quarrel the power of Kings,
and subvert the peace and state of Kingdoms, the swords which these late ones
strike with, being whetted by those, who most revile the present hands: I will
not revive that Bishops pretenses, to the supremacy Anton Sum. p. 3. tit. 21.
of secular Empire; not show where he claims the honor of holy Angels, and
the kiss of the feet, which they never suffered, nor observe that Caesar's
throne must stand no higher then the feet of this Vicar: That the Cerem. Romans
l. ^. s. 2. c. 2.
Angels may not oppose his determinations Suar. romans 1. disp. 44. s. 1. Kellen
66.
. (Like our revelations they are principles, and like presentiments in the
Leets, to be imagined as true as Gospel,) To him, as to Christ, every knee must
bow Capistran. de author. pap. et council. 94. Blondus.
. All Princes of the Earth honor and worship the Pope as a great God: Nay,
their gloss of the Canon, calls him our Lord God; ^. ^el. hist. fic. l. 8. c.
4. Council. Trid. 103.
And thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us, is
common: And not to be less then our New Lights, the Bishoy of Bitonto at the
opening of the Trent Counsel, told the Assembly, The Popes light was come into
the world, and men loved darkness more then light. This was too furious to
hold, Age and its own violence had worn it low, and the swelling was rather
contemned, then submitted to, when a new succession of rashness, precipitates
in, and a Reformation, which interpreted, was but zealous madness, so much
without discretion and charity, that instead of remedies, wise men can look for
nothing, but the same miseries, under other names, like Plagues, whose
infection a new clime may give a new term to, and difference them in some
effects, yet the air is only changed, the malignity and pestilence remains,
and they are the same mortal plagues still; and so much worse, as a multitude
enraged is more fatal then a single Tyrant: And nothing has so much contributed
to the distractions, as the vain glory of a proud and self conceited Leader,
who must allow no way to ^eaven, but upon his ladder, who must innovate every
where, and rather then quit an opinion, taken up by chance, or in haste, (or
out of hatred only of those he had justly forsaken) and might, more then the
Jehuite considered, be an Article of the Nicene, or Apostles Creed; let
Melancthon preach his union Synod sub Patricio. Nemo audeat scindere unien^m.
, and his peace, (sure of some worth,) till he be hoarse, fire shall be called
for from Heaven, and under the notion of cleansing, the Church shall burn to
ashes from the altars flames: the Calendar was imperfect and faulty, the Pope
^^. de Thou. 579.
perceives it, and corrects it, the Lutherans agree it is a correction; yet what
peace, since the whoredoms of this Jezebel are so many. It was Doct. Reynolds
at Hampton, the Papists had used the Cross, and the King must take that for
crime enough; yet doubtless had not the Augustane Divine been exceeded, (who
whether more temperate from the experience of Muncer, and the Anabaptists, the
Odium which the frequent seditions and Presbyte^ian insolence brought with
them, or their own wisdom,) we had not been where we are now: For presently
with a garb and outside cut out but to enslave beggarly Geneva, (and no reason
it should extend beyond the first intention,) in comes Mr. Calvin, whose
Seminary Priests, I shall compare, with those that scandalized them and us,
from an Author, who was thought to wish them very well. And it will easily
appear, that deficiency and excess, heat and cold, though they make several
poisons, murder alike, and a negative cowardly superstition, is as noxious as
the affirmative: Nay more, since no Man can come to this abundancy, but by the
confines of the virtue, which the abundancy might become, were the tumor of
this nimiety but fallen, but deficiency participates not at all. First then, I
will consider the Discipline The King^ Evil.
, and note how fiercely she soars at that supremacy and infa^libility, which
her Champions, and the purer Churches cannot tolerate in any. It is, says one,
Justa authoritas Ecclesiasticorum, the 1 Tr^u. de discipl, 142. 2 Pe^tie. 3
Sions Plea. ^
true and just authority of the Kirk, The holy one, the soul of the Camp-royal
of Christ's mystical body. 3. The proper character of the true Church, (so then
all salvation is within her walls; there was none for mankind till some
hundred years since, when the great Hercules conquered Time and Lethe, and drew
up from the deep, from the of night and oblivion, this beautiful Proserpine, to
an alternate Tran. ibid.
Dominion on earth,) Christ had not proved himself a Prophet like Moses, had he
not instituted it. And as if a new Religion could alter power of jurisdiction,
for its dominion, Omnes Ibid. Buch. d. jur. ^gn 57.
principes and Monarchas parere necesse est, fasces submittere, All Princes
Sions Ple^. Their Synods of Blois, Privas, etc. were held without the Kings
authority, they style their Ordinances and Edicts in their favor fundamental
laws, Lov. 13. They join in all rebellions, no act of Majesty good but under
their test, Ibid. 43. 53.
must be their obedient sons, or executioners, must lay their Crowns at the
feet of the great Queen. Nay the French, as nearer their Mothers breasts,
declare, That the power of their Synod ought to precede that of Kings, that by
it Kings must rise or fall.

It will not be to any purpose to show how the certain key of Scriptures, and
all exposition there, is theirs, how every dissentient is an Amalekite* a
Moabite, and luke warm, and is mean^ by every cursing Prophet, Curse y^ Meroz,
(to be revealed in the nex^ Apocalypsis of holyes, either map o^ land,) and
those texts to be drawn upon him, he that has, to his misfortune endured one of
our pulpit storms o^ late years shall find it; Nor how Ton^ Cartwright
excommunicates Kings what they dislike in the Vatican, is but from a Roman
spirit, who would suppress The Hug. of Charles the 9. and Henry the 3 days.
all other Potentates, to rob the freelier themselves. Let it be lawful, having
set Calvin in his throne of Caliph, to see what followed, and so decline
homeward. France had rested in a long repose for many years, unfrighted with
the terrors of a civil war, the people not accustomed to take up arms against
the Princes name, then which, says the Sieur du Rohan (that used it too often
from the Geneva doctrines) nothing does more easily tear up from the Subjects
hearts, the reverence due unto him, when the evil spirits and Emissaries of the
Lemane Lake, spread their superstition and disobedience, together, (it being a
maxim of their ministers, That it is Hist. Lou. 13 14^.
impossible to serve the Churches faithfully, and serve the King too)
allegiance, honor, fidelity, friendship, all locks fly open, arm, arm, rings
every where, their own jealousies, fears, and distrusts, with the opposition of
their enemies, which they must needs make, leaving no place quiet, they being
Suspicax hominum genus and sectarium malum Thuan 322.
: doubting every thing, and assuring themselves of nothing: their character is
visible in Rochels definition, and the testimony of a Protestant, an
eye-observer, though not of the Primitive reign, he writes of the Rochellers,
We hear daily furious Grot. ep. 124.
things, I tremble, when I consider, whither this contumacy may break,
forgetful of its self and others. Again, They talk much of peace, Monsieur du
Rohan (the Essex of the Covenant) is Ep. 14^.
thought to propose things just, the stop is in the Rochel assembly (or Synod)
made up of hair-brained madmen: And by their actions they weigh no less; their
first sin was that Mother of Puritanes Sacrilege ^^md. el. 131. T^^an. 505.
. They gaped at the Bishops Manors, as Thuanus, who calls the war, the
Episcopal war; in Poictires they set them to sale. I cannot forget an impiety
or two of theirs, so abominable, the moderate of their party, (be there any
such,) must condemn them, Poncenac a Captain of that Covenant, Ibid. 28.
fired an Abbey of the Clugniacs, so full of all Manuscripts, the loss is
never to be repaired, not in Amara it self, this zeal opened the grave: The
house of Vendosm Id. 101. 103. 104.
of the blood, is forced to a Resurrection before the day: Anne of Laval scapes
no better. ( Hermodorus is banished by the Ephesians, who would have no man
frugal or good alone,) and John of Engolesm, the Kings Ancestor, is torn up by
these Jackals; his piety was his Delinquency, and they justify the action,
upon the necessity, to prevent adoration; his Coffin melts into bullets, he is
voted to the fire, and hardly scapes this Purgatory, and (what was sport
enough,) the Monks are hanged in their belropes. Concerning resisting the
Majesty Royal, they Thu. 250. D^ctrines
were of two opinions, the first Dandelot, Bo^i^ of the same opinion, ^.
Leaguer.
the Admirals brother Broches: It was this, Conspiracy is that of singulars;
the attempts of the universal are most just: the body of them were not so
scholastical, they conclude the war lawful if the Prince abuse his power:
without troubling themselves to define the abuse, or appoint a judge, though
they intended only themselves in both, yet they of Rouen were much perplexed
in the birth, of these wholesome doctrines, and with grief of heart, (no doubt)
resent it much, that the Sorbon should join V. ^^ox ex^ort. 91. 9^.
the Kings Deposition with his Heresy. But can there be thunder and
earthquakes, and the Pastors not there? does Antoin Chande (like the Knight
Quixote) first Zam riel, then Zadael, The Pastor of Paris, who changed his name
40 times Thu^n.
meditate nothing, but his 40th altisonant name nothing less. France was not
so happy to suspect her new Doctors, who like Zuinglius and the Zurich
Ministers, fight before the principia, lead the front of battles. Charles Our
Or^hodox Cle^gy never present at the trials of blood, unless with the book of
mercy.
of Suderman, the Rebel of the Swede Sigismund, tries the Nobility faithful to
the King, (who had forsaken the Augustan confession, and so incurred the ban)
12 Pastors, and 12 of the Baronie sat upon the Bench; and if our Sions Plea or
Guignard the Jesuit Of council in the murder of H. 3. T^uan. these words sound
in his study. Vid. Sions P. ca 24.
think fit the Basilic vein (as they love to speak) should bleed; what can be
so proper, as one of these hands? This agrees with their Churches Canons, ^
B^^h. de ju. reg. 57. Jun. B(...). 170. ^eza de author. magis. in sub. 97.
and holy practice, When Princes grow tyrants, (and themselves are judges,) the
people may use the sword, or a private man may do vengeance upon a Prince,
Pote^^ate, etc. meritoriously (as the Jesuits) whom an Author of their side
censures, and their error furious Sieur. Bern.
as he, putting the Sovereigns lives into the hands of the possessed with
devils, what assurance of peace can there Buchan. hist.
be within the Estates. Lesley, Carmichael, and Meluin, all of the Scotch
illumination, for a private cause, resolved to do their justice upon the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, Lesley and Carmichael strike, but Meluin perceiving
them in choler, takes them off, and tells them, this work, Knox calls it, (they
had their work too, but according to him, of lesser light, and not like the
Armies Goodwins, who styles the murder of his late sacred Majesty, the work,)
and judgment of God, although Over against these words Knox his margen^ has.
The godly ^act and words of James Melvin.
it be secret, ought to be done with greater gravity, then presenting the point
of his sword, he said, repent thee, I protest, no hatred of thy person, love of
thy riches, (yet they seized all,) has moved me, but because thou art a bitter
enemy, to Christ Jesus, and his holy Gospel: Then he struck him twice or thrice
through. To keep decorum, a Meluin, that can mischieve deliberately, is rare,
and a Pastor best becomes that part: See then what colors are laid, they
decree it lawful reproaching the contravenients to arm for Th(...) 11^.
conscience sake, for the King and Queens liberty, whom they will needs
imagine captives, their Sermons only sounding Gods glory, and the public
tranquillity, yet they join to set up an absolute Res-publick, divided from the
body of the An. 16^1. they* ^^de a new Seal.
Kingdom, give laws concerning Religion, civil jurisdiction, ( Montauban
coining in its own name,) Militia, Commerce, Imposts, put Lesdigueres into
command; forbid testimonies of fathers, maintain in public disputes, and
Scripture authority, violently perverted, That it was impious to Calvi^^ motto
was, Non v^^i pace^s mitt^re, sed gladium.
give quarter for life, to any of the Kings party: Nay, the Prince Conde, the
Antesignane, being necessitated ^o P^stors in Rochel at once. Th^an* ^68. The
rusty Priest i^ not suffered to preach any thing of his own, but wholly ^ut of
the Fathers, that it may not be in his power to make the people seditious, and
per^aps too, to pre^rve Religion ^till the same.
to peace, ( pacem infidam) ever the Pastors were to be sought to; but their
demands were so high, that to extinguish the war he was forced to imitate the
Venetians, turn them cut of the Council, and consult without them. Thus we
read, Religions altered, without being able to glory in the purchases of the
change. This narration I shall not parallel, though in Scotland, or at home we
might discover much more. As it is more grateful to the vice in the Satyr, to
be hid in the darkness of the name, so I thought it would be more pleasing
(Presbytery being the same every where, and not differing at all, but according
to bodies and humors) to expose France, or some other place, to serve for this
Scene. And the rather have I chose this Province, for these reasons: our ill
humors, it is true, gathered and grew corrupt, from our malevolence; yet the
tincture and imitation we owe to France, whose fantastical lightness and basest
diseases, we have received by communication, and from whom we can never receive
any thing but vices which unman us, and treacheries which fully the ingenuous
reputation of that plain honesty we have ever bin esteemed for. I have not
fetched my examples from Scotland, as fruitful in treasons as Hell it self,
though we have once by mixture overdone it, and the whole Universe, profane and
Christian: but as this act was not the guilt of the whole Nation, I would not
compare it with a people, with whom Chorah is more in repute then Moses, nay,
then our Savior himself; I knew France to be a more temperate clime, that her
disorders, with the furfets of her last Apostles too, were not so criminal and
unruly, her Kings against The French rebellions more plausible.
whom her unsounder parts mutinied, ever being of a different belief, with whom
there was neither love nor good correspondence: but had their king been of their
own Creed, my charity, if not the rules of their discipline, should induce me
to judge, they would neither have oppressed his just power, nor how ever, have
sought his life. France besides had ever her Lucida intervalla, after some
short contestation, she ever returned at least to a temporary obedience, never
abjured his name. And I had sometimes hoped, our Demoniacs would have been
contented with the lesser communer sins, with those of their forefathers, with
a madness of degrees, not have raged further. But France is too just, and must
condemn us, we live amongst those men whose cruelty is all their virtue, who
have made an example Acts 3. 14. Ye denied the holy One, and the just, and
des^red a murderer to be granted (...) you.
of the most abominable treason, (that ever any Cromwell brought forth) under
the name of justice. And so basely were all men's minds affected, that the most
flagitious impiety, a few durst contrive, more countenanced, and all were
contented to suffer; there is neither honor nor goodness in the age,
advantage not faith is looked See the Armies first declarations, The reasons of
Maj. Huntington.
for in a relation, courtesy, till their own ends ripen, is dissembled in the
deepest malice: Fair promises are but Plutarch Mar. Herod. 69. Erat autem
Severu^ unus omni^i^ mortalium ad amorem simul andd^^ maxim^ ^ fast. etc.
Andronicus besides his other arts, could weep at any time, he ever wept when he
was most mischievous. This is observed of another amongst us.
fair baits to deceive, and with Marius in the Senate to know the art of lying
cunningly, shows a brave spirit, and is a signal virtue. Nor is any way of
thriving dishonorable: all things are lawful but what are honest: and though
they may as well vote away the faculties of the mind, our essence, or
statures, as truth, and equity, yet we must give our selves up in a blind
obedience, our understandings bound too; but where conscience, equity, truth
and honor should tie us indeed, there to be tied, must be a capital, and the
most killing treason: Whose justest indignation would not these injuries
provoke? Who could part with the dearest relation of this life, an innocent
father, snatched from him, by the untimely stab of public robbers, and be told
too he must forfeit his birthright, and inheritance, by a decree of those
robbers, because he has not rendered himself into the same unmerciful hands,
highest goodness extorts, and forces a reverence from a very enemy: what
Barbarian, not quite a King-selling Scot Heretics named from Cain, said, Judas
was a godly man, and that his act was a benefit to mankind: for ^e cerceiving
what Christ's P^ssion would do, delivered him, or sold him to the Jews.
, as far from civility as law and justice, would not for common mankindes sake,
call upon the deaf faith of God and Man, against such Centaurs, such desperate
Cannibals?

Finding then our liberties, these late years but pretended, our Courts of
Justice lost, and the remains of the bloodiest Parliament, (if it can be sense
to think, the form of a carcass The Idol of the Nation, to when that might be
applied. Sipius nos quam deorum ^mplorant open.
the form of the man that killed himself) become a council of consuming war,
that Enthusiasm, and the Pythonism of spirit, are only of reputation: and
Hartford vies with Kent a holy maid, Finding every where furious arms, which
have violated Heaven and Earth, reason it self overcome by Ordale and victory,
and by a second Turcism, event set up the sign and Hieroglyphick of a good
cause, finding a general Atheism Revel. 13. And they worshipped the Beast (upon
whose heads in the name of blasphemy) saying, Who is like unto the B^ast. who
i^ also to make war with him. In villoria vel ignav^ gloriari lices, adversae
res etiam bonos detractans. Sacurt. Q(...) esset pr^sto ub que for^una,
teme(...) (and qu^^ ne sc^lus) in gloriam c^ss^^at. Prosper. and f^lix seel.
virt. vocatur. Distractam laceratamque ^em^. per magist^a us, magis q^d^um in
(...), quam ut in columis fit q^rti. Live.
which bequarrels even principles, doubts all old faith, and tryes not only
Kings, and godlike order, but the highest articles, and God himself; finding
after a new infernal Court, and a Hellish Sacrament of royal blood, nature, and
the being of beings too, disarmed, by these Giants, that a Vote can create
treason, and then Act too, like the Roman Chair, raise a mortal sin up to a
virtue, those who were trusted to make laws, having left no law in the
kingdom, that there is not like to be any end, till the Conspirators (who in
the concord of all orders were nothings, and have chosen rather to be Heads of
tumults, and seditions, then sit still contemned,) become confirmed as
honorable, as their conspiracy has been happy, that we know not by what God or
law to conjure them down; finding too it is never to much purpose to strike
strong and grown sins, and that he that would be safe must please: yet lest our
loyalty should seem destroyed, with the last King, and these intruders should
be thou^ht just possessors, (though it is come to ^^gentib. remp. satis, Dei
and bominum salutates admonitiones spernuntur.
that, they will either be our Masters or our Enemies, though an Hector, and
the living Oracle himself cannot save this Troy: and I am but a vain
Auxiliary,) against these torrents do I oppose my self, and think it religious
sense, to make the present Kings claim: For such he is, spite of their Sergius
his t^xts, and the last Mahomets new Alcoran: for take the Buff of White Hall
for a just Parliament, let that act by a just power, (lay by the violence of
sacrilegious conquest,) and it cannot reach the King, or his Rights, more then
a malicious Comet, can rob the Sun which exhaled it to that Region: We question
not, Parliaments are made of Men, and cannot change essences, nor are (what
their flatterers would presume them,) Omnipotent: Nature is not like the
Chemists walking metal; nor can a State- Hocus, turn beings into the
contraries, if they restore to blood, yet can they enact, that there was never
any attainder: they legitimated the house of Beaufort Rot. pat. ^^. ^. R. 2.
, but simple legitimation they never pretended to, since Divinity it self does
not contradictions, nor can 1 H. 7. (...)
the Parliament less make the next successor of a natural King his Heir, then
his Son or Kinsman. Of this in its place. I will begin this discourse of
Royalty with that which does indeed contain his greatness, and makes him not
so high and glorious, as necessary In^. 63
and useful, whatsoever his contrarients This appears in the care and esteem of
him in the laws, in the trust reposed in him, in 1 Jac. the causes there set
down why all subjects are bound to the love and obedience of the King. Vid. 27
El. c 1. Inst. 9^.
are pleased to declare: And in which, as to parts separable, and not of Royal
essence, by that boundary betwixt him and the people, Magna Charta he is not so
ample. Or rather by the conditions which the first usurpers accepted to seem
gracious. The Prerogative.

The Prerogative Royal e is termed, Prerogative. ^ 32 H. 8. c. 46.
The Royal Rights, the Kings rights of the Crown, or the rights of the Crown,
by Bracton the Privileges of the King, by Britton the right of the King 2
Inst. 2^3. regist. 61. Postna^. ^3.
, in an ancient statute Edw. the first speaks thus, And for that the King has
done this, for the honor of God, for the Church and Commonweal, he yet would
not this statute should prejudice him, or his Crown; but that his rights be
saved in all points: West. 1. c. ^^.
of late it is called jus Coronae, and a law that is parcel of the laws of the
land Inst. 15. 3 Inst. ^4
. It is part of the Common Law, and contained in it 2 Inst. 496. Dau. ^ep.
Praeface.
: Lord Cook, enumerating the Laws of the Land, begins with the Law of the
Crown Inst. 11. 4 Inst. 342.
: Nay he gives it the precedence of his dearest Law and custom of Parliament,
and after styles it the principal part of the Common law Ibid. 344.
, which with the Common law, makes not two, but one law F^nch 85.
, (as a most knowing Judge:) the King is the defender, preserver, and nourisher
of the people, by his great travels they enjoy their lands, goods, lives, etc.
in peace: For which cause, the Laws do attribute unto him, all honor,
dignity, prerogative, and preeminence. Stam^. pr^rog. ^. 1.
The prerogative has its being from the Common law, Id. Ibid. ^. 5. 6.
the statute is but declarative, and the treatise of the prerogative does not
contain them all. Com. Plowd. 322.
To describe him and it more particularly: the King is an Emperor 24 H. 8. c.
12. 4 Inst. 89. 342. 25 H. 8. c. 22. ^ El. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 1
, affirmed by Parliament, in no earthly subjection, but immediately subject to
God, in all things touching the regality of the same Crown, and to no other D^.
Th. Sm. resp. Angl. 183. 16 R. 2. c. 5. Camd. 105.
, he is a supreme King, 4 Inst.; 42. 1. 5 El. 1.
supreme and imperial, 4 Inst. 343.
his Crown Imperial, Ibid.
and his power in his own land, comparable and equivalent with an Emperors:
Id. Ibid. 4 Inst. 125. he received appeals from the high Constable.
as an ancient Writer: the King has all ordinary jurisdiction, dignity, and
power, over all in his Realm, he has the material sword, all Laws are in his
hand which belong to secular power: (the Pope claimed then the other part)
justice and judgment which go with jurisdiction are his: that out of his
jurisdiction he may render to every man according to his right, as Gods
Minister and Vicar, peace and vengeance, or punishment are his, jurisdiction
and peace and their concomitants, belong only to the Crown and dignity royal,
and to none else; Bract. in Judge Stam^. cor. ^4.
he is the Sovereign Governor, Lord supreme above t Stam^ cor. 56.
all. The statute which concerns Ecclesiastical x W. 1. c. 17.
jurisdiction is but declaratory y 2 Inst. 501.
of the Common law: For as that case, the King is an absolute Monarch, and the
Royal Head of the Body politic, he has full power to render justice to his
subjects in all causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal R. 5. 8. Da^. r. 70. 72.
95. Hub. r. 87. 112. 205. 216. 1. 7. Calu. ^ase. Dr. ft. 124.
: otherwise (it adds) how should he be the Head of the Body; he is our natural
Lord, his person is King Exil. Hog. le Spenc. 1 E. 3. c. 2. r. 7. Calu. c. 5.
, the Body politic is but a trick and finenesse of Lawyers. Henry the third
was under age, and the Pope (the Dictator universal then) was sought to, to
bestow the manhood before the time, his Barons suggesting the maturity of his
wit, deserved it: Mat. Par. addi^am. 151.
from this Emperor, supreme King, Head of the Body, and original jurisdiction,
is all justice administered, Justice.
by the ancient lex Regia or law royal, the King had the power of Parliaments
Har. Hollinsh. 177. Mir. 148. 150. ^ac. Elem. 69. Postnat. 106. Mat. Par. in H.
1. H. 2. Rich. 1. inf. 31.
. The King has sat anciently, and of late in the Kings Bench and Courts of
justice. Mat. Par. 405. Camd. Brit. 324. l. 5. E. 4. 58. Vit. C^anceri. L. Edg.
polit. c. 2.
Peter of Rivallis a wicked Steward, says Parisiensis, reverently salutes the
King sitting upon the bench with his Justices Rivallis being to make his
account, the Justices followed the Kings person and Court 2 I^st. 23 255. 24
I^st. 73.
, and were a part of the Hostel: Kings have given judgment, Reges ipsi causas
audiebant Camd. 324. vit. A^. ^. Alb. 76. L. Rams. s. 3. 1.
. False judgments and the errors of Justices used to be reversed, before
himself, Fleta. temp E. 2
all Courts are his Courts, the Ecclesiastic Courts too, though held in the
Bishops name. So of Leets, 2 I^st. 103. r. 5. 39.
their proceedings are directed by the Kings laws, all law is the Kings ^
Bract. l 4. c. 24.
law, R. 5. 39. Lit. se^. 199. Inst. 130. 2 Inst. 559.
he cannot be thought ignorant of the law, all law lies in his breast, Inst.
99. Com. ^^. 50^.
he interprets law. Postnat. 108. Mi^z. 141. 261. 2 Inst. 238. 13 R. 2. c. 2.
Mi^z. 148, 149.
The explanations which Edward the first made, upon the statute of Gloucester,
have ever since been received for laws; Postnat. 15. ^^
the King too has used to declare the law in Parliaments: Stat. de Conspir. de
finib. 25 E. 3. of treason. ^ R ^. c. 2.
nay, his extraordinary power can supply the defects and impotency of the law:
as when Carlisle a principal in murder was fled into Scotland, from whence he
could not be taken by legal Process, and it was impossible to proceed against
the Lord Sanchar the accessory, till the principal were attainted; Carlisle (as
the reporter) was brought from thence by the Kings royal and absolute power,
for the ordinary course of the law could not come near him L. Sach. case r. 9.
V. Br^ct. l. 1. c. 8. K t ^hin f. 1.
. This appears more in Henry the thirds time: intolerable robberies were
committed near Winchester, the Justice in Eyr could do no good, at length, (in
the Monks language) complaint is made to the King, who goes thither, and
assembles the Bailiffs and Townsmen, then looking grimly, he tells them, The
clamor of the robbed has come up unto me, I have appointed Wise men, who with
me may take a care of the Kingdom, I am but one, nor can I look to all parts,
without helpers; I will call all the Counties up, that they may lay open your
craft and wickedness: he shuts them all in the Hall, twelve are chosen for a
Jury, they are watched, but in vain, they will tell no tales: the King takes it
ill, he commands them to the prison and halter: twelve more are called out, who
are frighted and confess all; many of the thieves were masters of 400 and 200
acres, etc. Mat. P^r. 760.
Much is said to prove that the Kings delegation of Justices, and fixing and
distributing his justice into certain Courts has impoverished himself, how then
has he a fresh Justice to consigne to a new Justice or Court, since no man can
give what he has not? why are the Justices his Justices? 3 Inst. 224. a Inst.
255.
We will deny no man his right, Mag. Chart. c. 29
nor justice. This is spoken of the King, says the Commentator. 2 Inst. 55.
A Sun whose beams are severed from the great Orb, and broke, to make lower
lesser stars bright, yet he shines in every Court still: in judgment of Law,
the King is present in all his Courts 4 Inst. 73. 2 Inst. ib. and 14^.
of justice: and the Justices do but represent him. So that a bribing Judge
Thorp is charged and condemned, for that he had broken the Kings oath to the
people Rot. Pat. 24 E. 3 part. 3. Rot. Par. 25 E. 3. part 1.
. The Chief Justice is the Kings Chief Justice Com. 322. V. recog. libert.
Clarendoniae 10 H. 2. c. 7. Dominus rex si in regno fuerit conveniatur ut
rectum faciat, etc. Si extra justitiarius ejus. V. Eract. l. ^. 116. ^
. The ancient Kings used to ride the Circuits themselves, to enquire, hear and
determine offenses. But people, and offenses too multiplying, they were forced
to send their Commissaries, who are now called (says the Mirror) Justices in
Air Mir. 118.
. There the King limits the Judges their power. Ibid. 234.
Thus Britton notes of our Kings, they have divided their c^arge into many
parts, upon the Mirrors reasons Erit. 1. ^. ^.
. What then, were it not that now much more contentions are multiplied: so that
many cases would every day happen, unworthy the ears and presence of a King:
besides the quarrels being so numerous, the law is necessarily become more
obscure and voluminous, so that it may well take up the whole man; else saving
in his own case, I know no reason but the King may again sit upon a Bench, and
though the King has confined so much ordinary justice, to certain Courts, not
the jurisdiction but the administration is changed, and I cannot see, but that
for the time he sits, ^ Inst. 16.
the rule should hold, which tells us, in the presence of the greater the
authority of the lesser ceases. So that in Term-time, by Common Law, no
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, or Jail-delivery, can sit where the Kings
Bench sits in the same County: R. 9. 118.
but be it so that custom, and statutes, and the grants of former Kings, have
made this ord^r of Courts, and these delegations as firm and continuing as they
are convenient: yet is the King the father of justice still, allowed to be so,
by the author of this opinion too ^up. Cawdr. ^ase r. 5. 4 Inst. 104. Cor. 242.
Die. ^04. ^ Dau. ^. 95.
. Justice is derived from hi^ as from a fountain e: Nay, he is the center and
stay of justice; in acts of justice he is never supposed by law, ill affected,
but abused, and deceived. The same it is presumed is the Kings mind, with the
mind of the law: Hub. rep. 216.
All acts of justice, so of grace too, flow from him Hub. 205. 9 E. 4 2.
.

All pardons of Felony or Treason, Grace.
are to be made by the King 3 Inst. 233.
, he may pardon any Parliamentary attainder Cromp. juris. 12. Stam^. cor. 153.
. The 22 of Henry the 8. the whole Realm was in a praemunire, and pardoned by
the King Graston. in H. ^
, his acknowledging a prisoners innocence is a pardon, ^ Inst. 23^.
he may abolish an accusation of treason, 4 Inst. 124.
good men, says the Lord Cook, will never refuse God and the Kings pardon,
because every man does offend them both 3 Inst. Chapter of ^ Pardon.
.

All honor and tenures are derived from him Inst. 93. Com. pl. 498. 4 Inst.
204 363.
.

The office of a King does not only Protection Militia.
consist in civil justice, and the dependencies of that, but in defense against
hostile violence, and protection against homebred injuries of our fellow
subjects, neither of which can be performed without the power of arms. They
that shall oppose either of these rights, let them first show what this great
feoffee was trusted with, in what his being consisted, and what was the final
cause of the Kingly government? Suppose what election or confidence soever: yet
who so grants any thing to another, he implyedly grants too that, without
which, the thing granted cannot be or subsist R. 11. 52.
. Certainly, to receive justice and protection, are the greatest Br^st. l. 2.
c. 24. Com. 3 5 n 1. B. ^34
benefits of this life: and what can be the use of a Ruler, without the
attributes of these? Nor were it policy it should be otherwise, since as to the
Militia the Prince has not half the Sovereignty, where the people enjoy that.
And so at the inspiration of any traitor, of strength to force him to quit what
is left, (which is not improbable, since the boldness of a base nature grows
high,) when he perceives himself feared. So betwixt claim of the rest, and
defending to preserve, a Civil War would last till the Worlds end; treasure
being the sinews of war, our Judges give this reason, why Mines of gold and
silver in another man's soil, are the Kings; lest, say they, he whom the law
appoints, to defend the people, to prepare force and arms, should be destitute,
and want the means: Com. Pl. 316.
he is styled the Sovereign and chief Captain of arms, all power is his. No
man may use arms, so much as in sports, torneaments, tilt, etc. without the
Kings license: the statute unprinted 5 H. 4. rot. parl. nu. 24. of array.
declaring the Kings power, to array and muster at this day, (as the Lord Cook,)
is of force, and no other, and yet this statute was declarative only, one
example may be seen, in the mandatum ^egis de juratis ad arma, in the time of
Henry the third, too long to be transcribed. * An obligation to serve the King
in his wars, is void: every man is bound to serve him without it: and such
writings are disdishonourable, 3 Inst. 149.
every man being ^ound to defend the King and his Realm Na. b^. ^5.
, and to do the service that appertains to him, as to his liege Lord 3 Inst.
ibid.
: as the same Chief justice: No subject can levy war within the Realm, without
autho^ity from the King, for to him only it belongs. 3 Inst. 9. fla. ^^ quis
occas. pro p. osec. H. le Spen. ^. 56. 25 E. 3. c. 2.
It was high reason by the Common law, and ^s declared so by express words in
^he stratute of treasons.

The Prerogative, which is so admeasured Prerogative not grantable
by the Common law, that it can neither take away, nor prejudice the
inheritance of any Com. 136. 3. Inst. 84. V. Juram regis. ^ Inst. 536.
, is inseparable from his person not grantable over, it is always stuck upon
the King, or Crown, being therefore called, the liberty of the King Inst. 90.
; though sometimes, before the 27 of Hen. 8. which unites them all to the
Crown, some Prerogatives have been transferred: yet this may be imputed to the
barbarous ignorance of those ages: for being inherent to the Majesty of Regia
dignitat est indivisibilis. 4 Inst. 243.
a King, and part of the matter of that Majesty, they were no more grantable
then the Majesty it self, or a Royal member of the Imperial style 4 Inst. 287
. It is impossible to be done too out of incapacity of the taker, who being a
natural Subject, and unlimited homager, can except no act, in derogation of
that homage, more then a Layman is by Common Law capable of tithes, ever
concomitant, and competible with the Sacerdotal function: else by a
multiplication of such acts (like the Jews Corban,) natural relation^ might be
destroyed, in the lives o^ the correlates, subjection might be discharged,
which is not imaginable, since abjuration it self, the farthest act this way,
goes no farther then the country, and cannot reach the common Father R. 7.
Calu. case. V. a Inst. 15.
. Chancery justice, is a special trust committed to the King, and not by him to
be committed, to another Hub. 1. 87.
power of denization was never grantable 20 H. 7. 8.
, so of power to dispense with a penal statute Rep. 7. 37.
: for when a statute is made for common good, and the King as the head of the
weal public, and the fountain of justice, and mercy, is trusted with it, by
all the Realm: this confidence and trust is so inseparably adjoined, and
annexed to the Royal person of the King, in so high a point of Sovereignty,
that he cannot transfer it, to any private person, or any private use: thus the
book: Hill. 2. K. J^m^ 36.
as there the King cannot commit his sword of justice or oil of mercy
concerning any penal statute, to any subject, so we say of other essential
parts of Royalty too. Bracton is cited in Calvin's case to this purpose, To do
justice and maintain peace, makes the Kings Crown, without which it cannot
consist. These jurisdictions and rights cannot be transferred to persons or
fees, nor can a private man enjoy them. Bract l. a. de acquirendo rec. Domin.
c. 24. in 1. 7. 11
Stamford cites the same Bractons words, where it is added, Those things which
are annexed to justice and peace, belong to none but the Crown and dignity
Royal, nor can they be separated from the Crown, for they make the Crown Stamf.
cor. 54. Bract. l. 1. subtit. libert.
, and being regal rights, cannot separate from the regal dignity Fulb. Pand.
10. Camd. Brit. 118.
, therefore are they termed by Civilians and others, Sacra Sacrorum, and
individua.

That the Common law ever gives Common law and Prerog
way, and cannot hu^t; even the lower prerogatives is known by the people, and
the most ignorant: he may sue where he will, distrain where he will, lease and
reserve to a stranger, who may distrain, the quality of his person alters the
descent of Gavelkind, the rules of joyntenancy, no Estoppel can bind him, he
is all truth, judgment final in a Writ of Right cannot con^lude him Flnch 83.
84. co^ 36. 337 243. 322. na. ^r. 263. Dr. 225. Hub. 229. Dr. 139. r. 4. 55. r.
11. 91. r. 5. 92.
. The Irish in Queen Eiizabeths time deny the Ceas, which was a t^x of
provision, for the Deputies Family and soldiers: our Lawy^^s hereupon resolve,
That there is a certain right of Majesty, called royal prerogative, which is
neither subject to the laws, nor repugnant to them Camd. Eliz. 28*
: a custom which exalts it self upon a prerogative of the King is void as to
him Dau. r. 33.
. As the custom of London to create Corporations is void, the King only owning
that power, prescription cannot prevail against it, an usurpation of an hundred
and twenty years, hinders him not in his presentation after office Fulb. pand.
21.
. So the prescriber to toll, wreck, strey, a sanctuary for treason, his
prescription extends not to the Kings goods, nor to treason.

No statute can destroy it, if they Parliam. and Prerogat.
make him hold of any other, it is a statute of Nonsense R. 149. r. 6. 5. r. 8.
118. r. 11. 47. Die. 10. 154. 231. 313. 5. 1 H. 7. Brian. co. 381. ratt. uses 3.
co. 242. 238.
. So to serve any man, he cannot serve his subject: and to dis-inherit the
Sovereign, to destroy the royalty it self, is more impossible to be lawfully
done: To obeserve a little, and in haste of the word Parliament and the
antiquity of the Court: For some there are so much in love with that counsel,
that they draw the pedigree, from the Old Testament, perhaps could have been
contented it were thought to be Jure Divino; pity the China Chronicles were not
extant, they might have discovered farther what Saxon Laws soever are to be
met with, and assemblies, we must be sure to let them be statutes and
Parliaments: yet the Monks are every where to blame, who frequently deceive
with their forgeries, yet with this unhappiness of judgment they ever tell
the tale of the History past long ago, in the words of their own age, so that
they easily discover themselves to be Impostors: Of this nature, that Larua
antiquitatis modus t^uendi Parliamenta, appears to me (though much magnified by
the Chapter Justice, made an Author by Dr. Cowel and the Glossary,) yet because it
is most safe and wise to follow the great Authors, I will say but little: but
that M^d. cap. 2.
he should bring into his Parliament, in the time of King Edward the son of
King Etheldred, that order and manner of Estates even to the Commons
themselves, in fashion now, attributing to his Earls and Barons the same
Knights fees, which our Authors compose them of since, besides the Churchmen,
Abbots, and Priors too, holding by Barony, seems to me done not without a
notable spirit of prophecy: the Earls being neither hereditary till after the
Normans, nor the Barons settled, and ordinary Parliament Lords (but summoned at
the Kings pleasure, Henry 3. in 49. of his reign, taking in but 25 of the
Lay-Barons) till Edw. the first Spe^^. veth. Baro. and Honor.
, and the servitude of fees not being known till after the Conquest, and then
sicut fit in Normannia Codex agra^iu^ Domesd^i dict^^. Tit. Glowcest.
charged; and for the Churchmen, much against their will, and complaining of
the military servitude, William the first imposes upon Bishops and Abbots too,
tenures by Barony M. P^^. hi^^. ^aj. y.
: for the word Parliament, there perhaps wants divination too, for uno atque
altero post Canutum s^culo, an age or two after Canutus it was not used by our
Authors, Council. (...)
Grafton is of opinion, the first Parliament with three Estates in it, was in
the 48 of Hen. 3. Graft. 147. hist.
Martin thinks Henry the first in the 4th of his reign, framed the Parliament
of three estates himself the Head An. 1114.
. Speed, that Henry the first was the founder, and Salisbury in the year 1116
the place, In H^n. 1.
in the ancient So Polid. Virg. l. 1^
use of the state: so he, the people being seldom advised with, Sr. Henry
Spilman writes thus, The Nobility was bound out of custom and duty, in Time of
the Saxon Princes.
the three great feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, to repair to the
King yearly; as well to credit his Court and person, as to consult about the
affairs of the kingdom, and decree, as it were necessary. In those days the
King came abroad crowned, and showed himself in Royal pomp. Henry the second
celebrating the Nativity at Worcester Anno 1158. offered his Crown to GOD upon
the altar, which he never wore after, from whence these great Councels, or
Parliaments, (but of the King and Nobility) were discontinued, and many Ages
after in the time of Edward the third, restored Concilla 347. See the preface
of the act of Merton made at the second Coronation of Henry the 3d.
. So no certainty of the beginning of this Court can be well found, though I
believe it began in Henry the thirds time Vid. Stat. de Marlebridge.
. Two Authors of Henry the firsts days, say then, Either to command taxes or
tribute, or appoint new laws, the Kings Edict alone served the turn Malmsh. de
reg. 69. 70. Eadin. 94. Par. in. an. 1082. Wigo^n. m. 1084. 11. Ed^. conf. c.
11.
. Henry the third by Charter abolishes, in some* places that impious trial,
called, Judicium Dei; the Lord Cook R. 9. Ab. d. strat. Marcel.
will have it outed by Parliament. But our Parliament perhaps was not then to
be had, Provided by the King and his Council, is all the Charter has, and that
which was decreed by the King and his Council, and confirmed with his Seal
Royal, without doubt gained the vigor of Law in that Age Gloss. Sr. (...)
Spelm. 395.
. And since the King has made his people more free, and less servile, by
admitting them into the fellowship of his councels, out of his own benignity
only Dr. Cowel Interpret.
, I know no reason he should lose* and undo himself by his* own grace. It is
no Parliament without the King, he is Caput principium, and finis; the Head,
beginning, and end 4 Inst. 3.
; the business (as the Writ) ever concerns us, our state, and the defense of
our kingdom, Ibid. 14.
and not against all these: no Act can bind without him 1 Jac. c. 14. 4 Inst.
343. 1 Inst. 90. Com. pl. 79. Dr. and ^^ud. 165.
, It is no Act of Parliament, unless it be made by the King, the Lords and
Commons 2 Inst. 157.
. The Lords were anciently summoned in the faith in which they were bound, now
in their faith and allegiance (both forgotten of late) the original of Nobility
it self, being by the Kings creation R 7. 15.
, unlikely they then could be i 4 Inst. 16. 5.
intended formally for Buchanant Ephores, and the bridles of his power. I will
not take upon me to divine, what sense the Lord Whartons Writ of creation
contains, nor what it may enable: but I dare say this Writ of summons cannot
imply, Drive him away by tumults, sequester or rob him of his revenues, pursue
him by the Bloodhounds of the hireling Synod, in a full cry, curse him to his
people, tear him up root and branch, and if your arms grow weary, or you fear
the infamy of the last act, weaken him sufficiently, set that Adder of London
Independency upon him, who you need not doubt, let him charm never so wisely,
will bite him fatally. For this Serpent of Rebellion, was the Amphisbaena
mortal doubly, Presbytery stung in the head, though Independency killed in the
tail: The Parliament should be always full of honor, it should leave causes
to the golden metwaud of the Law 4 Inst. 41.
. It should stear by that which is Law and Custom of Parliament Ibid. 14.
: but no body can have such a law or custom, to destroy it self, to erase its
own head: we have known mad Parliaments 42 H. 3.
: Lacklearning Parliaments 6. H. 4.
, and Parliaments of Clubs 4 H. 6.
, and may know more: But if out of ordinary itch of Innovation, the disease of
the last reigns, which is dangerous 4 Inst. 11.
, if out of ignorance of Burgesses R. 1. Por(...) case.
, whom likely enough, Agrippa that was as bold with the Apostles had noted for
dull and senseless Asses, or out of indiscretion and arrogance, not keeping
themselves within the circle and law of Parliament 4 Inst. cap. P^rl.
, (for some look for law there too;) or by committing the power of Parliament
to the manage of a few Ibid. 42. I^f. 68.
: (a practice, to which we owe some part of our late misfortunes;) If I say by
these or other ways, the Parliament shall enact, (above the flight of an
Ordinance,) against natural equity, as to V. Spencess view of Ireland 22. 23.
25.
constitute a man judge in his own case, such a statute is void in it self, and
shall be controlled by the Common law Hub. rep. 12^.
: a Town has customs and usages against Law and Reason, and no others; a
Parliament confirms their customs, it does nothing, it cannot extend to those
customs L. 5 E. 4. 40. 41.
. The 11 of Richard the 2d enacts, that none condemned or forfeited shall sue
for the Kings grace; it was held an unreasonable statute, without example,
against law and custom of Parliament 4 Inst. 42.
. The statute of hunt^ng is a simple statute; 3 Inst. 77.
so is that of Wills which forbids Idiots to bequeath Hub. 317.
; concerning purlieus and Chases, the statute 22 of E. 4. mistook the law in
both of them 4 Inst. 3^4. 3 Inst 13.
, the 3 and 4 of Edw. 6. cap. 5. whereupon the Duke of Sommerset was indicted,
was repealed justly as a doubtful and dangerous statute. Green Chief Justice
grants, that the 34 of Edward the first, was made more in damage of the people,
then in amendment of the Common Law 24 E. 3. 2 Inst. 526.
; a branch of the statute De asportatis religiosorum is void, as inconvenient
and impossible a Inst. 588.
. The statute of Non claim, brought universal trouble upon the Realm: Q. Mary's
Parliament brought in the Pope, ours a second Cromwell. That a Parliament may
err, is without question Br. Parl. 16. 21 E. 3. 46. co. 86. 400. Cromp. Jur.
cap. Parl.
, if a Parliament which forbids charity and alms to the poor, be void for so
much, if an Act against payment of tithes and things merely spiritual, be
wholly void 21 Hen. 7. 2.
, how binding shall a tertio or small faction of the Commons alone be, which
votes the kingdom poor, advances Catholic sacrilege, and Atheism votes
public robbers honorable, and condemns the innocent to racks and gibbets. I
will cite an opinion, which though it may seem to stretch the true Prerogative
high, (yet it comes not near the overbearing prerogative of the Lieutenant
General;) and the Analogy, in all the parts, will fit this truth, it being
objected against a benevolence, demanded by the Saint Henry, that the demand
was directly contrary to the first of Richard the third; it was replied, Laws
made by Usurpers, oblige not legitimate Princes, that Richard was not only a
Tyrant, but a murderer of his Nephews; and therein more fit to suffer the Law,
then to make any; it being absurd to think, that a statute invented by a
factious assembly, and approved no otherwise then by a criminal in the highest
degree, should bind an absolute and lawful Monarch. Herb. list. ^. 8.
No question but these reasons strike home: much less can the contrarient Vid.
Inf. 63.
actions of the lower servants oblige the Master of the great family here;
since it is manifest, that a Parliament never so lawfully composed, never so
justly tempered, never so free from those faults and imperfections before
recited, cannot maim or weaken the Majesty or Prerogative, it is above a
Parliamentary thunder. Richard the 4. Inst. 42.
second, bequeathed certain treasure to his successors, on condition, to
observe the acts made the 21 of his reign; this was holden unjust and unlawful,
for that it restrained the Sovereign liberty, of the Kings his successors: and
the same reason may serve to overthrow a statute, which shall unjustly and
unlawfully restrain the same Sovereignty: nor had this bequest been of more
strength, had it been made by Parliament, injustice being injustice, In^^^^.
and unlawfulness, unlawfulness every where; and heresy is heresy still,
though defined otherwise by a council. The 15 of Edward the third, was utterly
repealed, and to lose the name of a statute, because contrary to the laws and
prerogative. Rot. Pa^ 17 E^^^. 23.
It Is true, Richard the second made R. de Vere Duke of Ireland for life, albeit
says the chief Justice, it is against the law and custom of Parliament, to
assent to any thing, which was to the disherison of the King and his Crown ^^4
Inct. 14. 357. ^
. It is declared by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, upon demand by the
King, That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
disherison of the King, and his Crown, whereunto they were sworn To: Parl. 42
E. 3. nu. 7.
: both Houses declare in the third of Charles the first, That they have neither
intention nor power to hurt the prerogative 3 Gar. 1. petit. of right.
. By the Lord Cook, A Reprobate is an abject, and created for the Devil; so a
reprobate sense is an abject, and damned sense. These terms are frequently in
Parliaments, when any thing is attempted, against the honor of God, the
prerogative and dignity of the King, the laws of the Realm 2 Inst. 385.
. An ancient Parliament, in answer to a Pope, claiming as umpire, and to give
the Law, spoke thus, as I render it, To the observation and defense of our
liberties, customs, the laws of our fathers, out of duty of oath, we are
bound, which we will maintain, with all our power and strength, and we will
hinder, by Gods help, no do we, nor will we suffer, nor may we, nor ought we,
(after the rude blustering of those times,) our Lord the King, to do or attempt
things so unusual, undue, prejudicial, and unheard of: nay, though he would
consent himself, especially since the said premises, tending to the
d^sinheriting the right of the Crown of the King of England, his Royal dignity,
and the notorious subversion of the state of the said Realm Rot. Par. 28 E. 1.
apud. Lincoln.
: this was good zeal, and more perhaps, then the King durst have spoke: then
Henry the eighth, being denied a divorce, his Parliament resents the Papal yoke
much, and writing to the Pope, has this language, His Royal Majesty is the
Herd, and even the very Soul of us all, his Royal Majesty's cause is the cause
of us all, derived from the Head upon the Members, his grief and injury is
ours, we all suffer equally with his Majesty. The Lord Chancellours oath is of
the Common Laws making, as others the oaths of the great Officers; by this he
swears, not to suffer the disheriting of the King, or that the rights of the
Crown be decreased by any means Rot. Parl. 10 R. 2 8.
. The Lord Treasurers oath is word for word the same. The Barons of the
Exchequer swear to redress with all their power, any prejudice or wrong to be
done to the King 4 Inst. 109. Cromp. juris. 213.
. Now all this were much in vain, had there been known then a more moving
power, supreme, and beyond the royal, why should these swear generally, and
against the whole world, to hinder that which orderly and lawfully might be
done: and his Crown being Imperial, and in very deed of it self most free 13
El. c. 2. inf. 72. Sup. 22. artie. against. Card. Wolsey at H. 8. art. 1.
, he being the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
dominions in all things, and causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, as
appears by the oath and declaring statutes of the supremacy, how can he suffer
any diminution whatsoever, from the Lieges and subjects of this free Crown,
from those which are ever under this supremacy, and his own subordinates, how
ever admitted and assumed unto his Councels, and notioned by a high and
specious name, yet gilded and glorious from the rays of his Majesty; it being
a mistake either full of ignorance or malice, to imagine an household, and not
take the Father in.

But the Commons are the Knights Commons.
of the book, they must be bound by none of these laws, more then by their own
oaths, but some implicit way, are above them all, yet these too cannot
convene, but by his Writ and Name: the reasons too of their coming, are as the
Kings Writ tells us, Concerning us, the King, the honor and safety of the King,
as the Chief Just 4 Inst. 9.
. The state of the kingdom and Church, and not the ruin and confusion of all
these; the title of every Parliament too being, To the honor of God and of
holy Church, and quietness of the people. Parliament men ought to be true men,
neither Traitors, Felons, Outlaws, or breakers of the peace: Cromp. jur. 12. 4
Inst. 25.
All are subjects still, they swear the Supremacy as such: Master Cromwell swore
it, not to revive the opinion, that the Articles proposed by the King are first
to be discussed 2^ R. 2. Graft. Speed.
. When the Parliament begins, the King, or one by him appointed, declares the
causes of the Assembly 4 Inst. 8.
: The King may disallow their Speaker, Ibid.
privilege of Parliament, (which extends to themselves, their servants, and
goods, in suits, and distresses 4 Inst. ^. Cromp. ju^. 8.
, and has devoured all privileges else,) does not hang upon the walls, but is
ever requested, by the Speaker, the first day, from the fountain of justice and
mercy the King R. 7. 37.
, and granted by him: Die. 60. Dn. T. Smith. resp. A^g. 174.
The King is the head, the Lords the principal, and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, the inferior members Die. ibid.
. During this union and consultation with their Head, a King tells us the
injury done the least member, is to be judged as done against his person Cromp.
jur. ^^.
, though far more are the Judges of his Courts of justice privileged, and more
grievously are punished insolent assaults or affraies in them, since he does
but advise with the first, but he is represented by the last Die. 188.
. No Parliament can either begin or end, without the Kings presence, or
representation 4 Inst. 28.
: For the Virtual presence, or Presbyterian presense, has not been heard of
till of late: for want of which discovery, Richard the second being on his way
to Ireland, was represented by the Duke of York; Queen Elizabeth being sick, by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Derby 4 Inst.
7.
CromP. jur. 13. Camd. Eliz. 466.
: the Kings death dissolves the Parliament: 4 Inst. 46. 4 E. 4. 44.
Queen Mary is an example, and the authority of the Members falls as a
derivative, ( altogether making the body of the Parliament Die. 60.
,) not to be thought, were the sovereignty theirs, or inherent in those they
represent: The Commons are the general inquisitors, they transmit examinations,
with proofs and witnesses to the Lords House 4 Inst. 24.
. The Lords are the tryers Ibid. 10. 11.
, the parties grieved may go directly to the Lords House, and not take the
Commons in their way: It was the ancient custom and law of the Parliament, (as
the book) continued unto this day Ibid. 11.
* yet it is cited an error assigned, that the Lords should give judgment,
without a petition or assent of the Commons Ibid. 13.
, I will not so much as think it a forgetfulness, though it may seem a full
contradiction Ibid. 21.
to another; there are those who to avoid an opinion mark the dissentient with
an obiter spoken, experience is doubtless against the single instance, and
that shall be instead of a reply: for proceedings in error 4 Inst. ibid. 1 H.
7. 20.
, the King is sued to by a petition of right, upon whose answer of Fiat
justitia, a writ of Error is directed to the Chief Justice, to remove the
Record in praesens Parliamentum, upon which, the Chief Justice brings the
Record into the upper House, where it is examined Die. 375. Cromp. jur. 13.
, and the proceeding upon the Writ of Error, is only before the Lords in the
upper House 4 Inst. 21. pos^^. 21.
. A few examples too that book has, of the latest times, from which a
judicatory power, for the Commons should be inferred. These were fines, etc. of
some See Judge Jenkin^ Cordial, p. 9.
offenders, in and against the lower House: which power were it allowed them,
in accid^nts and things relating to themselves, because as parts of the great
Corporation and Body, their welfare is considerable, and their peace to be
provided for; yet being a power not borne with them, this mischief would
follow, (besides that every discontent given or taken, would be a breach of
privilege:) they would bring things ad aliud examen, and to new trials;
practices not to be used in a Parliament, which (as the same Author) relieveth
none but such as cannot have remedy but in Parliament, for matters determinable
at the Common law, it remits them thereunto Rot. Parl. 13 R. 2. nu. 10. 4 Inst.
84. 72 1 H. 4. c. 14.
. We should never seek the extraordinary, but where the ordinary is deficient 4
Inst. ib.
, not to note that offenders of the House, may be informed against by the
Attorney General 4 Inst. 18. Cromp. jur. 4. Coron. Fitz. 161. 3 E. 2.
: there are no mischiefs nor grievances whatsoever, hurtful to any rights,
privileges, or persons of Parliament men, which the Law has not appointed
certain easy and orderly remedies for, with severe penalties recoverable
against the wrong-doers, by suits at the Common law, and in those Courts of
Justice, whither the King too by his officers addressed himself to be repaired
in his own cases, provisions not only vain, but simple and ridiculous, had it
been known to the makers of these statutes, that those they secured by several
new laws, by a fundamental indubitate law and prerogative, (more then the King
or any man can be,) * were the Judges in their own K Inst. 141.
cases, and justitiaries of their own injuries; Love and Revenge, two passions
ever ready, when our selves or our enemies are concerned, would render all such
judgments suspicious, it is apparent the Law has made these provisions for
them, be there deceit or foul play in the election, be the Parliament man
assaulted, coming to the place or staying, be he taken in execution, be not
paid his wages, etc. Courts, and Actions, and Damages too, with the Writ of
privilege in case of imprisonment are given Com. 120. 5 R. 2. stat. 2. c. 4. 8
H. 6. c. 7. 23 H. 6. c. 11. 11 H. 6. c 11. 6 H. 6. c. 4. 32 H. 6. c. 15 9 H. 8.
c. 16. 35 H. 8. c. 11. 7 H. 4. c. 15. Die. 60. 265. P. 34. 35 H. 8. 1. 23
: the sight of these laws alone would make any man think they wanted them, for
whose sakes they were invented, whether the Lower House may take a recognisance
or no, is questioned, and only seems to Brook that it may Recog. 82.
; a Court Leet may, that is a Court of Record. 4 Inst. 263.
The house of Commons cannot so much as give an oath, and and with those, how
small and new, their judicatory power is, appears in this, as Chief Justice
Hubert, they had no journal book till Edward the 6 Hub. 152.
, and after, those journals are no records, but forms of proceedings to Records
Ibid. 154.
; and those examples of the book might pass sub silentio too; for thus all
those judgments are reproved and slighted, which come in the way, and are
disliked by some authors.

I shall not say much of an ordinance, Ordinances.
being sometimes by the King, by the King and Lords, and never binding in
succession, 4 Inst. 23. 3 Inst. 40 4 Inst. 25. 48. 113. 2 Inst. 643. 644. 4
Inst. 117. 10. 186.
yet being a term seldom met in our books, but never amongst our Laws, we
being ruled only by Common Law, and Acts of Parliament. The 8 of Henry the 6th
is a statute and no ordinance, though taken otherwise 8 H. 6. c 29. Inst. 159.
, and it has been endeavored to make statutes invalid, by the sole objection
that they were ordinances, which is, (as the book) an objection to the life 1
Inst. 639.
. The King dispenses where statutes are poenal R. 11. 86. Die. 52. 54.
, though the statutes say such dispensation is void, and sometimes without a
non obstante, as of the statutes of Mortmain, Inst. 99. co. 502. 1. 7. 14.
a general statute, which names him not expressly, binds him not, R. 736. 1.
11. 68. com. 140. Kel. 35.
he shall take advantage of any statute though not named, R. 7. 32.
all the old statutes speak in his person, he wills, bids, appoints, commands
are usual. 4 Inst. 239.
Henry the eight was informed by his Judges, that the King stands in no time so
highly in his estate royal, as in the time of Parliament, when the King as
head, and the rest as members, are conjoined and knit together into one body
politic 34 H. 8. Fee^ case r. 5. Cawd. case.
. The King too we know was petitioned, as superior 4 Inst. 82. 83. ^
, after the manner of Parliaments, the ancient statutes being drawn in the form
of Petitions 4 Inst. 25.
, the rest of the Body ever obeyed the summons of this Head, and sought him
out, all jurisdiction being in him Dalt. Just. 1. 2 Inst. 601. 602. sup. 22.
: yet some there are, wittier then Epicurus, who will suppose in things called
gods, not only the image, but fragility of man, inter viva quaerentes mortua;
who thinking they were only born, that posterity might talk monsters, and
portents of them, ill speakers of dignities will raise upon the Law, or this
House, a Tribunal which The trial.
shall try Kings. For Law, let us look on that, since we have read the
Hollander their elder brother, was told, the whole line, though drawn with the
blood of a Sovereign, was made up of Law Lord Bac. just. univers. Aphoris. 39.
Let there be no r^bricks of blood, let no Court deal in cases ca ital, but out
of a known and certain law, God denounced death, then be inflicted it. Nor is
any man's l^fe to be taken away, who first knew not he had sinned against it.
: when Garnet the Gunpowder Jesuit was arraigned for regicide, the Earl of
Northampton tells him, Never in any Religious Age, was the murder of a King
thought an act of prowes, or a step to Martyrdom: likely, and as likely too,
this shall never pass for a religious age. Mr. Fox of the Martyrs in Queen
Mary's days, says, Neither was there so much as one man that once showed any
disobedience to the magistrates, fol. 1387. It was fault enough to be a King
Basil. doro^.
, and it will be danger enough to be a Protestant King. All Reformation is born
like that Roman Tyrant with its teeth. When Magistrates cease to do their
duties (that is, are not as furious as they) to the multitude a portion of the
sword of justice is committed, from the which no person, King, Queen, Emperor
(being an idolater) is exempt Goodman ^ Presbyterian 184, 185: of obedience.
Knox appel 28. 30
: and another: The greatest indignity is offered unto Jesus Christ, in
committing his Church unto the government of the Common law, as can be; the
Spouse unto the direction of the Mistress of the Stews, enforcing her, to live
after the laws of a brothelhouse: no question they have all their ends, and
that blow has struck dead the Common Law too. It were true madness to ask the
Devil the reason of his fall, the destruction of three Nations, could not
happen, without a guilt as horrible to forerun it: we must then see what the
Law has been, before the proscriptions of this unlettered Sylla: and in Law and
sense it will appear impossible, that the substitute should call the author of
his power to an account, Impune quaelibet facere id est regem esse. For though
usurpers (careless of the example,) and seditions have gone far, yet let all
their kennels be raked, even Spencer himself, with his damnable damned
doctrines (as Calvin's case names them) R. 7.
will be found much short of this light; he knew but the way of the sword, by
suit of law, says he, we cannot bring him (to that which he calls there
reason) under; and to see how this was to be done, they incroach (as the
statute) regal power over the King and his Ministers Exil. Hug. le Spencer,
which made him a traitor.
. So to make an extraordinary power, it must be regal still, and the Kings
power, that must be used, though against himself: for it becomes not the
subject to give laws G^oss. Spelm. Ver. Forres.
, it being against the Crown and dignity of the King, to deal in that, which
they have not lawful warrant from the King to deal in 2 Inst. 602*
. The statute goes on, They exercise high justice, power of life, and death,
taking unto themselves (still as there) the Kings power, and the jurisdiction
belonging to the Crown, in disherison of the Crown. The Lords forgiven, for the
persecuting these Spencers (for the Father and Son went together) excuse
themselves upon this reason: The Spencers having incroached Royal power, could
not be attainted by process of Law Stat. ne quis occasion. pro telon. fac. in
prosecut. H. le Spencer, pat. and fill.
: Nay, treason, ever amongst the Heathens too used to kill, by close stabs and
poison, never by form. There is one only King amongst the Spartanes, Agis
murdered by the Ephores, (being first sentenced by those Ephores in the
public prison, whither they had treacherously and violently drawn him) for
attempting (as Plutarch) Plut. in Agis.
things highly brave, to the glory and dignity of Sparta, as the same Plutarch,
their companies of strange soldiers had in horror the execution, a Sergeant
weeps, but the King, tells him, he was of more worth, then those that forced him
to dye thus unhappily, his Mother cries out, the too much goodness,
sweetness, and clemency of her son, were the causes of his death. The fear of
the Magistrates was not so great, but the Citizens had the boldness, to show
openly they were much displeased, and that they hated the contrivers to the
death, they call it the most detestable villainy that ever was committed in
Sparta, since the Dorians first came in, and planted the Peloponnesse; they
say, the hands of their enemies never touched their Kings, but if possible,
would ever turn from them, out of fear and reverence, which they bore unto
their Majesty. These Ephores (so extolled by Pagan Buchanan) were first merely
Plut. in Clcomen.
the Ministers and Surrogates of Kings, in time of war chosen by them, to
supply their place of justice at home: but (as it may be observed of others in
some late reigns) by degrees, they incroached and usurped a jurisdiction
distinct, and attributed the puissance sovereign to themselves, many Ages
after the institution of Kings there. So that Author, who gives this censure of
those insolents, The Ephores (says he) would In Clcomen.
they have carried themselves gently and modestly, had perhaps been more
tolerable: but being obstinate, out of a liberty or power usurped, to suppress
the Magistrate lawfully, and from all antiquity instituted, so far, as to
banish some and murder others, without either form or order of justice, this
(says the History in the person of the next King) is not to be endured. I
shall not much trouble my self to fetch in the old Texts, (being every where in
defense of these rights, to use those or others to the same purpose,) The King
has no equal, by no means no Superior; the King ought not to be under man, but
God, every man is under the King, and he under none ^ract. l. 1. c. 8. Cawd.
casc. 1. 5. Dau. r. 85. 2. Inst. 681. Finch 81. 1 H. 7. 10.
. The King is the most excellent part of the Common wealth, next unto God Ma^w.
for. law 7
. The King is under no vassalage, he takes his investiture from no man, nor
acknowledges no superior but God alone Camd. ^rit. 105.
. I will but note the inhumane injustice, That subjects apostatized degenerate
into Rebels, grown not only as dangerous as enemies, but consederated to urge
the hostility, contrary to all laws, as I have observed, should sit both
parties and judges: and (besides that) the law is positive, no man shall be his
own judge, R. 8. Dr. Bo^b. cas^.
but the King; and yet he (as Babington) delivers his own judgment by us or
others his Judges H. 8. 6. 19. charged upon the E. of Strafford, that he was
both party and judge, Artic. 1.
,) there could not be one upon that bench, but was either to share in his
power, or revenues. This they know too, if they acquit him, they condemn
themselves, that very trial being criminal enough, and it being to be granted
by all sides, that the arms of one of the parts were unlawful, be it never so
cruel, so damnable, so mischievous a crime, the Plut. in Agis. Nimirum summi
ducis est occider^ Galbam.
King of Sparta shall find no justice, no eloquence shall protect him, no
truth, no innocence shall save, they have sworn to destroy his power, and must
secure themselves at what price soever, Majora deliquerant, quam In magnis
printipum injuriis non incipitur ut desistatur, scelus sceleri viam emo^^it. Of
R. 2. The Lords had certainly so behaved themselves toward the King, they saw
they mu^^ be masters of his person and power, or perish. Sp(...) 616.
quibus ignosci possit: all experience, all history divine and profane, old
laws, and new resolutions, might be raised against these furies: in a Council
at Chalcuth in the Mercian kingdom, the inland kingdom of the Saxons, called
the universal council of the English, a thousand years since wanting but 38,
this Law or Canon we meet with, Let no man have to do in the death of the
King, not communicate in it, because he is the Lords anointed. If any man shall
join in such a sin, if he be a Bishop or a Churchman, let him be degraded, and
cast out of the holy inheritance, as Judas from the Order of the Apostles, and
whosoever consents to such a sacrilege, let him perish, in the everlasting
band of an Anathema, let him be the companion of Judas the traitor, let him
burn in those flames, which shall never extinguish, the doers, and they that
consent with the doers shall never escape the judgment of God. Did not David,
when God said, I will deliver Saul into 1 Kings 24. 5.
thy hands, answer his Captain that urged him to kill him: Far be this sin from
me, that I should stretch out my hand against the anointed of the Lord? he cut
off the soldiers head, who protested he had slain Saul, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness, and to his posterity after him. Contil. Calcuthcas. an.
717. capit. ^^.
Thus the Council; and if Saul's person be sacred, all Kings doubtless should
be inviolable, but a trick they have found out by that pedant, the greatest
tyrant of his Age, of strength to put by the force of any piece of Scripture
whatsoever. Tell them they must obey the powers, be subject to Princes, of
Saint Paul's appeal to Nero, and admission of his jurisdiction, he replies for
them, Buch. de jur. reg. p. 50. 55.
Paul writ and did this in the infancy of the Church, when the Christians were
few and weak: not one commandment or precept can hold against Llam. a Casulst.
389. of fasts, if a man have wearied himself, in breaking a house, that he
might rob or kill his neighbor, or in muldplying unchaste actions, or in
traveling to visit his Concubi^e, and fi^des himself unable, be is not bound
to the Fasts.
these limitations, Thou shall not steal or plunder may be meant from the
Saints, and thou shall not commit adultery intended of the sick; it cannot but
be irreligious impiety, (though well enough becoming a Scot,) to persuade the
World after so many years, that Saint Paul's Epistles are no more divine, but a
temporizing cunning piece of politics, for such they must be thought, if these
interpretations be authentic. Hoel Dha, King of Wales, a Lawgiver in this
Isse 700. years since, has this amongst his other laws, Rex non poterit
secundum legem in lite stare, coram judice suo, agendo, vel respondendo, per
dignitatem naturalem, vel per dignitatem terrae, ut optimus vel alius. The King
according to law, cannot in any suit or trial, either become the actor or
defendant, before his Judge, by his natural dignity, or by the dignity of the
Land, as a Noble man or any other ^n. H. Sp. council. an* Ch^. 940.
: nearer our times after the Confessors laws were allowed, and the Common law
began habitare late, to spread, we find this law, Let no man judge his Lord,
or give judgment upon him, whose liegeman he is Leg. Hen. 1, ^32. ^. c. 75. 83.
. In the learned speech, at the trial of the Jesuit of the Powder Plot, it is
said, when the Scots would refer all differences, betwixt our King and them, (I
think Edward the first is intended,) to the Popes decision, the Peers refuse to
consent, because (so they) in things of that quality, (For they concerned not
the Church) Their King was not to make his answer before any Judge whatsoever,
either Ecclesiastical or secular E. of North. Spe^ch.
: as Speed, their King was not to answer in judgment, for any rights of the
Crown, before any Tribunal under Heaven. Erubescit lex filios castigare
parents, is the Common law Maxim, in Dr. Bonhams case; where the College of
Physicians in London, would take upon them, to judge and try the sufficiency of
a Doctor graduated in Cambridge. Little streams the goodness and clearness of
the Fountain, enough to put the Law to her blush, (as the rule,) to see the
children correct the parents R. 8. 11^.
, This God commands in the holy Scriptures, this the Law of Nature dictates,
that every subject obey his Superior R. 7. 1^.
, then not try and condemn him is easily employed. In Crompton, the L. Cook, the
Diversity of Courts, Annals of the Laws, or others, Let them but show, the
footsteps of their High Court of Justice in any of them. Sup. 23.
All are the Kings Courts, the Parliament it self, is his Court too 33 H. 6. 18.
; that they may not persuade the ignorant, that he can be meant by any general
penal law or statute, he is not within the words, High and great men, in the
Act of scandalum magnatum, but above them a Inst. 228. Die. 155.
: as before, no statute binds him unnamed SuP. 43.
: and which of them all have made rules against the King, or subjected him to a
trial. Vindicta est mihi, all revenge must come frrom God or his Lieutenant the
King, in some of his Courts of justice a Inst. 103.
: The use of a King is not only for the defense of our bodies and goods, but
of the Law too. Fortese. c. 13.
The Laws are received, allowed, and put in practice, by the Kings authority
Postnat. 36.
; and besides the greatness of these benefits, (enough to set as high a price
on him, as those Israelits did of their David, who cried, thou art worth 1 Samuel
2.
ten thousand of us,) those other ties R. 7. 4. 1 R. 7. 13.
of reverence q, obedience and ligeance r, should preserve him from being
thrown into the common misfortunes of other men, and from appearing before any
bar as a prisoner, where those Judges sit who are authorized from himself; were
his life so cheap, the Law would every day want the soul that should actuate
it, the name of a Prince would be most contemptible: and if the refractory
contumacy and ignorance of the English increase awhile (which ever* go
together) a week will be a long reign. The Lord Chancellor Egerton in Calvin's
case, says, he holds Thomas Aquinas his opinion to be good, which is this, The
King is free, and not bound by the Laws, as to a co^rcive or forcing power, as
to a directive power he is bound by his own consent, who shall say unto him,
what do thou? Postnat. 106. Eccles. c. 8.
In the first of Henry the fourth, there was a Council of Lords, such as had
been instruments of the new usurpation, (we may be sure the Law was not much
heeded, not much sought after) the Earl of Northumberland of the name of
Piercy demands, what were to be done concerning the life of Richard the late
King, then called Lord Richard (and not Richard Plantagenet barely) that worthy
Prelate (as the Chief Justice) a Inst. 635.
John Merks Bishop of Carlisle spoke thus, They ought not to sentence the King
for these causes; First, Their power could not reach him, he was their
superior, and the Lords anointed. Secondly, They had obeyed him as their King
twenty two years. Thirdly, The Duke of Lancaster had done more trespass to the
King and his Realm, then the King had done to him or them: he desires the names
of those that would proceed against him, might be entered into the Parliament
roll. The stout and resolute speech of the worthy Bishop took some effect,
says the L. Cook x. The Lords vote upon it, they would by all means that
Richards life should 1 H. 4. 101. Parl. nu. 73.
be safe: but it appears more fully in another place to be the opinion of the
Lord Cook, that this Tragedy of Richard the second, (so much loved by late
rebellions) was treason and rebellion. * All the Judges of this opinion for R.
the ad. and E. the ad. their cases in that E. of Ess. case. Camd. El. ^00. The
statute which declares E. 4. his title, says Hen. 4. did timorously against
his all giance, rear arms against R. 2. 9 E. 4. 9. 3 Inst 12. inf. 85.
2. For the Lord Cook asking the Earl of Southampton, arraigned with the Earl
of Essex, whether to seiz the Queens Court armed, with a design to be masters
of her person, were treason or no: and Southampton demanding of him again,
whether he imagined in his conscience they would have offered violence to the
Queen? the Lord Cook replies, You would have done what Henry of Lancaster did
to Richard the second, he came humbly to the King, under pretense to remove
evil Councillors, but having got the King into his power, spoiled him of Realm
and life Camd. El. 797.
. There is but one unfortunate Prince more, who can serve for an example, and
for imitation to Rebels, (for Henry the sixth lost his Royalty to the justice
of Edward the fourths titles,) and that was Edward the second, 3 Inst. 12.
in whose History adultery, and not law is legible, and an Aegystheus and a
Clytemnestra, act in every Scene, yet notwithstanding his dismissing himself of
the Crown (as it is 4 E. 3. 101. parl. nu. 5.
called) his murderers had the judgment of traitors.

Those that are Judges in Parliament are Judges of their Peers, but the King
has no Peer in his own land, therefore he cannot be judged 3 E. 3. 19. Glan.
l. 7. c. 10. Stamf. cor. 153. sup. 47. Stamf. 5.
, (as Stamford) by them, as the Book. That he has no Peers is evident from that
statute of Eliz. entitled, An act for the assurance of the Queens power over
all estates 5 Eli^.
. They must first depose him then: For as King he can have no Peers, and so
cannot be tried: and if they do depose him, (which shall be proved hereafter
illegal and Id possumus quod jure postumu^. The law would have us think every
thing impossible. that is unlawful. Swinb. test. 225.
impossible,) then is he judged and punished before they have found him guilty;
yet the Judge must not be easily discovered; the life of man as one, which of
all things in this world is the most precious, ought to be tried before Judges
of learning and experience in the laws of the Realm 2 Inst. 30.
, and every Judge must take his authority from the King. Stamf. 55. Bract. l. 2.
c. 2^. The Judges have been styled ministri regis. W. 1. 25. 1 Inst. 207.
No man, not of the Kings faith can be a Judge, nor any man that has d 3 Car.
1. Opinions of this Parliament contrary to their actions.
not his Commission from the King *. And as the Petition of Right, No man ought
to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in your Realm, the
customs of the same, or by Acts of Parliament. The fifth Article against the
Earl of Strafford, charged him, To have used a tyrannical government, not
only over the lives, but also over the lands and goods of the Kings subjects,
against the seventh of H. 6 (say they) which provides all matters to be
determined by the ordinary Judges. The fifteenth Article, To have inverted the
ordinary course of justice. The House of Commons, it should seem, when they
took such care, to frame their Articles out of the matter of such corruptions,
were th^n of an opinion, that these practices were abominable in others, and in
such crimes to be suspected, was to be capital. There are the new Gnostics as
well as the old, who are always clean and the spiritual: and though there may
be sins for others of a more unworthy Clay, yet every thing must turn to gold
at the touch of their fingers; the same Commons in the sixteenth Article
against that illustrious unfortunate, are very angry, That he had Eandem
virtutem and oderant and mirabantur.
taken upon him (so the Article) a royal and Independent power; and in the
ninth, That having established his arbitrary government, his next design was
to make intrusion upon the The Article applying to his own use the public
revenues, to be more able to accomplish his d^stoyal intentions, withdrawing
sums from the Crown, as the close.
Crown it self, this they add, being a crime of a higher nature then his
others, those being done against the Subject only, this against the King
himself; as in the close, having weakened the King, and prejudiced the subject
of the protection, he was to expect from him; I wish the Commons had been of
this judgment to this day, and that it were as fatal to act these Articles as
it has been to be accused of them, then had no intrusions been suffered upon
the Crown, the King had not been so weakened, that he was not able to protect
either his subjects or himself; crimes of Majesty against the King himself had
still been the most heinous, and a royal power had been independent yet, nor
had wanted our arguments, more then subjects bound by nature, and oaths,
persuasions to keep themselves honest: how many repent themselves of their
London faith, and giddy zeal, being the converts of experience, the mistress
of Fools? as they say of Calvin, Could he have foreseen what mischiefs were to
accompany his Presbytery, he had never set up this standard of Christ, (as
blasphemously they call it:) so perhaps had Mr. Pyms spirit been aware, how far
the flames would have ascended, he had never tied the Foxes tails. But to keep
my way. Though the Commons are changed, the Law is the same still. The Kings
person is subject to no man's suit. Stamf. Prerog. 5. If the King enters any
man's land, there is no remedy but by petition 4 E. 4. 9.
. If he kills any man, there is no remedy, yet is it ill done, as Judge Weston
Com. 247.
, in the third of Eliz. (a Princess, who among Sr. Rob. Naunt.
, her people got the name, of most gracious and popular, and as a woman, could
not be like to pay for the opinion:) The King cannot be attainted, no not in
Parliament; yet all judgments in treason and felonies, and attainders follow
one another. Henry the sixth, after his inchoation or reception, holds his
Parliament, though attainted before by King Edwards Parliament, and disabled as
to the Crown, Br. parl. 105.
, his new gained Royalty made all this void, (though that Royalty was never de
jure, but de facto only, never of right. It was Brutum fulmen a flash of weak
malice, and a poison which could not hurt: if the attainder of a private man
falls off alone, at the access of the Royalty descended 1 H. 7. com. 2; 8,
I^st. 16 Fi^z. ti^* parl. 2. Br. 37. com. 244.
, and it be granted that criminal causes cannot disable the descent, or accruer
of right, less can they disable, when it is descended, which right no order of
men can blot. In the King (says the Law,) is imaginable no imperfection, no
infamy, stain, or corruption of blood Finch r^q. ^^.
. If a few Commoners can judge the Kings head, I may use Plinies censure of the
sentence, A Roman of quality being murdered by his own servants, No man now
(says he) can be secure, because he is mild and remiss. Non judicio Domini,
sed scelere perimuntur, it is wickedness, not judgment which destroys masters.
But to consider farther, Stam^. Cor.
all indictments run in the Kings Dalt. Just. L* Edw. Cons. c. 35.
name, the peace is his peace, all felonies are against his Crown, all treasons
against his Crown and person. No man can be attainted of high treason, unless
the offense be in law high treason 4 Inst. 39.
. There is no treason but such as is declared in 25 of Edward the third Rast.
Treas. 20.
. The reason that no Writ ever lay against him, is from the absurdity that he
should command himself Stamf. prerog. 42. Bract. l. 3. co^tra q^em compe^ir.
ass. Finch 255. M. Finch 83.
. No action lies against the King, for who (as one) can command the King m,
both which difficulties were easily removed, had a supreme name, and primum
mobile, been any where in nature discovered, to which he was to submit: but the
Law never went so far, never coeli ultra solisque; vias; If any man ask for a
late positive law, I might reply, as he did, who was bid to produce a decree
against Parricide, That there was never any such sin committed in his
Commonweal. Our forefathers would not forespeak their posterity, nor could
they divine their own blood should so much corrupt; The Commons of England (as
in some Creeds) being ever exemplary for their tenderness of their Kings
dishonor, and maintainers of their Sovereignty Dau. 1. ^6.
. But I answer, this Act is against every statute, every Law of treason, and as
much beyond known and common treason, as a private man is beyond a common
Homicide, who intending the murder of his father will personate the Judges
part, and formalize a wicked ceremony first; which yet had not needed, their
Patriarch Muncers Letter had been enough killing alone, whose doctrine it was,
That all Judgments Muncers bible must have Muncers interpretation.
civil must be by the Bible, or by revelation from God, and that all in dignity
must be equal: the first treason in the statute of treasons concerns the Kings
death, the compassing of that 3 Inst. 3. 6. E. of Ess. case.
, it is true, more then compassing or imagination, the statute has not; yet if
getting the King into their power, or imprisoning of him, if Gunpowder, as well
as Armies or Poison, be within the word, or its sense, with as good a reason is
a trial, within that sense, it being (we find) as quick a way to destroy as
another: Compassing is certain, and enough; the ways, and Medias which several
Traitors should invent or use, could not be declared or thought on, under
prophecy, which is conquered too, or was ever due

to the side: but it appears, resisting Mr. Cromwell, was to make an exception:
and this statute was to hold but till his salley: a summer or two hence we
shall know more of that: but if resistance be so mortal, what Prince generally
since the Saxon plantation, nay, since the first day of rule, is not within the
danger of a trial? It is a rare treason, and not every where read, that a King
must be supposed to commit against his own sworn liegemen and homagers; a
treason never met with, in any Author, Christian or others: Majestas laesa,
Majesty violated, is all the treason, the genus of all the treasons, that any
law civil or municipal takes notice of; this Majestas Laedens, or Majesty
violating, is such a treason as Trebonian never dreamt of, Fitzherbert knew
nothing, the Lord Cook never heard a word, and which a man must be religiously
mad to believe, treason in all books being a crime done against the dignity,
greatness, power, and security of the Prince in a Monarchy, of the Magistrate
in any other government of the people, a^ seditious Athens heretofore. I have
observed one treason objected against Richard the 2d, a treason not thought so
now, and not full so senseless as the last, which was treason against the
rights of his Crown. The Rochellers Sieur Per^.
before their last siege, declare all men traitors that do not adhere to their
assembly, which was a very pretty French treason: nor is it any wonder the King
should be called a traitor, since Mr. Cromwell may perhaps think himself (like
Hacket with the discipline) the King of Europe; and that John of Leyden,
Emperor of all the Earth, to destroy all Kings, Sleid.
Presbyterian Prophet, more blasphemous then Mahomet, assumed our Saviors
natures and would be Christ himself Camd. El. 580. li Conspirac. for Presbyt.
discip.
. Further, since holy King Charles is charged with murder, and offensive arms,
(though we may charge this charge in that of Paterculus, Expediebat facto
parricidii Caesarem tyrannum appellari, it concerned them that designed treason
against him, to call Caesar tyrant:) one word of those arms: have we not seen
which army was first raised? whose Commissions were first issued? and (what is
the very sign of sedition and rebellion,) the people courted; modest and calm
dissentients reviled, and posted? the Prince, the Arcanaimperii traduced, and
laid open? Fables and lies, as idle as the Sermons in every man's hands; the
factious Citizens, that would be wise because they are rich, pour out their
unrighteous Mammon, arming against their own good fortune, and driving away
theirs, and the Kingdoms prosperity, sacrificing themselves, and the fruits of
so many years peace, (which yet they ought to a most pious Sovereign, and the
blessed rule of his Ancestors,) to the cruel Furies and irreligious
covetousness of the five Members, and a few malcontents, as to wicked
spirits? Religion being become Faction, obedience to Gods Ordinance,
Malignancy. The Scriptures and the Hoc terum statu a regils partib. stare pro
crimine pe^duellionis habebatur. Thuan.
Laws expounded against the Texts, suppositions of an imaginary fundamental
invisible government, jealousies and fears Cavendo ne metu^nt, metuendos ultra
se efficient. The King never in any demands sought the be^^ering or increasing
his j^st rights, but to preserve his own, which alone proves him the defensive.
, without either faith or charity, blowing the fire of a Civil war,
propositions and demands to their liege Lord, so unreasonable and unjust; it
was clear, they neither cared for peace, nor would be contented with the
buckler, the King sometimes abandoning his friends, his strengths and revenues,
saw his Forts surprised, his domestics, and most intimate Counselors too
corrupted, and bought to betray him, his Magazines seized on, full allarms, and
signs who began: Nay, their General, the Revelation rider of the red Horse,
(according to the Mufti) had not only listed the Butchers, and the prodigal
sons of the town, but was got to horse ere the Royal Standard was advanced.
Something strange, the defensive part should march to Shrewsbury and Edgehil,
to find out the offensive, when all law, bids the defendant draw back, and not
strike, but when he can retreat no farther, Defense being instantis vel
imminentis offensionis propulsatio, the repelling the force that is over a man's
head, that is imminent; and were arming criminal, yet necessitas inducit
privilegium, necessity excuses, nay, takes away the guilt, as a Woman kills the
assayling Ravisher, it is justifiable Eac. elem. 25. r. 10. 61. 2 Inst. 326
, since any man may be the offensive lawfully, when it is unlawful to defend,
as to strike in dedefence of a man's goods Kel. 92. 9 E. 4. 28 Bald. Sect, si
fur de su^^.
: They know in their consciences, and shall with confusion of faces one day
give an account for it, who were the defensive, in these broils* but either
offensive or defensive, as to precedence of time, who heaped up, the provision
of powder, and matter of conflagration, it is visible: Nor can any Faux seem
defensive, if the King shall fall upon him, and not stay his time of giving
fire; and to build a civil and a Church-war, upon no other grounds but the
sands of Utopia, and I know not what fictions of distrust, the rageing of the
waters, and the madness of the people; they have won by the sword Their
expressions.
and will rule by it, indeed shows their whole history has more of the sword
then spirit in it, and possible, they that take so much of the sword may perish
by the sword: but this is but untimely piety, all our reasons are Physic to
the dead, we have seen this crystal of Majesty, so long beset with the quick
fire of zeal, it is at last dissolved into the original drops, we have seen
this royal Argo, robbed of her fleece and sails, split her naked ribs upon the
cliffes of her own unnatural shore, and like the Persian raving, we lash the
sea, accuse the desperate Pirates, and confute the storm, and reasonably enough:
they who have been covetous, rather of height then innocence, shall be told at
what price they have brought this flaring brittle greatness, and the careless
lookers on be shown, some of the glories of that gem, which they unworthily
have thrown away: I will conclude this discourse, with this character, of the
King of this kingdom, 2 Inst. 198. 3 Inst. 5. Ins. 8^.
The King is the Father of the country, and the head of the Commonwealth; and
a great Historian asks, Who ever liked that body long, whose head was taken
away?

It is now to be considered, (for in Royal Dures
the Kings trial Monarchy it self, they think has received a very killing
sentence,) 1. Whether force (himself out of fear consenting or not) may extort
this this royalty. 2. The King may freely part with it. 3. Or the people
require it from him. If none of those can be done, (and we know the two last
needed not have been mentioned, or thought of, being neither of them likely to
happen, which therefore makes the concession more easy,) then we are sure this
right is not cut off with his head, but descended to his eldest son the now
King: Dures which is a compulsion by menace of death or personal hurt, and by
all such acts as include the danger of death, present or future, no doubt may
reach the King: the person being King Calu. r. 7.
, he may be awed, and frighted out of his rights, as much as other men; nay, be
awed to speak his traitors good, and justify those thrusts which have run him
through. There is a Parliament Roll termed Rotul. contrarientium, for that
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, siding with the Barons against Edward 2. it was not
safe for the King to call them rebels or traitors, but contrarients, such was
their power: an Historian in R. the 2d calls the five Lords, one of which
dethroned the King after, the Kings Lords, for (as he) they were more masters
then the King, having drawn up 40000 men to awe him in the Parliament, of which
hereafter, and sent him word, if he came not quickly, they would choose a King,
who would and should obey the Council of the Peers, yet is the King forced to
acquit them by Proclamation, and note their accusers for unjust: Paris. Hen. 3.
960. 836. Ibid.
How often did Bigod and Montford belie the third Henry to his face, Earl
Warren answer a quo warrant^, with his sword drawn in the full Court; Clifford
forces the Kings Messenger to ^at the kings Writ, wax and all.

Nay, they placed 24 administrators over him and the kingdom, when he was above
50 years old, swore him M^t. West. H. 3. M. Par. 970.
to their new Ordinances, threatening death to all refusers, left him nothing
but the upper room at meetings. All Ages have shown some pieces and types of
this Cromwell, but the Common law would not so much as seem to force the King,
no not in those acts, which ought to flow from him of right ex'debite justitiae:
he that was a Clerk convict, who had made his purgation, might have had a Writ
of restitution for his lands, etc. which he was to be restored to of right, yet
the Writ ended with this clause, sine delatione restituas, etc. restore of our
special grace, etc. words used merely for the honor of the King N. Sr. 66.
reg. 68.
. He that kills se defendendo, ought to be pardoned of course, by the Prince,
yet says the statute, if it please him Stams. cor. 15. stat. Gloc, c. 5.
, these being words of reverence to the King, as the Commentator ^ Inst. 317.
, and again, in some cases, when the King ought ex merito justitiae, out of
duty of justice, to make restitution, to the party, yet for the honor of the
King, the Writ says, Without delay, of our special grace restore, which
derogates nothing from the right of the subject, when right is accompanied with
grace; 3 Inst. 241.
and if it be treason to take the King by force, and strong hand, and to
imprison him, till he has yielded to certain demands, as a sufficient open
act, to prove the compassing and imagination of the death of x 3 Inst. 12 Hill.
1. Jac. Wats. Clerks case. Sem. Priests. E. of Ess. case, An. 1601.
the King *, (resolved thus as the Lord Cook, in the case of the Earls of Essex
and S. who intended to have taken the Queen into their power, etc. And so (as
he) by woeful experience, in former times it has fallen out, in the cases of
King Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry the sixth, and Edward the
fifth, that were taken and imprisoned by their subjects: this appears more
plain by the legal form of an indictment, the first part of which alleges, the
death and destruction of the king to be compassed and imagined: the second part
alleges the open fact, as for preparation to take and imprison the King, etc.
3 Inst. ubi sup.
) Then necessarily a King cannot be bound, to these demands, got from him by
the treason of the agents, more then contracts upon the high way, betwixt
desperate armed robbers, and honest travelers, can be effective, otherwise the
Law should admit him in a worse condition, then his subject who cannot be
bound by any such act z; which were absurd 2 Inst. 433. ^ Inst. 15. 16.
, since all his grants too are void jure regio, by royal right or law royal,
when he may be thought deceived R. 2. 32. R. 11. 86.
, much more here his grants, being ever construed with favor R. 1. 41. R. 7.
11. Hub. r. 314.
. Yet I know there is a rule too which half crosses this, to this intention,
That the royal grants shall be expounded beneficially for the Patentee, and to
be effectual for the Kings honor R. 6. 5. 118. 77.
. This is to be meant, when they cannot be thought suspicious of any such
deceit, ( for he deceives himself, that thinks to deceive the King, says the
Law R. 11. E. of Deu^ case.
.) And I am content the rule shall hold, in this case of force too, if any man
will think it honorable, that a King should be thus forced: and were this
consent given in Parliament, yet had not the violence been purged, but had
still been traitorous and void, according to Eup. 29. 35. 34 Inf. 1 Graf. R.
2. postn. 18. 56.
those Judges f, the difference only, that the injustice thus is more
publicly done, neither the place nor those that sit there, (be they never so
sacred,) being of virtue to change the nature of the actions, Caesar being as
much murdered, and as traitorously, in the Senate, by the stabs of Senators,
as if he had been struck in the basest street, and by more ignoble hands: and
further, if it be treason in all orders of men, to attempt against the Kings
life and free power 1 Inst. 12.
, th^n he that strikes him through, or binds him, yet forcing him to use his
own hands as instruments of his own harm, is guilty of the breach of this Law,
and place or quality do nothing: As if a stander by strikes a third man with my
hand, I strike not the blow, but he that moved my hand Hub. 181.
. The story of the Pirates ship, and Alexanders navy, may notion any violence,
and whatsoever is taken, either by a multitude or a single Purser, either
rights or honor, as well as money and things, besides it is commanded by a King
in Parliament, and enacted that in all Parliaments, Treaties, and Assemblies to
be made in England for ever, every man shall come without force, and without
armor well and peaceably. To the honor of us, and the peace of us and our
Realm. 7 E. 1.
But this King according to the fate of of his best successor, neither found
honor nor peace at this rebellious assembly; the essential sense of the word
not being to be found in either house, no man having the boldness to speak a
word, but what the Kings Masters inspired; a Parliament followed the twenty one
of this King, of the same judgment with those Judges, who pray, the Commission
extorted in decimo of this King, may be annulled, as a thing traitorously
done: For of the Parliaments, which forced this King to the peril of his life,
Speed calls the first V. Speed 615. 626.
Seditious; Sir J. Davies, in the Preface to his Reports, the second, Unruly,
even to attempts, of introducing the trials of the Civil Law in causes
criminal: I grant this of 21 was repealed by the 1 of H. 4. a rebel in the 10
and 11 of R. 2. and an usurper in the last, so that as to the reason of things,
his repeal cannot weigh much, he being an actour in those factious violent
assemblies, and so is the judge of his own case and beginning his usurpation,
upon the foundation of those seditions, we must not look for much equity, in
those judgments, in which he was bound, to maintain and justify his own
party and those proceedings, though with the condemnation of Richards whole
history, and some diminution of the rights of the free Crown. It may often
happen too, that it must be madness to believe a Parliament: the first of
Richard the third, bastardizes Edward the fourths posterity, to flatter a
tyrant; but what historian since, ever fixed a truth upon this act, Elianor
Butler was supposed, as appears by Parliament roll, contracted to Edward the
fourth, but how true (considering the time and occasion) we leave to others to
judge, says the Historian. Concerning the Wives and succession of Henry the
eighth, what changes and contradictions do we find, in the Parliament
Declarations, First the marriage with Katherine is void, that with Anne good 25
H. 8. 52.
. Then the marriage with Anne of Bolein is disclaimed, divorces with both those
w^ves confirmed, their issues made illegitimate 28 H. ^. c. 7.
. The 26 which 26 H. 8. c. 1.
commanded to swear to Q. Annes heirs repealed, then the Crown is entailed
orderly to La. Mary and Elizabeth 35 H. 8. c. 1.
, who then must be both legitimate, which cannot so easily be understood;
Apollo though he missed the truth as much, yet kept his credit better, for his
Oracle ever went to two or three tunes: but to go on, I know the Chief Justice
brands the Judges of this reign and opinion bitterly: but this may be
attributed perhaps to the providence of his fears, lest this force might come
to be pretended every where The King in Magna Chatta grants by the words, Of
our good and free will, because k. John sought to avoid the same grant, as made
by Dutes. 2 Inst. 2.
, and so all concessions of Ages retro be made uncertain: but were the Law
declared otherwise, to what calamities and rapines would the Crown be subject?
What Antiparliaments, or Parliaments of my L. of Essexes summons, should E. of
Ess. would have summoned a Parliament. C^m. El. 794 L. Cook.
we be used to? and rather then fail of their ends, as one of that conspiracy,
they must draw blood from Q Elizabeth her self, like that sea of Florence, Sr.
Chapter Blunt at his execution. but he says not by trial, or otherwise.
our government would change at least seven times in an Age: there would be no
end of asking, while any thing remained to grant, especially it being lawful to
force; requests would be heaped upon requests, every thing would be thought
due, that could be had: I will oppose a most learned Chancellor against the
censure ^.
, who says of this reign, and these Judges, Our Chronicles talk idly, and
understand little, Then power and might of some potent persons, oppressed
justice and faithful Judges, for expounding the law soundly and truly: I will
produce a most wise rule of King James's, to try not only those statutes of 10
and 11, but all laws else, it is this, In all, either custom, or example, the
times are to be looked upon, when things began, in which, if either confusion
or ignorance bore the sway, it derogates much from the authority of what is
done, and renders every thing suspect: and we know Silent leges inter arma, let
the Bar sound as loud as it dare, yet the Drum sounds louder, and drowns all.
In the time of Edward the third, one claims a Warren by Charter, of the Kings
great Grandfather, Aldenham asks, how this Charter could be allowed, For Henry
the third was imprisoned, and forced to make many Charters Cas. in it intem. E.
3. pl. 50.
; the Barons were out of their wits then, as our Janus Dr. H. Sp. glos.
: if the Sheriff return he is resisted in the execution of the King his Writs.
This is disallowed, because such an answer does much redound to the disgrace of
our Lord the King, and his Crown. So the statute W. 1. c. 39.
. The Gloss, That which is to the disgrace of our Lord the King, is against
the Common law a Inst. 1^3. 414.
. Then we may add, no reason it should bind, and no body can deny, but the
procuring such concessions, by such ways, is to the disgrace of our Lord the
King: this were upon the matter, to make the King a subject, and to dispoil him
of his Kingly office of royal government 2 Inst. 12. E. o^ Ess. case.
, as the Chief Justice, it being manifest rebellion (as the Judges in the E. of
Essexs case) to force the King to govern otherwise then according to his own
royal direction, and for the Subject to put himself into such a strength that
the King shall not be able to resist him E. of Ess. cas^
. Nay, subjects by power ought not to take upon them to remove evil
Councillors u, pretending reformation to alter Religion, Laws, etc. This being
levying of war against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority
which is against the King: and because the Pretense is public and general 3
Inst. 9.
, such violent force of great men being anciently called, Felony against the
Kings peace Sta. Ne quis occas. pro prosec. H. ^e Despens.
: but an objection there is found in the Coronation Oath, out of these words in
it, Leges quas vulgus elegerit, say the objectors, he is sworn to the Laws
which the people shall choose, and so must be obliged to refuse nothing, force
or no force is no matter: this were a strange slavery to be sworn to by a King,
let him be of Sparta; with what righteousness and judgment, (notions
considerable in oaths,) can such an oath be taken? who can swear farther then
for himself? the performance of things in his power, and to be approved by his
own judgment rightly informed? They may choose Laws against the Church, and
all the old Laws and liberties, granted, as the first words of the oath, by the
ancient, just and devout Kings, which if he consents too, he should swear
implyedly in the latter part of the oath, to break what he had sworn to in the
first part: but since the old laws in the first sentence, and the Church, and
Laws after, Quas vulgus elegerit, may all stand together and agree in the
Oath, it must be intended of the Laws which the people has chosen, and which we
know may agree with the rest; see the full words, Sir (says the Archbishop) do
you grant the just laws and customs to be held, and do you permit them to be
protected by you, and strengthened to the honor of God, which vulgus elegerit
according to your power, if it must be, which the people will or shall choose,
then indeed it were not material (which has been Negat. Vo^^
the practice of all Parliaments) to seek for his 2 Inst. 741. 4 Inst. 25. 33
H. 8. c. 21. 33 H. 6. 17. Cromp. jur. 8. 3 Inst. 58. 1 Jac 1 2 Inst. 65. 100
Graf. 37 H. 8 p. 1279. 4 Inst. 176. D^. Th. Sm. resp. Aug. 169. 181. 182.
assent: this blind grant beforehand, without either knowledge or
understanding of the subject, might serve the turn; the oath in the old
abridgement of statutes set out in King Henry the eights days, cited by Dr.
Cowel, and his most unconscionable Plagiary, speaks thus, The King shall grant
to hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his power keep them and
affirm them, which the folk and people have made and chosen. The sense of this
part of the oath is enough manifest by the Lords and Commons in the twenty
fifth of Henry the eighth, directing their Declaration to the King 4 Inst. 342.
^. leg. Edw. the Cont. 17.
, and full satisfactory against this objection, say they, This your Graces
Realm, recognizing no superior under God, but only your Grace has been and
is free from subjection to any man's laws, but only to such as have been
devised, made, and ordained within this Realm for the wealth of the same, or to
such other, as by What need those words, if the Vulgus elegerit bewil choose.
no need then of his sufferance.
sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors, the people of this your Realm
have taken at their free liberty, by their own consent to be used amongst
them; and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the observance of
the same, not as to the observance of the laws of any foreign Prince, etc. but
as to the customed and ancient laws of this Realm, originally established as
laws of the same, by the said sufferance, consents, and custom, and none
otherwise.

The second. Whether the King The Kings free dissolution of himself
may freely cast himself or his Royalty rather from this Pinnacle of Majesty, is
now to be considered. These two last Discourses may easily run into one
another, and flow together. For if he stands too high for the peoples reach,
then cannot he lose, or extinguish, by the unnatural rashness of his own
hand; he being to watch as a most illustrious Sentinel, upon the top of that
Tower, where God and the Law have placed him, till the same great Master of
Nature calls him off, that unction which renders him sacred, making him so,
within and to himself, like the character of Order, or Priesthood, too
inherent, and internal to be scraped off at the fingers ends; and not to be cut
off as Samsons strength with his hair. And anointed he is with holy oil too
Rep. 3. Caw. ^^. Dau. r. 4. 33 E. 3. Fi^z. Aiddel. roy. 103.
, and not only capable of spiritual jurisdiction, but a mixed person with a
Priest. Nor is that all, that he is anointed, he is Christus Domini Council.
Sax. 2^6
, the Lords anointed, a sacred notion, thirty three times met with in the holy
Scriptures, and ever a character of Kings; Bishop Andrews challenges,
Bellarmine, or Tortus, to show one place where these words were taken
otherwise; for there are no enemies so much to these texts as the Puritanes
amongst those of that fide, or of any other Chu^ches) his power is then from
above, from by me Kings reign, and he can neither touch himself, nor can others
touch him, he is Christ's Vicar under himself, by the Doctrine of our ancient
Church Bid Weelloci ^51. hom. 34. cired 11 E^. Conf. 117.
, in our Law, Gods Vicar, his Minister, the Vicar of the eternal King, he
binds himself in Jesus Christ's Name by his Coronation Oath Bract. l 2. in
Stamf. cor. 99. 100.
: Another, being immediate under God, and therefore carrying Gods stamp and
mark among men, and being, as one may say, a god upon earth, as God is a King
in Heaven, he has a shadow of the excellencies that are in God, in a
similitudinary sort given him, Gods excellencies and honor partly stand in
things incommunicable to others, partly in such as after a sort the creatures
may partake of, both which the King is said to have, some in truth, other by
fiction, all by similitude, from the divine perfection Finch 81.
. The relations betwixt the King and subject are not made by themselves, the
Law in Calvin's case says R. 7. 12. 13.
, The law of nature is part of the law of England. The law of Nature is that,
which God at the creation of the nature of Man infused into his heart for his
preservation and direction, this law is eternal and moral, written with the
finger of God in the heart of man: as God and Nature is one to all, so the Law
of God and of Nature is one to all, and by this law of Nature, is the faith and
obedience of the Subject due unto his Sovereign. The moral Commandment, Honor
thy Father and Mother, extends to the Father of the country; Kings decided
causes not tied to any formalities of law, and the faith of subjects was due
unto them, before any municipal laws: For in vain had it been to have
prescribed laws to any, but to such as ought obedience and faith, in respect
whereof they were bound to obey and observe them: The Chief Justice concludes
this discourse, The very law of Nature never was nor could be altered or
changed: It is certainly therefore true, that laws natural are immutable f, and
faith and obedience due by those laws cannot be changed or taken away. So that
book, and were it true (which yet has not been done) that the supreme power may
dissolve it self, but bind it self it cannot, 7. Calr. case.
yet how q Bac. Elem. 67.
can this be performed? This Majesty this supreem power changed into a
derivative flood, must empty it self, into some Ocean of power, and dye there,
swallowed up by surrender or resignation; For extinguishment or consolidation,
and the cases of Lord and Tenant are earthly names and made up of tenures, the
tenant owning an estate in the land, and the act of the Lord enuring to destroy
the onus or servitude of the Fee, in the oath too to such Lords, Faith to the
King was ever excepted, but the relation betwixt the King and Subject are
personal and within, as those of father and son of natures making, whose laws
are immutable, and must be much above these paralels; And for the example put
with the rule, it dos not prove it home, For the King (says the book) may by
consent resume the power of Parliaments, which once by lex regia he did enjoy,
but Sup. 31. 37
how is the supreme power destroyed here, The King alone is supreme, The
Parliament a supreme court only as he is there the head, so that concurrency
of consent and action by the Lords, and Commons, is only resumed and restored
to the primitive fountain of the Supremacy, and his rays contract, and return
to their own body, which shined scatteringly and by Communication of beams to
lesser spheres before. For supposing this exorbition, it will require
revelation, to guess, what estate our Kings have had in this Soveraigntie, and
in what Treasury the Supremacy it self has been lodged in all this while, if
that be not it, which has been so often sworn to; if the resolution of the
Judges be the highest authority in law, 2 Inst. 601.
if they sit over and on the top of the laws, hub. 486. Postnat. 22. 23. 19. 20.
in Parliaments too (where they are not mere woolpacks) Stat. de big. c 1 4
Inst. Cap. Parl. See their writ. Sup. 22. 23.
If acts of Parl. too be of any force, then the fountain of the Kings royalty
is within himself, his honor, and justice, and mercy, which comprehend all the
rest are his own, l he is summus L. Coke. 237.
Dominus supra omnes chief Lord over all, 2. Inst. 501.
and if out of these reasons K. John's resignation (were there any such thing)
to the Pope and Pandulpho, as to those from whom he had never received, was
uneffectual and invalid, what need these objections be so frightful? for though
it be imagined, the reason of the invalidity truly, because the Lords and
Commons had not consented, yet 40 E. 3 rot. pat. ^u. 8.
could this be no reason then, where there was neither Parliament nor Commons,
as in use since, and however, the Lord Cook in the very next words condemns
such a consent, as against Law and Custom of Parliament, 4 Inst. 14.
so that exceeding its own Laws, the consent is lawless and infirm, then this
cannot be the cause, why the resignation should be invalid. It seems the Pope
demanding Homage and Tribute of Eward the third, from that supposed act of King
Of all kings the lying Monks most ^^osed king John.
John, or resignation, (which resignation has been pretended to be burnt at
Avignion, and never yet shown, so that some think King John never either
resigned, or paid the pensions ^i^ Thomas More sup. of so^ ^ Camp. Camp. hist.
of ^rel. l. 2. ^. 3.
gave that reason for an answer, (it being familiar in those times to speak of
ages past, in the language of their own) yet another reason they give, which is
more pertinent, That such ^ resignation was against the oath taken at his
Coronation, P and though there are those, who neither weigh perjury in
themselves or others, so it be to their advantage, yet is the King as much
swron to preserve the rights of his Crown, as the Liberties of the people, nay
the Crown has the first place, and stands next the Church, so that out of
Conscience, as well as other respects he cannot contribute to his own ruin.
These are the words of that part of the oath, That he shall keep all the lands,
honors, and dignities righteous and free, of the Crown of England, in all
manner whole, without any manner of minishment, and the rights of the Crown,
hurt, decayed or lost, to his power shall call again into the ancient estate.
Henry the seconds virtues being admired, he is praised that he was a great
Defender 2 Inst. 29.
and Maintainer of the rights of his Crown.

3. And could it appear, the King The people in monarchy.
were originally but a grand trustee, he could not be commanded to resign that
trust, it is so a power given away, which no revocation for its time can fetch
back, nor no condition, not created with it, can defeat; but without a new
light, who can look upon the cradle of our first Prince, and find out that
Faerie Chimaera of the people, plowing up a crown and scepter in their ore?
Could there be any such discovery made, it must be somewhat before the Arcadian
Moon, and much about the time, when according to Fortescue, and the famous
Becselenisme the Common Law came abroad.

And grant a King so chosen, The Election.
rout on their knees to the work of their own hands, they are so grown a
corporation of Citizens, and he their head, R. 5. Cawd. case
no more a loose and irregular rabble: The term the people now dos not signify
the dispersion, or wildness of a nation or sept, but as with us, The people
there includes all the new Kings subjects, And they al are not their own, but
the Kings people, 2. Inst. 537 Art. sup. Chart. lib. 2. H. 6. cap. 1. Sup.
ibid. ^ Inst. 539.
Nobles, and Commons are all in, s so of the word the Commonaltie too, t They
are now bound by their own election, and the Vassals of the covenants they have
sworn, and be the King even Saul himself, yet they having only obedience left,
can no more, tied with their own hands, free themselves, the^ recall any their
other grants to one another: This was the doctrine of ou^ primitive English
Church, of a people submitted to no government; such a people have the liberty
to choose their King, but the King once declared or made, he takes the power,
has the empire, or truer with the original,) the who^e sway over that people
Sermon. Cathol. de Epiphan. Domini, in the S^x. Church
whose yoke they cannot shake off their necks* For what is done by this
submission to a Prince? Is not justice against oppression sought for, and
protection for the weak, it must be necessary then, that they offer up 3 Inst.
143.
to this Sovereign the unruly sword, Otto Fri^^ng. e^^ co^suetudo curlae
imperia^is ut regna pergladiu^ (^ (...) ptemae potes^a^^s ^^mbolum prout Do^.
Sp^l man) ^^^dantur et recipian^un.
with which like wild beasts they had gored one another. For by the old Law
royal lex regia, at the foundation or consigning of Empire, The people did
tranferre all Empire and power upon the Prince, so that after, the people has
it not, the power of law-making too passed over from the people to the Prince
Ins^i^a^ ^mper. lib. 1. Com. A^cu^,
, else had this government been neither necessary, nor profitable for the
society of man, both wh it is R. 7. 13.
. And there is an evennes and p^oportion in the body of our kingdom, There
being such harmony so just a symmetrie betwixt the head and the body, (as one)
the law of England, excells all laws, in upholding a free monarchy, which is
the most excellent form of government, exalting the prerogative royal, and
being very tender to preserve it, and yet maintaining withal, the ingenuous
liberty of the Subject, Dav. rep: preface. V. John's re^at.
who enjoyes a multitude of prerogatives above all other nations. For by the
Law (a Parliament tells us) not only the Kings authority, but the Peoples
security of lands, livings and privileges, both in general and particular,
are preserved and maintained, 1 Jacob. c. 2.
and by the abolishing of or alteration of the which, It is impossible, but
that present confusion will fall upon the whole State, and frame of this
Kingdom 1 Jacob. c. 2. Sup. 27.
. And enjoying the blessings of such Laws under a Prince, what was there more
to be desired? To shake of these laws and this government, is to return to
the disorders of our ancient wildenesse, and according to that Parliament, It
cannot be liberty loosed from the Laws, but present The Laws of the Realm are
called libertates because they make free m^n 2 Inst. 4. magna chart. c 1
confusion which we must expect; And as little can the representative of the
people so submitted, redemand that power so transferred; since Nemo potest plus
juris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet, R. 424. 2 Inst. ^
no derivative having power of that which the primitive has not, and to speak
something of elections. Fear (as some profanely) first made gods, it is fear
which first made governments, societies of men, and made it necessary to set
up Kings: man being the Wolf to man from the beginning, but the world being by
degrees civilized, and divided into governments, the causes (those fears and
oppressions being remedied by government and laws) ceasing, This election too
must become unnecessary; nor are the overflowes, of some single Prince, (Though
election among the Emperors has as often proved unfortunate that way as
hereditarie succession) so mischievous as election it self, as one, when the
matter Suing test. 72.
lies in the mouth of the multitude, magistrates with a very little wit are
many times chosen, decernente ferocissimo quoque non sententiis magis quam
clamore and strepitu, Live. l. 23.
Capua deposing her Senate would be moralized. The multitude is the sea The
people believe upon another faith.
of fierce winds, it is easily, we know, driven, by wicked flatterers, into
actions and choises which ruin it: every election would be like a Fair, or the
Hall in Plinies time, where they ^^artlan. in Didio Juliano. Venale imperium
turpissimo praeconio milites proposutrunt.
gave so much for the Euge or applause, and so went for eloquent: he that can
speak better then think any Clodius eloquent to the ruin of his Commonwealth:
but however the greatest offerer will carry all: Varro a Butchers son shall be
Consul at Cannae, and throw away the Roman destinies themselves, if possible:
if for no other virtue, for his detracting from the honor of the noblesse,
Athens, in Thucydides, Florence, nay, Rome it self may show fearful presidents
of a people let loose; how often did she run from her self in the seditious
successions of her Tribunes Live. l. 2. 126. Tribunitia potestas gratuitus faror.
, changing from Kings to Consuls, Tribunes brought in, the Decemuiri, Consuls
again, Tribunes military, interreges Consuls again, besides the sovereign
Dictator, so that they were many ages climbing to the point of that greatness,
which Alexander (adding wings to sat) attained to in a short life, nay, in
twelve years, and left them behind him to, it being not discord of base
Atoms, but concord which makes the tree of Dominion spread: the discord of the
estates is the poison of this City (says Livie,) in an election too, the
inconstancy of resolutions proceeding fromthe diversity of ends, would trouble
all good resolutions of a few, besides the despite to honor, an enemy, an
equal, an inferior advanced, not digested by a father, who in the Venetian
History refused to see his son the Duke, unwilling to give him his hat or knee.
Poland and the unhappy interregna there, may be a visible example: but were it
to follow after these elections, that the Princes height were so slippery, as
some would have it, were his life and Diadem forfeitable upon every
miscarriage, what invincible mischiefs again would the admittance of such a
change bring with it: 1. Not to be prevented by any providence of the Prince.
2. Minas esse principis non imperium ubi ad illos provocare liceat qui una
peccaverint, the Prince may threaten, but command or be the Prince he cannot
where appeals are allowed to those, who are fellows of the seditions, would be
found a true rule,) how often, would wicked and ambitious men from hence build
pretenses of treasons and disobedience? what burnings, robbery, and
depopulations, what massacres of the best men, would every reign bring with it,
every such eclipse produce; the malecontent would still cry out before his
hurt, and out of uncertain hope of alteration, we should apply remedies more
pestilential then the disease, every headstrong factious fellow would sit at
the helm, every Schismatic would set up his new Church, or the government
should be tyranny, and the elect should hazard his peace: sad condition of
rule, who so (says the Difference bewixt an ordinary regular government, and
the rule of new masters ill established.
Florentine history) shall consider the great mischiefs, which happen to
Commonwealths by alteration of government, or change of the Prince, though
without any dissension or division, shall find the same of force to ruin any
kingdom or state, how mighty soever. But these are but changelings of Rebels,
we have no such customs, nor can it appear, our Sovereign claims by so low a
title: the opinions which divide the person and the King or Crown, and fancies,
that he ticks with the people for his royalty, were never thought on, says the
knowing Chancellor Pos^^^t. 99.
, but by traitors, as in Spencers bill, or by treacherous Papists, or
seditious Sectaries and Puritanes. Let us look upon our Laws, and no higher:
For our liberties we owe much to Magna Charta, (where the King took his
Charter of Sovereignty we know not) and all the way through this Charter, the
King is the granter, he bestows what is received there, To be held of us and
our heirs for ever Mag. Chapter c. 1.
; which implies, says the Commentary, that all liberties were at the first
derived from the Crown 2 Inst. 4. 5.
. Sometimes the King grants certain graces and pardons to his Commons 50 E. 3.
c. 5. 33 E. 1. c. 2. 1 R. 2. c. 11.
: Some statutes out of special grace Q^o War. Artic. sup. chart. 28 E. 1. The
Kings tenu^e sup. 29.
. So we find the people in debt and the King, as it is regium potius dare, more
Kingly to give, doing acts of bounty and grace, He (as the Lord Cook) is a
tenant who holds of some superior, in this sense the King cannot be said a
tenant, for he has no superior but God Almighty, Praedium Domini regis est
directum Dominium, cujus nullus est author nisi Deus, the possession or
inheritance of the King, is a proper, a direct Demain, which he takes
immediately and only from God Inst. 1. ^.
. For we here have no land, which holds not of some superior, the Crown land
only excepted: so Doct. Cowel Verb. Demaine 1 Tit. Demaine.
, and the Terms of the Law i. Other Nations agree in this definition of their
crown lands, they are consecrated, united, and incorporated to the Kings Crown,
as the French Ch(...)n. de dom. Fr^^. ^^t. 2.
. All else depend either mediately or immediately of the Crown Cow. Terms of
law ubi sup.
. These possessions of our King too, are called, Sacra patrimonia, and Dominica
coronae regis Inst. ubi. sup. ^n. S^. gloss. verb. Heraldus Mare Claus.
Praesatic.
. The sacred Patrimony, and the demain of the Kings Crown: and as Master
Seldom, Quicquid in regalibus est, ita est principibus privatum, ut subditis
quod suum est, Whatsoever belongs to the Kings Crown, is among his Royalties,
the Prince has as much propriety in it, as the subject has in any thing that is
his ^. Mare Claus. 117
This demain then, being held of none, can escheate to none, and being sacred,
it cannot become profane, it is permanent and inalienable, and the King is
bound to annul and revoke all such alienations Cow. Inst. jur. Aug. l. 2. tit.
8. v, sup. ^7.
; and being his own in private and propriety, what has Master Cromwell to do,
or the people, to cut them from him? As to a dissolution of the Royalty, the
Commonlaw will not permit it, it is never imagined, never supposed there. The
Law would V. ^^^. 90.
have him last like the Sun and Moon, and as that Maxim, That is to be
taken for void, and not done at all, which is done against the Common Law R.
3^4.
. And since no such Act of deposition (which yet in all the presidents, was
covered in the term of resignation, and the people told, that too, moved from
the King,) or dissolution, can be solemn but in a Parliamentary way, where the
King must consent too: (For without the King, there can be neither Parliament,
nor Act which can bind Sup. 32.
:) yet we may reduce all to that we have before had recourse to: it is against
law and custom of Parliaments, to consent to Sup. 35. 36. 37.
any such deprivation of Royalty there, the whole proceedings being condemned
Sup. 53.
in all Ages. For treason, treason being Diminuta, or laesa Majestas 3 Inst. 2.
, diminution or violation of Majesty, and there is both diminution and
violation, in plucking up root and branch. It is manifest, that all such
deprivation is treason, by that statute of Edward the third, which says, None
shall be impeached, which took part with the King against his Father (...) ^.
^. 2.
, and that other of the next usurper, Henry the fourth, which enacts, That none
shall be impeached, that did assist Henry the fourth, or helped to pursue King
Richard the second or his adherents: That (to mark the haste of the guilty
actors) of Edward the third, was the first statute of that reign, that of Henry
the fourth, the second. It may be considered too, that the regality cannot be
demolished, without a great change and confusion in all the other parts: it
being senseless to think, that licentious wickedness can limit it self, and
stop in any mean; Independency being a thunder which rends the clouds
themselves which conceived it, is not like to take any ground for holy. The
Magna Charta (which as the words is to be held of the King Sup. 8^.
) whose excellent temper, like a noble Cement, laid, as it were the foundation
of the Laws, and politic constitutions of this kingdom; being by some books 1
Inst. 81. 2 Inst. 87. 3 Inst. 111.
reputed so sacred, that no new law can infring it, is torn by the same lawless
Anarchy, is sunk upon the hearse of its cause and stator; as if it were fatal,
that the Kings most high and precious Stamf. pref. to the pregog.
Prerogative, and the Peoples just rights ^. Cn. 3. Car. 1.
should expire for the time, and as far as cruel Tyranny can operate together.

The Majesty Royal then being yet alive, and not cleaving to the block of
death, cannot wander like Adrians soul, or hover in an airy abstraction, but
rest somewhere, and in the night of Athaliahs persecutions, let her rend her
clothes and cry treason, treason, against Rebellion and Usurpation, yet will
Jehoiada, God and his right show the Kings son, and the noise of the people
will be heard running and praising the King, and saying, Chron. 23.
God save the King. But we cannot pass from the scaffold of the Royal Martyr,
to the interests of his Heir, but through a stream of precious blood, and lest
the Law should be thought as guilty men, (though it cannot be done without the
just disgrace of three Nations,) I will show what care the Law takes of the
life of her Sovereign, in all places, as the oath of Allegiance, Shall every
subject defend him to the letting out the last drop of his dearest heart blood
*. R. 7. 7.
To this purpose, the life and members of the subject are in his power Inst.
127.
, he cannot be denied the service of his subject R. 7. 14.
. This care appears in that mere consultation against his person is adjudged
treason, in the trial the discovery is to be made by circumstances, with all
endeavor evermore for the safety of the King 5 Inst. 6. E. of (...) case.
: imagination alone is treason Br. treas. 9. ^5 E. 3.
, if it be uttered by words Stam^. (...) 2. ^
, in the Kings case (as the Lord Cook) mere cogitation is prohibited. 2 Inst.
228.
The Law intends in every Rebellion as consequent the death and deprivation of
the King 3 Inst. 6.
: such is the vigilance of the Law for the Kings sake, to repel all violence,
never so secret, never so dark. Nay, the Law is the Kings Nurse, and with
untired diligence expresses, at what rate she prizes the Sacred Head of this
Father of the Country. An ancient Record wills, that no Physic be given to
the King, without good warrant, to be made by the advice of the Kings Council;
no Physic may be administered, but such as is set down in writing; the
Physicians may use the advice of Chirurgians named in the Warrant, but not any
Apothecary, but must prepare and do all things themselves 4 Inst 251. rot.
parl. 31 ^ 6. ^. ^7.
, and the reason of this is, says the Chief Justice, The precious regard had
of the King, which is the head of the Commonwealth 4 Inst ib.
: And in another place, The King is the head and health of the Commonwealth,
and from the head, health is transmitted over all the body R. 4 124.
: and again, Our Sovereign Lord the King, is the light and life of the
Commonwealth ^ Inst. 1^.
.

Let me but note some complexions ere I proceed, who will endure the King,
though he is never the better for it, nor never shall be, like Monsieur
Soubize, who summoned to surrender S. Jehan de Angely to his Prince, the French
King, answered, he was much the Kings servant, but the execution of his
commands was not in his power. Enough of these there are, and not a few
Heretics of Royalty, or Infidels rather, something too wise and overcareful
for the Weal^publick, will partly from proof, and a little out of reason, yield
to some of these truths, some of these conclusions. But in the midst of these
good thoughts, the Evil Councillors or a Monopoly of Pins, (yet more tolerable
Plate, twentieth part, free quarter, taxes, horses, Ireland, Excise, Scots, etc.
then the Chapels and Oblations of this Moloch, whose hands are ever spread to
receive, and like the lean Grave, will never say enough,) are remembered, and
spoil all. These men would do well to prescribe Cordials to faint Nature, to
cure, a Drought, a Plague, a Famine, if possible, were there a Mercury with
news from Heaven too, which I wonder is not discovered yet: and were they sure
the sheep were innocent sheep: yet shall no Wart be allowed in a fair face,
allow them their providence, appoint a coercive unrestrained power over the
Court actions, suppose this coercive move irregularly, (for this must be
uncontrolled,) or will they go on infinitely and eternally, the same doubts and
inconveniences will go with them: let them make the Mathematicians impossible
engine of the government, add for the easiness and perfection of motion, some
glorious first guiding wheel, which shall turn about and direct a million of
less, yet that may prove faulty, and after all the subtilty, the curious
follies, the security and certainty is never the more, only the remedy may
become more difficult. We must trust something, not practice that Atheism to
overreach Gods providence, and this is probable, that however a Monarch may
err, mistake, oversee, and run wildely and wrong, yet such deviation is
sooner stopped, sooner tired, and easilier helped or endured, then that of
many. Death at last may exchange Jou hist. 152. D^. W. Rawl. hist. live. l. 1.
Fremere deinde plebs multiplicatam servitutem centum pro ano dominos factos.
a bad Prince, which in any other government cannot advantage at all.

I will not, (entering the discourse of the Royal descent) look back into the
Histories of our Princes, which were they brought in to do their part, the
English Monarch might be shown descended, lineally and lawfully, (the first
Henry having mixed his Wives Saxon blood, with the adoption C^md. B^ren. R^nd.
Higd. Polichron. l. 6. c. 29.
of the Confessor Edward, the Kinsman of the first William, and with the good
fortune of that William,) from the first great Monarchs, and Kings of both
kingdoms; and that by so long and so continued a Line of just descent, that, as
Lord Chancelour Egerton, therein he exceeds all the Kings which the Christian
world now knows posm. 58.
. I am only to manifest how the successor derives Descent of the Royalty.
his splendor, what alteration and change the setting of one of these Sons
makes. For being miserably fallen into the rule of our new Masters, whose mouths
(like Wat Tyler, ^^om this day says Tyler, all law shall fall Wat Tyler, mouth
in London) utter all Law, nay, give life and death, this disquisition will be
as necessary as any. If then there can be any validity allowed, to those
things before proved, that there can be any immortality of the Prerogative, and
that they whose use of Victory; is the everlasting accumulation of injuries,
may be bounded somewhere, and not be permitted Dn. Th. ^m. resp. Ang. 123.
Gens Anglicana regia semper a^thoritat^ usa est.
to ruin even essences themselves, and truths as ancient as the first week,
then spite of the new commandment, which sounds like him in Plautus
Tranquillam concinna viam
Si rex obstabit regem ipsum pervortito,
and bids level Kings to make the way smooth, yet for perpetuity (as one) the
K. has a similitude of God, he never dies Finch 8^.
. The King (or rather the Kings line) is a name of continuance, which as the
Law presumes (so three Judges) shall always remain, as the head and governor
of the people Com. 177. 234. 4 Inst. 136. 201. 4 Rep. praes. p. 2.
. Rex non moritur, the King dies not, the King in that name never dies Com. 177.
. It is in law called, the demise of the King, because he does by it demise the
Kingdom to another, he is taken as not subject to death, but is a corporation
in himself that lives for ever Cowel. verb. king. Crom^t. ju^.
, and in Law it is not the death of the King, The dignity shall continue for
ever Com. ubi sup.
, a young Phoenix of spice and perfumes, ever rising out of the others ashes,
Our Sovereign Lord may be referred to the heir or successor of the King Com.
ubi sup.
, all interregna being amongst us unknown R. 7. 11.
: the heir or successor takes by descent Inst 15. com. ubi sup.
: The King (as the Judges of all the Courts) holds the kingdom of England by
birthright inherent, by descent, from the Blood Royal, whereupon succession
does attend. The word heirs is first named, and successors is attendant upon
heirs: the title is by descent: by Queen Elizabeth's death the Crown descended
to his Majesty (meaning King James Rep. 7. 10. 14. 1 El. c. 3.
.) Our Realm (as our Law) is a Monarchy, successive by inherent birthright, of
all others the most absolute perfect form of government, excluding an
interregnum, and with it infinite inconveniences. R. 4. praef. p. 2. The
eldest is to be preferred Inst. 15.
. It was resolved 1. Eliz. That the heir or successor may date and begin his
reign, from the day on which his Predecessor died Die. 165.
. Nay, the same moment that the predecessor deceases, the rights of Majesty
descend Si^ur B(...) ^^. ^e rege Galli^.
and fall upon the successor: One book accounts the day of the death in the
reign of the dead Prince, and would have the heir tarry till the day after 4
H. 6. 7.
, which were unreasonable, and against the experience of Fulthorp that spoke
it: for the King reigning then not four years before, began his reign upon the
last of August, the very day of his Fathers death Speed. 66^.
: it is made one of the reasons of that Metaphysical body, the body Politic,
that the* may not be an interregnum R. 7. 12.
. For were there an interregnum, there would be a time, like the present with
us, in which the statutes and Common law should neither be of force or use, and
to owe still less to the people, or an Army. The heir or successor,
Coronation.
when the right of the Crown descends, is fully and absolutely King without
coronation 3 Inst. 7. ^. 7. 10.
, without any ceremony or act to be done Ex post facto R. 7. ubi sup.
: he is accomplished from himself, God and his right are enough; he takes
nothing from any act subsequent: the contrary is part of the Spencers treason,
E^il. Hug. ^e Spens.
the contrary is part of Watson and Clarks treason, Seminary popish Priests,
who believed nothing treason against King James before his Coronation Hill. 1.
Jac.
: (both of Hugh Peter's his faith as far as Kings or the English Church are
concerned,) L. Cook in one book, Coronation is but a Royal ornament, or
solemnization of the Royal descent, no part of the title R. 7. 10.
, in another, If the Crown descend to the right heir, he is King before
Coronation, which is but an ornament or solemnity of honor ^ Inst. ubi sup.
. He goes on, For by the Law, there is always a King, in whose name the Laws
are to be maintained and executed, otherwise justice should fail ^ Inst. ubi
sup. F(...) 83.
. And as a Lord Chancellor, The Sovereignty is in the Person of the King, the
Crown is but an ensign of Sovereignty, The investure (if that may be called
so by him which gives nothing) and Coronation are but Ceremonies of honor, and
Majesty, the King is an absolute and perfect King before he be Crowned, and
without those Ceremonies L. Chanc. Eger. ^on. Postnat. 73.
. So then Coronation is merely declaratory, typical, and significant of the
change and descent, and the Kings of naked Afric or America, (to whose
commands nature has submitted the rudest Savages) who never heard of a
coronation, or understood the sense, are as much Kings, as the Emperor with
his three crowns, for what are they to the necessary causes of Sovereignty, to
justice and protection, to the duties of the prince, the defense and safety of
a people; and if coronation be no more considerable, Then, Proclamation, (which
yet cannot be made, without authority from the King but by privilege or
custom) llb. exe^. 250. Br. Proclam. 10.
is nothing at all, as when a new Statute is ordered to be proclaimed Artic.
sup. chart. c 17. 18. E. 1.
(though ignorance of the law excuses no man, and the proclamation might have
have been spared) the Statute took its force from the Parliament, the head and
body there, and the proclamation dos but make it known, and publish it to the
common people, and adds nothing to the law; and that coronation dos but denote
possession, is manifest by history and fact. All acts of State, of what
grandeur soever, have been as usually commanded and obeyed before coronation as
after. I will not cite King Edgar not crowned in 7 or 12 Ranul^h. Ces^^. in an.
960. not till his twelfth year.
years; nor Hen. the 6 not crowned n Grant. 157.
till the eighth year of his reign, yet treason and trials of traitors are met
with before his coronation in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 6. years of his reign he holds
Parliaments, which style him our Lord the King, and our Sovereign Lord 2 H. 6.
c. 2. 1 H. 6. c. 3.
; and the people his subjects 6 H. 6. c. 1.
one or two statutes say (with such) it shall be done as of Rebels to our Lord
the King 4 H. 6 c. 3. 1 H. 6. c. 3. 2 H. 6. c. 8.
. Nearer our times, Q Mary left this life November. the 17. 1558. Queen Elizabeth
makes choice of her Privy Council, Consults and resolves to restore Religion
(the same which our Seditions have destroyed) gives commands concerning the
Ports, puts a new Lieutenant into the Tower, sends a Commission to the Earl of
Sussex Deputy of Ireland, gives new Patents to Judges, with a prohibition not
to confer offices, dispatches Ambassadors to declare her succession by right
of inheritance, and to the treaty of Cambrey, Is woed, and refuses, the King of
Spain, forbids disputes about Religion, and suppresses the green overbusie
Anarchy of the Lake, appoints Correctors of the Liturgy, restores the Marquess
of Northampton, and the Earl of Hartford to honors, creates one Vicount and
two Barons, yet her inauguration (as the Author) was not till 1559. Camd.
Eliz. 2. 3. 4.
and no man ever questioned the legalitie of these acts, nor had they been
less binding had Ket broke from the chains of darkness, in the head of his
gnooffes of Dussindale and disclaimed them So called by themselves Nevelli
Ketus 88.
. The consideration of our allegiance and how that grows due will make this
plainer. Ligeance or faith of the Subject is due unto the King by the Law of
nature: Gloss. Domini Spilman verb. fidelites.
It is due to our natural Liege Sovereign, descended of the blood royal of the
Kings of this Realm (as the council of Judges) Calv. case 12. 24 25. 5. 6. 14.
it binds the soul and Conscience Postnati 101.
, it is immutable, its continuance is perpetual, and extent unbounded Calv. c.
ubi sup. 10.
, the corporal oath is but a declaration, it obliges without an oath, being
writ in the heart of every man, and engraven by the finger of the Law 2 Inst.
121.
. It is not due to the body politic, that is an invisible nothing, and can
neither give nor take homage Postn^t 105 1 10. 31. Com. 213. Calv. ubi sup.
. It is due then to the person 17 11.
, and so crowned or not crowned is nothing, where this right, this birth right
1. Jar. 1. r. 7. 14.
is settled: who is the 2 Chronicles. 23.
Kings son, The King our natural Liege Sovereign, decsended of the blood royal
of the kings of this realm, is as visible as the day or light, and be he in
Holland, or farther off this ligeance should reach him, this immutable, this
absolute R. 7. 7. 14.
ligeance, in all places whatsoer should seek him out R. 7. ubi supra.
. For the faith of the Subject, this ligeance, is not of the place, not
circumscribed, It obliges in all ubies. And the liegeman ought in duty of this
faith, to perform to his Liege, the offices of a Subject, wheresoever he shall
need his assistance: we must aid him in his time of need, as the Lord Cook ^
Inst. 541.
. Serve the King and our Country as need shall require, in another place a
Inst. 149.
, the liege is bound to his Prince against all men, Qui mori possunt, aut
vivere, and ought not in the least to assist the side against him, Cus^om vel
Nor. c. 43.
he must be with him, and for him against all men. Ligeance too ties
indefinitely, * Nobringen. his l 2. c 37.
from this day forward, (so the oath) R. 7. ubi supra
It Is not an allegiance of our own prosperity, to last on condition we escape a
prison, or a sequestrator, nor of the Homage not to the fortune
Court and flattery, ^o expire with the Princes good fortune, it should be his
Cowardly wa^inesse treason
cloak in all weathers, in all storms: This faith should be religiously
preserved, no calamity nor sin of the Prince should loose it, it is not success
nor happiness of a side, should sway us, no man's own interests should be more
to him then his piety; nor should the present misery be terrible, when there is
too so much honor in the very conscience of the action. It was Caesar's bloody
robe could raise Armies, and fright the Parricides out of Italy: but we, the
broken pieces of a stupid people, grow tame and patient slaves; and reputation
the most sacred charm, which should quicken the very grave, heat the benumbed
Highland^r, and frozen Muscovite, cannot thaw us: there is no bravery but of
the health, and a little chamberfiercenesse is cried up for mighty dareing; yet
dishonor can bring no safety with it, and if we must fall, it were handsomely
done to meet the blow. (...)alus in Tac^ 239, De^sse nobi^ terra in qua
vivamus, in qua mor(...) non po^^^.
And were the King now but Prince of Wales, his father still alive, and in
Henry the thirds prison, we are told by an Act, There were not a few
disherited, because they did not assist the Kings son. They that stirred up the
people by lies (as there to side with Montfort and forsake the King and the
Kings son, were grievously fined, others are thus sentenced, who (as the text)
had freely armed their vassals, against the King and his son Statutum vel
dictum de Kenelworth.
. Amongst the Civilians, the Kings son may be called a King, as the Lord Cook,
The Prince shines with the beams of his father, and is taken for one person or
the same with his father ^. 8. 28 stat. 38 H. 6.
. This I thought fit to add, for their witty sakes, who can find a Prince of
Wales without a King, and think themselves highly honest, if they style their
Sovereign softly the Prince, resolved not to go further, till Lilly mends his
prophesies, that they may know, were he no more then they will speak him, yet
more is due to him from them then a Name: but to look upon him as he is a King,
and upon his straits, his condition is not deplorate, forlorn: Kings oppressed
by a rebellion all Annals are full of; and he that will not own his Sovereign
amidst his afflictions, consents with the Conspirators, and keeps out the King
and the kingdoms peace, though he sits still: And if the King cannot be denied
the service of the subject, he cannot be denied it, when the world and the
fortune of his fathers have forsaken him, and he is left alone, doubts and
delays are now criminal and highly guilty, since Moses was obeyed in the
wilderness of Scorpions; David at Bahurim, where Shimei threw stones and cursed
him: and Saul, though those of Belial despised him, and brought him no
presents, and had been, had they driven him out, and taken all from him, (as
Justice Fenner) there may be a King of subjects without land in possession Arg.
in Ca^^. case.
. And that knowing Chief Justice told a Parliament, that if a King and his
subjects be driven out of the kingdom by his enemies, he continues still King,
and they are still bound by their allegiance h. Nor Sir J. Popha^ ^ited pe^^o.
104.
can any subjects revolt from their obedience, and by a covenant or an
agreement of the people, or New Model, put themselves under any other
government; for, were this lawful, Sup. 96.
then were neither the Prince sacred, nor Laws firm, nor Cities or Societies of
continuance, nor were ligeance natural, perpetual, and immutable, which are
demonstrated before: No subject within the Kings laws is divided from his Head
and Supreme Lord, a^ Lord Cook R. 3. 28.
. The statute of Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for retaining the Queens
subjects in their due obedience, 23 El. c. 1.
, enacts thus, That all persons whatsoever, who have or shall pretend to have
power, or shall practice to absolve, or persuade, or withdraw, any the Queens
subjects, from their natural obedience to her Majesty, or move any of them to
promise any obedience to any pretended authority, of the Sea of Rome, or any
other Prince, State, or Potentate, shall have judgment, etc. as in case of
high treason: So of the absolved, the counselors or procurers, in the
maintainers and concealers it is misprision of treason 23 El. ubi sup.
. Doctor Story, a Papist in this Queens reign, being indicted of treason,
denies the Judges power, and tells them, he was become the sworn subject of
the Spanish King: he is condemned, for as those Judges, no man can exuere
patriam, or abjure The Puritan never imitates the Papists ^reasons, but ^e
exceeds them.
the Prince at his own pleasure Camd. El. 213. Annal. Waverlier. Edgarus
veniens a Scotia rex ^um inlagavit and homines suo^ in an. 1074. i. e. eject^m
restituit. L^. Can^ti p. 2. c. 1^.
, by the 25 of Edward the third, the attainted in a praemunire, is put out of
the Kings protection: yet say the Judges of England, this extends but to legal
protection, For the Parliament (as there) cannot take away that protection,
which the law of nature gives: so that notwithstanding this statute, the King
may protect and pardon the offender Rep. 7. ^^
. By the rule of contraries then, as little can a Parliament take away that
subjection, and allegiance which is due by the same law of nature, in
correlatives there being a reciprocal propriety, which ties and unites both
parts alike. It is thought good, right, and cause enough to dis-inherit the
King since they have driven him out and possessed his power; as Antigonus the
usurper of Hyrc^nus, cuts off his ears, that by that maim, which yet was the
Usurpers act, he might make him for ever incapable of the Priesthood, yet no
man should take advantage of his own wrong Inst. 14^.
. Force and fraud cannot reduce an old right or remit the party Inst. 357.
; much less can an injurious intrusion gain a just possession, when titles and
interests rise only from a disseisors violence: Such acts cannot prevail upon
private owners, then no reason they should bar the King, who cannot be put
out of possession of things permanent s his possessions cannot be taken from
him, by any violence or wrongful disseisin Stamf. praerog. 5
; and (as Chief Justice Hubard,) Where the Kings title is just and true, and by
the officers to have been promoted, and found in just time, no reason the
negligence of officers should defeat him, vigilantib. and non dormientibus jura
subveniunt, the Laws help not the sleepers, is a rule for the subject. Nullum
tempus occurrit regi, No time can prevent the King, is the Kings rule. * It Is
true let all ages past be searched, u Hub. 4^7. Flnc^ ^2.
let all posterity to come, be read on a fresh Ariostos screen; below our
Saviors Cross we shall meet nothing like his fathers passion, (a Prince, who
may be easilier admired then praised:) but if we enquire into the distresses of
our own Monarchs, we shall find some, over whose heads those bitter waters
have passed, as low as his sacred Majesty now stands, yet the sacred character
and holy ointment not washed off; and to look back a little upon the lives of
his predecessors: (For as in things humane, Ages and Men dye, but the same
causes, effects, and events, revive and are met again. So some parallels may
be made, by which it may be shown, That this is not the only dangerous
Turmoil, and Rebellion, though the worst: was King John less King, when his
abominable Barons (hateful even to the Monks) called in the French, and left
Mat. Par. (...) ^^ct.
him nothing faithful, but Hubert de Burgo and Dover? There William de Albeney
suffers him not to be shot at, Mat. Par. ^^0. hist. may.
(though a Rebel) because he was sacred (says he) and the Lords anointed. Was
not Edward the 4th King de jure (as they call it) of Right, at the Hague, fled
from the make-kings ragged-staff? Does air and soil which cannot change the
mind, change things and rights: look on the unhappy sons of our second Richard
(whose reign was but a rebellion of two and twenty years) you shall find Wat
Tyler and Jack Straw with their Communalty, to the number of 100000, that beast
the Common people, being come out with all its heads, (but not one of all those
capable of reason) and as the Devil is every where Gods Ape, we read of a
Clergy Boutefeau, Baal a Churchmen the favorers of all rebellions, E. of
North. at Garnet^ trial. Baal was an (...) communicated Priest.
Priest baits them with pleasing texts, at one Sermon of this Prophets, meet
20000 men, far more numerous then army and the representative tryers. Tantum
religio potuit suadere malorum

To note the agreement, the Lord They ^ook up a ^^ight by the way, but they did
but stalk with him, we hear no note of him.
Chancellor, the Archbishop of Canterbury, must appear at their rude audite,
and give account, they behead him, the Lord St. John's, Sir Robert Hales, and
many others: They burn the Chancery Records, Lawyers, and Courtiers houses,
open London (a place which has ever attested, all titles religions and
rebellions, which eminent power has backed against their Prince) enter the
Tower, where the King was in manifest peril, against Whose life they had
damnably conspired ^
: they receive banners of liberty, awe the King, take away his sword: and had
not some loyal hands amongst the Kings followers, cut off this Idol of Clowns
(as he is called) perhaps there had neither been government nor laws left,
for the successors of this Idol and his Priest to deface: yet in the thickest
of this cloud, who ever asked for the King, or thought that interposition more
then a malignant eclipse, if the represented could transfer Empire, there they
were, if Baal with his lights could spy Richards spirit departed from him, he
was there; if levelling were needed, they had it: when Adam delved, etc. was
their word, and the levellers were there, but their leader having by his
punishment taught others to reverence those powers which he had violated, the
flame of this Aetna did rise no higher. Since, one Ask a fellow of no repute,
boasting himself to be some body, rebels in Yorkshire, Temp. H. 8. The holy
pilgrimage. The name of the Lord wr^t in the ^^ sl^eve^. ^^.
he takes Hull, pretends he will purify the Nobility, and expel evil
Councillors: two of which, of low birth and small reputation, his company tell
the King they dislike, and they name the Lord Crumwel and Sir Richard Rich:
they spread lies, and strange claims supposed to be made by the King: they
give an oath (but reserve no doubt the interpretation of it to themselves;)
they paint the five wounds of our Savior in their Banner, Priests with crosses
lead the way, nor forget they to be very earnest for a Parliament: the K.
replies, He questions whether those things they call liberties be lawful and
beneficial to the Commonwealth so he takes it ill that these bruits, so he
terms* them (yet were there near twenty Lords and Knights with them) should
appoint him his Council, more he adds then appertains to any subject, he tells
them he reputes their insurrection to rise, from a lightness given in a manner
by a naughty nature to a Communalty. But in this was the holy Martyr more
unfortunate then the whole Chronicles, all heresies arming together against
him; the Irish as against a King disaffected to that faith, the Scots as not
enough of theirs, the English from the example of their wickedness, but
nothing but an excellent goodness, and the very virtue of the mean, could have
been set upon by so opposite extremes, accusing and proving so the justness of
his temper. Our Monarchy fortunately escaped the Harpies, and Vipers of those
reigns, and may do others* These talk of liberty, we are sure, never was power
more arbitrary. Andreas Doria freed his country from the real thraldom of the
French, and like a man of honor, bestowed his countries liberty upon his
country. If the Commonwealth, and the liberty so much in their mouths began
the quarrel, they are able now Non est liberta^ ^r^^ioyulla qu^m sub rege pi^.
to let the whole Nation share in the rich purchase, let them offer their
common mother, their Country, this liberty they talk of, which we shall never
find: They will over-doe great Dor^^, he saved but a small Commonwealth, and
they may obliege a populous kingdom, for the greatest benefit mankind can
receive. Let them then disarm themselves, turn Christians, (peace and charity
being the badge of those soldiers) and from our fierce Libertatem aliorum
vert^sse in suam servitutem. We may say n^stram.
Lords become our fellow Citizens, (else it may be there was no liberty pursued
but theirs, which being born upon the wings of their victory above all laws,
must be tyranny, and there can be nothing but Turkish slavery left for all the
world beside,) this cannot then be expected, from such as have expelled a ^ust
and honest power. Di^clesian at Salonae, after his cruel persecutions shall be
no more seen, they will rather ^y striking off the Poppy heads, by massacres,
tortures, and spoil, establish their usu^pation, mix Heaven and Earth, as
whirlwindes, move Hell it self to reinforce their illgot greatness. It Is an
observation made by the truest Historian of the C^m. l. 1. ^7.
World, in the war (so he) called the weal public, at the treaty of peace,
every man makes his demands, and some overtures were made for the common good,
(for that they made the title of the Rebellion) yet, as he, that was the least
intended, the least part of the question; and by late experience we find, that
amongst such reformers particular advancement, and fortifying themselves
against the Sovereigns authority, is the design; yet it was ever thought,
there could be no more capital injustice, then that of those, who when they
mean to deceive most, yet study to seem most honest; that seeming, being all
they are, and what they care for. For according to Machiavels rule in these
politics, Virtue it self is not much to be cared for; a show turned outward is
enough, the credit and opinion of Virtue may help a man, but Virtue indeed
would but hinder: this appears how, in that of Pompey, who sometimes (ambitious
of the Roman dominion) would chide his fortune to himself, thus, Sylla could,
and I cannot, not considering the difference (as a learned Author) betwixt
Sylla and himself, Sylla being cruel, bloody, and viclent; one that would
prosecute what he began, and make his way plain and easy, and go on, against
whatsoever could be encountered: whereas Pompey 70000 he killed at the gates
4000 unarmed, innomerable in the ^^y, he was adv^sed to leave some over whom he
^ight command, after which he set up his rables of proscription.
on the contrary, was grave, mindful of the laws, framing all his actions to
reputation and Majesty: by which temper he was much less able to perfect his
desires: to these two not unfitly might the late Earl of Essex and Mr. Cromwell
be resembled, for, saving that Sylla was nobly born, and so unlike, yet Syllas
foundation was as weak: his freed man and he, renting their dwelling together,
the Master paying thirty Crowns for the lower rooms, the Man twenty for the
upper. So that returning rich from the war of Africa, a person of honor P(...)
(...)
told him, it was impossible he should be honest; but these digressions are
unlawful, and I am too guilty. To return to my politic reformer, or the
peoples good and just man, and his arts, Sub nomine honesti conjurationes Salus.
adversus remp. ever, with what mountains of goodness and reformation, are all
rebellions swelled, they breathe nothing but the Commonwealth, O that I were
made a Judge in the land! complaints of oppressures, detestation of cruelty and
injuries, pious and well intended cures. For every sickness of the fainting
State, Religion and Laws, are reverend and sacred notions, and the glory of a
weak, misled, seduced Prince, are the sole Whites at which these righteous
Marks-men aim: and to behold with what sober gravity, and serious hypocrisy,
the Empiricks themselves play their parts of the mischiefs, were enough to
cheat an honest blind man into the train, and to bring the not over-wise into
an opinion, that they are not things made up of flesh and below, not mortal,
lying, overreaching man, but bright Tutelars or guardians, dropped out of S.
Paul's third heavens; the guilt of the outside, and titles, being so specious,
that Antichrist himself, or a new King John of Leyden, shall not draw the rout
after them with more art, as if such counterfeit of devotion, close shows of
religion, and smoothness of words were certain sanctity, Inter sacella and
aras regna acturos rati animos sustollunt. Monfort our English Catiline 2 I^st.
226.
, dying an implacable Rebel, is by Rishanger a Monk, carried up to Heaven for a
Martyr; they thought miracles hung about his tomb, which durst not (as he) walk
abroad for the fear 998 page
men had of the Kings. Before these years profane Rebels have styled their
seditious bands Gods hosts y. Once a Te^p. H 3.
pilgrimage of grace, but like wise Snakes, unless the Sun shine and their
arms prosper, they are never seen but in their knots and folds. It Is so in all
late rebellions, there is nothing but holiness and mystery in the forehead;
nay, all insurrections since the blessed light have begun in tune: Muncer the
Auabaptist thought a psalm well sung, alone defensive, against the army of the
Princes, it is the French a la mode, the Hugonots use it, Condes camp rung Jaq.
de Thou. 298. St^ad. 121.
with psalms; the Grusians or Lowcountrey brethren, ever began a Sacrilege or
mutiny with an hymn; this was the ^ound for a charge, it made them mad. Thus,
the Bohemians perfidiously Jul. Bell. bell. germ. 37.
revolting from the Emperor, some of the godly Weavers sung the good company
up: thus the wellaffected fought the combat of Branceford (with far more
devotion then the Norman used, who at battle fight mixed a song (or Ball^d as
we say) of Rowland, with a prayer, and so fell on: they think there are
exorcismes for Princes, as there were by all means for Sarahs amorous spirit,
and that a for ever and for aye, is as terrible as the first verse of Saint
John, which they of the other side think, scares the Devil himself. It was ever
too (to note a little how they deceive by that name,) a fashion of the
Spartanes to make the liberty of others the pretense of their wars. This was
the Swedes policy, all these pretenders are discovered by time and the
conclusion, to be liars and abusers. In a well ordered Commonwealth (says a
Thu^n. 62. to 2.
grave Historian) the Magistrate must beware of such pretending subjects, be
the cause never so just. Nay, though rarely their meaning may have some mixture
of good in it at first, let them thrive that sinks lowest: John Typotius had
lived familiarly with Charles Thu^n. 1109.
of Suderman, who got a kingdom by this play: he protests Charles was once free
from any desire of invading another man's right: but being carried away with too
much heat of religion, and proving successeful, this ambition says he, which
before was neither hot nor cold, boiled over: an Archbishop of York tells the
Rebels of his country, Pilgrimages might be good, but these armed pilgrimages
could never be lawful. Oliver, a wise French Id. 744. romans ^.
Chancellor favored the Religion, but allowed not arming to set it up, it
being observed of our Savior, that he spread his faith by persuasion and
miracles, but Mahomet and all Impostors by the sword. And were there not a
prohibition in Law ^. 11. 74.
and Scripture too, you shall not do evil that good may follow: nay, were the
end of the pretenses honest, were it wisdom and zeal, and not singularity of
factious men, were it love and piety to the Nation, and not a furious
willingness to discharge their prodigalities, homelosses and passions upon the
government which sets them on? Yet if the breach of all laws, the sacrilege,
the uncharitableness, the bloodshed, the perjuries, the blasphemies, the
rapines, the lies, the atheism of the instruments, the sins of murdering
preachers, (who in all the wares of Christendom are the fire and the powder,)
let this train of Rebellion and pious treason which is certainly Remo unq^am
imp^rium st^gitii^ (...)cum, boni^ a^ti^u^ exerc^it.
subsequent, be considered, let them be weighed justly, and the acquisition of
this, or such another victory will appear but small: we may say as Pyrhus did
after the overthrow of the Romans, such another victory would ruin us: yet I
think we need not a second part, Knox the Scotch Jeh^ (no^ to be remembered
without horror) reformed so like Bajazet or Gilderun, the raging Turk, so like*
consuming fire, melting Bells, defacing Churches and Monuments; the Goths
Jonston^^.
and Vandals, (as their Countreyman) could not have spoiled worse; and are our
Reformers a step behind him? No, our condition is the most wretched of any
Nation under the Sun, being (like the Barbarians in Livie) governed ^. 37.
by lawless conceits of our Masters, without any law written. Nay, the basest
Trooper, is not only Prince of what is without us, but of our consciences too,
which was a point Maximil. 2. dict. Gravissimum s^elus esse conscien(...) velle
aom^nari, id v^ro esse coel^ arc^^s inva* de^^.
(say this House of Commons in the heap of accumulative treason, (words as ugly
and monstrous as treason can be) of the most tyrannical and arbitr^ry
government, ever heard of, not only to Lord it over the fortunes, but also over
the souls of men A^ic. 19. E. o^ Straff. charge.
, yet the world is impudently told, there was never any tyranny like that of
our Kings; who had they but spoke a syllable of what these have done, how had
our Pulpits declaimed, what Satyrs, what fire and brimstone had they showred?
Like the furious Bohemian, Jul. Bell. 2^^. V. Thua^. 103.
they had bequeathed the kingdom up to Turks and Tartars. If no wellminded
Rebel would have shown himself of their side first, but amongst their sins
committed against the peace and prosperity of this perishing people and
kingdom, after those against the Church and our faith; there is none so high
and mischievous, as that against our natural allegiance and the rights of the
Royal Family, enough to involve us in a combustion not to be extinguished but
in the kingdoms ashes. No man defends the Defender of the Faith, it is not
without our wonder to be thought on; we have hedged in our Sovereign by wary
and sharp laws against the Papists, and we see those that would be called
Protestants, destroy him, our pious and learned Divines dispute against Papal
deposition, and there are those within our own pale (as they would be thought)
will act it at home. A learned Earl at the arraignment of Sr Everard Digby of
^^rl of North.
the Gunpowder treason, affirms, The practices of the Papists, from whence the
powder had its derivation, were merely to prevent King James haereditary right,
And the Lord Cook, in Garnets trial (a Jesuit and (as before) a father of the
powder mine,) charges that Jesuit with high treason, because (as he) the end of
his plot was the final destruction of the royal Succession. Indeed there was
not any Protestant Church else, nor any adverse King and Royal family worth a
Jesuits fears, we have saved them by these acts (yet why should I say We, since
the Viper within the man is not part of the man) the sin and the hazards, which
their black arts daily subjected them to, to the greatest and most solid
happiness and content that ever befell the Papacy, since Henry the third French
King of that name received the Iacobins knife; yet was there as much ods
betwixt that blow and this, as betwixt the windfall of a t^ttering feeble
single Cedar, and an unnatural earthquake, which tears up Lebanon it self, and
ruins the whole wood: yet cannot it but seem a horrid and a fatal Judgment,
that English men and seeming Protestants should perpetrate that treason, which
the Papists would have given (after the price of merit) half the triple crown
to have been Actors in. I will but add the opinion of K. James his first
Parliament, which declares, the indubitate inheritance of the King, and the
descent of the royalty, and might serve for a thousand arguments, and ought to
convince every Englishman, were there no other defense made of the Question at
all, being the deliberate confession of the Kingdom and people, Showing (so it
speaks in the title) That the Crown is lawfully descended to ^ Jacobi c. 2.
King James his progeny and posterity, the statute is to this purpose, The
Parliament recognizes being bound unto it, by the Laws of God and man, that
immediately upon the decease of the late Queen Elizabeth, the Imperial Crown of
the realm of England, and of all the kingdoms, dominions, and rights belonging
to the same, did by inherent birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession,
descend and come to your most excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and
lawfully, next and sole heir of the blood Royal of this Realm, by lawful
rightful descent, thereunto we do most humbly and faithfully submit, and
obliege our selves our heirs and posterities for ever, until the last drop of
our blood be spilt; and do beseech your Majesty to accept the same, as the
firstfruits in this high Court of Parliament, of our loyalty and faith to your
Majesty, and your Royal progeny and posterity, for ever to endure as a memorial
to all posterities of our loyalty and obedience, hearty and humble affection,
among the Records of your high Court of Parliament: which if it shall please
your Majesty, to adorn with your Royal assent (without which it can neither be
Negative voice.
complete or perfect,) we shall add this to the rest of your Majesty's
inestimable favors, etc. This was a complete Parliament, it says, The whole
body of the Realm, and every particular member thereof, either in person, or by
representation, upon their own free elections are by the laws of this Realm,
deemed to be personally present. So here is an House of Commons of 439 (which
no man can say of theirs, when the Army came up and the Work began,) with an
House of Lords and the King with his Negative voice: The right of the King is
acknowledged by descent, and so to descend, the Parliament and their posterity,
so the represented bound with their posterity for ever, and submitted to this
acknowledgement: again it was to endure among the Records of Parliament for
ever, most strange not above 46 years since, and all these submissions to this
power and right (then which no Parliament or Nation could ever make any more
ample, and more solemn) so soon forgot! What equal strength has dissolved this
bond; either this declaring statute is in force, or some other has repealed it,
There being nothing so agreeing to natural equity, as that every thing should
be loosed, R. ^. 57. R. 2. 53. R. 5. 26. R. 6. 43.
by as high a power, nay, by the same power that bound it: We know no laws in
England, but Custom, which is Common law, and Acts of Parliament Inst. 11. 110.
: If the Sword must cut such Gordian knots as these, we may fear our glory is
departed. This one place may supply all other weight, colors, or number, and
may serve to condemn this kingdom, in the highest breach of National Faith, (if
we add no more) that ever people commicted; for we yet knowing that lawfully
this statute is in it force, (and it being confessed by it, that King James
took by descent with his posterity) carr* not with the whole world but ask, how
the present King comes to be cast out of his Fathers house? and against law,
reason and nature be denied his birthright? I might infer, i^ he incurred the
danger of a praemunire, who R. 5. Cawd. case.
by the Popes Bull sought to stop the proceedings of one of the Kings Courts of
justice, what should they suffer, who have cast him out, his Royalty and
jurisdiction together? Were there nothing else left but hope, yet may we hope,
that these men, who unwise enough, found the veneration they would establish
upon blood M^chiav. Let the Politician think only fear can bend men, let him
endeavor that all men may be obnoxious to him, and either in danger or
distress.
and terror, (that modesty or softness which is ever most winning and
necessary in a new power (being as a virtue, to be borrowed from the Tragedy of
the assassinated King never used,) whose triumphs and conquests are but
glorious sins, and whose inhumane insolences, have corrupted those triumphs,
are ascended to the highest point, and must decline; and that if these be not
what they seem to be Caesar's Suevi, quib. ^e Dii ipsi immortales pares esse
p^ssu^^, got up above Gods thunder, then Ver^l. Aug. scien. ^ Bella obvindictam
justam fere semp^r f^licia fuerunt, etc. The success of wars in the end
depends chiefly upon the innocence of the quarrel. ^ Galc. 130.
Si qua pios respectant numina if there be any justice any where, the innocence
of the holiest Martyrs quarrel shall prevail, and from the day of that accursed
regicide, CHARLES the seconds Crown shall flourish.

FINIS.

