THE SCOTS APOSTASY.
Is It come to this? what? shall the Cheeks of Fame
Stretched with the breath of learned Lowdens name
Be flagg'd again, and that great piece of Sense
As rich in Loyalty, as Eloquence,
Brought to the Test, be found a trick of State?
Like Chimists tinctures proved Adulterate?
The Devil sure such language did atcheive,
To cheat our un-fore-warned Grandame Eve;
As this Impostor found out to besot
The experienced English to believe A Scot.
Who reconciled the Covenants doubtful Sense?
The Commons Argument, or the Cities Pence?
Or did you doubt persistance in one good
Would spoil the fabric of your Brotherhood,
Projected first in such a forge of sin,
Was fit for the grand Devils hammering.
Or was it Ambition that this damned fact,
Should tell the world you know the sines you act.
The infamy this super-Treason brings,
Blast's more then Murders of your sixty Kings.
A crime so black as being aduis'dly done,
Those hold with this no Competition.
Kings only suffered then, in this does lie,
The Assacination of Monarchye.
Beyond this sin no one step can be Trod
If not to attempt deposing of your God.
Oh were you so engaged that we might see,
Heavens angry lightning 'bout your ears to flee;
Till you were shriveld into dust, and your cold land,
Parcht to a drought beyond the Libian sand;
But it is reserved, and till heaven plague you worse
Be Objects of an Epidemick curse.
First may your Brethren to whose viler ends,
Your power has banded cease to count you friends;
And prompted by the Dictate of their reason
Reproach the Traitors; though they hug the Treason.
And may their Iealousies increase and breed,
Till they confine your Ships beyond the Tweed.
In foreign Nations may your loathed Name be,
A stigmatizing brand of Infamy.
Till forced by general hate you cease to rome
The world, and for a plague go live at home;
Till you resume your poverty, and be
Reduced to beg where none can be so free,
To grant; and may your scabbie Land be all,
Translated to a general Hospital.
Let not the Sun afford one gentle ray,
To give you comfort of a Summers day.
But as a Guerdon for your Traiterous war,
Live cherisht only by the Northern star.
No stranger deigne to visit your rude Coast,
And be to all but banished Men, as lost.
And such in Hightening of the infliction due,
Let provoked Princes send them all to you.
Your State a Chaos be, where not the Law;
But Power, your lives and liberties may awe.
No Subject amongst you keep a quiet breast,
But each man strive through blood to be the best;
Till for those Miseries on us yo'ue brought,
By your own sword, our just revenge be wrought.
To sum up all -- let your Religion be,
As your Allegiance, mask't hypocrisy.
Until when Charles shall be composed in dust,
Perfumed with Epithites of good and just;
He saved; Incensed Heaven may have forgot,
To afford one act of mercy to a Scot.
FINIS.

