CLOTHING FOR THE Naked Woman, OR The second part of THE DISSEMBLING SCOT, SET
FORTH IN HIS COLOVRS, Being a Corection of Mr. DAVID BROWN His errors in his
Pamphlet called THE NAKED WOMAN, styled also by him, A RARE EPISTLE to Mr.
STERREY.

PROVE. 26.5. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
Conceit.

Written by the Minister of CHRIST-CHVRCH London, in vindication of him and his
flock from those false aspersions which are cast upon them, of false Doctrine
and Discipline.

Whereunto is added, THE NEW CREED, or belief in GOD.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the black spread Eagle
at the West end of Paul's. Anno Dom. 1652.

CLOTHING FOR THE Naked Woman.
SInce the Author of the naked woman has alleged that Time is one of the
most precious Jewels under the Sun, and that upon the well or ill spending of
time depends Eternity, either of weal or woe. Much has Mr. Brown to answer
for, who has so much misspent it, in making medlyes of frivilous discourses,
that he might (amongst the rest of his tedious stuff) shufle in the old Rotten
rags of his own rage against some religious persons whom he envieth, and
labors to make odious to the World, But if he aimed only at the glory of
God, he would not have built a Scaffold upon the Dunghill of the Ranters, to
publish his abominable lies against such Godly people who abhor the practices
both of them and him, and if he desired (from the bottom of his heart) the
undeceiving of those wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked, deluded, and
bewitched people who are conceited of the Raritie of their Ranting fooleries,
as he is of his rare Epistle, then he would have taken a better course, and
instead of sounding a Trumpet about her, have been so modest as to turn away
the peoples eyes from beholding vanity, and much more should he have sought to
take away that false principle, upon which the Ranters build their carnal
exercises, for he is a Physician of no value, who seeks not into the cause as
well as the Cure.

And that I may not be fruitless to the Reader, I thought good to mind you,
that the ground wherefore the Ranters hold, the sinfullest deed to be as holy
as the purest act, is, because the whole life and power of motion both in men
and Angels, good and bad comes Originally from GOD, and therefore they
conclude, that the poor creature can do no otherwise, then what it always
does, and may do what it lists, and is drawn forth to evil, by the great
power of God and the dispensation of his good Spirit, who (they affirm) has
decreed, determined, commanded, necessitated, and drawn them forth to kill,
steal, commit Adultery, Idolatry, and all manner of wickedness, which they
lust to do, all which (they say) coming from God who gives power, ability,
and activity to all, must needs be, and is still good, agreeable to his will,
and not evil in the least manner, or measure, but as pure, and holy, as the
holiest of all, and that what man does, God does, and man has no more power
then a stock, or a stone to move, to evil or good, but as God moves, and that
they do it not, but God does it by them, and if they sin (they think) they do
no more then God would have them do, and that they are therefore never out of
his favor or Communion by any thing which they do or can do, they think,
their holiness cannot bring them nearer to God nor their profaneness draw
them further from him.

But herein they err and have not the knowledge of God, for albeit, that all
power and ability comes from God, so that the same hand that does good, does
evil also, and the same tongue that blesses God curses men, Iam. 3 9.
yet the misaplication of that power is theirs, and nothing else is or can be
sin, but the abusing of that ability which God has given. Its true, by the
power which God has given to men, they do such devilish actions. But that God
gave them abillities and powers purposely to misaply the same, is to set
himself against himself, and to make himself the Author of sin, and like the
Devil himself who is the Father of a Lie, John 8.44.
Now the misaplying of men's created faculties and misgovernment of them selves
is a derogation from the Creation of God, Romans 1.20.
by which, the invisible things of Gods power and Godhead are clearly seen, And
the misaplying of the divine Ordinances of God, is a swarving from his holy
institutions; So then, God is the God of all life, motion, and action, both in
Angels and Devils, good men, and bad, but not of the misapplication thereof,
and in abillity without misapplication thereof, is not the essential cause of
men's damnation. If the poor creature could never have done otherwise, he could
not have been blamed nor left without excuse, Prove. 10.22
therefore the poor creature has or had abillity to do better once, God is
neither the Author of sin nor of sorrow, Ezekiel. 18 32.
He has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, sinners destruction is of
themselves, neither sin nor temptation to sin comes from him, though sometimes
he permit sin, to punish sin, in his Justice. Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, Iam. 1 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: But every
man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised, then when
Lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. Do not err my beloved Brethren. Every good gift, and
ever^ perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of changing.

Hence it follows, that God has neither decreed, commanded, determined, or
drawn them forth to do such devilish actions, God is only good, and all good
proceeds from him, as the Fountain, I am. 3.11
^ut of which there cannot proceed sweet water and bitter: Evil proceeds
from the Devil that wicked one, sin is contrary to the will of God, and man
has ability given him of God not to do evil but good: This then is the
message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is Light,
and in him is no darkness at all. If we say we have Fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness we lie and do not the truth, but if we walk in the light, as
he is in the light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 1.7, 8, 9.

My Conclusion is that so long as men misaply the powers and faculties God has
given them, they commit sin, and are the servants of sin; And those that do not
at all apply their abillities, are evil and sloathfull servants. John 8.34
Mat. 25.26.
But if they rightly apply their powers and faculties to observe, the Statutes
of God, that is righteousness: But the power is one and the same, Deuteronomy. 6.25.
Act. 17.28.
though it be not always applied that way which God would have it applied.

Has not God power to restrain all men from sinning, and why will he not
compel them to make right applications of their abilities, seeing God has all
power and is infinite in strength?

I know that what soever God does it shall be for ever, Eccles. 3.14.
nothing can be put unto it, nor any thing taken from it, and God does it, that
men should fear before him. Let this deter you from the abusing of your
received abilities, Lest God power contempt upon you, and harden your hearts
from his fear that ye can never be rec overed out of the Grave of Apostasy.

Thus having written somewhat to convince the sect of the Libertines of their
abominable sins, and to deter them there from. I shall proceed to answer: D
B. in those matters concerning my self wherein I refer him and the Reader,
first of all to the book which I set forth in vindication of Leiutenant Col.
LILBURNE and Mr. MUSGRAVE, and others from David Brownes false aspersions And I
deny that he ever procured any place for me in the Commonwealth, or that he
ever kept me in it, as he falsely alleges, or that I was so much as suspended
from it, unless it were in private, and I have nothing to do with any thing
that is done in Hugger-mugger, I also challenge all persons to show wherein I
have done the least wrong to the Commonwealth or to any particular person,
because D. B. who seems to be the Committees (and their Clerks) advocate
(though he be none of the wisest (unless in his own conceit) would make men
believe he is a great looser by me, but he lies; for I never had any thing from
him, and what I and my Friends have done and suffered in our estates for him is
well known, and my promise never budded but it blosomed after in performance,
but his accusations are general, and I know not where to find him; therefore I
will not trouble my self, nor the Reader, to follow him, because he is as a
fish in the water; And indeed I expected that he would have set forth something
more particular concerning Worcester house, but because he says he has it yet
to divulge; I shall cease troubling my self any further, to untwist Briars and
Thorns, before I be entangled therewith, I know its more suitable to the Rules
of the Gospel, to be Defendant then Plaintiff; And I fear not the face of
any man, though Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, and all his Train be set in
battell-array against me, to make thousands of people more wretched then they
be, by hindering my progress concerning the satisfaction of THE PUBLIQVE FAITH,
out of all discoveries of Lands concealed from and which does Justly appertain
unto the Commonwealth, and also out of all monyes in Treasurers and Collectors
hands which they have concealed from THE COMMONWEALTH, as also all the estates
of Convicted Papists, and Delinquents, undisposed of (making this proviso, that
every man's Just right, and legal interest should be preserved and industry
considered) and so, It is desired that the Mines, and Lands under
high-watermark and Forest Lands may be improved, and Popish Cathedralls
demolished and sold, and that the overplus may be for THE RELIEF OF THE POOR,
and satisfaction of the LOSSES, and other Just debts of the Nation, according
as the PARLIAMENT shall appoint, Which some private men, who seek their own
mercenary ends, more then the glory of GOD or THE PUBLIQVE GOOD do labor to
oppose, the Devil being always at their elboes to stir them up thereunto.

And as touching Mr. Brown I confess ingeniously that although the Church has
excommunicated him justly, Rev. 8.10
yet he houldeth forth many truths which he held, and received when he was a
Member with us; But he is like the blazing Star, which Saint John saw fall
from Heaven to the Earth burning, He professes total separation to cloak his
abominable Hypocrisy and disimulation; as shall be made to appear shortly
for he has a burning zeal against these Ranters, he professes for total
separation, from the false Assemblies, stands for Common Justice imputting
male factors to work, who ought not by the Laws of God to suffer death, (and
that THEY ARE MVRDERERS WHO KILL THEM,) he is for the quite plucking down of
the Idolatrous high places, and yet he is a sinner against his own soul,
though he with Belz^bub confess that Christ is the Son of the blessed; But his
confessing Christ is of envy, thinking to add affliction to the poor Saints,
who have cast him out from amongst them for his wickedness, for after he had
brought in those persons whom he (in his rare Epistle) calls famous
Witnesses, to prove his Charge, D. Brown the Plaintiff (after I had made my
defense) confessed, that he was heartily sorry for charging me with Lying and
Cheating, and that he knew in his own conscience, I was bonest and Just; But
that the Devil provoked him to accuse me, and thereupon he prayed the Church
to forgive him, and urged the speech of Christ to Saint Peter to forgive often,
70 times 7 times; but when he saw that the Church would have a little more
experience of him before they would admit him to the SACRAMENT, (from which he
was suspended because he had so often played fast and loose with them in a
dissembling way) and desired him to Certify under his hand the wrong that he
had done, that those that are without may be satisfied, to whom he had carried
his lies, he then fell to justify himself, and to undo all his repentance,
and to charge the Church with sin, wherefore the Church seeing his
wickedness and obstinacy, called upon me to discharge my duty, and to
pronounce the sentence, and so he was cast out as a liar and false accuser of
the Brethren, and as a hateful person before God and man, because of his
sowing discord amongst them, and persisting in his obstinacy; Since which time,
he has proceeded from evil to worse, as if he were given up to a reprobate
sense; And whereas he says he witnessed against the evils of diverse false
Doctrines which were by Samuel Chidley one of their Teachers delivered; I
shall declare the Doctrine what it is, and leave the same to wise men to Judge
of.

The Text from whence the Doctrine was raised, is Isaiah 63.9. Surely they are
my people, Children that will not lie, so he was their Savior.

The Doctrine which was raised from the word (will) in that place, Children
that will not lie, he accepted against.

And as a preparative to the Doctrine, I noted many things.

And after them these which follow.

1. That it is not said Children that do not lie; The Saints of God through
infirmity have fallen into that sin, and Solomon says, There is not a just man
upon the Earth that does good and sins net. Eccles. 7.20.

2. Neither is it said, Children which cannot lie, 1 John 1 8.
for If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. The Saints are subject to sin, the seed of sin is in their natures, St.
Paul complains that he was carnal, sold under it, and with his flesh, Romans
7.44.
served the Law of sin, and the evil that he would not do, Verse 25.
that he did, yea these precious Saints, spoken of in the Text in hand, Verse
19.
whom the Lord testifies of* saying, surely they are my people, Children that
will not lie, and so he was their Savior, Isa. 63 9, 10
in his love and in his pity, he redeemed them, yet its said afterward, in
verse. 10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned
to be their enemy, and he fought against them, therefore when Paul says, we
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, Joseph says, how can I do
this great wickedness and sin a against God, the meaning is, 2 Cor 13.8
that by that inward principle which they had received from GOD, they could not
assent unto it, as being contrary to their mind, and WILL, they had no
disposition in them so to do, for the fear of God was before them, and They
delighted in the Law of God after the inner man, -- In this sense he that is
borne of God sins not.

3 But the Text says, Surely they are my people, Children that [will] not lie,
whence this Doctrine was raised, THAT THERE IS A WILL IN THE SAINTS OF GOD NOT
TO LIE.

They have a gracious and a voluntary disposition in them to resist sin.

The point being amplified from the 7th. of the Romans, from the 15 verse to
the end of the Chapter, and confirmed further by Reason, and some further
progress made, to the information of the minds, and stirring up of the
affections, of the hearers, and the Comfort of the poor Saints, concerning
their Evidences and Interest in Christ none of the Church opposed but Mr. D,
Brown who made a disturbance in the Congregation, charging me with false
Doctrine, another Minister and a learned man whom he himself chose to have the
hearing of the business and to Judge and make an end of the difference
justified the Doctrine, yet Mr. Brown was therefore angry and discontented with
him also.

There is somewhat else which I delivered concerning ORIGINAL SINNF, which Mr.
Brown was discontented at.

That ORIGINAL SIN came from Satan, entered into the World by one man, and
was acted by him, this actual sin was original, Rom^ 5.12
but pardoned to Adam, and not to be imputed to his posterity to eternal
condemnation, without further degeneration; for although Adams sin made a
leak in the ship of Mankind, and was the Inlet to all other finnes which are
committed by his posterity, yet Adam was not so guilty, nor contracted such a
measure of Guilt upon his posterity, as they have since brought upon
themselves; For we read not that Adam committed Murder, or Adultery, Idolatry,
Sabbath breaking, and such abominable sins as men now commit with a high hand.
Adams sin was one, theirs are many, hence it comes that God sends many diseases
upon them, which Adam had not, and which he threatens in the Law, as the
Consumption and burning Ague, Lev. 26
and such like, and so their days are shortened to what they were before; The
consideration whereof should deter all men from sinning; for as Adam was, a
Root to all mankind, so every man is a root unto the Children which spring from
him; so that that which was actual sin in the Parents, Heb. 7.9.10
is the Childs by imputation, as Levi paid Tithes in the loins of Abraham,
because he was in his loins, and as we all were transgressors in the loins of
Adam, so every sinner contracts more sin upon him and his posterity then Adam
did in Paradize, and so becomes an Original root to his posterity after him.

These are the Doctrines which Mr. Brown calls false; If he have any thing
further to allege, if he manifest it, I shall give such an Answer thereto as
the Word of God shall direct, with such moderation as I hope shall demonstrate,
that I have no hatred to the man, but to his evils.

And now to conclude, I have here set down my profession which is agreeable to
my Doctrine, which Confession of Faith J resolve through Gods grace to live and
dye in.

The Belief as follows.

A NEW CHRISTIAN CREED Built upon the old Foundation of the Holy APOSTLES and
PROPHETS. JESUS CHRIST being the Chief Corner Stone.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the power of the HOLY
GHOST, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontus Pilate, was Crucified,
dead and buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God, from thence he shall come to Judge the Living
and the Dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost,
The holy Separated Church
The Communion of Saints,,
The forgiveness of sins,
The Resurrection of the dead
And the life everlasting,
AMEN.
FJNJS.

