The CASE of SIMON CLARK Son and Heir of Peter Clark deceased and now Heir
apparent of the Family of Sr. Simon Clark, against whom a 'Bill is brought into
the 'Parliament by Sr. John Clark and Fuller Skipwith to deprive him of all
estate settled upon him by Sr. Simon Clark Baronet his Grandfather.
SIR SIMON CLARK Baronet, had three Sons (viz.) Sir John Clark his Elder, Peter
the second, and Woodchurch Clark the third, and upon the Marriage of his son
Sir John with Anne his first wife did in the 11. year of K. Charles 1635. agree
to settle all his lands near about the value of 1500 l. (viz.)

The Manor and Rectory of Salford with the appurtenan^^ (...) at least ^00 l.
per annum to the use of Sr. John for life the remainder to Anne his wife for
life for present maintenance and Jointure with diverse contingent Remainders to
1, 2, 3, 4. and to the tenth son and to the heir males of the body of each son
successively.

The Manor of Bidford and Broom to the use of Sr. Simon for life the Remainder
to Sr. John for life with the contingent remainders to the 1, 2, 3. son unto
the tenth.

And his Manor and Lands of and in Newbald and Easnall to the use of himself
for life the Remainder to the Lady Clark then the wife of Sr Simon for life for
her Jointure. The Remainder to Sr. John his son for life, with like contingent
Remainders to the 1, 2, 3. sons and to the tenth son.

And to preserve the said contingent Remainders from being destroyed by Sr.
John, and that Sr. Simon might have it in his power to preserve his said Lands
in his name and blood and to go with the Honor after the said contingent
Remainders (agreed to be limited) should be spent: The immediate Remainder was
to be in Sr. Simon Clark and his heirs. But by some mistake or artifice in the
Marriage Conveiance dated on or about the 28. of May in the 11. year of King
Charles. The next immediate remainders to the said conting^ (...) ^ders were to
the heirs males of Sr. John, and after to the heirs of Sr. Simon, whereby the
whole intention of the said Marriage agreement might be defeated by Sr. John.

Whereupon there was soon after a suite in the Court of Requests by Sr. Simon
against Sr. John and the Trustees to have the estate settled according to the
said Marriage Agreement, and in that suite the said deed of the 11. of King
Cha^les was produced and thereupon a second settlement was made according to
the said first Marriage Agreement by fine and deed dated the 23. of March in
the 14. year of King Charles whereby the immediate Remainder to the said
contingent Remainders in all the said Manors and premises are limited to the
heirs of Sr. Simon.

In the said deed of the 23. of March 1638. it is recited that whereas diverse
suits and differences have been between the said Sr. Simon and John Clark for
and concerning the settling the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments
afterward therein mentioned in the name and blood of the said Simon and John
Clark. That for the ending and appeasing of all and every of the said suites
and differences, and for a perfect reconciliation betwixt the said Simon and
John Clark, and in con^ (...) a certain sum of money in hand paid to the said
John Clark, the said settlement was had and made.

That Sr. Simon Clark perceiving that Sr. John Clark had not nor was not like
to have any Children, by deed dated the 15. of August 1651. conveyed his
reversion or remainder of the said Manor of Bidford Broom and Salford, and the
Rectory of Salford by the said settlement of the 14. year of K. Charles unto
Sir William Craven and Edward Carew Esquire and their heirs to the use of James
Pits and H Big^ton to their heirs during the life of the said Sim. Clark son of
Peter and heir apparent of Sr John (in respect the said Simon was born out of
the Kings Dominions, but now naturalized) and after the death of the said Simon
to the use of the 1, 2, and 3. sons unto the 10. of the said Simon in Tail,
and afterward to the said Woodchurch Clark with the like contingent Remainder,
the Remainder in fee to Sr. Simon, and thereby also conveyed the reversion or
Remainder of all his other lands by the said settlement of the 14. year of K.
Charles, unto the said Woodchurch Clark for his life with like contingent
Remainders to his 1, 2, and 3. son with Remainder over to the said Simon as in
the other lands and afterward to the said Sr. Simon in Fee.

That Sr. Simon dye^ (...) ^651. nothing having been moved against him after
the said settlement of the 14. year of K. Charles in thirteen years during his
life. But about 3. years after the death of Sr. Simon a Bill was exhibited by
Sr John Clark and Fullwar Skipwith as an intender purchaser for 6000 l. and the
Lady Clark relict of Sr Simon and in the names of diverse as creditors of Sr. J.
Clark and others against the said Simon Clark the son of Peter deceased an
infant and without friends and Woodchurch Clark and his son Simon with diverse
other defendants pretending thereby that there was a trust upon the said
settlement of the 14. year of K. Charles; for Sr. Simon to pay 5000 l. debts of
Sr. John Clark in consideration of the said reversion or Remainder limited
thereby unto the heirs of Sr. Simon and that the said estatesly mitted by the
said deed of the 15. of August 1651. ought to be subject thereunto and
therefore would have the lands decreed to be sold to Fullwar Skipwith to pay
the debts of Sr. John Clark and all parties interested to be bound thereby.
That one Jones a stranger and not related to Simon Clark the son of Peter was
named a Guardian for the said Simon the son of Peter Clark by the Contrivance
of the said Sr. John; Fullwar Skipwith and the Lady Clark to make such Answer
as best serve^ (...) ^poses, and thereupon witnesses have been examined and
publication past many years since no care at all being taken for Simon Clark
or he knowing thereof till since the commitment of the Bill of Sr John Clark
and Fullwar Skipwith in Parliament.

That the said Cause is still depending in Chancery and unheard and the Bill
brought into Parliament, by Sr John Clark and Fullwar Skipwith is for the same
matters upon which there is proper relief in Chancery against the said
settlement if the proof is sufficient to invade the same, and therefore not
proper for the Parliament.

That Sr. John Clark having improvidently brought himself into debt, and having
no Children the Lady Clark second wife and relict of Sr. Simon and not mother
to any of his Children and Fullwar Skipwith who was first the Servant to Sr.
Simon Clark and has since married the Niece of the Lady Clark, and pretends
with the Lady Clarks money to purchase combine together to work upon the
necessity of Sr. John and for some inconsiderable sums of money to gain the
whole estate of Sr. Simon Clark and leave only the title of a BARONET to
descend unto Simon Clark the next heir apparent of the Family and not a foot of
Land therewith, and seek^ (...) destroy a Family by Act of Parliament, which
the established Law would preserve in spite of fraud and improvidence, and that
most unaturally and undutifully by a Wife, Son, and Servants of Sir Simon by
defaming him dead which cannot speak for himself, and wounding his memory they
are most obliged to defend. If such settlements so well made for the
continuance of Lands in the Name and Family of Ancestors after so many years
peaceable enjoyment be shaken, no man will ever be able to secure his Estate:
and Honors will descent without Revenues to suppport them.

Anno Dom. 1661.


