CLEAVELAND'S PETITION To His HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR.
May it please your Highness,
RUlers within the Circle of their Government have a claim to that which is
said of the Deity, They have their Center every where, and their Circumference
no where. It is in this confidence that I address to your Highness, as knowing
no place in the Nation is so remote, as not to share in the ubiquity of your
care; no Prison so close, as to shut me up from partaking of your influence. My
Lord, it is my misfortune, that after ten years of retirement from being
engaged in the difference of the State, having wound my self up in a private
recess, and my comportment to the public, being so inoffensive, that in all
this time, neither fears nor jealousies have scrupled at my Actions: Being
about three months since at Norwich, I was fetched with a guard before the
Commissioners, and sent Prisoner to Yarmouth, and if it be not a new offense to
make inquiry wherein I offended (for hitherto my faults are kept as close as my
Person,) I am induced to believe, that next to the adherence to the Royal
party, the cause of my confinement is the narrowness of my estate; for none
stand committed whose estate can bail them; I only am the Prisoner, who have
no Acres to be my hostage. Now if my poverty be Criminal (with Reverence be it
spoken,) I must implead your Highness, whose victorious Arms have reduced me to
it, as accessory to my guilt. Let it suffice my Lord, that the calamity of the
War has made us poor; do not punish us for it! Who ever did Penance for being
ravished? Is it not enough that we are stripped so bare, but it must be made in
order to a severer Lash? must our skars be engraven with new wounds? must we
first be made Cripples, then beaten with our own Crutches? Poverty! if it be a
fault, it is its own punishment; Who suffers for it more, pays Use upon use. I
beseech your Highness put some bounds to our overthrow, and do not pursue the
chase to the other World; Can your thunder be levelled so low as our grovelling
Conditions? Can that towering Spirit that has quarried upon Kingdoms make a
stoop at us, who are the rubbish of those ruins? Methinks! I hear your former
Atchievments interceding with you not to sully your glories, with trampling on
the prostrate, nor Clog the wheels of your Chariot with so degenerous a
Triumph. The most renowned Heroes have ever with such tenderness cherished
their Captives, That their Swords did but cut out work for their courtesy;
Those that fell by their prowess, sprung up by their favors, as if they had
struck them down only to make them rebound the Higher. I hope your Highness as
you are the Rival of their fame, will be no less of their virtues; the noblest
Trophy that you can erect to your Honor is to raise the afflicted. And since
you have subdued all opposition, it now remains that you attach your self,
and with Acts of Mildness vanquish your victory. It is not long since, my
Lord, that you knocked off the Shackles from most of our party, and by a grand
release did spread your clemency as large as your territories. Let not new
proscriptions interrupt our Jubilee. Let not that your lenity be slandered as
the Ambush of your further rigor. For the service of his Majesty (if it be
objected) I am so far from excusing it, that I am ready to allege it in my
vindication: I cannot conceive that my fidelity to my Prince should taint me in
your opinion; I should rather expect it should recommend me to your favor; Had
not we been faithful to our King, we could not have given our selves to be so
to your Highness; you had then trusted us gratis, whereas now we have our
former Loyalty to vouch us. You see my Lord, how much I presume upon the
greatness of your Spirit, that dare prevent my Indictment with so frank a
Confession, especially in this, which I may so justly deny, that it is almost
arrogance in me to own it; for the truth is, I was not qualified enough to
serve him; all that I could do, was to bear a part in his sufferings, and give
my self up to be crushed with his fall; thus my charge is double (my obedience
to my Sovereign, and what is the result of that, my want of a fortune;) Now
what ever reflections I have on the former, I am a true penitent for the
latter; My Lord you see my crimes! As to my defense you bear it about you; I
shall plead nothing in my justification, but your Highness Clemency, which as
it is the constant inmate of a valiant breast, (If you graciously please to
extend it to your Suppliant in taking me out of this withering durance,) your
Highness will find that mercy will establish you more than power; though all
the days of your life were as pregnant with victories, as your twice auspicious
third of September.

Your Highness humble, and submissive Petitioner. J. C.

TO The Earl OF WESTMORELAND.
My Lord,
IT were high presumption not to be proud on this occasion, and I should be no
less then a Rebel to Eloquence, if the lines you sent me, had not raised me
above my ordinary Level, so that to express my gratitude, I must renounce my
humility, and purchase one virtue at the price of another: and well may my
modesty suffer in the service, when my reason it self is overwhelmed with the
favor. To see a person of your Lordships Eminence possessed of Nobility by a
double tenure of birth and brain so to bend his greatness as to stoop to me,
who live in the valley both of parts and fortune is so high an honor, that who
rightly considers it, if he be not stupedly senceless, will be senseless with
ecstasy I for my part am lost in amazement, and it is my interest to be so; for
not knowing otherwise how to give your present a fit reception, it is the best
of my play to be besides my self in the action; you see my Lord how I imply my
self of my native faculties to be ready for those of your inspiring; as the
Prophets of old in a sacred fury, ran out of their wits to make room for their
diety. I shall not need hereafter to digest my conceptions, I shall speak by
instinct, for where you designed to visit me with your lofty numbers, what was
it else, but to make me the Priest to your Lordships oracle, such is the
strength and spirits of your fancy, that me thought the Poem like richest wine
sent forth the steam at the opening, what flowed from your brain fumed into
mine, it is almost impossible; to read your lines and be sober you, you my Lord
are the favorite of the Muses, your strain is so happy, and has a reputation
so fair and matchless, as if you had a double key to the Temple of Honor to
let in your self and exclude competitours. It is you my Lord who have cut the
clouds and reached perfection; who having mounted the cliffe lend an hand, to me
who am laboring yet in the craggy ascent; so powering are the praises you
please to bestow on me, and my deserts so grovelling that to show you my head is
unworthy your height, it is not able to bear them, but it grows giddy with the
praecipice: It pains me to be set upon the last of an Hyperbole, you do but
crucify my tender merit thus to distend it at length and breadth: consider I
pray you that the leanest Endowments would be plump and full thus blown up
with a quill, and that there is none so dwarfish whom the rack would not
stretch to a proper man: It is an excellent breathing for a puissant Wit to
over-bare the world in defense of a Paradox, and a good Advocate will weather
out a cause when there is neither truth nor tackle to assist his invention. I
persuade my self you had never undertaken to write my Panegyric, but that you
saw it was to combat the tide and to put there abilities to the utmost test in
so unlucky a subject. Little do you think what store of opposites your opinion
will breed you, for though you be so powerful in the Art of persuasion, that
should you turn Apostate, there would need no more but to toll the Bell for
religion, yet this is an Heresy where you stand alone, and like Scaeva in the
breach with your single valor duel an Army. And now my Lord if I be not
mistaken I have found the motive that induced you to oblige me, you are tied by
your order to give protection to the weak and succourlesse, so I must change my
addresses and thank your red ribband for my commendations; such and so many are
the flowers of Rhetorique you have heaped upon me, that I run the hazard of
that Olimpick victor who was stifled with posies cast upon him in Approbation
of his worth. Which fragrant fate if I should sustain, what is there more to
make me enamored of death, but that the same florist should strew my corpse in
a funeral Oration? Could you think my Lord that suppressing your name was able
to conceal you, when it is so easy to wind you by your phrase? The
sweetness of the language discovered the Author, like that Roman senator who
hiding himself in time of proscription, his perfumes betrayed him. But I shall
not arrest your Lordships affairs with a further interruption, my Lord you
have ennobled me with your testimony, and I shall keep your paper as the
patent of mine honor, yet give me leave to tell; you that among all the
Epithets you pil'd so artificially to build me fame, there is one wanting to
accomplish my ambition, and which I beseech your Lordship I may enjoy for the
future; that is, to be esteemed.

Your Honors humble Servant, Jo: Cleaveland.

FINIS.

