THE HVE AND CRY AFTER Sir JOHN PRESBYTER.
WIth Hair in Characters, and Lugs in text:
With a splay mouth, and a nose circumflext:
With a set Ruff of Musket bore, that wears
Like Cartrages or linen Bandileers,
Exhausted of their sulpherous Contents
In Pulpit fireworks, which that Bomball vents:
The Negative and Covenanting Oath,
Like two Mustachoes, issuing from his mouth:
The Bush upon his chin, (like a carved story,
In a Box knot) cut by the Directory:
Madams Confession hanging at his ear,
Wiredrawn through all the questions, How and Where,
Each circumstance, so in the hearing Felt,
That when his ears are cropped he will count them gelt:
The sweeping Cassock scared into a Jump;
A sign the Presbyter's worn to the stump;
The Presbyter, though charmed against mischance
With the Divine right of an Ordinance.
If you meet any that do thus attire'em,
Stop them they are the Tribe of Adoniram.
What zealous Frenzy did the Senate seize,
That tare the Rochet to such Rags as these?
Episcopacy minc't, Reforming Tweed
Has sent us Runts even of Her Churches breed;
Lay-interlining Clergy, a Device
That Is nickname to the stuff called Lops and Lice.
The Beast at wrong end branded you may trace
The Devils footsteps in his cloven Face.
A Face of several Parishes and sorts,
Like to the Sergeant shaved at Inns of Court.
What mean the Elders else, those Kirk Dragoons,
Made up of Ears and Ruffs, like Duckatoons?
That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun?
That new Exchange-men of Religon?
Sure they are the Antickheads, which placed without
The Church, do gape and disembogue a spout:
Like them above the Commons House, have bin
So long without, now both are gotten in;
Then, what Imperious in the Bishop sounds,
The same the Scotch Executor rebounds.
This stating Prelacy; the Classick Rout,
That spoke it often, ere they spoke it out.
So by an Abbyes Scheleton of late,
I heard an Echo supererogate
Through imperfection, and the voice restore
As if he had the hicop over and over.
Since they our mixed Diocesans combine
Thus to ride double in their Discipline;
That Pewles shall to the Consistory call
A Deane and Chapter out of Weavers-Hall;
Each at the Ordinance to assist,
With the five thumbs w of his groat-changing Fist.
Down Dagon Synod with thy motley ware
Whilst we do swagger for the Common Prayer.
That Dove-like Embassy, that wings our sense
To Heavens gate in shape of Innocence:
Pray for the Miter'd Authors, and Defy
These Demicasters of Divinity.
For where Sr. John with Jack of all Trades joins
His Finger's thicker then the Prelat's Loyn's.
FINIS.

