THE CLERGYES BILL of COMPLAINT, OR Submissive suite of one in the behalf of
all the Orthodox and great Sorrow-suffering Churchmen throughout England.

EXHIBITED To the most honorable Houses of Parliament, Against Brownists,
Anabaptists, and other Schismatics, showing amongst other things, How the
material Churches on earth and our Reverend Divines are made despicable
through their misdemeanors.

BESIDES Necessary Annotations in the end, whereunto the Reader is respectively
referred by certain Alphabeticall Letters, from A to T included in several
lines to this work.

AT OXFORD, Printed for LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University, 1643.

The Clergies Complaint.
I Am not ignorant, what a numerous and almost infinite issue of bastard Books
daily comes to light: Even the very streets of the most populous Metropolis or
Mother-City, being spread with petty Pamphlets not worth a rotten thread, of no
value: Yea, this present day seems to procreate more books then Babes: the
books (it skils not what they be) b^ing begotten even by Eunuchs, and brought
forth by the Ba^ren; Certainly* if the late offsprings of the Press, which
this over-scribling Age has extruded, any one would number, Arithmetic could
hardly give him satisfaction. What need many words? A greater number of books
has been printed at London within this year and half past, then at either of
the Universities from the very Cradle, or invention of the Typographicall Art.
Insomuch as that complaint of Famianus Strada touching the prodigious plenty of
books, is true. Obruimur libris, Oculi legendo, manus volitando dolent; that
is, We are overcloyed with books, our eyes are pained with reading, and our
hands with turning over leaves. (a) O egregious future spoils for the Moths
and Worms, unless the most devoted lovers of the Nicotian Deity do in the
interim sacrifice them in flames. Hearken thou Tobacco-sucker, (b) that spokest
nothing but fumes, and as the Virgilian Laws, Faucibus ingentem fumum, mirabile
dictu
Evomis, involvisque domum caligine caeca
Prospectum eripiens oculis.


That is, (b) Huge fume do vomit, wondrous to be told,
And with blind darkness do thy house involve
That none can once discern it.


Behold enought, and too many sheets that may last everlastingly to light thy
contagious herb of many appellations. (c) Sheets worthy to be burned in
terrestiall flames, and the greatest part of their Authors (being the inventors
of so many false and scandalous Relations) in infernal fire.

Yet, O you reverend Churchmen, pardon me, and you endued with a soul divine,
so many, as not only with open mouth, but with public pen (according to the
Talents to you committed by the Almighty) have stoutly fought against the
monstrous Heretics daily springing up, especially Brownists, the most deeply
sworn enemies of our Church; your posterity, J dare say, coming long after
you, shall for your vigilancie repay unto your memory most ample thankfulness.
I only point at lurking Knaves, and such kind of Rascals of no reputation,
risen out of dirt and dung, whose furious Pen defiles the sacred Orders and
pious Ordinances with Cartloads of Contumelies. These things, If any one do
dream or surmise that J have slanderously uttered, surely he himself is a
notable slanderer, and more blind then a Mole, that denies those things which
are well known to barbarous and bleere-eyed men, and most notoriously
witnessed by many examples. I call to witness the near numberless Pamphlets
of men at the highest, but half learned. (d) For what do books of these days
prefer, but an incredible multitude of injuries and reproaches? Can any wicked,
execrable, inexpiable thing be devised, that such, so many, and immane swarms
of new books may not contain? Who now adays betake themselves to write, that
think not all liberty of malediction lies open to their hand?

(e) First of all the Prelates of the Church, chi^fe Pastors of the Christian
flock, and supreme Rulers of the Sacred Orders, they inculcate and contemn
even to loathing, as of the fraternity of, I know not, what Vtopian Antichrist,
and that even by that name, because they be settled in the most eminent degree
of the Church: and to the end they may colourably deceive Idiots and (f) Globe
head or Brownisticall-men. Texts out of the holy Scriptures they do infinitely
multiply. That delight and Darling of the Muses properly said, Et latro and
cantus praecing itur ense viator;
Scripturam Haeretici Catholicique legunt.
that is, The theife and wary traveller goes guarded with a sword,
The Heretic and Catholic, both read Gods holy word.


(g) Moreover, our Liturgy, most like the forms of the former and purer age,
and most honored by us and our Grandfathers many years now past, with ^
poisoned style and exulcerated heart they continually pursue. Admit their
victorious and overworn Objection. The Liturgy of England (say they) is
ex^racted o^t of the Romish Rites and Popes Masses, and therefore to be
utterlie shunned by those that are pure. O foolish and mad heads! By like right
I will pronounce it altogether unlawful to gather Gold from Dunghills to take
pearls out of foul Shel^s and precious stones out of Toads and Dragons.
Others, rather to be derided then confuted, as yet more audaciouslie do accuse
it in their stinging and stinking Scribbling scattered abroad to be full of
impiety and (which is heinous to be ut^ered) horrible blasphemy (g) Yea more
the Lords Epitome or Abbreviation of the Gospel, the Cannon of Christians and
the most omnipotent Prayer (to use the words of our German Elias) now begins
(I tremble in the rehearsal) to be evil spoken of (h) But what should those
Pies do with this sweet sounding st^ing? Asses (as they say) with this
Angelical h^^p^! To conclude, our most religious Rites, as Popish Refeus and
Relics of Romish superstitions, they refuse and abhor! Surely in so great
vanity of many which are of the Dregs of the vulgar, who yet do take unto
them the honorable name of a Div^ne, it is no wonder, that so many inglorious
horrid things, (I will say nothing hard^r) as well from press s as from
pulpits, are propounded both to the Eyes and Ears of the foolish Common
people. But let these Patrons of unreverendnesse beware, lest the same be
verified of them which the last and also first of the Apostles said of foolish
wise men. Romans 1.22. When they accounted themselves as wise, they became
foolish. For truly I fear least they earnestly avoiding the Charybdis of
bread worship (J had almost said Self worship) unadvisedlie fall upon the
Scylla of contumacie, while they not only disobey, but also like Enemies
oppose themselves against the just Commands of their most loving and indulgent
mother, (i)

Here I say nothing (k) of Cobblers and Howists and other Shameless Mechanics,
worthy to be chastieed rather with a Cudgel then ^ Quill, who, blasted with a
pestilent motion, ascend the pulpit with a sacrilegious boldness (o how great
is the Licentiousness of men!) and there do handle with unwashed hands (as the
saying is) or which is more true, do miserably ra^k the word of God. If this
be not with Icarus to she without wings, I know not what that saving of Plantus
means: I do also pass over the Brethren of ignorance (o what a breeding age is
this of such Brethren!) to whom the white Garment, which we call a Surplice, is
no less form^dable then the Coat of a certain Martyr, (his name I now
rem^mber not) mbrodered with horrible images of (...) Spirits. I touch not the
Anabaptists nor E^thyli^sts the plagues of our times, that use the best means
they can to extinguish all humane learning, and by whose judgments, most
unjust, our Universities of Cambridge and Oxford (the most renowned mansions of
the muses) do suffer as if they were the Seminaries of Heresy and the Apple of
Contention. Finally I do not mention the Giant boldness of those that honor
the house dedicated to Almighty God (and therefore called Royal and Lordly)
no more then the Stable of Augaeus, and contemn Saint Ambrose, Saint
Augustine, Saint Jerome, etc. Defenders and Champions for the Standard of the
Orthodox Faith, as so many old men overcome with Dotage.

But lest any one more perverse then others should say, what man is this?
whence comes he? and when borne? who alone inculcates and reculcates these
things even to loathing? I call to witness the sound Doctors of this and the
age past, of whom, some have propagated with life, pen, tongue and blood, the
repurged Religion which we profess. Behold first the blessed Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, etc. in heaven now triumphing with purple Crowns of Martyrdom: next
the most absolute men Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hooker at lowest
lost, but of prime note, and others in the days of our English Deborah, and
David numberless: lastly, a thousand preachers of this age, whose names J
spare, most worthy of double honor, as well for profound Doctrine as for
Sanctimony of life on either part did with one tongue and pen generally affirm
the Hierarchy, Liturgy, and our Church Rites to be most consonant and
agreeable to that book of God.

If therefore any one do compare so many Divines of the greater sort, with the
upstart Smatterers in Divinity of the common flock, rushing rather than entering
into the: Sanctum Sanctorum, the Church of God; can he believe that those (n.
o.) night Owls do more sharply see the truth, than these Eagles; Nay rather,
what man well in his wits, dares prefer a very few English Geneva Preachers
of different mind, though otherwise not unlearned (and whose authority in
other things may be sound) before so many heavenly wits of the Columns or
Staples of Christ's Church? Nevertheless, if they had been somewhat more
perverse than is meet, and more unjust than those blessed souls do think
otherwise; let them faithfully compare the strong (p) arguments of those with
the weak and slender reasonings of the dimsighted Schismatics. For they not
with sollid and invincible reasons, but only with scoffs, obloquies,
calumnies, cavells, and impudent reproaches and distractions, do scurriously
handle their cause, and undeservedly desteine with many Criminations and
Revilings. Some the best (in words Chrysostom, in deeds Polycarps) worthy to
be honored with all kind of duties, and maliciously traduce their fame, with
more than a certain doglike rage or madness. (q)

Yea more, the most Reverend Fathers and Doctors of the Church (whom all our
Orthodox Divines do reverence with the name of Saint) they vilify as men
unworthy of Sanctfiication; And the material Churches being Gods peculiar
Houses edified, and ordained for Preaching and Prayer, as in Genesis 28.13. to 18,
Esaias 56.7. and Mat. 11.13. which by our forefather of blessed life, were set
apart and consecrated to divine Service, by the names of the holy Evangelists,
Apostles, Martyrs, and other most Religious men; they most profanely and
irreligiously endeavor, not only by scandalous speeches, but by most abusive
papers, to unsanctifie, or at the least, unsaint, and whom they cannot deny to
be blessed Saints in in Heaven; will not acknowledge to be worthy of that
appellation, some of them nicknaming; and opprobriously terming (as I have been
credibly informed) the Churches dedicated to the honor of S. John, S. Matthew,
S. Bartholmew, S. Mary, and S. Thomas; Jacks church, Mats church, Bats church,
Mobs church, and Toms church, holden also, or seeming to hold themselves to be
so just and faithful, that they rather deserve to be sainted before others,
and all Churches so Consecrated, fit to be utterly demolished, or converted to
warehouses and barns, or such other profane uses. (r)

O good God, pardon them I humbly and earnestly desire, that know not what they
write, think, or babble: Yet unto those men of desperate condition, that under
the veil of zeal and piety, both with a raging Pen, and Stentorean voice,
either for the filling of their purses, or the catching of popular applause,
have violated thy holy Orders, be thou asevere Judge and revenger.

And you Heroicke Personages and Senators, I being the meanest amongst the
Students of sacred Theology, with all the reverence in my poor power do
beseech; that with conjoined strength and associated hearts, you would conserve
the Church of England, the most beautiful Spouse of God, amended and defended,
as well from lightharnessed Soldiers, fighting not with Thunder, but with Hail
thick enough (s) as especially from her capital enemies aforesaid, that would
put their Sieth (ahlas) too sharp (unless they feared your Thunder due to
Church-Robbers) deep enough into the Ecclesiastical Harvest.

Hear you Magnanimous Persons, I most humbly entreat; what a Reverend and
famous Divine, perfectly well and readily spoke, of those Arch-hereticks and
wicked wretches, whom he knew without and within.

They corrupt (says he) the Decrees of faith they break the Bonds of charity,
and practice both with evil speeches to cur in pieces, and with evil deeds to
rend asunder the seamlesse Coat of Christ; that is, our Church, flourishing in
all-maintaining Peace, under most Royal Charles, her foster Father, amongst so
many elsewhere, most turbulent Tempests of Controversies. The 32 Articles of
the Brownists confession, impiously cry out, That either we must go out of the
English Synagogue, or perish; And they do both write and also think those
things of us their Brethren which being christians and English Protestants,
which neither scourge-bearing Spaniard, nor mis-beleiving Turk, nor
Antichristian Pope, nor any Jew, nor Judas himself if he were living, ever
dreamed of, neither barbarous Scythia, nor the savage Irish, nor fierce
Hercania, nor monster-breeding Afric, nor the Sun it self the Worlds eye,
has beheld, or the earth brought forth any thing more inhumane, than the envy
and cruelty of these men; hither that blessed man. You therefore, the true
Patriarchs of the English- Israel, and the most excellent Gentry thereof,
succor with your benignity the laboring Church, opportunely quench the kindled
firebrarnds of Sedition, suppress the monstrous opinions now of late risen;
and in a word, the rage of the Clergy scourging people and other Schismatics,
who if they be once permitted to advance the head, I do divine will become more
terrible and cruel, than the very Irish, yea, than the Scythian, Anthropophi,
or man-eaters, Tigers; these things carefully and seriously again I beseech you
as heretofore your Ancestors (whose memory be blessed) have done with exceeding
praise. Came. Annal. R. El. page 71. and 275.

Our most blessed and Almighty GOD grant from my soul I pray) that your course
right well begun, you may happily consummate.

This is my Prayer, and not mine alone, (u)
With many others which are joined in one.
FINIS.
The Annotations whereunto you are referred by Letters placed in the lines of
this precedent work.
(a) This year has produced great plenty of Pamphlets, there was almost no
day, wherein 6. or 8. came not forth. Allusion to Plinii. lib. 1. Epist. 13.
Many in these days itching with the scab of desire to write, have their
brains (as the saying is) in their fingers, so great and inconsiderate is the
boldness to put any thing in writing. D. Will. Hall.

(b) Regina Britaina libras ter centum mill quotanis
Expendit, morbos accellerando novos.
Non opus Helleboro, nam quisque Tobaccon ab aula
Principis, ad caulam pauperis; usque bibit
Doct. Vaugh. in Orph. Jun. englished thus, Great Britane new infirmities to
have,
Three hundred thousand pounds does yearly waste
We need not Hellebore; for (though it stink)
From Court to Cottage all Tobacco drink.


(c.) An Indian root very well known by daily use called Herba Nicotiana,
Medica, Petum; commonly Tobacco and perhaps Betele whereof Plutarche makes
mention in lib. de facie in orb Lunae.

But facetiously said one, Quod vino madidis detur Tobacco, vocari,
Do-Baccho cur non rectius ille solet.
which may be thus Englished; Tobacco should be called Do-Baccho rather,
As by the use thereof we well may gather,
Do-Baccho signifies, I give thee wine,
Which with that herb makes many sup and dine


(d) A man half learned is a most pestilent creature. Pr.

(e) In the book of the holy Fathers, there is scarce a leaf, wherein the
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, with other Orders, and also Priests (which
name some do greatly detest) are not named with honor.

(f) He that has a head round like a Globe or bowl, is defective in his sense
and reason, Alsted. Encycl. published in fol. 773. and thereof our simple
Sectaries may be properly called Brownists.

(g) Gallen said, he would give Momus 100 years to change the structure of man's
body, even in the least part, and doubted not but he should be forced in the
end to confess, that it could be made in none other, or a more perfect man.
The same I say to those that cavil against the English Liturgy.

(h) In all Services, the Lords Prayer is said; for than is the salt and
seasoning of the Sacrifice, Durand. rational. lib. 1. cap. 5. numb. 17.

(i) Those of our Country (to omit Foreign Nations) unanimously maintain,
that the bowing of the knee to the holy Eucharist, is very proper. Bp. Winch.
Conc. p. 991. Bp. Norw. tom. 1. p. 560. D. Boys. postil. p. 598. D. Don. in
Conc. p. 115. D. Featl. in Conc. p. 393. D. Clark. in Conc. p. 264. D. Saunder.
in Conc. p. 631. Kellet in his Tricaen. Christi p. 203.567.581.582.638.645.653.

Sutores crepidam, tractent, fabrilia fabri. that is,

Let Sowters meddle with the Last or Shoe,
Smiths in their Art with what they have to do.
(l) There are in heaven most honorable Crowns of dignity, either white, for
Virginity, or purple, for Suffering, or laurel, for Learning; S. Aug.

(m. n) It is a wonder, if they were mules; and many of one and the same time
with us, not of so great name, are far better sighted than Argus.

(o) Our late Sovereign Lord K. James of famous memory, overthrew the
Innovators Rams, Anno 1604. for at that time the Church of England had most
acceptable Halcionian days.

(p) Amongst so great men, Mr. Hooker (a man of a most unreproveable judgment)
in Polititia Ecle. gives most unreproveable Arguments.

(q) The objections of such trifles, blind Fisher (but in the holy Bible,
sharp-ey'd enough) does strongly confute defense of the Liturgy, written in
English.

(r) If our Bishops have committed any fault, they are men and may err;
sometimes good Homer slumbered, and sometimes holy Peter slept, who was the
first, not the chief of the Apostles. Constantine the Great piously said, That
he would cover the crimes of his Priests with his Purple; a saying worthy to be
written in gold on Cedar.

(s) No man sees how the Cavaliers now a days bring into displeasure, and
hurry into contention, and how much they move (I speak not of writings but of
deeds) every where of strifes and calumnies for every small trifle.

(t) See the Apology of the B. of Norwich, (whom some do call the christian
Seneca, I Englands Chrysostom) against Brownists; Also Camd. Annals. Q. Eliz.
in English page 257. and 403.

(u) De la champ. in the Prayer of David.

FINIS.

