THE CIVIL MAGISTRATES POWER In matters of Religion Modestly Debated,
Impartially Stated according to the Bounds and Grounds of Scripture, And Answer
returned to those Objections against the same which seem to have any weight in
them.

TOGETHER WITH A Brief Answer to a certain Slanderous Pamphlet called Ill News
from New England; or, A Narrative of New-Englands Persecution.

By JOHN CLARK of Road-Iland, Physician.

By Thomas Cobbet Teacher of the Church at Lynne in New England.

Take us the foxes, the little foxes which spoil the vines, etc. Cant. 2. 15.
Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, etc. Romans 13. 3.
This Treatise concerning the Christian Magistrates Power, and the exerting
thereof' in, and about matters of Religion, written with much zeal and
judgment by Mr. Cobbet of New England, I do allow to be printed, as being
very profitable for these times.

Feb. 7th. 1652. Obadiah Sedgwick.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Philemon Stephens at the Gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OLIVER CROMWELL, Captain General of all the Forces of
the Commonwealths of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be
multiplied.
THrice noble Sir, whom not Man alone has honored with greatest dignity of
highest Military Command, but the God of Glory also has dignified, as with
peculiar Interests in his special Grace and Favor in Jesus Christ, and with
an abundant measure of the saving Graces of his blessed Spirit, so with a
glorious and prosperous success in all your weighty undertakings; let it not
seem overmuch boldness in me who am a stranger to you by face, that I send
forth this following Discourse into the world, under the shadow of your
Lordships Name. It seems, according to our best intelligence here, that the
subject of this Discourse, beginning to grow the great controversal business of
these polemick times, your Honor, with some other of the Lords Worthies in
England, have expressed some desire of yours, that something might be spoken
thereunto: Now I having begun to do something that way formerly, and (though
the most unworthy of any such respect from such choice Favorites of the Lord)
being often moved by some of our honored Magistrates, and reverend Elders
here, to present it to public view, I began to conclude, that it might be now
seasonable, so to do; And although I were a very babe in comparison of others,
for abilities and wisdom to manage so weighty a cause of the Lord; yet I
remembered him that said, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have
ordained strength, that thou might still the voice of the enemy and the
avenger; so that I was encouraged, not alone to put forth this discourse, but
to make use of your Lordships Name therein. Besides, we receiving certain
information (Renowned Worthy) of your dear respects to the Churches here, as
also to our Civil State (which I trust New England does not, nor ever will
forget) even your cordial appearing for us, who are so much subject to the
reproach of tongues at so great a distance, together with your charitable and
frequent expressions of the good opinion you have of us; This also (Right
Honorable) the rather moved me, as a Member of this Polity, even in way of
Gratitude, to dedicate to your Excellency this Apology for Civil Christ an
Governments, why they ought, in their Civil, and Political way, to restrain and
punish abuses and enormities, even in matters of the Lord and of the Church.
You (truly noble, and valiant Sir) have quit your self like a man of God, in
managing your Military weapons, in defense of the Civil State in England,
against all opposers of them, for their exemplary acts of Justice, which they
did, both upon delinquent Statesmen, and (as they are called) Churchmen too;
even the Prelates, and their retinue: Yea you have to your utmost, in your
Military way, managed that cause, at first covenanted by the State, which was,
not alone the bringing of all sorts of Delinquents to their condign punishment,
but the reforming of matters of Religion in Engl according to the Word of God,
and the pattern of the purest Churches: wherefore (right worthy Sir) what you
have fought so many bloody battles for in the field, now stand courageously,
and plead stoutly for it in peace. Isreal's General Joshuah was not more famous
for his prowess and victories over the Canaanites in the field, than for his
care of settling Religion in the people, acding to Gods mind, when the War was
ended; witness those memorable passages that way, recorded Josh. 23. and chap.
24. King David is renowned for the like care, who after the inhabitants of the
land were given into his hand, and the land was subdued before the Lord and his
people, 1 Chr. 22. 14. Now (says he) set your hearts and souls to seek the
Lord your God, and arise and build his Sanctuary, etc. And chap. 27. he
gathers the chief Civil and Military Commanders before him, and ver. 8. he
charge them all (in their several places, callings, and conditions) to keep,
and seek for all the Commandments of God; and he joyneth with him, in special,
the chief Commanders of the Army, in a Civil way, to help on the Work of
Religion, and of the Church, mentioned 1 Chr. 25. 1, etc. Let not therefore the
least thought arise in your Noble breast (Right honorable Sir) that it is (...)
for you to meddle in such matters, or to maintain things of that nature: But
let Holiness, and the defense and maintenance thereof, be written upon your
horse. bridle, as it will be upon theirs whose Conversion we are even waiting
for, Zach. 14. 20. Who will be presently up in arms for Christ and his cause,
against which they were so long hardened. That returning Shulamites Portraiture
is represented by the company of two Armies, Cant. 6. last; of whom more also
is spoken, Zac 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jesus Christ himself is represented as the
General of the Field, and owning the godly Soldiery as his Army, who, in a
cause of Religion, shall, by the dint of the sword, be instruments to bring
Antichrist and his Abettors to their deserved ruin, Rev. 17. and chap. 19. Yea,
but could not Jesus Christ destroy them by his own immediate hand, and is not
his Truth and Word of force to overthrow all that is contrary to it? Yea
verily, yet is it the will and pleasure of Jesus Christ, by humane, external,
forcible means, to restrain, and punish such offenders in matters of Religion;
wherefore, neither the State, nor Soldiery of England, have any cause to
repent of their Covenant Engagements, in their several respective ways, to
endeavor the bringing it about, that Religion there may be reformed according
to the Word of God, and the best patterns of the purest Churches. Nor has the
State of England any cause to retract any wholesome penal Laws which they have
made the 2. of May 48. or since, against so many blasphemous, and false
Doctrines, and corrupt Practices, in matters of Religion, mentioned in those
several worthy Laws. Nor has either State or Soldiery any cause to condemn
their own renowned acts of Zeal for the Lord, in some exemplary punishments
which accordingly they have already inflicted upon some persons for such like
offenses; but they shall assuredly find it good, to be always zealous in a
good thing. And as they have begun to show themselves, to be indeed with
Christ, and not against him, so to continue, and go on, in despite of all
false, or malignant spirits or tongues. And as for you (most Noble Sir) who in
your Military way, have had so many Military disputes for the Causes of the
Lord, if it be vile to be for Jesus Christ, be you yet more vile, only still
keeping (as through Grace you have done hitherto) low in your own eyes; so
shall you at length, after you have stood, and in your way also have fought for
Christ and his Cause, com to receive that incorruptible Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give you at that day; and not to you
only, but to all those which love his appearing: Which shall be ever his
prayer who is, Sir,

Lynne in New-Engl. this 4th of the 8th 52. Your Excellencies humbly devoted
Servant, THOMAS COBBET.

To the Reader.
CHristian and Courteous Reader, thou can not but see (if thou wisely
observest the designs now on foot in these last and perilous days) that Satan
being disturbed, and in a manner dethroned from his so large Dominions,
possessed under him by his eldest son, the Great Antichrist, he is now stirring
up many petty Antichrists, who being in pretense for Christ, do some way or
other oppose and undermine Christ in his Person, Titles, Offices, or Truths:
And surely, It is none of the least amongst those renowned Titles of his, that
he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he, under, and for whom, higher Civil
powers do, and must rule. That Great Antichrists masterpiece was, in the first
place, to ham-string Civil powers from having any thing to do in matters of
Religion, or of the Church, further than as servants, and indeed vassals, unto
the Pope, as visible Head of the Church, or to the Mother Church of Rome, or at
least to Church, Councils and Synods, to execute only their Decrees and Laws:
But since that Civil powers have broken those cursed bonds of Antichrist, and
shook off that tyrannical yoke of that man of sin, and have through grace seen
it their approved dignity from the Lord, and duty to him, to improve their
Civil Authority to the utmost, against that man of sin, and all his usurpations
and inventions, Satan stirs up others to prosecute the same design,
insubstance, albeit, under more specious pretenses, even to despoil Civil
powers of that which is their glory and crown, even as Civil powers, to serve
the Lord Jesus, their Lord, and to improve their Authority, to establish his
Laws and Government only, within their jurisdictions, and to root out
whatsoever opposes, and undermineth the same. The Devils name is Belial, one
without yoke, at least, in his desire and endeavor, and he breaths that
masterless, licentious spirit in such as he effectually works. They were
children of Belial, that said of Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 27. How shall this man save
us? and they despised him, and brought him no presents; thence that Spirit and
Speech of theirs of old, Psalm. 12. Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over
us? we will maintain, hold and say what we please, without control from any;
this Spirit was in Corah and his Company, who at once contemned and condemned
those two main Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministry; they were Levellers,
they would have none in office above others, in the Commonwealth or in the
Church. Number. 16. 3. They gather against Moses and Aaron saying unto them, ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them,
and the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? the self same spirit, Jude says, shall be in some
licentious Preachers, and professors, who shall turn the grace of God into
wantonness, Jude 4. Walk after their own lusts, ver. 16. and ver. 8. Despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities; namely, not so much of persons in
Office, in Church or Commonwealth, as of their very Offices; and ver. 11. They
perish in the gainsaying of ^ore; these have Corahs speeches up, in substance;
what, are not all the Lords people Saints, and must one Saint be so much above
another? are they not all one in Christ Jesus? is not the Lord among them as
their only Lord, Judge, King, and Lawgiver; and must they have any other? of
these also, Peter, another witness testifies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. There were false
Prophets among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who
shall privily bring in pernicious Heresies; and ver. 10. some of their black
marks are; that they despise Government Civil or Ecclesiastical, Presumptuous
are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and
ver. 19. they promise (their fellows) Liberty, they themselves are the servants
of corruption, Seducers and erring spirits; they know well enough, that under
Christ, there is no ordinary means left, to restrain and punish their
extravagancies, but Government in Church and Commonwealth, therefore it is
wont to be a constant concomitant of Error and Heresy, to become a back
friend to Magistracy and Ministry, to civil Jurisdiction, and to Church
Discipline; common experience in these days witnesses this; when Magistracy
and Ministry both are either wholly cried down, by too many erring spirits, or
so enervated and dispoiled of their proper worth and power, by others, that
they have little left but the bare title and name of such; if the Magistrate be
allowed by some, his power in matters of the second Table* yet the other half
of his political power in matters of the first Table, he may not assume.
Religious States may not, they think in wisdom, tolerate State errors and the
ventings of them; but if dangerous errors in Religion are scattered and
spread, they must let them alone. As if civil maxims were more near and dear
to Christ, under whom Magistrates rule, than the matters of his own sacred
truth; or that matters in politiques, were more blisfull or fatal to their
Christian subjects, than those in Religion, or that Christian regulated
Magistrates should leave that at a loose end, (even matter of sound doctrine)
which is the very bond of Christian societies under their power; bodily
murderers they will yield, must be capitally punished, but if the Wine of
Intoxicating and Infatuating doctrine of error, vented and broached by corrupt
members of Deuteronomy, 32. 33.
the Church, be the Poison of Dragons and venom of Aspes; if whosoever eats
of those Cockatrice Eggs which they hatch, dies, spiritually; if they commit a
thousand soul murders, yet Isa 59. 5.
who must say, why do you thus; unclean practices respecting the flesh, may be
punished, but unclean spirits and doctrines must be suffered in the Land; they
would not have such as rob and spoil others of their goods, escape; but its no
matter what havoc any make of Church Ordinances, Privileges, and Liberties, by
any Tenants of theirs: If they rob us of the Law, and the Prophets, and take
away a great part of the holy Scriptures, which was all given by Divine
Inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Isa. 49. 23. and
3. 7. Romans 13. 3, 4.
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; or if they plunder and strip us
of the office, Political power, and care of the Churches Civil Nurse-fathers,
Physicians, and Shepherds, for their best good, none must punish them for such
like outrages. And if at a dead lift, Magistratical power, be, with much ado
permitted to come within the range and reach of the first Table, yet they will
have it under so short a tether, and lay such strong chains and heavy bolts
upon it, that its there rather as in its prison, than any way as in its
privileged place; they shall be permitted to punish Witches, Sorcerers, and
Inchanters, else say they, what mischiefs will befall our Estates, Families, and
Bodies? But as for those good, those white Witches, that out of pretense of
conscience, bewitch souls Gal. 3. 1, etc.
to death, by their enchanting doctrines, let not Civil powers meddle with
them. Men of our times, will not speak these, in so many words; but in their
tenants and practices, they speak in effect as much. But good Reader, be thou
ware of such false Prophets, that come in sheeps clothing; will carry it
toward thee, as fruitful and Matthew. 7. 15.
spiritual Christians, as humble, meek, gentle, harmless, self-denying,
mortified persons, for a season, till they have attained their ends; will tell
thee, it is new light, what the Spirit reveals to them; it is the tenderness
of their consciences, which makes them scruple such and such things, which
others have long held, etc. And all this while, they are inwardly ravening
wolves. I hope, pious Reader, I speak to one who yet has an ear open to hear
what may be spoken in the defense of that truth so much questioned and opposed
now adays: That the Lord has not left Christian regulated Civil Commonwealths,
without their respective ways of Authoritative Redress of such like mischiefs
in Religion; for which end, read and consider (in thy retiring hours and times)
this little Treatise, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Tho. Cobbet.

The Method and scope of the ensuing Discourse concerning the Civil
Magistrates Power in matters of RELIGION.
By way of Introduction, THe example of our Head Jesus Christ (John 2. 13. ad
17. who made it one of his first works to reform matters amiss in Religion) is
opened and applied in many pious and seasonable observations. page 1. ad 6.
That this act of Christ is presidentiall and imitable, according to the
judgments of the Godly Learned Pareus, Bullinger, Tossanus, Marlorate, Dyke,
Ainsworth, Musculus, Suecanus, and Beza. page 6. ad 9. 2. Objections answered.
page 9. ad 12. The Thesis and Position propounded to be cleared is this, That
Corruptions in Religion outwardly breaking forth and expressed, may, yea and
must be restrained and punished, by such as are thereunto called. page 12. In
handling whereof, the Author first propounds some 1. Distinctions. page 12.
2. Some Conclusions about it are laid down 1. Negatively, what may not be done
this way. page 13. ad 16. 2. Positively, what may and must. page 16 3. The main
Assertion is explained. page 16, 17. And proved by Seven Reasons grounded upon
Scriptures. page 17. ad 34. Five Corollaries or Instructions drawn from the
Premises. 1. The first is by way of Refutation and Answer to sundry Objections,
tending to undermine the Cocrcive Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of
Religion. page 35. ad 46. 2. The second Instruction charge Rulers with the
Duty of Endeavoring the exact knowledge of Gods law, word, and rules. page 46.
3. The Third Instruction or inference from the premises, That then the Highest
Civil Authority are to make Coercive Laws about matters of Religion. page 46.
Touching this particular, The Author distinguishes, 1. Of Civil Magistrates.
page 47, 48. 2. Of Kingdoms or Commonwealths, in which they rule. page 49. 3.
Of Legislative power in matters of Religion. p. 49. 4. Of Laws about Religion.
page 50. Conclusions are laid down about this weighty matter, 1. Negatively,
page 51. ad 54. where it is proved that humane laws, formally and as such,
cannot bind the conscience. 2. Positively. Positive Conclusions about this
Nomothetique power are sour. 1. That Political Laws, properly such, may be
made about matters of Religion: page 54. This Conclusion is confirmed by seven
Reasons. page 54. ad 58. 4. Objections against this Conclusion are answered.
page 58. ad 67 2. Conclusion, That in doubtful matters, Ecclesiastical
Assemblies are to be called, whose Counsels unto the Magistrate are
Ecclesiastically Authoritative. page 67. 3. Conclusion, Civil Magistrates are
to call upon Ministers to expound the whole Counsel of God. page 68. 4.
Conclusion, Civil Authority must establish their Laws with the consent of
their people or their representatives. p. 68. 4. A fourth Instruction from the
Premises, -- Then are the Civil Authority in their Political way to Judge,
which things acted by the outward man in cases of Religion are contrary to the
word, and which are not. page 70. For further clearing of this from all
gainsayers, 1. Some distinctions are laid down. page 71. 72. 2. The Conclusion
is stated and cautioned page 73. 3. Five Reasons for proof thereof, and the
Objections against them answered. page 73. ad 82. 5. The last instruction from
the premises -- Then are not persons to be left to the liberty of their own
Judgments or consciences. page 82. For the better clearing of this weighty
Conclusion so many ways opposed now adays, 1. Some distinctions about it are
propounded, and Romans 14. 3. etc. cleared. page 82. ad 86. 2. The Conclusion is
stated against a set fixed Toleration, and proved by 10. Reasons from
Scripture, all which are vindicated from the several Objections against them.
page 86. ad fin.


Errata.
In the Epistle Dedicatory page 4. line first add cor.

page 29. for (...) read (...)

page for (...) read (...).

p. 32. for 1 John 14. 1. read 1 John 1. 14.

This Treatise concerning the Christian Magistrates Power, and the exerting
thereof, in, and about matters of Religion, written with much zeal and
judgment by Mr. Cobbet of New England, I do allow to be Printed, as being
very profitable for these times.

Feb. 7th. 1652. OBADIAH SEDGWICK.

A Discourse concerning the Nature and Latitude of Civil Powers in matters of
Religion.
IF ever it were a time, wherein the Zeal of Gods house should burn in the
hearts of the sincere members of Jesus Christ; or if ever the Lord called for
the flaming forth of that holy fire, in their zealous expressions and actions
(according to their several places and callings) in way of vindication of the
Lords abused Name, Truth, Ordinances and Ways, surely this is that time; when
under pretense of Spiritual Light, so much hellish darkness begins to
overspread the face of the Churches of Christ. Wherefore before that I do enter
upon the main point which I intend in this Discourse, I shall first present a
memorable example, of such holy zeal in our Head Jesus Christ* to the Intent,
that such of his Members, who are by office and place most concerned therein,
may in the fear of God wisely and seriously ponder, whether that holy Zeal
which was in Jesus Christ, as in a Wellhead, and is doubtless (in their
measures) derived to them also, should not now be more abundantly exerted and
exercised that way.

The example I intend is recorded in Joh. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And Jesus went
up to Jerusalem. And found in the Temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and
Doves, and the changers of money, sitting. And when he had made a scourge of
small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen,
and poured out the Changers money, and overthrew the tables. And said to them
that sold Doves, Take these things hence, make not my Fathers house an house of
Merchandise. And his Disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine
house has eaten me up. This History of Christ's purging the Temple, being the
relation of one of his most glorious Acts, in which he put forth his hand in
public view, after his most solemn entrance upon his great work: It is the
more observable, and does call for more then ordinary Improvement, by all such,
whose property it is as Saints, to make narrow search into all the great Works,
as of God a Creator, Psalm. 111. 2.
so of Jesus Christ God-man their Redeemer: but especially by all such, whose
duty it is by their office and place, to be Reformers of matters amiss in the
house of the Lord. Twice at least (it is clear) Christ acts thus, once in the
beginning of his Ministry, as John notes in this Chapter: and another time
toward the end thereof, as the other Evangelists show, Matthew. 21. 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13. Mark 11. 15, 16, 17. Luke 19. 37. to 47. Jesus Christ then when
acting his public Ministry upon earth, he made it one of his first, so one of
his last works to reform matters amiss in Religion. At first, buyers of oxen
and sheep are outed the Temple; but at last, sellers too. At first Dove-sellers
are gently spoken to, to carry away their Truck, but at last their seats also
are overthrown. Christ says at first, you have made my Fathers house an house
of Merchandise; but at last, ye have made it a den of thieves. He is then more
severe at a second time, against such who reform not by his former check.

If any enquire after the time when this was: It was immediately upon Christ's
first coming to Jerusalem, after his solemn Initiation into his office, Joh. 2.
11, 12, 13. compared. If any ask what the occasion of this Act was, It is noted
in that, he found in the Temple those that sold oxen, etc. if any would know in
what manner he Acted; that also is expressed; with some he deals by blows;
violently driving them out with his scourge made of small cords: so that the
Instrument he makes use of to correct them in such sort, is a whip or scourge:
the materials thereof were small cords; namely, which those traders brought
with their Cattle: with this scourge so made, he lays on so violently, that
he drives out not so much the beasts, as the Beast-sellers also; he drove them
all out, and the sheep and the oxen, or with the sheep and the oxen; which the
Greek text clears, using the word (...), in reference to (...), as also to
(...), the Beast-sellers, and money changers. If any would demand the ground
why Christ did thus: It is given partly in that himself spoke; Make not [my
Fathers house] an house of Merchandise. It was his Fathers house which was so
profaned and polluted; and he, as his son, is nearly concerned in it; and
partly in that which the Spirit of God suggested seasonably to the Disciples
from the Book of Psalms; The Zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

And now may not the Saints learn for their Instruction sundry things hence,
which concern them also, even all of them in their several callings* especially
those in higher place? Yes verily.

From a more general Consideration of this history, as holding forth, the
dealing of Jesus Christ, with sinners amongst his people: we may all note, that
which godly Interpreters hint hence to us.

As from this that is said, he found such and such, and dealt so with them:

Learn first, That the sight and assured knowledge of sins acted, especially
by persons pretending to Religion, it provokes the Lord Jesus some way or
other to express his deep displeasure against them.

Secondly, that sometimes the Lord Jesus deals with sinners, and punishes
them in the very Act of sinning; as he scourged them here, which he took in the
manner.

From what is here said; he took small cords and made a whip thereof, even of
the very Cords, which they sinfully abused to bring their Cattle into a
forbidden place for any such use:

Learn, that sometimes the Lord Jesus makes punishing scourges for sinners,
even of the very instruments themselves, abused to sin.

From the manner of Christ's dealing here, that with his whip he drives out the
beast-sellers, as the beasts, using them therein as their beasts; Learn that
such as under the means of grace, grossly abuse and profane the same, they are
of basest esteem in the sight of the Lord Jesus.

Furthermore, these abuses were not without religious pretenses of Scripture
grounds: God had of old said, Deuteronomy. 14. 24. 25, 26. If the way be too long for
thee, so that thou art not able to carry it, (namely, the tithe of their corn
and firstlings of their flock which they were to eat before the Lord, v. 23.)
Or if the place be too far from thee which the Lord thy God shall choose to set
his name there: (which afterward was Jerusalem and the Temple there) then
shall thou turn it into money, and bind up the money in thy hand, and shall go
to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: And thou shall bestow that
money for whatsoever thy soul lusts after, for Oxen or for sheep, etc. And
thou shall eat it before the Lord thy God, etc. It might therefore seem
convenient to have the beasts at hand to be sold there where they were to be
used; besides every one was to offer half a shekel after the shekel of the
Sanctaurie, to make atonement for their souls; Exodus 30. 13, 14, 15. and were
it not convenient to have some money changers, to have so many hundred thousand
such like pieces in readiness for each one that needed them, who though they
might have either greater or lesser pieces, yet possibly not such as weighed
neither more nor less then half the shekel of the Sanctuary. But yet for all
such pretended conveniences and seemingly good ends propounded, those abuses
were so distasted and corrected by Jesus Christ: And may not all thence learn;

1. That good ends propounded or pretended, cannot justify actions seemingly
good, but really bad, nor exempt the Actours of them from the check and scourge
of Jesus Christ?

Secondly, that such are in special wise distasted and detested by the Lord
Jesus, who under religious pretenses corrupt Religion.

From the ground expressed which moved Christ to do thus, in that through their
covetousness his Fathers house designed to holy ends and uses, is perverted to
common and profane uses: Learn:

1. That worldliness or covetousness is, and has ever been wont to be the
common inlet of corruptions in Religion, whatsoever they pretended for this
Temple trading, the gain of their merchandise is intended.

2. That worldly and covetous professors of Religion are of vile account with
Jesus Christ; he whippeth them as he does their beasts out of the Temple. From
this History considered with more special reference to Reformation of things
amiss in the Lords house; and therein from the circumstance of the time when
Jesus Christ acted thus in way of purging the Temple even upon his first solemn
coming into public view at Jerusalem, after his actual entrance upon his
public work: may not we learn,

That Reformation of things amiss in Religion are very speedily, and as in the
first place to be set about, by such as are thereto called of God?

From the occasion of what Christ here did, he found matters at so bad a pass
in the Temple: may not we learn

1. That corruptions in matters of Religion are very apt to creep into true
Churches, and being once let in, to be connived at, and tolerated? These abuses
were of long standing, and notwithstanding those whose charge it was to have
looked better to it, yet Christ when he came into the Temple, he finds such
corruptions there.

2. That when such as are called to redress things amiss in religion, do
grossly neglect their duty therein; the Lord himself is wont some way or other
to put forth his hand, in purging out the same, when the Priests rather further
then hinder these corruptions, and civil authority suffered the same to
continue; then comes Jesus Christ with his whip and purges the Temple.

From the manner of Christ's purging the Temple: Learn;

1. That Church Reformers work, may in some particulars thereof be sometimes
despicable, but yet is never disdained by persons truly gracious. Christ with
his own hand refuses not to gather up small cords to make a whip of them, and
with it to drive out men and beasts out of the Temple. Reformers work is in
Scripture language, Refiners, Fullers, Hedgers, Vine-dressers, Shepherds,
Sink-cleansers work, yet very acceptable to Godly ones.

2. That Reformations of things amiss in Religion, are to be carried on with
expressions of greatest indignation and distaste, as of the abuses themselves,
so of the instruments, and of the appurtenances thereof, hence Jesus Christ
used a scourge: hence such distaste of his expressed against the very Oxen and
Sheep so abused: hence also his overthrowing the money changers tables, and
pouring their money upon the ground. Besides the use of Christ's whip was both
an outward means of forcible restraint and punishment of these abuses in
Religion; and that in respect to persons themselves, who were chief actours
therein; for Christ violently drove out them also with his whip; and therefore
Matthew relating this act of Christ as renewed a second time, Matthew. 21. 12,
13. He only mentions Christ's casting out both all them that sold, and all
them that bought in the Temple; and the word, (...), used there and here
denotes some special violence, he cast them out as a stone out of a sling, the
word is often used in Scripture to express some violent way of dealing. Its
frequently used in Matthew, Chapter 8. and 9. and 10. and 12. for casting out
of Devils; Its used for casting out the unprepared guest into outer darkness,
Matthew 22. 13. and for casting out the unprofitable servant, Matthew 25. 30.
and for casting out the bondwoman and her son, Gal. 4. 30. and for expelling
of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. 50. etc. And may not this Act of Jesus Christ
thus forcibly restraining and punishing these abuses in persons manifestly
guilty thereof, afford this instruction also, as clearly deducible thence?

That corruptions in religion, outwardly breaking forth, and expressed, they
may, yea, and must be restrained and punished by such as are thereunto called.

Now this being a point of much weight, and (albeit abundantly attested and
confirmed by Scripture) yet now adays too too much disrelished and opposed, I
shall God willing propound it to further consideration and disquisition. Only
before I leave this considerable and memorable example of Christ's zeal this
way; It will not be amiss to set down the judgments of sundry godly learned
writers touching the way and respect wherein it may be said Christ did act
thus, and how far forth this Act herein is presidential or imitable.

Pareus upon Matthew 21. 12, 13. (where the second time of Christ's purging the
Temple is recorded) says, This example cannot be drawn into imitation by every
private man, because they can in no wise say, that the Temple is their house;
but such to whom the house of God is given and commended by virtue of their
Office: As are Princes, and Pastors, and Governors of the Church, who as they
are to govern the Church according to the word, so also in case of abuses
creeping in, should they reform the sin; only according to the word.

Bullinger upon the same place, having said that Christ did thus as a King, and
as an high Priest, etc. He would have that noted; lest every private man should
think it lawful for him to do the like, etc. And because God has not armed
every ones hand, private persons, and such as are not in public authority,
are rather to oppose it with their tongue, and to sigh and cry before the Lord
till he afford remedy thereof: he denies it as imitable by private, but
yields it as imitable by such as are in public authority.

D. Tossavus (in loc.) It may be demanded says he, whether it be not enough to
purge the Temple or Church from corruptions by word and doctrine, and why
Christ did it by fact also, and by any force? It is answered, says he, that by
this example is showed that abuses even in externals are by all means to be
reformed; in which matter godly Magistrates are to lend their help to the
Ministers, that as they by preaching, so Magistrates may even by external
repurgation remove those things which are repugnant to the regular worship of
God. But as for that Christ did, it appertains not so much to his Priestly
Office, as to his Kingly.

Marlorate (on the place) from this that Christ as well by fact, as word,
casts out Temple abuses; says, They are hence taught, who have received
authority from God in the Church, how they ought by work as well as word to
purge the Church* Although they know the corruptions, as superstition,
idolatry and such like have taken deep rooting in the hearts of the wicked.
For therefore has the Lord armed their hands, that they might take chief care
of his worship.

Master Dyke writing upon this fact of Christ's purging the Temple, and having
declared how this fact of Christ was not imitable, as Christ did thus as the
Son of God; he propounds this question, how far forth this fact of Christ
is imitable.

And Ainsworth* men are either public persons or private; public either in
the Magistracy, or in the Ministry; As for Magistrates, they being Christ's
Vicegerents (as God) in special manner, the imitation of this fact belongs to
them; For God has given them the sword, not to let it lie rusting in the
scabbard but to strike, and he has put the whip into their hands to scourge
withal, etc. Then he shows how Ministers in their way of preaching are to
do thus, and then how private men in their way of prayer and sighings (but not
by other violence) are to be doing this way.

Musculus upon John 2d. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. upon that; he found in the Temple,
as soon as Christ came into the city, (says he) he visits the Temple. This
should be the first care of all godly ones, not of Pastors only, but of all
Magistrates whatsoever, that the Kingdom and worship of God be sought after.
And upon that, and when he had made a scourge of small cords, he cast them all
out together with the Sheep and the Oxen; he observes we see by this fact of
Christ how distasteful they are, and how unsufferable in the Church, who under
pretense of divine worship exercise merchandise. Doubtless there were many
other crimes, by which God was commonly provoked; and yet we read not that
Christ used like severitie against them; but forthwith he casts this
loathsome plague of such Merchandise out of the Temple. Who sees not hence
that those things which concern the Glory and Worship of God are not alone
before all other things, but with greatest severitie to be purged away, and
that not without cause, since in these sin is committed against the first
Table, and under pretense of Divine worship, service is done to the Devil and
to worldly lusts; and beside the plague which arises here spreads into the
whole body more speedily and dangerously then can be imagined. Again, let such
who would have nothing done in a compulsive way against Idolaters and
corrupters of Gods worship in the Church, but think such as do evil are to be
entreated willingly to desist: let such answer, Why Christ did not here do
thus; why he did not meekly request these merchants to carry their Oxen and
Sheep, and money out of the Temple; None say they are by force to be compelled
to godliness; be it so, but are they not by force to be restrained, yea and
driven away, who exercise gainful trades in the Temple; what shall we say that
Christ here sinned? God forbid! he compelled them not to Piety, yet he casts
that merchandise out of the Temple. Furthermore, they have hence ground to
change their opinion who teach, that external evils in the Church, are not to
be taken away, unless they be first taken out of men's hearts? for according to
this Doctrine, Christ should first have cast that inward evil of covetousness
out of the Jews hearts, and then have cast them out of the Temple; but we see
it quite otherwise in what Christ did here, he cast these merchants out of the
Temple, although they kept their covetousness still in their hearts: giving
hence an example, whereby he might teach us, that public evil is not to be
suffered in the Church, although it cannot be rooted out of men's hearts. If any
reply, It is but vain to remove it out of the Church, if it be not removed out
of the hearts of men; surely (says he) Christ knew this well enough, yet he
did his office, having made a scourge, he hunted these dogs out of the Temple.

Snecanus in his Tract de Magistratu, he makes use of this example of Christ's
purging the Temple with a scourge in his hand, to prove the Magistrates power
now under the Gospel, in matters of both tables.

Beza in his Tract de haereticis a Magistratu puniendis says; In or by what
right did Christ twice take the Whip in hand? both John 2. 14. and Matthew. 21.
12, 13. by what right did Peter kill Ananias and Sapphira? by what right did
Paul strike Elimas blind? what? by that of the Ecclesiastical Ministry? surely
no, unless you would confound the Jurisdictions; therefore by the right of the
Civil Magistrate: for there is no third. Yet I acknowledge this power put forth
by Ministers of the Word, was in them extraordinary, and the manner of
exercising it after a sort divine: but I prove, that though the Lord does not
always make use of the help of the Magistrates, yet in all ages, he does make
use of the Power whereof the Magistrate is the only ordinary Minister,
according as himself sees it meet, for the preservation of his Church.

Now then if any object against this example as Imitable; because

It is answered, first, That Civil Rulers are Christ's Vicegerents, by me (says
the essential wisdom of God) Princes rule: hence called King of kings, and Lord
of lords, 1 Timothy 1. 16, 17. Rev. 19. 16. yea he makes Civil Rulers nursing
Fathers and Mothers to his Church, and so commits his Church which Esaias 49.
23. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
is his house, into their hands, as those, who in their civil officed way, are
every way to further its welfare. What Christ did here immediately, as an act
appertaining to his Sovereignty, to purge out Church corruptions, he now does
by his Vicegerents hands, mediately.

Secondly, It is answered; he that was God and man, who

Secondly, If any object that it was extraordinary in Christ as

I answer, Admit it were so, 1. Yet at least the act it self of such by such as
are thereto called of God, to do that in an ordinary way, which he did in an
extraordinary.

Secondly, Be it that it were extraordinary in Christ as man, to act thus; so
was Phinehas his act of killing Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25. 7, 8. and Samuels,
in hewing Agag in pieces, 1 Samuel 15. 33. and Elijahs slaughter which he made
among Baals Priests, 1 King. 18. 40. yet it must be yielded, that there must be
some, who by office might, and should, in an ordinary way, have punished such
filthiness, murders, or Idolatries; the Lord not using to stir up any, to
an extraordinary way, to do any such like acts, but in the defect of acts of
ordinary power: and so here; the same Spirit which stirred up them to supply
that defect of the acting of ordinary power, by extraordinary motions and acts;
did also stir up Jesus Christ, in an extraordinary way, to restrain and punish
these corruptions in Religion, which the present Civil power, in duty unto the
Lord, as his Ministers, ought to have restrained and punished; and so to have
revenged the Indignity therein done to the Lord, whose house was so profaned.
According to that Romans 13. 4. but they failing in their duty this way, the same
Spirit of zeal that stirred up David his type, in the corrupter times of Saul,
to be vindicating such indignities against the Lord, stirred up Christ his
Antitype, to do like work for substance, in those corrupter times, upon which
he was cast. Nor was this an extraordinary supply of the defect of ordinary
Ministerial and Priestly power, considered as Priestly and Ministerial: for
what had they to do, as such, with external and corporal restraint, and
punishment, in any ordinary way: in that way, if Peter use the sword, he must
perish by it, Matthew. 26. 52. but it must needs be a supply of the defect of
Magistratical power, which in an ordinary way, makes use of the sword, or
whip, or like instruments of corporeal punishment, and vengeance, Romans 13. 4.
rather then such like abuses in Religion shall not be, in an external coercive
way, curbed and punished, Jesus Christ himself will do something extraordinary
to supply that defect. So far is that from being Mosaical, Jewish, and much
less tyrannical work, outwardly to restrain and punish such abuses in
Religion, for which yet conscience to the Word might be pretended, (as that Law
Deuteronomy. 14. 24. 25, 26. might be for these) that Jesus Christ thought it fit to
become himself, to put forth his hand, to so good and blessed a Work, when
those whose duty it was to do it, would not discharge their trust.

And now having thus far waded, to find out some part of Gods Counsel, in this
famous History of Christ's purging the Temple; I shall leave the same to the
Judgment of the godly wise.

The Thesis and Position, which I shall propound to be cleared and confirmed
from the Scriptures, shall be that, which before I hinted, namely,

That Corruptions in Religion, outwardly breaking forth and expressed, may, yea
and must be restrained and punished, by such as are called thereunto.

Now for the better Handling, and the more full discovery of the truth of this
point; we shall first propound some distinctions. 2. Lay down some conclusions
about it. 3. Confirm the point from Scripture. 4. Draw three or four
Corrolaries thence.

Touching the first.

1. Corruptions in Religion are either Dogmatical, or Practical. And these
again, are either such as are more gross, and strike at the very fundamentals,
or vitals of Religion, whether directly or collaterally; or such as are of a
more circumstantial and lighter nature.

Again; Corruptions in Religion, are either such as are secretly taken up, and
embraced, and so kept close in the minds and hearts of persons; or such as come
under man's kenne and view: being outwardly expressed in word, writing, Action,
or the like. And these again which come thus into open view, are either such as
are held forth with meekness, peaceablenesse, and real expressions of cordial
readiness to lay them aside, and reform them, upon better information; or such
as are carried on in any insolent, and turbulent way; or with expressions of
contempt of Civil, or Church order.

2. Restraint and punishment of these, is, either that which is merely and
immediately divine, or that which is mixed, partly divine, partly humane, in
respect either of the agent, or manner of Acting; or that which is properly in
the nature of the act, person, and manner of Acting, Humane. And this is either
Political, which is carried on in a civil way, and by political means; or
Ecclesiastical, which is carried on in a Church way, and by Ecclesiastical
means.

3. A Call of God, to restrain and punish abuses, is, either immediately
Divine, as when by divine vision, revelation, prophecy, inspiration, instinct,
and the like: or that which is mediately divine, in respect of God the Author,
but immediately humane, in respect of man designing and inviting.

Now let us in the second place lay down some Conclusions: 1. Negatively; what
may not be done this way. 2. Affirmatively; what may and must.

In a negative way we say.

1. No private person now, in these days, under any pretense whatsoever, may
take upon him to restrain and punish Corruptions in Religion, in those who are
not under his personal charge. Calls which are immediately Divine, are now
ceased; men are now to look for a call from man; and by man to act in way of
restraining and punishing the faults of others which are not under them, either
as Parents, Guardians, Masters, Tutors, or the like. It is rash zeal; zeal
without knowledge, to do any thing that way, without the bounds of ones
particular calling; in the limits whereof, every one should abide with God, 1
Cor. 7. 20, 24. It tends to confusion in Churches and Commonwealths; and God
is no Author of that, 1 Cor. 14. 33.

In those days, when God was pleased to give forth sometimes extraordinary
Calls to such work: yet those zealous Levites await their call from him, whose
proper work it was, in a forcible and corporal way, to punish such abuses; even
from Moses the Magistrate, Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28. and Deuteronomy. 33. 9. compared.
Uzzahs sad punishment by the Lord (even in those days) for putting forth his
hand to stay the Ark from falling, having not a call thereunto, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9,
10. is of public Admonition to all of us, to take heed we break not the bounds
of our calling this way; out of a pretense to preserve Religion from Injuries:
he that so uses the sword, shall perish by it, Matthew. 26. 52, 53.

2. No Civil Authority whatsoever, nor persons thereto called, Conclus. 2.
may, as persons in Civil Authority, curb or punish abuses in Religion, in any
Ecclesiastical manner, or by means properly Ecclesiastical; as excommunication
or the like. What he who is a godly Ruler may do, considered as a member of a
particular visible Church, with joint concurrence of the Church whereof he is a
member, is another case. Christ never gave the power of the keys, to any Civil
Common Wealths or Kingdoms, as Civil Societies: but to his Church, as an
Ecclesiastical society, Matthew. 16. 18, 19. and chap. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4.
nor on the other hand may Churches, or Church Officers, take upon them to
restrain, sentence, or punish Church abuses, or corruptions, in any external,
forcible way, or by any corporal punishments, as Imprisonments, Fines, Mulcts,
Stripes, Sword, Whip, Fire, Faggot, or the like. And in vain do the Rhemists in
their gloss upon that Scripture in Joh. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. plead for their
Father the Pope, as having ground from thence, to make use of both swords, the
temporal and the spiritual sword; Even Peter himself, whose Successor he
falsely pleads to be, he may not use the temporal sword: no not when
pretending zeal in the cause of Christ, his Master, but is chidden, and
threatened by Christ for it, Matthew. 26. 52. the Church of Rome, and all her
Officers, must subject themselves to Civil Authority; and if they themselves do
any manifest evil, they are to fear the Magistrates sword, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.
which with the rest of the Epistle is directed to the Church at Rome, Chap. 1.
7. the ordinary use of the Whip and Sword, is a Lordly and Masterly Act; it is
one exercise of a Lordly Dominion and Authority; and it may not be so with
Peter, or any other of Christ's Apostles, or their Successors, Matthew. 20. 25,
26. where if the words (...), and (...), would be evaded as understood of any
tyrannical use of such power; Luke in his 22 Chapter, verse 25. takes off all
scruple; when he says of the Kings of the Gentiles, that, (...), and (...),
they barely exercise Lordship and authority over you, namely in their Civil
way: he adds, verse. 26. but it shall not be so with you: you may not imitate
them, in any such use or exercise of their power. Nor was the Question moved to
Christ, by the Disciples, who should be tyrants over the rest, but, who should
have Dominion over the rest: to which Christ answers, It shall not be so with
you.

3. Neither Civil, nor Church power may curb, or punish, a mere supposed
Corruption in Religion, but that which is so really, and manifestly appearing
from grounds of the Word: the contrary is condemned, when men are made
offenders for a word rightly uttered by the just, Esaias 29. 21. when Assemblies
shall ignorantly and rashly pass censures, out of a bare supposal of service
therein done to Christ, Joh. 16. 2, 3. they that kill you shall think they do
God good service.

4. Neither the one power, nor the other, may censure and punish real
corruptions in Religion, till breaking forth into outward expression, and
brought into more open view: for then they are Judicially certain, then they
are of legal proof: then they are scandalous and Infectious. Hence that Law
about civil punishing corruptions in Religion, Deuteronomy. 13. 13, 14 and 17. 2, 3,
4, 5. If it be told unto thee, and thou have heard it, then shall thou enquire
diligently, and if it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is
wrought in Israel, then shall thou bring forth that man or woman, and stone
them, etc.

5. Though such as are in place may be, and should be in a holy wise jealous,
and carry a more watchful eye, in case of hints given of such corruptions, as
creeping in amongst them; as were the heads of the Tribes upon some information
given, touching a new Altar made by the two Tribes and half, Josh. 22. 11, 12,
13, 14. and as was Paul in his way of the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3.
yet is it not meet by any external violent means, as by Oaths ex officio,
close Imprisonments, wracks, Strappadoes, and other preposterous ways of
Inquisition, to bring that under Censure, which Gods providence ripeneth not
for it. Neither Claudius Lysias the Centurion, nor Felix, nor after him Festus
the Governor of the Jews, would any of them use any such ways, to extort
self-accusations (so contrary to the light of Nature, and Law of Nations,) from
Paul, a supposed and accused Delinquent many ways. See Act. 22. 30. and 23.
28, 29, 30, 35. and 24. 22, 23. and 25. 5, 7, 8.

6. Although the Corruptions in Religion, may be manifest either to the Civil,
or Church Court, yet not actually punishable, till sufficient means of
conviction be used. Thus did the Heads of the ten Tribes, although preparing to
strike and punish that Innovation and new way of Religion, (as was supposed)
yet what effectual means they did use of conviction, may appear by that
gracious speech made to the two tribes and half, by their Messengers, Josh. 22.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. verses compared. So in Church Courts,
an Heretic must be rejected, but yet not till after once, or twice Admonition.

7. Although neither powers Civil, or Ecclesiastical, may enforce upon Aliens
from the true Religion, any of the ways of it, yet may not the Civil power
suffer Aliens, either openly to vilify or blaspheme the true Religion, or to
abase the Preachers and professors thereof, or any way to disturb them in the
holy exercise of it. Christ would not suffer the man possessed, to make
disturbance in the Sabbath solemnities, but casts out the devil, Mark 1. Or
least of all may they induce them to practice openly their Jewish, or Pagan
Religions.

8. Neither Powers may equally censure or correct all sorts of corruptions in
Religion, which come into public view: but as the corruptions are more gross,
or the persons more contemptuous, and turbulent in their way, so to lay on the
more load upon them. Some are Seducers and Ringleaders in the offenses and
abuses, some seduced; neither all errors, nor all erring persons, are of equal
guilt, and Justice must suum cuique tribuere.

Positively we affirm, that both Church Officers with their Affirmat. Conclus.
Churches, in a Church way, and highest Civil Authority and Rulers, in their
political way, they may, yea they must restrain, and seasonably and suitably
punish all grosser corruptions in Religion, manifestly cross to the Word, when
they are outwardly, and openly expressed, to the Just offense of the Saints,
and hurt of others. To explain this a little.

We say, they may do so; not as a matter of their own liberty to do or not to
do so; a thing may be lawful, which in case is not expedient: but this is a
duty to which they are bound, and with which they cannot wholly dispense: its
therefore added, they must do it; often times indeed they do it not, but in duty
they are bound to it: Albeit they may for a time sometimes suspend the acting
of it; yet its added, they must seasonably do it: not too suddenly, before some
pains and patience be used; nor yet too slowly, delaying overlong, till such
evils spread too far, grow to too strong an head, or become incurable, or at
least uncontrollable. They must also do it suitably, that is, observing
proportions of persons offending, of matter, manner, times and places of
offense that way. And they must so deal, not with every lighter matter of
offense, but in case of grosser offenses, striking at the weightier matters of
God, tending to invalidate and undermine, or to invert or pervert his choicer
institutions. And they must so punish corruptions manifestly cross to the
word, not matters which in themselves are merely disputable both ways, but
which are in themselves clearly cross to the Word, if not in the express
letter of it, yet in respect of conclusions unavoydably, and necessarily
deducible from the Word.

It is further added when they are outwardly expressed, etc. Namely in word,
writing, in gesture or deed; uttering or acting the evils themselves in an open
and offensive way; or else contemptuously and turbulently expressing distaste
some way against the contrary truth and way professed and practiced by
Religious Commonwealths, or by the purer Churches in them.

But because in these latter times so many depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils, and because that civil government
is now so much despised, and too many are not afraid to speak evil of dignities
in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, making them usurpers for meddling in such
matters of Religion, or for daring to improve their civil power to restrain and
punish such enormities in Religion; I shall therefore only address my self at
present to prove and confirm this Position; that it is the duty of highest
civil authority, and of the civil Rulers in a religious State, to restrain and
punish corruptions and abuses in religion, breaking forth within their
jurisdiction, according as even now explained and stated in the foregoing
conclusion.

This I prove by several reasons grounded upon the Scriptures.

When Moses the chief Magistrate would be putting forth his authority to call
forth some as instruments of his authority, to punish by the temporal sword,
those open corruptions in religion in the Actours thereof, Exodus 32. 4. etc.
verse 26. He asked, Who was on the Lords side. (...) Who is for the Lord? It is
therefore in the very nature of the thing to be for the Lord, or on his side to
punish such corruptions in such offenders. And verse 29. speaking of the same
work; Moses authoritatively bids them, Consecrate your selves to day to the
Lord, even every man upon his son and upon his brother: (adding this blessed
motive to that work) That he may bestow a blessing upon you to day. It is in
the Hebrew Text, (...) Fill your hand; a phrase borrowed from sacrifices, and
such as offered sacrifices, or had their hands filled for that end. Hence when
Aaron and his sons are to be consecrated to the Lord for offering sacrifice,
Exodus 10. 9. It is said in the Hebrew, and thou shall fill the hand of Aaron,
and the hand of his sons. Acts of justice against enemies to the Church;
watching to make advantages of their weakness, as did the Amalekites They are
a choice service and sacrifice to God, yea, preferred by Samuel before
Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 2. 3. 18. there is Gods charge: And verse 22. Obedience
to that Charge, is made better then Sacrifice. Hence when God by others sword
does punish the Churches enemies; Esaias 34. 6. He says of it, The sword of the
Lord is filled with blood: He calls it his sword, and adds, For the Lord
has a sacrifice in Bozra, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. That
Act of justice is owned by the Lord as his Sacrifice; and Ezechiel 39. 17.
speaking of those grand enemies of his Church, Gog and Magogs just slaughter:
He calls to the Fowls, Come to my sacrifice, etc.

And this place is the more observable, In that the like speech is expressly
applied, when the overthrow of such as follow the whore and beast, and false
Prophet of Rome, in his ways, worship and government; and when the overthrow
of all such as support that man of sin is described, Revel. 19. 17, 18, 19.
It is there called The Supper of the great God: come and gather your selves
unto the Supper of the great God. So delightful and contentfull, and pleasing
to the great God, are such acts of political Justice by the civil Sword, upon
such as are grossly corrupt in matters of Religion; It is to him as a Sacrifice,
as a Supper.

If any say that was Old Testament, surely this is New Testament Doctrine, and
that with Jesus Christ himself commended to John, to communicate to his
Churches. If such Acts be in their own Nature acts of persons for the Lord, or
on the Lords side, or if as a very acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, then;

It is so now; would not underminers of Magistrates power this way, have godly
Magistrates for the Lord, and on his side now, as well as formerly, or to do
him such choice service which may be to him as a very sacrifice now, as well as
then? Besides such as are zealous this way, in doing such acts of civil
Justice upon corrupters of Religion, and persons grossly corrupt in Religion;
(such as were Antichrists Abb^tters and followers:) they also are said to be
with the Lamb, or on his side, Revelations 17. 14. And they that are with him,
are called, and chosen, and faithful. and Chapter 19. 19. They are called
Armies. And those not rude, profane soldiers, but as before called, chosen
and faithful, or the Armies which were in heaven followed him, persons of
heavenly Spirits, aims, and conversations arrayed in white: single sincere
hearted ones in the cause of Christ, nor will this be evaded: As meant of a
Spiritual way of fighting against Antichrists Adherents, by the sword of
Christ's mouth, taken only for his Word, and his sword considered only as a
Prophet, or taken for his Word applied in sharpest Church censures of
Excommunication of them: and so his sword of his mouth considered as King of
the Church; but it is by the Temporal sword of Christ, considered as King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: For therefore in this war, It is his blessed Motto,
(as I may say,) and that which he gives in his Banners; King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. This sword also is in some respect, the sword of his mouth; for
as Supreme over all civil powers, he sentenceth that whore, and beast of Rome,
with his Adherents, to such a doom to be executed by such as have power under
him, and from him, to avenge his quarrels by the Temporal sword, which only
are civil Magistrates, Romans 13. 4. He gives the word of Command to them,
and bids them smite: and the judgment so executed; it is the Lords
according to the expression, Deuteronomie 1. 17. The retinue of Antichrist,
fight not against Christ, his Laws and Subjects only by dogmaticall and
doctrinall weapons, or such like: but as Revelation 17. 14. By external violent
ways and weapons; they have their Captains, their mighty men, their horses:
the Fowls also are called upon to devour, not their souls, but their
carcasses; Revelalation 19. 17, 18. which surely are slain by that opposite
Armies, by like ways of violence; without which so great temporal forces and
power, would not be brought to become meat for the Fowls.

And this punishment upon persons so corrupt in matters of Religion is in the
days of the New Testament, set forth as so renowned and acceptable a piece of
service to the Lord. To like purpose Esaias Prophesies of these days of the
Gospel, Esaias 66. When the glory of God shall be declared among the Gentiles;
Verse 19. When they shall be brought to his Holy Mountain or Church; Verse 20.
yea, When some of them shall minister to him there; Verse 21. When there shall
be a new face of all things; Verse 22. And all flesh shall come and worship
before the Lord; Verse 23. Now will the Lord judge with his sword all flesh,
and his slain shall be many; Verse 16. Namely, Of such as sanctify and purify
themselves in Gardens, eating unclean things as the Swine and Mouse, (alluding
therein to the forbidden meats of the Jews, Leviticus 11.) These shall be
consumed together, even these that are corrupt in matters of Religion, shall be
punished by Gods sword; As Verse 16. Not alone immediately, but mediately, even
by the civil Magistrate, who bears Gods sword for that end; And as Verse 24.
Expresses this punishment to be corporal, is their carcasses, which others
shall look upon; and so hear and fear.

That speech, Canticles 2. 15. Take ye us the Foxes, the little Foxes which
spoil our Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes; Is of weighty
consideration here. Some would have it to be spoken to the Ministers of the
Church; but there is no reason so to restrain this indefinite speech; some
would have it to be the voice of Christ, some of the blessed Father, Son and
Spirit; most agree, that it is to be referred, either to God, or to Christ, the
owner of the Church.

Now the word, Take ye, (...) In the most usual and proper rendering of it,
signifies an external forcible taking, as with the hand, or something
equivalent; As when David took the Amalekite, and after slew him; 2 Samuel 1.
10. So when the men of Gilead took the Ephraimites, and after slew them;
Judges 12. 6. So when the Philistims took Sampson; Judges 16. 21, And so when
Babylons Children are commanded to be taken and slain; Psalm, 137. 9. The
same Hebrew word is there used. As it is likewise used of Moses his taking the
Scrpent by the tail; Exodus 4. 4. Of Jacobs taking his brother by the heel;
Genesis 25. 26. Of Sampsons taking the Gates of Gaza; Judges 16. 3. Of Abraham's
taking the Ram by the horns; Genesis 22. 13. besides diverse like instances
of forcible taking, and therefore the Hebrew word is rendered by the Septuagint
(...) which in the New Testament is constantly used of such forcible taking;
Twice of taking Fishes; John 21. 3. 9. Six times of their taking of Christ,
which at least they desired and intended; John 7. 30. 32. 44. and 8. 20. and
10. 39 and 11. 57. Of Peter's taking by Herod; Acts 12. 4. Of Paul's taking at
Damascus; 2 Corinthians 11. 32. which yet both narrowly escaped. Of the taking
of the Beast and false Prophet; Revelation 19. 20. And never but of an
external taking, as with the hand. And indeed such externally forcible taking,
must needs be most proper to the nature of the resemblance, in that Text of
Canticles, which is the taking of the Foxes which spoil the Vines. Evident
then it is, that this taking of the Foxes there enjoined, is not to be
restrained to Church Officers acts, if at all understood of them; but must be
referred to such at least, whose place and work it is, to act in an externally
forcible way of taking, or of restraining and punishing such Foxes, which
spoil the Vines or Churches of Christ: compared to Vines, Psalm 1. So Esaias 5.
Matthew 21. John 15. Some would have these Foxes to be errors, heresies, and
other hurtful offenses, against the first or second Table; which must be thus
restrained and punished, in the Actours and Authors of them.

Others, understand the persons rather so offending, which must be so taken as
Heretical persons, blasphemers, and such like. Whence false Prophets compared
to Foxes; Ezekiel, 13. 4. Concerning these the Churches well beloved; Canticles
2. 10. Even Christ the Churches Spouse, whose Dove is the Church; Verse 14. He
gives this order; Verse 15. Take ye us the Foxes.

Whether the speech he utter, were in his own name, as some think; or in the
name of the blessed Father and Spirit also: as others think, or whether spoken
with respect had to his Spouse the Church: Take ye us; that is for me and my
Church, or for my sake and hers, or on my behalf and hers; yet to be sure,
Christ spoke this, as Spouse to the Church, his welbeloved Dovelike Spouse; and
so he spoke it as head, at least as political head of the Church, and so also
as Mediator; and therefore what herein he injoyneth, is to be the more
observed: undeniably holding forth:

First, That this is a charge of Christ as Mediator, unto all such, who by
place and office under him, are to restrain and punish, not by the use of a
spiritual rod, or sword so much, as are Church Officers; but specially by the
use of the temporal sword, as our Civil Rulers, who in their political way, are
here enjoined forcibly to take such corrupters, and disturbers of Religion, as
well as of good manners.

Secondly, That such taking of such Foxes, is in the nature thereof, a special
service to Christ Jesus, as Mediator, and Political Head of his Church. Yea
and to the blessed Father and Spirit, in whose name, and to the Church it self
also, on whose behalf, he may seem to speak; not thus, Take ye for me: but
thus, Take ye for us, the Foxes, yea the least of them, which may seem not to
do so much hurt as others: the taking of all sorts of such Foxes then: who by
their tenants or practices do hurt, and spoil in the Churches, or the
restraining, curbing, and punishing of them in some external forcible way; this
must needs be very acceptable service to the Lord. So Numb. 25. 11. 1, 2, 6, 7,
8. verses compared: that extraordinary act of zeal in Phinehas, corporally
punishing, not merely an act of corporal fornication, which then was not of it
self death, (though Adultery was) but a joint act of spiritual whoredom too,
in that Idolatry there mentioned; (which then was punishable with death by the
civil Magistrate in an ordinary way, Deuteronomy* 13. and 17.) I say this that he did,
is by God reckoned, under this head, as for him, or for his sake, verse. 11.
while he was zealous for my sake; and verse. 13. because he was zealous for his
God. God then looked at himself, as in a very special manner, both concerned,
and respected, in that service of Zeal.

All which places thus cleared, may help to expound that, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.
where the Kings and Judges of the earth are required to serve the Lord, the
Son, Gods Anointed, verse. 6. Now this service being not enjoined them as men
barely, but as Kings, even Kings upon the Throne, Job 36. 7, 11. compared. It
cannot be restrained to service in common with other godly persons, but looks
also to Authoritative service, as Civil Rulers. Whence this Argument may be
formed, in reference to that before spoken.

All Authoritative service whatsoever, of civil Rulers, unto Christ, is by
command required of them: For serve the Lord, (that is, Christ,) is indefinite,
and so extendible to all such service also: but, (as has been before proved)
forcible restraint and punishment of corruptions in Religion, by the temporal
sword, is one special part of such service; therefore forcible restraint and
punishment of corruptions in Religion, by the use of the temporal sword, is by
command of God required of Civil Rulers: And it must here further be noted, to
what times this Psalm must be referred: the comminatory and threatening part of
the Psalm, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Peter applies to the times of the Gospel, Acts
4. 25, 26, 27, as is that, Psalm. 2. 9. by John, Revel. 2. 27. and 12. 5. and
19. 15. The Instructive part of this Psalm, as that, verse. 7. is by Paul
applied to Christ's Resurrection, Acts 13. 33. that, verse 8. concerning the
Heathen, or Gentiles becoming Christ's possession, and the utmost coasts of the
earth his Inheritance, all will yield must respect the times after the
partition Wall, twixt Jews and Gentiles, was broken down; and the Gentiles
made the Lords habitation, Ephesians. 2. this was the time to which that [Now]
verse 10, 11. looks. Be wise [now] ye Kings: serve the Lord with fear. Kiss
the Son, etc. verse 12. namely thus risen, and reigning; as verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
do express. So then, it was not a Mosaical Injunction, respecting the Kings of
Israel and Judah, who might be types of Christ; but it is a command lying upon
Gentile Rulers, in the days of the New Testament, to serve Christ with their
Authority, in restraining and punishing corruptions in Religion. And the
Argument hence is undeniable.

That Command of God, which is expressed with peculiar reference to Gentile
Rulers, which should rule after Christ's Incarnation, that command must needs be
of force in the days of the New Testament: But this command unto Princes and
Judges, in their Authoritative way also to serve Christ, is of that nature, or
is referred to the days of the New Testament; therefore that Command is of
force, or binds in these days of the New Testament: The Proposition is
evident, because the Commands of God must needs bind the persons respected and
intended in those very commands. The Assumption was before cleared: So that the
Conclusion remains undeniable; and there wants not now a binding command of
God, requiring such Authoritative service of Christ, by Civil Rulers, as that
is, and was proved to be; namely Authoritatively to restrain and punish such
corruptions in Religion.

A second Reason of the Assertion is taken from the end, to

In the General, he is appointed for the good of such as are under his
subjection: he is the Minister of God to thee for thy good; Indefinitely, Romans
13. 4. whether that good be natural; as life and safety of their bodies: or
moral; as temperance, chastity, honesty, and the like: or civil, as civil
peace, civil liberties, men's Lands, goods, estates, etc. or Spiritual; as the
free passage of the Word and Ordinances of God, the purity of all the worship
of God, and of the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ dispensed, and the like.
Now if God make the Civil Magistrate, the Minister of all this good to the
subjects, then has he armed them with civil power, in a civil way, and by
political means to promote that good of the Subjects; and to rescue from
whatsoever externally breaks forth, tending to impair that Good of the
subjects; and who sees not, that Corruptions in matters of Religion, do some
way or other strike at all that good? not alone, by provoking God in Judgment
either to blast all that good unto a people, amongst whom such corruptions
prevail; but the corruptions themselves occasion breaches upon men's natural,
and civil good; even their lives, safety, estates, civil peace and liberty, and
the like. Witness the sad fruits of Popery, too often in England; of Anabaptisme
in Germany, in John of Leyden and Cnipper Dollings days; of Levellisme not
long since in England, when the better part of the Army were sent down toward
Oxford (as I remember) to suppress the stir raised by the Levellers, and I
wish that might have been the last of the destructive, turbulent, seditious, or
treacherous designs of men grossly corrupted in their Judgments, in the matters
of Religion.

As for the moral good of subjects under Civil Authority, how much such
corruptions do entrench thereupon, let the woeful experience of the looseness,
and even profaneness of too many in both Englands, amongst whom corruptions in
matters of Religion, have taken place, testify; besides the scandal upon
Religion, which such have brought in the eyes of the common sort, which have
made little or no profession, and the woeful miscarriages thereby occasioned
amongst them also. But how such corrupt persons are branded in Scripture, for
such mischiefs and miscarriages, let these places be duly considered, Romans 16.
18. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. compared with verse 10, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19. Jude 4. with
verse 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
whence also such perilous times, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13.
whence railings, strifes, and the like, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. whence increase of
ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2. 16.

And is not then the Civil Magistrate, whose end, partly, is the subjects
natural, and civil good, bound, in his political way, to restrain and redress
the causes of the contrary evil? but specially as the Magistrate is a political
Minister of God, in his civil way, and by his Civil means, of the subjects
spiritual good; so he is to improve his Authority, that the liberty, purity,
and peace of Gods own instituted worship, and ways, wherein their spiritual
good, externally, does much lie, be maintained and defended against all
Infesting, infringing, Impugning or Impairing principles, or practices breaking
forth to the contrary; the Civil Magistrate, in Gods Appointment, is a Minister
to the Churches good, as that of Rome, to which Paul writ, Chap. 1. 7. and 13.
4. compared, he is the Minister of God to thee, for thy good. Esaias 60. 11. the
Gentile Kings shall be brought to the Church, to be added to it: they shall
also as Kings (in some respect) serve the Church: else as verse 12. the Nation,
and the Kingdom (or Authoritative part of the Nation) that will not serve
thee, (speaking of the Church) shall perish: and verse 10. Their Kings shall
minister to thee: Yea in point of the very Discipline of the Church: which is
to it as its walls, they shall help in the building thereof; by their Civil
Authority, setting up that in their Jurisdictions, strengthening, settling, and
establishing the same there. Hence verse. 10. And the sons of strangers shall
build thy walls, their Kings shall minister to thee; namely in that matter of
building her walls also there mentioned: hence also they are called the
builders of the Churches walls, Esaias 49 16, 17. compared. Thy walls are before
me: Thy children, or (as in the Hebrew) thy builders (namely of those walls)
make haste. As builders, by their Civil Authority, they shall break down all
manifest unevenness in the Churches fabric, curb all palpable Intrusions of
any bad stuff therein, and redress whatsoever might visibly undermine the
same: and all this spoken with reference to the Days of the New Testament,
when the Gentiles should be thus behoveful to the Church, verse 22. I will lift
up my hand to the Gentiles. Verse 23. and Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers,
-- they shall bow to thee with their faces toward the earth. So Esaias 60. 3. The
Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising.
Verse 9. Surely the Isles shall wait for me: verse 10. The sons of strangers
shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister to thee. So Rev. 22.
24. And the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory to it: namely, to that
new Jerusalem or purest Gospel Church: not in heaven; but which comes from
God, out of heaven, verse. 2.

Now the glory of the Kings of the earth, is chiefly their Sovereignty and
Civil Authority; which Christ by John says, they shall bring to the Church:
not to be resigned to them, or usurped by the Church, or any of her Officers:
they shall be Kings still, although ministering, as Kings, to the Church, Esaias
60. 10. but they shall bring this their glory to the Church, to be improved for
the Churches good; or for the maintaining the doctrine, discipline, and ways
of God held forth by the Church in the purity, and liberty thereof: against all
opposers, impugners, despisers, depravers, disturbers, and corrupters thereof.

And let none say; What need the Church any such terrestrial

It is true, (say I) this help from Civil Authority is not of esse of the
Church, or to the esse of its operations: but it is an accumulative good,
conferred of God upon the Church, to have such builders of her walls, and such
nursing fathers, to curb and hinder whatsoever is destructive to her good: and
so it is necessary to the optimum esse of the Church.

Besides, when the Church has used all her power, against corrupters of her
purity, or disturbers of her peace, by excommunicating of them from her
Society, which were of it; yet such may grow the more insolent, and commonly do
wax the more turbulent, and pragmatical that way; and do more hurt after the
Church has gone to her utmost limits, to censure them, then before: yea
turbulent seducers may go from sea to sea, to make proselytes, and draw
disciples after them, where the particular Churches have no immediate power
over them; either then the Civil Magistrates sword and service, is needful, or
else there will be left no ordinary and orderly power to restrain, and punish
such gross Abuses, in such cases.

A third Reason of this Assertion may be taken, both from

The former is held forth, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet, and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Whence it will
necessarily follow:

First, that it never comes of God, for any to desire to lead a quiet and
peaceable life, or to be let alone without any molestation from Civil
Authority, in any way contrary, either to godliness, or honesty; the contrary
desire, being that only which God here puts his upon.

Secondly, that civil Rulers by their Office and place, now in the days of the
New Testament, are to look to matters pertaining to Godliness: whether
Doctrinal, or practical, so far as acted by the outward man, and appearing in
outward view in their life or the like, as well as they are in the like way, to
look to the matters of honesty. As he that is taught to pray that he may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness, and Honesty, prays that he may
lead a life in all Godliness and honesty, (without which to pray for peace
and quiet in any other life, or to pray to be let alone unmolested, in any
ungodly or dishonest way of his life, even but to ask leave and liberty to
sin.) So he that prays to the Lord, for all that are in highest civil
Authority, as for Kings or the like; for this end, that he may live in all
Godliness and Honesty, quietly, and peaceably, he prays to God, to cause
the persons in such civil authority, to further by their civil authority such
an end, to which under God they are an external means, and surely then he
prays, that persons in civil Authority may in such sort attend and look to
matters as well of piety, as of honesty, appearing in any acts or ways of
their subjects lives; as that their subjects may in such godly and honest acts
and ways of their life and in no other enjoy peace and quiet.

If this kind of prayer here exhorted unto, be in the matter according to Gods
Will (as it must needs be, being what the Holy Ghost by part exhorts unto;)
It is then according to Gods own Will, that civil Magistrates should
Authoritatively see to it, that their subjects lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all Godliness and honesty; which quiet and peaceable life is not alone a
life free from disturbance, by persecution, for any act or way of Godliness or
honesty appearing outwardly, but a life free from disturbance in any such acts
or ways of Godliness or honesty by any other open, and manifest disturbers
thereof, whether such as by open violence combine together to hinder the Godly
from meeting together publicly or privately to worship the Lord according to
his mind, or such as profanely rise up in their Assemblies or Families, and
openly disturb them in that worship, or interrupting them by unseemly and
unconvenient gestures; talking, showting, singing or the like; or such as
openly revile them, rail upon them, or at least rashly censure and condemn
them, and openly protest against them, and the worship and ways of God held
forth and practiced by them, and by the rest of the Assemblies and Families of
the Saints amongst them, or take any other ways, undermining and striking at
their quiet and peaceable living in all godliness or honesty. The Greek words
in this text, 1 Timothy 2. 2. (...) are observable, (...) is that quiet of a
Serene sea, when free from turbulent winds, and by proportion it is a quiet
life in all godliness and honesty; when not alone gusts of persecution disturb
it not: but when winds of false doctrines too, (as Ephesians. 4. 14. They are called,
are not suffered to molest and unsettle the same. This then is the sum that the
truly godly do even beg of God on the behalf of Magistrates: that they may
discharge their duty in their authoritative care and endeavor, that their
Subjects may first lead godly and honest lives: secondly, Lead their godly and
honest life in such sort as to be free from what ever may undermine, unsettle
or disturb their quiet and peace therein. Touching the latter, namely the
Saints praises when such an end is attained: we se it is in Ezras time, they
thankfully acknowledge it, as put into their Rulers hearts, not from Satan, the
world or the slesh, but from the Lord himself, to take such effectual and exact
care of pure, peaceable and comfortable carrying on the whole work of God
committed to them; Ezra 7. 25, 26, 27, 28. verses compared Revel. 11. 15. It is
acknowledged to the Lords praise, that the kingdoms of the earth are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that as v. 17.) He takes to
him his Kingdom. Now the kingdoms of the earth become Christ's Kingdoms, not
alone when either the people thereof become godly, or when their Rulers with
them subject themselves as godly to Christ's government in his Churches: but
when the Rulers, who rule under Christ, and by Christ, do rule likewise for
Christ; and by their civil power seek to suppress such as openly oppose, or
cross, or attempt to subvert, or pervert his royal laws and blessed rules and
institutions, held forth in his holy word. Surely where substitute Rulers do
rule for another, they must needs be such as do authoritatively vindicate all
injuries done to the laws of their Sovereign. So is it in the case of civil
Rulers, ruling under and for Christ. It is indeed a mercy to the Saints and
Churches of Christ, when kingdoms in their ruling part give free liberty to
hold forth and exercise the ways of Christ: but yet this is not enough to make
it out all here spoken: yet their Christ takes to him his Kingdom, or that
such kingdoms be become thereby the Kingdoms of Jesus Christ; for beside that
such a toleration in case, may put no more honor upon Christ then upon
Antichrist: (For they may happily tolerate and often do tolerate in their
dominions, properly as well as the pure worship and ways of Jesus Christ;)
such a toleration of the purer ways and doctrines of Christ, may be yielded
unto and allowed by the authority of kingdoms, which professedly avow the Pope
to be head of the Church, and prefer the Decrees, Laws and Customs of the
Church (as they call it) above the Laws of Christ; and by their secular power
maintain the power and kingdom of the beast openly: as does the kingdom of
France at this day; and yet none will say that Christ has taken to him his
Kingdom in France; or that France is become already the Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Christ in any other way, then in that general way, in which all
power in earth as well as heaven is his which is not that, at which that text
Rev. 11. 15. looks. The like might be said of the Mahumetan kingdom of the
Turks, which professedly adoreth Mahomet, this also should be Christ's Kingdom
in a special respect, because they tolerate all religious, and amongst others
the true Christian Religion. Surely then by the Saints praises here; for this
authoritative service and subjection to Jesus Christ before mentioned, it
appears to be in the days of the New Testament not alone lawful, but a praise
worthy blessing of grace.

A fourth Reason of that assertion, is taken from the zeal, punishments that
way mentioned, verse 2. Any under pretense of the name or of ground from the
word and counsel of God, shall hold forth false Doctrine then (as verse 3.) If
any shall yet prophecy (or speak lies in the Name of the Lord) his father and
his mother that begot him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live, for thou
speak lies in the Name of the Lord: and to show that it is no rash
threatening of capital punishment for such false Doctrines; they will be active
also to bring them to condign punishment; for so it follows: His father and
his mother that begot him, shall thrust him through when he prophesies. Nor can
these punishments of corruptions in Religion, in persons notoriously guilty
thereof, be meant of punishments immediately Divine, by some immediate stroke
of God or Christ; for the father and the mother in some cases thrust them
thorough; verse 3. In other cases they are branded and wounded in the hands, by
their friends, verse 6. Nor yet are they ecclesiastical punishments, or
censures here spoken of: for what have Churches, or any Church members, as
such, to do, to slay persons, or to thrust them through, or to inflict upon
any delinquents, visible, corporal punishments: such as leave their marks in
persons hands as verse 3. and 6. express. Nor yet are these corporal
punishments of such persons merely aeconomical and parental corrections of
their children in a private way; unless any will say, that even in times
wherein godly civil Rulers (who put forth their civil power of the sword
against open enemies, Zech. 12. 5, 6.) are to be had and made use of, godly
parents may execute death upon their children, for holding corrupt Doctrines;
without making use of civil authority, for that end. It remains therefore,
that the punishments here mentioned, are such as are of a civil and political
nature, by the use of the authority of the civil Magistrate; whereas even
godly parents and friends shall be active; and shall in a sense punish them,
after that manner of witnesses against them, having been convented, convicted
and censured, by lawful civil authority, alluding to that Deuteronomy. 13, 6. where
when a man or woman's, son or daughter, etc. should be themselves corrupt in
Religion, and seek to corrupt others, they were not to conceal or spare him,
but they were to kill him. verse 9. which is expounded by that following, Thine
hand shall be first upon him, to put him to death, and afterward the hands of
all the people: which is further expounded in a like case of capital punishment
of a persons worshipping Idols, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3. As he must die for it upon
legal proof, ver. 5. 6. so verse 7. Its said, The hands of the witnesses shall
be first upon him, to put him to death; and afterward, The hands of all the
people. So that a private man or woman in such cases, did regularly stone and
kill another; as giving in casting evidence against him for his fault, and then
as witnesses by order of that polity, did cast the first stone at him, and so
killed him: and as much, and no more is here held forth as orderly in the days
of the Gospel. This use therefore of the coercive and vindicative power of
civil authority, in matters of the first Table, is the more observable, as
that which will be called for by the Saints in the best times, and likewise
exercised by godly civil Rulers, even when the Jews shall come home to Jesus
Christ; and observable it is who it is that ingageth that these things shall be
so done; even the same Jehovah mentioned Zech. 12. 1. Who says, verse 10, That
he will power out the spirit of grace and supplication upon them, and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, (which
John applies to Jesus Christ the Son of God, John 19. 17. and Rev. 1. 5, 6, 7,
This same Jehovah says Zech. 13. 2. I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean
spirit to depart out of the land. By Prophets are understood such as verse. 3.
Prophecy lies in the Name of the Lord. By the unclean spirit, is meant that
pack and knot of corrupt Teachers, which then shall arise to hinder that
glorious work of the purity of the Religion of these times: by their several
false Doctrines: so 1 John 14. 1. Try the spirits, namely, the Teachers or the
Doctrines of your Teachers, and every spirit that confesses, etc. That is
every Teacher that so confesses figuratively noting the effect for the
impulsive cause; every Teacher and the Doctrine he teaches, comes from some
spirit; either pure and holy, as is the holy Ghost; or unclean and impure as is
the Devil. Hence corrupt doctrines, called doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2,
3, 4. Now Christ here ingageth to curse his peoples land to be rid of these
false Teachers; so that so far as political Governors in the civil sense of
the converted Jews, shall rid their land of such false Teachers, whether they
do it by banishment, or death, according to their several demerits, the Lord
Jesus owneth their juridical vindicative acts, as his acts he causes this;
That Government is Christ's Government, as John phraseth it, Revel. 11. 15. he
banisheth when they do it, he kills them, and thrusts them thorough when
they do it: or if their punishment run not so high, but be in some part only
of their bodies, as in their hands, or the like; yet he says of it, that it
shall be a means of good to some so punished corporally, verse. 4, 5, 6. thus
was I wounded in the house of my friends.

A fifth Reason is taken from the public evil removed, and so shall thou put
the evil away from among you: and as evil is removed hereby, so is good
attained; both moral, Deuteronomy. 17. 10. All Israel shall hear and fear, and do no
more any such wickedness: and civil good, as that in outward estate; as when
theirs was impoverished by that drought and famine, yet upon the execution of
Justice upon those Idolaters, reparation is therein made by that ruin, 1 King.
18. 40, 41. also that of Civil peace, 2 Chronicles. 14. 3, 4, 5. Therefore the
Kingdom was quiet before him.

Again, what a deluge of evil overfloweth all where the use of such power is
wanting, or neglected: thence that Idolatry in Israel, when no Supreme
Magistrate, no King in Israel, Judge. 17. 45, 6. thence such corruption in
Church discipline; as the consecration and administration of that hedge Priest,
verse. 12. and Chap. 18. 1. compared: and as mischiefs arise thence in
spirituals, and Ecclesiasticals, so also in temporals: for when none is found
to stand in the Gap, and Authoritatively to make up the hedge, which is broken
by such prophanations of Gods holy day, and holy things and laws, then comes
an inundation of ruinating Judgments upon that State; as Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26.
compared with verse. 30, 31. yea and as mischief to State and Church in general;
so to corrupt and indulgent Rulers in particular, as also to their houses. What
mischief came upon that indulgent Judge Eli, for his too gross connivence at
such corrupt customs in Religion, as well as at other lewd pranks of his sons:
read, see, and consider, 1 Samuel 2. 22, 23, 24. with 27, 28, 29, etc.

A sixth Reason may be taken from the unwonted dispensation of Gods providence,
when the zeal in the ordinary Ministers of Gods vengeance fails this way, he
stirs up zeal in others in a more then ordinary way, to execute such
vengeance: as when Ahab fails to punish such abuses in Religion, Elijah is
stirred up to do it, 1 King. 18. God would have it some way done; so far is he
from prohibiting the doing of it.

The last Reason may be taken from the examples both of such as have acted this
way by the light of grace, and are commended Dan. 3. 1, 2. etc.
them: which though it show the miserable fruits of man's Fall in this their
misguided, and misplaced zeal, yet by these ruins we may judge, that it is a
principle deeply engraven in man's heart, that as there should be some to rule,
and some to be ruled; some God, and some worship of that God: so by the Law of
Nature and Nations, there should be the external exercise of some external
coercive power, in cases of prophanations and abuses of the name and worship of
that God, who is to be adored.

And let none now object; that such Authoritative acts in

For, 1. We speak not of David, and Solomon, and such that these were types of
Christ: we might have instanced in the Judges in Jobs time; that corruption in
Worship, as the worship of the Sun, or Moon, etc. was an Iniquity to be
punished by the Judges: so our last Translation renders that place, Job 31.
26, 27, 28. yet were not those Judges types of Christ.

2. Those Worthies mentioned, did exercise power in matters of the second Table
also; yet not therein Types of Christ: for then the substance being come, the
shadow vanishes, and so all Civil Power and Jurisdiction in matters of
Righteousness, as well as Religion, would be turned up by the roots.

3. Those zealous Acts of the converted Kings against all superstitions, and
the fomentors and Abettors of them, prophesied of Rev. 17. 16. can under no
pretense, be called Old Testament types; or Old Testament Zelots.

The point propounded being explained in the Distinctions and Conclusions
before laid down: and being thus confirmed; we shall now consider of some
doctrinal Instructions arising thence.

1. Then if this be so; It serves to refute and remove many

1. If you grant Magistrates such Coercive power in matters

The second Conclusion denies to them any way of exercising that power, which
is properly Ecclesiastical, allowing them only a Civil way of doing what they
do, in matters of Religion. When Church Officers with the Church do
Ecclesiastically punish one of their members, for that which is also a civil
offense: as when they cast him out for lying, drunkenness, Incest, etc. they
are not therefore Civil Officers; because they do it in their own proper way;
namely Ecclesiastically. So when Civil Courts censure persons for heresy,
schism, etc. which also is an Ecclesiastical offense, they are not therefore
Church Officers; because they do it in a Civil way; and as it is a breach of
humane Laws made against the same, and as it tends to break civil peace. In
the one Court they are censured as matters of the Lord properly; in the other,
as they come under other political 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11.
respects. Nor is either Court clear of that Guilt, unless both Courts in
their several ways, as several witnesses of Christ, do bear their respective
Juridical and Authoritative testimony against the same.

If you grant such power to Civil Authority, you make them

God, that of old enjoined such restraining and punishing Cantic. 2. 15.
to Lord it over men's faith, and conscience? Surely none dare say so: or did
Asah, who 2 Chronicles 14. 4. commanded Judah to seek the Lord, etc. Lord it over
their faith? or did Josiah, who did compel some to stand to their Covenanted
worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 32. he made all that were present to stand to it;
and verse. 33. he made them serve the Lord their God: and 2 King. 23. 20. he
slew the idolatrous Priests there; did he therefore sit in Gods Throne of men's
consciences, and Lord it there? surely then he had never been so renowned for
it, as he is, but blamed rather: and say not this is Old Testament; for if it
be in it self a lording over men's consciences; to require persons to carry it
orderly before the Lord in his worship, with their outward man: and neither to
hold forth or express, in any scandalous way, what is contrary thereunto: or if
they do, to punish them for it: It is of this nature wheresoever it is, or
whenever it is found: times of Old or New Testament, make no difference in
the nature of things. What is in it self tyranny, or murder, is so. It was so
then, and is so now: and if so now, it was so then. Yea if it be in it self
Lording over conscience, to punish gross corruptions in Religion, for which
men pretend conscience: then if Churches in a Church way punish heretics, cut
them off from Church communion, or deliver them up to Satan, they lord it over
men's faith and consciences; they would force others to believe, as they do
believe, when yet those others profess that in conscience they cannot do so;
and so will force other men's consciences. But will any say, that this is
forcing conscience, or lording over it, verily then, Thyatira had not been so
much to blame: or why does Jesus Christ blame that Church, for suffering
Jezabel to vent her corrupt doctrines, especially in such lesser matters, as
eating things sacrificed to Idols, Rev. 2. 20. if Thyatira might reply; Jezabel
professes her self a Prophetess, to be extraordinarily inspired; to have the
Spirit, promised in Joel, poured out on her, one of the Lords handmaids,
whereby she prophesies; and so to hold forth what she does, out of conscience,
to the dictates and manifestations of the Holy Ghost, in her spirit and
conscience: besides the matters are of no great weight; to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, which Paul himself made a matter of indifferency, in some
cases, 1 Cor. 8. and chap. 10. and Romans 14. And should we not let such blind
guides alone, in their seducing of other blind ones, like themselves; as Matthew.
15. 14. they were required: or if we should deal with them, and force them out
of the Church for such matters of conscience, shall we not seem to force men's
consciences, and to lord it over that which is thy peculiar to manage, and
overruled, even conscience. Besides, if such Church restrictions of the
corruptions in Religion, or punishing of them Ecclesiastically, when yet they
are matters of conscience, be forcing of other men to our belief, and forcing
men's consciences: why are Churches to censure heretics? first, by that censure
of Admonition, once, or oftener; and after that, of excommunication, Tit. 3. 10,
11. or why did not Paul himself let Himeneus and Alexander alone? or why is he
so earnest that such false teachers who troubled the Galatian Churches, might
bear their (Ecclesiastical) Judgment and be (Ecclesiastically cut off, Gal. 5.
10, 12.

2. It has been declared already, how such Rulers do therein act, but as Gods
Ministers, and by virtue of their office and charge from God; and de Jure, do
not restrain or punish what seems to be cross, but what is evidently cross
to the Word of God; according to the third Conclusion: and so they do restrain
and punish that only, which if others had any conscience, (as we say) they
would refrain from: as first, Forbidden by him, even God and Christ, who is
Lord both of their Faith, and Conscience too; and will one day be a Judge of
both: and in the mean while does make lawful Civil Powers, his Substitutes, and
Ministers, and under-Avengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans
13. 4. the Lord makes no exception, in their Magisterial work: but speaks
indefinitely; if corrupt persons in Religion, even as they hold forth such
corruptions in word, or deed, be evil doers, the Lord ordains Civil Rulers to
be Ministers of his vengeance, against them: albeit he himself be an avenger,
and could execute divine vengeance upon them immediately, as he is Supreme Lord
of men's Consciences.

3. It has been already said in the sixth Conclusion, that the use of such
Coercive power in punishing, it is to be after due means of conviction first
used; which being used, and yet persons persisting still in their evil ways,
they are according to Gods own Censure, accounted as persons self-condemned, or
condemned in their own consciences, Tit. 3. 10, 11. so that their punishment
then, is not lording it over their consciences, but a just censure of persons
sinning against their Consciences.

If this power be so exercised, it would make Christians servants to men, or
like their servants they must be forbid this or

First, The Lord of old required as much as now we plead for: did not he then
and thereby make his Saints of old servants

Secondly, such a like Argument, if of any force, would also undermine Church
restraints and punishments of corruptions in Religion; for it will be said, the
Church is but a Society of men: they forbid this or that to their members,
which if they obey it not, they censure them; and will any become such servants
to men?

Thirdly, It is evident that now also men may be servants to men, 1 Timothy 6. 2.
Ephesians 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Tit. 2. and yet in a sense, they may not be servants to
men, whether Family-Masters, or State-Rulers; namely in way of base, servile
compliance to men's vain humors, to the sinful lusts of their wills, or carnal
Fancies of their minds; if either Masters or Magistrates, will forbid what they
please, and not what God would have them be not the servants of men: better
obey God then men, Act. 4. 18, 19, 20. yea but when according to the former
Conclusions, they forbid and punish only, what their Lord and Master and yours
also injoyneth them; now you show not a servant-like spirit, to your professed
Supreme Lord and Master, if you submit not.

Grant such Power once, and it is the way to make Christians,

1. As much might be said against that way, which that ult. they will but cause
them either to dissemble, or else sin against their consciences.

2. According to the former Conclusions, the Magistrate restraining and
punishing things cross, manifestly cross to the Word, he punishes only such
things which men out of conscience should avoid: and the Magistrate also
punishing such transgressors after due means of conviction; the persons now
punished become sinners against their own consciences: and is punishing sin or
sinners against conscience, a means or cause, in it self, to make them either
to dissemble, or else to sin against conscience? what more ridiculous?

The use of such Coercive power, is to introduce an external

1. That godly regulated Rulers they are wont to enjoin the

2. Even before they do actually sentence offenders, they use all means of
Conviction, Conclusion sixth; and consequently persuasion is used with such:
wherefore this makes nothing against what we plead for.

3. If the Objection argue ad idem, it stands thus; persons may not, cannot be
outwardly constrained by men to grace and true faith; therefore they may not be
externally restrained from ungodly practices, such as venting of pernicious and
blasphemous doctrines, quite cross to the Faith of the Saints; the very naming
whereof is a sufficient refutation of it.

This is to make the weapons of our warfare to be carnal and Christ's Kingdom
of this world.

We might answer, that 2 Cor. 10. speaks not of the use of civil Power, but
of Church Apostolical Power; and rather implies,

But the answer is easy: First, if this argument be of force against
Magistratical power in punishing open sins of the outward man against the first
Table, it is of like force against their punishing of such sins against the
second Table: Christ's Kingdom being not of this world in way of punishing the
sins of the one, more then the other; and Apostles and Churches having power
from Christ by spiritual weapons to avenge all disobedience, whether against
first or second Table, 2 Cor. 10. 6. 1 Cor. 5. 12. 3. 4, 5. It would follow
that Magistratical weapons must be used against neither sort of sins.

Secondly, when Christ himself did use carnal instruments to curb and convert
those Temple abuses and corruptions in Religion, John 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
yet did he not cross himself in his speech, John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of
this world, nor did he cross this in 2 Cor. 10. 4. which he spoke by Paul.

Thirdly, though Jesus Christ's Kingdom of which he spoke to Pilate, before
whom he was accused of assertation of a Caesarian kingdom and dominion, John
19. 12. were no such kingdom, nor he any such terrestrial Monarch; yet that
hinders not, but that both as God, he rules over all Nations, and as God-man
all power is committed to him, Matthew. 28. And he is King of earthly kings, and
Lord of lords, Revel. 19. He by and from whom, the Princes do rule; yea, All
the Judges of the earth; yea by whom it is that such Princes do decree Justice,
even any just Laws against open sins acted by the outward man, against God or
man, first or second Table, or any just censures against the same: (for so
says Proverbs 8. 15, 16. By me Princes Decree justice, (that which gives
every Subject his due encouragement or punishment.) Yea, he who takes to
himself his Kingdom in special form; when the kingdoms of the earth become
his, or are subservient to him, in establishing and vindicating his Royal Laws
and Institutions, so far as they come under their view, Rev. 11. 15. 17.
compared.

This is a way to let in false Religions and corruptions in worship, since
Rulers may seek to restrain and punish all purity of Doctrine and worship, and
to constrain Christians to the contrary, as do Popish Rulers and the like.

If the Objectors argue ad Idem, they argue thus: that to restrain

The exercise of such coercive power in matters of Religion,

The limiting of civil peace, as of duty only to punish things manifestly
cross to the Word, and that after due means used abuse of civil power takes
not away this due use of it.

2. Just persecution of men sinning against Gods Rules and the Dictates of a
right guided conscience, which require persons to obey Superiors in all their
lawful commands, is not to persecute men for attendance unto Gods Rules or to
the Dictates of a good conscience, and it were absurd to reason thus.

Men may not be persecuted for a good cause and conscience, therefore they may
not be punished for maintaining a bad cause, and that which is
(interpretatively) against their conscience.

The exercise of any such power by godly Rulers, is cross to

1. All that is required of Church Officers and Members,

2. Zeal of God in sharp punishing of such like corruptions stood very well
with Christ's Dove like Spirit; none so meek as he, yet none so zealous this
way. The zeal of Gods House even consumed him, and made him lay on so hard with
his scourge upon those who polluted the Temple, John 2. 16. with 14. 15. 16.
30. so Moses that King in Iesurun, the meekest of mere men in his own cause,
Numb. 12. 3. yet how Lion-like in that cause of pollution of Gods worship,
Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28, 29. So in Hezekiah, who was such a shadow to the Saints,
Esaias 32. 2. yet a very fiery flying Serpent against the enemies of God and the
Church, Esaias 14. 29, 30.

This is contrary to what was Prophesies of us Gentiles;

1. Although all sinful and rash quarrelsomness, all self avengings

1. Evident it is, that as good and evil doing, whereof the civil Magistrate
takes cognizance, are opposed Romans 13. 3, 4. so are encouraging rewards to
weldoers, as by that of praises and vindicative rewards to evil doing, and to
evil doers opposed: now none will deny that the civil Magistrate is bound to
encourage the Preaching Profession and practice of the Truth, worship and ways
of God; and therefore by paritie of reason, is he to be an avenger of what
comes under his cognizance contrary thereunto. 2. The persons more specially
spoken to upon that ground to do well, because then they have praise of the
same; or in case they do evil, then they are to fear the vengeance of the Lord
to be executed by his Minister, the Magistrate; they are Professors, Officers
and Members of Churches, such as they were at Rome, Romans 1. 7. and 12. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. compared with chap. 13. 3, 4. If thou do that which is evil, fear, etc.
which all will confess to be liable to evil doing against the first as well as
the second Table. 3. He is by Gods Ordinances to be a terror to evil works
indefinitely: For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil, verse. 3.
and v. 4. He is the Minister of God, the avenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil; be he who he will be, coming under his power; or be the evil what it
will be, coming under his view. Now the Scripture reckons especially the doing
of persons of corrupt judgments; as persons so corrupt to be evil deeds. Hence
if a Christian bid God speed to persons, who bring not the Doctrine of Truth,
he is partaker with him in his evil deeds. 2 John 10. 11. Hence Paul calls
those corrupt circumcision teachers. evil works, Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs,
beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. And the opposition, Romans 13.
3. evinceth this, Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil; whence
the argument is strong. Those good works and acts which civil Rulers are not to
be a terror unto, unto the contrary evil works they are to be a terror; to
good works and acts, (civilly such) respecting the Truth, worship and ways of
God, civil rulers are not to be a terror; therefore to evil works, contrary to
the truth, ways and worship of God, are they to be a terror.

If any yet reply, that this in Romans 13. is spoken with reference to the
present power that then bare chief sway at Rome; or at least with sole
reference to such like civil powers that were christian, and looks not to
civil powers becoming christian; and so is no rule for christian rulers:

The Answer is ready, albeit those who were in highest power, when Paul writ
this Epistle, were Pagan, and not Christian; yet the context carries the words
spoken about higher Civil Powers, to be extendible, yea especially appliable to
Christian civil Rulers.

1. When the Apostle says, Will thou not be afraid of the power? do that which
is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: Who knows not, that Nero,
then ruling, was so far from giving encouragement to any Christian Romans,
either in a way of piety or honesty, that he was a very Lion rather, cruelly to
devour them, 2 Timothy 4. 17. and that way rather to have encouragement from Pagan
Rulers, would be to comply with them in the ways of their profaneness and
heathenish outrages and abominations; which God forbid!

2. As the Civil Powers in or with Christians are ordered of God, (for there is
no power, says Paul, but is of God; meaning especially civil power, Romans 13.
1.) and as every soul by virtue of that word is also to be subject (in all
lawful things) to Higher Powers amongst Christians; and exercised by
Christians: so Anabaptists themselves will acknowledge, that Romans 13. 4. takes
in the Christian Magistrate as bearing Gods Sword, and being Gods Minister for
Civil vengeance against evil doers against the rules of the second Table; and
so the case is yielded by them, that the place in Romans 13. looks at the
Christian Magistrae also.

3. Those Rulers, to whom, what is here spoken touching their Magistratical
work, does best agree, and by whom, it is best performed, they must be here
principally intended by the Lord: but to the godly Christian Magistrate, the
Magistratical work here mentioned does best agree, and by him is it best
performed: therefore the godly and Christian Magistrate is here principally
intended. As for instance: [Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
evil.] who makes more conscience of this order of the Lord, the highest Ruler,
then the Christian godly Magistrate? who is wont else to fulfill that so fully
and faithfully unto the Christian and godly Subject: [if thou do that which is
good, thou shall have praise of the same:] who is actually and effectually [the
Minister of God for thy good] the Best good, as well as other Inferior good,
of the Subject: so properly, as the Christian godly Magistrate? Who makes
conscience, but he, to come up fully and regularly to that also, verse. 4. he is
the Minister of God, the Avenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

A second Answer to the Objection from Esaias 11. is, That Thus was I wounded in
the house of my friends, Zech. 13. 6.

This is cross to that Rule, Judge nothing before the time,

It is spoken in opposition to rash censuring of others; according Judge not,
that ye be not judged: but Paul never intended, that no matters of a sacred or
civil nature, should ever be judged of by such as were called thereto of God,
but all left unmedled with to the Judgment day; for 1 Cor. 5. 4. he charge in
Church matters, that the Church proceed to censure the incestuous person: and 1
Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. he would have some of the Saints to be chosen by them to
judge in their civil matters amongst themselves; the rather, because the Saints
shall (as Assessours) judge the world at the last day.

A second Instruction from the premises, is, that surely then persons in Civil
Authority are in duty bound, even as they are persons in civil Authority under
God and Christ, as they are Ministers of God, to endeavor the exact knowledge
of his Law, Word and Rules; as other under-Rulers, are to know the Laws of
their Sovereign: for if they must restrain and punish, what is cross to those
Rules, they ought to know the Rules; else how should they know what is cross
to the Rules of the Word? or before they punish the same, how will they be able
to use such means of conviction of offenders against those Rules, as God
requires? God put this principle into the heart even of Artaxerxes; that such
as knew the Laws of God, should be set in Authority to punish such as did
contrary to the Law of God, Ezra 7. 25, 26, 27, 28. compared. God by Jethro
counseled, that Rulers should be men of Ability; even in Scripture, as well as
other Laws and learning, Exodus 18. 21. and Deuteronomy. 1. 13. compared; the book of
the Law was ever to be with the Rulers set over Gods people, Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
Josh. 1. 7, 8. Esaias 32. 1, 2. and 33. 6. wisdom and knowledge in such as rule,
is the stability of their times. It is Gods Ordinance to Gentile Rulers, that
they should be wise and instructed; even in the things, ways and words of God,
Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Pagan Rulers indeed, whilst Pagan, do not know the Word, and
so cannot so well punish what is cross to it; but of right and duty they are
bound to know both.

A third Instruction hence, is; that if such corruptions in Religion, are to be
so restrained and punished by highest Civil Authority, then are highest Civil
Authority, which chiefly require such punishment to be executed, to make
Coercive Laws about matters of Religion. For if so to punish, then in an
ordinary way to do it, either by virtue of some political Law established and
promulged for that end: and then the case is granted; or else without such a
Law: and then way is made to bring in Arbitrary and tyrannical Government. Yea
when a Civil State does agree, in such or such matters of God, to be guided by
the Word of God, and necessary deductions thence, what punishments to inflict
upon such or such corruptions in Religion: Now that which is materially
considered, the Law and Word of God, yet formally considered, as thus
politically ratified and promulged; It is so far forth of the nature of a
political law, and does but strengthen this Conclusion; That what a Civil State
must punish, they must make political Laws for that end; in that extraordinary
case, Moses without a law must punish that blasphemer, Leviticus 24. 11, 12,
13, 14. but in reference to ordinary execution of Justice that way for the
future; God bids Moses to promulge a solemn Law in Israel, that whosoever
blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death, verse. 15, 16.

Touching this particular, 1. we distinguish of Civil Magistrates.

1. Civil Magistrates are considered either Indefinitely, or in a limited
sense. Indefinitely considered, they are the Ordinance of God; the Civil Powers
that be are ordained of God; there is no power but of God, Romans 13. 1. yea they
are of Christ, under whom they rule, and by whom they decree whatsoever.
Justice they do decree, Prove. 8. 15, 16. by me; who that is, is explained,
verse. 30. then I was by him, and I was daily his delight: and verse. 31.
Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, etc. by this essential wisdom of
God, Princes decree Justice; whether just Laws against evil doers, or just
censures, according to those Laws: he is King of kings, and Lord of lords, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16, 17. Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16. if considered in a limited sense,
under this or that form of Rule or Magistracy, whether Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, or mixed of Aristocracy and Democracy: so it is a
humane creature, as the Greek terms it, 2 Pet. 2. 13.

2. Civil Magistrates are considered either as rightly ordered according to
God; or as some way defective to his order* Regulated Magistrates, ordered
according to the Rules of God and Christ, whose Ordinance they are, and by whom
they rule; they are well versed in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. men of
choice Abilities for wisdom and understanding; yea even in the things of God,
Exodus 18. 21. and Deuteronomy. 1. 13, compared: such as fear God, ibid. such as rule
in Gods fear, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. such as do spiritual homage to Jesus Christ,
Psalm. 72. 10, 11. are spiritually wise, and well instructed, Psalm. 2. 10. Kiss
the Son, with the kiss of faith, love and obedience, verse 12. serve him,
verse. 11. not as men only, but as Kings and Judges Are nursing Fathers to the
Church, Esaias 49. 23. are brought to the Church to join with it, Esaias 60. 11.
stoop to the Government of the Church as members of it, Esaias 49. 23. bring the
glory of their Authority to the Church, Rev. 21. 24. thereby to minister every
way, in way of protection, preservation, and establishment thereof, Civilly, in
peace, and purity of doctrine and discipline, and the like, Esaias 60. 10. 1 Timothy
2. 1, 2. every way in their political manner, Ministers even to Gentile
Churches, such as that of Rome was, for its good, Romans 13. 4. and a terror not
to good works but to evil, Romans 13. 3. In this respect, its so far from truth,
that a godly man and member of Jesus Christ, should not be a Magistrate; (when
yet godly Moses, Joshuah, David, Asah, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and others of old were: and so in and after Christ's
Incarnation, was Joseph of Arimathea, Joh 19. 38. so was he, Joh. 4. 46, 53.
compared: so was Cornelius, Act. 10. 2. and Sergius Paulus, Acts 13. 7. 12.
compared, that Eunuch, Acts 8. 27. 37. compared, Erastus, Romans 16. 23. etc.)
that according to Gods rule, such an one should be the only man for that
office. The Conclusion in special wise respected regulated Magistrates, and not
so much such as are defective to their supreme Lords order and rules, and
sundry ways grossly transgressing the same.

3. Civil Magistrates are considered in the perfection either of the Essence of
their Magistracy, or of their Magistraticall Operations.

In the former sense Pagans and other Rulers not regulalated according to Gods
Rules, and perfect Rulers, and have a perfect right to establish true Religion,
and to make good our Laws to that end; Albeit for want of light, they know it
not, or for want of a better heart they do it not: According as out of the
like defects, they establish not many wholesome Rules, and Laws of civil
Honesty and Justice; albeit as Rulers, they have a power to do it. In the
latter sense, if regulated, they are complete, if not regulated, then in so
far forth, sundry ways imperfect, and deficient.

Secondly, we distinguish of Kingdoms or Commonwealths in which they rule.
They are either greater or lesser, the Rule concerns both alike.

Again, they are either Pagan, not intended in the point; or Christan, and
these again either more pure, and better squared according to Gods rules, whose
they are; or they are more corrupt, and Apostatizing from truth, or from purity
and power in Religion; that point reaches both.

Again these corrupter States are considered as so corrupt, either in the body
of the Spiritual guides thereof, or in the body of the People, or in both:
Neither the one nor the other are in Religion; excluded the point.

Thirdly, we distinguish of Legislative power in matters of Religion. It is
either Absolute, and merely Sovereign; and so only God, and Christ is
Lawgiver unto his people, both for matters of Religion and Righteousness,
Piety and Honesty, First and second table. Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver.
Esaias 33. 22. The Lord is our Lawgiver. Or it is subordinate and subservient,
and in a way of conformity and respect to the Laws of God already made by God,
and so as men may be Kings and Judges, though in other respects the Lord alone
be King and Judge. Esaias 33. 22. so may men also make just decrees, and be
Lawgivers. Again, Lawgivers are considered, either as Infallibly and
immediately inspired: such a one was Moses, Numb. 21. 18. or as bound indeed to
the Rules of God, which are of Infallible Inspiration, but not always
Infallibly carried out, according to those Rules, and so others in highest place
are Lawgivers, as where those Jewish Rulers long after Moses time, with whom
the civil Scepter was, they were Lawgivers, and long after David's time and
Solomon's (who had their inspirations) so far as the Scepter, or Higher Civil
power departed not from them, a Lawgiver was among them. Genesis 49. 10. Prove. 8.
15, 16. These Humane just decrees of highest Civil Rulers are by Christ.

Again, there is a power simply Ecclesiastical, respecting the decent, and
orderly carrying on of the worship of God, according to general Rules of the
Scripture, and the prescripts of holy prudence, left to the Churches liberty, 1
Cor. 14. 40. (though these constitutions are not so properly Laws but rather
are Ecclesiastical directions of order, and decorum, about external Rites,
and circumstances of worship,) which we grant, there is a Nomothetique power
about matters of Religion, which is merely Political and Civil, to which the
conclusion looks. There is a power supposed which is mixed, that is, partly
Ecclesiastical, and partly Civil, which some give to the Pope, as do some
Papists, some in name Prostestants, do give to Christian Princes; but this
confusion of the two powers and swords, we deny to be from the God of Order.

Fourthly, we distinguish of Laws about Religion.

They are considered either materially or Formally.

Concerning such Laws materially considered, they are either of such things
which are manifestly cross to divine Laws, which are the only Authentic and
presidentiall Laws, condemned in Jereboam and other wicked Princes, 1 Kings 12.
28. to the end; of such Laws see also Hos. 5. 11. Or they are Humane Sanctions
of the Laws of God, and of that which is according to those Laws which we
assert.

Secondly, Things according to the Word, properly respect either Fundamentalls,
or Circa-fundamentalls; matters bordering upon Fundamentalls, and
circumstantially in Religion, or matters respecting Religion, of greater or
lesser weight; we would not exclude either from being materials of Humane
Civil Sanctions. 3. Matters of Religion are either such as are manifestly in
the Word, or such, which though in thmeselves, in the word, and grounds of it,
yet not so clearly, but very disputably; the regulated Magistrates ordinate
Power, extends to deal about both, only in a different manner. 4 Disputable
matters in Religion are, either such which are so really and in themselves, or
so only Imaginarily and merely from Humane defects and corruptions, as when
not so to the most and best Judgments of the ablest Saints and servants of
God, but to some few, and that either through weakness of Judgment, or through
sophistical argumentations of men of corrupt minds, or through gross neglects
and contempts of means of Instruction; these also admit of several
Considerations in Political times about matters of Religion.

Secondly, Concerning such Laws about Religion formally considered, we
distinguish. They are either such which are made of equal Authority with the
Word, and such which of and in themselves do bind Conscience, which Popish
Tenent we abhor; or they are such which are no other but humane Civil
Sanctions, and Ratifications, and Promulgations of Divine Laws, commanding, or
forbidding what the Law or Word of God, either expressly, or by just consequence
commands, or forbids, so far as openly acted by the outward man, with
suitable humane rewards or punishments annexed, binding Conscience only so far
as the Word it self allowing the Authority, and the Laws likewise made by the
Authority binds the same. This we assert.

Again, Humane Laws this way, are either such as being made by Civil
Authority, yet are supposed to come from some Church power residing in the said
Authority, and so to be by virtue of that Civil Authority Properly and
Formally Ecclesiastical Laws, which we deny: Or such which are materially, and
Objectively Ecclesiastical Laws, that is, political, humane Sanctions of Gods
Rules and Laws respecting the Church also, and Church Ordinances, which we
assert. And now having laid down these distinctions, let us come to some
Conclusions about this weighty matter.

1. Negatively.

Concl. 1. Highest Civil Authority may not impose what form of Worship, or of
Church Discipline, they please, as Erastus and some others since him affirm:
For both the Matter of the Worship of God, and the Means of Worship, whether
Church Discipline, or any other Means, are limited by our own Lawgiver to such
and such Rules and Laws made to hand, and not left to any humane power to make
it way. Neither may any humane powers, which are his Ministers, transgress the
Laws of this their Supreme, either by adding thereto any Law of their own, or
taking therefrom; they may, and must in their way, ^^d place, look to the due
execution of his Laws, but foist in no new Law of their own, in things of his
Worship. Hence that Injunction given to Joshuah as Judge and Ruler, Joshuah 1.
7, 8. Observe to do according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded
thee: He is therefore to look to the keeping of both Tables, commanded of God
by Moses; but must not turn from it to the right hand, or to the left. So
gentle Princes must first be instructed (even in the Laws and mind of Christ)
and then serve him as their Lord, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. God rooted out Jeroboam for
this, and Israel for following such like Commandments, Hos. 5. 11. and
brandeth such Ordinances in such matters, which are not according to his Word,
but man's device and will, to be Will Worship, Col. 2.

Concl. 2. Civil Authority may not impose, either what circumstantials, or
significant Ceremonies in Religion they please, such significant Washings
enjoined are forbidden, Mat. 15. 2. 7. 9. God left not them of old, either in
matter of a very Curtain, or the like, in the Tabernacle; or in the matter of
any significant Ceremony to their own wits; but if he thought meet of teaching
them any such way, he himself told them thereof, and required it of them, as in
those significant Ceremonies at the Passover at first, of eating it with their
loins girt, with staves in their hand, and shoes on their feet, to note their
hasty coming out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 11. And in that of the Plates for a
covering of the Altar, made of those rebellious ones; Censers, to signify,
that none not of Aarons house, might ever after that dare to offer Incense,
Numb. 16. 38, 40. And of like significancy was Aarons Rod that budded, Numb.
17. 10.

Concl. 3. Highest Civil Authority has no power formally Ecclesiastical to
make Church Laws, so called, under pain of Excommunication, to be by virtue of
their Authority executed by Ecclesiastical persons, as those who should in
their names summon, examine, and censure such as will not actually conform to
such orders. This confusion of Civil, and Church Power, and tyrannical abuse
of Civil Authority, will bring confusions upon States, which against all
admonitions of Gods faithful servants persist therein, as it did to Jeroboam
and his house, and all the rest of Isreal's Princes which went in his footsteps,
Zach. 11. 14, 15. and 13. 4. 9. 12. 20.

Concl. 4. No Civil Authority can by their Laws free any of their subjects,
either from Ecclesiastical duties to the Church, as Members thereof; or from
Church censures; nay, they cannot by any such Law exempt themselves, if Church
members, from any such Church duty or censure, much less can they exempt
others; those just duties and censures being authorized by the Sovereign
Authority of Christ, as King, and Lawgiver of his Church, and laying that bond
upon Conscience, which no humane, no nor Angelical power can unloose, though
they should assay it. Christ requiring Peter and John to preach him to the
people, the Jewish Rulers forbid them, it is not right in Gods sight,
themselves being Judges, that man should be obeyed rather than God, Acts 4. 18,
19, 20. This Christ condemned of old in them, that by their Injunctions would
invalidate the Commandments of God, Mat. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Concl. 5. Highest Civil Authority cannot make any Laws about Religion, which
do formally, and as they are humane Laws, bind their subjects Consciences.

For first, neither men, nor any Laws of men, can loose Conscience from any
guilt upon it, and therefore neither can they by any power of theirs bind it
under guilt; For e^usdem est ligans and solvens: Who can forgive sins but God
only? Mat. 9. 6. Who can ease the heart of its burdens, or from its yoaks,
but Christ only? Math. 11. 28. Who can open that door but Christ alone? who
can shut it, and when he shuts it, no man can open, Rev. 2. 7. Church
Officers, with their Churches may indeed bind and loose in earth, remit or
retain sins ministerially and declaratively, but not effectually and regally,
Mat. 18. 18. John 20. 23.

2. Because men cannot take cognizance of the obedience, or disobedience of
Conscience it self, within it self, to their Laws; nor can any humane testimony
from without be produced, how Conscience does carry it in its internal acts;
God and Christ only know, and try the heart, Jer. 17. 10. Revel. 2. 23. No man
knows what is in man but the spirit of man, 1 Cor. 2. 11.

3. Because man cannot force either the mind or heart, wherein Conscience
partaketh, either to think. judge, or choose after their minds or Laws, other
than what themselves choose; though they may force the outward man.
Nebuchadnezar does his pleasure with their bodies, in Dan. 3. yet ver. 17, 18.
they will not serve his Gods.

4. Because men cannot reward Conscience with any reward suitable to it, as
inward peace or comfort, etc. in case of obedience to their Laws: God alone
gives soul-comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3.

5. Because men cannot punish the soul and spirit, thought it should disobey
their commands, they can only kill the body, but not hurt the soul, Mat. 10.
28.

6. Because if men's Laws of themselves bound Conscience, then at the day of
Judgment men should not be judged only according to the Word and Laws of God
and Christ, as is affirmed Romans 2. 14, 15. John 12. 48. but according to man's
Laws also.

7. Because it is possible that men's Laws though supposed to be according to
the Word, yet they may not really be so: Now if men's Laws did formally bind
Conscience, then men should stand Conscience bound sometimes to transgress the
rules of Gods Word, by virtue whereof alone all man's Laws do bind. True it is,
that Romans 11. 3. Subjects are to obey Authority for conscience sake, but not as
out of Conscience to man's Laws, as humane, but by virtue of the fifth
Commandment requiring honor of subjection to their Superiors lawful
Authority and commands, and by virtue of any such particular Scriptures upon
which any particular Laws of Churches are grounded.

Now let us lay down some positive Conclusions about this Nomothetique power.

Concl. 1. First then in the general we affirm, That highest Civil Authority in
a Religious State may make Political Laws, properly such, about matters of
Religion, and matters respecting the Churches of Christ.

R. 1. Because supreme Political, or Civil power of Authoritative keeping the
first, as well as the second Table, is the Civil Rulers both duty and
privilege, But Nomothetique power about both Tables is such supreme power; And
hence the King and Judge in Israel, is charged with keeping the whole Law of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 17 19. and 1 Kings 2. 3. Josh. 1. 7, 8. Hence that Coronation
Ceremony of delivering the Book of God into the Kings hand, when to be
installed in his Throne, 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. Hence 2 Chronicles. 13. 10, 11. For we
(even King Abijam and the rest of his Princes, and others) keep the charge of
the Lord our God, but you have forsaken him. Why, did Abijah minister to the
Lord in burning Incense? etc. No, he expressly says the Priests did it. How did
he and the rest of the Civil State keep the charge of the Lord? Surely in a way
opposite to Jeroboam, and the Israelite states forsaking the same (as the
opposition of the one to the other in the Context shows) now this was by
Authoritative commanding the setting up of corrupt Priests, and injoyning the
corrupt Worship and Service, and inhibiting, deposing, and banishing the
fruitful Ministers of Gods appointing, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. and chap. 11. 14, 15.
and Hos. 5. 1, 2. 11. compared. Abija's keeping then with his Princes that
charge of God, was by a contrary Improvement of his Authority, in establishing
the matters of God and of the Church, and of the Ministry thereof, and the
Ebrew text is Emphaticall. We have kept ((...)) the keeping of the Lord our
God. God required the highest Ruler to look to it ((...)) that he keep all the
words of this Law: King Abijah says, we have kept the keeping of the Lord our
God, or the keeping of Gods Laws, enjoined us by the Lord our God. Now
Nomothetique power in matters of the first, as well as the second Table, is
supreme Political power in keeping of both Tables; Ergo, Nomothetique power in
matters of both Tables, is the Civil Rulers dignity and duty, why else is the
Law-giving power Indefinitely considered, respecting matters of Religion or
righteousness, annexed by God to the Scepter, or highest Civil power, in a
State of his own appointment, Genesis 49. 10. Papists indeed generally give
Nomothetique power in matters of the Church, and of Religion, to the Pope, as
the head of the Church: and no wonder, in that they give him Supremacy above
highest Civil Rulers, as Emperors or Princes; other Papists give that
Legislative power to the Church Representative in Synods: and no wonder, in
that they exempt the Clergy from the secular Arm, unless first degraded, and
delivered to them by the Pope: but we that know that Church Officers and
Members, as that of Rome was, must be subject to higher powers, and that for
conscience sake to the Lord, who has so Marshalled (as the Greek word bears
it) them and us, making them as Laws. in an Army to lead us the way, and
(according to this great General of the fields order) Politically to choose
out our way for us, Job 29. 25. Romans 13. 12. we may have learnt better things.
We know that when God commended his Laws about Religion at first to his People,
allthough he had Aaron the High Priest, as well as Moses the highest Magistrate
before him, yet Aaron must not promulge those Laws, and give them in charge
Autoritatively to be kept, or else in such and such cases to be corporally
punished; but Moses the Magistrate is chosen to be the man, Manifestly showing
thereby, that the care of Civil Injoyning and ordering the matters of God,
formerly enjoined by himself, is committed by God to the chief Magistrate, and
to no other; when Moses was dead and Aaron both, God took the like course, he
lays not the charge of highest Political keeping both tables (even all his
Law) upon Eleazar the high Priest, or upon the rest of his Brethren with him;
but upon Joshua the chief Judge and Civil Ruler, Josh. 1. 7, 8.

R. 2. If Highest Civil power may, and must root out all abusive practice, yea
Monuments of Religion, then may they make Edicts and decrees to that end, with
reference to Civil punishments of such as maintain or uphold them; But the
former is true, therefore the later. The proposition is evident, since the
Political Humane Law must Politically and legally give force and Authority to
such proceedings, and leave the Actors and Abettors the more inexcusable. The
Assumption is evident, by the rule of Gods proceeding in Church-Reformations,
Esaias 1. 25. God says there to the Church, I will partly purge away thy dross,
and take away all thy Tin: even all Church corruptions and corrupt mixtures in
Religion; what course will God take for this end? he says, verse 26. I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning,
after that, etc. they should be then such as their first Judges were, Moses,
Joshua, etc. who were zealous that way, Exodus 32. Numb. 22* and such like as
their first Sanhedrin of 70 Elders, Numb. 11. what such Godly Rulers do, God
says he does, I will take away all thy Tin.

3. R. If Highest Civil Authority ought to repeal persecuting Laws, respecting
Religion, and so free their Subjects from being any more liable to punishment
in neglect thereof, then may they make Laws in matters of Religion; But the
former is true Ergo, the latter. The consequence of the proposition appears,
in that it must be one and the same power to make Laws about Religion, or the
Church, as to unmake Laws about the same, or to repeal them; nor can a Law be
legally or regularly repealed, but by a Law of Equal Authority with the
Former; the Assumption we have all cause thankfully to acknowledge to Gods
praise, in the Laws of Edward the sixth, of Q. Elizabeth, and of this present
Parliament of England, besides those of other godly Reforming States.

4. R. If Civil Authority may make Laws about Religion and the Church, to
encourage or reward the same with Civil favors, who shall observe the same,
then may they make Coercive Laws with reference to Civil punishments to such
as transgress the same; but the former is true, Ergo, the consequence
appears, in that it is the work of the same civil power to render praise to
Public commanded weldoing, to be in a like Authorative way, a terror to evil
doers, Romans 13. 3. 4. the Assumption none will deny, if they would; Its
Scripture proof, witness the example of Darius the Mede, Dan. 6. 26. 5. of
Cyrus the first Ezera. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. so of that other Darius, Ezra 6. and
Artaxerses, Ezra 7.

5. R. If Civil Authority may not make such Laws with reference to Civil
punishments or rewards, to ratefie what the Lord that way Injoyneth or
forbideth in Religion, it is because therein they either usurp Church Power or
transgress some rule of God; but they do neither thereby, Ergo, the Assumption
is proved thus: they usurp not Church Power therein, because what ever the
Church may do, in a Church way, is not now the question, but to be sure the
Church can make nothing like a Law, in any Civil and Political way, or with
reference to Civil rewards or punishments, and what rule of God they
transgress, is yet to be instanced in.

6. R. Bcause if not alone particular Ministers, but a very Synod and Assembly
of the Officers of the Churches in a Religious State; who in an ordinary and
oderly way, are to guide and lead the godly Civil Rulers, and Ecclesiastically
to determine what is the mind of God, touching matters of Religion, about which
their Rulers are to make Laws, if such an Assembly (I say) should be corrupt in
the Major part of it, who must Authoratatively reduce them into order? not an
Universal Bishop as the Pope, nor an ecumenicall Counsel, which is scarce
Imaginable to be said now adays; Nor the Minor part of the Church Officers
there met, or of their Churches to whom they do belong: The Minor part being in
Foro externo and humane, the weaker and lesser force and weight, and since in a
Church Way they cannot do it, by way of other force, they must not assay it.
They may not use the temporal sword, as they are either Churches, or as
Ecclesiastical Synods, Math. 26. 53. now the Civil Magistrate, or none upon
Earth, in an orderly way must help, and if the Civil Magistrate legally help
and regularly, then by Virtue of some State-Law provided for that purpose: Yea
if such a Synod should in the Major part of them make decrees flatly cross to
the word of God, they must make Civil Laws to make them null, if not one or
two, but an Assembly, of the Nurses of the Churches children, should combine
together to prison them, as a very Kennell of Wolves, or a company of Foxes
Agree to destroy the Lambs of the Flock, these Political Nurse-fathers, Esaias
25. 12. And Shepherds, Mich. 7. 5. must help against such mischiefs
seasonably, and provide to restrain the same, by holsom Laws, Edicts, and the
like; and suitable punishments executed.

Object.
Yea, but Civil Authority may be Corrupt.

Ans.
True says, Reverend Mr. Beaza (lib. de haereticis Magistratu puniendis) For
the Churches suffering for sins provoking to that Judgment, and for trial for
such as are godly; but in the mean space (says he) For fear of Tyranny, to
spoil the Magistrate of one Chief part of his Jurisdiction, and leaving the
Ordinary Remedy to look for an extraordinary one is not good: with diverse other
passages to like purpose.

R. 7. Because the rule of Relates requires, that those to whom we are
Politically subject, as to the highest Civil power; do in like sort as we are
subject to them, give forth Laws for our Spiritual and Ecclesiastical good,
or restraint of the contrary evil, as under a Civll respect, and coming under
their Cognizance, but to highest Civil Authority, are all sorts, Churches,
Members, or Officers of Churches, etc. even every soul, to be subject in a
Political way; Therefore in the like Political way, may they make such Laws
for the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical good of Churches, and of their Officers
and Members, and for the restraint of the contrary evils; both propositions
are grounded upon, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Let us now briefly Answer, what some may object against this Conclusion.

Obj.
1. We have one Lawgiver in the matters of God and the Church, and therefore
not so many as highest Civil Courts to give us Laws that way.

Ans.
True, we have one only Lawgiver, who is Absolute, Supreme, and Infallable,
which alone gives us forth Laws, in matters of God, or the Church; Nor may any
other give forth other Laws that way for substance, then what he first
delivers to them. Yet this hinders not, but this only Lawgiver having
delivered his royal mind and will therein, that other Political Ministers of
his, and whom he substituteth under him, to look to it that these Laws be
executed, should, yea and ought, in their Political way to ratefie, and
promulge these Laws of their Sovereign and ours, and improve their utmost
power, Politically to encourage, such as shall, Externally at lest, observe the
same, or discourage such, as shall openly, and obstinately transgress the same.
Civil Magistrates are Earthly Gods, under the God of Heaven and Earth, Psalm.
82. and are according to God to improve all their power for God, and against
open scandalous sinners against him; And one chief part of their power, being
Legislative power, they are in their Political way to improve that power for
God, as well as to put forth their remunarative, or vindicative power, actually
for God, in matters of God or man, of Religion or Righteousness, of the first
or second Table, both Tables being committed to their keeping, as their
Political charge.

2. God only gave Laws to his Church in matters of God, of old, and was the
only Lawgiver, yet allowed the name of Lawgiver, even in respect of Religion
also to Moses the highest Magistrate, Number. 21. 18.

Object.
True you will say, he was immediately inspired by God that way, and so are not
others.

Ans.
Yea but this proves, that Gods being the only Lawgiver to his Church, it
hinders not but that the Civil Magistrate under him, and from him, may and
must promulge his Laws, and that under penallties of Civil punishment; For God
inspired no other powers of old, than highest Civil power, to do that work
Secondly, though God were the only Lawgiver in matters of Religion and of the
Church, yet that hinders not, but that he allowed others in highest Civil
Authority to make Laws, and Orders, and Edicts, respecting Religion, and that
under penallty of Civil punishment. Honor that Order solemnly made, and
engaged unto by Asah, and that General Assembly of the Heads, and Members of
that Kingdom, that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be
put to death, 2 Cron. 15. 13. Yet were not these immedtately inspired, as was
Moses. Ioash also gave forth royal Edicts, and made Proclamction of it,
concerning collections to be made for the house of God, Politically ratifying,
and promulging a Law of Moses in substance. Exodus 30. 13, 14, 15, 16. And 2
Cron. 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. etc. Albeit David might, from immediate Inspiration
from God, or direction from some Inspired Prophet, make those Decrees and
Orders about Church matters, matters of Gods Worship, of the Ministry, of
Discipline, and the like, mentioned 1 Chronicles. 16. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. and chapter
23. and 24. and 24. and 2. Yet Hezekiah, who added his political Sanction to
those orders, he was not so inspired, 2 Chronicles. 29. 25. God made a Law about
Ministers maintenance by Tyths and the like; But Hezekiah also adds his
Civil Sanction thereto, 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. and causes his Edict to be spread, or
published, or promulged, ver. 5. The like Magistraticall power did Nehemiah put
forth, in making Orders about Ministers Maintenance, Neh. 13. 13. and about
the Sanctification of the Sabbath, threatening Civil punishment to the
transgressors thereof, ver. 19. I commanded to shut the gates, and charged that
they should not be opened till after the Sabbath; and ver. 21. he threatens to
lay hands on them that shall persist to profane the Sabbath; and ver. 22. he
charge the Levites to look to the sanctification of the Sabbath; and to make
it appear, that though God had made a Law about Sanctification of the Sabbath,
yet he as a chief Civil Ruler, did but his duty in making Political Orders
about the same; he pleads with God, ver. 22. Remember me O my God for this.
It was a Political Order and Decree which the State of Niniveh made for that
penitential Fasting, and seeking of God, Jonah 3. 7. The King caused it to be
proclaimed and published throughout Niniveh (by the Decree of the King and his
Nobles) saying, let neither man nor beast taste any thing, let man and beast put
on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, let them every one turn from his evil
way, etc. And how well God took this, see ver. 10. For hereupon he repented him
of the evil that he had said, etc. The like political Injunction of Fasting
and Prayer by good King Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles 20. And the like political Act in
matters of Religion see in the State of Judah in Hezekiahs time, who having
first called a Council of State about it, 2 Chronicles. 32. 2. afterward, they,
ver. 5. established a Decree to make proclamation through all Israel, that they
should come to keep the Passover at Jerusalem; though upon just reason given,
ver. 2. 3. it were not the very same month appointed in the Law of God; and
how acceptably God took this, the sequel showed. Mordecai also having by Queen
Easters means been advanced to highest Authority under Ahashuerus, he makes a
solemn Law, and standing Decree, about solemn yearly days and exercises of the
duties of Thanksgiving, to be observed by all the Jews, Est. 9. 30, 31, 32. and
he sent letters unto all the Jews, etc. to confirm those days of Purim in the
times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew, and Ester the Queen had
enjoined them, etc. of which see more, ver. 21, 22, 23. and is commended for
it, Est. 10. 3. It was a Law, a coersive Law about matters of Religion, under
Civil penalties to those that transgressed it, which Artaxerxes made, Ezr. 7.
26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God (which all know commands matters
of Religion as well as Righteousness) and the Law of the King (respecting it
commanded by God, in reference to his house, the Temple, and Worship of it,
etc. mentioned ver. 23.) let judgment be speedily executed upon him, whether
it be to death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
imprisonment. And lest any should say, that he did this of his own head, ver.
27. Its thankfully acknowledged to be of God; Blessed be the Lord God of our
fathers, which has put such a thing as this into the heart of the King, to
beautify the house of the Lord, which is at Jerusalem: Darius also makes a
political Decree respecting Religion professed and practiced by his subjects
the Jews, and that under penalty of Civil punishment to such as shall any way
alter his Decree, Ezr. 6. 11. compared with ver. 8, 9, 10. this is recorded in
his commendations. That was a political Order and Decree made by that other
Darius the Mede, for which he is commended in Dan. 6. 23. [It is about matters
of Religion] I make a Decree, that in eveery dominion of my Kingdom men tremble
and fear before the God of Daniel. That was a coersive Decree about matters of
Religion which Nebuchadnezzar made, under the penalty of Civil punishment, and
he is commended for it, Dan. 3. 28, 29. Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his servants
that trusted in him, etc. And therefore I make a Decree, that every People
Nation, and Language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses be made a
dunghill, because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort. So
that the Conclusion is but further strengthened by this Argument. That which
the Lord himself has either put higher Civil powers upon, or has owned, or
commended either in such as were within, or without the Church, in so doing;
that must needs be according unto the Mind and Word of God: But the exercise of
Legislative power, by higher Civil powers, about matters of Religion (yea and
that in a coersive way, and under Civil penalties) is that which God has put
into the hearts of such higher powers, or has owned, and commended in them (as
the Instances before do declare) therefore the use of Legislative power by
Civil power, about matters of Religion, yea in a coersive way, it is according
to the Mind and Word of God.

And this now said, may help also to take off another Objection.

Obj. 2.
Some object, That then Heathen Kings, as they are Civil Magistrates, have
right to make Laws about matters of Religion, and of the Church, although not
able to do it, not knowing the Matters of God or of Churches, and not Members
of the Church, and so not censurable by the Church; which were to make a
King-Pope to give out Laws to the Church, and not to be censured by the Church.

Ans. 1.
We especially intend the Conclusion, of a Magistrate regulated according to
the rules of the Word of God, whose Minister he is; and so the Civil
Magistrate is no Heathen, or Ignorant of Religion, or out of the Church. If he
be otherwise, it is his sin that way. See more page 48.

2. Although the Civil Magistrate fail in that part of his duty, that he
knows not the Lord who girdeth him with that Princely girdle, yet that sin in
that particular does not wholly Is. 45. 1. 4. 5.
excuse another sin of omission of another duty, namely Authoritatively to keep
the first, second, third, or fourth Commandment. Rulers may be Ignorant of
many matters of the second Table, and disabled so far, from making good
coersive Laws about them, yet both are sins of omission. In both he has a
right essentially, and actu primo; but in respect to the execution of that
Nomothetique right in reference to matters of the first or second Table, he
has that power virtually only.

3. Heathen Kings not of the Church, and not censurable by the Church, may give
out Laws to the Churches under their jurisdiction, touching matters of
Righteousness and Honesty; yet that makes them not King-Popes, no more does
the other. Nebuchadnezzar might as commendably make a coerfive Law upon civil
penalty against the Jewish Church Officers or Members under his jurisdiction,
as execute any such corporal punishment upon them both for false Doctrines
vented by them under pretense of Gods name (a sin against the first Table) as
also for committing Adultery; for a Law made that way, does leave the subject
more inexcusable, and had been no other than a political Legislative Sanction
of the Laws of God, whose Minister (considered as a civil Magistrate) he was;
the Lord himself by law having made such sins capital, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Lev. 20.
10. Now that exemplary act of Justice in Nebuchadnezzar upon a member of the
Jewish church under his jurisdiction, as well for false Doctrine as for
Adultery, is renowned, and a form of Imprecation thence borrowed, Ier. 29. 22,
23. The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon
roasted in the fire, because they committed adultery with their neighbors
wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I commanded them not, even
I know, and am a witness, says the Lord.

4. When Heathen Kings come to know their duty in matters of the first, or
second Table, and accordingly they establish Laws about Religion, they do it
not now by any new right, when Christians and knowing Christ, no more than a
Parent becoming Christian, and knowing Christ, gives out parentall commands to
his children, with respect to bodily corrections, if they do not such and such
Religious duties, does this, by any new Parentall right which he had not
intrinsically when Pagan: The case is alike in those Fathers of the
Commonwealth.

5. Heathen Kings, whilst Heathen, may and must make Laws about the matters of
God and his Religion, so far as their right guiding light extends; else
should they hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; now its certainer, that
they whilst Heathen have, or may have much light, so as to see into matters of
the true God, and of his Religion.

1. By the light of Nature Heathens know, and have known that there is a God,
that he is one God, that he has made all men as his Offspring, that he is to
be worshipped according to his spiritual nature, that he is to be called upon,
that he is not to be blasphemed, nor belyed, nor called to witness in a false
thing, that images of him are not to be made, that men are not to take his name
in vain by rash, or false Oaths, that some time is to be set apart for his
Worship, and the like, Romans 2. 14, 15. By the work of the Law within their
hearts, many things contained in the Law, may be, and have been done.

2. The light of Gods Works, both of Creation and Providence, may help them
much this way, Romans 1. 18, 19, 20. see more Ezekiel. 36. 23. 36. and 38. 16. and
39. 21. 28. The notable Providence of God rescuing by his Angel, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego from Nebuchadnezzars fury, for not worshipping his Idol
of gold, made him make that coersive Law mentioned Dan. 3. 28, 29. Therefore I
make a Decree, that whosoever shall speak amiss of the God of Shadrach, etc.
shall he cut in pieces, etc.

3. They may have some common light of the Spirit that way, communicated by
means of some of their godly subjects, whence such expressions of that Darius
mentioned in Ezra 6. 10, 12. and no wonder then he make that penal Decree,
ver. 11. Also I have made a Decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let
timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and let his house be made a Dunghill.

4. None will deny to Pagan Princes a right of Authoritative praising, and
encouragement of such as do well, in regard of duties either of the first or
second Table, to which also God in special wise stirred up the spirit of Cyrus
the first, Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Though he knew not the Lord savingly then,
Isaiah 45. 4. and 44. 28. compared. And why shall not Heathen Rulers have a
right with like latitude of respect to first or second Table, to be a terror to
evil doers, by making coersive Laws for that end, so far at least as their
right guided light extends; yea we have showed before diverse of them are in
Scripture commended for this. So that the truth hereby is further strengthened
thus.

That which Heathen States, Kings and Princes remaining Heathen, have done, and
been commended in Scripture for doing it, as Princes, or higher Civil powers,
that must needs be essential to them as higher Civil powers, and imitable by
others in like Civil power; but (as has been formerly declared) such use of
Legislative power, by Heathen Higher powers, as Higher powers, making coercive
Decrees in matters of the Religion of the true God, has been commended in
Scripture; therefore such use of the Civil Legislative power is essential
even to Heathen Rulers, and imitable by all others in like Civil power.

Obj. 3.
God has left others to Govern and Feed his Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 8,
11, 12, 13.
who must give an account of their souls: And the Civil Magistrate is not
among those Officers which Christ has left to edify his Church; nor is he a
Preacher or Expositor of the Scriptures: What should the Civil Magistrate do
governing them, or seeking to edify them, or expound Scriptures to them by
such Law-making in matters of Religion, or of the Church?

Ans. 1.
Church Governors are in an Ecclesiastical way to watch over, and censure
Church members for matters of the second Table, as well as those of the first
Table; and by this Argument therefore Civil Rulers may not watch over, govern,
and censure Church Members, in matters of the second Table neither, because
there are others by Office to do it Ecclesiastically, and he is not reckoned
among them.

2. Civil Magistrates, as well as Church Officers are Rulers, Elders,
Watchmen, Shepherds over Gods people and flock, and therefore in a Political
way are to rule over, watch over, yea to feed the people of God, and to hold
forth the same by their wholesome Laws, and Executions in matters respecting both
Tables.

3. The Magistrates end being matters of Piety as well as Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1,
2. And he being a Minister of God, even to Gentile Churches, Officers, and
Members for their good, and so most of all for their best Spiritual good, as
externally held forth, helped, exercised, or expressed, Romans 13. 4. and being
charged with the things of God and the Church, 2 Chronicles. 13. 10, 11. he is in
his political way to attend his charge, to look to the external fulfilling of
it (at least) yea in so far is he charged as a political Father and Shepherd
with his incharged, or Christian subjects, as his political children and flock
committed to him, Ezekiel. 34. 9, 10. I will require my sheep at the Shepherds
hands; the Princes as well as the Priests; hence the sins of Church Members in
Church matters are charged upon their Civil Rulers, as their sins, when the
people neglect their Ministers, Nehemiah 13. 10. he chid the Rulers, ver. 11.
saying, why is the house of God forsaken? when there was such buying and
selling upon the Sabbath, ver. 15, 16. Nehemiah says, ver. 17. Then I
contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what evil thing is
this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath.

4. Their Laws are not Ecclesiastical expositions of Scripture, but the mind
of God in the Scriptures, being in ordinary and orderly way first sought and
had from the body of the ablest, and best guides, and lights in the Churches in
their Jurisdiction, conclusively declaring the Law and rule of God, touching
the question, their Laws about matters of Religion, are Civil Sanctions, under
Civil rewards or punishments, of such Laws of God so declared and commended to
them. And by the execution of such Political Laws, others may and should be
edified, honor, and fear, and learn to do no more so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13. 10,
11. Some delinquents themselves, even some false teachers, shall acknowledge as
much, thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. Zac. 13. 4, 5, 6.

4. Object.
The Church has sufficient power to attain her ends within her self, what need
Civil coercive power in matters of the Church?

Ans. 1.
The Church has that power in matters also of the second Table, sufficient to
attain its ends, offending Members therein, yet none will therefore make Civil
coercive power in such matters needless. 2. The State as well as Church is
injured, by witchcraft, by perjury, by schism, and other sins, against the
first Table, and notwithstanding the Churches power, Ecclesiastically to attain
her ends, the State must have its defensive and vindicative power, Politically
to attain its ends too, the good of safety and peace of the Subjects; and so
both perfect within their own Spears. 3. When the Church has gone to her
utmost extent of power in casting out Blasphemers, Seducers, Perjured persons,
Scismaticks, etc. yet they may do more hurt in Church and Commonwealth than
before, unless Civil coercive power help; The Church may attain her ends in an
Ecclesiastiall way and yet the Civil State not hindered of attaining its ends
in a Political way, but both polities be reciprocally helpful to each other;
The Civil polity ratifying the Churches cases, by Civil Laws and punishments,
the Ecclesiastical polity lending help to State and Commonwealth cases, by
declaring the Laws and rules of God, and by reasonable administration of Church
censures upon her delinquent Members.

Conc. 2. That in matters of Religion which are doubtful, and not so directly,
plainly and expressly laid down in the word, Civil Authority, in purer times of
the Church, must call for the Counsel of the Churches, at least of the
Officers of the Churches under their Jurisdiction; who are most faithful and
able to give Counsel therein; and they are bound in conscience to follow what
they according to God do clear up to be his mind, in all such matters of
weight, about which they do inquire, not alone as that which such a Synod or
Assembly of Church Officers do determine that way, is for the matter of it
according to God, but as it is given in the way of an Ordinance; Namely of the
Counsel of a Synod of the Officers and Ministers of the Churches, whereof
they, as regulated Magistrates, are Members; Whose Counsels unto them are
Ecclesiastically Authoritative Counsels. And herein also Godly Rulers do lick
the dust of the Churches feet, in attending faithfully to the well grounded
Counsels of their Pastors, not alone distributively given in their respective
Churches, but collectively also, when jointly delivered in a Synod. Herein also
Church power Ministers help to the Commonwealth, Ecclesiastically, as the
Commonwealth administreth help to the Churches Civilly, in exerting its
Political power, in framing Civil Laws answerably to their Counsels. Deuteronomy.
18. to 13. The Counsel and sentence of the Priest, or Council and Assembly of
Priests, delivering the mind of God in doubtful matters, was to be required
and followed. Joshua the chief Magistrate must stand before Eleazar the Priest,
who should ask Counsel after the Judgment of Urim, and according to his word
from the Lord, they were to go out and in, Number. 27. 21. Hence Iehoshaphat
(according to that Law for that end, Deu. 17. 89, 10.) Places at Jerusalem,
some of the Priests and Levites and chief Fathers of Israel, to be for the
Judgment of the Lord, and for controversy, not merely in point of doubtful
actions, as between blood and blood, 2 Cron. 19. 10. But in point of doubtful
rules, according to which Civil decreees and sentences also were to be
regulated: causes between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments. Only
that Council is limited to Gods word, they must still warn them, that none
Trespass against the Lord. True it is, something peculiarly Jewish was in this,
whence that Law of Capital punishment, to such as presumptuously disobeyed
their sentence, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. But there is something also for our learning and
instruction held forth therein, not alone respecting Christ our blessed Prophet
and high Priest and Counselor, Esaias 9. 6. Which Prophet, whosoever shall not
hear, shall be destroyed from his People, Acts 3. 22, 23. But respecting the
Ministers of the Churches of the Gospel, from whom the mind and sentence of
God, in controversall cases, is to be sought by all sorts, and being found, is
to be followed by all sorts, whence that, by allusion to the Priests under the
Law, yet respecting the time of the Gospel, Ezekiel. 44. 23, 24. And the (id est
the Priests) shall teach my People (id est Members of Churches, whether Civil
Rulers or Subjects) the difference between the clean and unclean, and cause men
to discern between clean and unclean. And in controversy, they shall stand in
Judgment, and they shall Judge it (only with this limitation) According to my
Judgments, where by Judging he intends the Ecclesiastical Judging, which
appertains to Church Officers, and not a Civil and Political Judging, which
is peculiar to the Civil Magistrate, of which more anon.

Conc. 3. That Civil rulers are to call upon the Ministers of the Churches
under their Jurisdiction, to expound the whole Counsel of God to their people,
especially about such matters of Religion, or of the Church, as they are by Law
to Establish. Hence that Act of Iehoshaphat, sending abroad the Priests and
Levites to teach those Cities the mind and Counsel of God, what was according,
or repugnant thereunto, before he sent out Civil Judges. to deal in their
Judicial way with them, concerning matters of that nature, 2 Chronicles 17. 7, 8,
9. compared with Chapter 19. 4, 5, 6.

Conc. 4. That in all matters of Religion, or of the Church, the Laws which
Civil Authority do establish, they must establish them, by, and with the
consent of the people, either in themselves or their representatives, this
strengthening their Political Laws, that they bind Scientes and Volentes. As
Asah willing to make a binding Capital Law about Religion, by his Authority he
summoneth the people, with whose consent it is made, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. He
gathered all Judah and Benjamin, etc. and they decreed that, verse. 13. That
whosoever would not seek the Lord should be slain. So Jonah 3. 4. Its said, the
people believed the Lord and proclaimed a Fast, but verse. 7. that business of
the decree for the Fast, is applied to the King as his Act, by the consent of
the Nobles, or chief heads of the people, and so representing the people; by
the light and Law of Nature, these Pagan Ninevites learned this to be an
orderly way of making such like decrees, in such like matters of Religion it
self; whence also was that course taken, in the case of a coercive Law to be
made, about a business of Religious worship, for the matter of it (allthough in
the form of that worship to be decreed of, it were devilish) It is to be made,
by the representative Estates of the Persian Kingdom, which being a Kingdom,
was then to be established by the King. Dan. 6. 7, 8, 9, The rulers of thy
Kingdom, the Officers and Governors, the Counselors and Dukes have consulted
together, to make a decree for the King, and to establish a Statute, that
whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man, for thirty dais, save of
thee, O King, he shall be cast into the Den of Lions. Now O King, confirm the
decree, etc. When Iehoshaphat was to make that Order, about the particular
matter of Religion, He consulteth with the people, 2 Chronicles. 20. 21. And When he
had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the Lord, and that
should praise the beauty of holiness as they went before the Army, and to say,
Praise ye the Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever. Which may serve to take
off that offense of some, against political Laws to be made this way: because
it will be a forcing of Christian people in matters of Religion, since the Laws
which are made that way, are virtually and interpretatively made with their own
free consent; As made either by their own free consent personally, if not too
great a body to be ordinarily called together in one Assembly; or at least, by
their own free consent in their Representatives, where the body of the people
eannot ordinarily be called together to debate such matters, or express
personal consent to the Laws which Civil Authority do make about matters of
Religion or of the Church, which are in themselves doubtful, and not merely
made so by men's wiles and Satan's sleights; They must be made with great
latitude, and tender respects, to such as are really and truly tender in
conscience, even Political ^hepheards must not over-drive their Flock, and
such Lambs would be carried in their arms.

A fourth instruction from the Premises, if Civil Authority are so to restrain
and punish such matters, then are they in their Political way to Judge, which
things acted by the outward man in cases of Religion are contrary to the word,
and which are not; Else shall they sin in a high degree, in censuring
Politically that as contrary to the word, of which they have no right nor power
to determine politically, either one way or other. Job who was a right godly
man, Job 1. 1. and a man of chief Civil rule in this Country, as chap. 29. 7.
he had a chief place in the Gate in the seat of Judgment, verse 9 even Princes
kept silence, when he was to speak. He Judicially delivered the Fatherless,
verse 12. Brake the Laws of the wicked, verse 17. and verse 25. I chose out (or
as the Geneva Translation has it, I appointed out) their way, and sat as a
King in an army, as the General of the Field has with his Council of War,
being the highest Military power, chief Military Judgment, both what Military
Orders to make about the common Soldiery, and what courses are most
advantageous, or disadvantageous to the good of the whole, or what acts of the
Souldery are to be punished, or contrariwise encouraged, and what particular
rewards or punishments such or such particular facts of the Soldiery deserve,
in way of subordination and conformity unto the Laws of that higher Civil
power, whose Military Ministers they are; so have highest Civil Authority in
religious States the like highest political Judgment, what acts of the
outward man, respecting Religion are to be encouraged or discouraged in their
subjects, and in what way, and what orders to make for that end, so as in way
of general conformity, and subordination to the Laws of God and Christ, whose
Ministers they are, and so as may be warranted from the Word of God, either
expressly, or by just consequence. Job did not leave every one under his
authority to choose what way themselves pleased, or judged the best, either in
matters of Religion, or of Righteousness; but he in his authoritative
political way determined that for them; he appointed and chose out their way.
Nor does he mention this as any injustice in him, or as any tyrannical course
of his, but as one piece of his right guided political wisdom, justice, and
power, as the context shows; and this course he took is recorded in his
commendations, and as his comfort in his very trouble, before Moses his
Judicial or Ceremonial Laws were made; for after them that sacrifising so
approved of by God, chap. 42. had been unlawful to be performed by such as Job
was, who was not under that religious State, and Church polity of the Jews,
Levit. 17. 8, 9. It was a capital offense for any Jew or stranger among them
to offer sacrifice unless he brought it unto the door of the Tabernacle. See
more in the Notes of Junius and Tremellius upon the first of Job.

But for the further clearing of this from all gainsaying of others, let us
first lay down some distinctions, and then the conclusion respecting this.

1. Then there is the divine Rule of Judging, which is the Scripture; the Judge
of all Controversies; and the act of Judging, what is, or what is not according
to the Word. Herein quaeritur who is Judge.

2. There is an absolute, supreme, praetorian, and infallible Judge thereof,
which is no other but Jesus Christ, and his Spirit speaking in the Word, and
there is a visible, limited, subordinate, and Ministerial Judge, what is, or
what is not according to the Word; of which quaeritur who is Judge.

3. There is a more private Judging thereof, whether apprehensive, discretive,
directive, or corrective, proper to each particular Christian, in respect to
his own particular actions, and of which there is a public judgment of what
is, or what is not according to the Word; of which quaeritur.

4. There is an Ecclesiastical, and there is a Political, or Civil judging
of what is, or is not according to the Word. Ecclesiastical judging is either
by virtue of Office, defining Ecclesiastically what is the counsel of God, as
is that of Church Elders; or by virtue of Ecclesiastical deputation, and
designation, as that of the Synod and members of it, or by virtue of
Ecclesiastical union and communion, as that of the Church colectively, and the
members distributively considered, 1. Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise men.
Judge ye, the present quaere is of political Judging also.

5. Political Judging in such matters, is either that which is in the
political Lawmakers, whether in any stated, standing, higher Civil Office,
or otherwise, as in Parliamentary and General Courts or the like, or that
which is in higher Civil Officers in a state, we look at both.

6. Authoritative political Judgment, is either Definitive, Authoritatively
stating in a political way, what is or is not to be acted by the outward man,
in weightier matters of a religious State-concernment, whether of first or
second Table, or preceptive injoyning those political determinations, with
respect to Civil encouragements, or punishments; Both which acts of political
Judging are appliable to State-lawmakers; only de Iure, they are limeted to
the sole rule of Judging; even the whole Scripture.

7. There is a Judging what is true or false, to be believed, or not, simply,
as teaching and binding conscience with reference to Spiritual and Eternal
rewards: Which is the Ministers business officially, and each Christians work
privately and personally, and is not the Magistrates work, as a Magistrate.
There is a Judging what is to be professedly believed, and maintained, as true
or false, with reference to Civil rewards, or punishments; And thus the Civil
Magistrate Judges.

8. There is a Judging what is or not to be done by soul and body, both in
reference to inward sense, and Divine Approbation or rejection; Officially the
Ministers work, in a private directive and discretive way, each Christians
duty; There is a Judging what is or not to be acted or expressed by the outward
man, with reference to Civil rewards or punishments proper to Magistrates.

9. There is a Judgment what is or is not a Christians duty, either only as
Godly, or only as a Church member, diversely appliable to Churches,
Church-elders and private Christians, and there is a Judging what is or is not
the duty of a Member of a Christian State, as a member of that political
society, to be ordered or curbed thereby: Appliable to the Civil Magistrate.

Conc. 6. That regulateed Civil Magistrates and higher powers have not alone a
Judgment in Common with other Christians and Members of Churches considered as
Christians and Church members, what is, or is not according to the Word, but as
Civil higher powers. Magistrates also have a public political Judgment,
both Definitive and Preceptive, what is, or is not to be acted or expressed by
the outward man of each particular person whatsoever coming under their
jurisdiction: as those persons are politically subjected to that Civil state,
and as those their acts reflect upon the body politic.

This caution here annexed, that in all matters of difficulty respecting
Religion, higher Civil powers be not too sudden in determining the same,
without the best counsel first had therein, of those who are over them in the
Lord (according to the second Conclusion before mentioned, page 67.) ever
remembering that regulated Civil Magistrates may not politically determine that
to be according to the Word, in the letter or consequence of it, which is not
Scripture proof, Josh. 1. 7.

The Conclusion thus stated, and cautioned, I doubt not will stand as Scripture
proof, against all objections to the contrary.

R. 1. Because as much is yielded in effect, even by opposers of Magistraticall
Judging, as,

1. That they may make encouraging Laws in matters of God, and of the Church;
surely then they may so far determine of the matters of God, and the Church,
which they are, that they are to be encouraged as such matters of God, or of
his Church, and what encouragements are due to the same: And surely then they
are to be equal Judges in the other part of distributive Justice, respecting
matters of God, or of the Church; which fall under vindicative justice, as Romans
3. 3, 4. proves. The same Rulers are in a Civil way to be a terror to evil
works, which are in a like way to give praise to such as do well.

2. Its yielded in matters fundamental, and such as are set down in so many
words in Scripture; and why not as well to judge in other matters set down by
clear and necessary consequence, as are many weighty matters, reducible to the
four Commandments of the first Table, of which the Civil Magistrate is a
keeper, and had need be allowed his political Judgment, what is, or what is
not his political charge which he is to keeep.

3. It is yielded in matters of the second Table, yet that Table also is as
well a part of Scripture, and therefore all the duties expressly or consequently
therein commanded, and the prohibition of the sins in like sort forbidden in
those six Commandments, are so far forth Scripture as they are reducible to
Scripture, or to any Moral part of it. He is then a political Judge of that
which is, or which is not according to the Word in the latter, and why not upon
like grounds in the former; both being equal in this, that they are both Gods
Tables, Mat. 22. 38, 39. the second is like to this, says Christ: As Gods
Tables they are the Magistrates charge from God.

R. 2. Because supposing Churches in their Messengers, met in an assembly to
debate of matters of Religion, and in particular of the matters of the Church,
and the Civil Magistrate after their debates and determinations thereof, as
according to the Word, be desired to establish their Determinations for Laws,
now must the Civil regulate Magistrate either examine, and censure such
Conclusions of the Synod, whether they are, or are not Scripture proof, before
he do politically establish them for Laws, and so he is a political Judge,
what is, or what is not according to the Word; or he is not at all to meddle
thus to try and judge of such Decrees, whether according to the Word or not,
but to establish them at random, and at a peradventure, upon a bare supposall
of the Synods fidelity, which is to establish implicit faith, and to make the
Civil Magistrate, according to Popish doctrine, a servant to Councils, which
would make Princes have no light, but as the Moon, what they borrow from the
Sun, either of their representative Church, or of the Catholic Church of Rome,
or of the Head thereof, the Pope; yea this were to deny to the regulated, and
so to the godly Magistrate in his public way, what is recorded as a commended
duty in private Christians, and what is plainly commanded them of God in their
private way, namely, to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good, 1
These. 5. 21. yea though delivered by such a one as Paul an Apostle, yet to
search the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Acts 17. 11, 12.

Yea, but it may be the Civil Magistrate will judge that the Decrees are not
according to the Word, when indeed they are, and proceed to punish such as had
a hand even in such Conclusions, because he judges them cross to the Word.

Ans. 1. The regulate Magistrate (of whom we speak) who studieth the Word day
and night, is godly, wise, etc. has Gods warrant for it, as possible and
ordinary to him, as subject and faithful to the Head; that a divine sentence is
in the Kings lips, his mouth Deuteronomy. 17. Psalm. 2. Pro. 16. 10
transgresses not in judgment, and that Princes shall rule in judgment, Esaias
32. 1.

2. If transgressing his Rules, and leaving his Guides and Counselors, God,
his Spirit, Word, and Servants, he will follow a corrupt and misguided
judgment, or will of his own or others, he lies open, as to divine judgments,
so to humane censures also, whether from the body of the Commonwealth, orderly
assembled, or represented, or the like; and in case of obstinate persisting in
any such public and palpable breaches of the Lords Rules, the particular
Churches, whereof either such highest, or inferior Magistrates are, they have
their Church way of censuring, and healing such offending brethren of theirs.

R. 3. If the Magistrate as a public political Nurse-father to the Church be
to rescue the Church from noysom milk provided for the Church of Believers, by
such as should be Nurses, yea though met in a Synod, and decreeing it to be the
Word, then is he politically to judge what is, or what is not according to the
Word; yea in case wherein others judge the contrary; but the former is true (as
Is. 49. 22. shows) ergo, the latter. The consequence, if to rescue from such
food, then to judge of it, is evident; for if he may not, or cannot judge it to
be corrupt food, how can he rescue the Church from such food as is corrupt?

R. 4. If the Magistrate as the public keeper of the peace of the
Commonwealth (as all grant him to be) is to punish the disturbers of it, when
some pretending grosser errors in the contrary party, do carry it
schismatically; then is he to be political Judge in matters of Religion; as
say in Christian Commonwealths, Assemblies, or Synods, there should be rents
amongst those they call Independents, among themselves, or those they call
Presbyterians, amongst themselves, differing upon some points amongst
themselves, and both sides violently carried in their apprehensions, and both
sides pleading Scriptures, both for what they hold, and for what they do thus
violently in pursuit of what they hold; the Magistrate now, o none, must be a
political Judge and helpless, like careless Gallio, when even insurrections
are made, amongst the Religious party, (as were the Jews) upon pretense of
false doctrine held forth, in matters of divine worship, by an adverse party
(as was Paul and his companions) the Civil Magistrate must think it reason, to
Judge only in matters of injuries twixt man and man, or the like, but by no
means to be a Judge in any such matters of the worship of God (For I will be
(says Gallio) no Judge of such matters, Acts 18. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.) But who
sees not that this is recorded as a blemish in that careless deputy of Achaia?

Yea but the Churches may call their respective Members or Officers to an
account for such outrages, and as cause is, censure them.

Ans. Its possible the schism and Rent may be such, that the Major part of the
Church or Churches may be the corrupter part, and the Minor part too weak to
carry it in a Church Way against them. Bue if the Churches had strength to
carry it against the respective delinquent Members, yet the Churches Judgment
is only Ecclesiastical, and the means of prosecution of its Judgment, only
Ecclesiastical, the Church cannot Judge Civilly, or use Civil and political
means to prosecute such a Judgment to effect, and so cannot heal breaches of
the Civil peace, made by such outrages.

Yea, but the Magistrate should call the sincerer part to meet again though the
Minor part.

Ans. If he do, yet he must be supposed to Judge which is the sincerer part,
how else knows he whom he should call together, as the sincerer part? and if
he politically Judge, and act Magistratically from his political Judgment, in
calling that sincerer part together, and the Magistrate siding with the Minor
part, as politically Judging them the sincerer part, and politically condemning
the erring part, although the Major part* and although pleading Scripture also,
both for what they hold and do in violent prosecution thereof; Now the Civil
Magistrate does both politically Judge what doctrines and practices are, or are
not according to the word of God, yea, he herein does politically Judge the
usual and ordinary Ecclesiastical Judge, either in a Church or Synod; Namely
the Major part.

5. R. If the Civil Magistrate be to punish transgressors of the Law,
indefinitely, and to take vengeance upon open evil doers, then even upon
erring Synods also, for any heretical decrees of theirs tending to hurt the
State, or disturb the Christian societies under his charge: and if so, then he
is in a political way to Judge in matters of Christ and of his Church; But the
former is true, Ergo the latter.

But is not this to make the Civil Magistrate a Pope?

Ans. No, he is by duty tied to his rule, the word, and to Judge according to
that.

Yea, but he may err, and the Synod be in the right.

Ans. He may so, and so may Ecumenicall Synods err, yet many make them the
highest Ecclesiastical Judge; so here, possibility of erring hinders not, but
that the Civil Magistrate, and highest Civil Authority in a State, or
Commonwealth, should be the highest political Judge. For standum est in aliquo
primo, If erring Churches should Ecclesiastically censure godly Rulers, for
righteous political Judging or censures, there is no higher Church, Court, or
Iuridicall Judge; If erring Rulers and highest Civil Courts, politically
censure the Churches met in their messengers in a Synod, for their Godly
determinations there; or if they censure particular Churches for any righteons
censures of offending members at home, there is no higher Court or Judge than
the highest in that kind.

Object.
The same power that makes Church Canons, must define them, and Judge of them:
The Synod, not the Civil Magistrate makes Church Canons, Ergo the Synod, not
the Magistrate must define and Judge of them.

Ans.
If this whole argument were granted, Yet this hinders not, but that the Civil
Magistrate may both make Laws about the Church, and Church matters, in a
political way, and in the like way Judge of such matters, albeit he may make
no Laws Formally Ecclesiastical; Nor is his Magistraticall Judgment, as such,
an Ecclesiastical Judgment.

So that this rather confirms the conclusion in hand, thus,

Such as may make political Laws about Religion or the Church, they may
politically also define and Judge of matters respecting the same; but the
Civil Magistrate and higher Civil powers may do the former (as has been
proved) Ergo they may do the latter.

Object.
He may (say some) deny his Civil Sanction, to the Synods erring Canons;
albeit he make no penal Laws that way.

Ans.
Even this also suffiseth to make him political determiminer and Judge in such
matters, yea to make him political Judge of such, which dogmatically are the
highest Ecclesiastical Judges, surely he must Judge the Synods Canons to be
erring, if he be allowed to deny his Civil Sanction to them, as erring.

Object.
But the regulated Civil Magistrate being by duty a Member of the Church, he
has covenanted subjection to the Church, and to the Elders of it, Ergo he is
bound to own their determinations of things in controversy, according to the
word, else as an offending Brother, is he liable to be dealt with in a
Church Way.

Ans.
It is true, supposing they judge according to Christ's judgment, in the words
He that hearreth you bears me, and he that despises you despises me: and so
as a covenanted Member Luke 10. 16.
he is bound to hear them; and if he by gross contempt of their Counsels, when
according to Christ, do give them offense, they may by all good means seek to
convince such an offending brother: and in case he hear not, bring it to the
Church, of which this or that Magistrate is a member, and if he hear not the
Church, he may be cast out of the Church. Math. 18. Yet secondly this hinders
not, but that that Civil Magistrate is a political Judge of others pastoral
Judgments, whether indeed according to the word, before he do establish any
conclusions of theirs for Political laws. Thirdly, Nor does this warrant any
Church to proceed against any Civil Ruler whatsoever for rejecting their
erroneous determinations, but that it being clavis errans, it is an abuse of
Church power, and binds not before God. Nor is that, What ye bind on earth
is bound in heaven, verified in the abuse, but right use of the power of the
keys: whence Christ's owning of him whom the Synagogue cast out, Joh. 9. 35,
Luke 6. 21*
37. 28. 39. Hence a blessing pronounced to some unjustly censured. Fourthly,
Nor does this hinder but that Civil Authority may and must politically judge
of the errors of Synodicall determinations, and censure civilly such as make
them.

To shut up all that we would say to what is thus objected.

In case of a right administration, the Civil Magistrate, in duty subjecteth
his Memberly Judgment to his Pastors ministerial Judgment, but in case of
Aberration, he may not deliver up to any the supremacy of his Political
Judgment. They herc conclude right who say, that neither the Civil
Magistrates Political Judgment is a certain rule, either to Synods or
Churches Judgments: nor is their Ecclesiastical Judgment an infallible rule
to his Political Judgment, but the revealed word is the only infallible rule
to both. Leaving then to either the supremacy of their several Judgments, to
the former Political, to the latter Ecclesiastical, the Magistrate as a
Magistrate cannot define ecclesiastically, with reference to Church censures,
in refusal of such determinations of his: the Church as a Church cannot define
Politically with reference to Civil rewards and punishments.

Ob.
It may seem that each particular Christian subject is to judge rather what is,
or what is not according to the word, because they are to obey those edicts,
and none are to yield blind obedience, to obey this or that Political law
concerning Religion, or the Church, as in this or that particular according to
God, because others Judge so, but because himself judges so: a man's own
Judgment is to him his own immediate personal Judge of what he is to act, or
forbear: let every man be fully persuaded in his mind: and whatsoever is not of
faith is sin. And the Contrary Romans 14.
tenent, making Civil powers, highest earthly Judges what particular things
are contrary to the word, were a way to open a gap to most bloody persecutions
without redress, since they may Judge that to be contrary to the word, which is
not: And it were a way to justify the Civil acts, and Ecclesiastical too, of
Popish governments, whereby they have made and executed fiery laws against the
Saints for Heresy, as judging it to be Heresy and deserving the Faggot, as in
the Mariau days.

Ans.
1. Be it that a Christian, be his own next Judge of what he is to do or not,
as he is a Christian and in reference to his inward Peace, or the breach of it:
nor is he to pin his personal Judgment of matters of Christ or of his Church
upon any others Judgment merely or chiefly: but though he have his particular
Judgment as a private Christian, in a Christian way, yet that hinders not but
that the Civil Magistrate has his public Political Judgment, in reference
to Civil rewards and punishments, of what is or is not to be expressed and
acted by the outward man of each Member of the State, as he is a Member of the
State, and as his act reflecteth upon the Civil State, or its peace and good;
no more than the same privilege of private Judging hinders the Church to
Judge Ecclesiastically of what a Member, as a Member of the Church, is to do,
or not to do, or has done amiss; as his act does concern, or reflect upon the
Church.

Secondly, If because each one as a Christian, is in a private way to Judge of
his own act, the Magistrate Legislatively and Iuridically may not determine in
his Political way that any thing is duty or not, in matters of Religion,
unless according to such particular Christians Judgments: then it is unlikely,
if not impossible, that any law about Religion should be made, or any
political determination thereof given: since some will be of different minds,
yea about fundamentalls; as for example, some will Judge the Pope to be head of
the Church: some that Christ is not very God, some that he is not very man:
some will hold such Encouragements to well doers should be given, others will
differ from them: yea the like will follow in matters of the second table, upon
like grounds, Christians therein also are to follow their own Judgments and
not other men's: and whatsoever in such matters also, is not of faith, is sin:
therefore it must not be Politically determined, that lying with another man
wife is sin, or to be punished at all by State or Church, since some Judge a
community of the use of the bodies of Sisters (at least) to be lawful, nor
must the taking away of others goods or cattle from them for others use, be
Politically determined or punished as evil, since sundry Christians Judge a
community of such things also to be good: nor must the taking away of
Heretique-princes lives by Assassinates be Politically determined and punished,
as evil, since Christians of Popish Judgments, think it a meritorious act.

Thirdly, Then could not it not be orderly determined, no not 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.
with consent of the body of the people, that such as would not seek the Lord
-- should be put to death: since sundry might judge it too harsh, yea in
determining thereof* they implied that some would be of another mind, and ly
open to that censure: yet its recorded to their honor, that they did so. Exo.
34. 1, 2, 3, 4. These are thy Gods O Israel that brought thee out of Egypt:
that was their Judgment, yet Moses Politically determining otherwise of it, as
punishable with death, ver* 26, 27, 28, 29. did well in it.

Ob.
True, you will say: but the Israelites erred in either thinking or speaking so.

Ans.
Yea, they did so: but say we, that was their particular Judgment, though
erring: and they as well as we must walk in the light of their own judgments,
and not of any others (if the objection be right) and therefore according to
the objectors mind, should not have been accused or punished.

Fourthly, Then all Ecclesiastical Judging of men in matters of Religion,
which in Judgment and Conscience, though erring, men hold forth, is cut off,
and why then did Paul wish that those should bear their Judgment? Gal. 5. 10,
11. since many of them held no more, than what they Judged to be right.

Fifthly, Then such men's Judgments (at least) are not to be a rule to the
Christian Magistrates Judgment, but as he is persuaded in his heart, he also
(as any other Christian) must do. If he can make it a matter of his faith, it
is no sin in him, Politically to Judge, what is, or what is not according to
the word, or accordingly to be civilly punished or praised, in Members of the
Civil State, when expressed in such sort by the outward man, as it merely
concerns the State, or reflecteth upon it: and this in matters of both
tables, and what then is gained? Nay by this indefinite principle in the
objection much would be lost if the Civil Christian Magistrate, and State, be
in mind persuaded, and do verily Judge, that the bread in the Sacrament is
turned into the very flesh of Christ, and that whosoever holds forth the
contrary shall be burned at a stake, must they not do whatsoever they are
persuaded in their minds? and if of faith to them, then not fin to them to do
it, according to the bottom of the objection.

Nay but you will say, their persuasion must be rightly founded upon the word,
which is the object of faith: else it is not right.

Ans. Very good, and in that meaning, your objection is no objection; unless
better warrant be showed from the word, why each man's Judgment, is so to be
his own guide, that as a Member of the Civil State, his Judgment also is not
in a Political way to be ordered by the Political determinations of regulated
Civil Authority. As for the sequels urged: persecution, or justifying of
persecutors thereby, they are urged from that which is not a proper cause, as
if it were a cause. It is not the use of such a power of Judging, in regulated
Civil Authority, that causes persecution for matters of the first table, more
than tyranny in matters of the second table, but the Abuse of that power
rather: and from the abuse of a lawful power or privilege, to reason against
the use thereof, is not right or regular. Churches also may abuse their power,
and persecute a Saint of God, by a wicked determination, and answerable
censure, in a matter of God or the Church: but that does not therefore hinder,
but that the Church is highest Ecclesiastical Judge in such matters.

The last instruction from the premises; If abuses in Religion are thus to be
restrained and punished by regulated Authority, then are not persons, in an
ordinary way, to be left, by regulated Civil Authority, to the liberty of
their own judgments, or consciences, to profess or practice in matters of
Religion, according as their several minds and spirits, yea though seduced and
erring, shall think meet; no, though those persons profess the Christian
Religion, and the fundamentals (at least) thereof.

For the better clearing of this weighty Conclusion, so many ways opposed now
adays, we shall first propound some distinctions about it; and so the better
state the Conclusion.

1. Then let us distinguish of Liberty, which (according to Scripture grounds)
is either lawful and regulate liberty, or a liberty that is sinful, lawless,
and boundless.

Lawful liberty is either that which is of a more civil, or spiritual, or
mixed nature.

1. That of a more civil nature is either oeconomicall, or political properly
such; oeconomicall, as that of servants, Ex. 21. 11. Jer. 34. 10. or that of
wives, Romans 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 36. Political, properly such; whether more
general, as that of a free denison of a State; or of more special privilege,
as freedom from taxes, Act. 22. 28. Math. 27. 26.
1 Samuel 17. 21. Ezr. 7. 24. from going to war, Deuteronomy. 24. 3. to this the
Conclusion properly looks not.

2. That of a more spiritual nature, taken

1. For immunity from sundry evils, pressing hard upon the Saints, or enslaving
them; If the Son make ye free, then are ye Joh. 8. 36 1 Cor. 7. 22. Romans 6. 18.
Romans 8. 2. Is 61. 1. 1 These. 1. 10. Gal. 3. 10. 13. Ibid. Romans 7 6. Gal. 5. 1.
Heb. 2. 14, 15. Ibid. Gal. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23.
free indeed; the Lords Freeman; which liberty is either inchoative or
perfected; inchoative spiritual liberty is, that from sins guilt, or power,
being made free from sin, and made free from the law of sin, and of death, he
shall proclaim liberty to the captives; That from Gods wrath, Jesus which
delivers us from wrath to come; That from the Moral Laws curse, Cursed is
every one that continues not in every thing written in the Law to do it;
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us;
That from the rigorous exaction of the Laws righteousness and personal
perfection from us, we are delivered from the Law; That from the Ceremonial,
and Judicial Law too, as far as it was properly Jewish, Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; That from the power of hell, who
has delivered us from the power of darkness; That from the power of death,
delivering them who were all their life long subject to bondage, by reason of
the fear of death; That from the world, redeemed from this present evil world;
That from men's inventions and lusts, the Lords freemen, bought with a price,
become not the servants of men; That from all our enemies, being delivered out
of the hands of all our enemies, Luke 1. 74. This spiritual liberty perfected,
is the glorious liberty of the sons of God, of which Romans 8. 21. see also 1
Cor. 15. end. This first spiritual liberty of each Saint, is not that to which
the Conclusion looks.

2. Spiritual liberty is taken for freeness, readiness, and voluntariness to
the holy, and good things of God, that what we do therein, it should be
freely, with a ready and willing mind; not as at liberty to do, or not to do
any duties required of us, according as we list; for that were rather in part
licentiousness, a cursed liberty of servants to sin; When ye were servants to
sin, Rom 20.
ye were free-from righteousness; Nor yet as persons to be haled to do our
duty; Thy people are (...) people of free oblations.

3. Spiritual liberty is taken for that which stands between two extremes,
wherein a Christian may be said to be properly free; as when free to choose; or
refuse, or suspend, to use or do such or such a thing, or to forbear; And it
is Christian liberty strictly taken, or liberty of Christians in matters which
in themselves are of an indifferent nature; of which is that place so often
applied too largely, Romans 14. 3, 5, 6, 14, 17 Of which nature were the Jewish
meats and days, formerly observed, but then abolished, although every
believing Jew was not presently convinced thereof.

And here a little to digress, let us clear this place so often wrested; that
it is meant of things of an indifferent nature in themselves; this appears in
that they wcre such things, as whether observed or not, the Lord might be
exalted, he might be praised, ver. 6. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for
he gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and
gives God thanks: They were not such things which were not in themselves
Morally good, or evil, ver. 14. I know there is nothing unclean of it self;
namely, nothing of that sort before mentioned, as were Days, and Meats, and
other like things of an indifferent nature; else it might be said, many things
are in themselves unclean, whether he that deals with them think so of them
or no, as Idolatrous, Adulterous, Murtherous acts, etc. morally evil, and so
unclean. They were such things in which the Kingdom of God consisted not, ver.
17. meats sacrifised to Idols, made not any more or less accepted, 1 Cor. 8. 8.
Meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better, or if
we eat not are we the worse; and 1 Cor. 10. 25. Whatsoever is sold in the
shambles eat, etc.

3. Mixed liberty, which is partly of a spiritual, and partly of a civil
nature, as it respects things spiritual, wherein it is exercised, so
spiritual, as it respects family authority, by which it is exercised, either
privately or publicly, so it is of a civil nature, as when the Saints of old
had from Cyrus Authority, liberty to go up to Jerusalem, freely to build the
Temple, Ez^. 1. 3. Ezr. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
anu worship the Lord there; and when they had liberty from Darius without
disturbance from enemies freely to carry on that good work, and to offer
sacrifises to the Lord. Hitherto also that in 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. may partly be
referred, and if that were all the liberty which were pleaded for, that by the
influence of Civil Authority we might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, without any kind of disturbance, or molestation from
any, we would join in that plea in the Court of God and man.

As for that sinful, lawless, and boundless liberty, that is a liberty (indeed
and reallity) to the flesh, or the motions and fruits of corrupt nature, a
liberty to sin, a liberty for men to do what they list, and the like, this is
it which the Scripture every where decryeth and condemns, Judge. 17. 6. In
those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right
in his own eyes. So was Micha's Idol, and Idol worship, and Ministry, right in
his eyes, ver 5. 12, 13. Now I know the Lord will be good to me, seeing I have
a Levite to my Priest. He verily thought he was right in all, and might look
for a blessing of God in that way. Mich. 4. 5. All people will walk every one
in the name of his God. Romans 6. 10. Ye were free from righteousness; and 2 Pet.
2. 19. They promise them liberty. Jude 4, 5. Turning the grace of God into
wantonness. There wanted not some in the Apostles days who would pretend their
own, and others spiritual liberty, whereby to bring in, and carry on, and
covertly to exercise this liberty to sin; and for that end plead liberty from
Authorities which should curb or restrain sin; whence that item of Peter, 1
Pet. 2. 16, 17. As free, but not having for a covering of wickedness the
Liberty, but as the servants of God, honor all men, love brotherly fellowship,
fear God, honor the King. Whence that bait of Seducers to draw on disciples
after them? they promise them liberty, they themselves despising 2 Pet. 2. 1^*
Government in Church or State, speaking evil of Dignities, etc. How like that
was to the Spirit breathing in these days in too many professors of Jesus
Christ, and liberty purchased by him, I leave to consideration.

Secondly we distinguish of conscience: which is to be considered either as
rightly guided, or as misguided and erring, to Conscience rightly guided by the
Lord, and according to his word, Civil Authority must give all encouraging
Liberty.

2. Misguided and erring conscience is either erring out of mere infirmity and
weakness; in which case great tenderness is to be used on all hands for a time;
or of wilfulness, and in way of pertinacy, contempt, and turbulency; of which
in the Conclusion.

3. We distinguish concerning Authoritative leaving persons to some liberty, in
abuses of this Allusion. It is either a kind of temporary Connivency, or
forbearance for a time to punish them, which in cases of weakness must be
granted, till sufficient means used of Conviction; or it is a kind of more
fixed toleration, without certain limits of time. This later is supposed to be;
either in some cases of an extraordinary respect; as in cases of Universal
obduracy, spreading over the face of a whole professing State, as was the
Toleration of that sin of causless Divorces, by Moses, as a political Ruler,
for preventing of a worse misehief, of insupportable Tyranny and cruelty over
their injured Wives, Math. 19. 6, 7, 8, 10. Moses, for the hardness of your
hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives. -- Or in case of some Evils,
either acted or owned by a more prevailing and potent party, in a Civil State,
which if exasperated and crossed, would imbrue the State in blood or confusion;
as in the case of Joabs murder of Abner, owned by Abisha, who with their
faction, were too strong for David, 2 Samuel 3. 39. In which case also, Godly
Emperors have born with some Errors, whilst their State was royled, and the
foundations thereof even shakeing, by reason of strong factions and tumults in
it. Or secondly, this fixed toleration is supposed to be in an ordinary way,
and in common and usual cases, which is that which the conclusion denies.

Now then to State the conclusion, and accordingly confirm it, we say,

That in ordinary way, a set fixed Toleration, is not to be given, by the
Regulated Magistrate or higher Civil powers, that their Christian Subjects
should hold and profess in matters of Religion, what themselves may pretend
conscience for so doing; When indeed grossly erring, and contemptuously and
pertinaciously holding the same forth.

Reasons from scripture of the conclusion so stated, may be these.

R. 1. Because liberty to the flesh is not to be given in such a way, by such
Rulers, for such Rulers, to give such a liberty for all such persons, to hold
and profess corrupt opinions, is to give liberty to the flesh; Ergo that may
not be done; the proposition is grounded upon the Rulers duty to keep both
Tables, and so not in an ordinary case and way, to suffer fleshly sinful
breaches of the Rules therein. The Assumption is grounded upon Gal. 5. 20.
Where Heresy and Schism are counted fruits of the flesh, to give liberty
therefore to such fruits of the flesh, is to give liberty to the flesh.

R. 2. That liberty, which suffers men, ordinarily, in a Christian State, to
draw persons away from God, is not to be given by Regulated Rulers thereof; but
in such a way, as before mentioned, to tolerate persons, under pretense of
conscience, pertinaciously to hold forth corrupt opinions, is to suffer persons
to draw away others from God; Ergo it may not be done. The proposition is
evident, such a one as would go about to thrust others from God, must not be
pitied or spared, Deuteronomy. 13. 9.

Object.
True, you will say, in respect of the witness, which was not to conceal him,
Ibid. but what is this to Authority?

Ans.
Yes, that which is here enjoined every private person, is with respect to it,
as to be brought before Authority (as it is evident) and if a private person be
not to let such alone, but to bring him to light, to complain of him to
Authority; surely that Authority was not to spare them, when detected; if
Authority had been to entreat such, tolerate persons needed not to be charged
not to spare them, nor to conceal them; for if they would not forbear them, but
complain of them, if the Magistrate would or might forbear them, their non
forbearance of them was to little purpose.

Secondly, it appears, that both private and publiquc persons are taken in,
in that Collective [Thou] shall not spare him, verse. 8. The same phrase with
that, verse. 10. [Thou] shall stone him with stones that he die. No private
person could do thus upon his own head or will; that had been confusion: It was
then by influence of the higher powers, that it was so done. But why are they
to be so strict, why is there to be no sparing or tolerating, but Capital
puinshing? Ans. ver. 10. Because he sought to thrust thee away from the Lord
thy God. Hence also was that blamed in those, which under Moses had power of
life and death, for sparing those Midianitish women, Numb. 31. 14. Moses was
angry with the heads of thousands, and verse. 15. Have ye spared the women
alive. But why are they blamed? Ans. v. 16. These through Balaams Counsel
[Caused the Children of Israel to transgress against the Lord in the matter of
Peor] which is explained, Numb. 25. 1, 2. They called the Children of Israel to
the sacrifices of their Gods, and they did eat, and they bowed down to their
Gods. The Assumption is evident, and needs no proof, Acts 20. 29, 30.
Speaking perverse things to draw away (namely from Christ and his Church)
Disciples after them. Although for this also, such may pretend Conscience,
Scripture, etc. be Wolves in sheeps clothing, transform themselves into
Messengers of light, of whose mischievous sleights read Ephesians. 1. 14. 2 Timothy,
3. 5, 6, 7.

R. 3 That liberty which suffers the sheep of the Lord, in an ordinary way,
to wander from their Fold and Pasture, without restraint or effectual care to
reduce them, that is not to be allowed off, by such as God calls to be
political Shepherds Math. 7. 15. 1 Cor. i. 13.
to them: but the liberty mentioned does thus, Ergo. The proposition is
evident, as being that for substance, which was blamed in those Shepherds of
old, Ezekiel. 34. 5, 6, 7, 8, There was no Shepherd, neither did my Shepherds
search for my Flock: but they wandered and became a prey -- were driven away --
devoured, etc. For there was no Shepherd, not simply, for there were
Shepherds, but as good as none, they did not execute their Shepheardly Office,
but suffered Gods Flock to go to wrack, by false Prophets, false Teachers,
Idolaters, etc. Nor were these Shepherds only Church-Rulers, but State and
Civil Rulers, even the same with those verse. 4. who in Civil respects also,
tyrannized over them, ruled them with force and cruelty, which were especially
oppressing Princes; such were those Ier. 50. 6. Their Shepherds caused them to
wander; of whom see more, Ier. 23. 1, 2, 3. and 22. 22. and 12. 10. And the
title and Office of Shepherds, as appliable to Civil Rulers, is usual in
Scripture, Joseph is so called, Genesis 49. 24. So is Cyrus, Esaias 44. 28. so is
Moses, that King in Jesurum, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. with Isa. 63. 11. So David, Psalm. 78.
72. and Ahab, 1 Kings 12. 17. and Numb. 27. 17. Without a Shepherd, that is,
chief Ruler. The Assumption is evident, because such liberty tolerateth Rents
of Members from Churches, as in Shisms is usual, Acts 20: 30. (...) to rent
away, as members from the body, Disciples after them, it also tolerateth
wandering from Gods ways, truth and Ordinances.

R. 4. Such a liberty mentioned carries the mark of an Anarchy in the State,
so far forth: yea of a sad Judgment of God upon that State, for provoking sins
of Rulers and people, Ergo, it may: the Consequence is evident, if it carry a
mark of Anarchy, and Divine Judgment, then to be avoided: unless the very
shadow of an evil, coming cross to the very light and law of nature and
Nations, by which all shun Anarchy, and set up Government, or of that which is
commonly the punishment of sin, as deprivall of Government is, be not to be
shunned, which none dare affirm. The antecedent is evident in both the branches
thereof. 1 It is one brand of an Anarchy, as Judge. 17. 6. shows. Then was No
King in Israel, every one did what was right in his own eyes, even the eyes of
his own mind, judgment, or conscience, how corrupt soever; hence when through
Gods Judgment, that perishing people of his should not have the benefit of his
feeding Government, so as to hinder them from sining, to their ruin, Zech. 11.
9. I will not feed you, that which dies let it dye, etc. It is accomplished by
his judicial breaking of the staff, Beauty, namely both of civil as well as
sacred order, enjoined of God. 2 It is a sad judgment of God, as that place,
Zech. 11. 9. 15, 16, 17. compared, does show, God in judgment is said to let
those of the sinful people, or flock of his alone to themselves (as it were)
That which dies let it dye, or let them take such killing courses of sin, as
tend thereunto. Now the judicial means he uses, is, in judgment to raise up
a foolish Idol Shepherd, Verse. 15. 17. That is, such kind of Rulers in Church
and Commonwealth, Kings (as well as Priests) into whose hands the Flock is
delivered to be spoiled, verse. 5, 6. I will deliver them into the hand of their
King, which though they be by place and office Shepherds, yet in effect are
Idols, nothing, no Shepherds; as Ezekiel, 34. 8. 10. he calls them, of which
see before, such as shall be wholly careless what becomes of the Flock,
Zech. 11. 16. If they be cut off by any spiritual mischief, let them, for
them, they will not visit and look after them; if being young, and so weak and
unexperienced, they will take any wrong path in stead of the right, and so
loose themselves, let them, for them, they will not seek their young one: if
they be in any measure broken in judgment, or otherwise, let them be so, for
them, they will not endeavor to heal them: if any of the Flock yet keep their
standing in the fold and pasture of God, they will not cherish and encourage
them, and by their Authority seek to keep them there, they will not feed that
which stands still, they will rather make a prey of them, what they can: Even
the flesh of the fat, etc. Such a Shepherd or Ruler (as verse. 17.) who leaves
the Flock, namely to themselves, he cares not for them, looks not after
them: he has a sword upon his eye, or not the use of that, even of his wisdom
and parts: and upon his arm, or power, he puts not forth that. One place
more to prove this, that so to be left of Authority, to take up Corruption in
Religion, under pretense of Conscience, this is a sad judgment of God, for the
sins of a professing people. For this let that place in 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. be
considered of. Howbeit the high places were not taken away, for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts to seek the God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles.
33. 17. seems somewhat to explain that about the High places, Nevertheless
the people did sacrifice in the high places, yet to the Lord only. Now what
these High places were where they thus sacrificed, may be known by comparing
Scriptures: namely, such places where they had wont in a manner to sacrifice to
the Lord, before the Temple was built by Solomon, where God allowed his people
to sacrifice before, but after that was built, it became unlawful to them, and
sinful, as expressly forbidden of God. They had formerly an High place at
Ramah, in the Land of Zuph, in the Tribe of Ephraim, called one of the two
Ramah's of Zuphim, in Mount Ephraim, to distinguish it from that in Benjamins
Tribe; compare 1 Samuel 1. 1. and Chap. 9. 5. 6. 11. 12. there was another High
place, where then also they lawfully sacrificed, in Gibeah of Benjamin, for
which see and compare 1 Samuel 10. 5. 12. 13. 14. 26. Gibeah, Saul's home, verse.
26. even where his Uncle with whom he lived, dwelt, verse. 14. is the Altar
where the high place was, verse. 13. Another, and the great High place, was at
Gibeon, where also the acceptable sacrifice was offered, 1 Kings 3. 4. Not to
mention other places of like use for sacrifice then, as Gilgal, etc. 1 Samuel 11.
15. but the reason of that use of High places then allowed of, is given 1 Kings
3. 2. only the people sacrificed in High places, because until those days
there was no house built to the Name of the Lord: but after such a place should
be built, where God should place his Name, as was the Temple at Jerusalem (as 1
Kings 8. 29. shows) It was unlawful, and a breach of rule, in point of
Religion and worship of God, to sacrifice elsewhere, as it was long before
charged in reference to that time, Deuteronomy. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14. Offer not thy
Burnt-offrings in every place which thou see, but at the place which the Lord
shall choose, etc. Hence God says of Solomon's Temple, I have chosen this place
for my self, for an house of sacrifice, 2 Chro. 7. 12. Hence also after the
Temple was built, all former places for their religious use, such as Bethel,
Gilgal, etc. must not be sought to, Amos 5. 5. And it is in a judicial way,
and wrathful irony, that God in Amos 4. 4, 5. says, Come to Bethel and
transgress, at Gilgal multiply transgression, and bring your sacrifices every
morning, and offer a sacrifice with leaven, and proclaim and publish the free
offerings, for this likes you, O ye Children of Israel, says the Lord.

Jehosaphat then a good Prince, yet leaves the people to their former liberty
of the corrupt use of those High places, not as for Idols, that was too gross,
he would never have born that (nay, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. He took away the Groves out
of the Land) but as for sacrifice to the Lord, only as in Manasses time, after
his repentance, they had the like liberty. Yea but the people might well enough
in conscience, though erring, do thus much; the places were in Samuels time,
and others after him, yea in the beginning of Solomon's time, of good use, and
God had there accepted sacrifice, Jerusalem was far off, they could not be at
it morning by morning, as they desired. Compare 1 Kings 12. 28. and Amos 4. 4,
5. Yea but the Israelites might abuse that to Ieroboams Calves: Ans: Be it so,
but they of Judah, in their High places, sacrificed to the Lord only, 2 Chronicles.
33. 17. and so long, will not God accept it? They thought he would. Yea but as
small as this corruption might seem to be, and as much as they might in
conscience plead for it, it was a corruption in worship, cross to rules before
mentioned, and that they were so left to this their liberty, it was Gods just
hand upon them, as 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. because they had not prepared their hearts
to the God of their Fathers, they were securely slight in his worship, loose
hearted to God-wards, not cordial and entire to him, and thence they have
their desires and minds in it; their very godly power, that was in many
respects zealous for God, yet herein through Gods displeasure against them for
their unheartednesse, shall leave them to their own liberty. It is in
judgment, if they are suffered to sacrifice in such forbidden places, and left
to have their own minds therein, and much more, when men have their own
likings in grosser corruptions, in worship through the unfaithfulness of their
Civil Rulers, as they of Israel had, in Bethel and Gilgal, in the times of
Ieroboams successors. It was Gods judgment upon them for their sins, as Amos
4. 4, 5. Go (says God, in judgment against them) to Bethel and transgress,
and at Gilgal multiply transgerssion, and bring your sacrifices every morning,
etc. for this likes you O ye children of Israel, says the Lord God. One
would now think that none that had a heart awful of Gods displeasure, should
ever plead for such a sad judgment of God, upon themselves, or others, as to
be left to Princes or Rulers, to have their own likings in corruptions of
Religion.

R. 5. The Toleration mentioned would make Christian Rulers not to be for
Christ, but in that respect to be against him; Ergo not to be permitted by
them; the Consequence will not be denied, unless any make nothing of that sin,
not to be for Christ, but against him. The Antecedent is evident in that such a
Toleration would make such Rulers, in their place, not to be for one chief end
of his coming, which was to destroy the works of the Devil, and ergo not for
him. The Consequence is undeniable, because if therein not for so chief an end
of his coming, then not for him: The Antecedent is evident: as that such
Toleration of such errors, and corruptions in Religion, so held out, is a like
Toleration of the works of the Devil, and ergo not a dissolution and
destruction of them; the Consequence is evident, because such a Toleration of
the works of the Devil, gives full scope and liberty to them, to have their
devilish operations and energy, cherishes them, suffers them to spread, and
to gather strength in parties, which thereby come to side with them, to stand
and plead for them, to despise all the Ministers shall speak against them, etc.
which none will say is a way to dissolve enervate or destroy those works of the
devil. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl.
8. 11. The Antecedent is evident, namely, that such a Toleration of such
errors, etc. is in like sort a Toleration of the works of the Devil, because
erroneous doctrines, etc. are hammered, forged, and generated by the Devil,
they are some of those lies of which he is father, John 8. 44. those doctrinall
lies, 1 Timothy 4. 2. are Doctrines of Devils, verse. 1. those unclean Frogs are
spit out of the mouth of the Dragon, Revel. 16. 13, 14. nor is this true only
of grosser errors, in fundamentalls, but all, even lesser errors, delivered
about meats and marriage, these are of the Devil, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Among
those doctrinall lies, or doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry, and to
abstain from meats, are the only Instances; if it had been said, forbidding to
believe Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, or to be very God, and very man,
or God and man in one person, or to be our only Mediator, etc. this had not
been so much, but to instance in such petty errors, as the world would think
them as doctrines of the devil, is the more observable, to stir up to utter
defiance of all manner of errors; seeing men use to say they defye the Devil.

R. 6. Such a toleration, in such sort, of such things mentioned, is a
toleration of that which wounds a State body, in the very Continuity of it;
of that which directly tends to break the peace of such societies (of which
the regulate Magistrate is the preservour) and of that which breaks the very
Hedge and walls of a State; ergo is not to be yielded by them, the consequence
that if such a toleration lets in so much mischife, it is not to be yielded
to, by godly regulated Rulers, none will deny, unless they would have them
knowingly, to concur, contrary to their duty and place, to such state
mischiefs: the Antecedent is proved in all the three parts of it (which might
have been seven arguments) the first branch is evident: because such corrupt
doctrines, so let alone, do mingle, corrode, and what in them lies, enervate
sound doctrine, pure religion, the Covenant of God held forth to, and by such a
religious polity, which are the very ligaments of a Christian State: hence so
opposed by wicked rulers and people, because as coards and bonds, Psalm. 2. 1,
2. 3. thence Jerusalem, by these especially, becomes a City so compacted,
Psalm. 122. 1, 2, 3. Now these veins and Arteries of such a religious body
politic, which should and would convey vigor and spirits, and good every
way, do these poisons and venoms of Asps exceedingly injure. Esaias 59. 5. that
which eats of their cockatrice eggs dies, 2 Timothy 2. 17. their word will eat,
as does a canker, and verse. 16. they will increase to more ungodliness;
wherefore no wonder that Paul charge Timothy, to do what in him lay, to stay
them, (...) restrain them,

The second branch is as evident: that it is a toleration of that, which
tends to break the peace, etc. for errors and such like corruptions in
religion, trouble the Churches which are the choicest societies in that polity;
hence that Gal. 5. 10. 12. I would to God they were cut off which trouble you,
speaking of seducers; and Acts 20. 30. they draw away, or rent away as members
from the body, disciples after them; hence that reasoning of Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
18. I hear there are divisions ((...)) schisms amongst you; which he proves
verse. 19. thus; For there must needs be heresies amongst you, etc. as if the
one is a necessary cause of the other; where there are heresies amongst
Church Members, there will be Schisms. True it is, Churches have their ways
of healing such evils in their members, as they have to heal other scandalous
evils in them, as drunkenness, lying, etc. but that hinders not Gods civil
ordinance of the Magistrates coercive power also, more in the one, then in the
other, yea, errors and heresies are wont to breed troubles and divisions in
civil societies. Hence those seducers and their followers, who turn the grace
of God into wantonness, Jude 4. and are filthy dreamers, verse. 8. are branded
for seditious persons in Commonwealths: even such as come justly to perish, as
sometimes seditious Corah did, verse. 11. perish in the gainsaying of Core.
Hence those black brands of seducers, who have a form of godliness; that they
are traitourous, heady, high-minded, truce breakers, false accusers, fierce
etc. making their times perilous, 2 Timothy 3. 1. 3, 4, 5. and that he speaks
that of seducers, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. declare: Hence those also in Jude are
branded for murmurers and complainers, Jude 16. ever and anon quarrelling
against matters in Church and State, 1 so Tim. 6. 3, 4. the very fruits of
false doctrines are reckoned to be envy, strifes, railings, evil surmises, and
perverse disputes, and as that Apostle reckons those fruits of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 19. as concomitants: so doubtless, by purety of proportion, those
adjoined, v. 26. contentions, seditions Heresies etc. those Antichristian
seducers Revel. 16. 13, 14. are persons of turbulent spirits in civil states,
stirring up to wars and the like; that Impostor and seducer Theudas mentioned
Acts 5. as a murderer and seditious person. Histories ancient and modern are
full of examples of this nature: of persons of corrupt Principles in religion,
becoming movers and Abettors of civil Seditions.

The third branch: that it is a toleration of that which breaks religious
States hedges and walls, etc. appears: that hedge Job. 1. 10. Zech. 2. 4. 5.
and wall of fire of Gods gracious protecting providence over such a State, is
undermined by such things. As Adam was naked in that respect, Genesis 3. 10. so
was the State of corrupted Israel naked, Exodus 32. 25. before their Idolatry
was punished, Moses saw that they were naked, and as a means of recovery of
their wonted covering, he commands the civil execution of Justice upon some,
for terror to all the rest, verse. 26, 27. those fox-like false Prophets (Ezekiel.
13. 4, 5.) let alone, did spoil the vines, and break the hedges: and says
God, both to Church and State Rulers, Ye have not gone up into the gap,
neither made up the hedge, for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle, in
the day of the Lord. Their care should have been to have prevented such
breaches thereby, but yet though the hedge was broken, a gap made, and war
from God prepared against them, all might have done well enough, had not State
and Church Officers both, been too indulgent and remiss, in punishing the
causes of such mischiefs. Hence also, when such corruptions in Ministry and
Worship mentioned Ezekiel. 22. 26, 27. are let alone, verse 30. we read of a gap
made, and no man of Authority, being found to make it up for the Land, that God
should not destroy it: Therefore says God (verse. 31.) I have poured out 1
Kings 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. etc.
mine Indignation upon them. Corruptions in religion connived at, and too much
countenanced by Solomon, in his wives, rent that Kingdom in pieces; whence, by
punishing such corruptions in religion, evil is said to be put away from
Israel, Deuteronomy. 17. 2. 3. 7. as if otherwise, Israel had been exposed to that
evil.

R. 7. Such a toleration of such corruptions, before mentioned, it
interpretatively by God himself, a kicking at Religion, and honoring of such,
as hold forth, and practice those corruptions in religion, above the Lord
himself, and therefore undeniably not to be yielded unto, by regulated civil
Rulers, the consequence, none but profane spirits will deny; the antecedent is
evident by that, 1 Samuel 2. 12. to 16. compared with 23, 24, 25, 29. verses. It
was a corrupt religious custom, to snatch out in that sort, what first came to
hand, and forcibly to take the fat of the peoples sacrifices, for the Priests
use: the matter was not fundamental, nor contrary to the light of nature, but
very justly offensive to God and men; ver. 17. Eli is told of all that, as well
as of other sins of his sons, against the second Table: he chideth them a
little, as a father, but does not as he was a Judge (1 Samuel 4. 18. He judged
Israel forty years) punished them according to their deserts, he is indulgent,
they are let alone, what is Gods censure of this, v. 29. Wherefore kick [yee]
(not Hophni and Phineas only, but Eli too) at my acrifice and at mine offering
etc. and honor thy sons above me, to make your selves fat with the choicest
of all the offerings of Israel; God instanceth in this his indulgence, toward
his sons, in that matter of that corrupt religious custom only; as if that
was, as verse. 17. of most heinous guilt before him; the sin of your young men
was great before the Lord, and it is observable, since there is a purity of
proportion. Such Rulers as can be indulgent to g^osse errors, and corruptions
in religion, in Gods worship and sacrifices, they little regard Gods truth or
worship, they kick at i^, in Gods account; and if they will needs b^
soever-tender of such as are not fit objects of their tenderness, they show
little tenderness of Gods name, truth worship or honor; they it seems more
regard them, and their ease etc. then God [thou honor thy sons above me]
now who would be so thought of by the Lord.

R. 8. Such a toleration of such evils mentioned, causes the very evils
themselves to be charged upon Rulers, and brings the wrath of God upon them
also: ergo not to be yielded to, by any godly wise Rulers; the consequence,
none, not prodigal of Rulers welfare, will deny. The Antecedent appears.
Solomon is said to go after Ashteroth, etc. which as its thought, was only in
respect of his connivence at, and countenancing of such abominations in his
wives. To be sure; God guided Nehemiah, to contend with the Rulers, for those
corruptions, in neglect of the Ministry of their Sabbath duty, Nehem. 13. 10,
11, 12. 16, 17, 18. compared, as if, that where such things were, and not
seasonably and suitably restrained, and punished by them, those became their
sins; hence that indulgent Judge Eli is put in: ye have made your selves fat
with the chief of the sacrifices, 1 Samuel, 2. 29. yea but verse 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. with 17. It is said to be the young men's, his sons sin.

Answ. True, but laid upon him too, who should have redressed it, but did not,
and hence he also is punished, as the sequel, verse. 30, 31. etc. shewerh; so in
these careless sheapheards, the wanderings and evils of their sheep, lost
thorough their neglect, of seasonable prevention thereof, are charged upon
them, Ezekiel. 34. 10. I will require my sheep at the sheapheards hands, says the
Lord. Observable is that place in Hosea 5. 10. compared with chap. 1. 1. The
Princes of Judah were like them, that removed the bound: wherefore I will pour
out my wrath upon them like water; not alone Ahaz who did grossly transgress,
in bringing in another altar for offerings then God had oppointed,, 2 Kings 16.
15. 16. etc. but more [Princes] of Judah says Hosea, were such. Now chap. 1.
1. he prophesied in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of
Judah; as for Hezekiah, he was rather exact in point of Reformation, yea, even
of what other Princes before him had omitted in theirs, 2 Kings 18. 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 29. 30, 31. It must then fall upon Jotham and Vzziah, one or both, since
Princes of Judah were as those that brake their bounds, even in Hosea's time;
but how was Jotham such a one, in matters of Religion, of whom that is
testified, 2 Chronicles. 27. 2. 6. He became mighty, because he prepared his ways
before the Lord his God. and verse. 2. he did that which was right in Gods
sight, as his Father Vzziah had done. Answ. The people did yet corruptly,
(namely in matters of God) which he suffering, the blame thereof is laid upon
him, as one blemish in him: and 2 King. 15. 34, 35. this corruption in the
people is mentioned more clearly, speaking of Jothams reign: its said, and he
did that which was right in Gods sight, as his Fath^^ Vzziah had done, what
then was his blemish?

Ans. Howbeit ^^e high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt
inc^^^e still in the high places; not to Idols, that assuredly he would never
have endured in them: but as 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. to the Lord only, not in
Id^latrou^ high places but in such, which were formerly devoted to God, and of
acceptable use: as Rama, Gibea, Gilgal, Gibeon, etc. which the people might in
both respects think well of; but being let alone, and connived at in th^^e,
its charged upon Jotham, and so upon Vzziah before him, 2 Kings 15. 34. and
though they were but as those that brake the bounds, and did not themselves so
directly set up false or corrupt worship, but suffer a little way in others:
therefore says Hosea from God, as in their times still to come: I will pour
out (not I have poured out upon others) upon them my wrath like water.

R. 9. Such a Toleration of such evils, which make men abhor Religion, and
speak evil of the way of truth, by reason of them, yea which are in ordinary
way destructions and ruin to such as obstinately persist in them, ergo, not to
be yielded to, by Regulated Civil Authority. The Consequence will not be
denied, unless such Rulers should bear such Abhorring to come upon Religion,
or scandal to Gods truth and way, or ruin to their subjects. The Antecedent
appears by that instance in those corruptions connived at in Elies Sons,
which made men abhor the Lords Offering, 1 Samuel 2. 17. and by that, 2 Pet. 2. 1*
2 3. speaking of Heresies, verse. 1. he adds, And many shall follow their
pernicious ways (or destructions) by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of, or blasphemed.

R. 10. Such a Toleration of such like corruptions in matters of Religion, in
such as so pertinaciously hold them forth, is a like Toleration of such who
spoil the Vines under such Rulers charge: of Wolves which spare not the Flock
over which they are political Shepherds: of spiritual Sorcerers be witching
them: of so many Jezabels, which seduce their people, Ergo not to be allowed,
or yielded to by Regulated Rulers. The Consequence is evident, unless any
would have such Rulers to be so unfaithful in their charge, or careless of
their duty, respecting their people. The Antecedent is grounded upon Scripture;
they are Foxes spoiling the Vines, and rather to be taken down by civil
officers of a professing State, then Cantic. 1. 2. 16.
let alone in that way of spoiling, so are they such Wolves, not sparing the
Flock, of the Churches, which are also politically under their care, Acts 20.
30. with Ezekiel. 34. 8. 10. before explained; so are they Sorcerers, Revel. 22.
15. Without are Sorcerers, 2 Timothy 3. 13. Evil men (...). and inchanters, such
as can by sleights of the Devil, deceive the eye, hence that of such Gal. 3. 1.
Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth. They are also as
Jezabell, whom God will punish; if men fail in their duty, Revel. 2. 20, 21,
22, 23. and say the Church in a Church way, was to censure such; yet that
hinders not the discharge of the Magistrates duty, in political punishing
such as are so injurious to Church societies, yea and the State also, of which
he has a political charge; as of old, Jehu a chief Magistrate, did
politically punish Jezabell, who was isntrumental in the spiritual whoredom
of the religious State of Israel, and therefore called, her whoredoms and
witchcrafts, 2 Kings 9. 22. of whose punishment by Jehu's command, read verse.
33.

That which is mainly objected against what we have now said, is,

This Objection being of some seeming weight, for the better clearing the
whole, take these Conclusions.

Concl. 1. The highest Rule, to which all are in conscience bound, is the very
Word of God. Conscience is to a Christian, Regula regulata, and not Regula
regulans, which rather is the word; conscience it self must be subject to
that: hence it is made the natural man's sin, that it is otherwise with him,
Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can
be. Hence is it that God lays Commands upon Conscience also, Mark 12. 30. the
whole soul, heart and mind of man, must love the Lord, or is by duty bound in
its way to express dearest, highest respect to him, even by its respect to
Gods Commandments, in its way, 1 John 5. 3. This is love, that we keep his
Commandments: Otherwise love simply and strictly considered, is not appliable
to the whole soul and mind, but is an affection of the will only. Now if all
the soul, mind, and heart must do thus, the conscience too, which is one
faculty thereof. Hence the Law is called spiritual, as reaching the sins of
the Spirit, the mind and conscience, etc. of man also, and enjoining the Spirit
its duty, as well as the body and outward man: Hence that writing of Gods Law
in his peoples hearts and minds, to be a Sovereign commanding Law therein.

Concl. 2. Whatsoever therefore is really contrary to the very Word of God, it
must needs be sinful to him that does it, as having the form of sin in it. Sin
is (formally) (...), the transgression of the Law, or Word of God; yea albeit
the conscience of him, who holds or practiceth that Anomie in doctrine or
life, does thorough error, tell him, that it is good and according to the Law
or word, for no Creature, and so not conscience it self by its dictates, can
make that which is formally, simply, and in its self sinful, to be other then
sinful: yea albeit a man should come afterward to see, and bewail his
error, and evil, yet the sin is still in it self and nature, a sin, although
God in Christ, will not impute it to penitent beleivers in Christ. Hence
expiation of old, made by blood, for such breaches of Gods Commands, when yet
the party did not think that they had been sins, Levit. 5. 17, 18. When a soul
sins, and does in any of those what is forbidden by Gods Commandments
[though he wist it not] yet he is guilty. Hence Confession made by penitent
Saints, of sins, as sins, which yet they did out of conscience and judgment,
as duty, Acts 26. 9, 10, 11. I verily thought I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing I also did, etc. And
being exceeding mad, I persecuted the Saints, etc. He says it was really in
his heart, as duty to him, yet confesses, that it was in deed, and before God,
his exceeding madness.

Concl. 3. Each ones conscience therefore is bound to suggest, that to be held,
professed, or practiced, and that only, which the very written word of God,
does really hold forth, to be so held, professed, or practiced, and to deter
from whatsoever is really contrary to the word, and to that only; else
conscience does not express its boundless respects and love to God, which is
the first and great Commandment of God, Mark 12. 30.

Concl. 4. Each Christian is bound to hearken to the voice of Conscience, thus
speaking and suggesting the mind of God, not alone, as that is the word which
conscience does speak, but as it is the voice of conscience, so speaking from
God. Hence it becomes sin, if what we do be not from a good consciences
persuasions, grounded upon the very Word of God, the rule and object of Faith,
Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, or that which is not grounded
upon the Word, which is Faith in the object, and suitable persuasion built upon
the Word, which is Faith in the subject, it is sin.

Concl. 5. Neither Conscience it self simply considered, nor the directing,
instigating, and persuading acts of conscience, in themselves nakedly
considered, without respect to the Word of God, and their conformity thereunto,
are an immediate rule approved of God, for Christians to regulate their
apprehensions, or actions thereby; for to make that such a rule of Gods
approving, were either,

1. To suppose the dictates of Conscience to be infalliable, whereas Conscience
in unregenerate ones (such as Hypocrites are) is wholly defiled, Their mind
and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1. 15. And in the Regenerate, it is in part
corrupted, and has a law of sin in it, as well as any other faculty, Romans 7.
14. 23. Paul a Regenerate man, says, I am carnal, sold under sin, his whole
soul also as far as yet carnal, was sold under sin; and the heart taken for
the conscience, will be showing it self, in it self, wicked and deceitful in
such dictates, Jer. 17. 9. What godly person finds not this guilefull dealing
of Conscience it self, so far as unregenerate; that it will be accusing when
it should excuse, and excusing when it should accuse. Whence that of David,
chiding his soul for such like evils, Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou cast down O
my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? etc.

Or 2. This at least were to suppose Conscience to be fallible (as what other
thing can be supposed of it, as in part unregenerate in the best here on earth)
Now if so, then 1 it is to suppose, that God should set up to his people a
fallible, deceitful rule. 2. It is to make God the Author of Confusion in
Religion: since diverse persons consciences, being diversely led, become diverse
rules, yea (according to that supposition) approved rules of God: yea then
there are approved contradictory rules in Religion: As that no Saints are to be
worshipped with Religious worship, according to some Christians Consciences who
are Protestants: and that Saints are to be so worshipped, according to other
Christians consciences, who are popish, that the Lords day is of Divine
institution, according to some, and that it is not of Divine institution,
according to other Christians consciences. 3. It is to make God the Author and
allower of rules, requiring palpable breach of his own sacred infallible
rules, as Fornication, Heretique-King-killing, plurality of Wives, living
without any proper calling, refusal and neglect of public and private
worship of God: since the consciences of too many Christians dictate these as
meet and lawful, although the word of God speak the contrary. 4. It is to make
God himself to acquit the most horrid blasphemies and heresies, and other
penaticall enormities in Religions of any guilt, supposing they are, as too
often they are, and the objection supposes them to be, the dictates of
Conscience, though erring: for then according to this supposall, they are made
to be according to Gods rule, and so not irregularities, not sins. 5. This were
to make God the Author or allower of that, which too often proves fatal in
the issue. For be it that sometimes such evils mentioned, be no other then
such as are right in the eyes of a Christians mind, judgment, and conscience,
yet God says, There is a way which seems right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death, Prove. 11. 12. and 16. 25. 6. This were to cut
off all ordinary ways of conviction and conversion from such as go astray
thorough an erring conscience: For their errors and corrupt ways being
according to conscience, are by this supposition according to Gods allowed
rule: And would you convert men from following a rule of God? 7. Then in case
of a more then ordinary conversion from errors and heresies, and corrupt
practices thereof, held in and acted in conscience formerly, yet are not those
errors to be bewailed, or that conversion to be looked at as of grace, since
before that conversion such walked according to Gods rule (as it is here
supposed) namely consciences dictates, though erring: the contrary whereunto is
evident in the former instance of Paul, who Acts 26. 9, 10, 11. confesses that
to be his madness, and 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15. magnifieth Gods rich grace, as
showed in his conversion. 8. Then persons dying for the maintenance of the most
horrid blasphemies, which an Arrian and popish conscience, may hold unto the
death, they dye for Righteousness sake, as following (as is here supposed) an
allowed Rule of God, conscience. 9. Then corrupted, deserted christians
consciences, pressing thorough strength of temptation, to contradictings of
what has formerly been spoken effectually to them, and done for their souls,
are rules of God whereby to conclude their estates according to God, and so not
blameworthy, or to be crossed or curbed by the Saints, contrary to that, Psalm.
31. 22. where David blames such like conclusions as rash and sinful; I said
in my have I am cut off from thy sight, and Psalm. 116. 1^. I said in my have
all men are liars (albeit in a case wherein they held forth no other promise of
God, then formerly himself had believed and professed, verse. 10.) To which
purpose it is that David chideth his soul for such like disquieting thoughts
and conclusions, Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou, O my soul, so disquieted within
me? If then it appear by these reasons, that the bare dictates of conscience,
without their due and just grounding upon the word, are not an approved rule of
God, we have what we would; otherwise these absurdities must needs follow the
contrary.

Concl. 6. Albeit there be some binding nature in conscience, though erring, so
that in that estate of conscience, not to omit a thing in it self good, from
which erring conscience disswadeth, would become to that person, an offense
against conscience, and a present resolution never to do something in it self
evil, to which the erring conscience does persuade, would be of the like
nature to him, yet may regulated civil Authority, yea they must restrain and
punish, both manifest neglect of weighty duties, in matters of God or man,
required by God, and under God enjoined by man: and likewise evidenced
commission of any forbidden evils, both by God and man, committed by the
outward man in any scandalous manner; and yet therein such Authority does not
restrain any from doing, or punishing for doing their duty, or for not sinning,
and we shall in confirming this Conclusion, Answer the weight of the Objection.

Now the First Reason hereof is, Because Civil regulated Authority, does
restrain and punish sins against either Table, not under that notion, as the
dictates of Conscience, which are secret, and as such pass man's view, scaning
or censure, but as the outward man's neglect of what God himself immediately,
and by his Ministers, Civil Magistrates, mediately, and as the outward man's
commission of evils forbidden, first by God, and then by Civil Authority,
from, and under God, also as evils infringing the civil power, and cross to
the end for which Civil Authorities and societies are appointed: Likewise as
hurtful to Civil States, and bringing many mischiefs upon the same, if they
are not thus restrained and punished.

2. Because, that together with their coerceive Laws binding to Civil
punishments, they do provide for all due means of conviction, of persons
pretending Conscience for what they either refuse to do, or for what they
actually do contrary to God: whether it will appear (at least
interpretatively) to them, as well as others, such punishable acts of theirs
arise not from conscience regulated, but stiffned against its duty.

Nor 3. Do such persons, in such omissions or commissions, their whole duty,
but many ways contrary to their duty, in regard of some of which contrary
walkings to their duty, they may be justly punished for them. In some sense it
is a part of duty to do nothing against conscience, and to do what one does
according to conscience, yet the stresse and force of that duty lies here:
because conscience it self by duty, is to be subject to the word, and bottom
all its dictates upon the word, and to attend to all as well as any of the
rules of the word; to all which, each man therefore is in conscience bound to
attend: so that such erring and corrupted persons, they do not their whole,
nor do they their maine duty, in that they do not therein what is according
to the word, but contrary rather to the word, both as requiring first such and
such duties of them: as for instance, to swear by the name of God, to go out
to War, and the like, when called to it, under pain of Gods displeasure; and
then in a second part, requiring obedience out of conscience to such or such
things, as lawfully required by his Civil Ordinance and Ministers, even higher
Civil powers, and in case of doing contrary, leaving them to the dint of his
sword in their hands, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. compared. 2. Since in that
condition (mentioned) of their erring consciences, whilst erring, they offend
their conscience, if they should then resolve against the doing of something in
it self evil, they may and should take a middle course rather at present;
namely, to use all the best means of better information of their erring minds,
that so they may refuse to act or hold: not where an erring conscience
requires, or on the other hand, may do, not what an erring conscience then
forbids, but what the same conscience upon better sight, sees cause to
refuse to do, or else to do; as in the former instances of taking an Oath,
going to War (to which we may add) putting away a wife upon a slight cause, or
the like: they will not stiffly refuse an Oath, or to go for a soldier when
Authority lawfully requires it, nor yet forthwith actually do it, but humbly
desire time and help to be cleared in the lawfulness of it, and afterward
give in their Answer, and accordingly seriously and conscionably using the best
means, usually and ordinarily accompanied with the Lords special blessing,
they groundedly do what is required. So in case of such putting away a wife,
to which erring conscience urges, they resolve not wholly to forbear such a
thing, but at present to suspend, upon desire of the best information, which
attained, they forbear now upon a well informed Conscience, what they durst not
have wholly refused in the former state of their erring Conscience. Now if such
persons, through pride, wilfulness, peremptorinesse, contempt, falsehood, or
false conceit, will refuse the due and real use of such means, and of the
ordinary way of God, to help them out of this Labyrinth, they refuse a
manifest, known duty, and expose themselves the rather to Civil Justice.

4. Because, else according to the ground work laid in the objection, what
horrid outrages, blasphemies, idolatries, and the like enormities, can
ordinarily come under the curb or lash of Civil Authority. In case of murders
of a Protestant Prince, or person, or people, by Papists, in whose Conscience
they are acts more then ordinary pleasing to God, and meriting heaven, so in
case of committing of filthiness with the wives of others of their Judgments,
by persons of famalisticall consciences; or in case of sins which yet are not
against Natures light, as in Arrians, out of Conscience denying Jesus Christ to
be the Son of God; or in others out of conscience crying down all Church
Societies, and Ordinances, and from the same erring conscience, peremptorily,
yea seditiously, opposing and despising them, and all Civil Authority which
would or does maintain the same; will you now have them punished for doing
their duty, in harkening to their Consciences? O^ for not sinning against their
Consciences, in not doing those things which they in conscience stand bound to
do. If the Objectors say, yea, God forbid it should be otherwise; all Civil
and Church peace, and privileged proprieties, are else undermined, if such be
not punished, then have they the weight of their own objection taken off: if
they say no, none of them may be punished by Civil Authority, but they must be
left to Gods Judgment, I doubt not, that godly wise Rulers are otherwise
minded, and know and will do their duty therein.

Now let us also briefly clear up some few Scriptures wrested against the
Conclusion.

Object.
The Parable of Tares, Matthew. 13. is Objected, Let them (says Christ) grow
till harvest; and therefore Heretics, Schismatiques, persons otherwise
corrupt in matters of Religion, such in judgment and practice are to be
continually tolerated by Authority.

Answ.
1. If this prove any such matter of Toleration, it must prove immunity of all
the children of the wicked one, of all that are to be cast into hell, of all
that offend, verse. 38. 41. All these as well as Heretics, which are but some
of that sort, must be let al^n^, they must also all be free, not alone from the
Civil sword, but from Church Censures: yea whether the persons, those tares,
and wicked ones, within the field of the visible Church, do sin against the
first Table, by professed Atheism, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Perjury, Witchcraft,
etc. Or against the second Table, by Murder, Adultery, Treachery, Robbery, or
the like: yet both Church and Commonwealth, must let these Tares in the
visible Church-field alone to the last day, and dare any say so? Observable it
is, that Christ Expounding all the rest of the Parable, comes not over that
sentence again [Let them alone to the Harvest] as practically appliable
thereunto, or enjoining any such to be rational,

2. The drift and scope of the Parable is to show, what by Gods providence will
be ordered, not in this or that particular religious State or Church in it, but
what will fall out in the field of the whole visible Church, through out the
world, over which no one Civil State, or Church, has power: that even in this
great field, taken in from the rest of the world, and this field sown by God,
and which in a more special manner is his Kingdom, there will be mixtures of
good and bad; and the rooting up, not of this or that Tare, or wicked person,
but of all the Tares in general, or of all the children of the Devil, within
the pale of the Church; will never be, till the general day of Judgment,
which will be an universal and infallible kind of severing, sorting, and
censuring; and when there shall be a total and final ridding of them from
amongst the Children of the Kingdom, or the righteous: Although God in the
mean space, by his own hand, immediately, and by the hands of men sometimes,
mediately, will be cutting off this or that Child of the Devil, this or that
Witch, Traitor, Atheist, Blasphemer, Murderer, or the like: As he will be
gathering in many particular godly ones, as good wheat and seed into his
Garner, leaving the general severing and gathering of both good and bad, wheat
and tares, unto that general, last, and great harvest day. The like is held
forth in that Parable, Matthew. 13. 48, 49, 50.

Object.
That speech of Gamaliel, Acts 5. is objected, Let these men alone, etc. if of
God, ye cannot resist, if of men, it will come to nothing.

Answ.
1. He spoke this in a doubtful, newtrall way, not closing with either; hence
he says, If it be of God, and if it be of men, is this therefore a ground to
godly, wise, or regulated Rulers, either to be of Gamaliels doubtful spirit in
matters of God, or of the Church, when all Christians are required to be
established in the Faith? Yea in that Doctrine of God, which respects
Church Order also, Col. 2. 5, 6, 7. in which they are to be men of
understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20. sheep who know Christ's voice, John 10. 4. Or is
this any ground that they should be of a newtrall spirit, leaving all to God,
either to determine the right therein, or to maintain his own cause, and to
ruinate the contrary, which was Gamaliels ground of his newtrality, If this
thing be of men, it will come to naught, God himself by his providence will
bring them to ruin. Upon which ground, what need is there for Magistrates to
punish Adulterers, or fraudulent dealers, or the like; for God professes
himself to be an Avenger of such evils, Heb. 13. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 10. Yea but
Rulers (say we) are Gods Ministers, to avenge such like evils. And so in
matters of God, it is alike as was showed, in thesi it might be truly said,
What is of God, cannot be resisted, what is of men will come to naught, and God
is an avenger of such things, he can defend his own worship and ways, and his
truth is able to defend it self, else who would regard either, yet God also
would have Moses to promulge Laws, and to look to the due execution of Laws,
providing for Civil punishment of persons who came with their own lying
fancies, though in his Name, to thrust his people away from God, Deuteronomy. 13. or
draw away his people from his instituted worship to idolatrous worship, Deuteronomy.
17. and in the times of the Jews coming home to Christ, Christ and his truth
will be able to defend themselves, he will be the chief avenger of evil, yet
shall false Prophets be punished differently according to their demerits, by
the Civil Magistrate, Zech. 13. Gamaliel might rather have added, that yet
such seducers as Theudas and Judas, with their obstinate abettors, do justly
perish by the sword of the Civil State, as himself intimates, verse. 37, 38.
and so are not, in such pernicious ways which come from beneath, to be left
only to Gods judgment: to be sure Christ's sentence, He that is not with me is
against me, Matthew. 12. 30. requires more of his people then such a newtrall
spirit.

2. These of whom good Gamaliel spoke, howsoever thought of by the blind
bemisted world, yet were such as in the judgments of the whole body of the
Saints then, who were of discerning eyes and spirits, did indeed preach the
truth; and so no fast ground hence, that such which both really and in the
judgment of the most discerning Saints and Servants of God, do hold forth
falsehoods and blasphemies, should be let alone in any such scandalous or
mischievous courses.

Object.
That also 1 Timothy 1. 4. is objected; That the Law is not for the righteous: and
so man's Laws, if according to Gods Law, should not provide to restrain and
punish such, for their Opinions, etc.

Answ. 1.
The Law is not for the righteous, as righteous, and regular (through grace) to
it: nor is there any Law against the fruits of Gods Spirit, Gal. 5. 23. yet if
he that is either really or seemingly a righteous man, commit murder or
adultery, or if any such Members of the Jews Church commit idolatry, or
blaspheme the name of his God, by the Law, promulged by Moses that Magistrate,
he was a man of death, and that by the hand of the Civil Magistrate.

2. The Law being said in this quoted place, to be for whatsoever is contrary
to sound doctrine, surely the political keepers of the Law of God are rather
in duty bound to make Laws, ratifying that sum and scope of the Law of their
Sovereign, and their Laws, as consonant to their pattern Law of God, are to
be for whatsoever is openly and grossly held forth and acted contrary to sound
doctrine.

Object.
That also 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, thinks no evil,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, is objected as a
ground of such liberty.

Answ.
That will not follow, because we should do nothing of malice against any
person, nor rashly, and upon bare surmises, nor without a due distinction and
consideration of the matter of fact in judgment, or the like, therefore we
must not call evil, evil, therefore a godly Ruler, as a Ruler, must endure all
things how scandalous soever, or hurtful, without respecting either second or
first Table, and how palpably evil or gross soever it be, yet that he must
hope the best of it, and how dangerous soever to State or Church, yet he must
let it go unpunished. Suffer long, even defer a righteous sentence upon an
evidenced evil doer, contrary to Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an
evil doer is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men
are fully set in them to do evil.

Object.
That of Moses politically tolerating divorce is urged, that therefore all
sorts of errors, and the like are to be tolerated and not in an ordinary way
punished.

Answ.
We Answer, that that conclusion speaks of that which is to be done in a way of
ordinary use of Civil Authority, and in cases ordinary, and not as that of
Moses in such like politic permission of things otherwise evil, of an
extraordinary nature, nor may any reason, because Moses tolerated a sin against
the second Table, or 5th, 7th, and 9th Commandment (as was the divorce of
Moses, for every cause, even every slight cause, Mat. 1. 9.) therefore Civil
States in an ordinary way and case may tolerate in the grosser sense, against
the first Table, as Blasphemy, Perjury, the Mass, Witchcraft, etc. or against
the second Table, as Robbery, Adultery, etc. Nay, if Moses his toleration be
urged for a ground of toleration, it must be rather a toleration of sins
against the second Table, then for Toleration of sins against the first Table.
David in an extraordinary case let murder a time unpunished in Joab and
Abishai all his days, but it will not follow that therefore godly Princes and
Rulers may in an ordinary way and case let another alone unpunished.

Now to the High, Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever.
FINIS.

