A SINGLE EYE All Light, no Darkness; or Light and Darkness One: In which you
have it purely Discussed,

1. The Original of Darkness. 2. What Darkness is. 3. Why it is called
Darkness.
As also, What God is Within, and what Without; how he is said to be One, yet
Two; when Two and not One, yet then One, and not Two.

Likewise A Word from the Lord touching the only Resurrection of the Body, In,
From, and To the LORD.

With a certain parcel of Quaeries to be answered from Heaven or Hell,

This Revealed in L. C. one of the UNIVERSALITY.

Imprinted at LONDON, in the Year that the POWERS of Heaven and Earth Was, Is,
and Shall be Shaken, yea Damned, till they be no more for EVER.

BEhold, the King of glory now is come
T'reduce God, and Devil to their Doom;
For both of them are servants unto Me
That lives, and rules in perfect Majesty:
Though called God, yet that is not my Name,
True, I be both, yet am I not the same:
Therefore a wonder am I to you all,
So that to titul'd Gods ye pray and call.
Oh then my Creature, let me speak to thee;
Thy Worship, and thy God, shall die truly.
Why dote ye Worldlings? up and down being hurled,
As he is, so are we even in this World;
And so are all things perfect, just, and good;
Yea, all are saved by's Cross, his wounds, and blood.
Where else is heaven, but in our present peace
From him? or hell, but when that this does cease?
Fie then for shame, look not above the Skies
For God, or Heaven; for here your Treasure lies
Even in these Forms, Eternal Will will reign,
Through him are all things, only One, not Twain:
Sure he is the Fountain from which every thing
Both good and ill (so termed) appears to spring.
Unto this Single Eye, though Adams two
Cannot perceive, to Such, to All
Adieu.
HAving experience that his Majesty, the Being and Operation of all things,
appears in and to the Creature under a twofold Form or Visage, by which that
becomes real with the Creature, which is but a shadow with this Infinite
Being: So that from hence it arises, the Creature supposes God to be that
which is not, and that not to be, which is God.

Therefore has his Majesty divulged his pleasure, that thereby he may take
occasion to unfold himself in and to the Creature under such a prospect, that
the Creature may know God, as he is known of God, that so from the clear
appearance of God, the Creature may behold purely what God is, which as yet is
manifest, the Creation in this Nation inhabiteth in no other Region then the
Woman of Samaria: And therefore it is the cry of his Majesty is not fulfilled
and obeyed, but by Churches, Saints, and Devils opposed and contemned: So that
rare it is to find the Creature that is awaked out of his deep sleep, that has
shaked off the covering, so that he can from the clear Appearance of God say,
the vail is taken away, and that he believes the Truth as it is in his Majesty.

In answer to this, I have traveled from one end of England to another, and as
yet could find very few that could define unto me the Object of their Worship,
or give me a Character what that God is, so much professed by them; yet
notwithstanding I could come into no City, Town, nor Village, but there I heard
the name God under one Form or another, worshipped that for God, which I had
experience was no God: So that in the period of my Pilgrimage, I concluded
there was gods many, and lords many, although to me but one God: Therefore at
my return, I was carried out by God to hold forth to the Creature, the God
yesterday, to day, and for ever.

To that end, in the perusal of his Majesty's pleasure, you may take notice
what is intended, or rather, in the ensuing Treatise recorded, having for the
present but only presented to you a Map, in which you may take a full view what
that God is thou pretends to Worship, whether he be Infinite, or Finite;
whether he be subject to passion and affection, whether he behold the actions
of the creature as the Creature esteem them, and whether he can be changed by
thy prayers, so as to expiate a judgment, or produce a deliverance, yea
whether he be all, and in all, or but all in part, that is to say, whether one
act be good, another evil, one light, another darkness; and if so, reason from
Scripture declares, God is passionate, God is affectionate, and if either,
then changeable.

But by forms and spiritual God like forms he is professed, and so worshipped
as a God that beholds evil and good; so passionate with the one, and
affectionate with the other, so that in conclusion they imagine him as
themselves, not infinite, but finite, therefore it is, one Act in God is
conceived two in themselves, to wit, one Act Adultry, another Honesty; when if
Reason were admitted, and thereby Scripture interpreted, then should they
observe in that Act they call Honesty, to be Adultry, and that Act so called
Adultry, to have as much honesty as the other, for with God they are but one,
and that one Act holy, just, and good as God; This to me by Reason is
confirmed, and by Scripture declared, That to the pure all things are pure: So
that for my part I know nothing unclean to me, no more then it is of it self,
and therefore what Act soever I do, is acted by that Majesty in me, as in the
ensuing Treatise will appear what Acts they are, the nature of Acting them; and
in the period: how I esteem them: So that I weigh not how I am judged, in that
I judge not my self. So to conclude, the censures of Scripture, Churches,
Saints, and Devils, are no more to me than the cuting off of a Dogs neck.

Vale.
ISAIAH 42. 16. I will make Darkness Light hefore them.
THe God of gods has cast me on this Subject, to the end he may take occasion
to unfold himself what he is in himself, and how he makes out himself in his
Appearance to the creature.

To that end, be pleased to peruse the precedent verses, and you will find what
occasioned these terms in this Text; In brief, you may behold the Original
thereof arise from the present state of the Gentiles, they being then as it
were Prisoners, and in the state of darkness; So that in reference to their
bondage, Christ called the Son of God was promised, to redeem them from the
Region of Darkness; that notwithstanding they had worshipped that for God which
was no god, yet now is the time come, now is the day that God will plunder them
of their Idols, that God will enlighten their dark understandings, as in my
Text, God will make darkness light before them.

Notwithstanding it may be supposed by some, that the connection hereof does
only concern the Gentiles, yet let me tell thee, I find that God is not so
limited in his pen, ink, and paper, but that he can and will make the
darkness of the Jew light, as well as the Gentile; yea, the darkness of you as
any other: for never was there more superstition, more darkness in the Churches
than now, therefore never more need to have the light of God expel those dark
mists that at this time is spread over all opinions in the Kingdom: So that now
does the time draw near that the sayings in this Text shall appear in the
unfoldings of the Spirit, I will make darkness light before them.

Being now arived at the wished Haven, all the difficulty will be how to unload
the Vessel fraughted with such hidden pearls, how to make merchandise of them,
how to unfold this Subject to your capacity, how to give you the mind of God,
in such terms as God appears in you.

And that the more, I find the unfoldings of God in this, seem to appear
contrary to most that is quoted in the History; I will make darkness light; How
is it possible, when there is no communion, no correspondency but enmity? Yea,
so great, that they cannot dwell in one house, lodge in one bed, but devour one
another; for where darkness is, light is not, and where light appears,
darkness is gone; yet notwithstanding you hear, he will make darkness light.

So that the first thing I mind from hence is, That he will not take darkness
away, and in the room thereof place light, but that which in Scripture is
called darkness, and by the Creature believed darkness, shall be made light.

Secondly we shall enquire, Whether that in Scripture, or by the Creature
entitled darkness, be darkness with God or no?

To this end you may read Light and Darkness are both alike to God. So then it
appears but a darkness in the Creatures apprehension, so but an imagined
darkness; for says the Text, God is light, and in him no darkness. So that you
see, whatsoever or howsoever it is called darkness in Scripture, yet it is none
with God Then

Thirdly, I shall search, Whether that in Scripture or by the Creature called
God, admit of any other Title but unus (to wit) One himself, and if I find
there is but one Being, one God, and that all that is be light with God, then
shall I not cease till I find the Original of Darkness, what it is, and why it
is called darkness, etc.

First, I find in his Divine Being, in his Essence, there is but one God; the
history declares the same. I am what I am: I am the Lord, and there is none
else: There is no other God beside me: with varieties of Scriptures to this
purpose. So then, it is clear by the History, That the Being and Essence of God
admits not of the plural but singular.

So that there is but one God, whose Name is Light, so called God; for, that
which God is, is God (to wit) God is light, then that light is God; for what
God says he is, that is himself, but God says, He is light, therefore Light
is God; so from the Scripture where God said Let there be light, it is no more
then if he had said, Let there be God, and there was God, for God is Light. For,

You have heard the Scripture holds forth but one God, which God is Light; yet
the same Scripture holds forth not only light, but lights; as verse 14. Let
there be Lights, and that Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven: So that God
made two great lights, that is to say, The light of the Sun, the light of the
Moon, Stars, fire, and candle. From hence take notice, that though but one God,
yet diverse Lights, and that all made by God; for he that said Let there be
light, said Let there be Lights; therefore he is called The Father of Lights,
etc.

But then how shall we do with that place, For God is light, not lights; either
he must be as well lights as light, or else, that all other lights but one has
a Being and Original besides God.

And if it appear that all lights, or that which is called light, though the
light of the candle, be made by God, then the light of the candle is the light
of God; but if all that is called light, to wit, the light of the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Fire, and Candle, have not their being in God, then not made by God; So
it will follow, that there is not only one, but two gods.

But the Scripture says, That God made the Light, and God made the Lights: So
that both light and lights were made by God, then had they their being in God;
for all that he made were in him, of him, and to him, as well the Sun as the
Moon, the Stars, the Fire, and the Candle, as any of them; So that in making of
these, he made nothing but himself; for God is light, as well the one as the
other.

But then, If God be light, then lights; so that we may as well say Gods, as
God; a God of the Sun, another of the Moon; for in that God is light, he must
as well be the light of the Moon, as the light of the Sun, the light of the
fire, the candle, as the stars.

Not denying but God is as well the light of the one, as the light of the
other; yet notwithstanding that, God is but one light, and although called
lights by God, yet they are but one light in God; to that end he is called The
Father of Lights, but one Father, though many lights. So that why they are but
one light in God, or God one light, and yet by God called lights, are in
reference to their distinct appearance in those several bodies (to wit) the
body of the Sun, the body of the Moon; that as you see notwithstanding several
beams from one Sun, yet in their rise from the Sun, they were but one in the
Sun; nay indeed, they were nothing but the Sun, but after they are issued out
of the Sun, one this way, another that way from the Sun, then according to this
diverse appearance, it is no more called a Sun, but a Beam, not only Beam, but
Beams, which when reduced to their being, they are no longer called a Beam, but
a Sun.

So why they are called lights, and yet but one light with or in God, who is
light, it is but according to its diverse appearance, which in the being is but
one appearance, because he that is the being of the light, is the appearance of
the light, in what kind or degree whatsoever.

So that now you may take notice, and in some measure behold what God is, and
what is to be understood by those terms, God is light, and light is God; which
if it be that light is God, to wit, the light of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Fire,
and Candle, which if the light appearing in these, and held forth by these, be
the light of God, Why may not the whole Creation say with their brother Jacob,
Surely God were in these, and we knew it not?

But may be you will say, the light that is there recorded, is not to be
understood the light of the Sun, Moon, etc. but a light that is quoted in these
several Scriptures, to wit, a divine and Spiritual light, by which a creature
beholds and enjoy God.

However God that is light appears in you, discovering to you that the light
in the creature is not the same light of the Sun, yet the appearance of light
in me, shows me (and that from Scripture declares to me) that one is as much
divine as the other; no more precious (simply in it self) then the other: for
as you have heard, though Lights, yet but Light with God: so that all that is
light, is nothing but God; for Light is Light, and God is light: this may be
will in some measure be believed. But now to the matter in hand, I will make
darkness light, and crooked things straight, etc.

Whether it is intended the darkness of the night to become the light of the
day, or it is the Dark, as in several portions of Scripture is recorded: yea it
is intended that you call the darkness in the Creature, which darkness is
sin, hell, and misery: this darkness he will make Light, Heaven, and Felicity;
for in God is no darkness, sin, nor misery; yet this will he make Light. So
that now I am come to the place where I told you I would show you the rise of
Darkness, what it is, and why it is called Darkness.

To this end you shall find in Scripture a twofold Power, to wit, more Powers
than one, yet notwithstanding there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that
be, are ordained of God. From hence you may observe the connection hereof run in
the plural, not Power, but Powers; a Power of darkness, a Power of light, a
Power in the wicked, a Power in the Godly; yet you have held forth in the same
Scripture but one God.

So then, as it has been proved, and I believe by you all will be granted,
that the Power of Light, Life, and Salvation, comes from God; the Power that
acts in the Godly, has its rise from God; but then, What shall we say to the
Power of darkness, that Power in the wicked? for in them is a great Power, as
says the Prophet, I have seen the wicked in great Power, (instance) the Power
in Esau, in Pharaoh, the Power in Herod and Pilat, by which they crucified
Christ, from whom came this Power? the Scripture says, from above, (to wit)
from God: yet this was the Power of darkness, of sin: was it not a sinful act
to crucify Christ? that I know you will all conclude it was a wicked act; and
yet this act was according to the will of God, as says the History, By the
Power of God the Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered
together, against the Lord, and against his Christ. etc. What had they Power
from God to destroy the Son of God? was this the will of God? so says the
Scripture, by the Power of God they gathered together: What to do? Nothing but
what thy hand and thy Council determined before to be done.

Well friends, consider this Power in Pilate, was a dark, sinful Power, yet it
came from God; yea, it was the Power of God, as is recorded: I form light, I
create darkness, I form Peace, I create evil. So that let it be a Power,
whatsoever, in whomsoever, whether in Flesh or Spirit, wicked or Godly, it is
the Power of God, yea, came from God. So that in time, he will make this Power
of darkness a Power of Light; that whereas you have called and condemned one
Power for a dark sinful Power; you shall have it appear to you, as now it is
to me, that it is a Power of Light; for you heard this Power came from God,
this Power of darkness: ye^ ^^d is Light, and in him is no darkness.

So that consider, though two Powers, yet they have but one womb, one bi^th; ^o
both Twins, both brethren, as Esau and Iaakob, then if Tw^^s, if bre^hr^n, then
one Flesh, one Nature, yea, of the self same Nature of God, from whom they
came; as well Esau as Iaakob, Pharaoh as Moses, Pilate as Christ: I say,
although these be di^^inct, in reference to their several operations, as two
streams runs contrary ways, yet they are but of one Nature, and that from
one Fountain: Herein it appears but a seeming opposition; instance the Tide,
what striving for Victory; yet but one Water, yea and that from one Ocean. So
is the case with these Powers, one opposite to the other, contending for
Victory, till at last, one overcomes another, as the Tide the Stream.

Thus you may take notice from whence darkness has its rise, only from God.

Secondly, What Darkness is; nothing but light with God.

Thirdly, Why it is called Darkness, is but only in reference to the Creatures
apprehension, to its appearance; so nothing but imagined Darkness: therefore
his meaning is, that which appears now under the form of Darkness, shall ere
long appear in a Visage of Light, as says the Text, I will make darkness
light before them.

Again, it may be granted by you, as it has been by some, that the Power or
Powers are of God; yea that Power by which Pharaoh persecuted Israel; that
Power by which Pilate crucified Christ, yet it will not be granted that God
gave the Power so to do; neither was it the Power, but a corrupt thought, or
sinful imagination arising from the Devil, and their own wicked inventions.

Answer. Being now surrounded with the black Regiment, whose Commander is the
Devil, and the whole legion consisting of the imaginations of the whole
Creation, I have no way to escape this Camp and bottomless gulf, but by
breaking through the Bulwark and strong hold fortified against me.

So that being armed with a weapon of Majesty, I doubt not but that God in me
shall cast down those strong holds and imaginations, yea every thing that
exalts it self against the Power of the most high.

To that end attend the nature of your objection, the sum thereof is to this
effect, that a sinful act, or an act that is sinful, has not its being in the
Power of God, nor produced by the Power of God; no not that act of crucifying
the Son of God, but from the Devil, and their sinful imaginations.

If thou by whom the Objection was raised, did nakedly understand the truth
therein contained, I should not in the least molest thee, but in that thou
declarest Truth not knowing it, I am engaged to unfold the same, that thou
may know it, for whereas thou say a sinful act is not produced by the
Power of God, its Truth: for that which is not in the Power, cannot be acted by
the Power: but an act that is sinful is not in God, nor the Power of God,
therefore has not its being in God, nor acted by the Power of God, for God is
light, and in him no darkness: but sin is darkness, therefore sin is not in
God.

So that yet, notwithstanding that, I must tell you as before I have related,
that as all Powers are of God, so all acts, of what nature soever are produced
by this Power, yea this Power of God: so that all those acts arising from the
Power, are as Pure as the Power, and the Power as Pure as God.

So from hence it comes, there is no act whatsoever, that is impure in God, or
sinful with or before God.

Yet say you, there is a sinful act, or acts that are sinful; so that if all
that is an act be produced by the Power of God, then why not the act that is
sinful arise from the same Power, so sinful in and with God.

As I have said, so I say again, that those acts, or what act soever, so far as
by thee is esteemed or imagined to be sinful, is not in God, nor from God, yet
still, as I said, all acts that be are from God, yea as pure as God.

And yet, notwithstanding that act, or so much of the act that thou
apprehendest sin is not in God, nor simply in thy self: for indeed sin has its
conception only in the imagination; therefore; so long as the act was in God,
or nakedly produced by God, it was as holy as God: but after there is an
appearance in thee, or apprehension to thee, that this act is good, and that
act is evil, then have thou with Adam eat of the forbidden Tree, of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, then have thou tasted of that fruit, which is not
in God; for says the Text, Out of the mouth of the most High proceeds not
evil, and good: good but not evil; for God is good, and good is God: therefore
it was he made all things good: yea that which by you is imagined evil, he made
good: so that thou apprehending that from God which is not in God does of all
his Creatures most abuse God, in making God the author of that which is not in
God, (to wit) Sin. But to the matter in hand, Thou have heard all acts that
are, had their being and birth from God, yea acted by God, to be plain those
acts by thee called Swearing, Drunkenesse, Adultery, and Theft, etc. These acts
simply as acts, were produced by the Power of God, yea, perfected by the Wisdom
of God.

What said I, a Swearer, a Drunkard, an Adulterer, a Thief, had these the power
and wisdom of God, to Swear, Drink, Whore, and Steal? O dangerous Tenent! O
blasphemy of the highest nature! what make God the author of Sin? so a sinful
God! Well Friends, although the appearance of God in me be as terrible to you,
as it were to Moses in the mount, yet notwithstanding, that what I have seen
and heard, I do not in the least tremble, but rejoice, that I have this
opportunity to declare it unto you; however it may be received by you.

To that end consider what I said those acts called Swearing, Drunkenness,
Adultery and Theft, those acts, simply as acts, not as they are called (and by
thee imagined) Drunkenness, Adultery and Theft, that is in and from thy
imagination; for there is no such act as Drunkenness, Adultery, and Theft in
God; though by his Power and Wisdom thou executest this act and that act, yet
that appearance by which thou apprehendest and esteemest them to be acts of
sin, that esteemation was not in God, though from God.

For indeed, it is but imagination, which is not, yea nothing in this, infinite
being; for as I said before, so I say again, the very title Sin, it is only a
name without substance, has no being in God, nor in the Creature, but only by
imagination; and therefore it is said, the imaginations of your hearts are only
evil continually. It is not the body, nor the life, but the imagination only,
and that not at a time, or times, but continually. Herein sin admitting of no
form in it self, is created a form in the estimation of the Creature; so that
which is not to God, is found to be in a something creature; as you have it
related, One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day
alike: what to one is pure, to another is impure; herein it appears but a
bare estimation.

To this end (says Paul) I know and am persuaded, by the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean.

So that the extent thereof is in reference to all things, as well as meats and
drinks; let it be what act soever. Consider what act soever, yea though it be
the act of Swearing, Drunkenness, Adultery and Theft; yet these acts simply,
yea nakedly, as acts are nothing distinct from the act of Prayer and Praises.
Why do thou wonder? why art thou angry? they are all one in themselves; no
more holiness, no more purity in one then the other.

But once the Creature esteems one act Adultery, the other honesty, the one
pure, the other impure; yet to that man that so esteems one act unclean, to
him it is unclean: (as says the History) there is nothing unclean of it self,
[but] but but to him that esteems it unclean: yea again and again it is
recorded that to the pure all things, yea all things are pure, but to the
defiled, all things are defiled: yea the Prayer and Praises of the wicked are
defiled, as says the History, The Prayers of the wicked are abomination to the
Lord.

Observe not the act nakedly, as the act, for we find the Prayer and Praises of
some to be pure, though to others impure: impure to those acting, in relation
to the title his apprehension, his Conscience in the improvement of them is
defiled and condemned for a Swearer, a Drunkard, an Adulterer, and a thief.

When as a man in purity in light, acts the same acts, in relation to the act,
and not the title: this man [no this man] does not swear, whore, nor steal: so
that for want of this light, of this single pure eye, there appears Devil and
God, Hell and Heaven, Sin and holiness, Damnation and Salvation; only, yea
only from the esteemation and dark apprehension of the Creature.

I will make darkness light, rough ways smooth; not half light and half
darkness, not part rough and part smooth; but as it is said, Thou art all fair
my Love, there is no spot in thee. Observe, all fair my Love; in thee only is
beauty and purity, without defilement: my love my dove is but one, thou one,
not two, but only one, my love: Love is God, and God is Love; so all pure, all,
light, no spot in thee.

So that consider what act soever is done by thee, in light and love, is light,
and lovely; though it be that act called Adultery, in darkness, it is so; but
in light, honesty, in that light loves it self, so cannot defile it self: for
love in light is so pure, that a whore it cannot endure, but enstranges it self
from darkness from whence whoredom has its first original. Light is so pure,
that it will not lodge with two; but treads the steps of the Apostle, saying,
Let every man have his own wife: when as darkness is not ashamed to ly with
his neighbors wife: for in light I declare that whoredom is the fruits of
darkness; therefore no companion for light, who scorns the society of a whore
indeed. Light is like Susanna, that had rather die, then be desiled with
harlots. Yea, innocent Susanna, uncorrupted Light, must be accused, arraigned
and condemned, for that her accusers are guilty of: Yet fear not Susanna, thou
shall be vindicated, and thy accusers condemned.

So that this is my Majesty's pleasure to declare, again and again, that what
acts soever is done by thee, according as thou esteemest it, yea according as
thou beleevest it, so be it done unto thee; that is to say, if thou have
committed those acts in Scripture recorded for swearing, drunkenness, adultery
and theft; and so acting apprehendest them, let me deal plainly with thee; to
thee it is Sin: and for so sinning, thy imagination will pursue thee, arraign
thee, and condemn thee for a Swearer, an adulterer and a thief.

When as on the contrary, thou art persuaded that those titles in Scripture,
and thy apprehension recorded, for swearing, adultery, and theft, be no such
acts with thee, but only titles without thee; neither do thou apprehend them
any other, but pure acts, without title: then I declare, according to thy
esteemation so is the act to thee, and for so doing, thy imagination, will not,
cannot condemn thee, but say with the Apostle, We know that an Idol is
nothing: what thou esteemest Idolatry, to us is none: So that whatsoever I act,
though it be that act you call swearing, adultery, and theft, yet to me there
is no such title, but a pure act, for there is nothing that I do that is
unclean to me, no more then it is unclean of it self.

And yet notwithstanding this, my privilege does not in the least approbate
thee, yea thee that apprehendest the title to swear, whore or steal, etc.
because to thee it is unclean, therefore not lawful for thee: neither can
thou upon the bare report hereof, say, Well, if it be but as man esteems it,
then I will esteem it so too.

Alas friend, let me tell thee, whatever thy tongue says, yet thy imagination
in thee declares sad things against thee, in that thou esteemest them acts of
sin, thy imagination will torment thee for this sin, in that thou condemnest
thy self, thou art tormented in that condemnation; with endless misery: so that
I say, Happy is the man that condemns not himself in those things he allows
of.

No matter what Scripture, Saints, or Churches say, if that within thee do not
condemn thee, thou shall not be condemned; for says the History, Out of thine
own mouth, not another, will I judge thee: Therefore, remember that if thou
judge not thy self, let thy life be what it will, yea act what thou can, yet
if thou judge not thy self, thou shall not be judged; For, I came not into the
World to condemn, but to save the World. But if the reproach and slander of
Saints and Churches do cause thee to question thy self, then art thou ready to
say within what they report without, I am guilty of what they accuse me: So
that true is the saying, O Adam, thy destruction is of thy self.

But before I conclude touching how darkness is made light, sin holiness, and
so all deformity converted into its own pure nature, it was my pleasure to
treat something concerning the nature of this loss, that whether darkness in
Scripture recorded, and by the creature believed, be cast out as distinct from
light, and so said to be damned, in that it is not light, not pure, but defiled.

In answer to that, the Lord declares that those filthy abominable works of
darkness (by thee so apprehended) shall be destroyed and damned; But how, or
where shall they be damned? that is in the sayings of this Text, I will make
darkness light: Oh that this were purely minded, then thou would see that sin
must not be thrown out, but cast within, there being in the Vat, it is dyed of
the same color of the liquor; as Saffron converts milk into its own color, so
does the fountain of light convert sin, hell, and devil into its own nature and
light as it self; I will make rough ways smooth: Now it is damm'd and ramm'd
into its only Center, there to dwell eternal in the bosom of its only Father:
This, and only this, is the damnation so much terrifying the Creature in its
dark apprehension, that it shall be robbed and carried it knows not whither,
cries out I am damned, I am damned, being carried out of its former knowledge,
now knows not where it is, therefore lamenting, Master, Save me, I perish,
perished in its own Apprehension, yet saved in the essential. Thus much
concerning I will lead the blind by a way that they know not, and in paths they
have not known: I will make darkness light, crooked things straight, etc.

A Word from the Lord touching Resurrection, there being reports not a few that
I should deny the Resurrection of that body consisting of Flesh, Blood and
Bone. (...), Reason would arraigne me for a mad man, (...) w^u^d declare me
anti-Scripturist, in favoring (...) of Darkness, which if rightly understood,
(...) the Resurrection of this Body: both which (...) body is made of, that is
the life, perfection, and happin^^^ of (...) body; but thy body consisting of
flesh and bone, i^ made (...) dust of the earth, therefore when thy body is
reduced ^o its c^^ter, then (and not till then) is thy body alive, perfected in
its happiness; now for thee to raise this body, it would declare thee a Tyrant;
for as it is destructive for the Fowl to live in the water, or the Fish in the
Firmament, so to raise thy body to a local place called Heaven, would to thy
body become a Hell; for as the earth would become a Hell to the Spirit, so that
place called heaven, would become a hell to the Body, for after laid in the
grave, it is buried in its heaven, glory, and happiness, where it shall rot and
consume into its own nature for ever and ever.

Yet not denying but that body quoted in the History shall rise, which body
has several denominations, as earthly, corruptible, dishonorable, weak, vile,
and natural body; all which does but make one clear prosp^ct, in which you may
take a full view of what that body is made of that shall rise, whether a
visible body consisting of flesh and bone, or invisible body, consisting of the
Sensitive within this body; To this end the History speaks on this wise, That
we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the redemption, to wit, our
Body.

So that in light I declare, that the corrupt senses must put on incorruption,
thy mortal apprehension must put on immortality, that whereas before thou wast
alive to five, and dead to one, now thou shall be dead to five, and alive to
one, that lovely pure one who beholds nothing but purity, wheresoever it goes,
and whatsoever it does, all is sweet and lovely; let it be under what title
soever, thou art risen from title to act, from act to power, from power to his
name, and that only one name, pure and undefiled; so that now thou art of purer
eyes than to behold any iniquity, so that Devil is God, Hell is Heaven, Sin
Holiness, Damnation Salvation, this and only this is the first Resurrection.

Yet here is no lodging, no safe inhabiting, in that thou art yet on the
borders of Egypt, only with Moses on Mount Hermon, only verbally, not
practically, so short of the second Resurrection which is the life and power
what thou saw, for till thou be delivered of that thou wast risen to, thou
can not say, Death, where is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory?

Wonder not at me, for without Act, without Birth, no powerful deliverance, not
only the Talkers, but the Doers; not only your Spirit, but your Body must be a
living and acceptable Sacrifice; therefore till acted that so called Sin, thou
art not delivered from the power of sin, but ready upon all Alarums to tremble
and fear the reproach of thy body.

Therefore my beloved ones, that supposes your service is perfect Freedom, by
having only light into another life, know this, that if light without life,
thy service will be perfect bondage; and therefore it is when a creature is
drawn forth to act in another life, instead of tryumphing over sin, he will be
conquered in sin; so that I say, till flesh be made Spirit, and Spirit flesh,
so not two, but one, thou art in perfect bondage: for without vail, I declare
that whosoever does attempt to act from flesh, in flesh, to flesh, has, is,
and will commit Adultry: but to bring this to a period, for my part, till I
acted that, so called sin, I could not predominate over sin; so that now
whatsoever I act, is not in relation to the Title, to the Flesh, but that
Eternity in me; So that with me, all Creatures are but one creature, and this
in my form, the Representative of the whole Creation: So that see what I can,
act what I will, all is but one most sweet and lovely. Therefore my deer ones
consider, that without act, no life; without life, no perfection; and without
perfection, no eternal peace and freedom indeed, in power, which is the
everlasting Majesty, ruling, conquering, and damning all into its self, without
end, for ever.

The ensuing Queries.
What that God is* so often recorded in Scripture, and by the Creature believed.
First, Whether he admit of a Corporeal Sustance (to wit) flesh, blood, and
bones; and if so (as by some of the Creation is believed) then the Question
will be Where his habitation has been, is and will be, to the end of the
world? I say, if God admit of a corporal substance; whether then any other but
a local plaee caen contain that substance, or that he can be omnipresent in all
places, and with all Creatures at one time, in that substance, etc?

Secondly, Whether God admit of any other but a Spirit, so invisible? and if
so, (as by others of his Creation believed) the Query is then, where its Region
has been, is, and will be? I say, if God admit of no Corporal substance, form,
nor image, but only a spirit, whether then any other but an invisible
habitation, an infinite boundless region can contain an invisible infinite
boundless Spirit.

Thirdly, If God be a Spirit, then whether a Spirit can be confined from any
thing? and if confined, then must we observe these two things,

1. What he is confined from, or confined in? 2. What it is that does confine
God?
Fourthly, If God be a Spirit, and cannot be confined, then whether God be not
infinite and omni-present in all places, and in all things: as well Hell as
Heaven, Devil as Angel, Sin as Holiness, Darkness as Light?

Fifthly, If God be infinite in all things: then whether all things are not
finite in God? That if God be subject to nothing, then whether all things be
not subjected to God, so as to do nothing without God, nor against God; but in
the performance of the will of God, as well Esau as Jacob, Pharaoh as Moses,
Pilat as Christ; yea Sin, Devil, or any other instrument whatsoever?

Sixthly, Whether a creature living in God, so as to know God, as he is known of
God, be not infinite with and in God; and so all things finite unto him, as
unto God; subject unto him, as unto God whether Devil, Hell, Sin, Death, or any
other thing whatsoever?

Seventhly, If God be in all things, then in all men, the wicked as the godly,
wherein then is the state of the wicked worse then the godly? yea if God be in
both, why have they not both one title, but one wicked, another godly?

Eighthly, If God be in all things, then in all Creatures that has life
whatsoever, so that wherein is man better than these, or has any pre-eminence
above these? yet if he have, by whom is it given: and the reason of so being
given?

Ninthly, If God be in all, the wicked as the godly; why is not the wicked
saved with the godly? but if not saved, what is that in the wicked more then
the godly, that is damned? with the place where, and the nature of that
damnation.

Tenthly, If God be in all, why are not all things one in God? and if they be
all comprehended as one in God; how comes it they are two distinct from God,
yea so titled from the Scripture? now if Scripture were indicted by God* the
Question will be, why it speaks not of things, as they are in God, but relates
two distinct titles two opposites; the one for God, the other against God? and
whether that Scripture so contradictory be not the original or instrumental
cause by which the Creation becomes blinded, divided, yea destroyed; in
worshipping that for God, which in the Original is no God? I say, the Query will
be, whether the contradiction in the Scripture, be not the contradictions in
the Creation: and that so long as there is this Scripture, there will be
Religions, not Religious forms, not Spirit; war, not Peace; envy, not Love; the
teachings of men, not the teaching of God: yea in conclusion there will be
gods, and not God: no not that God that is all in all, Alpha and Omega; the God
yesterday and to day, and for ever.

FINIS.

