A CHARACTER OF A DIVRNAL-MAKER

By J. C.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1657.

THE CHARACTER OF A DIVRNAL-MAKER.
A DIVRNAL-Maker is the Sub-almoner of History, Queen Mabbs Register; one,
whom by the same figure that a North-Country Peddler is a Merchant-man, you may
style an Author: It is the like overreach of language, when every thin
tinder-cloaked Quack must be called a Doctor; when a Clumsy Cobbler usurps the
attribute of our English Peers, and is vamp'd a Translator, list him a Writer
and you smother Geoffry in swabber-slops, the very name of Dabbler over-sets
him, he is swallowed up in the praise like Sir Samuel Luke in a great Saddle,
nothing to be seen but the giddy Feather in his Crown. They call him a
Mercury, but he becomes the Epithet; like the little Nergo mounted on the
Elephant, just such another blot-rampant. He has not stuffings sufficient for
the reproach of a Scribler, but it hangs about him like an old-wives skin, when
the flesh has forsaken her, lank and loose. He defames a good title as well
as most of our modern Noblemen, those Wennes of greatness, the body
politics most peccant humors, blistred into Lords. He has so raw-bon'd a
Being, that however you render him, he rubbes it out, and makes rags of the
expression. The silly Countryman (who seeing an Ape in a scarlet coat, blessed
his young worship, and gave his Landlord joy of the hopes of his house) did not
slander his Complement with worse application, than he that names this shred an
Historian. To call him an Historian, is to Knight a Man-drake, it is to view him
through a prespective, and by that gross Hyperbole to give the reputation of
an Engineer, to a maker of Mouse-traps. Such an Historian would hardly pass
muster with a Scotch Stationer in a sieve full of Ballads and godly Books. He
would not serve for the breast plate of a begging Grecian. The most crampt
Compendium that the age has seen since all learning was torn into ends,
out-strips him by the head: I have heard of puppets that could prattle in a
Play, but never saw of their writings before. There goes a report of the
Holland women, that together with their children, they are delivered of a
Sooterkin; not unlike to a Rat, which some imagine to be the Offspring of the
Stooves: I know not what ignis fatuus adulterates the Press, but it seems
much after that fashion, else how could this Vermin think to be a Twin to a
legitimate Writer, when those weekly fragments shall pass for History? let the
poor man's box be entitled the Exchequer, and the almes-basket a Magazine. Not
a worm that gnaws on the dull scalpe of voluminous Hollinshed, but at every
meal devoured more Cronicle, than his Tribe amounts to. A marginall note of
William Prinne would serve for a winding sheet for that man's works, like thick
skinn'd fruits are all rind, fit for nothing but the Authors fare, to be pared
in a Pillory.

The Cook, who served up the Dwarf in a Pie, (to contain the frolique) might
have lapp'd up such an Historian as this in the bill of fate. He is the first
tincture and rudiment of a Writer, dip't as yet in the preparative blew, like
an Almanac well-willer. He is the Cadet of a Pamphleteere, the Pedee of a
Romancer. He is the Embrio of a History, slink'd before maturity. How should
he record the issues of time, who is himself an Abortive? I will not say but
he may pass for a historian in Gerbiers Academy, he is much of size of those
knot-grasse Professors; What a pitiful Seminary was there projected yet
suitable enough to the present University's, those dry Nurses which the
providence of the age has so fully reformed that they are turned Reformados.
But that is no matter, the meaner the better. It is a maxim observable in these
days, that the only way to win the game is to play petty John's. Of this
number is the Esquire of the quill; for he has the grudging of History, and
some yawnings accordingly: Writing is a disease in him, and holds like a
quotidian, so it is his infirmity that makes him an Author. As Mahomet was
beholding to the falling sickness to vouch him a Prophet. That nice Artificer,
who filed a chain so thin and light that a flea could traile it, (as if he
had worked short hand, and taught his tools to cipher) did but contrive an
Emblem for this skipjack, and his slight productions.

Methinks the Turk should license Diurnals, because he prohibits learning and
books. A Library of Diurnals is a wardrobe of frippery, it is a just Idea of a
Limbo of the Infants. I saw one once that could write with his toes, by the
same token I could have wished he had worn his copies for socks, it is he
without doubt from whom the Diurnals derive their pedigree, and they have a
birthright accordingly, being shufled out at the beds feet of History. To what
infinite numbers an Historian would multiply, should he crumble into Elves of
this profession? Legion'd Pimme, whose flesh bred such a world of Executors, as
being made of the row of a Herring, of nothing else but compacted Nits, did not
disband his body in more variety. To supply this smalnesse they are fain to
join forces, so they are not singly, but as the custom is in a croaking
Committee; they tug at the Pen, like slaves at the Oar, a whole bank together,
they write in the posture that the Swedes gave fire in, over one another
heads. It is said there is more of them go to a suit of Clothes, than to a
Britannicus; In this Poligamy the Cloats breed, and cannot determine whose
issue is lawfully begotten.

And here I think it were not amiss to take a particular how he is accoutred,
and so do by him, as he in his Siquis for the wall-ey'd mare, or the crop
fleabitten; give you the narkes of the Beast. I begin with his head, which is
ever in the Clours, as if the nightcap should make Affidabit, that the brain
was pregnant. To what purpose does the Pia Matter lie in so dully, in her white
formallityes, sure she has hard labor; for the brows have squeezed for it,
as you may perceive by his buttered bongrace, that film of a dimicaster, it is
so thin and unctuous, that the Sunbeams mistake it for a vapor, and are like
to cap him; so it is right Heliotrope, it creaks in the shine, and flaps in the
shade, What ever it be, I wish it were able to call in his ears; there is no
proportion betwixt that head and appurtenances; those of all Lungs are no more
fit for that small Noddle of the circumcision, than brass bosses for a Geneva
Bible. In what a puzling newtrality is the poor soul that moves betwixt two
such ponderous byasses. His collar is wedged with a piece of peeping linen, by
which he means a band, it is the forlorn of his shirt crawling out of his neck,
indeed it were time that his shirt were jogging, for it has served an
apprentiship and (as prentices use) it ha h learned his trade too, to which
effect it is marching to the Paper Mill, and the next week sets up for it self
in the shape of a Pamphle. His gloves are the shavings of his hands, for he
casts his skin like a cancelled parchment, the itch represents the broken
seals. His Boots are the Legacies of two black Jacks, and till he pawned the
silver that the Jacks were tipped with, it was a pretty mode of boot-hose-tops.
For the rest of his habit, he is a perfect Seaman, a kind of Interpawlin, he
being hanged about with his course composition, those pole-dames papers.

But I must draw to an end, for every Character is an Anatomy Lecture, and it
fares with me in this of the Diurnall-maker, as with him that reads on a begged
Malefactor; my subject smells before I have gone half through him: for a parting
blow, then, the word Historian imports a sage and solemn Author, one that curls
his brow with a sullein gravity, like a Bull-necked Presbiter, since the Army
has got him off his jurisdiction, who Presbyter-like sweeps his breast with a
reverend beard, full of native mosse-troopers. Not such a squirting scribe as
this that is troubled with the Rickets; and makes penny worths of History. The
Colledge-Treasury, that never had in bank above a Harry groat, shut up there in
a melancholy solitude, like one that is kept to keep possession, had as good
evidence to show for his title, as he for an Historian so if he needs will be
a Historian, he is not cited in the Sterling acception, but after the rate of
blew caps reckoning, an Historian Scot. Now a Scotch-mans tongue runs high
Fullam's, their is a Cheat in his Ideome; for the sense ebbes from the bold
expression, like the Citizens Gallon, which the drawer interprets but half a
pint. In sum, a Diurnall-maker is the antemark of an Historian, he differs
from him as a Drill from a man or (if you had rather have it in the Saints
gibberish) as a Hinter does from a Holder-forth.

FINIS.

