Monumentum Regale OR A TOMB, Erected for that incomparable and Glorious
Monarch, CHARLES THE FIRST, King of Great Britane, France and Ireland, etc.

C. R.



In select Elegies, Epitaphs, and Poems.

Printed in the Year 1649.

EPITAPH.
BEhold the Mirror of a Prince Pourtraid!
The living Emblem of glorious shade.
Whose Chair of State was late a Scaffold made.
One, then whom never any did profess
More Zeal to the Public, and received less;
Of more desert, and brought to more distress.
That real luster to our Royal Garter;
That late inlarger of our Cities Charter;
Whose Crown the Crime that made this Monarch-Martyr!
Adien Dear Prince; Death, like a loving friend
Has Crowned thy sufferings with a peaceful end,
While headless we our ruin must attend.
Nor can we less expect, Judgement's at hand
To scourge the follies of a sinful Land*
"What Brightman wrote we would not understand.
"From the fatal period of a Charlemain,
"Wain should a Kingdom in her Charles-wain:
"But Prayers nor tears might call him back again.
"Lords should resign their Patents to the Sword,
"Lurdane should equal any English Lord.
O brave Platonic Level! Martial Board!
CHRONOSTICHON Decollationis CAROLI Regis, etc. tricessimo die Januarii,
secunda hora Pomeridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.
Ter Deno IanI Labens ReX SoLe CaDente CaroLVs eXVtVs SoLIo SCeptroqVe SeCVre.

CHARLES! -- ah forbear, forbear! lest Mortals prize
His name too dearly; and Idolatrize.
His Name! Our Loss! Thrice cursed and forlorn
Be that Black Night, which ushered in this Morn.
CHARLES our Dread-Soveraign! -- hold! lest Out-lawed Sense
Bribe, and seduce tame Reason to dispense
With those Celestial Powers; and distrust
Heaven can Behold such Treason, and prove Just.
CHARLES our Dread-Sveraign's murdered! -- Tremble! and
View what Convulsions Shoulder-shake this Land,
Court, City, Country, nay three Kingdoms run
To their last stage, and Set with Him their Sun.
CHARLES our Dread-Soveraign's murdered at His Gate!
Fell Feinds! dire Hydra's of a Stiff-neck't-State!
Strange Body-Politick! whose Members spread,
And, Monster-like, swell bigger then their HEAD.
CHARLES of Great Britain! He! who was the known
King of three Realms, lie's murdered in his Own.
He! He! who lived, and Faith's Defender stood,
Die'd here to re-Baptize it in His Blood.
No more, no more. Fame's Trumpe shall Echo all
The Rest in dreadful Thunder. Such a Fall
Great Christendomene're Pattern'd; and 'twas strange
Earth's Center reeled not as this dismal Change.
The Blow struck Britain blind, each well-set Limb
By Dislocation was lop't off in HIM.
And though She yet live's, She live's but to condole
Three Bleeding Bodies left without a Soul.
RELIGION put's on Black. Sad LOYALTY
Bulshe's and Mourn's to see bright-Majesty
Butchered by such Assassinates; nay both
Against GOD, against LAW, ALLEGIANCE, and their OATH.
Farewell sad Isle! Farewell! Thy fatal Glory
Is Summed, Cast up, and Cancelled in this Story.
AN ELEGY On The Meekest of Men, The most glorious of Princes, The most
Constant of Martyrs,
CHARLES the I. etc.
Most cruel Men,
CAn you a winged souls swift flight restrain,
and lure her to her widowed home again?
Or bound the wanderings of the floating blood?
And to his purple channel charm his flood?
Can you a gasping hearts fallen heat repair,
And into breath coin the unfashion'd air?
Can you unweave the Nerves, then twist their thread
And to th'unravell'd corpse re-fit the head?
Who can do less then this, should fear to kill:
Best pulling down is by a Builder still.
But cool debates you can embrace no more
Then Cesars Lion, who his Teacher tore.
From meaner gore, and Subjects courser flood,
Your curious Treason thirsts your Princes blood:
And flesht in under-slaughter, boldly brings
Raised appetite to diet on your Kings.
No Epicure like thriving Murder's found:
Her Stream tastes foul, unles her Spring be crowned.
But though who Thrones and Majesty betray,
As largest guilt, so reap the largest prey,
And sage projecting Hell her snares might fear,
But that she bids, high pay, and damnes some dear:
Yet few have levelled at a Princes fall,
But such whose claim did for succession call:
Whose bordering title tired to be kept down,
Cast trains less for his ruin, then his Crown.
But here the desperate Rebel strikes at sway,
Not for who shall succeed, but that none may:
Deeming the crimelesse daring, of less hight
To ravish Scepters, then to break them quite:
As if an ampler beam of power were hurled
To hatch a Chaos, then create a world.
No shie concealment leads this murder in;
That were too much the Modesty of sin,
No closet-ambush, unsuspected pill,
No mingled cup, no secret drug must kill,
Success has raised them up to opner crimes,
Rolfe was an Instrument for doubtful times.
A mock Tribunal's built, a pageant Court,
Which but for matchless crimes, might pass for sport,
So frail and lawless; Faith has no defense
To credit, it is at all but insolence.
No fond Romance, no famed Arcadia treats,
Of such Eutopian, frantic Judgment Seats:
At whose dire black decrees, we wondering stand,
As some pale Ghoasts dim taper, and cold hand
Did waftus through the shades, until he brings
Where Fairie Traitors murder aerie Kings:
While slumbring we invoke the mornings light;
To chase the Legend-vision from our sight.
High in this dream, in this fantastic Bench,
Bold apparition Bradshaw does entrench.
One whom the genuine Bar did seldom see,
Whose obscure tongue scarce boasts a seven years Fee.
Whose Lungs are all his Law, whose pleading noise
And silence, dearer then discreeter voice.
Whose conscience wears a face for every dress;
Religion justifies the Savages.
Faction'd, and byas'd, for who gives most fair,
Camelion through, only not hired with Air.
Whose insolence no presence can relaxe,
Whose carriage wounds his King worse then the Axe.
This needy Orator, now richer dressed,
And higher placed, is Image still at best:
Who though from hell, he his glib dictates hold,
As Satan talked in the Idols tongues of old;
Yet the close drift of this bright pomp and shrine,
Is nor the Devil, nor He, but worse design.
The Ephesian workmen great Diana made,
Not for Diana's sake, but their own trade.
Our Sovereigns sighs, the Peoples louder groan
Is not black Incense burnt to Bell alone;
But strew their Altars round, and we shall meet
An undistinguisht rapines numerous feet.
The Bloody Rebels conscious of their slain,
Like the first murderer, the guilty Cain.
Though just Remorse looks nobler then offense,
Prefer continuance to penitence.
Weigh crimes against mercies, down the Balance bear,
Much with their sins, but most with their despair.
Their own pale fears arm to this desperate thrust,
their King can pardon, but they cannot trust.
The haughty Tigers dare the Lions spite,
And force bold inrodes through their Sovereigns right;
But if retireing from incroaching pride,
They make their proper confines bound their tide:
A faithful truce is struck, peace shuts in wars,
And fresh assurance springs even from their jarres;
One equal desert shrowds their pastime still,
And each entrust their slumbers to one hill.
But jealous guilt, nor fence, nor safety has:
A Rebel is a Tiger without faith.
But though stung conscience press to be secure,
And would be wary when she cannot be sure;
Yet often she most encounters what she flies,
And all her ruin in her Refuge lies.
For had their Foes conspired, and framed a pit.
Whose train, whose deepest artifice should hit:
They none so speeding, none so fleet could bring,
As what themselves have shaped, their slaughtered King.
By this, they naked lie to weakest eyes,
And quit their ablest guard, their long disguise;
Whose strength like men's in ambush, still has been
Not from their strength, but cause their strength's unseen.
Who^ shall they combat now in's own defense,
And whom bring home only by driving hence?
Whom shall they disobey to serve his will?
Whom shall their Canon court, and humbly kill?
Whose omnipresence space shall reconcile;
Be here, and yet be hence a hundred mile?
Whose doubtful seal shall, while it is betwain,
And burnt from phoenix cinders bud again?
They, whose thick vows, exalted hearts and eyes,
High as the skies, and stable as the skies;
Who know their lives are frail, short recompense,
And cheap oblation weighed with conscience:
Will now no longer gorge their venomous pills,
Nor by elusions steer enlightened wills;
Nor prize the shame of finding former sin
At the sad rate of wading farther in.
But haste returns as vigorous as mistake,
And hate the ghastly dream the more they wake:
No longer brook a Tyler or a Cade,
Those Dunghill Tyrants whom themselves have made:
Which like dire comets mounted in the air,
Rain plagues on earth, whose vapors placed them there.
They find this hot impatience against the throne,
Is by its embers but to light their own.
Like him, who raised his Gods adored head,
To make his own blaspheme it in the stead.
Hence their Agreement, chains and shackles throws
As not what we Agree, but they impose;
Gilding the peircing'st flames with specious smoke,
Glossing in our consent, which is their yoke.
Were their dark arts soft as their glistering shows,
Did their thronged chapplets scatter naught but Rose:
Did they a Freedom give, was ours before,
Which the Kings slaughter were but to restore,
Yet the Acceptance ought to prove ours still,
And none obtrude a bliss against our will:
It Is not a Liberty we needs must have,
And he is only free, who may be slave.
Nay, were it our keen request, and eager cry,
It might so fall, 'twere nobler to deny;
Their bounty, us might to our ruin arm,
And better not bestow, then give to harm:
Who weapons one, who seeks himself to kill,
Bestows a murder, and a Liberal Ill.
And such is theirs, and worse, for they afford.
Not only means to kill, but prompt the Sword.
Men's frenzy bated now, and could endure
To hear of physic, though 'twere far from cure;
When cruel they break in, and crying, save,
Intombe the Nation in their Sovereigns grave.
The Heathen Brutus did at murder stay,
Who, though he durst eject, he durst not slay:
His bare deposing too, no shelter brings,
But that it fastened on the worst of Kings:
The Public curse had blasted all his praise,
Had his attempt been up ere Tarquins days.
Where shall they build their plea, who at once do
Destroy the best of Men, and Princes too?
Whose rooted Thrones fair growth did less improve
From clear unenvied claim, then Subjects love,
Whose boundless worth, and rate had given Him sway,
Though His descent and title were away.
And now, since virtue vice does best descrie,
As straight shows straightness and obliquity;
His prudent sway, her beauty best affords,
Drawn out, and shadowed by usurping Lords.
Whose early first decree so loathed has stood,
By framers guilt, and injured Straffords Blood.
Who suppled Laws, and gagged them to their wills,
Not to support their Rights, but strengthen Ills.
No resolves steady, no vote tumult strong,
But ratified, or cancelled by the next throng:
Such floating levities their coin disgraced,
Till cheap irreverence the mint defaced.
Whence poorly conscious of their ticklish sway,
They sweat to husband and improve their day;
Working to steer their low designs about,
Ere the next Faction shake their title out:
They lease their interest, each suffrage rent,
As the two Houses were their Tenement:
Who chaffers best, buys mercenary throats,
Reaps plenteous harvest in the next days votes:
They shear the People, bear their fleece away,
Not as their Orphan-wards, but happier prey;
Place and preferments pass their market-curse,
Not to the worthiest men, but strongest purse
Succeed by families, relations scale,
Make Patriots not our choice, but their Intail
Desert, or hold their stations with the Tide:
Ruin, or ruined, as Factions side.
Nere acting right, now suffering this alone,
Their Usurpation fell with CHARLES His Throne.
Who Antidote to all the ills of these,
And all their poisons strict Antipodes,
Who when his crowns soared highest, did even then
Remember still he was a King of men,
Made their advantage to compass to his own,
And rankt their freedom equal with his throne.
Never checked their Liberty till't license stood,
Nor asked their goods, but for their greater good.
Who i'th'loud prejudice five Members sin,
(Which hung Reforming out, but Ruin in)
Armed with the Guards of unoffended State,
Like one that would not crush it, but debate:
Like Titus tamely wished confederates leave,
Ask (bate his Empire) and they should receive,
Which fertile showers of grace so thick expressed,
They fell too weighty on their narrowed breast:
And as the clamorous channells shallow womb
Would force the bounteous Sea her streams resume
And from his banks does foul contractions take,
And for a Chrystal-flood re-payes a Lake:
So their unsound receipt his bounty slew,
Returned in Poison, what He shed in Dew.
Nor did a happier arm His gifts dispense,
Which private threw but vast munificence:
When hands Himself had raised would reach Him down,
And nerves His Alms had strengthened, shake His Crown.
The Vultur's Rapine does at Bounty stand;
Who though she gorge the prey, she spares the hand,
The Giant Elephant obeyes for bread;
And can forgo his rage where he is fed.
Where shall unthankful men for place intrude?
Nor Air nor Desert shrowds Ingratitude.
Yet as the equal Sun ore all does tend,
Though some use light only to see to offend:
And both the barren Bramble and the Flower
Partake the juice o'th'undistinguisht shower:
Because the teeming Clouds descending flood
Designs the many only, not the good:
So His impartial bounty Blessings threw,
Nor did the Recompense, but Gift pursue.
His Temperance might an Anchorite, rigor tell*
And make the Palace Standard to the Cell.
Not that its Laws from the thin board proceed,
Where to abstain is Avarice or Need;
Or that the coursenesse of the Cates might please,
Like the great Consul caught a parching pease,
But from the strict chastising Plenties wings,
And the severest use of highest things.
His Table grasped the seas, the earth, the air.
Yet never His surfeit was, nor others snare.
His Bowels massacred none, nor did in inrage,
Till Subjects blood the Princes wine assuage.
No Orphans swam about his riotous cup,
Like his who killed, but first drank Clytus up,
Unbatter'd Chastity his reins and law,
Firm against the luster of all threating thaw,
Which though it want the checks of mean restraint,
Where charge chills sin, and makes the goatish faint;
Where Continence is dread lest Vice succeed,
And trembles at the issue, not the deed:
Nay though it seem fortfy'd with plea, and they
Who sin with Him, might seem but to obey,
At least the guilt might large allayes endure,
Since few deny where Scepters do allure:
Or stand the vigor of a storm or rape,
Where He was King, as by descent, so shape:
For He their title had to back his own,
Who to the goodly feature give the throne.
Yet all was frail to Him, and soon suppressed,
Who set His Scepter first ore his own breast:
And that His Crowns be in full square combined,
He made His fourth Dominion be His mind.
Not like that Romans ch^st, but timorous care,
Where to be chaste, was not to see the fair:
Who found his breast not proof against the flames,
But to escape, did bid remove the Dames.
But as firme-sighted Eagles range the skies,
And eye the Sun when stro^gest luster flies;
So His keen managed view severely sees,
Not frailty to corrupt, but Judge the piece.
And could in the dazeling round securely stay,
To bless the potter, not abuse the clay.
Wise Justice, such as mercy might dispense,
To spare the Men, but punish the offense.
Not to endanger Law, but temper doom,
To kill despair, and yet make none presume.
And here to match the births of strictest wills.
Where naked virtues are but glistering ills,
He lays His balance at the Temple gates,
The Sanctuary Shekles are His weights.
He quarters all His day with constant prayers,
No business shall dispense, no pleasure dares.
Limnes Copies to His Court: does rein and hold
By Constancy the careless, Zeal the cold.
His intent thoughts do their perplexed decry,
His bent knees, stiff, His fixed, the wandering eye.
Humble, the arrogant; His vigorous, dead;
His awe, irreverence; affiance, dread:
Makes all His practice dictate this alone,
They had two Kings to obey, Himself had one.
But Calm and Sunshine, undistracted ease,
Yield but the Trophies of well-ordered peace;
But He was furnished through, and had a stock,
As for Fates fawn and courtship, so their shock.
And though some c^ses make the task as great
To manage temper, as to master heat,
Though a sound prudence may deserve as well,
To wave assaults, as courage to repel;
Yet, here the generous luster justly springs,
Less from the Scepter, then the Sufferings.
For as the rage of these tempestuous times
Was His Misfortune only, not His crimes,
('Less Socrates the Lightnings blame must bear,
Because it Lightened when he took the Air:
Or 'lesse the drought lies still at the Christians gate,
'Cause Drought and Christians were contemporate)
So His harsh draught had some ingredients mixed,
Which never on Prince or Man till now were fixed.
No Agony so tempered, no such Cup,
Unless when God helped Man to drink it up.
Where though the sufferings, rival none endure,
'Cause one so sound received so sharp a cure;
Yet we may safely give Persuasion this,
Those Jews then these less knew they did amiss.
His first affliction from rude Tumults came,
From them the fuel, but elsewhere the flame,
Their trunk and boughs build the instructed pile,
But worse men light and fan the flames the while.
That waves and winds should mix united stocks
To bruise, and threaten Ships with shelves and rocks,
Provokes our wonder less then moves our grief,
Because they want the sense of our relief.
Nay, were their rage, design, and ship-wracks, spleen,
Yet there might clear pretense, and plea be seen,
Since our encroachments they but pay with spite,
And do but check usurpers of their right:
For words we to commerce and traffic melt,
By them is inrode and invasion felt.
But should this sea, these winds conduct their threats,
To the awful palace, where great Neptune sets,
Should their swelled surge make his bent Trident groan,
And dash their foaming billows against his Throne:
Then might they pattern us, then we might see,
That winds and waves at least are wild as we.
Nor was our frenzy, fit, our uproares, blasts,
Or cloud that outs not light, but overcasts;
But, like that fatal inauspicious day,
When all the less and larger birds of prey,
Conspired to force the Eagle from her throne,
Because her eyes were clearer then their own:
When the vast air seemed to the thronged muster scant
And with oppressing load the Element pant.
The injured Eagle girt in this distress,
When reason nothing could, and force could less,
She arms her active plumes with swiftest spring,
Darts through their ranks, and saves her self by wing.
But Eagles they are well when freed from rape,
And need no reparation but the escape:
Re-view the sun with undishonourd eye,
And build again their towering nests as high.
But Princes escape not, though they are not slain.
They may the wound, but cannot fly the stain.
Yet has our mischief father arts, and can
Distress Him both at once, as King and Man.
Our sharp alarmes forbid his shortest stay,
He may advise for gone, but not which way.
We set His mazed resolves at gaze, and start,
Else it were not to drive hence, but bid Depart.
Else had our fury lessened of its spite,
W' had forc*d Him to a progress, not a flight.
But like a pilot huddled up in the dark,
Himself surprised, and His unfurnish't bark,
Whom unexpected tempests do constrain,
And from His harbor drive into the main:
No tackle tight, no anchor weather proof,
But waves invade below, and winds aloof;
Distract and tossed, not bound for any road,
Nor can return, nor can hold out abroad.
Such was His mixed distress; how, what, or where,
Uncertain all, but dangers certain were.
By this self-pregnant sin improves to the full.
Affront at London, Treason grows at Hull:
A bold repulse succeeds perplexed abode,
Despised at home, thrives to refused abroad:
Place tutors Place, on Cities Cities call,
He may not here be safe, not there at all.
When lo the spreading mischief not content
To force up breaches in one element,
Invades His Navy, does insulting stand
Over the joint Trophies both of Sea and Land.
To gild this rapine for the vulgar eyes,
They chase Him through all His capacities;
Shift lights and distances, until they see
Another self in Him, which is not He.
Vex stills, and Crucibles, the furnace ply,
To sift and drain a Chymick Majesty.
At last their careful sweats auspicious how'r,
Drops Him apart, distinguished from His power.
But the afflicted quill, whose penance lies
Through all His thorns, must stories martyr rise:
What hardy plume dares register His cares?
When foreign close, to sow'r His home affairs;
When Ireland charitable fame untells,
Adopts the vvorst of ven'mous beasts; Rebels.
When Edenburg out-villain'd Carthage has,
And Scotch more slippery proves then Punick Faith,
When they can trade their King, and beat a price
For's Blood, to ingrain their crimson Avarice.
Whilst we un-king His Fame, dethrone's repute
Word our artillery, and libells shoot.
Shift His restraints, and bound him with new hedge,
Not for enlargement, but fresh pawn and pledge
To now prevailing Gaol; snare Him with Shapes
Of nearer ills, to prompt him to escapes.
So the close practiced foulers treacherous gin,
Already seized of prey, the lost bird in;
Yet has attendant dogs, whose disciplined throat,
And busy roavings aid their threatening note;
Till the feathered prisoner scared with mixed mishap,
Un-skill'd in the guil of the industrious trap,
Struggles and flings with unsuccessefull coyl,
Till motion weaves inevitable toil.
When varied bondages some beams afford,
To checker plots, dissembling some accord;
Which though smooth-phras'd rough sense does still control
TO un-crown his head, or else un-king His soul.
When all of Meniall trust, whose cares expense
Hearty with long experienced confidence,
Paid diligent homage to his justest will,
Must see their desolate ranks, and courses fill
By rough unpracticed homespun Colonies
Of Russet Courtiers, and instructed spies,
Whose treacherous attendance, and sly drift,
Makes all their servi^e but Officious shrift.
When the pure Altars sacred sons must flee
His reverent approach, when single He
Must both His Priest, and Congregation stand,
Or some rash Korahs foul unhallowed hand
Corrupt His virgin gums, and raise a smoke,
Not to appease His deity, but choke.
When the revolted C^ssocks plum their darts,
With crooked Sophistry's perverted arts:
To reason down His faith with studied power,
And drown His soul in that confederate shower.
To heighten these, when some, whose nobler name
In His declining Banner arms their fame;
Whom yet ignoble envy bent awry,
Or Faint Devotion, cooled to Indifferency,
Conspired the Churches battery; His weights,
Took balance from her cause, not from their hates;
He poised thin calumny, by ponderous good;
Her sole, and yet unconquered champion stood.
When warmer onsets, like the searching ploughs,
More fertile wounds on natures yielding brows:
Were not the scar, but tillage of his heart,
Cares thriving husbandry, and fruitful smart,
Where what was sown a Cross, sprung upon a sheaf,
And Virtue, Harvest, though the Furrow grief.
His glorious own Record gave this presage,
Which next to hallowed writ, and sacred page,
Shall busy pious wonder, and abide
To Christian pilgrimage the second guide:
Which reconciles (till now) the eternal hates
'Twixt simple piety, and fraudulent States.
Shows how all Michiavell in Solomon lies,
And Cunning makes men wilely, but not wise.
Bottomes a stable Throne, whose secure chance
Shall steady sit, or in her fall advance.
When ghastly Death's astonishing Arrest
In all her terrors, and grim wardrobe dressed,
From a green Treaty nipt ere fully blown,
And soft amusements of a restored throne,
He meets with cheerful combat, and armed breath,
A vigorous Resignation, not a Death.
When His unlimited forgiveness flies
High as His Blood's shrill voice, and towering cries,
Not spun in scanty half denying prayers,
But Legacy obliging to His Heirs.
CAROLI (...).
I Come, but come with trembling, lest I prove
The unequal Greet of Semele and Jove.
As She was too obscure, and He too bright,
My Theam's too heavy, and my Pen too light.
And whilst, like Midas, I presume to sit
In wise Apollo's Chair, without HIS wit,
Is it not just t'expect, that He, who dares
Higher then Midas, should wear longer Ears?
May I not fear Patroclus Fate, and feel
The dangerous honor of Achilles steel?
Just like that busy Elf, whose venurous Pride
Found none but Titan Titan's Coach could guide?
Why; He Will not stand in Verse. Can I enclose
Him, whom the greatest Liberty of Prose
Wants room to hold? And whose unweildy Name
Is big enough to fill the Trump of Fame?
An Individual species? like the Sun,
At once a Multitude, and yet but One?
One of such vast Importance, that He fell
The Festival of Heaven, and England's Hell?
One, who for Eminence was these two things,
De Catone vetus dictum, Ultimus Romanorum, Primus Hominum.
The last of Christians, and the first of Kings?
One so diffusive, that he lived to all,
And One that died the whole world's Funeral?
For Charles being thus dismounted, and the Swain
High shooed Boots leapt into the Wain,
Is not old Beldame Nature truly said
To Advance her Heels, and stand upon her Head?
Does not the Judge, and Law too for a need,
The Stirrup hold, whilst Treason mounts the Steed?
Is not Gods Word, and's Providence besides
Used as a Laquy, whilst the white Devil rides!
Sure all things thus into Confusion hurld
Make, though an universe, yet not a World.
And so our Sovereign's, like our Saviors Passion,
Becomes a kind of Doomsday to the Nation.
If Dead men did not walk, 'twould be admired
(The Breath of all our Nostrils thus expired)
What 't is that gives us motion. And can I,
Who want my self, write Him an Elegy?
Though Virgil turned Evangelist, and wrote,
Not from his Tripod, but Gods Altar taught;
Though all the Poets of the Age should sit
In Inquest of Invention, and club wit,
To make words Epigrams; should they combine
To crowd whole stock of Fancy in each line;
Sell the Fee-simple to advance one sum,
(As Eglis spoke but once, and then lived dumb)
'Twere all as inarticulate, and weak,
As when those men make signs, that cannot speak.
But where the Theme confounds us, (...). Longin.
it is a sort
Of glorious Merit, proudly to fall short.
Despair sometimes gives courage; any one
May lisp him out, who can be spoke by none;
None but a King; No King, unless He be
As Wise, as Just, as Good, as Great as He.
When Late Posterity shall run t'advise
With Times impartial Register, how Wise
This Great-one was, they will find it there enrolled
That He was never in's Nonage, but born old.
View hm whilst Prince of Wales, and it appears
His wisdom did so antedate his years.
That He was Full in the Bud, and's Soul divine,
Nestor, might be Great Grandfather to thine.
View him again, where he so ripe was grown,
As not to rise, but drop into a Throne.
How did those rays of Majesty, which were
Scattered in other Kings, concenter here?
As if h'ad got King Sapors sphere, and proved
How each Intelligence his Orb had moved:
Wise Charles, like them, sat steering at two Helmes,
King of himself, but Father of his Realms:
And just as if old Trismegistus Cup
Had by his thirsty Soul been all drunk up,
His understanding did begirt this All,
As it were Ecliptic or Meridionall.
Supp^se a Diet of all Christian Kings
And Bish^ps too, convened to weigh the things
Of Church and State: Nay add Inferior men,
Those of the Sword, the pensil, and the pen.
From the Scepter to the Sheep-hook, Charles in all
Must have been Vmpire Oecumenicall.
He lived a Perpendicular; The Thread
His Wisdom was; Humility the Lead,
By which he measured Men and Things; took aim
At actions crooked, and at actions plain.
He and all from him into Cubes did fall,
And yet as perfect as the Circle, all.
'Twas He took Nature's Breadth, and Depth, and Hight,
Knew the just difference 'twixt Wrong, and Right.
He saw the points of things, could justly hit,
What must be done, what may; what is just, what fit.
As if, like Moses he had had resort
Unto Gods Council, ere he was of's Court.
Hence his Religion was his choice, not Fate,
Ruled by Gods Word, not Interest of State.
Others may thank their stars, He his inquest,
Who, sounding all sides, anchored in the best.
His Crown contained a Miter; He did twist
Moses and Aaron, King and Casuist.
When the Mahumetan or Pope shall look
On his Soul's best Interpreter, his Book;
His Book, his Life, his Death, will henceforth be
The Church of England's best Apology.
Thus Dove and Serpent kissed, as if they meant
To render him as wise, so innocent.
His own good Genius knew not, whether were
His Heart more single, or his Head more clear.
Virtue was his Prerogative; and thus
Charles ruled the King, before the King ruled Us.
He knew that to command, his only way
Was first to teach his Passions to obey.
And his incessant waiting on God's Throne
Gave him such meek reflections on his own,
That, being forced to censure, he expressed
A Judges Office with a Mothers breast.
And when some sturdie violence began
T'unsheath his sword, unwilling to be drawn
He but destroyed (and so soft mercy can)
The malefactor, to preserve the Man.
Even Hell's blind Journey-men, those Sons of Night
Who look on scarlet murder, and think it white,
Unwillingly confessed, The only thing
Which made him guilty was, That He was King.
He was Incarnate Justice, and it is said
Astraea lived in him, yet died a Maid.
We want an Emblem for him: Phoebus must
Stand still in Libra, to speak Charles the Just.
And yet though he were such, that nothing less
Then Virtue's mean stretched to a just Excess
Flew from his Soul; He, like the Sun, was known
To see all excellence, except his own.
His Modesty was such, that All which He
'Ere spoke or thought os's self, was Calumny;
But yet so mixed with state, that one might see
It made him not less Kingly, but more free.
He was not like those Princes, whot' express
A learned surfeit, a sublime excess,
Send to dispeople all the Sea of Fish.
Depopulate the Air to make one dish,
(Such skilfull' luxuries, as only serve
To make their minds more plentifully sterve)
Whatever Dainties filled his Board by chance,
His only constant Dish was Evagr. l. 1. c. 21. de Monachis quibusdam, (...).
Temperance.
His Virtue did so limit him, his Court
Implied his Cloister; and his very sport
Was Self-denial. Nay, though he were seen
So roab'd in purple, and so macht to a Queen,
As made him glitter like a Noonday Sun,
Yet still his Soul wore sackcloth, and lived Nun.
Evagr. l. 1. c. 13 (...).
Simeon the Stylite in his Pillar pent
Might live more strict, but not more innocent.
So wise, so just, so good, so great and all,
What is it could set him higher, but his fall?
When he caught up by a Celestial Train
Began his second, and more solid Reign.
How to that Heaven did this Pilot steer
Twixt the Independent, and the Presbyter,
Placed in the confines of two shipwracks? thus
The Greeks are seated 'twixt the Turks and Us.
Whom did By zantium free, Rome would condemn;
And freed from Rome, they are enslaved by them.
So placed betwixt a Precipice and Wolf,
There the Aegaean, here the Venice gulf,
What with the rising and the setting Sun,
By these they are hated, and by those undon.
Thus virtues hemmed with vices, and though either
Solicites her consent, she yields to neither.
Nay thus our Savior, to enhance his grief,
Was hung betwixt a Murderer, and a Thief.
Now Charles as King, and as a good King too
Being Christ's adopted self, was both to do
And suffer like him; both to live and die
So much more humble, as he was more high
Then his own Subjects. He was thus to tread
In the same footsteps, and submit his Head
To the same thorns: when spit upon, and beat,
To make his Conscience serve for his retreat,
And overcome by suffering: To take up
His Saviors Cross, and pledge him in his Cup.
Since then our Sovereign, by just account,
Lived over our Saviors Sermon in the Mount,
And did all Christian Precepts so reduce,
That Is Life the Doctrine was, his Death the Use;
Posterity will say, he should have died
No other Death, then by being Crucified.
And their renownedst Epoch will be
Great Charles his Death, next Christ's Nativity.
Thus Treason's grown most Orthodox; who since
They said they would [ make him the most glorious Prince
In all the Christian World] it is plain, this way
They only promised, what they meant to pay.
For now (besides that beatisick Vision
Where all desire is lost into fruition)
The stones, they hurled at him, with intent
To crush his fame, have proved his monument.
Their Libels his best Obeliske; To have
A fit Mausole, were to want a Grave;
His Scaffold, like mount Tabor, will in story
Become the proudest Theater of Glory,
Next to the blessed Cross: and thus it is sense,
T'affirm him murdered in his own Defense.
For though all Hells Artillery and skill
Combined together to besiege his Will;
And when their malice could not bring't about
To hurt God's Image, they razed Adam's out,
(Like men repulsed, whose Choler think's it witty
To burn the Suburbs, when they cannot the City)
However they stormed his walls, and draind his blood,
Which moted round his Soul; yet still he stood
Defender of the Faith, (and that which He
Found sweeter then revenge) his Charity.
This then the utmost was their rage could do,
[ It showed him King of his afflictions too.]
Vntempted Virtue is but coldly good,
(As she is scarce chaste, that is so but in cold blood)
To scorn base Quarter is the best escape,
(As Lucrece died the chaster for her rape)
These two did Charles his Virtue most befriend,
His glorious hardships first, and then his end.
Death we forgive thee, and thy Bourreaux too,
Since what did seem thy rape, proves but his due.
For how could he be said to fall too soon,
Whose green was mellow, and whose dawn was noon?
Since Charles was only by thy courteous knife
Redeemd from this great injury of life
To one so lasting, that it is truly said
Not He, but his mortality is dead --
To weep his Death's the treason of our eyes;
Our Sun did only set, that he might rise.
But we do mock, not cheat our grief, and sit
Only at best to upbraid our selves in wit,
And want him learnedly: such colors do
Disguise disasters, not delude them too.
For though, I must confess, a Poet can
Fancy things better then another man,
He can but fancy'um; and all his pains
Is but to fill his belly with his brains.
He may both Petrified and famisht sit,
That wears his thoughts, and only dine's on wit.
Were I a Polypus, and could go on
To be those very things I think upon,
I would not then complain: but since I know
To call things thus, is not to make them so,
Great Charles is slain: and say we what we will,
Yet we shall find, judgments are judgments still.
For though it is true, that his now-immense So ^
Does hold commensuration with each Pole;
Though he does shine a Star more fixed and bright
Then where the year makes but one day and night;
And, least he fill the Zodiac, does appear
Not in the Eighth, but Empyraean Sphere;
Yet we his Rise may our Descension call,
As Libra's mounting is poor Aries fall.
He was the only Moses that could stand
Betwixt the sins and judgments of the Land.
And what can we expect, our Lot being gone,
But that a Hell from Heaven should tumble down
On our more sinful Sodom? (unless we
Are damned yet worse, to an impunity.)
Kings are Gods once removed. It hence appears
No Court but Heavens can try them by their Peers.
So that for Charles the good to have been tried
And cast by mortal Votes, was Deicide.
No Sin, except the first, has ever past
So black as this; no Judgment, but the last.
How does our Delos, which so lately stood
Unmoved, lie floating in her Pilots blood?
And can we hope to Anchor, who discern
Naught but the tempest ruling at the stern;
Whilst Pluto's Rival, with his Saints by's side,
Drawn by the Spirit of avarice and pride,
Being fairly placed in the Chair of scorn
Sits brewing Tears for Infants yet unborn?
Vast stocks of misery, which his Guardian-rage
Does husband for them till they come to age?
When future times shall look what Plagues befell.
Egypt and us, by way of Parallel,
They Will find at once* presented to their view
The Frogs and Lice, and Independents too.
Only this signal difference will be known
'Twixt those Egyptian judgments and our own,
Those were Gods Armies; but the effect does tell
That these our Vermin are the Host of Hell.
Pausanias and Herostratus will look
Like Pygmy-Sinners writ in Times black-book.
The Spanish Fleet, and Powder Plot will lack
Their usual mentions in our Almanac.
-- Nay, which is more, Socrat. l. 7. c. 10. hoc Alarichi responsum recitat.
(...)
Alaricus his name
Will scarce be legible 'th' leaves of fame,
When Cromwell shall be read. Nature was never
So blessedly reformed, since Lucifer.
O for a Jeremy to lament our woe!
From whom such tragic Rhetoric might flow,
As would become our misery, and dress
Our sorrows with a dreadful gaudinesse!
For next those hovering judgments, which the fall
Of One so great, so good, makes Vertical.
(And rushing down, may only be withstood.
If Charles his prayers cry louder then his blood)
I say next that, It is our second Cross
We cannot grieve worthy of so great a Loss.
To weep upon this subject, and weep sense,
Requires we should be born ten Ages hence.
The greater are the hights an Artist's hand
Designs to take, the farther he must stand.
And as when Sol's in's Zenith, He imply's
His dazzling glory best, that shuts his eyes,
So, where the Theme's ineffable, the way
To speak it is, Herodor. l. 3. Psammetichus ad Cambysem, cum Amicorum vicem
lacrymis lugeret, suam vero silentio, (...) etc.
Not to know what to say.
A DEEP GROAN, FETCHED At the Funeral of that incomparable and Glorious
Monarch, CHARLES * THE FIRST, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
TO speak our Griefs at full over thy Tomb
(Great Soul) we should be Thunderstruck and dumb;
The trivial Offerings of our bubling eyes
Are but fair Libels at such Obsequies.
When Grief bleeds inward, not to sense, it is deep;
We Have lost so much, that it were a sin to weep.
The wretched Bankrupt counts not up his sums,
When his inevitable* ruin comes:
Our loss is finite when we can compute;
But that strike speechless, which is past recruit.
We Are sunk to sense; and on the Ruin gaze,
As on a curled Commets fiery blaze:
And Earthquakes fright us, when the teeming earth
Rends open her bowels for a fatal birth;
As Inundations seize our trembling eyes;
Whose rolling billows over Kingdoms rise.
Alas! our Ruins are cast up, and sped
In that black Total -- Charles is Murdered.
Rebellious Giant hands have broak that Pole,
On which our Orb did long in Glory roll.
That Roman Monsters wish in act we see,
Three Kingdoms necks have felt the Axe in Thee,
The Butcherie is such, as when by Cain,
The fourth Devision of the world was slain*
The mangled Church is on the shambles l^y'd,
Her Massacre is on thy Block displayed,
Thine is thy peoples epidemick Tomb,
Thy Sacrifice a numerous Hecatombe.
The Powder-mine's now fi^'d; we were not freed,
But respited by Traitors thus to bleed.
Novembers plots are brewed and broached in worse,
And January now compleats the Curse.
Our Lives, Estates, Laws, and Religion, All
Lie crushed, and gashing in this dismal fall.
Accursed day that blotted'st out our Light!
May thou be ever muffled up in Night.
At thy return may sables hang the sky;
And tears, not beams, distill from Heavens Eye.
Cursed be that smile that guilds a Face on thee,
The Mother of prodigious Villainy.
Let not a breath be wofted, but in moans;
And all our words be but articulate groans.
May all thy Rubric be this dismal Brand;
Now comes the miscreant Doomes-day of the Land.
Good Friday wretchedly transcribed; and such
As Horror brings alike, though not so much.
May Dread still fill thy minutes, and we sit
Frighted to think, what others durst co^mmit.
A Fact that copies Angels when they fell,
And justly might create another Hell.
Above the scale of Crimes; Treason sublimed,
That cannot by a parallel be rim'd.
Raviliack's was but under-graduate sin,
And Goury here a Pupil Assassin.
Infidel wickedness, without the Pale;
Yet such as justifies the Canniball.
Riot Apochyphall of Legend breed;
Above the Canon of a Jesuits Creed.
Spirits of witchcraft; quintessentiall guilt;
Hells Pyramid; another Babell built.
Monstrous in bulk; above our Fancies span;
A Behemoth; a Crime Leviathan.
So desperately damnable, that here
Even Wild smells Treason, and will not appear.
That Murdering-peece of the new Tyrant-State,
By whom't has Shot black Destinies of late;
He that belched forth the Loyal Burleighs doom,
Recoyles at this so dreadful Martyrdom.
What depth of Terror lies in that Offense,
That thus can grind a seared Conscience?
Hellish Complotment! which a League renews,
Less with the men, then the actions of the Jews.
Such was their Bedlane Rabble, and the Cry
Of Justice now, amongst them was Crucify:
Pilates Consent is Bradshawes Sentence here;
The Judgment hall's removed to Westminster.
Hayle to the Reeden Scepture the Head, and knee
Act over again that Cursed Pageantrie.
The Caitiffe crew in solemn pomp guard on
Mocked Majesty as not to the Block, but Throne,
The Belch agrees of those envenomed Lies;
There a Blasphemer, here a Murderer dies.
If that go first in horror, this comes next,
A pregnant Comment on that ghastly Text.
The Heavens never saw, but in that Tragic hour,
Slaughtered so great an Innocence, and Power.
Bloodthirsty Tigers! could no stream fuffise
T'allay that Hell within your Breasts but this?
Must you needs swill in Cleopatra's Cup,
And drink the price of Kingdoms in a sup?
Cisterns of Loyalty have deeply bled,
And now you have damm'd the Royal Fountain Head.
Cruel Phlebotomie! at once to drain
The Median, and the rich Basilick vein:
The tinctures great that popular murder brings,
It Is scarlet deep, that is died in blood of Kings.
But what could Israel find no other way
To their wished Canaan then through the Red Sea?
Must God have here his deading Fire and Cloud,
And he be the Guide to this outrageous Crowd?
Shall the black Conclave counterfeit his hand,
And superscribe their Guilt, Divine Command?
Does th'ugly Fiend usurp a Saint-like grace?
And Holy Water wash the Devils face!
Shall Dagons Temple the mocked Ark enclose?
Can Esau's hands agree with Jacob's voice?
Must Molech's Fire now on the Altar burn?
And Abel's blood to Expiation turn?
Is Righteousness so lewd a Bawd? and can
The Bibles Cover serve the Alcoran?
Thus when Hel's meant, Religion's bid to shine
As Faux his Lantern lights him to his Mine.
Here, here is sins non ultra, when one Lie
Kills this, and stabs at Majesty.
And though his sleepie Arm suspend the scourge,
Nor does loud Blood in winged Vengeance urge,
Though the soft hours a while in pleasures fly,
And conquering Treason sing her Lullabie.
The guilt at length in fury he will inroul
With barbed Arrows on the trayt'rous Soul.
Time may be when that John-a-Leyden King
His Quarters to this Tomb an Offering bring,
And that Be-Munster'd Rabble may have eyes
To read the Price of their dear Butcheries*
Yet if just Providence reprieve the Fate,
The Judgment will be deeper, though it be late.
And After times shall feel the curse enhanc'd, vanc'd.
But how much They Have the Sin bequeathed, ad-
Mean time (most blessed shade) the Loyal Eye
Shall pay her Tribute to thy Memory.
Thy Aromatic Name shall feast our sense,
'Bove balmie Spiknard's fragrant Redolence,
Whilst on thy loathsome Murderers shall dwell
A plague sore, blayn, and rotten ulcers smell.
Wonder of Men and Goodness! stamped to be
The Pride, and Flourish of all History.
Thou have undone the Annals, and engrossd
All the Heroes Glory which the Earth e're lost.
Thy Privilege it is only to commence.
Laureate in Sufferings, and in Patience.
Thy wrongs were 'bove all sweetness to digest;
And yet thy sweetness conquered the sharp test:
Both so immense, and infinitely vast,
The first could not be reached, but by the last.
Mean Massacres are but in death begun;
But Thou have Lived an Execution.
Close coffined up in a deceased Life;
Had Orphan-Children, and a Widow-Wife.
Friends not t'approach, or comfort, but to mourn
And weep their unheard plaints, as at thy urn?
Such black Attendants Colonied thy Cell,
But for thy Presence, Car'sbrook had been Hell.
Thus basely to Be Dungeon'd, would enrage
Great Bajazet beyond and Iron Cage.
That deep indignity might have layn
Something the lighter from a Tamerlain.
But here Sidonian Slaves usurp the Reins,
And lock the Scepter-bearing Arms in chains.
The spew'd-up surfeit of the glut'nous Land:
Honored by scorn, and clean beneath all brand.
For such a Varlet-Brood to tear all down,
And make a common Football of the Crown,
T'insult on wounded Majesty, and broach,
The blood of Honor by their vile reproach.
What royal eye but thine could sober see,
Bowing so low, yet bearing up so high?
What an unbroken sweetness graced thy Soul,
Beyond the world, proud conquest, or control?
Maugre grim cruelty, thou keepst thy hold;
Thy Thornie Crown was still a Crown of Gold.
Chaste Honor, Might enraged could never deflour,
Though others the Use, Thou claim'dst the Right of Power.
The brave Athenian thus (with lopp'd-off Hands)
A stop to swelling sails by's mouth commands.
New Vigor roused Thee still in thy Embroyles,
Antaeus-like, recruiting from the Foyles.
Victorious fury could not terror bring.
Enough to quell a captivated King.
So did that Roman Miracle withstand
Hetrurian shoals, but with a single hand.
The Church in thee had still her Armies; thus
The World once fought with Athanasius.
The Gantlet thus upheld; It is decreed,
(No safety else for Treason) Charles must bleed.
Traitor and Sovereign now inverted meet;
The wealthy Olive's dragged to the Brambles feet.
The Throne is Metamorphiz'd to the Bar,
And despicable Batts the Eagle dare.
Astonishment! yet still we must admire
Thy courage growing with thy conflicts high'r.
No palsied hands or trembling knees betray
That Cause, on which thy souls sure bottomed lay.
So free and undisturbed flew thy Breath,
Not as condemned, but purchasing a death.
Those early Martyrs in their funeral pile,
Embraced their Flames with such a quiet smile.
Brave Coeur-de-Lyon Soul, that would not veil
In one base syllable to beg thy Bayl!
How did thou blush to live at such a price,
As asked thy People for a sacrifice?
The Althenian Prince in such a pitch of zeal,
Redeemed his destined Host, and Commonweal;
Who bribed his cheated Enemies to kill,
And both their Conquest, and their Conqueror fell.
Thus thou our Martyr died'st: but oh! we stand
A Ransom for another Charles his Hand.
One that will write thy Chronicle in Red,
And dip his Pen in what thy Foes have bled.
Shall Treas'nous Heads in purple Caldrons drench,
And with such veins the Flames of Kingdoms quench.
Then thou art least at Westminster, shall't be
Filled in the Pompous List of Majesty.
Thy Mausalaeum shall in glory rise,
And Tears, and wonder force from Nephews Eyes.
Till when (though black-mouthed Miscreants engrave
No Epitaph, but Tyrant, on thy Grave.
A Vault of Loyalty shall keep thy Name,
An orient, and bright Olibian flame.
On which, when times succeeding foot shall tread,
Such Characters as these shall there be read.
Here CHARLES the best of Monarchs, butchered lies;
The Glory of all Martyrologies.
Bulwark of Law; the Churches Cittadell;
In whom they triumphed once, with whom they fell:
An English Solomon, a Constantine;
Pandect of Knowledge, Humane and Divine.
Meek even to wonder, yet of stoutest Grace.
To sweeten Majesty, but not debase.
So whole made up of clemency, the Throne
And Mercy-seat to Him were always one.
Inviting Treason with a pardoning look,
Instead of Gratitude, a stab He took.
With passion loved; that when He murd'red lay,
Heaven conquered seemed, and Hell to bear the sway.
A Prince so richly good, so blessed a Reign.
The world never saw but one, nor can again.
-- Humano genere Nature benigni
Nil dedit, aut tribuet moderato hoc principe major
In quo vera dei, vivensque eluxit imago:
Hunc quoniam sceleratacohors violavit, acerbas
Sacrilego Deus ipse ^etet de Sanguine poenas
Contemptumque sin Simulachri haudlinquet inultum.
Parodia ex Buchanani Geneth: Jacobi sexti. AN ELEGY Upon KING CHARLES the
First, Murdered publicly by His Subjects.
WEre not my Faith boy'd up by sacred blood,
It might be drowned in this prodigious flood;
Which reasons highest ground does so exceed,
It leaves my Soul no Anch'rage, but my Creed;
Where my Faith resting on the Original,
Supports it self in this the Copies fall;
So while my faith floats on that Bloody wood,
My reasons cast away in this Red flood,
Which never o'reflowes us all: Those showers past
Made but Land-flouds, which did some valleys wast;
This stroke has cut the only neck of land,
Which between us, and this Red Sea did stand,
That covers now our world, which cursed lies
At once with two of Aegypts prodigies;
O'recast with darkness, and with blood o'rerun,
And justly, since our hearts have theirs outdone;
The inchanter led them to a less known ill,
To act his sin, then 'twas their King to kill:
Which crime has widdowed our whole Nation,
Voided all Forms, left but privation
In Church and State; inverting every right;
Brought in Hels State, of fire without light:
No wonder then, if all good eyes look red,
Washing their Loyal hearts from blood so shed;
The which deserves, each pore should turn an eye,
To weep out, even a bloody Agony.
Let naught then pass for Music, but sad cries;
For Beauty, bloud-les cheeks, and bloud-shot eyes.
All colors soil, but black; all odours have
Ill sent, but Myrrh, incensed upon this Grave:
It notes a Jew, not to believe us much
The cleanerm ade, by a Religious touch
Of this Dead Body; whom to judge to die
Seems the Judaicall impiety.
To kill the King, the Spirit Legion paints
His rage with Law, the Temple and the Saints:
But the truth is, He feared, and did repine,
To be cast out, and back into the Swine;
And the case holds, in that the Spirit bends
His Malice in this Act, against his ends:
For it is like, the sooner he will be sent
Out of that body, He would still torment:
Let Christians then use otherwise this blood,
Detest the Act, yet turn it to their good;
Thinking how like a King of death He dies;
We easily may the world and death despise:
Death had no sting for Him, and its sharp arm,
Only of all the troop, meant Him no harm.
And so He looked upon the Axe, as one
Weapon yet left, to guard Him to His Throne;
In His great Name, then may His Subjects cry,
Death thou art swallowed up in Victory;
If this our loss a comfort can admit,
It Is that his narrowed Crown was grown unfit, For
For his enlarged Head, since his distress^
Had greatned this, as it made that the less;
His Crown was fallen unto too low a thing
For Him, who was become so great a King:
So the same hands enthroned him in that Crown
They had exalted from him, not pulled down.
And thus Gods Truth by them has rendered more,
Then ere men's falsehood promised to restore;
Which, since by death alone, he could attain,
Was yet exempt from weakness, and from pain;
Death was enjoined by God, to touch a part,
Might make His passage quick, never move His heart
Which even expiring, was so far from death,
It seemed but to command away His breath.
And thus His Soul, of this her triumph proud,
Broke, like a flash of lightning, through the cloud
Of flesh and blood; and from the highest line
Of humane virtue, passed to be Divine:
Nor is it much less His virtues to relate,
Then the high glories of His present state;
Since both then pass all Acts, but of belief;
Silence may praise the one, the other grief.
And since, upon the Diamond, no less
Then Diamonds, will serve us to impresse:
I Will only wish, that for His Elegy,
This our Josias, had a Jeremie.
AN ELEGY On The best of Men, And meekest of Martyrs, CHARLES the I. etc.


DOes not the Sun call in his light? and Day
Like a thin Exhalation melt away?
Both wrapping up their Beams in Clouds to be
Themselves close Mourners at the Obsequie
Of this Great Monarch? does his Royal Blood,
Which the Earth late drunk in so profuse a Flood
Not shoot through her affrighted womb, and make
All her Convulsed Arteries to shake
So long, till all those Hinges that sustain,
Like Nerves, the Frame of Nature shrink again
Into a shuffled Chaos? Does the Sun
Nut suck it from its liquid Mansion,
And still it into vap'rous Clouds? which May,
Themselves in bearded Meteors display,
Whose shaggie and dissheveld Beams may be,
The Tapers at this black Solemnity?
You Seed of Marble in the Womb accursed,
Rocked by some storm, or by some Tigresse nursed.
Fed by some Plague, which in blind Mists was hurl^
To Strew Infection on the tainted World.
What Fury charmed your hands to Act a Deed,
Tyrants to think on would not weep but bleed?
And Rocks by Instinct so risent this Fact,
They'ld into Springs of easy Tears be slack'd.
Say Sons of Tumult since you thought it good,
Still to keep up the Trade and bath in Blood.
Your guilty Hands, why did you then not State,
Your slaughters at some cheap and common Rate?
Your gluttonous and lavish Blades might have,
Devoted Myriads to one public Grave.
And lop'd off Thousands of some base Allay,
Whilst the same Sexton that entered their Clay.
In the same Urne their Names too might entombe,
But when on Him you fixed your fatal Doom.
You gave a Blow to Nature, since even all,
The Stock of Man now bleeds too in his Fall.
Could not Religion which you often have made,
A specious Gloss your black Designs to shade.
Teach you that we come nearest Heaven when we,
Are suppled into Acts of Clemency.
And Copy out the Deity again,
When we Distill our Mercies upon Men?
But why do I deplore this Ruin? He
Only shook off his frail Humanity.
And with such Calmnesse fell, he seemed to be,
Even less unmoved and unconcerned then we.
And forced us from our Throes of Grief to say,
We only Died, He only lived that Day.
So that his Tomb is now his Throne become
TO invest him with the Crown of Martyrdom*
And Death the Shade of Nature did not shroud
His Soul in Mists, but its clear Beams uncloud,
That who a Star in our Meridian shone
In Heaven might shine a Constellation.
AN EPITAPH.
Within this sacred VAULT does lie
The Quintessence of MAJESTY;
Which being Set, more Glorious shines,
The Best of KINGS, best of Divines;
Britains shame, and Britains glory,
Mirror of Princes, complete Story
Of ROYALTY; One so exact
That the Elixirs of Praise detract:
These are faint Shadows; But to endure,
He Is drawn to the Life in's POVRTRACTVRE:
If such another PIECE youl'd see,
Angels must Limn it out, or HE;
Where Wisdom, Grace, and Eloquence,
Are Centred in their Eminence.
Martyred HE was to save His Laws,
Religion, People, from the Jaws
Of ASSASINES; whose weal HE sought,
Even then when they His MURDER wrought
With Horrid Plots, that HEADLESS He
(And in HIM Church and State) might be.
Then since Correlatives They were,
Three Kingdoms in One KING lies here.
A. B.

FINIS.

