TRUTH RELEASED FROM PRISON, TO ITS Former Liberty. OR, A true discovery, who
are the troublers of true Israel; the disturbers of Englands Peace. With a
brief Narration; in which is impartially debated of, who are the true
Ambassadors of that great Jehovah, the Prince of Peace. By LAWRENCE CLARKSON, a
Labourer in that great Mystery of godliness.

London, Printed by Jane Coe, for John Pounset, at the lower end of Budge-row,
near Canon-street. 1646.

TO The Mayor, Aldermen, with the Inhabitants of the Town of Preston in
Amoundernesse, in the County of Lancaster.
Your Townesman wishes, that Truth in Peace, and Peace in Truth, may dwell in
your hearts as one man.

GENTLEMEN,
WEre it so that Truth were understood in its Center, that Truth were
apprehended in its Element, then would a Truth be received as a Truth;
notwithstanding the Messenger be not he you expected. This would be nothing in
hinderance, that Truth should not be embraced as a Truth, so that if Truth in
the power thereof has not reduced your spirits in obedience thereto, though an
Angel from Heaven should divulge the truth you cannot believe it.

To that end says the Prophet in hearing you shall hear, and not understand,
Isa. 6. 9.
in seeing you shall see, and not perceive a truth from an error, for the
prevention hereof, observe the Apostles exhortation, prove all things, and try
the spirits of men; that so you 1 These. 5. 21.
may not hold fast that which is evil, and lose that which is good, in
esteeming one messenger above another; in so doing you receive the message in
love to the messenger, and not in love to the message it self; so that it
comes, ye rejoice in man and not in truth, delivered by the man (as instance)
the Countrymen of Christ could not but be astonished at the Doctrine delivered
by him; Saying, from whence has he these things, and what Mark. 6. 2. 3.
wisdom is this that is given unto him, etc. They could not but acknowledge
the excellence thereof, and with admiration conclude; never man John 7 46
spoke like this man, (but) when they understood whose Son he was; how that he
was a Carpenter, Mary's Son, the brother of JAMES and JOSES verse. 3.
and of JVDAH and SIMON, and that their Sisters were with them; then their note
was changed; for whereas before they appluaded him: now says the Text, they
were offended in him.

So that Gentlemen, to this end I quote this Scripture, that so you may examine
your own hearts, whether you be not offended, that God has been pleased to
call out the poorest, and weakest of his Saints, adorning them with gifts
equivalent thereto, authorizing them by his Princely Majesty to divulge his
message to People, Kings, and Nations, and who shall withstand his pleasure
herein, or who dare presume to murmr at the doings of the Lord, seeing they
are marvelous in the eyes of men; knowing this, that all things are of him,
through him, Romans 11. 36.
and to him; So that he may do with his own, what he pleases; as what if he
please to confound the Wise, and exalt the Ignorant? what if he please So
accounted.
to refuse the greatness of the Elders Scribes, and Pharisees, and accept of
beggars, as Peter and John? what if he please to reject the Nobility of King
Ahab, and approbate the Prophesye of poor ELIAH, of poor Tradesmen, as
Tailors, Weavers etc. Should this displease you, that is the pleasure of God?

If this be your trouble that Eldad Gentlemen,
and Medad should prophecy, that the Saints of the most high should deliver
the message of the King of Kings, that the Family of love should improve their
Tallent given them by their Father; notwithstanding your displeasure 1 John 1.
^.
herein, I dare not, I cannot, but what I have seen and heard, declare unto
you; (yea you) my Countrymen, my Townes-men, my Neighbors, and my
Acquaintance; under this Relation I am imboldned. I am engaged to present my
Light before you, to traffic with my Tallent amongst you, to the end you may
see and acknowledge, God is not partial, with him is no respecting of Persons;
yea Romans 2. 11.
with God it matters not, of what occupation he be, provided, he be lawfully
called and sent out by God, approbated and authorized by his Majesty, in that
the work is the Lords, and not man's, (therefore) it is the Prerogative of God
to make choice of what messenger he pleases.

So that Gentlemen, what should I say to you, or to what should I council you,
(only this) that you would be pleased to approve of that which is approved by
God, that you would receive that which is sent by God, that so I may not have
the like occasion to weep over you, as Christ had over Jerusalem; saying, O
Jerusalem Jerusalem, Math. 23. 37.
etc. So that I may not say O Preston, Preston, thou that have been seduced by
blind Guides; insomuch that thou have worshipped that for God which really was
no God, as instance thy exalting the Common Prayer, thy crucifix in baptism,
thy kneeling at Sacrament; thy reverence to the Steeple was so great, that I
was reproved for turning against the wall; so By Mr. Huddson then your Lecturer.
that I may say, thou that despisest the Prpohets of God, and rejects them
that are sent unto thee, how often has the Lord unsheathed his Sword against
thee, how often has he plundered thee, and yet notwithstanding thou can not,
thou will not return, return unto thy God; so that Preston my request to God
is for thee, that the Love of Christ may plunder thee, may persuade thee, yea
may conquer thee in obedience to his Majesty: that so you may become truly
Noble with the men of Berea, in receiving the Word of Acts. 17. 10.
God with all readiness of mind, and in holy wisdom search the Scriptures,
to the end you may truly understand by whom the Gospel was preached, and from
whom they were authorized.

That in so doing this poor Tallent of mine may find entertainment with you,
so as to be received by you, not only by the hearing in the ear, but in the
understanding of the heart; the which I in all Christian love present to your
consideration, desiring it may be perused with a single eye and impartial
Spirit, to the end you may not approve or disprove, of these few lines, in
reference to the Author; but as you understand the matter herein contained, so
Judge, and so Speak, and withal I entreat you, if you apprehend any error
through weakness, delivered by me in that I am the weakest of thousands: that
you would be pleased to impute it to me the Author thereof, that so Truth by
you may not be Scandalized; but in all wisdom Vindicated, James 1. 27.
in that it is pure and undefiled

For the performance of which, turn your eyes upon the ensuing subject, and the
Lord give you understanding to apprehend the truth therein contained; which, I
hope nothing there from is presented to the view of your eye; but what the text
will bear me out, as that Eliah by the Court of equity was engaged, to bring
to light the Ishues of Ahabs unjust proceedings, and that the more truth might
be vindicated, the Gentry with the Comonalty satisfied, who was the troubler of
Israel: under the same engagement, by the same Covenant, are Elias friends
constrained to vindicate their call, their Doctrine, and their Profession; from
any report or scandal, imputed on them by Ahabs Kinsmen, under what term
soever, that thereby it may appear who halts between two opinions, who are
Newters, who turns with the times: that so you may know who are the troublers
of Israel.

Gentlemen, this (and only this) is my love to you: yea, my Petition for you;
that you may be a discerning people, yea such a people that the Lord delights
to enhabit with, then will your Shire be a joy to England, yea your Town will
be a terror to the Enemies round about you, in that truth is stronger then
Kings: Truth will do as the Ark to the Philistines, make them fear and tremble;
yea truth is so far from troubling 1 Samuel 4. 4. 7.
the Saints that it is their joy, their peace, their chifest treasure: So that
my conclusion is, truth may be your Governor, your Weapon, your refuge, your
all in all; that truth may preserve you from all your enemies, that truth may
support you in the greatest misery, that truth may possess you in everlasting
peace. So prays he that is,

Your Servant in the Truth. LAW. CLARKSON.

Truth released from Prison, to its former Liberty.
1 KINGS, 18. 17. Art thou he that troubles Israel?
Dear friends, you have an indictment or accusation preferred into the Court
of the living God.

The extent thereof lies in these words.

Art thou he which troubles Israel?

The connection of which is divided in accusatorem, et reum, That is, the
Plantiffe and Defendant; so that the Court of equity does produce an engagement
in the hearts of all such that are in Covenant with Christ Jesus, that are of
the sworn Jury, to give in our Testimony concerning the indictment.

In that we may Evangelically prosecute the truth of this information, I shall
enquire whether it be suppositive or Affirmative, that so justice in all equity
may pass sentence on both sides.

To that end peruse the Bill preferred by King Ahab, and seriously take notice
of the perticulars quoted in the Indictment; which were, that Eliah the
defendant, should prophecy bitter things that would befall the King, and
Kingdom of Israel; saying, Chap. 17 1.
as the Lord God of Israel lives before whom I stand, there shall be neither
dew nor rain, but according to my word.

Secondly, examine the Defendant what was the reason of this his Prophecy,
whether it were out of the envy of his Spirit, or that it was the power of
Jehovah, commanding and carrying out his heart to deal plainly with the
Plantiffe, King Ahab.

For your satisfaction in this quaery, I conceive the record will clearly
produce, that Eliah had no envy against Ahab or his Kingdom, but did by the
teachings of God declare, what the Lord had determined to do; in that he
prophesied in the name of the Lord of Hosts, as is confirmed by the record,
where you have the Lord approbating his Prophecy, in that Chap. 17. 7.
there fell no rain upon the earth, etc.

Secondly, this Message of the man of God was very important, so as to requite
King Ahab for his rebellion and trouble of his poor Prophet, by his gross and
wicked proceedings, in contempt and provocation of the Lord of Hosts; insomuch
that he became the only troubler of the Kingdom himself, as the Defendant
has it clearly recorded; saying, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy
Fathers verse. 18.
house, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, etc.

Yet you have this wicked King Ahab, with his wicked Priests and Courtiers
accusing and attaching innocent Eliah, to be a troubler of their State, a
disturber of their Peace, a hinderer of their reformation, when truly and
really the Court of equity has found the Plantiff guilty of that he accused
the defendant of, and that not only suppositively: but affirmatively, saying
I, (yea I) a poor despised Prophet, am not the troubler of Israel, etc. but
thou (yea thou) King Ahab, art he that troubles Israel, From whence observe
this conclusion.

That the disobedient and troublers Doct.
of Israel; do first complain that they are troubled.

Thus beloved, when justice is permitted to have its Prerogative, and when
Partiality with respect of persons does standat the door; then shall poor
Eliah have as free permission to defend his cause as the King upon his Throne;
then shall truth be countenanced and an eror rejected, and not with this
Prophet retire into the Wilderness into Prison, etc. when erors lodge in the
Kings Palace, as is recorded of this Chap. 19. 4.
Defendant, he for the delivering of the Message of the God of Truth; he for
revealing the Kings pleasure, was by a wicked King hunted and persecuted for a
troubler of Israel, etc. so that from hence you may take notice of this
proposition.

That a truth prophesied or preached Doct.
by a poor Eliah, a poor Saint, is esteemed a trouble to the Nobility of
Israel.

Thus beloved, having set open the fountain, and made way for the ligt of
truth, whereby we may with all brevity prosecute the precedent doctrines.

In which I shall by the assistance of God, produce nothing to this auditory;
but what the subject I am now to treat upon, will vindicate my innocensie in
opposition to any malignant catching Spirits, that may hereafter favor or lay
to my charge any supposed error, etc.

So that in all Christian love, I entreat your Christian attention, to that
which God by me shall be pleased to speak from this conclusion.

That the disobedient and troublers Doct.
of Israel, do first complain that they are troubled.

The truth of this will appear in these two ensuing perticulars, which are as
follows.

First, who are the true Israel.

Secondly, what will trouble this true Israel.

For your satisfacton in the first I shall produce you the original, and rise
of Israel; that so ye may take notice, ABRAHAM was the first that was made
choice of, to call his Genesis 2. 12.
people, in that he was commanded to leave his kindred, to the end, the Lord
might bless them that blessed him, and curse them that cursed him, he being
the first called an Hebrew, Genesis 14. 13.
so that as yet Israel were not, nor had not their title; till JACOB was born
ABRAHAM'S Sons Son, ISAACS Genesis 32. 28.
Son, so JACOB was first called JSRAEL; this JACOB having 12. Sons, which stock
and Children were Exodus 1. 1.
called JSRAEL, a people by themselves, persecuted of all nations, beloved of
none but God; so that of this stock came MOSES, yea all the holy Fathers,
Kings, and Prophets, Deuteronomy. 14. 2
called and chosen by God for his peculiar treasure, of this stock came Christ
Jesus, as was both promised Genesis 49. 10. Mich. 5. 2 Mat 2. 6.
and prophesied being confirmed in his birth.

But what then, shall we conclude that the generations of the twelve tribes
were the true Israel?

My answer to that must speak from the record in that the declaration of that
arises, that all these were not true Israel, as is remarkable; concerning
Saloman, at whose death all 1 Kings 13. 11.
the tribes save, one had a wicked King Ieroboham; you shall find they were
divided again, yea you shall read this Israel so tituled, became so sinful,
that this Prophet this defendant could not destinguish Israel from other
people, so that now the only way to find out the truth is to peruse these
ensuing Scriptures.

As fitst take notice what the Profit Isaiah 1. 1. 22:
Isaiah says, which text I conceive is important to the question in hand, in
that it is an exposition of those texts formerly coated, so that I need not use
any other argument, save only the language of this Profit who shows plainly
that all those of the 12. tribes were not true Israel, that all those
generations were not regenerate; therefore but a remnant shall Verse: 21:
return even the remnant of Jacob etc. so that take notice, that although thy
people O Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant of them shall
return, so that dear friends, all that had their original 1. Note.
from the loins of Abraham, according to flesh, were not true Israel, as more
fully will appear in the next Scripture, where Rom: 9: 7.
it is said they are not all children any whit the more; for being of the seed
of Abraham, as if he had said it matters not; for all their birth external, in
that their birthright and evidence does not arise there from, that birthright
which the Profit and Apostle here intends that birthright by which thou art
entitled, and so chosen one of true Israel, I say for all Abraham be thy
kinsman according to flesh, yet observe thou art but only of Israel, and not
Israel, as says the Apostle for all Verse. 6.
they are not Israel which are of Israel, so that dear friends your profession
without possession, your relation to Abraham and not with Izack is of no
validity, because says the text in Izack shall thy seed be called so that this
may put a period to any such doubts or queeries, that may assault my exposition
hereon, as to conclude that any of Abraham's kindred were true Israel, save
only those that were called in Isack* those that were Children 1 Cor. 10 18.
of the promise those that were elected before the foundation of the world,
those that were beloved in eternity, and so chosen for true Israel these and
only these are Gal 6: 16:
true Israel, as have been by argument confirmed with scripture proved.

Secondly what will trouble true Israel believers etc.

In answer hereto I must be silent in that there is so many experienced Fathers
Prophets and Apostles, So many true Israelites, that can better then I give you
satisfaction herein so that I shall but only rehearse over their records in
that some of you are not versed in the letter and others there are that observe
not what they read, so that dear friends if you please to peruse the
Scripture, you shall find what troubled Noah and Abraham if not sins and
iniquities, you shall 2 Pet. 2: 7.
find Lot troubled with the sins of Sodom, you shall find Moses troubled with
the sins of Jacobs children, you shall find Joshua Josh: ^ 1: 7
troubled with Achans wedge of gold, you shall find Samuel troubled with he
sins of Saul you shall find Jeremiah weeping for the sin of his people, you
shall find the disciples troubled with the sins of the Jews, So you shall
find this El^jah this defendant troubled with the abominations of King Ahab,

Thus dear friends I have given you the judgments of most of the ancient and
holy writers what have and what will trouble true Israel, as sins and iniquity
of any sort whatsoever in especially that great sin of persecution committed
and enacted daily, against Elijahs kinsmen, yet this is no trouble to Ahab nor
his friends to have conventicles in taverns and alehouses, in cities towns
and parishes conspiring and plotting treason against the King of Kings,
inventing mischief against the Saints of the most high, yet in all this Ahab
and his Kinsmen are not here at troubled, yet on the contrary when Eliahs
kinsmen are assembled together Matthew: 7: 1
either in fields boats or houses to teach or hear the word of God,
notwithstanding it be approved of by the King of Kings, yet King Ahab and his
kinsmen, are much troubled, as that Eliah should wander up and down the
kingdom, preaching Mesias to be the only truth, this (and only this) is the
case that people kings and nations are troubled as this Eliah, this defendant
had experience, being by a wicked King persecuted for a troubler of Israel,
saying art thou he that troubles Israel etc.

Thus dear friends, the conclusion is clear that the troublers are first
troubled.

So that it is apparent my second proposition will vindicate it self, and with
Scripture defend it self.

That a truth prophesied or preached Doct.
by a poor Eliah, a poor saint is esteemed a trouble to the nobility of
Israel.

Dear friends, I hope by this time you are satisfied that my conclusions do
not consist of untempored mortar as Philosophy only, or Logic patched
togethet with lincy woolcy, or such like stuff; but that thou may with a poor
prison^r conclude that in them is no mixture, but true effects of that only
truth Christ Jesus in hopes thereof I shall advance to meet with my adversaries
Ahabs kinsmen the troublers of Israel.

So that small time the Lord shall enable me to speak, and give you hearts to
hear.

I shall deliver my judgment in this method which is.

First, to prove the doctrine.

Secondly, answer 3. objections.

Thirdly, apply the same to whom it

Were it not that supposed queries would 1 Kin. 22.
turn with me to Michaiah who for prophesying a truth did greatly offend King
Ahab: so Ierimiah for prophesying Ier. 37 15.
a truth was counted a troubler Act. 5. 18. 7. 51. 16, 20.
of Israel; so the disciples of Christ will fully confirm this. Doct. As when
they preached the Lord Jesus, it cut the elders even to the heart; yea, they
were so exceedingly troubled, that little less then death Psalm. 2, 2 Act: 17:
6:
must be their reward: So in the like occasion, you shall hear the outcry of
people: saying, these men do exceedingly trouble our City; yea for preaching
the Act: 34: 5:
Truth, you shall be the men that turn the Kingdom upside down, and in
conclusion Dan. 6. 7.
esteemed movers of sedition; yea troublers of Counties, Towns, and Parishes.
Obj. 1.


Yet say you we conceive such Truths should be silent, that we understand will
hinder a Reformation, and so trouble their Prove. 25. 11.
proceedings as from these Scriptuures will appear. A word spoken in his place
is Romans 12. 18.
like Apples of Gold with Pictures of Silver: So if it be possible as much as
in you is be at peace with all men* I do so conceive Answ.
too, provided that Reformation be real, not verbal, that under pretense of
Reformation in Religion, do root up Religion. I say if your Reformation be
real, it must Note.
be in Truth; so that Truth prophesied or preached, can in no kind be said to
hinder but further a Reformation; in that Truth must be the Foundation, Truth
must be the instrumental case; yea Truth must be all in all in a true
Reformation: So that your Scriptures if a true exposition be given thereon, are
much important to the question in hand, in that a word in due season is
commendable; yea, says Wisdom it produces joy to the Speaker, and Auditory;
yea, how good is a word in due season: But the question is when is the Season,
if not to reprove a Child when he offends; if not to reprove David upon the act
of Adultery: So when were a time more seasonable for Elijah to divulge a
Famine; but when Ahab had Idolized his Pride and Voluptuousness: so that dear
friends to conceal a Truth when Errors are published, is not the season, but
to speak a word in due season, is to preach light in darkness, to divulge
Truth in opposition to Errors; as says the Apostle, Be 2 Timothy 4. 2
instant in season, and out of season; so that it is clear, there is no season,
but a Truth ought, nay must be divulged (Provided) the God of Truth carry out
thy heart by the Power of Truth; to speak nothing but the Truth, as it is in
Jesus.

I say to thee, it matters not, whether So esteemed.
learned or unlearned: whether a Tradesman or no; if God has given thee a
Talent, thou must trasuck with it, as Christ has the saying: no man lights a
candell to Mat. 5. 15
put under a bushel. So that it is the express command of Christ, that such so
gifted must not be silent, least in so doing he be condemned for an
unprofitable Servant: Matthew. 25* 26.
but, say you, if it be possible as much as in you is, be at peace with all
men: True, it is a blessed condition; but the question is, whether the Apostle
intends there the silencing of Truth, that thereby you may attain love and
peace with all men (or that) when thou art reviled of any man, not to revile
again; as when thou art evil spoken off, not to speak evil again: to this
purpose, the Apostle has his saying, Recompense to no man evil for evil: but
if thy Verse. 17.
enemy hunger feed him, etc. This beloved is the Exhortation, that ye would be
at peace with all men, that is, overcome their pride with your humility;
overcome their malice with your love; overcome their Verse. 21.
evil with your good, that so if it be possible, you may be at peace with all
men, good or bad, friend or foe, etc. (yet not so) as to bury Truth; but in all
love discover Truth, that Christ did not come to send Peace without Truth, but
Peace with Truth; that so Truth and Peace may kiss each other, etc.

But you will say who may we most suspect a many or a few the Obj. ^
wise or the ignorant those that are gifted and called or those that are not,
in that Prou. 15. 7. 1 Cor. 7, 20.
says the wiseman the lips of the wise disperse, knowledge, and says the
Apostle let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he was called. It is
very requisite Answ.
to answer this objection in that the trouble may be imputed to the troublers,
to the end it may appear take the advice of Elijah, he having experience can
direct you the truth hereof that notwithstanding the prophets of Baal be four
hundred and fifty in opposition to one verse. 19.
poor Elijah, yet try your doctrine by the touchstone of truth Christ Jesus in
which you shall find that the people of God the Family of love are not many
but few, yea the fewest of all Sects or Churches whatsoever, (So few) that it
is the subject of Christ saying my little Luke 12. 32.
flock two of a tribe one of a city, So that it may be suspected if not
concluded that an error may be found in many and a truth in few, but say you
these prophets so many, this assembly so great, are men of wisdom; therefore
cannot err, neither is there any color or show that these should prophecy a
lie and one poor traidsman that has no leaarning should preach a truth, in
that says the text the lips of the wise not the ignorant O dear friends what
wisdom is this, what wise men are these, whether you intend the wise men the
Sorcerers of Egypt, or Moses and Aaron, whether the Magicians the Astrologians
or Daniel, whether the Scribes and Pharisees or Christ and his Disciples, Dear
friends have you not read that God will confound the wisdom of the wise; so
that he says where is the wise where is the Scribe, where is the disputeer 1
Cor. 1. 19. 20.
of this world has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishnesse^

Is not this too too apparent that, that which is foolishness with God is
wisdom with man that which is of no validity with God is in high estimation
with man, if not why not the ignorant so accounted as the learned, Oh my dear
friend that I might prevail with this court in the behalf of Ahabs kinsmen, O
that these tears might move the Judge of the Court to show kindness unto them;
notwithstanding their unkindnesse toward Elijahs friends: this is the evil:
this is the injury that I wish my Adversaries; even this, that the Lord the
Judge of this Court would open their eyes, that so they might see the evil of
their doings; even this evil, of accusing and attaching innocent Elijah,
inocent Saints for troublers of Israel, when you have heard they are found
troublers themselves but say you these Elijahs kinsmen ought to follow their
vocation, their trades and callings appointed them, and not take upon them the
work of the Ministry, wanting parts enabling them thereto; by which all
scandals, reproaches, and tumults would be taken away, and People, Citiet,
Towns, and Villages, would be at peace and unity.

Dear friends, do but seriously consider the extent of this Apology or
Exposition on this Scripture; let every man abide in That is in reference to a
human Calling, not a divine call, being confirmed a Minister, may have both.
Mat. 6. 3. Act. 18. 3.
the vocation wherein he was called: from hence you infer, that no man ought to
lay aside or change his calling, or that a man so called, so traided, ought not
to assume to himself another Calling. In answer to this Christ and the
Disciples are engaged, in that these aspersions and false imputations does as
highly concern the^, as any other in that, we understand Christ was a
Carpenter, the Disciples Fishermen, Paul and Aquila was Tent-makers; yet
notwithstanding their crafts, they took upon the^ the work of the Ministry, as
appears in the Record, where you may find Christ questioned by what authority
he did preach. Act. 4.
So the Disciples was examined, in whose Name they did teach, and do miracles,
etc. yet wanted a human call, having no experience of any University or
College whatsoever; yet wanted no ability to divide the Word of God aright, or
to carry forth that holy and heavenly message of the King of Kings, but were in
a high measure approved of by God, and thereby authorized by the divine
inspiratio^ to the astonishme^t of their adversaries, by being not only able
Minister of the Letter, but able Ministers of the Spirit, from thence studying
to show themselves approved, not only by man but God, and thereby vindicating
their calling and institution from such reproaches and tumults affirming that it
does not arise from their Preaching, but from their envious spirits, in that
they seek their own prais and credit more then the praise or credit of God, and
hereby are enraged with cruelty over the Saints of the most high, supposing to
blot out, or at least silence the language of the Scripture, which the Apostle
has so fully* ^ Cor. 1. ^ Tim. 1. 11 1 Cor. 4. 1
recorded that he was by the will of God appointed, A Preacher, an Apostle, and
a teacher of the Gentiles; therefore let Israel so think of us as of the
ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. So that it is clear,
that the troublers are first troubled, wicked Ahab for breaking the commands of
God, and not Elijab; saying, I have not: no, it is thou and thy Fathers house,
etc.

But say you, we are to give no offense Obj. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 3^.
to any whatsoever high or low, rich or poor, Christians or Heathens, as says
the Apostle, give none offense, neither to Jews nor to the Grecians, nor to
the Church of God; therefore you are not to proceed in such a way that do
offend, not only in the singular, but plural, even a whole Kingdom.

It is requisite every man should be cautious Answ.
herein, and very watchful and circumspect, that nothing be acted by thee,
that may offend the adverse party; that although it be thy liberty to eat or
drink or do any such thing; yet if it be a bondage to another, I conceive thou
ought to forbear in that it is but moral; so indifferent, that notwithstanding
it be lawful to thee, yet it is not expedient for the other: Therefore (says
the Apostle) 1 Cor. 8. ^
if meat offend my brother, I will never eat flesh so long as I live; would
Paul forbear to eat that which is comfortable and refreshing to the body, and
all that he might not offend his brother, so I co^ceive ought every Christian
to forbear such things as are indifferent, instance days, times, and seasons,
concerning which has been a great offense in cities, towns, and villages, in
that some esteems one day above another, and another man counts every doy
alike: So that says the Apostle, Romans 14*
let every man be fully persuaded in his mind, which persuasion will remove
all offenses; that notwithstanding some open their shops, others shut their
shops, yet if both persuaded, what need offense arise, but if it do arise, the
rise thereof is offense given. So the offender, then to observe, or not observe
a day is no offense, but if thou that keeps the day be offended at me for not
observing the day, thou gives offense; so the offender the disturber of Peace,
the troubler of Israel. As observe, two men of two judgments, one for
sprinkling of infants, the other for dipping believers, yet thou art in peace
with one, and he in peace with the other, so that there is no offense in
either, but now if he that is sprinkled be offended at he that is dipped, then
the party sprinkled gives the offense; so the offender the troubler of Israel.
As is confirmed in one remarkable passage betwixt the Lord Major of London, and
a Constable of the said City* in whose Ward there was some Saints assembled
together, to reason out the mysteries of the Gospel; concerning which, notice
was given to the neighbors, that there was a private conventicle, at which
they were ready to obey their father, and with all vigilance to put his work in
agitation, which was done accordingly, insomuch that there was a great tumult;
upon which the Constable of the said Parish did inform the Lord Major, and
withal desire a warrant to fetch those Saints before his Lordship, to which
the Lord Major replied, by whom is the tumult from them within, or them
without? the said Constable being convinced of the truth thereof answered, from
them without, then make the warrant to apprehend the^ without, etc. From hence
let all sorts of people observe, that he that is the 1. troubled is the
troubler, he that takes the offense gives the offense, so the offender. Then it
may be concluded, that Elijahs kinsmen, those that you call Conventiclers,
those that you call Tub-preachers, those that are tradesmen, that have no human
learning, do not give offense, do not trouble true Israel. No, no, it is Ahabs
kinsmen; such as deride, reproach, and persecute Elijahs friends, the Saints of
the most high; these and such as these are the offenders, the troublers of true
Israel. Thus dear friends, having with all brevity that might be, and with as
much sobriety as the Lord has afforded me, collected the quintessence of the
Text into 2. conclusions, and from thence reduced the excellence therein
contained into several branches, so that little else can be expected; only my
conclusion in 2. things, which is. 1. That you would walk circumspectly in 1
Pet. ^ 14, 16.
all your ways, that so your accusation may appear with Elijah suppositive, and
not affirmative; therefoer says Christ, beware of men: so say I, beware of
Ahabs kinsmen, deserve no stain in your white raiment, that they have no
sinful act to brand your profession with, knowing this, that if thou be a
friend of Elijah, thou have many enemies that waits for thy falling; therefore
I say, be vigilant in all that thou do, that when thou art accused* and
attached by Ahabs friends thy cause may he as inno^e^t as Elijah, that so the
judge of the Court may vindicate thy good name from false information. etc.

If it so fall out, thou be the man that Ahab or his friends, my request is,
thou would be exhorted by Christ; to be armed with Elijah's patience, that so
thou may overcome their evil with good, and labor with all meekness and
tender respects, to redeem that time they lose, in letting thy light so Math. 5
16
shine before men of all sorts and Sects whatsoever, that thereby Ahabs
acquaintance may have the like occasion to glorisie God, as they had by thy
friend Elijah, saying, the Lord is God, the Lord is God. Thus having done; thou
shall overthrow the treachery of any adversaries, in the saying of Elijah. I
have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord, etc.

FINIS.

