CANTERBVRIES PILGRIMAGE: (...) the Testimony of an accused CONSCJENC^ For the
Blood of Mr. Burton. Mr. Prynne. AND Doctor Bastwicke.


^ed the just deserved Sufferings he lies under: Showing the Glory of
Refo^mation, above Prelaticall Tyranny.

^erein is laid open, the reallity of the Scottish Nation with the Kingdom of
England.

READ AND CONSIDAR



LONDON Printed for H. Walker, 1641.

CANTERBVRIES PILGRIMAGE.
THE just God of Heaven, being provoked by Sin, beyond the Bounds of Grace and
Pardon, (though he be the Fountain of Mercy it self) yet will he manifest his
Power when he is so provoked, which makes him to suffer Monsters to Tyrannize,
Scillaes, Mariuses, Neroes, Dioclesians etc. which brought little Laud to our
displeased Affections: such ravening Wolvet, like cruel Bears, are fittest to
associate the hungry starved Monsters, beyond the Alps high Hills, and not to
mix themselves into our merciful government; for the King of Israel is a
merciful King, and out Laws are full of pity, and, which is above all, we
profess the worship of a gracious, and merciful God; and thus we learn, that
when a people are oppressed with Tyranny, let them call upon the Lord, and
return from all their evil ways; and then the Lord will set them free, and
give them victory over those Tyrants, that so cruelly oppress them: as blessed
be his holy name, he has now done for us; covering their faces with shame
amongst us; so that we may say with the Poet:

O simple fools, what mean you hence to run,
You evil choose, your wonted will to shun;
Turn back for shame, turn back, and do not fly,
To live with shame, and let your Honors dye,
Why are you gone, are you afraid to dye?
Is no hope left, a fortune here to try?
Shall one vild Pagan boast another day,
His cause alone has driven you all away?
When the Lord made England first a Protestant church, he bestowed upon her a
great Blessing: he made her the spouse of Jesus Christ, whose Members are his
Saints on earth: this was a happy marriage for our Nation and herein have we
bin happy ever since. Only what has bin Eclipsed since by Popery, makes us
miserable most of all; though by many other ways we sin: yet this has bin our
greatest misery. God was provoked by our sins, when he did threaten us with
Famine. Plague Wars, and we have often felt his gentle Chastisements, but we
did not repent, and turn unto the Lord, and enter into Covenant with him: we
cried like wanton Children whilst we felt the smart, but hated not the Cause;
God sent us good Ministers to gather his people unto him; but the envious man's
tares sprang up faster in our rotten hearts, then Gods good seed: and Satan
raised up opposers, even of those godly Preachers themselves, to stop their
mouths: Then the Lord permitted blind unpreaching Prelates, and Ministers to
be thrust into our Churches; who, whilst they allured us with the beauty of the
Temple walls, and drew our affections to behold the huge Cedars of the church
Mountains; but fed us not with the Word of God: they fed us with Leaves and
Acorns, like the Beast of Rome, and withheld from us the truth of Scriptures,
the savory venson for our souls; and O how blind we were, to sit still; as if
we had enough! But oh, the sad groans, and heave sighs that passed from the
Souls of Gods holy people, the zealous Professors amongst us! When Bishop Laud
was made Archbishop of Canterbury; his disaffection to the Truth of Protestant
Religion, caused his designs to be expected as Tyrannous in his Metropolitan
See, and to be as terrible to the Church and Children of God, as the fierce
winds and storms, to the halfe-drowned Passengers in the turmoyling waves of
the troubled sea many were our prophets to foretell this sad disaster. And if we
look upon this Monster, we shall see how high in pride he soared, whilst all
Opposers of his will were endangered thereby to incur his great displeasure,
whose prosecution was without pity.

This Ork directed his course like a Canterbury Tyrant, against the faithful,
godly, and Religious Protestants, laboring to suppress Purity: yet being
zealously affected with Romish superstition, and blind Popery, roaring in a
blind devotion; yet was his sent so sharp, that it was hard for any sincere,
godly Professor, to shun his paws, either in himself or his Agents So was his
power also great, in so much, that few could escape him; so that always, his
Prisoners had little hope, either to fight or fly. Amongst the rest, look upon
Reverend Mr. Burton, a grave, and worthy, Religious Divine; how he suffered
under him, and that for no just cause, that I could ever hear; but because he
was so pure, so holy, and that tyrants will grew so great, that neither piety
nor pity, wife, nor Children, would work upon him: No, he must have blood, his
ears must be cut, and that in vild disgrace upon the Pillory, when the tender
eyes of all spectators, could not refrain weeping, to behold so sad a
spectacle. Look upon D. Bastwicke, a meek, courteous, affable Gentleman; yet
to please the fancy of the bloodthirsty Monster, must suffer his ears also to
be cropped. And how has Master Pryme, that admired Lawyer, whose Pious, and
Godly Conversation, is transcendent above most; yet had his ears twice clipped,
his Cheeks burnt with an hot Iron, his Books burnt before His Face, and each
of them constrained to live in exile, from wives, Children, families, flock,
friends: O monstrous cruelty, thus to trample on the blond of holy Christians;
what shall I say of D. Laiton, M. Lilborn, Nathaniel Wickins, and many others
who have bin cruelly imprisoned, censured, whipped, fined beyond the bonds of
charity, or Christian ty, who have bin afflicted with the vast Cave of his
illegal, and unjust proceeding Courts, and his large family of Rotchet
Prelates; which comely Matrons, have curbed the mouths of faithful Ministers,
whilst this great Goat keeper himself, has destroyed the grass upon the
Mountains, prepared to f^ed the sheep.

What lamentation was there then amongst the Saints, and godly people; how did
they mourn to see the Church silled with popery and superstition, and Popist
Innovations, and instead of the Ministers of God (in many places) were set the
Priests of Baal. The good people of the land prayed for Reformation, but rested
(almost) despairing of release.

The Scots they rise, and tell our Kingdom, that the Orcke of Canterbury, that
great Monster, and his Agents, have kept away their sister, the Church of
England, from Christ her spouse, and have polluted her with Popery; and that
themselves also, are in danger of the same sad disaster and protested that they
would lose their lives, before they would permit that their Doctrine should be
corrupted.

Hereupon a Parliament was called, which gave both us and them hope of
Reformation; we poor souls were so taken with the Parliament; that we thought
our selves in Heaven at a trance, as if all was then done; but yet neglected
the chiefest thing on our part, Repentance, and Conversion to God: we forgot
the Lord, and thought our deliverance past: some few days passed sweetly, but
politic Canterbury was so diligent; and Catulous of his own Inventions; he
labored in the day, and contrived in the night to hinder our Designs, and to
obscure the bright day stars then appearing; and though not for his Sect,
whose intents were wicked* but being provoked by our sins, God thwarted our
hopes in that Parliament, by a dissolution thereof: This gave his graceless
Laud, great satisfaction, his heart began to sore again, as high as ever: but
this bred sad thoughts upon the hearts of good people, but they were
constrained to patience, waiting Gods appointed time.

The Scots were counted Rebels, and traitors, Soldiers were banded, wars
were begun, blood was shed on both sides, and oh how beyond all admiration was
the sword so soon sheathed again: had they gone or, O the lamentable
spectacles that our eyes would have seen ere this, our Chan^els might have
flowed with blood, and husband, wife Child, etc. have parisht before each
others eyes: yet none able to help, the sword spares neither the gray hair,
nor the tender babe, old age, nor virginity? But ever blessed be our God who
has preserved us.

The Tyrant of Canterbury, provided a sorrowful cup, for the Saints he drove
his flock, and called his Goats together, themselves constituted ungodly
Oaths, and sinful Canons, to confirm their Designs, and their silken
Doctors, labor to establish them, whose readiness and diligence, was, as if
they soared on Eagles wings, to perfect the same; whilst good and godly men,
wept and bewailed the Calamities we then groned under.

The great Monster, still inflamed with cruel Rage, would have all power, and
all Laws subject to him, and his Courts: nay, he would have men's means forced
from them, and like a cruel Ork, in his own quarrel, draws the 3. Kingdoms
to a Controversy, to make them swim in blood; but O our God, Deliver us we
beseech thee from cruel bloodthirsty Tyrants. And ever blessed be our good
God, who in our greatest need, in the midst of this distress, haeh set us free
again, by an happy Parliament, from that forlorn and woeful Condition, in
which we were, under so great Perils? O let us therefore praise our good God,
and enter into Covenant with him of new Obedience, and write the memory thereof
to our unborne Posterity for ever.

Let us look upon this cruel Ork, as he is a Traitor convicted by the High
Court of Parliament, and lying under the heavy sentence of death: by whom we
have so long bin plagued, and groaned under yet now (by Gods providence we
shall find) the troubled State set free.

Let us again cast our eyes upon Gods, most ample blessings in the testimony
of his favors, that we enjoy a merciful King that loves his people, and as
careful of our peace and profit: Let us, I say, magnify the felicity of our
Realm of England, for the gracious and mild government of our Royal
Sovereign, and the calling sitting, and confirming, of that great Assembly of
wise Senators in Parliament, whose proceedings appear like the Balm of
Gilead, to our diseased Nation.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

