The clear Sense: Or, a Just VINDICATION Of the late ORDINANCE OF PARLIAMENT;
Forbidding Persons not Ordained, or not allowed of, as intending the Ministry,
to Preach, From such Malignant Interpretations as some ill-affected labor to
fasten on it, thereby to Authorize their Opposition against those other most
Warrantable Duties of Expounding Scriptures, mutual Edification, etc. which
the Scriptures do require of every Christian within his own Sphere and
Relations. Which may also serve for an useful Caution to those Gentlemen of
the Magistracy, Soldiery and Committees in the several Towns, Garrisons,
Places of strength, Cities, Counties, throughout the Kingdom, to whom the said
Ordinance is respectively recommended by both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, 1645.

Die Sabbathi 26. April. 1645.
IT is this day Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That no person be permitted to preach who is not Ordained a
Minister, either in this, or some other Reformed Church, except such (as
intending the Ministry) shall be allowed for the trial of their Gifts by those
who shall be appointed thereunto by both Houses of Parliament.

IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That
this Ordinance be sorthwith printed and published; and that it be forthwith
sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax, with an earnest desire and recommendation from both
Houses, That he take care that this Ordinance may be duly observed in the
Army, and that if any shall transgress this Ordinance, that he make speedy
representation thereof to both Houses, that the Offenders may receive condign
punishment for their contempts. It is further Ordered by the Lords and Commons,
That this Ordinance be forthwith sent to the Lord Major, and Committee of the
Militia in London, to the Governors, Commanders, and Magistrates of all
Garrisons, Forces, Places of strength, Cities, Towns, Eorts, and Ports: And to
the several and respective Committees of the several and respective Counties,
with the like Injunction unto them respectively, that they take care that this
Ordinance be duly observed in the places aforesaitd respectively, and that they
make speedy representation to both Houses of such as shall offend herein, that
they may receive condign punishment.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

A Clear and Just VINDICATION of the late Ordinance of Parliament, forbidding
Persons not Ordained, or not allowed of, as intending the Ministry, to preach,
from such malignant interpretations as some ill-affected labor to fasten on
it, etc.
WHereas the Enemies of Gods People were wont to keen their tongues against
them with the malicious calumnies of Puritans and Conventiclers, thereby
rendering godliness it self, with the power and practice of it, odious to the
world, but now of late have invented other Stratagems, every whit as
diabolical, to do the same infernal work, while they bitterly scorn at
godliness, truly so called, under the nickname of Independencie, and at all
the Religious and undoubtedly known duties of it, under the reproachful term
of Tub-preaching, and contrary to the intentions of the Parliament, (as shall
presently be manifested by unanswerable demonstrations) do violently extort
such a pernicious sense from the Ordinance forbidding Persons not ordained, or
not allowed of as intending the Ministry, to preach, as the words themselves in
the plain and grammatical construction of them can never yield, thinking by
this means to justify their own evil practices against the Saints of the High
God. Let us a little examine the natural and genuine interpretation of the
said Ordinance, as well to vindicate the Parliament therein, as to caution
those to whom the care of the execution of it is respectively recommended,
^lest besides the intent of both Houses of Parliament, it become a snare and
vexation to very many of the best affected in the Kingdom.

The chief Passages to be confidered in the Ordinance, are the persons to whom
preaching is forbidden, and the true sense of the word Preach.

For the first, Persons not ordained may be distinguished, for they are either
such as never were at any University, or Schools of Learning, nor have
attained unto a competent measure of learning by any other means; such as never
intend the Ministry, were never called thereunto by any company of people that
are acknowledged to have a power to call them, such as are engaged in their
Trades, Artificial crafts, or other civil employments and course of life,
these doubtless are the persons which most properly and intentionally are
forbidden to preach.

Or secondly, there are other persons not yet ordained, which have been
educated in the Schools of Learning, have received degrees in the
Universities, have preached for several years together, are every way gifted
with parts, both natural and acquired that may fit them for the Ministry,
which likewise they really intend, and give up themselves unto; but yet
notwithstanding have not been ordained, partly, because never called to office
(ordination, as they conceive, being proper to no other but such as are so
called) and partly, because formerly they scrupled ordination by Bishops, and
since the reign of Bishops, till now lately, no persons have been appointed to
administer ordination to those that should desire it. And lastly, do still
scruple the present form of ordination, which is acknowledged on all sides to
be extraordinary, and beside the rule, and but for the present exigencie, for
which among other weighty reasons (as they apprehend) they judge it better to
forbear, till Church Matters be fully settled in the Kingdom. Now, though the
first sort not ordained, or not intending the Ministry, are forbidden to
preach, yet how far the Parliament intends that such as these last should be
silenced from preaching, must be left to wise men rationally to judge.

Only thus much may be said, that there are no less then many hundreds of this
latter sort, very able and orthodox, some living as Chaplains, and Students in
private families; others, at this time, preaching many eminent Lectures in this
Kingdom, with much blessing upon their labors; besides the many
Schoolmasters, and Fellows of Colleges, which by this means will be laid
aside as useless, from their profitable course of preaching, if no difference
be put betwixt them and the first sort of persons not ordained; and how
prejudicial this may be to the Reformation intended, especially in such a time
as this is, when there is so great a scarcity of able preaching Ministers, and
so little hope of supply from the Universities, either at home or abroad, and
hereby what discontents it may occasion to the minds of the well affected, how
much profaneness among others (at least) in the remoter parts of the
Kingdom, since it will necessarily follow, that many Congregations will be
deprived of that faithful and painful preaching they were wont to enjoy. And
lastly, how many ingenuous and conscientious men, who are of known ability and
honesty, but yet cannot for the reasons above mentioned, submit to the present
ordination, will be left under an impossibility of subsisting, and groan under
such discour agements as are very unsuitable to a time of Reformation, is
likewese left to all wise men to consider of.

Thus much for the persons in the Ordinance forbidden to preach.

Next, let us expend the word Preach, which in the common and vulgar acception,
is the naming of a verse or two of Scripture for a Text, and spending of an
hour or more upon it, by opening of the words, dividing them into parts,
raising Doctrines, framing Reasons, and Uses in the same form and manner, as is
ordinarily used in Pulpits; this properly seems to be that which is forbidden
to persons not ordained in some reformed Church, and not intending the Ministry.

But yet it follows not, that first, persons not ordained in any reformed
Church, or not intending the Ministry, may not read the Scriptures, and
expound them as well as they are able for the benefit of them that belong unto
their charge: as suppose a Master to his Family, a Captain to his Company, a
Colonel to his Regiment, a General to his Army, a King to his People, if he
has the grace to do it.

Secondly, it follows not that such persons, or any other of Gods people are
hereby forbidden upon any just occasion to meet together for prayer or mutual
edification, in way of conference or consulting the holy Scriptures, whether it
be for exhortation, instruction and counsel, or for brotherly admonition and
reproof, or any other Christian duty in what kind soever, provided that they do
it at such seasons as hinders not the public preaching, and in such a manner
as disturbs not the public peace.

That the hindrance of the duties contained under these two last heads, cannot
possibly be meant by the forbidding of persons not ordained, or not intending
the Ministry, to preach, not only appears from the plain and grammatical
construction of the Ordinance, but also from the incongruity of fixing so ill a
sense with that intention of a Reformation which both Houses of Parliament have
declared; and indeed, how can it rationally be imagined from any expression in
the Ordinance, that any such thing should be aimed at by them? Is it not the
blackest, the foulest aspersion that can be cast into the face of our Reforming
Parliament? especially the considerations following being well weighed?

For first, to forbid men the use and improvement of their Talents, every one
in his proper sphere, according to rule and order, is it not a direct
contradiction of pregnant and apparent Scriptures? both testimonies and
examples are not wanting; did not Moses, and Joshua, and Gideon, and David,
with many others in the sacred story, not only encourage, but exhort their
soldiers, and that in those words and expressions, which are now become no
less then parts of those very Scriptures which in all things are the most
adequate and complete rule both of faith and practice? Exodus 17.11, 12. Exodus
32.19.26, 27, 29, 30 Numb. 10.35, 36. Josh. 1.10.16. Josh. 4.21.24. Judge. 7.15.
1 Samuel 16. from 26. to 47.

Did not the Patriarchs and holy men of old instruct their Families, kindred
and acquaintance, and teach them out of the Law? Genesis 18.19. Genesis 49.2. Judge.
24.15. Prove. 31.1. to 10. yea, and were they not commanded so to do, and that
under grievous punishments? Deuteronomy. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.6, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.19. And those
that did accordingly, are they not commended and blessed for it, upon record to
all ages by the Holy Ghost himself? Genesis 18.19. 1 Chronicles. 13.14. And this not
only in the old Testament, but in the new; in which are not Christians
frequently exhorted to assemble together, not only for prayer and other acts of
worship and devotion, as well upon extraordinary occasions as ordinary; but
also for mutual edification and building up each other in their most holy
faith, Ephesians. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.29. 1 These. 5.11. Heb. 1.13. Heb. 10.24, 25. John
2.4. Jud. 20.

Now such known duties as these, having been so commonly and constantly
received and practiced (and that in all ages) throughout all Reformed Churches,
yea, and so abundantly authorized in Scripture, shall any man dare to think
that the Parliament in this, or any other Ordinance, would go about in the
least measure to discourage, much less oppose them? It Is malignity and
disaffection toward that most great and honorable Counsel of the Kingdom, by
mis-interpreting of their actions, to seek an occasion of entertaining so
dangerous and bad a thought of them. No, no, the Parliament of England, which
intends, and labor for a Reformation according to the Word of God, and which
every day fits under such powerful and heavenly Doctrine from the eminent
Preachers of it, cannot rationally be supposed not to abhor and abominate the
contrivement of so great an evil.

Secondly, as the above mentioned mis-interpretation of the Ordinance, would be
a direct contradiction to apparent Scriptures; so likewise to many Votes,
Orders, Ordinances, Protestations, formerly passed through both Houses, yea,
and most of all to the Solemn League and Covenant between the Kingdoms,
wherein every one lifts up his hand to the most High God, in manner following.

In the Prologue or Preamble of the Solemn League and Covenant, thus:
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by the providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ -- and calling to mind the
treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and Practices of the
enemies of God, against the true Religion, and Professors thereof in all ages
-- and how much the rage, power and presumption are of late, and at this time
increased and exercised, whereof the deplorable estate of -- Ireland, the
distressed estate of -- England, and the dangerous estate of -- Scotland, are
present and public testimonies; We have now at last (after other means of
Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations and sufferings) for the preservation
of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to
the commendable practice of these kingdoms in former times, and the example of
Gods people in other nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and
determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, where in we
all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our Hands lifted up to the
most High God, do swear:

In the first Clause of the solemn League and Covenant, Thus:

That we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings -- the reformation of Religion --
according to the Word of God -- that we and our posterity after us, may live in
faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

In the second Clause of the solemn League and Covenant, Thus:

That we shall in like manner, with out respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues.

In the sixth Clause of the solemn League and Covenant, Thus:

We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this common Cause of
Religion, Liberty, and peace of the kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves, directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God -- All which we shall do as in the
sight of God.

In the Epilogue or Conclusion of the solemn League and Covenant, Thus:

And because these kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
GOD, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses
and dangers, the fruits thereof; we profess and declare before God and the
world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of
these kingdoms; especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity
and power thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our
hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other
sins and transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and
unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our
power and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God
and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another, in the example
of a real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; most humbly
beseeching the Lord, to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and
safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning
under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny --

Now wherein does the power of godliness here asserted, protested for, and
owned to be maintained by Solemn League and Covenant, more properly (at least
in the external part of it) consist, then in the diligent improvement of gifts
and graces by the holy practices of the aforesaid duties? Can the Parliament of
England (think we) thus engaged, thus unanimously appearing for the defense of
the power of godliness, before the world (for which end the Solemn League and
Covenant was turned into Latin, and Cent to all the Protestant Churches) be
rationally supposed to intend any such mischievous sense in the Ordinance as
has been mentioned?

Thirdly, should the giving an advantage to persecuting spirits, be any way at
all aimed at in this Ordinance, which is the general (though injurious)
apprehension of ill minded men, would not this be an an establishing of Tyr
anny by a Law, and encouragement for oppressi^n? a justifying of what is
already more then once condemned by this present Parliament? Were not the
Courts of Star Chamber and High Commission therefore abolished by an Act,
because the just Liberty of the Subject, not only in his estate and person, but
also in the tenderness of his conscience, and the innocence of his practice,
in ways of godliness, was so much struck at by them? And can it be now
rationally imagined, that the Parliament of England, who with the rest of the
Kingdom in those Star Chamber and high Commission days, so sorely smarted
under Prelaticall pride and power, should now voluntarily inslave the whole
body of the nation by whom they are trusted, under bondage and misery, far
worse then the former, because allowed by that very Authority which should
suppress it? Are not the eyes of the whole kingdom set upon this present
Parliament in expectation of deliverance rather, from such like and all other
grievances?

Fourthly, were there any the least ground (as indeed there is none at all) to
believe such a destructive scope from any one syllable in the Ordinance, would
it not soon beget a jealousy of a very dangerous plot indeed for the breaking
our new molded army, by weakening the hearts and hands of all the faithful
and valiant both Commanders and Soldiers, who stand ready girt with the utmost
hazard of their lives to save the three kingdoms?

Fifthly, should the prosecution of this Ordinance be according to the
aforesaid malignant sense and latitude, would not all the great powers of the
kingdom (to whom it is recommended) become no better then executioners to
torment the precious of the land? and that for doing no other then those most
known duties, the neglect whereof, either for fear or favor of any mortals
whatsoever, would necessarily render them obnoxious to the danger of eternal
wrath in hell fire?

Sixthly, by this means, would not the hands of the rude multitude (which needs
no stirring up) be strengthened, and the violence of the spoiler, against the
insolent, be increased without control? Would not fasting and prayer, godly
conference, and all religious exercises, quickly be even hooted at, and
banished out of every town and family throughout the kingdom? Can it be
imagined with any sense or shadow of reason, that a reforming Parliament should
consent to this? God forbid, that any man should ever find place for such a
fear.

Seventhly, How ill a requital would this be for all the loyalty and love,
which the godly party in this kingdom have expressed in the loss of their
estates, and of many of their lives and blood? and which the superviving
remnant are still willing to hazard, with as much cheersulnesse, as any other
whatsoever, either have done, or ever shall do?

Lastly, if after so many years indefatigable labors and serious
consultations, seconded with innumerable prayers and tears, if after so many
brave hopes of a Reformation pleaded, contended, fought for, the issue of all
should be a leaving of the godly party to a necessity of flying from
persecution, countenanced and raised against them in their own native Country,
and this by that very Parliament which has been preserved by them; by that
Parliament, which has found them both prevalent and powerful helpers in the
hour of their distress, as well by their prayers at home, as their success
abroad; would not this be a guilt of a very large extent, even spreading over
the whole nation in their representative body of it? Would it not be a crime,
reaching up to heaven; and fetching down all manner of plagues, curses,
judgments upon whatsoever counsels or undertakings both of Church and State?
But blessed be God, who yet has left us one most pregnant and satisfying
argument to evince, that our renowned and reforming Parliament has no
intentions either in this or any other Ordinance to grieve the faithful, and
thereby incur the displeasure of that God, who hitherto has been entreated
to continue a shield and buckler to our distressed England. And to put the
question out of all doubt, be it known to thee ( Reader, whosoever thou art)
That in the day when this Ordinance passed in the House of Commons, it was then
and there declared by the said House, that they intended not hereby to
discountenance, much less forbid any man to read Scriptures, and expound them
in his Family, or any under his charge, which they conceived to be every man's
duty in the place God has set him. It had been well indeed if this Declaration
had been printed with the Ordinance; but since it is not printed, what remains,
but that every man notwithstanding, should go on in the practice of every
Christian duty, both in his Family, and (as just occasion serves) amongst his
honest neighbors, being always prepared for the Edification of himself and
others?

You therefore Gentlemen of the Soldiery in the field, though (not intending
the Ministry) for reasons best known unto the State, you are forbidden to
preach, as that which in their judgment belongs not to you; yet doubtless,
you may both pray and speak too in the head of your Companies, Regiments and
Armies, you may deliver the piety of your souls the wel-grounded confidence of
your hearts, the valor of your minds, in such Orations, in such Liberties of
speech, as may best enspirit the men that follow you, with such a religious and
undaunted animation as may render them unconquerable before the proudest enemy:
And to justify you in so doing, beside the examples already mentioned from
Scripture, and of many other Christian Kings and Generals which might be
reckoned up (to instance one for all, the late famous King of Sweden) the
ancient custom of the very Heathens will plead for you: witness the many
memorable stories to this purpose in the learned Writings of Plutarch,
Xenophon, Salust, T^citus, Julius Caesar, and others, who tell us, and that very
plentifully in their several Languages; what fluent Eloquence, what
Invocations upon their immortal Gods were used in the greatest and most
renowned battles of the Romans, Grecians, Persians, Lacedaemonians, etc. Doubt
not therefore, but that not withstanding this Ordinance against Laymens
preaching, you may do as these your valiant Ancestors have done before you; and
that with the most religious and highest gallantry you can, to the great
content and complacencie both of Parliament and Kingdom.

And you the rest of Gods people, of whatsoever rank and condition, in
whatsoever Country, City, Garrison, strong Hold, Town, or Village, raise not
unjust fears to your selves from this Ordinance, do not wilfully mis-interpret
it, to your own greatest disadvantage; think not that you must now forsake the
assembling of your selves together (as the manner of some perhaps will be) from
unworthy and needless apprehensions of danger where no danger is, never let
this at all hinder you from your pious meetings, either for prayer, conference,
right use of Scriptures; the Parliament and whole Kingdom have as much need of
your prayers now as ever, and God expects that in this time of the three
kingdoms Reformation, every one (according to the Solemn League and Covenant)
should go before each other, in all good ways of propagating both truth and
holiness; and if any man shall dare disturb you in so doing (Provided you do
it in such time, place, and manner, as may no way prejudice the public
preaching of the Gospel, or disturb the public peace) you may p^tition with
assured confidence of finding a just relief, remedy, and protection from both
the same Houses of Parliament, that have made this Ordinance against the
preaching of such persons as are not ordained in some reformed Church, or
intend not the Ministry.

FINIS.

