The Clothiers Petition to His Majesty: WITH His Majesty's gracious Answer.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Clothiers of Suffolk, and the Towns of Dedham and
Langham in Essex.
May it please Your Majestic,
THe pressing fears that has befallen your loving Subjects; especially those
of the City of London, in whom the breath of our Trade and livelihood
consists; have so blasted their hopes, that the Merchants forbear
exportation: our clothes for the most part, for the space of this 18 months
remain upon our hands, our stocks lying dead therein, and we can maintain our
trading no longer: The cries for food of many thousands of poor, who depend on
this Trade, do continually press us, not without threats, and some beginnings
of mutinies: so that, if some speedy relief do not interveine, we can expect
no less then confusion.

For help hereof your supplyants have petitioned both Houses of Parliament;
and well knowing that the life of all supply next under God, rests in Your
Royal Self: and being encouraged by Your former gracious allowance of us to
have access,

We are emboldened in all humility to petition Your Majesty's most gracious
aspect upon us, and the cries of the poor; and to let one word fall from Your
Majesty to Your Parliament in our behalf, that our Trade may be inlivened,
the poor set to work, and thereby the peace and good government of the
Country preserved.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray the God of Heaven to bless Your Majesty
with continuance of his love, and this Nation with the continuance of the
mutual love of Prince and People.

THis Petition was delivered to his Royal Majesty at His issuing out of His
Coach in Greenwich, and his Majesty commanded them to attend His pleasure in
the Presence Chamber; where Master Secretary Nicols informed them that His
Majesty would give them an answer himself, which His Majesty was graciously
pleased to perform the next morning in the Garden: His Majesty demanded if
they were the Clothiers that presented that Petition, they answered they were:
whereupon His Majesty was graciously pleased to make this Answer. viz.

They did well in petitioning Him, and that He thought they did it not before
they had just cause: and was further pleased to express, that He had seriously
considered of their Petition, and had already recommended it to His Parliament;
and that He would take further care of it.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole in Cornehill, near the Royal Exchange. 1642.


