ENGLANDS COMPLETE Law-Judge, AND LAWYER.

Declared in these ensuing Heads; 1. Whether that Law and those Judges and
practizers owned time out of mind by the Supreme Authority of the Nation, be
not the Laws, Judges, and Lawyers of this Commonwealth, etc. 2. Whether Courts
so constituted are not Records of the Nation? 3. Whether each Court has not
power, as such, to enforce its own Decrees. 4. That the Decrees and usages of
such a Court are as valid as of any Court. 5. Whether it be not against Reason,
that when diverse Courts in the same Nation act by diverse Laws, one of the
Courts should have power to prohibit the other to proceed to bring the matters
in difference before it self. 6. Concerning Judges of Appeal.


LONDON, Printed for Edmund Paxton at Pauls-chaine over against the
Castle-Taverne. 1656.

TO HIS HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector Of ENGLAND, etc.
Great Sir,
IT is not any interest, or respect to the Professor of the Civil Law, nor
envy at, or disobligement from the Practizer of the Municipal Law of this
Nation puts me upon this work, but a pure zeal to, and love of Justice (or my
own heart deceives me, and in sincerity I have searched it as narrowly as I
could) You sit at Stern, and have laid hand to the Helm: where you find a
good and just rule, I hope you will not alter; and where you find none, or a
broken, weak, defective one, I see your desires are strong for Reformation:
but you will see, that while you set one thing right, you bring not disorder
upon all. Sir, it is your wisdom; for as in the natural, so in the politic
body, each great alteration is dangerours; Constitutions must be altered
slowly; the fowler the body, the more need of preparatives before the Purgation
comes; yea, it is fit the patient in some measure have some intimation of his
condition, that he may more willingly receive his cure, that imagination
obstruct not due operation, and that his Physician gain his affection, lest
prejudice operate more for destruction, then the medicine for preservation;
These things are as natural to Societies, as persons, to the Politic, as
natural body. I have here discovered what of necessity requires a remedy, and
that speedily: before a disease has brought the body low, it will endure heats
and colds, and many distempers, alter little or nothing visibly, but the dregs
remain, and bring the disease by degrees to a height, and then each slight
offense is taken, and strong distempers appear to danger and ruin. I fear
the Politic State labors under a Critical sign, the disease is grown so
strong, it has such a height, that the utmost skill of a wise Physician, yea,
guided and seconded by the all wise hand, must intervene for Restoration, or
danger is threatened. This thing now presented to you was an evident symptom
what time would and must work in the same; For, in this Nation of England you
have variety of Jurisdictions, every of which have long bandied against each
other: for although the Courts of Law and Equity were at variance, yet both
seemed to join against the Civilian. Princes saw it, and it may be thought it
a piece of policy to keep them at a distance; but it is a certain rule, the
building is weak that is raised upon a loose foundation. There are as
demonstrative rules in Government, as in Architecture; and the intention of
Societies, Colledes, Fraternities, or what you will, were allowed for unity
sake; and that not only in, and with the Society it self, but each with other
mutually; for all make up but as members the body of the Commonwealth: the
Head rules all. I shall not touch upon the varieties of Government, all which
represent the Head, but must say, the Heads function and duty is to see each
member act in his due place, and not suffer them to quarrel each with other to
the general prejudice; I regard not who be chief Chancelour, nor Chief Justice,
I seek not Eminency, but a due of honor or reward for the Judges of Admiralty
or Probates; I would not an enlarging of either jurisdiction to the prejudice
of another: but though that part of the Civil Law here used be not only fitted
to the Meridian of England, but all Europe allows the justice and reason of
it; yet let it be the Law of England, and so owned by all English Judges. And
though the Chancery be not a Court of Law, in regard of the Courts of
Upper-Bench and Common Pleas, yet while I conceive upon the due Rule, it ought
in a legal way to allow nothing, but where the Law would have, that is not to
go against Law, but to supply where extremity was ruinous, moderating the
severity and rigor of the letter-Law, (and indeed there was a necessity of it
in most cases, while an issue upon a point only was allowed) it is to be
accounted the law of England, and let all the Acts of all those Courts be
allowed in the Courts of Law, as with each other. The evil is apparent: there
is a case proper to equity, state it, and go to a Lawyer for his opinion in
Law, he takes Law only for that called the Common Law, and puts a man upon
suits to his overthrow, for he knows the Chancery will give relief against it;
I know many Lawyers do not so, but they know many do. I would not be tedious:
there is happily greater necessity of this then is conceived, and this may
content more then other things have disrelished. The men to deal with in this
case, are wise and prudent, and no doubt will, if consulted, agree to reason. I
have only with as much moderation as I could, presented this to consideration.
I have cleared my own conscience, and remain

Your Highness humble Servant, Theophilus Philopatros.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE JUDGES OF THE LAWS OF England.
Right Honorable,
THough the Government of a Commonwealth be not a Head or quarter of the
Municipal Law of Law, and so the practical Lawyer, little needing to study or
know that point; yet most Students are from their ingenuous Education something
seen in universal learning, and from that not ignorant of Politics; That
providence which ordained you (my Lords) to so high trusts, gave you souls
large, and of capacity for the places. You must know, both from your reading
and experience, how to supply whatever might be defective in the most accurate
settlement of a Commonwealth and how to govern according to every
establishment; and know what is to be done, to proportionate the whole in every
part, should necessity enforce any alteration. You are not unworthy men, whose
ambition have made them catch at worthy places, and satisfy their consciences
with a deliberative Vote, though they know no rule of Law; you are not only
knowers, but lovers of Wisdom (and Justice is a right witness, otherwise a
fool might, going according to his light, a child, or woman, give as good a
judgment as the ablest Philosopher.) Judgment is a deep fountain, whose
bottom each Bucket cannot arrive at; It Is given to them that seek after it,
(that is, by due search, and enquire into each particular action, and
qualification of himself and others; for he must read himself well, who will
know others aright): You are Sages, men, quick, and ready, from long experience
to determine, not only in the deeper questions and resolutions of the Law, but
also in the nice quaint subtilties of wit and practice. I justly apprehend my
inability to bring forth ought worthy your view, but I seek not applause nor
acceptance to or for my person; but my aim, desire, intention and prayers are
for the public, for the good of the Commonwealth, that each person in his
place, and each place to the person might be so settled, constituted, and
fitted, that the establishing of part, might but make the whole more glorious
and lasting; It is an age of Interest, great, never greater; your places are
high, and your pattern will be exemplary. If ought here convince you that any
thing may be done for the bettering of the Commonwealth; be active in it,
delay not, it is a season of Judgment as well as Interests; and its truly
noted, neither have Mercies allured, nor Judgments terrified hitherto. You
know, not only the secrets of Government, but of Judgment: you may thence
conclude how much more wisely, God deals in his both governing and judging the
world: Its a truth in Politics to the State, as in reason to the person; Laws
must be as well fitted to the times and offenses, as clothes or shoes to the
body or feet. Was it not a Tyranny to cut the stranger shorter that lay in the
Tyrants bed, to the dimension of that, as well as to stretch him that was too
short to the length? There must be a jealousy lest the Laws be altered, and
the principles of property and privileges lost by degrees: but let it be so,
that we lose not more by the contest, then we can gain by having them; You are
to declare the Law, but Evidence that Law salutary to the people, or you ruin
us. You say, better an ill Law then none: And I say, better Judges to execute
necessary power, though it be a question whether legally they have that power,
so it were fit they should have it, then to let people do injustices for want
of a Law, or power to enforce that Law. I leave the thing with you: the Lord
set it home to your hearts, that what is just may be done justly, and the cry
of the oppressed may cease: In prosecution of which, I shall ever beg the
assistance of heaven upon you and your endeavors, and labor to approve my
self a friend to Englands Law, my birthright, and

Right Honorable, Your servant Theophilus Philopatros.

TO THE ENGLISH READER.
I Have little to say to thee; each man is not fit to judge of all things: my
scope is but to show thee a truth, which has been much endeavored to be kept
from thy knowledge; Namely, that all the Administrations of Justice in England
by what Law soever called, as Common, Civil, or Equitable, all make up but
Englands Law; and you have an equal Birthright to all; I agree, they may be
altered according to the Rule of the Nation; And then I say, that alteration is
the Law. So that I would not alter the Law, nor oust the Common Law, nor
introduce the vaste body of the Civil Law; no, I am to have Laws plain and
easy, but Judges deep and searching: I desire certainty in Courts, and
ascertaining the Jurisdiction of the Courts: and because difference may be,
while some things may equally participate of both Laws, so it may (as to some
part) belong to one Court, and other part fit to be tried in another upon the
rigid letter of the Law. It may belong to a Common-law-Court, and yet the just
decision of the Case from the nature of the Contract necessarily require the
Rule of the Civil-Law: That there may be a way to settle this controversy
before great expense be, and then to have it removed; And that as the case now
stands upon so visible an Interest, as has nothing of Reason to warrant it, is
this intended; Boggle not then at this, nor at the Author, who professes to
love God and his Country, and would not then do ought tending to subvert
Englands Law, or take away the least due privilege of an English man.
Therefore that you may duly endeavor it, praying for it, and justly submitting
to it when settled, is the sole and utmost end, with Gods glory, of

Theophilus Philopatros.

ENGLANDS COMPLETE Law-Judge, AND LAWYER.
ENGLAND has always without question had Courts wherein the principal part of
the Law administered, was not according to any particular part of the owned
Common Law of the Nation, but according to the ever used and accustomed Law of
those Courts, set up for administrating Justice to the people of the Nation in
special Causes; Concerning two parts whereof I principally intend this
discourse. The first does generally concern the people of this Nation; The
other concerns equally any other Nation in the Universe. That which concerns
the people of this Nation, is the Court (now commonly called) for Probate of
Wills, and granting Administrations: The other which concerns all people, or
may concern them is, the Court of Admiralty (so called) being a Court properly
(not only) accommodated with Laws and Rules for Trade and Commerce by Sea;
And with Nations and people using Laws diverse from the Generality called
Municipall Law of England, yet generally received in the Judicatories of most
of the European Nations; All which with England, being originally Limbs of the
vast body of the Roman Empire have universally retained the Laws, or the
generality of the Laws of the old Empire, but yet have their Municipalia
still, though their procedures be in them generally by the Rules of the Civil
Law, so called, they admitting no diversity of practizers in their Laws as
with us, but both the general Law of the Empire with them received, and the
Laws of their particular Princes, Diets, Parliaments and Assemblies are
equally owned; the Law of that Land, Nation, or people, and the Doctors of the
Laws, as such, pleads both, as occasion requires, without controversy of
Courts or practizers, while here many controversies have arisen to the
obstructing of Justice, and infinite damage, vexation, and charge of the
people, and to the dishonor of the Nation at home and abroad. The controversy
I shall endeavor to render as truly and perspicuously, yet as briefly as may
be; and therefore shall handle it under several Heads: As first, 1. Whether
that part of the Civil-Law which has been time out of mind, received, used,
and allowed in public Judicatories, authorized by the unquestionable Supreme
power of the Nation in Parliament be not to be received as, and is part of the
Law of the Land, and consequently the Judges of those Courts, Judges, etc. and
practizers, practice of etc. 2. Whether a Court so constituted and authorized,
cannot be, and is not a Court of Record of this Nation? 3. Whether it be not
naturally and properly incident to every Court, to have power to enforce its
own Decrees in what is properly cognizable by it? 4. Whether the Usages,
Rules, and style of a Court in England, of as long continuance as any court so
called of Common Law, has not as much power, virtue and energy, as in a Court
that properly Judges of Vsages and Customs, and other Laws esteemed more
proper to the Nation? 5. Whether in a Nation, where diverse Courts are admitted,
proceeding judicially, and definitely according to diverse original Laws, it
can stand with reason that one of these Courts should have power to prohibit
the other to bring any matter before it self, or decide to what Court the
Cognizance belongs? 6. Concerning Judges of Appeals.


As to the first, I conceive there is but three ways whereby Laws have
properly their birth; The first is, constitution, by the lawful, wonted, or
authorized power of a Nation, Country, or the like, and promulgation by the
same accordingly: which is certainly the purest settlement of a Law, for the
Law so settled and promulgated is ever the same, and a living speaking Record
of the Will of the Lawmakers; not properly alterable, but by the like power.

The second way of ushering a law into the world, (yet universally accepted) is
Custom and Usage, which after once generally received, and publicly known,
has the force of a Law, and justly, for experience has manifested both its
fitness and acceptance: yet have ever been, and its of necessity that the
Magistrate should, when time has given them the strength of Laws, require a
public ascertaining of them to prevent the evils (evident in England) from the
proof of them by ignorant and interested Testimony.

The other way, as it may be called, is Allowance and usage of a settled
certain constituted Law in a Country, though the Laws were not made by the
present legal authority of the same, (or by a strange Prince of another
Country) yet there used and not disallowed, but rather by owning the Court,
and not disowning the Law allowed and confirmed, which certainly has the
virtue of Usage, and the certainty of constitution in it.

Bring then either the Court of Probats or the Admiralty to their Trial, and I
conceive the Law in them used and administered, will have either from
Constitution or Usage, or both, as great strength as any Law in England to be
radically vested in the people as their birthright. As to those Cases there
Cognizable, the Usage is, I conceive, without dispute; but you will say, will
you bring in the whole Civil-Law? or which part do you intend? Those Courts use
the whole body of the Civil Law, and then you will subvert the Law of England.

I shall answer with a caution, for I suppose most wise men when they see the
objection, will see the weakness of it, for it concludes a general from a
particular. But I say, first, as to the Court of Probates, the matters there
cognizable, are specially Probates of Wills, and from that the Admission; I say
Admission or Allowance of Executors, or disallowance; for they cannot grant it
to fools and idiots, nor should, to persons Outlawed, convicted of great
crimes, or notoriously debaucht, that the estate being spent, there may be a
suit at Common Law, for wasting of it, and the Legatees wholly defrauded of
their right; And they have, or are to have who are Judges of Wills, cognizance
of the Testimony or Witnesses, so as to reject or receive according to the
Rules of the Law in that Court used. And so far the whole Civil Law, as to
those Heads, ought I say, as used to be received. So in the proof of
Nuncupative Wills, or Wills by word of mouth, I intend not to the number of
witnesses, for England has still allowed its people the favor of a Military
Testament, requiring but two witnesses, but to be Judges of the validity of
their Testimony. So in admitting Guardians to Minors. And also in granting
Administrations, and revoking them upon grounds laid down for revoking
Administrations by the Civil Law, still observing the Rule of the Statute Law
of the Nation in their secondary or after grant, as in their original; I say
the same of Legacies, being but a member, and derivative from Wills, and that
Law best fitted with Rules for settling the same; and its most agreeable to
reason, that that Court which has the principal, and is to Judge of the whole
Will, should best judge of a Legacy, being but a part of the same whole, and
not first judge the whole in one Court, and after send part of it to be judged
in another.

But here it will be objected, that the Statute gives the Ordinary only power
to grant Administration to the next of kin, and gives no power of revoking.

I answer, each eye may see the captiousnesse of the Objection. Did the
Parliament that made that Law, think we, or can we suppose it intended only a
snare to the people; ever these dark times of Religion had more light of
morality, for it was never then questioned, though the Ordinary and his Judges
then used a greater latitude of power then the present Judges will do. But lets
enquire what was the end of the Law; and to see that, lets consider first, what
was the reason of making that Law. I suppose it is manifest, that many
Ordinaries (there being no express penalty) having misused the power to them
entrusted, or by them used, in granting Administrations to strangers to the
defrauding the next and nighest kindred; to prevent that evil, and do the
kindred right, that Law was made only, or chiefly, to limit the Ordinary to the
person or persons equal in degree according to Rules of Law, and according to
the same capable to restrain such exorbitants under a penalty, and not alter
the Rule which was just, and the same, though abused before that Law was made.
And therefore I conceive it clear, and not to be denied, whatever judgments
and reasons I have seen to the contrary; that notwithstanding that Act for
granting Administration to the next of kin, the Judges may not only in case
of a sister and brother, grant to the sister, but in case they should both be
legally unfit who are in next degree, grant it to the more remote, who then are
as next; because of the legal exception: The Law according to right rule and
construction, implying all those things which by necessary consequence are
required to a just Law, and may also upon the same ground take bond for
distribution (not according to the will of the Judges (that being purely
arbitrary may (how well done soever) be very evil in effect) but according to
the Rule of Law, which does upon a pure and sound Rule (as the Law then stood)
divide, and it is fit should be observed. I intend not to divide to (so called
pious uses) but amongst the next of kin, by rule of Law capable. The Reasons
are, this was used, the Law has prescribed no other remedy, the usage was
absolutely certain and allowed, the thing was just, and the Grounds and
Reasons be still the same; therefore cannot by implication be annulled, nor is
the Judges, by the Statutes limitting him to what party he shall grant the
Administration, bounded in any other particular power before had, used, and so
enjoyed, as to have the virtue of a Law. If we come to state a Case or two, the
Justice and Reason of the thing will most evidently appear. A man has one
hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand pounds a year, and a personal estate of
one thousand, ten thousand, or one hundred thousand pounds, and has two,
three, four, five or six children, sons and daughters, be he Lord, Knight,
Esquire, Gentleman, or Burgess now in England, all is one; here present riches
controlls and carries all, money makes the man. The land unless specially
settled by the Ancestor or Ancestors (which we are not to look here at, but at
the course of Law, according to the old legal Rule, for our foundations are all
clean lost, altered, or unknown, that the Prince might be the better served
in his war) went, and goes wholly and undivided to the eldest son: well, be
it so, though as I now apprehend the reason of the Law ceasing, the Law should
be fitted according to the present condition of the Commonwealth; For as a
City or Commonwealth consists not in the walls and structures, but in the
people, so the reason of the Law is the life of it, not the letter, which the
wise Judges well know, who can when and where they please, cast the model of a
Judgment according to the present interest of the Commonwealth, clean
diverse, if not quite contrary to the first Institution, and that in
constituted or latter Laws, upon no other ground or rule visible but that; but
shall then the personal estate go to the eldest also, and shall all the other
children be beggars, or set to work, (how highly soever educated) as if
impotent, maintained by the Parish, go by degrees, and so to the disposition by
the letter of the Law, the eldest ought to have it, for he is properly the next
of kin (the wife being not within the letter of the Law, for indeed literally
and legally she is of no kin, being part of himself, while living, and is
now his relict or widow, which has no legal degree of kin in it, but is in
by the Statute) So the reason the eldest is naturally the Prince of the family,
and is, though not nearer, yet in the same degree the more worthy, and what the
Law gives him otherwise, ought not to bar him of any right) if then he be
waved, its not by the letter, but the equity, and where equity comes in, and
prudence rules beyond the letter; how comes the Judge of constituted Law to put
his Oar into this Boat; If because the eldest has enough already, the same
reason runs strong for a distribution to give each one a competencie; but
admit the Ancestor has no land, but a personal estate, great or small, the Law
of 31. E. 3. bounded the Ordinary as aforesaid sufficiently, but under no
express penalty; he might not appoint whom he pleased Administrator, but was
regularly then tied to the next of kin, and they were made accomptable to the
Ordinary: I cannot think devotion had in these times swallowed up charity, or
charity natural respect, engagements, or common prudence: I should err much,
seeing not only the general Law which treats of distribution, made Rules for,
who should be capable to come in to claim Administration, and to require part
of the estate; but also to settle the Rule of and for distributions, and from
that even the constitutions Ecclesiastic of England settled the same.

I see also they take care for payment of debts, so that I must conclude the
Law then truly construed, consisted in a pious and discreet careing for the
equal, and right wise disposing of the estate left by the Law, as if the party
himself had settled it. But for to prevent mistakes, and reduce the Law, in
certain to its first and Primitive Rule.

The Law of 21. H. 8. gives the ordinary power to grant Administration to the
Widow, or to one or more claiming as next of kin in equal degree, or when more
be in equal degree, and one claim according to his discretion. Now that Law
has this clause, taking surety for the true Administration of the Goods and
Chattels, etc. which he or they shall be Authorized to Administer, which clause
was surely to some purpose; and to what could it be, but that the Ordinary
might still have security? Yea, were it from Wife or Child, that the
Administration of the Goods might be according to the Rule of Law; and the
equal course of distributing to Wife, Children, and Kindred, according to the
Rule of Law, was still continued.

Now to the Suretiship, I conceive it clear, that the Bond taken faithfully to
Administer, proving questionable, and dubious from clashing of Courts. The
Common Law-courts seeking in the declining of the power of the Episcopal
party, to intermeddle and umpire in and over the Ecclesiastic Jurisdictions*
What was before wrapped up in general words, was intended to be reduced to a
more special Declaration, at least in that particular most strukt at. But oh,
the Common Lawyer beats his Buckler to his head, telling him the Ordinary has
no power to take such a special Bond, for he has no power, but only to take
Security truly to Administer. And though these questions were from the
prudence of former Judges (plainly convinced of the Justice and necessity of
the thing) mostly waved some persons of late times, not only questioned these
securities, but have so varied concerning the power of the Judges of Wills and
Testaments. The ancient Jurisdiction of the Ordinary failing by the taking away
Ordinaries, and by them of that Ordinary legal coersion in those Jurisdictions
used, have endeavored obliquely, and by the by, pretending those Bonds suable
no where but at Common Law, to obstruct and subvert the whole businesses, by
delivering opinions, that those Bonds were not valid in Law, and so
consequently enervate the distribution, by rendering the security fruitless.
Whereas the Statute require such Bond to be taken, and consequently intended,
if broken, to be sued. I shall exemplify by the weakness of the foundation by
instance, A man comes to the Court, craves Administration, his Brothers and
Sisters, or next Kin within Rules of distribution, crave it also; the Judges
grant it to one (to avoid the known covetuousness, suits, wasting of the
estate, and perpetual enmities arising from joint Administrators, each one
getting all they can, and then to suite; no due account, nor ought fit for men:
and we all know, that the differences of Allies and near relations, are the
sharpest and hottest) taking Bond to stand to the distribution of the Court,
which is, as I say, settled upon known, legal, and rational grounds. The
Administrator claims an interest in all as Administrator, the Common Lawyer
tells him he is only to pay debts, and not knowing what debts may appear, he
is never to account or distribute. The Judges of Wills have no power to take
further Cognizance. The Judges of Probates question him, or seek to compel him
to his duty, then comes a Prohibition from the Court of Common Law, as Keepers
of the Liberties of the Laws of England; and then a contest arises 'twixt the
Courts, or might, were they but equally backed, then a suite in Chancery; nay
this is, though the party taking Administration has it only upon consent, nay
subscribes that consent: and what is the reason? truly the Common Lawyer (in
this Case and this Court) says it is a forced consent, for Administration
would not be granted till consent were; yet he was free to take or refuse for
the Election by the Law of H. 8. was in the Ordinary, and so now in the Judges.
I conceive to any uninterested party this will more then manifest, that pure
interest overrules in these cases, and sure the powers, if ordained of God,
will lay these oppressions of the people to heart, and give ease to them, and
settle the limitts of Jurisdictions; for it makes men knaves, and makes
multitude of poor, and brings not only Courts and Judges, but Justice it self
into contempt. This shall suffice for the Court of Probates as to this point, I
intending only to hint things, not make up all matters, to make the wound
wide, and happily past healing, but by a Corrasive.

A word or two concerning the Admiralty: It is an ancient Court as must be
acknowledged; yea, as ancient as any, that it has a certain peculiar and
proper Law, according to the subject matter of its Authority, is agreed, that
it differs from the rest of the Law of England, may be acknowledged, but not
contrary; the Common Law not treating at all, nor intermedling with the proper
matter of the Court; from which its clear, that what is properly tryable at
Common Law belongs not to that Court, and so on the contrary, and certainly the
Judges of either Law will know this, what is tryable there, ought not to be
tried or prohibited by the Judges of the Common Law. I conceive it agreed by
the Common Law, they cannot or ought not to try contracts made beyond Sea, but
only in such places from whence a venue may arise, and terms of that Law
publicly printed and allowed: In the word Admiral, grants the Admiralty power
to judge of contracts between party and party concerning things done upon and
beyond the Sea; and the words of the Statute upon the whole Law are plain,
perspicuous and evident to that purpose; but suppose they were difficult, what
construction they shall bear is the question? I take it clearly, that no
prescription shall run against an Act of Parliament, but I take it as clearly,
that a non-user of an Act, invalidates the Act in time; as the Statute of
Merton is agreed by Mr. Littleton, and if I be not mistaken, the Sages of the
Law have atcheived to themselves a power, that no such grand consultations
might be invalid, not only to expound, besides the open and vulgar evident
meaning of an Act, but contrary to the litteral meaning of an Act, to quash
those evils which experience manifested, and might not at making of the same be
foreseen. If so, then they have a power not to prohibit where they see a
greater evil would ensue, in case the strict letter should be observed. Put
case then, two English Merchants, or one Englishman, and another Country man of
any Nation, or a Merchant, with a Master of a ship, meet at Constantinople,
Venice, Smyrna, or any part where the Common Law of England is not known, and
by a Lawyer there practicing, according to the Rules of the Civil Law, make a
contract upon Land in writing, can it be intended the Common Lawyers should
judge this contract, because done on land, or twelve men packed by an under
Shrieff or Bayliffe of a liberty, servant to the Attorney in the case should
come in, and being only to try the fact, sum up the Law in a huddle, by
finding for the Plaintiff or for the Defendant, when the Judge himself is not
in ordinary supposal, able to instruct them; and how then should they
understand, for many Pleas are by the Civil Law admissible, which the Common
Law takes no notice of, or the Judges will not, or would not ever yet allow.
For example, suppose the contract were upon such slaves money, etc. delivered
the Master at Morocco in Barbary, to take so much Sugar at Morocco from his
Factor, and deliver it at London, or any other Port in England; shall it be
tried by a Trover in England, or by a promise upon consideration, or in case of
money by account, these actions not admitting legally such Pleas as the nature
of such Foraign contracts of necessity must allow. So suppose the same done in
London, and the delivery to be in Foreign parts, if the same be drawn
according to Rules of Common Law, upon the Laws Civil, or of Merchants; so in
case of the Consuls Ambassador and Merchant taking money, where it runs at
forty pound per cent. shall it be paid here by six, or stayed with a
prohibition? So in case of hiring Seamen and Mariners often in an Alehouse, to
debar the Master or outtrader of his lawful and just Pleas in Marrine
contracts, because of their being made on Land, is more then rigid Law, which
is the most grievous wrong, ruining under color of relieving, yet with
prohibitions for such like cases (infinite of which might be put, but I say not
an Infinity of prohibitions) are they (so the called) Civil and Common
Law-courts at variance; yea sometimes in case of Mariners wages; And had not a
late good Act been, it likely more would have been. The evident evil in case of
prohibitions rightly brought, if any be, yet seldom or never a prohibition
comes, till the charge be past, and all things pubished: so that there is a
light to discover by the proofs, which way the case will go, and then that
party likely to be overthrown, flies to a prohibition.

Sure if reason be reason, and there be ought of Justice amongst men, these
things be cruelties and oppressions to be remedied; the guilt must lie some
where, God grant whom it most concerns may lay it to heart. I shall not touch
upon the laying Actions betwixt high and low water mark, when done at Sea, nor
laying things done in the furthest part of Europe, nay of Asia, in the Ward of
Cheap. because I will not overlabour things; for its evident, an English Jury
was never intended to try them, for so the Act expresses, contracts, pleas, and
quarrels arising within the bodies of Counties, as well by water as Land. This
is enough to clear up what the just and due intendment of Law ought to be, if
Courts and Judges be for Justice sake, and for the peoples benefit and quiet,
and not the contrary; and if so, I conceive it will follow from the premises,
that the Subject and people of England have a right, yea a birthright, in that
part of the so called Civil Law, used in England equally with, and in any part
of the so called Common Law, the whole making up, but the Laws of the Nation
and people, though by words, according to the custom or mode of speech, the
same be variously called and distinguished, and consequently the Judges of
those Courts are Judges of England, and of the Laws of England, and ought to
have respect and esteem accordingly, and indeed deserve it, for no man of
ingenuity, but will acknowledge (though the meanest Barrister at Law almost
will not regard them) their study is full of high and deep knowledge (I
knowingly put those extremities together) renders the Nation more glorious
abroad, and is so more universally beneficial: Indeed heretofore the Judges
being but the Admirals Deputies, (or by the Common Lawyer so esteemed) the
great regards due to them, and the Prerogative Judges, who then were in like
manner but the Ordinaries Substitutes, were fore-clozed.

But now the Prince wisely giving immediate power from himself, lays a sure
foundation of regard, if meet encouragements follow: From this it will be as
clear, that the Doctors and Practizers of the Civil Law have their due rights
to be heard, not only in the Courts of Civil Law so called, but also in case of
any question arising in any Court of Common Law, concerning any matter
originally cognizable, or which has had any proceeding in any of the Courts of
England, what the Rule of the Civil Law so called is practiced, and followed,
and not only to be consulted with, which the ancient Sages of the Law, as
occasion offered practiced, but to be admitted to plead in the Courts of Common
Law, in such cases, as the Sergeants and Barristers at Common Law do and ought
to do, both in the Admiralty and Court of Probates, in case a question upon any
Statute, or other part of the Common Law of England comes in question, and then
much more where a question comes, whether the Cognizance of the case belongs to
this or that Court; and this is surely reasonable upon the score of general and
universal reason, whatever it may be upon the score of interest or particular
benefit.

2. Head.
I now proceed to the second Head proposed, viz. Whether Courts, whose special
known Origination stands principally upon usage and allowance of the Supreme
power, though using a distinct Law from the general received Law of the Nation,
may not be, and are not Courts of Record of and in that Nation, and so to be
allowed by the Courts of Common Law?

Were it now the time, when Abbots, Bishops, Canonists, and Civilians were the
chief (if not the only) Judges of this Nation, and sat upon the Benches of
Common Law at Westminster, it would be labor in vain to make this a question;
but I shall wave those suggestions, that I may not irritate if possible, and
only discuss the case, that the grounds of things may so appear, that some
judgment and conclusion may be raised; its certainly a difficult matter from
what I can find, amid all the Authors of the Common Law, to come to a certain,
either definition or description of this great question, What properly
constitutes a Court of Record, and what are the proper and peculiar rights,
powers, and privileges of such a Court, for their learning may be much, but it
is confused, and in a Chaos for the generality, and loath they are to have it
modeled for common and general use. I shall not attempt to discover the
reasons, but only essay to clear up what I find of this; one mark I find of a
Court of Record is, That it consists by matter of Record, or Patent, or Grant
of the Prince; but I conceive that is not demonstrative, because that each
Court so constituted, is not, or will be allowed of Record.

Another note I find to distinguish by is, where a Writ of Error lies upon any
Judgment given in an inferior Court, it is a token the inferior Court is a
Court of Record; but if a Writ of false Judgment, then a base Court: So that
the difference is not between Courts of Record, and inferior Courts, but
Courts of Record, and base Courts, then the conclusion must be, all Courts, not
base, are of Record; but that will not be granted by the common Lawyer, for
ancient Demesne is not a base Court; if base be taken properly for a Court
where base tenure is; but if from the contrary, you come to conclude all Courts
not of Record are base, its evidently false, if you take their own Rules; for
whatever the civil Law Courts might be esteemed from the learning and Pleaders,
specially used and employed in those Courts, sure the Court of Chancery, which
they call in derision a Paper Court; so that of Requests, and others, are not
base, take base from the subject matter there handled, or inferiority of power,
and that as to the value or power, to enforce obedience, and the like.

These Courts, though partly using Rules of common, partly of civil Law, yet
the Practiser being wholly according to the common Law constitution, are not so
oppugned, as those using wholly, or mostly, the rule and practice of the civil
Law, but will not be allowed of Record.

There are some other such notes, whereby you may, if you can, pick out what is
a Court of Record, but its the safest way to conclude in this case, as when the
question is, What are the Original Languages, and how many they are? Those, and
so many as the ancient learned Authors make them, and better set down by that,
then dispute; so they are those Courts, and so many as the learned and
Authorized in those Laws will have them, for I find no certainty, and am the
more in doubt, when I seriously consider the matter, from what I find in a
learned Author, who seems to distinguish between a Court of common Law, and a
Court of Record: I know well he intends a Court that was by custom originally,
not by Patent, but I can conclude, what is Record, is not of common Law, and it
must be a good conclusion, or the other will prove vain to be a sure
description. I shall not say ought of a Patent in words expressing it to be a
Court of Record, for the Origination is plain, but what the distinct powers
are, is never a whit thereby the more perspicuous and manifest.

I am not so ignorant, but I can tell, there may be a reduction of things to
some certainty, both what makes a Court of Record, and also its powers, etc. by
that part of the Law of England called Common, from the Judgments and Cases in
the Books of the same, or rather, by the powers the several Courts have used in
themselves, and in and over each other, and against others, and the virtue and
power they give to the Acts of their Courts, regularly Entered and Recorded, and
the disallowance of the Acts of other Courts, neglecting them, and calling
them, yea though under Seal of the Court, and attested by a Sworn Officer, but
as papers, scrowls, or less. Now to let all other things pass at this present
under silence, I shall only offer to consideration, whether it be not essential
to every Court, and of necessity to evidence the reason and Justice of the
constitution of the same, that the judicial Acts of each Court, not only be
drawn in writing and Registered, but that the same be Records, and so allowed in
all Courts in that Nation, next that, each Court has power to enforce its own
Decrees within the bounds where its power reaches, to take Cognizance of any
cause judicially.

As to the first, see the end of a Court, its agreed universally to do Justice,
and give forth Judgment to the people, now this is either by Declaration,
Plea, and Judgment in writing, or without; in England, by the general Law,
there is none but in writing, nor indeed where Judgments are subitane or
summary, and pressed, as in Fairs, Markets, etc. upon strict reason they ought to
be in writing, though short, and not held to form, now if reduced into writing,
why not Record, and to prove it self, and to manifest and testify the nature
of the case, and be evidence in case of any suit for the same in any other
Court? Is not the trial there? otherwise a deceit; it might not be so grievous
when time was, but now all is brought to the Courts at Westminster, it is sound
of very evil consequence; I must agree Court Baron, Hundred, Town and County
Courts, are generally so ill provided of Judges, they have nothing worthy the
name of a Court of Justice, but if you think fit to continue them Courts for
the people, to receive Law thence, let their judgments be ascertained, and
also Records: But the question here, is not concerning those inferior
Jurisdictions, (for I humbly conceive all the base Courts in England are upon
true rule gone and extinguished) but concerning the Court of Probates, which
for ought I can find may have the cognizance of the proof of all Wills, and
that both to real as personal estate, rather then the Chancery, and examine
Witnesses in perpetual memory, for the inconveniences to the people are great;
for the personal estate prove the Will in the Court of Probates, for the
real, in Chancery, by Witnesses: Yet the Court of Probates has always used
proof, by Witnesses upon oath: Then out comes the Original Will from the
Office, and though there it might rest as a Record, upon Record, for the equal
benefit of all concerned, which it very often proves, yet by the Common Law it
comes to one parties hand principally, it may be concerned yet with many
others, and upon a Suit he will not produce it; the Copy taken by the Officer
on oath must not be a Record, and unless the Judge at Common Law will in
equity, and for Justice sake, admit it, he is not bound, and so the Suit is
lost; the truth indeed appears, but it is not evidence in this Judges opinion,
and so the Law is as the Judge is minded; and all this in England, under the
same power* and from clashing of Courts and Judges of the same Prince and
people.

Thus by the end, and the inconveniences, it is clear, each Court, Administering
Justice, ought in the same Nation to be so far a Court of Record, that the
Acts of the same in the public Registry ascertained, should be of themselves,
if produced proofs (if by true Copy sworn, to be accepted as proof.) And, I
say, it is not material, whether the Registry be in Parchment or Paper, happily
the first, being now known more subject to alterations without discovery, let
as much of certainty be as you please; but if you find incertainty in a Court
judicial, remedy the incertainty, for it is of necessity to have all such acts
Records.

Now if this be so, and so it ought in the Court of Probates, then much more in
the Admiralty, which is a Court has as great a latitude of power in the
Cognizance of cases of Life, Maim, Wounding, Imprisonment, Damage and Loss, to
the greatest value, as any Court in England, yet its acts, with the Judges of
England, are not Records, and which is the wonder, the Judges of all Foreign
Princes of Europe, will allow them judicially in proof, if under Seal of the
Court, or judicially attested; but the Judges of England will not, What is the
reason? because for the benefit of the Nation in special causes, they use a
Law allowed and practiced by other Nations: No, that is not the thing, but
practiced by Doctors, and not Barristers and Sergeants, which these Judges
were; and how the interest of Societies in education runs, and has its work,
even to deprave Judgment, and to maintain things evidently irrational, needs
no proof: I profess sincerely I have impartially weighed things, and can
find no ground in reason for it, and can only settle it upon the interest of
education, private benefit to them of like study, etc.

3. Head.
I will not enlarge upon that, but come to the other part of this Question,
which is the third Head or Proposition, Whether it be not naturally and
properly incident to every Court to have power to enforce its own Decrees? The
question is here, concerning the coersive power of a Court; there is no Court
in England, nor in any place, but it had a certainty of power, either against
body, or goods, or both, to enforce those Judgments, it gave in cases there
cognizable: Indeed its evident to reason, it were not otherwise a Court of
Justice, for Justice is not giving sentence, but seeing the thing done
accordingly, which is called justly execution.

Now this question is out of doors in the Admiralty, it inforces, as well as
it can, the power there is not denied, but in the Court of Probates wholly,
though it has the Ordinance of the Parliament and his Council; let us see how
it stood before, while the Ordinary had it, who being an Ecclesiastique, had in
this case of Wills, and Testaments, and Administrations, first power to
excommunicate, which if the party obeyed not, was after forty days of common
right assisted by the Civil Magistrate, and of course there issued a Writ to
the Sheriff, to imprison the party till he obeyed, which amounted to as much as
a Capias ad satisfac, or Execution at common Law, and the Excommunication it
self, was before a Writ for Attachment, a kind of Uthagary, debarring him
right of a lawful man in matters of greatest concernment, and then pleadable,
even in the Court of common Law. Now this power, Judge, and Court of
proceedings being gone, and Lay-Judges, as in other Courts constituted,
whether, while a Court, it has not coersive power, is the question: I
conceive, even by the very constituting of it a Court, it has power coersive
in it self; for as there are words of Art which include much, which the
ignorant ones know not, so this word Court, or making, or constituting men
Judges of, etc. include in them, not only a power to hear, but to Judge, and
to enforce that sentence; for as nature, so the Law does nothing in vain, it
settles not a power in any to make Judges, but to have power also to enforce,
for otherwise their sentence were in vain.

It Is plain, that the power Ecclesiastique by censures is gone, and the Judges
civil cannot execute it; but my reason is, that ceasing, the Judges now, that
the Law may not want his course, and that Justice be done to the people; the
general reason of the Law requires, that coersion be. The question now is, what
I must acknowledge, the liberty of man is precious, and so are goods, for
property is little, if liberty be incroached on, and liberty little, if
property be taken away; whether then this should extend to body, or goods, or
both, is the question I must own; the common Law meddled not with the person,
while there were goods, but attached him by his goods, but that was found
inconvenient, which principally altered that Law, or course of practice, for
the letter of the Law is not observeed. Now then if the procedure of the Judge
be according to the practical Law of the Nation in general, I should conceive
the Officer ought to be free from Action, and plead the Rule of the Court, I
know there is no settled Prison to which he can be committed, and that private
houses ought not to be Goales.

But I stand upon this as a case of necessity, wherein much more damage must
come to the people from defect of Justice; and therefore I know, though they
may not be warranted by a particular Law, yet they have the general Rule of
saving, and not ruining the Commonwealth in your trust to plead for them, to
avoid both punishment or rebuke; yet it may be more fit certainly to declare
the coersive power thereof, and how far it extends, least there should be any
incroachment under color of Justice.

4. Head.
The fourth Head, will from these former Reasons and Grounds laid down, receive
a full proof, and no way conclude (to spare expense of time and words, for I
would no more reiterate then irritate) that a certain continued, and constant
known practice and usage in a judicial Court, ought to have the force of a
Law, the same ought to be allowed in any Superior Court after such usage, yea,
though it might seem otherwise against Law; for while Common Error (upon the
Rule for the safety of the people) makes a Law, this cannot be denied; but let
the Superior Court admonish the Inferior, and if it does not then rectify,
let the Judges and Officers be punished, otherwise the Suitor will be grownd
between two Milstones, one Court inforces to do, and in another he is
overthrown, for doing, but how? there is the mystery, not for doing as that
Court ordered; but because that Court is adjudged not to have power to make
such order, but it may be, a Court may claim to be Superior, where it is not,
or declare the Acts of an inferior Court erroneous upon a coliteral occasion,
which may indeed supplant and enervate the whole settled Jurisdiction of the
inferior Court, and bring all to the Superior, by which means all County
Jurisdictions have been destroyed, and the whole stream and current of
business, is brought to the Superior Courts, this aptly brings me to discuss
the fifth head or Proposal.

5. Head.
Whether in a Nation, where diverse Courts are admitted, proceeding judicially
and definitively, according to diverse original Laws, it can stand with
reason, that one of those Courts should prohibit the other; to bring any matter
before it self, or decide to what Court the Cognizance belongs.

I see all times and persons professedly taking care, by all means possible,
to decline interests; as seeing how subject, even the best of men are to turn
and bend aside, drawn by the baits and allurements of worldly allurements, of
worldly riches, honor, power, and the like: I know in the most sedate and
quiet times, Princes have been wary to exasperate potent persons, or
multitudes, unless able to balance interests, and how loath to suppress an
evil by power, least they should give cause to men to doubt, they might call
good evil, and suppress that also in a like way; but still wise and just
Princes, Rulers, and Powers, have done what they could, and effected it as soon
as opportunity served. I know this is a question of concernment, usage mixing
with interest, which makes it the more difficult to reform, and interest
having so strong a Bulwark to defend it self by as usage, interest will be
called property, and we know what strength custom has; but this being the
interest but of a few, and to the damage of the whole body, I should conceive,
if the reason be apparent, not only wise men, but Christians will give the
Supremacy to reason, and then yielding for public good, shall Crown them as
Benefactors to the Commonwealth. Is there then benefit to the Judges from the
cases depending in, and tried in a Court? and is there not glory in multitude
of Suitors in a Court, and the like, then there is an evident interest, both of
profit and honor, and consequently these things will (yea, even with wise men)
work, yea, and ancient men, who more desirous of riches and honor, yea, who
more jealous of it, then even dying men. Now if you shall look at the Usage, I
say that is the ground of the complaint, the evil is evident before, therefore
it is fit to abolish it: The Judges if they should consult with prudence first,
before they agree a Prohibition, should know from the Judges of that Court
where the case has been depending, when the cause came into the Court, and
what progress has been in it, and what the cause appears to them to be. I
know how indifferent the ancient practice of the Law was between the Civilian
and the Common Lawyer, while the Civilian managed Legacies, Marriages,
Alimony, Tithes, and the like, under the Title of Court Christian: I shall
profess I know the learning of the Common Law to be great and deep, but it
being not used to many questions, which the Civil Law has fully handled, it is
not complete, nor is the Law of England therefore complete, but by that
learning which the Civilians uphold: I know it is short in many things, I
conceive it of necessity to keep up that learning, be it but to know what is
done abroad, should you supply what is defective by Statute, if you would have
it known, give encouragement to it, see but how a few years have wasted all the
ingenious spirits intended that way, and all men know, if you keep not up the
particular part, the speculative will be weak and low. Take a contemplative man
from his study to the Bar, and his learning will but render him more ridiculous,
from the greatness of expectation, he can do nothing: But to return, you will
say, the case is opened to the Judges, I say it is by Common Lawyers, whose
interest it is equally, if not more then the Judges, to have the Cause in that
Court, so that there is interest upon interest, and where should they now sue
for a consultation, either Judge, as Bishop (which ought to be) or party; then
there was great conscience to defraud the Churches or Court-Christian of any
due, Excommunications were feared: now there is as it were a feud, which all
the learning of the Civil Law for Pope interest sake. I say therefore, the
intetest being clear, the reason is evident, they ought not to be Judges, for
they are parties in this quarrel.

But it will be said, the Judges at Westminster are specially trusted with the
observance of the Laws, and have as it were, the trust of general Inquisitors
for the Public good, so as to see to the Regulating of all Courts, and though
the Civilian may plead and urge the meaning and intentment of his Authors, yet
the Judges of the three Courts at Westminster, are to Judge of each Act of
Parliament.

Really, I from my heart shall yield the Honorable and learned Judges all
their dues to my utmost, but I must say, they ought to hear what can be
opposed, the interest of their Courts is plain, so that as things now stand,
it may be, should they admit Doctors to plead, in case of prohitions and
questions of Civil Law, cognizance, their determinations might be the more
warrantable. But not hearing any but Common Lawyers, the complaint of suitors
carry something of credit with them. Indeed were the Judges at Westminster as
at first, special conservators of the Law, the Princes Council always
advising him, and informing him of the Law, yearly visiting the Counties, as
the Prince each fourth or seventh year to see to the equal Administration of
Justice, according to the Plot of Englands Government, I should, and ought to
hold them as indifferent Judges betwixt two other Courts; but as now gathering
all the business of the whole Nation to the sole determination, I can see it,
but not the reason of it, no not one Iota or Tittle, and yet I think my self no
enemy to the Judges or the Law of England, who would have it a just balance in
each part of it, which God grant. And so I pass to the consideration of Judges
of Appeals, which briefly holds forth the expedient to all these contests.

6. Head.
We use in England in all Courrs, when that called the Civil Law has its
course, not to bring the appeal by Writ of Error to the Judges at Westminster,
but by Appeal to several persons which may justly be called Delegates; and they
are of several sorts, some only to Doctors, some to Judges of the Common Law
and Doctors, wherein there is a Quorum, and those are Judges of the Common Law,
others are to Judges of Common and Civil Laws, Doctors and men of degrees,
ranks, and qualities whatsoever, but unless it be that all to Doctors, they
are so incertaine a Court to get together, having no encouragement to come
together, but their affection to the case, that its so extreme dilatory, that
he that gets the money in hand to come to that Court, may account it half as
good as his own. Its in some part a great cause of confusion, for from the many
cases all the Doctors are engaged at the same Court, both as Judges and
Advocates, and so the same person now a Judge, presently an Advocate, then a
Judge again: were it not grown to such an Abject condition, that there are few
or no spectators, it would be ridiculous. But this is tolerable, because
Justice may be done, which is the maine work: but the great fault is, men are
chosen Judges by parties, and especially in cases of marriage of their most
confiding friends; all given in by one side, and though there be noble and
learned persons Approvers, yet they cannot discern the interest. Therefore to
remedy all these evils of contentions, 'twixt Courts as well as parties, its of
necessity to keep a Class of Judges, as the Original settlement of Englands
Laws intended, fitted for, and only to be employed in the determination of all
cases that can fall out in England, etc. Who shall not Originally hear any
case, but shall be Moderators in all cases, of all Laws Common, Civil, or
Equitable; and in case any Ecclesiastique power should ever have head, of that
also, both as to difference 'twixt Court and Court, and also to decide and
determine all Appeals in cases Appealable, for it is fit to bring all cases to
appeal and determine all such cases and differences as there arise, speedily
and summarily hearing Court and Court, as well as party and party; there coming
nothing before them to be tried by Juries, but only upon the rigor of Law,
which will indeed and really according to Englands good Law given the people,
Justice, and well will it be if such Judges be appointed, as they may have it
as the Law pretends at their own doors, according to a settled Rule.

I well know there are objections of no weight offered scatteringly, by way of
Oratory now and then at some public meetings against this offered, let them
give them openly, and in certain conclusions, that they may be brought to the
Test, either of Law or Reason, that we be not blindfold led out of the just
path of Englands Law, which holds a just balance Originally 'twixt Prince and
People, Court and Court, party and party, which should be the endeavor and
prayer of all good men.

FINIS.

