i Ko^ano o i asile.
depiction of flag

(...).
(...), ut Sol unus in Axe Poli.
Sunt qui plures esse volunt, sunt qui quoque nullum;
Fax hominum haec praeceps quo malesana ruit!
Vult alius Reges ex aequo scilicet omnes;
Haec Paritas secum ^^ ^^e pericla trahit.
Nec plures sunto, nec nullus sunto, nec ommes;
(...), tantum Angligenis esto (...)
Unus erat nostris quondam majoribus; unus
Esto simul nobis; pluribus h^ud opus est.
Dum te fata sinunt, tu solus, Carole, Regna;
Post, tua Progenies Sceptra Britanna regas.
CANTERBVRIE MARCH Beaten up, on the day of KING CHARLES HIS INAVGVRATION March
the xxvii. 1648.

By some of His MAJESTY'S little, but Loyal Subjects and Servants, under the
Conduct of Signior Ilermo di Manta.

Our Colors, as the Cross will show,
Are English; and because but few
Conceive the Motto; for their ease,
I Will thus explain it, if they please.
ONE LORD, ONE KING: in Greek it is writ,
If any ask the cause of it;
Know it is as 'twere that Golden-Fleece,
Which sometime Jason fetched from Greece.
I'tis here the Inauguration day
Displayed; to cloth in Rich Array
King CHARLES; who though yet in distress,
Shall have, we hope, e're long redress.
Ilermo di Manta Philanax Oenopola Grand Majestre de la Rose.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

Canterbury March.
Fellow Soldiers;
You Are marching forth into the Field,
To try how each his Arms can weild,
His Sword, his Pistol and half Pike,
Mark well your Drum, how it does strike;
And that each Posture may be neat,
Know when to advance, when to retreat.
You Are going now but to a sport,
Yet, think it were to take a Fort,
Or fight an Enemy hand to hand,
As long as side either canstand;
If e're it come to such a push,
Fear not, but on with courage rush.
Creep in a Hedge! fly to a Tree!
Lurk in a Pit! this must not be;
A Soldier truly valiant
Will (like a Lion salliant)
Bear all before him, rather die
Than offer once away to fly.
Honor is all a Soldiers aim,
And whosoever to that lays claim,
Must not outbrave't with Bombast words,
But through the midst of thickest swords,
Put on, and farther still advance,
As did onr English Kings in France.
But, I have done; now of the Day,
Hear what your Leaders have to say;
Order your selves, and silence keep,
Be whist, as when you sweetly sleep;
Attend your charge, be sure ye do,
Else here is the Marshall, up ye go.
You Will stride the wooden Horse at least
And that is a villainous sharp-back Beast;
The hardest Hackney in this Town
(Though one should ride him up and down
Without a Saddle) would not more
Torment your Twist; beware therefore.
Besides, there is the Gantlope Race,
Where he speeds best that runs apace;
Yet be he near so swift of foot
He Will smart for it when he comes unto't:
Be silent then, full well you will speed,
If of your charge you take but heed.
Deering. 1. Come, Noble Sparks, I hope you are square,
Keep Rank and File from Van toth Rear;
March bravely on, and let us display
Our Colors, to set forth this day,
In which King CHARLES our Sovereign
Amongst us first began his Reign.
Yate. 2. It Is fit we should; for though of late
(Through Englands most unhappy Fate)
It has, as 'twere, been smothered,
And in oblivion buried;
Yet we le revive it, what we may,
And give due honor to the day.
Stocker. 3. In honoring it, we honor give
To him, by whom our Laws do live:
King CHARLES I mean, who though as yet
He Is force't as one forlorn to sit
In solitude, yet certainly
E're long he will have good company.
Frognall. 4. A Sunshine day has often appeared
After the blackest Night, and cleared
The cloudy Sky: a storm at Sea
May last a while, but 'twill allay,
When Neptune with his Trident Mace
Commands each Wind into his place.
1. Time brings things about, which we
Could hardly once believe would be;
Let man plot what he please, there is
A Power, that over-ruleth his;
This either makes or marres the end,
What ever mortal men intend.
2. The world (we use to say) runs round;
The Heavens indeed do, but the ground
Stands fixed on its stability,
And yet from mutability
Not fre'd; we ring the changes here,
From day to day, from year to year.
3. It fares with man, as with a Bowl.
Which on the Green when it does role
Turns up and down; or as a Ball
At Tennis, struck from wall to wall;
Say It fly in the hazard; make no doubt
But that at length it shall come out.
4. The Sun sets darkish in the West,
Yet does next morning in the East
Arise most glorious, while its Face
All Fogges and Mists away does chase;
Such heavy Meteors have not force
To out his light, or stop his course.
1. Come then, Comrades, cheer up with me,
We hope good days again to see;
Days of Plenty and of Peace,
Days of Joy, and Trades increase,
Days of mutual Amity,
And Truth without Hypocrisy.
2. Were Phoebus once but in his Sphere,
And had his wonted motion there,
The work were done; then strait those days
Would crown our Cypress brows with Bays;
And after many a deading day
Make us as fresh as Flowers in May.
3. O how mine eyes would joy to see it!
My heart would leap, my legs and seet
should nimbly trip it over the Plain,
With many an honest-hearted Swain;
Chaunting out loud with frolic Mirth
King CHARLES his new and second Birth.
4. Some saucy Tongues are over-glib,
Sorting with Princes Tom and Tib;
They cry they are Kings and Queens each one,
From Madam, to the meanest Joane;
They would be so in very deed,
But, I'ie not bid their Plough God speed.
1. What? Princes all? Why this were brave,
Then every Master and his Knave
Should share alike: Jack Straw did say,
As many Jacks do at this day;
When Adam dug and Evah span,
Who was then a Gentleman?
2. Why how now Levellers? Is it fit
That Pesants cheek by Iowle should sit
With Princes? What foul Ataxie
Would you bring in with Anarchie?
The laboring man ought use his Spade,
Kings Scepters were for Sovereigns made.
3. One King, no more: no more at once,
Who e're says nay, I think his Sconce
Runs Wild-Goose-chase; he may seem wise,
But surely he is otherwise;
Let him seem sage, yet (sooth to saine)
He Is but an Ass, and Fool in grain.
A King must be a King alone,
None should be his campanion,
But much less his Superior,
That makes him an Inferior;
And sure he will be of small account
Unless he be Lord Paramount.
1. To give a Prince of Sovereignty
Check-mate with upstart Parity
4. Is ill beseeming; Kings are they
That ought to rule; whom to obey
Subjects are bound, in all that tends
To Virtuous and Religious ends.
1. Put case they should command what is ill,
(While Reason is o're-borne by Will)
We must submit; yet how? to do
The thing that they command us? No;
But rather bear with patience
Even Death, than offer violence.
3. They are not to be withstood by force,
Subjects ought take another course,
That Is better far; a milder way;
It is, to Counsel and to Pray;
Such means with them will more prevail,
Than to oppose, defame and rail.
4. Touch not the King in any wise,
That may to his dishonor rise;
Not in thy thought, nor word, nor deed,
For never well did any speed,
That durst adventure such a thing
Against their Sovereign Lord the King.
1. Kings be Supreme, and Subjects are
As to the Sun each lesser Star;
Of them, never since the world begun,
Any one strived to be the Sun;
No River e're did enterprise
The Ocean Sea to equalize.
2. Dales rise not up, high Hills to nose,
But quietly do below repose;
The Lapwing must not partner be
With th Eagle in his Sovereignty:
That builds oth' ground, but this above,
And's called chief Armiget to Jove.
3. Each Element moves in its place;
To Nature it is a foul disgrace,
When her well ordered Nation
Is turned into confusion;
All is as't should be, when all is right,
Let day be day, let night be night.
4. One King, no more, our Colors cry,
And with them we will live or dye;
We are but Tyroes; yet from Greece
We fetched of late this Golden-Fleece,
To'adorne King CHARLES with rich Array,
On this INAUGURATION day.
1. Some say he is poor, but we say nay,
It matters not what others say;
Can he be poor that is rich in Friends?
Why? Codrus, but with his Cobblers ends,
(If well ^elov'd) has riches more
Than Craesus had with all his store.
2 CHARLES is not poor then, being beloved
Of Loyal Friends: this will be proved,
When that day comes, which is not yet,
We must with patience wait for ir,
Himself does, being assured that he
Shall be at length, what he should be.
3. A Monarch still amongst us here,
As now this four and twenty'th year
He has been: yet, not such as now
Under a Cloud, I know not how:
The Cloud, I hope, will break at length,
And Sol will then shine in his strength.
4. He avens grant it, maugre all the spite
Of Envy, Hatred, Malice, Might:
I wish these twenty four years Reign
May be redoubled: but in vain
This vote may seem, for such a date
Of life did long since terminate.
2, Well howso're, we wish long life
(Devoyd of farther jars and strife)
To CHARLES our King; The Parliament
Desires it too: but some are bent
Another way, nor do they spare
To run point black against the hair.
2. They are Sactaries and Schismatics,
State-Troublers and Church Heretics,
Brownists, and Antinomians,
Jesuits and Amsterdamians;
If any such be in this place,
I bid defiance to his face.
3. These are the seeming Saints, that make
A show of Holiness; do but take
Their Vizard off, and you shall see
They scarce have common honesty;
The Devil by a cunning slight
Will seem an Angel even of Light.
4. Hence Viprous Brood, what make you here,
Who thus the Kingdoms Bowels tear?
Were you but gone, we'd soon agree
With mutual Peace and Unity;
King Charles should sit upon his Throne,
And none should Rule, but he alone.
1. One People, and one only. King,
Observe this even in every thing;
The Bees, the better for to thrive,
Will but one Master in one Hive:
The Heavens have but one only Sun,
Nor e're had since the world begun.
2. The Eagle is the King of Birds,
The Lion of the Beasts and Herds
That in the Forest have their chase,
And each one keeps his several place;
The very Ant, that little thing,
Is not without its petty King.
3. All these acknowledge seoalty,
And do perform it faithfully
To him that is their Head and Guide,
Nor do they ever out of Pride,
Rise or resist; content are they
To let him rule, and do obey.
Its strange (o strange!) that any then
Should live among the Sons of men,
Who dare by force and treachery
Attempt to beat down Monarchy;
Yet such there be, more reasonlesse
Than are the Beasts 'ith Wilderness.
Had they, I think, but common sense
To help their weak Intelligence,
They would be wiser than they are,
And stop, before they run too far.
Be other States, what they list be,
Great Britan's now a Monarchy.
2. (...), our Ensigns word,
Is, let there be one only Lord;
(...) is, let there be
One King supreme in Majesty,
The Motto's very fair I hope,
Who ere says nay, beware the Rope.
3. One only King we constantly
(So long as breath shall last) will cry,
King CHARLES is He, yea He alone,
Until by death he quit his throne
(A fair death be it) unto his Seed
That in their Right shall him succeed.
4. March on brave blades, stand to your Arms,
Fear neither force, nor Magic charms,
Stand for a King, and but for one,
Be not for many, nor for none:
Then are you truly right and square,
Though such of late were very rare.
1. They were indeed, yea very thin,
But now me thinks they do begin
To wheel about; insooth they must,
For, else they know whereto totrust;
Even to their heels, yet diverse say,
The'le rather turn, than run away,
2. I think so to; They Will never strain
To turn, and turn again for gain;
These whirligiggs were all of late
(I marry were they) for the State;
The Publick-good sounds well to the ear,
But, do thou think that was their care?
3. Yes, if they count themselves the State,
For many a cunning-crafty Mate,
And simpering-soothing Separatist
(Let be his Sect what ere you list)
Within a while has gotten more,
Than e're in all his life before.
4. Had these but loved the State indeed,
As they pretended, better speed
The Commonwealth had found; but now
(As 't were a wagon in a flough)
It Is foundred; Let us, might and maine,
Labor to get it out again.
1. It Is deeply plunged, it 'ith mire and clay,
And like is longer there to stay,
Unless the Master Waggoner stand
And set thereto his helping hand;
Then it shall run on wheels again
Being kept up right by Char-le-main.
2. Me thinks I see it begin to rise,
Fill me a cup of upsy-frize.
To joy our Friends: such Friends I mean,
As do unto the right side lean;
Who being Loyal to their King,
Never wronged the State in any thing.
3. These are the cordial Royalists
That love (not as the Familists)
Their King, and Country, Church, and State,
Nor do they seek to animate
Each against other furiously,
But study peace and unity.
This unity is hell'd by none,
That have more Ruling-Heads than one;
The manyes multiplicity
Produces such variety
Of judgments, that they know not where
To set their staff up, here or there.
1. No King at all, some feign would have,
And some would all, even every Knave;
These mad-head, Hare-braines have such fits,
They run themselves quite out their wits;
Let them go on, and run their fill,
For naught they will do but what they will.
2. England, search all Antiquity,
Has thrived best under Monarchy:
Our Ancestors approved of it,
And why should any question it?
Oh I-these are wiser, and do see
More clearly than their Ancestry.
3. There are in the Indies, Travelers say,
Some Monsters called Acephaloi:
All breech and body, but no Head,
If we prove such, we'are ill bestead:
Yet many a woodcock, tooth and nail,
Labors to do it, could he prevail.
4. It Is dangerous cutting through the Maine,
(Say, but from England into Spain,
Nay less, not many words to spend,
Be It but from London to Graavesand)
Without a Pilot: Let him sail,
It Is ten to one, if safe we sail.
1. Each Kingdom is a ship, and it
Ought 't have a Pilot that is ^^^*
None can be more than is a King
Experienced in every thing,
That to his Kingship does belong,
Right to maintain, and punish wrong.
King Charles is such, then happy we,
Could we our happiness but see-
But ah, the lately new-sprung Light
Has put out many a Weaklings sight;
So operative is its excellence,
That it does quite corrupt the sense.
They call 't a Light, but yet indeed
It rather heat, mark with what speed
The Zealots in their fiery fit
Run headlong, being inflamed with it.
Called what they will, 't has proved more dire
Than ever did Saint Anthonies fire.
This Light like Ignis fatuus,
Or Jack with a wispe has led us
Quite from our Thoame, about let us tacke,
And then away to the Fiels we will pack;
Pack? March, I would say, for that word
Becomes not him, that wears a Sword.
Vive le Roy, long live King Charles,
Maugre the spite of envious Carles:
King of England, Scotland France,
And Ireland too: come, let us advance,
All his just Titles to maintain,
Proclaming him, once and again,
Defender of the Faith, over all
Civil and Ecclesiastical
Supreme, subjected unto none
That lives in his Dominion:
Having a right in every thing,
Such as is due to an English King.
This is his Title, but of late
It Is almost quite worn out of date*
One cries Charles, and lets slip King,
Whch is a pretty upstart thing;
As if he only had a name,
Without a Kingdom to the same.
The King, cry others; but, sans ours;]
Indeed they only count him yours,
Who with a free and loyal heart
Do both your selves to him impart,
And what is yours; To do him good,
Not sparing even your dearest blood.
There is a third sort (man to blame)
That use nor King nor Charles to name,
But only He, He who is placed,
Here over us; Will this still last?
I hope it will not; ere't be long,
They Will pack, or sing another song.
Renowned Charles, thy suffering
Being past, Thou Wilt be a glorious King:
Fire purifieth the Gold from dross,
The way to th'Crown is by the Cross;
Thou Have three Crowns now, and time to come
Reserves thy fourth of Martyrdom.
Come, strike up Drums, and bravely beat
An English March, our Charles the Great
Shall never fall, whise we canstand,
In this, or any other Land:
Triumph he, wheresoever he goes,
With honor, over all his Foes.
Vive le Roy, and tous les siens,
Dieu luy guard, and tous set biens.
FINIS.

