THE CHARACTER OF A Moderate Intelligencer With some select Poems.
Written by the same Author. J. C.
AN Intelligencer is a State-spie, he pries into each man's breast, and would
feign know all men's crimes but his own; He is a constant Imitator of
HOLINGSHEAD, his Lines are as harsh and unpleasant, save that he makes more
SPEED, and is not so Voluminous, yet he will tell you as queint stories, as
either of those Chronographers, and make as artificial a Narration of Sheriffs
and Bailiffs; He is the Countrimans Chronicler, and he sings JO PEANS to his
Muse, as to the Rusticke Dieties; He is the Citizens Harbinger, and saves him
the labor of walking on the Change to hear news; He is the Epitome of wit,
and is contracted in so small a circumference, that you may draw him through a
loop-hole, or shoot him as a pellet out of an Elder-gun: and though he tell
lies by the gross, yet he would have the Booke-turners of this Isle to believe
that he uses Moderation.

He has seen the exit of his great Master, that impudent and incorrigible
Reviler Britanicus, who while the world lasts shall never be mentioned by any,
but to his shame and infamy; and yet he hops he is fixed so surely, that all
the strength of wit cannot eradicate him: he will tell you his Majesty is in
health, is merry, plays at Chesse, etc. And then he will comment on His
actions, and wish he had never lent his ears to evil Councillors, evil
indeed, when he betrayed his power; then he will counterfeit a whining passion,
and condole with Crocodiles tears his present estate; then he will take a
large stride, and celebrate the names of the principal of the Decemvirs; he
will tell you, that General Leven is in his study, beating his brains to a
gelly, to project apt ways for the safety of the contracted Kingdoms, and in
deep meditation, how to subdue Antrim and his handful, and tying knots of
concord never to be dissolved; that Ormund has revolted without horror of
conscience, and thinks not that his Majesty's Ghost haunts him, that he is at
Dulcarnan, even at his wits end.

That Holmby is richly decked for his Majesty's entertainment; and that he
shall commit Sacrilege unwittingly, drink in that new molten Plate once
dedicate to the Temple; that he will not yet hearken to Marshals Instructions,
nor hear him to his face revile him; that he is yet minded to wear his
Crown, and not to prostrate it and himself at the feet of his vassals, that
he will not yet be contented to have a Gallemoffrey of Religions, but will have
but one, and that form of Church Government which so many holy Martyrs have
sealed with their blood; that he is angry his Queen should be forced from him,
and the Revenewes of his Crown maintain an Army against him.

That the Prince is in France, and is much to be doubted, that he will incense
all Christendom to revenge his Fathers wrongs; then with a swift carriere he
will transport himself into Holland, and not fear to belie Foreign Nations;
he can with wondrous facility make the Swedes and Imperialists shake hands, and
by and by meet in battle; he can ralley a scattered Troop that ran clean
away, and constrain them to return and fight lustily; he will tell you, that
the Turk intends no more to invade Christendom, but confine his Silver
Moon within her own proper Orb; that Don Camillo Panfillio the Popes Nephew,
is married to the Prince Rosseanos widow, and bestow a whole page in
discoursing that she put off her mourning habit, as if any would imagine a
Princess would be married in Sable weeds; that her Vestiments were very rich,
who will not esteem that possible enough? that they were married by the
Vicegerent, in the presence of the Prince Lodovissio, O strange providence I
that the Brides Mother, and her Cousin stood by; this nothing impossible
neither, that after they had knit the gordion knot, Ambassadors and Lords sent
to Complement them: take the substance of the narration thus, the Popes Nephew
Camillo Panfillio was married to the Prince Rosseanos widow, they both being
attyred in brave clothes, things which great persons seldom put on; that the
Prince Lodovissio, the Brides mother and Cousin stood by while they were
married, and when they forsook the Temple, diverse Lords and Ambassadors were
so mannerly as to complement with them by their several Proxeis; ha, ha, ha, a
fine story of Tom Thumb sitting under a Cabbadge leaf: thus he stuffes a
Cushion with stubble, alas, how else should he amount to a sheet and an half,
and increase the trade of Paper? After this he will lead you into Russia, to
see the Sea coagulated, and the nose of a Bore wipt away by the frozen hand of
Hyoms; then again into Turkey to see the Mahometans sit and tipple in their
Coffa houses, and in the streets lowsing themselves at noone day; then into
Germany to see the ruins of war, and the fatal effects of Schisms and
Factions; then into Scotland, and there show Kilketto exercising his Troops,
and giving them Military Discipline, encouraging them yet to maintain their
Sovereigns cause (Fortune does not always bend her brows on one party) and
once more to elevate a trodden down King; to avenge the deaths of Strafford,
Lindsey, and Canterbury; to place K. Charles in his Throne by force (entreaties
not the least availing) to Impede the growth of Schism, and to cause the
seditious and obstinate to be dutious and pliable; then, as if he ran round in
a ring, with a trice he will be again in England.

But he will not relate to you, that the Incendiaries there are so out of
conceit with the piece of work, about which they have so long been hammering,
finding their labor spent in vain, to the loss of their time and credit, that
they wish they had never handled carving tools, nor ever kindled a fire to
scorch their own fingers; while like a Mill-horse they have gone often round,
and now are arived at the same station where first they set forth; nor that
they fear his Majesty's wrongs are so deeply imprinted in his breast, that now
having drawn the Sword, they may throw away the Scabbard, and never look to
sheath it again.

Nor that London is become another Amsterdam, and that there is a tolleration
of all Religions, that they are a mixed multitude, such as went with the
Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, a medley of Jews and Infidels;
some Presbyters, some Independents, some Anabaptists, some Brownists, some
Arminians, and some Antinomians (that is) some Babell builders; some of their
Sect against whom Paul disputed, when he fought with beasts at Ephesus,
Libertines; some Dippers, whom Learned Featly plunged in Cocytus Lake; some
despisers of Gods Ordinance, the Disciples of Brown; some that have a will and
ability of themselves to achieve any thing save what is pious, whom King James
has sufficiently canvased, the Sect of Arminius; and some that exclude Christ
from his Mediatourship. Nor will he tell you that their hearts fail them, and
that they fear the one will take vengeance on the other, and with Cains, that
whosoever meets them will slay them; nor that the Citizens of London have
bought their wit at dear rates, O where was Diogenes his Lantern? and with
their expense of Coin and Blood, have purchased his Majesty's wrath: nor that
the Queen like another Isabella, is courting Foreign aid, there will be a
John of Henault, who if France should degenerate, would assist her opportune
hopes, these matters he will not inform you, the Diurnall and he are
confederate, and resolve to utter nothing but perfumed breath, and make no
Narration but what shall be pleasing to the close Committee.

With them as Coadjutors, join the two Empericke Astronomers, Lilly and
Booker, who can force the Planets that walk retrograde, to make their
perambulation no farther then their proper circuit, persuade Malevolent Saturn
to smile with a luckie Aspect, smooth up their great Masters in hope of gain,
stuffing those empty Bladders with moist air, telling them the motions of the
superior Bodies Prognosticate future Tranquillity, that the time will never
come when they shall be examined on strict Interrogatories, and yield an
account of their Stewardships to their Royal Master, for they must be no
longer Stewards; those two Disciples of ERRA PATER, that can make predictions
of fair weather in harvest, and that the Sun will lose some part of his light
when he is Ecclipsed, have led the Commons of this Kingdom, as the Bears are
led by the Nose with Bagpipes before them in the morning, and in the afternoon
are worried at the Stake, they have cast a veil before their eyes, and have
led them into a deep pit by the hand.

Let Wharton Illuminate them, he will show them, that his Majesty is not yet so
low, but he reads in the book of heaven, he may be yet raised, and that it is
possible he may once more be as great as ever; that the Stars threaten the
ruin of his enemies, and that they (like Jonas Gourd) shall only flourish for
an hour, and then wither away; and that his Majesty's faithful Subjects may
yet have a time mutually to rejoice together. But here the Intelligencer has
left me, and I leave him to peruse his own shame.

The Sub-Committee.
THe Slaves are set, the ink and Counters stands
Upon the Table, I at your commands
Right Worshipful am come, and here have brought
For you a pair of pick-tooths, and a groat:
Nay rise not, for your their wives
hens not cackle yet,
Undo the Country, seeing you are met.
I see the Canniballs, when you I eye,
Or the man-eating Anthropophagie.
You are but under Tyrants not so witty
As the Round-Table Knights, the Grand Committee.
O were you altogether, you would outvie
The Athenian Thirty, Romes Decemviri,
In Rage, Injustice, Cruelty, as far
As you above those men in number are.
What mysteries of Iniquity do we see?
Our Goods forced from us, for Propriety.
The King Delinquents to protect did strive,
What Clubs, Pikes, Halbeits, Lighters saved the five?
O Charles, shall I accuse thy dismal fate,
That to Pigwidgins art subordinate?
Ship Money was unjustly taken they say,
But what Injustice took the Ships away?
To the Kings will the Laws men sought to draw,
The Subjects will is now become the Law:
The Princely Eagle is mewed up, and Dawes,
Howlets and Buzzards, wound him with their claws;
Bright Sol's obscured, and those guide the day,
That force his Carr through the most oblique way.
By what vaste hopes is your ambition fed?
It Is red in blood, and may be plainly read.
The Bishops Lands, O strange! ye did of late
Attempt in gold to transubstantiate:
For it is against Superstition, your intent
Is to root out that great Church-Ornament
Money and Lands, your swords alas are drawn
Against the Bishops, not their Cap or Lawne:
And can you think that your design will fadge?
Can that house stand is propt with sacrilege?
Besides Loanes, Contributions, Pole-monies,
Bribes, Plunder, and such common privileges,
Are words which you will never learn in holy Writ,
Till the Spirit and your Synod has mended it.
But I conclude, the Scriptures you look on
Not as Gods Word, but as the Alcharon;
To yield subjection you have quite forgot,
And therefore Christ will say, I know you not.
Epitaph on the Archbishop of Canterbury.
A Heap of learned Dust here lies,
Englands Archbishop, whose disguise
Was such, though against the Pope he wrote,
His cursed betrayers knew it not.
Or would not else, but made him be
A Martyr to the Papacy.
THE ZEALOUS SECTARY.
REligion is a Circle, Men contend
And run the round in dispute without end.
The zealous Brothers say they do not dare
To take Gods Name in vain, it is sin to swear,
I say so too; but I Would not have thereby
Them priviledg'd, 'bove others for to lie;
For to maintain their new erected cause,
They hug a lie, and call it pia fraus;
They whine, and sigh out lies with so much ruth,
As if they grieved 'cause they could never speak truth:
They for to vent their lies have Pulpits chose,
And thrust them forth apace, at mouth at nose,
And how ere gross, are certain to beguile
The erring Earth-wormes of this middle I Will;
Nay to the Almighties self they have been bold
To lie, and Green the Anabaptist told
They might say false to God; for if things were
Not as they wished, most sure God was not there.
Not all the Legends of the Saints of old,
Nor vast Baronius, nor slye Surius hold
Such plenty of apparent lies as are
Vented by these men, they in lies do share.
Nay more, these power over the Scriptures take,
Blot out some clauses, and some new ones make;
Knolles durst avouch it would do wondrous well
To race out, Christ's descending into Hell,
From forth the Creed; but he will never change I fear
The sentence of his own descending there:
Yet modestly they use the Creed, for they
Would wisely take the Lords Prayer, root and branch away;
And wisely said a Levit of our Nation,
The Lords Prayer was a Popish Innovation;
Take heed, you will grant ere long it should be fed,
An't be but to desire your daily bread.
Organs to play in the Church offends their sense,
And therefore they have sung it out from thence:
Which shows, if right their minds were understood,
They hate it not as Music, but as Good:
Their madness makes them sing as much as they
Dance, who are bit with a Tarrantula.
Ye have your wish, Gods worship is put down,
Alas that vanished, when Charles mist his Crown
When you began with blood to fat our Coast,
That fatal debt paid to great Straffords Ghost;
When hoodwinkt with your zeal, you durst defy,
And even too assault his Majesty.
Your Ship does lie at Anchor, but if scanned,
You have no Cable, but a Rope of Sand.
To Cupid an Ironicall Recantation.
PArdon Love, my great offense,
And my wilful Insolence,
That durst boast, I never would be
Subject to thy Deity.
Thou that Lovers hearts inflam'st,
And the proudest Champions tam'st,
Take thy quiver and thy bow,
And thy wonted power show.
Draw thy Arrow to the head,
But not that is tipped with lead,
Wound sweet Delia, as thou did,
When my heart so right thou hitst,
Pierce her obdurate heart, that I
May in her Society
Be linked, whose beauty dimm's the Sun;
Who when he spies, back does run
All ashamed, that her eye
Should with his glorious luster vie;
Wound her deeply, else I fear
She never bucksome will appear
Unto me, who dare to woe
Her whom service strive to do
Those who far (to outward sense)
'Bove me challenge pre-eminence.
I acknowledge, just it were
If thou should to shoot forbear,
But thy mercy I implore,
To forgot what was before:
And for the future I will be
Another Ovid unto thee.
To DELIA, Scorning him.
LAdy, scorn me not cause I
Jet it not in bravery,
Nor because I Lands do want,
Nor because my coin is scant;
I have that the world cannot get,
Nor yet for money purchase it.
When as thy Silken Lovers all,
Having received their burial,
Shall on earth be quite forgotten,
Ere their earthly Trunkes are rotten:
I shall live by will of Fame,
And ever on the earth have name.
Then smooth thy rugged front, and be
More blithe, thou my sole Deity,
Divinest Beauty, let me twine
Thy body in these arms of mine,
And be more happy, then if I
Did command a Monarchy.
Thy rare virtues I Will rehearse,
Sing thy praise in lofty verse,
That shall make thee honored be
Unto all Posterity,
Equalling Julia, Lawra, Stella,
Cynthia, Lesbia, Amorella.
Then O dearest clear thy brow,
And some grace to him allow,
Who for thy disdain does languish,
Grant him favor, cease his anguish.
Thy sweet beauty drew me on,
Thus thy heart to set upon:
Be not guilty of my death,
If thou hat'st me, 'reave my breath:
I shall esteem it my chief bliss,
If thy fair hand my soul dismiss:
But if pity move thy mind,
And that to love thou art inclined,
Let me know my happiness,
That my thanks I may ezpresse
Unto Cupid, and may praise
His goodness to me in my Lays.
The strange Divorce on the Queens departure out of England.
It cannot be that thou should so depart,
And we not strive thy journey to divert.
Shall Charles lose half himself, and we not mourn,
And on our knees invoke thee to return?
They Are silent all, a lethargy does ceaze
Upon their minds, a crampe has taken their knees,
They see their loss, and yet untroubled stand,
See thy winged Vessel launch out from the Strand,
Behold their Sovereign bewail his state
With sighs and tears, their crimes to expiate.
Have patience, dread Lord, and cease remorse,
Heaven it self weeps at this strange Divorce,
The Angels sigh, the genius of the Land
Covers her face, and does amazed stand:
But thou ere long shall see bright Sol display
His beams on earth, and make a gawdie day.
Great Neptune calm thy waves, thou now do bear
Englands Great Queen, who takes the Sea for fear:
Not as Europa, when she backed the Bull
Whence Lybian Hammon has his horned skull;
Not as Atrides wife, when she forsook
Her Lord, to doat on Alexanders look;
But oh accursed, forced on thy waves to run,
Her Husbands much bewailed fate to shun.
Let Aeol bind the winds in gyves of brass,
Not suffer Boreas from his Cave to pass;
Let Mermaids with the Sirens now agree,
As her Ship glides, to chaunt harmoniously;
Thaetis forsake thy watery bower, as when
Thou chear'st thy Son, wronged by the King of men,
With all thy watery Train, set forth to meet
Englands Great Queen, who does over Neptune fleet:
A Princess made of goodness, and compact
Of all those virtues make her Sex exact,
Her virtue wounds her, and she flies from them,
Which virtue as a thing of naught esteem.
France, let thy Genius smile, our loss to thee
Will cause loud Echoes of sweet jollitie.
Heaven forbid thou should from goodness fail,
And our disease be Epidemicall,
That thou should fail Her Highness to accept,
And honor Charles his Sponse with dread respect:
No, we have better thoughts, and we will not fear
That she will with joy return, and cheer us here.
POETASTERS.
FRom that all scient, ever springing Fount,
Upon the two-brow'd hill, Pernassus Mount,
The Fountain that Perseus winged Horse
Struck with his hindfoot, when he fetched his course
Through the thrice three times lythe and gentle air
To save from spoil Andromeda the fair;
How come so many thence water to draw,
Whom Homer nor the Muses never saw?
Learned Tailor, Martin Parker, have their lot,
And as a third take in, Mercer the Scot.
The Independent Presbyter.
ALinsey Woolsey Garment mixed with hair,
Half Ass, half Mule, or like the Minotaure,
A Problem of two Sexes in one met,
As if a Camel should a Cow beget,
Nabuchadnezars Image, Waters Smoke,
Or as an Aple grafted on an Oak,
So the rude Chaos in an heap was laid,
When cold the heat, the heat the cold gainsaid:
When like an Embrio, this whole mass of clay,
Before the Fiat, yet imperfect lay.
The Preaching Soldier, and the sighting Priest.
THe world's turned arsey varsey, upside down,
Old customs out of fashion now are grown,
And in great Britain it is most sure, there is
A strange and wondrous Metamorphosis;
Henceforward, it will not so strange appear
To me, that I should credit Plato's year:
I will believe men's souls to beasts do pass,
The strange opinion of Pythagoras;
That there is a world in the Moon, and I Will nere swell
To hear there is redemption out of hell:
Great Neptunes love, killing Medusas head,
The maid-fac'd Harpyes, nor that the winds have bred
Swift Spanish Gennets; I Will nere henceforth doubt
Holy S. Dunstane clinch'd the Devils snout:
For things more strange I with these eyes have seen,
A change of that I thought should nere have been.
The very Heathen have allotted Priests,
And they must only wait on Bacchus Feasts;
Delphian Apollo has his offerings slain,
Only by those his offerings do maintain;
The Snake-like God Serapis, whom with fear
Even all rich Egypt, and the Nations nere
Devoutly worship, has his long-gound train,
Whose work it is only Incense to maintain;
Minervas Temple that does kiss the sky,
Where famed Psamniticus entombed does lie,
Has those who only do her Rites attend;
No Laick Thief must there his duty spend,
Where Pan the Arcadian God was worshipped,
And Goats adored: there Goats (as I have read)
Do mix with women-kind, so got was he
Who loved the boy turned to a Cypress Tree;
Yet even this rustic Deity has those
To kill his offerings who naught else dispose:
But we who serve the true Almighty Jove,
Unto our maker show so little love,
That we permit both Priests and Laity
Serve in the Temple to his Deity.
The Priests of Mars nere served at Juno's shrine,
But Soldiers now descant on things Divine;
And that we might amaze the world, we let
Priests upon barbed horses for to get;
Lincoln alight, does all Gods Lore afford
Thou should the Pulpit leave, to take the Sword?
To see thee armed does trouble me so sore,
An uncouch'd Afric Monster could not more;
Thou Art a right Centaure, some it much delights:
To see thee scuffle amongst the Lapethites.
I do abhor a woman should wear breeches,
A Priest that fights, a man at Arms that Preaches.
FINIS.

