AN Elegiack Tribute to the Sacred Dust of the Reverend and Worthy Mr. SEABORN
COTTON Pastor of the Church of Christ at HAMPTON in New England: who was
discharged from his Work and Office, to be admitted into Heaven, April 20th
1686.
AMong the weeping wailing Mourners drove,
I come to show my weakness, yet my love.
I shall not I cannot refrain when Grief bids speak,
And Sorrow forces: I choose to seem weak
Rather than stupid; and not for to show
What he deserves and what my Fancies ow
Unto his Horse, which wants no Verse, to whom
A Diapason of each Muses Moan
Is a due Tribute. Yet Griefs passions spent
Are cased when broach't, cured when they have vent.
If tears and fears, or Moans and Groans were verse,
How would I, could I, should I grace the Hearse
Of this vast soul; of which the unworthy earth
Was never so much as honored with the Birth.
The grandest birth are Amphurite had:
To rock his Cradle Angels they were glad.
By Winds and Waves, and prosperous ^s before
Heaven sent by Sea this heaven-born soul to shore
Whose Worth who^^ Works, whost Life and well-spent Days
I need to imitate but not to prais^
I ever hated flattering of the dead.
(Without all fraud) it may, must, shall be se'd
He was a Gemm, Joy, Jewel, Head and Hand,
Light, Life, Stay, Staff, and Oracle of our Land.
Hard things he eased, obscure he brought to Sight,
Feet to the lame he was: to Blind a Light.
Ears' to the deaf. Strength to the feeble Knee.
A Mouth to dumb. A Churches eye was he.
Hands to the helpless ones. Stay to the Weak.
The ^aint he cheered: to wicked swords he would speak.
An heart to heartless. A Souls guide, to keep
And fright off wolves and wicked from Christ's sheep.
He dr^v and drove, wooed, warned with all his might
Men's souls, by love, by fear, by force, by Fright.
Never had Body such a Soul within^
Vice-hater, and a Thunderbolt to Sin?
Oh how he studi'd, prea^h^, teacht, practiced too!
His w^rds, works, ^ight and life together grew.
A Mi^^ur and a Master-peice of Art.
His h^ was full of Light, of Grace his heart.
He did not seek the Churches Goods but Good:
'Twas them not theirs he sought. O what a brood
His sed'lous care, love, labor, bred, fed, raised!
What earth does hide, in heaven will be praised.
Modest, mild, meek was he. A gracious grave
Pattern and Patron. Souls to strive to save
He m^de his work his wages. Souls to gain
He n^^e grutcht time, labor, life, strength or pai^
To make souls start, smart, feel to heal, he spared
No cost, no means: let Heaven regard, reward.
One while he would draw, then thunder, yet anon
He Would bring to calm souls an Anodynon.
^carce second to an Angel was his Tongue
(...) wonder how he tarried here so long,
When fitted for the Angels company;
(That high, that holy, heavenly Hierarchy)
That he was not housed before, but left to slay
Till ominous sins did fright this Saint away.
Well may the earth grow waste when heaven grows full
The world may well grow bad when God does call
And choose and sift the good from bad. Lord bare
A while, and fetch not till we can such spare.
What ere thou take, don't take our spiritual bread,
From which our eyes have light, our souls are fed.
We Have lost a Guild midst sinful sullen times,
Which are uneven, and will not stand in Rhymes;
^ho in home feuds kept an unblas't heart
which steady stood; nere faild, nere fell nor, ^art.
^armless himself demeaned without Offense:
^hewing great Wis^om, yet great Innocence.
In his last Sermons Raptures, Ecstasies
Did him transport unto the azure Skies.
(...) heard good Authors say that then were near him,
That Angels might come down and crowd to hear him.
That Worthies leave us to our Overthrow,
^hese are bad Symptoms of a future Blow.
^^xorable Death and Heavens Frown
^^uff out our Lights, Pillars, Posts, Propps cut down.
^ur happy Hap, Hope hopeful, Help, Joy, Crown
Death's fatal blow (in him) at once cut down.
What to the COTTONs Stock N-England owes
Earth cannot tell: in Heaven we shall know
When souls come there. The mean while I may say,
We may talk of our debts, though we cannot pay.
Though earth has Cossin'd up most of the studs,
^est be the Heavens we have yet some buds
(...) the same Stock. Heavens waters make them shoot
^^d show the world they came of COTTONs Root.
^^d save our souls, Thy Frowns, our Fears remove,
^^rn away Wrath and Rods, and give us Love.
Moestus composuit et posuit
Edward Tompson.

-- Fretum vitae gaudente carina
tranavit -- tutum tenet anchora portu^
Nunc hilaris Ventos ridet tumidasque (...)


