A TRUE RELATION Of the late Action between the French and Dutch AT TOBAGO IN
The West Indies.

Giving an Account of what happened there upon the Assault made by the Count
D'Estrees, BOTH BY Sea and Land, For the Gaining of the said Place.

With an Account of the Losses on both Sides, by a diligent Hand.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for W.D. in the Year 1677.

A RELATION Of the late Action between the French and Dutch At Tobago in the
West Indies, etc.
THe desires and Curiosity of some People, and especially those who were my
Friends, has made me a little more then commonly Industrious to procure the
best Intelligence I could Possibly to give them satisfaction concerning the
dispute between the French and Dutch at Tobago, which is as follows.

Some time since we had an Account how Count D'Estrees had assaulted Tobago
with great Resolution both by Sea and Land, in which there was great Loss
suffered on both sides, which by the first advice, was, That Eleven of the
Dutch Ships were lost, and only four of the French, but the French were totally
worsted by Land; The second seemed to speak much to the same purpose, only
somewhat more favorable of the Dutch, which is the less to be regarded,
because all these Intelligences came by the way of France, the Dutch not having
received the least intimation from the Sieur Binches, nor from any other hand
of certainty that can believe, but what they received from England, by a Ship
lately Arrived there from some of the English Colonies adjacent to the said
Tobago.

The Count D'Estrees by the King his Masters particular command and
appointment, was to provide himself with such a Force and Power, as might not
only be able to annoy the Dutch in those Parts, but to reduce Tobago, which the
Dutch had taken from the French sometime since, To which purpose he put on
Board Two Thousand Soldiers, some Hundreds of Gentlemen Volunteers and
Planters, besides a large proportion of Mariners above his Complement; with
this Fleet which consisted of near Twenty Sail, or thereabouts, great and
small, being Ships for the most part of very considerable force, and much
Superior to the Dutch, they arrived in the same place the latter end of
February 1676, where the Count D'Estrees called a Council of War, to consider
which was the best way to Attaque the Dutch, and by a general consent and
allowance it was determined both by Sea and Land at one time, to which purpose
1500 men was put on Shore, under the Command of the Sieurs Grand Fountain and
Horovard; and the Conduct and care of the Fleet to the Count D'Estrees himself.

The Dutch in the mean time, as it highly concerned them to resist such a
Power, was not wanting to make the most considerable Defense they could, and
therefore had very strongly fortified themselves at Land, and for their better
security next the Sea, had built a Platform, on which was mounted 30. Piece of
Ordnance, under whose Protection their Ships lay, and was the chief occasion of
the French loss, for the Dutch being weak in Shiping, were forced only to be
defensive, being moov'd as near as conveniently they could along the Shore by
the Platform, which was very vigorously assaulted by the said Count, and a
most ob^tinate Fight continued for some hours, wherein the Dutch lost near
their whole Fleet, being eleven in Number, amongst which was the Defender in
which the S^^ur Binches was, and the Zeland both run a Shore, the one of 50
Guns, and the other 44 Guns, and the Croningen another of their Capital Ships
of 56 Guns burnt, with seven others.

Notwithstanding the said loss on the Dutch side, 'twas impossible to dissodge
them from the Platform, which they maintained with so much Resolution and
Courage, that after the Count had attempted it with as much gallantry as was
possible for any Man, was forced to decline it, and leave five or six of his
Ships buried in the Ocean, besides two that fell into the Enemies hands, as an
everlasting Monument of his undoubted Gallantry. His own Ship the Glorieux
being Fired casually, being a Vessel of 72 Brass Guns, and near 500 Men, was
resolved not to survive so great a disappointment, but that at length, by the
persuasion of some, himself with some few others, escaped a shore in a shallop,
where he met with that unwelcome news of the Defeat of his Forces at Land,
where the Dutch had (for they certainly expected a visit from the French) so
strengthened themselves, that had the French been double the number they were,
they could not in Reason have prevailed. For the Dutch had raised a new Fort,
wherein were several Pieces of Ordnance in a most advantageous Place, and
though it was bravely attempted by the French several times, they were still
beaten off with very great Slaughter, wherein the Sieurs Herovard and
Baincourt, with several Officers of Note were slain, besides by water The
Sieurs Gabaret, De la Board, De Lizine.
Captain of Ships Killed. Four Captains more wounded, Four Lieutenants of Ships
Killed, Four Lieutenants wounded.


Five hundred Seamen and soldiers wounded and Prisoners, besides what were
killed; The Defendant a Ship of 62 Guns, and 380 men had her Mainmast shot
off; The Pearl and Entrepide, the first a ship of 58 Guns and 350 Men, the
other of 50 Guns and 320 Men, both taken by the Dutch. The Dutch loss is very
great, for all the Captains of their ships save one are killed or wounded,
besides what was lost a shore. I shall not undertake a further Relation, being
beyond my Intelligence, but leave the confirmation of what has been said to
the Account expected from the Sieur Binches.

FINIS.

