A true RELATION Of the several passages which have happened to our Army since
it advanced toward GLOUCESTER, WITH The manner of the relief of the same,
Related in a Letter from a Friend in the Army, to an Honorable person here in
the City.

Likewise An Abstract of several remarkable passages, which happened at
Gloucester between the Town and the Enemy, in the time of the Siege, collected
by an Eyewitness.

This is Licensed, and entered into Stationers Hall Book, according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for Stephen Bowtell, at the sign of the Bible
in Popes-head-Alley. Anno 1643. Sept. 14.

A true Relation of the several Passages which have happened to our Army,
since it advanced toward GLOUCESTER.
SIR,
Colonel Harvy is for present so busied in serving of you, as that he cannot
serve you in this way of giving an account of his service and therefore to
neglect the City he will not: His desire is, that by my pen, your Honor with
the Court of Militia may receive knowledge of the duty he adventures and
spends himself in for the Kingdoms good. Thus then briefly, of the
Occurrences in his march from Ockingham to Tame, which in the way befell his
Cornet, who came off from the Enemy by whom he was set upon, his last Letter to
you gave a sufficient relation: what Occurrences since that, worthy your
knowledge, have come to hand, shall now offer themselves nakedly to your view:
Thus therefore, from Tame, the 31. of August, we advanced to ^usset, through
and in a fair Champian: beyond B^siter found the Lord General with his whole
Army drawn up on a very fair green, where Colonel Manwarings Brigade
(consisting of the City Trained Bands and Auxiliaries) first met the Lord
General, at which meeting, there was such expressions of joy; the Londoners by
their showtings and the Lord Gener ll by his Courteous behavior, Riding with
his Hat off, bowing to them, which would have ravished any heart almost to have
seen it: And the like to Colonel Harvies Brigade. His whole Army being thus
drawn up it was indeed a very powerful strength; he may justly boast it
likely enough (God succeeding us) to compass great designs by. A Trumpeter of
the Kings came the day before ( Thursday I mean) pretending his business to
be only the procurement of a pass for some Lady, though many presumed his
intent might be to view the Army: when therefore the London Brigade under
Colonel Manwarings command was drawn up, the Trumpeter brought blind-folded,
had leave to take sight of those Companies only, the Lord General assuring
him these were only the Londoners, added to, and no part formerly of his Army,
and then sent him out of us. He was carried blinded into the field. This was
all the news of that day, besides that in the evening the Horse under my
Colonells command received an Alarm again near Somerton, where they were to
Quarter that night, being faced by 2000 of the Kings horse: all the hurt we
received by this was only some hours kept from refreshment, they not daring
to adventure on us, and we not able to fall upon them, the hill they had being
too high for us to charge upon in the night, and a strange Country; especially
from Frithwell two miles off that Somerton, the place our foot Quartered in
that night: we marched on Saturday morning toward Awtlebury, and in a field
near to it found the whole Army drawn up, which (a while after we had taken
our place with our horse) were commanded off a little way from us, as a reserve
to Colonel Middleton, who had been engaged all that day thitherto with a Party
of the Kings, the same we believe that faced us the night before; of which when
Colonel Middleton took a Lieutenant Colonel Prisoner, they wheeled off,
refusing to Skirmish with us; we therefore drew off to Hookenorton, where
quartering that night, we continued our march on the Sabbath day to Cornewell
in Oxfordshire; and as we were on our march the next morning toward Stowe of
the Old, the enemy appeared in a bottom near Emlard, we being then upon
Adlestrap-hill, from whence Colonel Harvy fired his Demi-Culverin three or
four times successively: with the first and last shot we conceive we did some
execution: upon this the Enemy retreated, Colonel Middleton pursuing faced
them again within twice musket shot, drew out a forlorn hope, who at great
disadvantage charged upon the enemy, and with the loss of one, shot dead, and
some six or eight taken prisoners, came off, the Enenemy retreating.

Two or three hours after, about two of the Clock in the afternoon, they faced
the London Brigado, who were that day part of the Van Guard, under Colonel
Manwaring command, but upon the discharge of a great Gun or two, they wheeled
off, and the whole Army therefore held on their march quartering that night in
the hilly open fields beyond Stow of the Old. Next morning, then after a cold
lodging without any refreshment (for the Soldiers could not the day before, in
all their hard march, get any considerable modicum of bread and beer) we
renewed our march, and held on our way, without any interruption from, or
indeed news of the Enemy; till toward evening, from the top of Prestbury
hills, two miles short of Chetnam, yet within sight of Gloucester, we discovered
in the bottom, a mile from us, several bodies of the Kings Horse.

On the nearest of them my Lord General bestowed a demy-Culverin, at the noise
if not execution thereof, that party wheeled: anon after we perceived a great
smoke and fire near Gloucester, the sight at first a little troubled some, and
my Lord General at adventure (that the Town might have notice of our
approach) fired four of his great Guns, at which the other bodies of the Enemy
retreated also: Our Army being then to march down, my Lord General himself
led on the forlorn hope, to clear the way for his Army to pass down the
hill, and by going down some steep place, sprained his leg: this done, the
Army marched for Quarter to several Villages adjacent, Colonel Harveyes foot,
the London Redcoats, and Kentish Regiment, drawing off toward Southam, a
little Village not far from the foot of the hill, sidewards, which when we
were within two or three bow-shoots of, my Colonel himself, with Colonel Sir
William Springate, Major Shepherd, and his own Cornet, with my self and some
few others, out-marcht the foot, the rather indeed that my Colonel might
(according to his wonted vigilance) view the Avenues before the darkness of the
night should overtake him; which while he, with Major Shepherd, were about,
Major Bourne and Captain Buller with their Troops (mistaking us for Cavaliers)
dismounted at our Quarter, and by a Pistol shot (before we could make them
understand who we were) wounded sorely, we fear mortally, Cornet Flesher, and
we strongly presume had Pistolled more of us had not my Colonel seasonably
returning, made known himself, and so rescued us.

This is all we have to acquaint you with, save that the siege being raised,
and the Kings forces fled toward Bristol, we are with the whole Army about
Chetnam, ready to serve our Country as God shall direct us.

September. 6. 1643. POSTSCRIPT.
THis night Colonel Manwarings Brigado could not march down the hill, and
therefore was forced to quarter that night upon the hill, the next morning they
marched down the hill into the Vale, his Excellency quartered at Chetnam, and
the rest of the Army in the adjacent Parishes. The enemy having raised his
seige on Tuesday in the afternoon, and gone the way that leads to Bristol, we
rested the Thursday: the next day being Friday, his Excellency marched into
Gloucester, with so many of his Army as it could contain, and the rest of the
Army quartered in the adjacent Parishes.



An Abstract of several remarkable passages which happened at Gloucester,
during the siege, collected by an eyewitness thereof.
THe close siege began the tenth of August 1643. and was raised the fifth of
September, during which time there were between three and four hundred great
Shot, and above 20. Granado's, and as many fiery Bullets; which Granado's and
fiery Bullets did no execution, save only that one woman was killed, and about
three others with the great Shot; neither were there any maimed, but some few
lightly hurt. Most that were killed with their Musket Shot, was by looking over
the Wall at Friars Orchard, to see their Works. The whole number that was
killed on our part in the City we cannot guess to be above forty: the loss
on their parts we cannot exactly set down, One that dwelt in the Suburbs saw
the Last, and made report.
but by their own relation there was a List of 900 and odd of sick and
maimed Soldiers, beside those that were killed, which (by the report of the
Country, that saw them carried away) were many, some thousands. Many likewise
ran away, and more would if the Horse had not kept them in. These relations are
within compass.

Relief was not heard of until August 29. that was only this: A Messenger of
ours saw a Letter at Warwick, which was written from Sir Samuel Luke to the
Governor of Warwick-castle, dated at Twvverd, August 22. to this effect, That
he should send two Messengers to Gloucester, to encourage us to stand out, and
that we should have relief very speedily; but we perceived none until we saw
their Carriages drawn from the Leaguer then firing their Huts they marched off
with their Colors: thereupon our Soldiers perceiving the enemies Trenches to
be clear, they got over the Town wall and spoiled their Gallery, and set
fire on some of the Cannon baskets.

A message shot into the City of Gloucester upon an Arrow.
These are to let you understand your God Waller has forsaken you, and has
retired himself to the Tower of London: Essex is beaten like a Dog: yield to
the Kings mercy in time, otherwise if we enter perforce, no Quarter for such
Trayterly Rogues.

The ANSWER.
Waller is not our God, in that you lie,
Our God still lives from all Eternity.
Though Essex beaten be as you do say,
Romes Yoke we are resolved not to obey.
But for our Cabbages that you have eaten,
Be sure ere long you must be soundly beaten.
Quarter we ask you none if we fall down,
King Charles shall lose true Subjects with the Town.
So says your best Friend if you make timely use of him.

An Epigram upon two Lawyers, Bell and Hill, who were sent into Gloucester to
persuade them to yield.
TWo pettifogging Lawyers came of late,
In love, to tell us of our present state,
And seemed to be affected with our streights,
Thinking to work us out with their deceits:
One speaks as if he had been soundly feed
By the Popes agents; and tells us in our need
No hope of help; all passages were blocked,
We must deliver, or be soundly knocked.
The other says, Armies of strength appear,
Yet for his life he could not tell us where:
Storm us they would, and that in several places,
Although as yet they dare not show their faces.
If storming would not do, then famine shall,
We having Beef, they eating Cabidge all.
If none of these will perfect their desere,
Then without question they will get all by fire,
Being sure to do it by some grand Granado,
As erst the Spaniard did with his Armado.
The verdict past, amongst the cursed crew
Men, women, children, they must taste of rue.
If we refuse to give them entrance,
Then all alike after their pipe must dance.
This was the Message: The answer thus in short:
Neighbors, as for your love, we thank you for it,
But for your bug-beare threats so huge and big,
If seven-score Cannons can but kill one Pig,
We then have cause to fear nothing but sin
Can make a breach to let such Rebels in:
We trust in God, whose power, can make you quail,
Although you make so sure for to prevail.
Come when you will, and enter where you can,
Be sure we will fight it out to the last man,
And if for to provaile it be your fate,
You Will find we sold our lives at a dear rate.
Bell. All know fall well
That every Bell
Is useless till't be hanged,
And none, I hope,
Denies a rope
To have his sides well banged.

Hill. This Hill was seen
In sinner green
Fresh, fair, and flourishing,
Now, Proteus-like,
It Is altered quite,
It Is fading, perishing.

FINIS.

