AN ENLARGEMENT OF A FORMER CATECHISM, WHICH CONTAINED IN BRIEF the grounds
and principles of Christian Religion.

That showed what we ought to believe, this upon what ground we ought so to
believe, both which are necesseary in the faith of every Christian.

Gathered at the first, and since enlarged by D. V. for the benefit of such as
are but Novices in the School of Christ.

2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. LONDON, Printed by T. and R. Cotes, for S. Enderby, and are to be sold
at his shop in Popes head Alley, at the sign of the Star. 1641.

The Grounds and Principles of Christian Religion.
The first Part.
Question. WHo made you?

Answ. God.

Q, How is that proved?

A. Out of the first Chapter of Genesis, the seven and twentieth verse, where
it is said, God made man in his own Jmage: and out of the hundredth Psalm at
the 3 ver. Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the second Chapter of Saint James, the nineteenth verse, Thou
beleevest that there is one God, thou do well.

Q. How many persons in the Godhead?

A. Three.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the first Epistle of S. John, the fifth Chapter, the seventh verse,
There are three that bear record in heaven, and these three are one.

Q. Which be those three persons?

A. The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the former words of S. John: where he says, There are three that
bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one.

Q. Wherefore did God make you?

A. To serve him.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the hundredth Psalm, where Gods making us, and our serving of God
are both joined together, giving us to understand thus much, that therefore we
should serve God, because he made us, and therefore he made us, that we should
serve him. The words are these: Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his
presence with singing: Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made
us. And to the same purpose speaks Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes, the
last chapter, the last verse save one: Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of
man.

Q. How will God be served?

A. According to his will revealed in his Word.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the nine and twentieth of Deuteronomie, the last words: The secret
things belong to the Lord our God: but the things revealed belong to us and our
children for ever, that we may do them. And out of the sixth Chapter of Micha
at the eight verse, where the Prophet says plainly: That God has showed us
what is good, and what he requires of us.

Q. Where, in what part of Gods word specially is this will of God revealed?

A. In the ten Commandments.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because the ten Commandments are diverse times in Scripture called the
Testimonies of the Lord, as in the sixth of Deuteronomie, the seventeenth
verse: Ye shall diligently keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, and
his testimonies, and his statutes. Where the same things that he calls
Commandments, he calls testimonies also because God does therein testify and
declare unto us what he would have us to do.

Q. Rehearse the ten Commandments

A. God spoke these words and said, etc.

Q. What do you learn out of the four first Commandments?

A. My Duty toward God.

Q. What do you learn out of the six last Commandments?

A. My duty toward my Neighbor, that is, how to carry my self both toward
my self, and also toward others.

Q. How is it proved that this is the substance of those things that are
required of us in the ten Commandments?

A. By the words of our Savior in the two and twentieth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, at the seven and thirtieth verse and so forward: Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind: This is the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto
it, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: On these two Commandments hang
all the Law and the Prophets.

Q. Can you keep all these Commandments?

A. No.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the twentieth Chapter of the Proverbes, at the ninth verse: Who can
say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And out of the third
Chapter of Saint James, and the second verse. In many things we offend all.
Besides this is sufficiently proved to every man, by his own daily experience,
if he do observe and take heed to his ways.

Q. Did God make you thus?

A. No.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the seventh of Ecclesiastes, and the last verse, God made man
righteous.

Q. How comes it to pass then that you cannot keep the Commandments?

A. By the fall of Adam and Eve.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, the twelfth verse,
where the Apostle says thus, By one man sin entered into the world. That one
man, is Adam, who was tempted by Eve, and the world is all mankind that came of
them, so that the Apostles meaning is, that by that means we are all become
sinful, and therefore break the Commandments of God.

Q. Who were Adam and Eve?

A. The first man and woman that God made, and having made them, he joined
them together in marriage.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the second Chapter of Genesis: for concerning Adam, it is said in
the seventh verse of that Chapter: The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a
living soul. And concerning Eve, it is said in the two and twentieth verse of
the same Chapter. The rib which the Lord God had taken from man, he made a
woman; There is the making of them both, in the beginning when God created the
world. Then concerning their joining together in marriage, it is said in the
two and twentieth verse also, that God brought the woman to the man

Q. Wherein did they fall?

A. In eating the forbidden fruit.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the third Chapter of Genesis and the seventeenth verse, where God
charge Adam, that he had hearkened to the voice of his wife, in eating of the
tree, of which he commanded him that he should not eat thereof. There it is
expressly said, that the man did eat of the forbidden fruit, but the woman's
eating thereof is understood.

Q. What is the forbidden fruit?

A. When God had made Adam and Eve, he placed them in the Garden which is
commonly called Paradise, and gave them liberty to eat of every tree of the
Garden excepting one.

Q. What is the forbidden fruit?

A. First, that God placed Adam in Paradise, that is proved out of the second
Chapter of Genesis, at the fifteenth verse; And the Lord God took the man, and
put him into the garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it.

Secondly, that God placed Eve in Paradise also, that is proved because she
was Adams wife, and man and wife are to live together: and it is said in the
third Chapter of Genesis and the eight verse, that she as well as Adam heard
the voice, of the Lord walking in the Garden.

Thirdly, that God gave them liberty to eat of every tree in the Garden save
one, that is proved out of the second of Genesis, the sixteenth and seventeenth
verses: And the Lord God commanded the man saying, Of every tree of the garden
thou may freely eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou
shall not eat thereof: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely dye. This being spoken to the man, concerns the woman also: for we may
not think that the woman had any more liberty for her eating than the man for
his

Q. If God placed them in Paradise, and gave them liberty to eat of every
tree of the garden excepting one, what of this?

A. They did eat of this tree, and that was their sin.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First that they did eat of that tree, is plainly set down in the third
Chapter of Genesis at the sixth verse. And when the woman saw that the tree was
good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to
make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat and gave also unto
her husband with her, and he did eat.

Secondly, that this was their sin, that is plain, because it was contrary
to the Commandment which God gave them.

Q. What is that to us if Adam and Eve sinned?

A. Yes, their sin is our sin, and their fall is our fall

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans at the twelfth verse:
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned. The Apostle says that all have sinned:
now it cannot be truly said of any sin that all young and old without
exception sinned, but only of that sin which Adam and Eve committed in
eating of the forbidden fruit.

Q. But do we partake with Adam and Eve only in this sin, and not in other?

A. From this first sin, which they committed, proceeds natural corruption,
both in them and us, which natural corruption, consists not only in the want
of holiness and righteousness, which God bestowed upon us in our first
creation: but also in an inclination to all evil, and a backwardness to every
thing that is good, and this natural corruption is the cause of all other
sins.

Q. How is this proved, that from that first sin proceeds natural
corruption, and from that, other particular sins?

A. Because that the Apostle says in the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, the nineteenth verse, that By Adams disobedience we were made sinners.
We did not only sin in Adam, but by that sin or disobedience we are become
sinners or sinful.

Q. What danger follows upon this, that God gives us a Law to keep, and we
are so sinful that we cannot keep it?

A. The curse of God.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because it is said in the seven and twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomie and
the last verse: Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to
do them.

Q. Does this curse of God concern us only so long as we live?

A. No, but the curse of God is upon us in death, and after death also.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because the Apostle says in the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans
the last verse, that the wages of sin is death, not only temporal death,
which is the parting of the soul and the body, but also eternal death which
follows after: and this is plain, because in the same place he speaks of
eternal life, and brings it in as a contrary to death: The wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life.

The second part.
Q. Is there any means to escape this curse?

A. Yes, by Jesus Christ.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because in the Epistle to the Galathians, the third Chapter, the thirteenth
verse, the Apostle says thus: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. He is the only Son of God.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because in the third Chapter of S. John's Gospel at the sixteenth verse,
Jesus Christ speaks thus of himself: God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son.

Q. Is Jesus Christ only God?

A. No, he is both God and man.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because in the third of Saint John's Gospel, at the thirteenth and
fourteenth verses, and in many other places, Jesus Christ calls himself the
Son of man.

Q. How did he being God become man?

A. He took flesh of the blessed Virgin Marie.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because Mary is called the mother of Jesus Christ, and the Angel said of
her, That she shall bring forth a Son, and call his Name Jesus, in the first of
Matthew the eighteenth and the one and twentieth verses.

Q. What has Jesus Christ done for us?

A. He dyed for our sins, and fulfilled the whole Law.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First, he dyed for our sins, so says the Apostle in the fourth Chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, and the last verse, and because his death had
been to little purpose, unless he had risen again from the dead, therefore
he joins his resurrection with his death: He was delivered for our offenses,
and was raised again for our justification.

Secondly, that he fulfilled the whole Law, that may be proved by the
comparison which the Apostle makes between Adam and Christ, in the fifth
chapter of that Epistle to the Romans, and the nineteenth verse: As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. Where by the disobedience of Adam, we must understand that
which he did contrary to the commandment, and therefore by the obedience of
Christ, we must understand that which he did according to the Commandment.

Q. How do you lay hold upon Christ?

A. By a lively faith.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because in the Epistle to the Ephesians, the third chapter and the
seventeenth verse, Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith.

Q. Rehearse the articles of your faith.

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. What is faith?

A. A persuasion of my heart, that what Jesus Christ has done or suffered for
the Salvation of mankind, he did it for me as well as for any other.

Q. How is it proved that the nature of faith consists herein?

A. The ground of this is in those words of the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Galathians, the second Chapter, the twentieth verse, where he speaks thus: I
live by faith in thee Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Q. What is the special fruit of faith?

A. Repentance.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the very nature of repentance.

Q. Why, what is repentance?

A. It is a turning from our sins, and a returning to God, whom by our sins
we had forsaken.

Q How do you prove that this is the nature of repentance?

A. Out of the Prophecy of Isaiah, the five and fiftieth chapter the seventh
verse, Let the wicked forsake his w^y, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord. In these words the Prophet preaches the
doctrine of repentance, while he calls upon them to turn from their wicked
ways, and to turn to the Lord. And so in the former Epistle to the
Thessalonians the first chapter and ninth verse, the Apostle sets out their
repentance in these words, that They turned to God from idols, to serve the
true and living God.

Q. But if this be the nature of repentance, does it follow thence that it is a
fruit of faith?

A. Yes, for that that moves a man to repent is this, that he believes he
shall find mercy, and obtain pardon upon his repentance. And this is plain
by the manner of the Prophets enforcing this duty of repentance: for in the
five and fiftieth Chapter of Isaiah, and the seventh verse, When the Prophet
had exhorted them to forsake their wicked ways, and to turn to the Lord
(wherein consists the nature of repentance) presently he brings in this reason,
that God will have mercy upon them, and abundantly pardon them. Now the reason
that does move a man to practice any duty, must first be apprehended and
believed, before he practice the duty it self: and therefore a man must first
believe, and have a persuasion of Gods mercy, before he does or can repent.

Q. What means be there to get faith, and to increase it when we have it?

A. The means are these three: first, the hearing and reading of the word of
God,

Q. What mean you by the word of God?

A. The canonical books of the old and new Testament.

Q. How do you prove that this is a means to beget faith?

A. Because the Apostle says in the tenth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, and the seventeenth verse, that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God.

Q. What is the second means?

A. Prayer is the second means.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Because it is the means that our Savior Christ has taught us, for the
obtaining of any good thing at Gods hand: for these be the words of our Savior
in the seventh Chapter of Matthew at the seventh verse: Ask and it shall be
given you, and again in the eleventh verse of that Chapter: If ye that are
evil can give to your children good gifts, how much more shall your Father
which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?

Q. What is the best form of prayer?

A. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Q. To whom do you make that prayer?

A. To God.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Because there is none whom we can call, Our Father which art in heaven,
but only God.

Q. How many petitions are there in this prayer?

A. Six.

Q. Which be the first three?

A. Hallowed be thy Name, that is one, thy Kingdom come, that is two, thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven, there are the three first petitions.

Q. What do you pray for in these petitions?

A. Such things as concern the glory of God.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Out of the form of the words, thy name, thy kingdom, thy will, etc.

Q. Which be the other three petitions?

A. Give us this day our daily bread, that is one, and forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, that is two, and lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, there are the three last
petitions.

Q. What do you pray for in these three petitions?

A. Such things as concern ourselves and our neighbors, our good and theirs,
both for body and soul.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First, the words be plain enough, we do not say, give me, and forgive
me, and lead not me, etc. but give us, and forgive us, and lead not us, etc.
Therefore we pray for our brethren as well as for our selves.

Secondly: And as we pray for bread which concerns the body so also for the
forgiveness of our sins, and strength against temptation; which concerns
the soul.

Q. Why do you make these petitions to God, rather than to any other?

A. Because it belongs to him to hea^^ our prayers, and grant our requests, in
that he is our King; he is able to do it, in regard of his power: and that he
should do this for us, it makes for his glory.

Q. How is it proved that you make these petitions to God, rather than to any
other upon this ground?

A. Out of the last words, where this reason is given, why we make the former
petitions to God: For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever.

Q. But does not our Savior teach us to give thanks to God for good things
received, as well as to pray for what we would have?

A. Yes, and this he does in these last words also: for they are not only a
reason of the former petitions, but do contain in them a thanksgiving also.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First, because that thanksgiving is a part of prayer, and our Savior would
not leave out such a necessary part of prayer, when he did purposely teach them
to pray.

Secondly, because we read in the former book of Chronicles the nine and
twentieth Chapter, at the eleventh verse, that David gives thanks to God in
the like words. Blessed be thou O Lord God of Israel our Father for ever and
ever: Thine O Lord is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and
praise: For all that is in heaven and in earth are thine, thine is the Kingdom
O Lord. Here in David's thanksgiving the Kingdom, and power, and glory of God
are mentioned.

Q. What is the meaning of the last word, Amen.

A. It is the conclusion of the prayer, and it signifies our faith and our
desire touching that we have prayed for, as if we should say, what I have
prayed for, I desire it may come to pass, I believe it shall come to pass,
and thus I set up my rest, and shut up my prayers.

Q. How do you prove that this is the meaning of Amen in this place?

A. Because so it is to be understood generally in the end of our prayers, and
so it is used in the two and twentieth Chapter of the Revelation at the last
verse save one, where when our Savior Christ had promised to come quickly to
Judgment, S. John answers, Amen, and then he expounds this by two things,
Even so, and then Come Lord Jesus, the former whereof, shows his belief, the
later his desire.

Q. What is the third means that may be used for the obtaining of faith?

A. The third means is the use of the Sacraments.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because for this end they were ordained of God, as may appear, if we
consider the nature of them.

Q. Why, what is the nature of a Sacrament?

A. It is a sign and a seal of that covenant of grace which God has made
with his Church.

Q. How do you prove that this is the nature of a Sacrament?

A. Out of the seventeenth of Genesis, where God made a Covenant with Abraham
and his seed, and gives them circumcision to be a sign of this Covenant, and a
seal to confirm the same: and hereunto agree the words of the Apostle, in the
fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, the eleventh verse, where he
says, that Abraham received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith.

Q. What is the Covenant of grace which God has made with his Church?

A. This is the tenor of the Covenant, that Whosoever believes in Christ
Jesus, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Q. How do you prove that this is the substance of the Covenant of grace?

A. Out of the tenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, where he compares
the Covenant of grace with the Covenant of works, and shows wherein the
Covenant of grace does consist, at the ninth verse: If thou shall confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him
up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two, and no more.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Because to these two only does agree that which has been said concerning
the nature of a Sacrament.

Q. Which be those two Sacraments?

A. Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is signified and sealed unto us in Baptism?

A. That as the water washes away the soil of the body, so does the blood of
Jesus Christ wash away our sins.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the two and twentieth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where
Ananias speaks thus to Paul at the sixteenth verse: Arise and be baptized and
wash away thy sins: where these two being joined together, baptizing and
washing away of sin, the one shows what is meant by the other, that by the
outward baptizing and washing with water, is signified the washing away of our
sins.

Q. What is signified and sealed unto us in the Lords Supper?

A. That as the bread and wine do nourish our bodies, so does the body and
blood of Jesus Christ nourish our souls and bodies to everlasting life.

Q. How do you prove that this is signified and sealed unto us in the Lords
supper?

A. Because when our Savior first ordained this Sacrament, in the six and
twentieth Chapter of S. Matthew, at the six and twentieth and eight and
twentieth verses, he utters these words, when he gives the bread and the wine,
saying: This is my body, and again, this is my blood, thereby showing, that
every worthy receiver does not only receive the bread and wine, but the bod^
and blood of Chist also, and that the re^^iving of the bread and wine, does
seal unto them the receiving of the other.

The third part.
Q. Who are they that shall have everlasting life?

A. The godly.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the five and twentieth chapter of S. Matthew, the last verse, where
it is said, the righteous shall go into life eternal.

Q. When shall they have this life eternal?

A. At the end of the world,

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the former Chapter, the five and twentieth of Saint Matthew, for
that that is there spoken of the righteous, and their going into eternal life,
is thus to be understood. For in the four and twentieth Chapter at the third
verse, the Disciples of our Savior asked him, what sign there should be at
the end of the world: and hereupon our Savior speaks of the end of the world,
and what shall fall out then, both in the four and twentieth and five and
twentieth chapter, and amongst the rest this is one thing, That the righteous
shall go into eternal life.

Q. Shall not the righteous have eternal life before the end of the world?

A. Yes, in part when they die, for their bodies shall be laid in the grave,
but their souls shall go to heaven, and there enjoy eternal life.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First, that the bodies of Gods children shall be laid in the grave, that
is plain by experience.

Secondly, that their souls shall go to heaven, and there enjoy eternal
life, that is plain out of the words of the Apostle, in the later Epistle to
the Corinthians, the fifth Chapter, the beginning of it: We know that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God,
an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

Q What shall become of the wicked when they die?

A. Their bodies shall be laid in the grave, but their souls shall be in a
place of torment.

Q. How is that proved?

A. First, for the bodies that is plain by experience.

Secondly, for their souls, that may be proved out of the words of our
Savior, in the seventh chapter of S. Matthew at the 13. verse, where he says,
That the broad woy leads to destruction: now the wicked walk in that way, and
when they die they come to the end of that way, and therefore though their
bodies lie in the grave, yet their souls meet with destruction.

Both these we may see fulfilled upon the wicked rich man in the sixteenth of
Saint Luke, the two and twentieth and three and twentieth verses, where it is
said, The rich man died and was buried, there is the bestowing of his body,
then it is added, that he was in hell in torments, that is to be understood of
his soul.

Q. How long shall the bodies of the godly and the wicked lie in the grave?

A. Till the end of the world.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the fifth Chapter of Saint John, the eight and twentieth verse,
where our Savior says, That the hour shall come; in the which all that are
dead in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, both they that
have done good, and they that have done evil.

Q. What shall become of them then?

A. Every body shall be joined to his own soul, and raised up again.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the former words of our Savior, for he says, They that are in the
grave shall hear his voice, therefore the souls shall be joined to their
bodies, otherwise they could not be so properly said to hear: and then he
says further, they shall come forth, that is, they shall be raised up out of
the grave.

Q. When the bodies of the godly and the wicked are joined to their souls,
what shall become of them then?

A. They shall come to Judgment.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the Epistle to the Romans, the foureteenth Chapter, the tenth verse,
We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

Q. Who shall judge them?

A. Jesus Christ.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the former words, and so all so out of the later Epistle to the
Corinthians, the fifth Chapter, and the tenth verse: We must all appear before
the judgment seat of Jesus Christ.

Q, How shall Christ judge us?

A. According to our works.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the former place, where it is said: We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Jesus Christ, that every man may receive the things which he
has done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil.

Q. What is the meaning of that, when you say that Jesus Christ shall judge us
according to our works?

A. The meaning is, that they that have done well, shall go into life
everlasting, and they that have done evil, shall go to everlasting
condemnation.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Out of the fifth Chapter of S. John's Gospel, the nine and twentieth verse,
where our Savior says thus: They that have done good shall come forth to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of
condemnation.

Q. Are we saved for our works, or for our faith in Christ?

A. For our faith.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Because it is plainly said in the third Chapter of S. John's Gospel, That he
that believes on the Son has everlasting life: and the Apostle says as
plainly, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, the second Chapter, and the eighth
verse, By grace ye are saved through faith, and then he adds, not of your
selves, not of works.

A. Why then will Jesus Christ judge us according to our works?

A. Because our works are more manifest and apparent than our faith.

Q. How do you prove that our works are more manifest than our faith?

A. That is plain, because our faith is within in the heart, but our works,
many of them are outward.

Q. How do you prove that upon this ground, because our works are more
manifest than our faith, that therefore Christ shall judge us according to our
works?

A. Because the day of judgment is a day, wherein God will not only be just
in rewarding the goodly and punishing the wicked, but he will make this his
justice to appear to the whole world, men and Angels, and therefore in the
Episte to the Romans, the second Chapter, the fifth verse, the Apostle calls
this day, A day of the declaration of just judgment of God.

Soli Deo laus and gloria.
FINIS.

