His Majesty's Most Gracious LETTER TO THE Parliament of SCOTLAND. With the
Speech of the Marquis of Tweeddale, His Majesty's High Commissioner: And the
Speech of the Earl of Annandale, Lord President of the Parliament.
Published by Authority.
His Majesty's most Gracious Letter to the Parliament of Scotland.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE Continuation of the War still hinders Us from Pursuing Our Resolution of
being amongst you in Person; And so Obliges Us to Call you together once more
in Our Absence. Therefore We have appointed Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely
Beloved Cousin and Counselor, John Marquess of Tweeddale, to be Our
Commissioner, and to Represent Our Person and Authority amongst you. The Proofs
he has given of his Capacity and Experience in Business, as well as of his
Fidelity and Zeal, by his many and long Services to the Crown and Nation, and
particularly to Us, since We made him Our Chancellor, will Render Him very
Acceptable to you. We Desire you to give him Entire Trust and Credit; for We
have fully Instructed Him with Our Mind. He has Powers to pass all such Laws
for the Good of that Our Ancient Kingdom, as have been proposed to Us at this
Time. He is to Ask nothing of you in Our Name, but that which the Interest of
the Country makes necessary to be Done; And therefore We need not Mention to
you, that the Subsidies for Paying the Forces are now Expired, and that your
Peace and Safety Requires the Renewing of them during the War. You will be also
Sensible, that there is a Necessity to have the Coast and Trade secured from
Privateers. We are glad of any Appearances of a Disposition to Moderation and
Union, about Church Matters; We Hope you will Encourage it, and Promote it, by
removing the Subjects of Differences as much as you can.

We are not unmindful of your Letter to Us in the close of the last Session.
The known Interruptions We have had in Business this Winter, have been a great
Hinderance to Us, but We are resolved to Do whatsoever may be for the security
of the Government, and the Satisfaction of Our good Subjects. We Recommend to
you Calmnes^ and Unanimity in your Proceedings; and Doubt not, but that you will
Act sutably to the Confidence We have put in you, in Calling you again in Our
Absence: And that as you have done upon other Occasions so you will upon this,
Give Us such Signal Testimonies of your Duty and affection, as will convince
all Men of the perfect Union and Understanding, that is betwixt Us and that Our
Ancient Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at Kensignton, the 17th Day of April, 1695. And of Our
Reign the Seventh Year. By His Majesty's Command, Directed thus, J. Johnstoun.

To the Lords Temporal, and the Commissioners of Shires and Burghs, Assembled
in Parliament of Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
The Speech of John Marquis of Tweeddale, His Majesty's High Commissioner to
the Parliament of Scotland; on Thursday the ninth of May, 1695.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE great Confidence the King has in your Affection and Faithfulness to his
Government, and the Trust he reposes in you, does evidently appear in His
calling you so frequently together, during his own necessary Absence beyond
Sea, as well as His tender Care and Concern for your Safety and Welfare, in
minding every thing which may contribute thereto.

Particularly as to the Concerns of the Church, that all Differences about
Church Matters, and amongst Churchmen may be composed; it being His Majesty's
Purpose to maintain Presbyterean-Government in the Church of Scotland.

And that the Peace and Security of the Kingdom against Foreign Invasion and
Intestine Commotion be provided for, by renewing the former or granting other
Supplies for maintaining the Land Forces, and providing and entertaining a
competent Naval Force for the Defense of the Coast, and securing of Trade.

And if you find it will tend to the Advancement of Trade, that an Act be
passed for the Encouragement of such as shall Acquire and Establish a
Plantation in Africa or America, or any other part of the World, where
Plantations may be lawfully acquired; His Majesty is willing to Declare, That
He will grant to the Subjects of this Kingdom, in Favors of those Plantations,
such Rights and Privileges as he does grant in like Cases to the Subjects of
His other Dominions.

And that the Judicatories Higher and Subaltern be so Regulated in their
Proceedings, as Justice may be Administered with the greatest Dispatch, and
least Charge to the People.

These things have taken up some part of His Majesty's Time and Thoughts these
Months past, that I have had the Honor to wait upon Him, and have been
frequently Discoursed by Him, and then put in the Method of Instructions, and
Directions for my Behavior on the Station he has Honored me with.

So that I can say without Flattery, there is nothing that can Contribute to
promote the Honor and Jnterest, the Safety and Security of this His Ancient
Kingdom, which His Majesty will not concur with you to provide for, and has
not Empowered me to Consent to.

It remains then, My Lords and Gentlemen, for you to take these weighty Affairs
under Consideration, and to Consult of the best Ways and Means to enable His
Majesty to perfect so good Designs.

By granting Him Supplies for maintaining the present Landforces.

And for providing and Entertaining a Competent Naval-force, for the Defense of
the Coast, and Securing of Trade: In Order to which, His Majesty has granted a
Commission of Admiralty for Managing the Affairs thereof.

Not omitting to take Care for the other unavoidable Contingencies of the
Government, wherein the Civil List comes short.

Your Dispatch of these Great Affairs with Chearfullness and Alacrity, will
perfect a good Understanding, and perpetuat a Confidence betwixt the King and
you.

The Speech of William Earl of Annandale, Lord President of the Parliament of
Scotland, on Thursday the Ninth of May, 1695.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am very sensible it is a great and undeserved Honor, that I have His
Majesty's Commands to preside in this Session of Parliament; for I know well my
insufficiency and unfitness, to Discharge so important a Trust, but Duty calls,
and I must obey.

I do therefore rely upon His Majesty's Goodness, who I know, has those
Allowances to give, which the accidental Failings and Escapes of His Servants
may require; And I am convinced, that the same Zeal and Forwardness which has
formerly appeared in all the Proceedings of this Parliament, for His Majesty's
true Interest, the Support and Honor of His Government, will yet show it self
amongst Us; and it is You I hope, will make this Station easy to me.

Here lies my great Encouragement and Confidence, that my Defects and Wants
shall be covered and supplied, by a cheerful and ready Compliance from this
Honorable and Great Meeting, with all His Majesty's so just and reasonable
Demands.

And now, My Lords and Gentlemen, it may be expected that I should enlarge upon
every Particular, which His Majesty by His Gracious Letter, and his Grace My
Lord Commissioner in his Speech, has recommended to you, whereby you may see
His Majesty asks not for himself, He only prevents Our necessary Cares, for it
is Our own safety and security that requires the dispatch of all of them; but
his Grace has so fully and distinctly spoke upon all the several Heads, and
they do so effectually speak and recommend themselves, that I am persuaded,
there remains a Conviction upon Us all; and I shall but touch some few of them.

The first makes way for it self, a Supply for subsisting of the Forces which
are now on foot, or what more may be judged necessary for preserving and
securing the Peace and Quiet of this Kingdom. For let Us consider, His Majesty
engaged in Foreign Wars against the Enemies of our Religion and Liberties, and
that we bear no share of the Expense.

Or if we reflect on His exposing His Sacred Person (I may say too liberally)
to all the Dangers and Accidents of War, upon whose Safety depends, God knows,
not only Our happiness, but the happiness of Europe, we must all as good
Protestants, and good Contrymen, esteem it Our Honor and Credit, as well as
Our Interest, to give now cheerfully, what the Honor and Security of His
Majesty's Government calls for.

And since We are Happy and Easy under it, let Us use our outmost Endeavors
that this Inestimable Blessing may not only be continued with Us, but handed
down to Our Posterity.

I Think I need scarce Mind you, how much the Honor of the Nation, and Our
Trade has suffered, by the Want of some Ships of War, for the Guard of Our
Coasts, and Convoys; This is not only our Loss in general, but I believe many
who hear Me, may be now Sensibly Touched with their own particular Losses; so
that I need not Use Arguments to Enforce this, nor can I Doubt your Forwardness
to Provide against It in time coming; and it is no small Encouragement that Our
King proposes only those Things to Us, which are Our own Advantage to Grant.

I shall but shortly take Notice of the Fresh Assurances We have of His
Majesty's Gracious and Firm Resolutions to Maintain the Presbyterian-Government
of this Church, as now by Law Established; And I Hope the Moderation and
Calmness that shall at this Time Appear in all Our Proceedings in Church
Matters, will Satisfy the World that this is the Government most Agreeable to
the Temper and Inclination of this People, and most Suitable for the Interest
and Support of Our King, the Civil Government, and Peace of this Kingdom.

I Fear to Spend too much of your Time, and am sensible, You cannot Bestow it
worse; but I Hope You Will Allow me to Wish, there may be Unanimity b^nd C^^mness
in all Our Proceedings, and that We Abstain from all Hea^s and Animosities,
laying aside Private Ends and Designs, that so We may with all Expedition Finish
the Work We have before Us; and thus We shall not only raise Our Reputation
Abroad, but Satisfy His Majesty, We Deserve the Trust, He has Reposed in Us,
when He himself is out of Britain.

And can there be a greater Inducement, or a stronger Argument to Encourage Us,
then that We have a King; who is not only careful to Govern Us by Our standing
Law, but as We may see, has now Instructed His Grace, My Lord Commissioner,
that such New Laws may be Made, and Old Ones so Rectified; as may be Judged
most for the Interest, Safety, and Ease of His Subjects.

There is yet One Thing, which I shall but Name, that does justly Challenge a
more than ordinary Zeal and Fervor in our Duty at this Time, and it is the
Sad and Irreparable Loss We have Sustained of the Best of Queens, I insist not
upon it, for it were to Renew Your Grief, and I shall only Wish (My Lords and
Gentlemen) We may All of Us make this Use of it, that as now the Whole
Sovereignty is Lodged in His Majesty, it may appear by Our Actings, that We
have Doubled our Forwardness and Endeavors to serve Him, which is the only way
now left Us, to Show Our Just Sense of this inexpressible Loss, and to make it
in some Measure, more Supportable by His Majesty.

And as We Ought to Give Him all the Assurances Imaginable, that We will
Effectually Maintain and Support His Interest and Government, against All His
Enemies; So when We put a Just Value upon so great a Blessing, it may be a
prevailing Mean with GOD to Continue Him long and Prosperously with Us.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson; And
Reprinted by Edward Jones in the ^av^y. 1695.


