royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROITBy the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by an Act made this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for Granting an Aid to His Majesty, for Disbanding the Army, and other
necessary Occasions. It is amongst other things Enacted, That the Army, and all
the respective Regiments, Troops, Companies, Officers and Soldiers of the said
Army, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, shall, on or before the Six and Twentieth Day of March, in the Year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred ninety nine, be Disbanded, Except such
Regiments, Troops and Companies, consisting only of Our Natural Born Subjects,
not exceeding Seven thousand Persons, Commission and Non-commission Officers
included, as before the First Day of March, One thousand six hundred ninety
eight, shall be particularly Expressed in and by Our Royal Proclamation under
the Great Seal of England: In which Proclamation the Particular Number only of
each Regiment, Troop, and Company shall be Expressed. We have therefore thought
fit (In pursuance of the said Act of Parliament, and by the Advice of Our Privy
Council) to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation; And We do hereby Declare Our
Will and Pleasure to be, That the several and respective Regiments, Troops and
Companies herein after mentioned, consisting of Our Natural Born Subjects, and
not exceeding in the whole Seven thousand Persons, Commission and
Non-commission Officers included, shall, and are hereby Declared and Expressed
to be the Regiments, Troops and Companies intended by Us to be kept up and not
Disbanded; Our First Troop of Horse Guards, consisting of a Captain, viz. Our
Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor, Richard Earl of
Scarborough, Two Lieutenants, a Cornet, a Guidon, Four Exempts, Four
Brigadiers, a Chaplain, an Adjutant, a Surgeon, Four Trumpets, a Kettle
Drum, and One hundred and sixty Private Gentlemen; making in all One hundred
eighty one Persons. Our Second Troop of Horse Guards, consisting of a Captain,
viz. Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely Beloved Cousin and Councellor, James
Duke of Ormond, Two Lieutenants, a Cornet, a Guidon, Four Ex^^^, Four
Brigadiers, a Chaplain, an Adjutant, a Surgeon, Four Trumpets, a Kettle
Drum, and One hundred and sixty Private Gentlemen; making in all (...) hundred
eighty one Persons. Our Third Troop of Horse Guards, consisting of a Captain,
viz. Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin, Richard (...) Rivers, Two
Lieutenants, a Cornet, a Guidon, Four Exempts, Four Brigadiers, a Chaplain, an
Adjutant, a Surgeon, Four Trumpets, a Kettle Drum, One hundred and sixty
Private Gentlemen; making in all One hundred eighty one Persons. Our Troop of
Granadier Guards, consisting of a Captain, viz. Our ^^sty and Welbeloved George
Cholmondley Esquire, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, Two Lieutenants, a Guidon,
Two Sub-Lieutenants, a Chaptain, a Chirur^^, an Adjutant, Six Sergeants, Six
Corporals, Four Drummers, Four Hautboys, and One hundred and forty five
Private Men; making in all One hundred ^^^nty six Persons. Our Royal Regiment
of Horse, consisting of a Colonel, viz. Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved,
Cousin and Councellor, Aubery Earl (...) Oxford, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major,
a Chaplain, Nine Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and
Major are Three, Nine Lieutenants, ^^^e Cornets, Nine Quarter Masters, Nine
Trumpets, Eighteen Corporals, an Adjutant, a Kettle Drum, and Three hundred and
twenty four Private Men, in Nine ^roops of Thirty six Private Men in each
Troop; making in all Three hundred and ninety Persons. Our Regiment of Horse
under the Command of Our Trusty and ^^elbeloved Henry Lumley Esquire,
consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Nine
Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant ^^lonel, and Major are Three,
Nine Lieutenants, Nine Cornets, Nine Quarter Masters, Nine Trumpets, Eighteen
Corporals, an Adjutant, a Kettle Drum, and Three ^^dred and twenty four Private
Men, in Nine Troops of Thirty six Private Men in each Troop; making in all
Three hundred and ninety Persons. Our Regiment of ^^se, under the Command of
Our Trusty and Welbeloved Cornelius Wood Esquire, consisting of him as Colonel,
a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, (...) Captains, whereof the said
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and Major are Three, Six Lieutenants, Six Co^nets,
Six Quartermasters, Twelve Corporals, Six ^rumpets, a Kettle Drum, and Two
hundred and four Private Men, in Six Troops of Thirty four Private Men in each
Troop; making in all Two hundred forty eight ^^^sons. Our Regiment of Horse
Commanded by Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin Charles Earl of
Arran, consisting of him as Colonel, ^^eutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain,
Six Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three,
Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets, (...) Quarter Masters, Twelve Corporals, Six
Trumpets, a Kettle Drum, and Two hundred and Four Private Men, in Six Troops of
Thirty Four Private Men in (...) Troop; making in all Two hundred forty eight
Persons. Our Regiment of Horse, under the Command of Our Trusty and Welbeloved
Hugh Wyndham Esquire ^^sting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a
Chaplain, Six Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel and Major
are Three, (...) Lieutenants, Six Cornets, Six Quarter Masters, Twelve
Corporals, Six Trumpets, a Kettle Drum, and Two hundred and four Private Men,
in Six Troops of Thirty Four Private Men in each Troop; making in all Two
hundred forty eight Persons. Our Regiment of Horse, under the Command of Our
Right Trusty and (...) Entirely beloved Cousin and Councellor Maynard Duke of
Scomberg and Leimster, consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a
Major, a Chaplain, (...) Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel
and Major are Three, Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets, Six Quarter Masters, Twelve
Corporals, (...) Trumpets, a Kettle Drum, and Two hundred and four Private Men,
in Six Troops of Thirty four Private Men in each Troop; making in all Two
hundred o^urty eight Persons. Our Regiment of Horse, under the Command of Our
Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin Charles Earl of Macklesfield,
consisting ^ him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Six
Captains, Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets, Six Quarter Masters, Twelve Corporals,
Six Trumpets, a Kettle Drum, and Two hundred and four Private Men, in Six
Troops of Thirty four Private Men in each Troop; making in all Two hundred
forty eight Persons. Our Royal Regiment of Dragoons, under the Command of Our
Right Trusty and Welbeloved Thomas Lord Raby, consisting of him as Colonel, a
Lieutet^ant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Six Captains, whereof the said
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and Major are Three, Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets,
Six Quarter Masters, Six Sergeants, Twelve Corporals, Six Drummers, Six
Hautboys, and Two hundred and twenty eight Private Men, in Six Troops of Thirty
eight ^^rivate Men in each Troop; making in all Two hundred eighty three
Persons. Our Regiment of Dragoons, under the Command of Our Trusty and
Welbeloved ^illiam Lloyd Esquire, consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant
Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Six Captains, whereof the said Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three, Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets, Six
Quarter Masters, Six Sergeants, Twelve Corporals, Six Drums, Six Hautboys, and
Two hundred and ^^enty eight Private Men, in Six Troops of Thirty eight Private
Men in each Troop; making in all Two hundred eighty three Persons. Our Regiment
of Dra^^oons, under the Command of Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin
Algernoon Earl of Essex, consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a
Major, a Chaplain, Six Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel
and Majorate Three, Six Lieutenants, Six Cornets, Six Quartermasters, Six
^erjeants, Twelve Corporals, Six Drums, Six Hautboys, and Two hundred twenty
eight Private Men, in Six Troops of Thirty eight Private Men in each Troop;
making in all Two hundred eighty three Persons. Our First Regiment of Foot
Guards, under the Command of Our Right Trusty and Right Welbel^ved Cousin and
Councellor Henry Earl of Romney, consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant
Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Twenty eight Captains, whereof the said Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three, Thirty two Lieutenants, Twenty four
Ensigns, a Surgeon, and Two Mates, Two Adjutants, Two Quarter Masters, a
Solicitor, a Drum Major, a Deputy Marshal, Fifty Six Sergeants, Fifty Six
Corporals, Fifty Six Drummers, and One thousand one hundred and Twenty Private
Men, in Twenty eight Companies of Forty Private Men in each Company; making in
all One thousand three hundred eighty three Persons. Our Second Regiment of
Foot Guards, under the Command of Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved John Lord
Cutts, consisting of him as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain,
Fourteen Captains, whereof the said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel and Major are
Three, Sixteen Lieu^^nants, Twelve Ensigns, a Surgeon and Mate, an Adjutant,
a Quartermaster, a Solicitor, a Drum Major, a Deputy Marshal, Twenty eight
Ser^eants, Twenty eight Corporals, Twenty eight Drums, and Five hundred and
sixty Private Men, in Fourteen Companies of Forty Private Men each; making in
all Six hundred ninety four Persons. Our Regiment of Foot, under the Command of
Our Trusty and Welbeloved William Selwyn Esquire, consisting of him as Colonel,
a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Ten Captains, whereof the said
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three, Ten Lieutenants, Ten Ensigns,
a Surgeon and one Mate, an Adjutant or Quartermaster, a Drum Major, Twenty
Sergeants, Twenty Corporals, Ten Drums, and Three hundred and sixty Private
Men, in Ten Companies of Thirty six Private Men in each Company; making in all
Four hundred forty five Persons. Our Regiment of Foot, under the Command of
Our Trusty and Welbeloved Charles Churchill Esquire, consisting of him as
Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Ten Captains, whereof the
said Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three, Ten Lieutenants, Ten
Ensigns, a Surgeon and one Mate an Adjutant, or Quartermaster, a Drum
Major, Twenty Sergeants, Twenty Corporals, Ten Drums, and Three hundred and
sixty Private Men, in Ten Companies of Thirty six Private Men in each Company;
making in all Four hundred forty five Persons. Our Regiment of Foot, under the
Command of Our Trusty and Welbeloved Henry Trelawney Esquire, consisting of him
as Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, a Chaplain, Ten Captains, whereof
the said Colo(...), Lieutenant Colonel and Major are Three, Ten Lieutenants,
Ten Ensigns, a Surgeon and one Mate, an Adjutant or Quartermaster, a Drum
Major, Twenty Sergeants, Twenty Corporals, Ten Drums, and Three hundred and
sixty Private Men, in Ten Companies of Thirty six Private Men in each Company;
making in all Four hundred forty five Persons. Which said Regiments, Troops
and Companies make in the whole Seven thousand Persons; and are, in pursuance
of the said Act, excepted from being Disbanded.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty third Day of February, School. In
the Eleventh Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. School.


