Note, that whereas in the return Quind. Pasce, the number 21 is twice set
down, it is not meant, that there are two one and twenty days, but that that
21 day, serves for two several purposes, viz. for the day of Excep^ions, and
the Returna breuium also, and so of such others. Note also, that a writ being
returnable (in the common pleas) upon any of the Return or Essoyne days
above mentioned, that the party ought not to be arested, upon the same
Essoyne day, the day of Exception, the Returna breuium, or the Appearance day of
that return.

To the courteous Reader.
All days in bank, in every Term,
as they fall out, this year,
(As plainly as I could contriue)
I offer to thee here.
Which if to thee in any sort,
may pleasurable be,
I have my wish, my purpose was,
only, to pleasure thee.
Nudae gratiae. George Alleyn.

To the courteous and studious Reader.
Acceptance of a simple gift,
in kind and friendly wise,
Is matchfull, with the giving of
a gift, of greater prise.
Each gift, that every man shall give,
such price and value takes,
As he that shall receive the same,
acceptance thereof makes.
For kind accept makes smalest gifts,
to seem greatest of all:
And hard accept, makes greatest gifts
to seem but very small.
But good accept, the widows mites,
(a thing of small account)
All offerings that the rich men gave,
in value, did surmount.
Hereby, the poor man's sacrifice,
that was a parched cake,
As pleasing was, as all the steemes
that sweet incense could make.
Hereby, two handfulls of water,
to Artaxerxes brought,
As welcome was, as jewels rich,
that were most finely wrought.
Hereby, poor Conons nauew roots,
became a greater gift,
Then was a stately Stallion given,
upon a gainefull drift.
In hope hereof, I boldned was,
to string my bow anew.
And subject this my second work
unto thy friendly view.
The good accept whereof shall be,
the springtime of my pain:
The summer of my recompense,
and harvest of my gain.
Pre captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli,
Proque animo capientis habent sua praemia don.
H. A.


