THE SPOUSE Raised FROM Under the APPLE TREE: OR, The way by which Children of
Wrath come to be made the Children of Grace. Opening the Doctrine of our
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, both in respect to the Purchase and
Application. By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Isa. 63.5. And I looked and there was none to help, and I wondered that there
was none to uphold, therefore my own arm brought salvation unto me.

LONDON, Printed for Rich: Tomlins. 1649.

The Spouse raised from under the APPLE TREE.
CANT. 8. ver 5. I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother
brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
I Have now done with my first general Doctrine, containing Man's misery: He
was brought forth under the Apple Tree, there his mother brought him forth,
there she brought him forth that bare him.

I am now come to the second General part, expressing Gods mercy to poor man,
fallen, and undone in this condition, expressed in those words, I raised thee,
you may observe, 1. The Agent, I. 2. The Act, Raised. 3. The Object, Thee.

I, thy Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus Christ, [ raised] It presupposes a fall, I
helped up [ thee] My Spouse being in a sad and undone condition.

The Doctrine is shortly this:

Doct. 2. That it is the Lord Jesus Christ that helps his redeemed ones out
of their undone condition.

1. I shall enlarge and prove this truth in the general, In these particulars,
1. He was designed to do it. 2. He can do it. 3. He must do it, for none
else could. 4. He has done it. 5. He will do it. After this I shall explicate
to you the manner how the Lord Christ raised up his servants under the
Appletree, then thirdly I shall give you the reasons, and lastly, I shall come
to Application. First, in regard that the Doctrine is propounded indefinitely,
I shall prove it to you in several particulars, which possibly may some of
them bear the force of Reasons too.

1. He was designed to do it. It was a design of Eternity that Jesus Christ
should step out of heaven, and raise up his elected ones from their lost
condition; therefore Christ is said by the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 3.
ver. 2. To be an High Priest, faithful to him that appointed him. The
business from Eternity lay thus: Here is man lost, and here are those amongst
others lost (says God the Father to his Son) that I have given thee for a
portion, what shall be done for man? Well, yet I will study to do good to a
wretched creature: Thou shall in the fullness of time go and be borne of
flesh and blood, and dye for them, and satisfy my justice, and they shall be
thine for a portion; therefore they are called the Lords Redeemed ones, Isa.
35.9. The holy People, the redeemed of the Lord. Isa. 62.12. This thou shall do
(says the Father) and upon these terms they shall live, believing in thee.
This was Gods Covenant with the Son of his love for us: For it is worth the
noting, that though the Covenant of Works was made betwixt the Lord and Adam
personally, yet the Covenant was made with Christ, and all us in him
mystically; this the Apostle largely proves, Gal. 3.26. The promises were made
to Abraham and his seed: he says not to seeds, as of many, but as of one; And
to thy seed, which was Christ. The Covenant was made then betwixt God and our
representative, The Lord Jesus Christ. God says, thou shall go and dye for
them, and I will yet save them, believing in thee. Content, says the Lord
Jesus Christ, I will go, and fulfill thy pleasure, and they shall be mine for
ever. I will in the fullness of time dye for them, and they shall live in me.
Psalm 40. verse 6. Burnt-offering and Sinne-offering thou have not required,
no it was Self-offering] Then said I, Lo I come; in the Volume of thy book it
is written of me, [to do thy will, O my God, Hebr. 10. verse 5, 6.] In what
Book was it written, that Christ should come to do the will of God? It was
written in Ciphers in the Ceremonial Law, it was written in plainer English in
the Prophets, But it was written in the Book of Gods Decrees; in this sense,
the Lord Jesus Christ is called, Rev. 13. verse 8. The Lamb slain before the
beginning of the World. And in regard of Gods Decree, we may say, the Saints
were redeemed, pardoned, Justified from eternity. His Father from before all
time appointed him to be our High Priest, and he from before all Eternity
subscribed to his Fathers pleasure in it. Thus from Eternity he raised us up.

Secondly, as he was designed to do it, so it was not a work beyond the
greatness of his strength: God in doing it, laid help on one that was mighty.
There was power enough in his mercy, price enough in his merits, to have bought
more than the handful of his redeemed ones out of the hands of the Devil, had
they been to be sold. It is a slandering thought of infinite mercy, for me to
think, there is no balm in Gilead, there is no Physician there: though our
sins be mighty, yet he that has help laid upon him, is mighty too; and the
might of our sins is nothing to the power of his mercies. He was God as well
as man: his manhood made him our helper, his Godhead made him a Mighty helper,
able to pardon all the sins of his Saints, and to furnish all their souls
with long white Robes of his Righteousness.

Yea, thirdly, Such a work it was to raise us, that it was he alone that
could do it: all heaven and earth had been at a loss for a satisfaction for
divine Justice, if it had not satisfied it self upon it self. See it in Gods
word, Isaiah 63. verse 5. And I looked, and there was none to help, and I
wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought
salvation to them. And so Isaiah 59. verse 16. And he saw there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor; therefore his arm brought salvation
unto him, and his righteousness sustained him. He saw none would: (And no
wonder at that, for none could;) but if they could they would not. All
creatures would have been like the Priest and Levite, Luke 10. verse 31, 32.
they would have passed by on the other side. Christ was he that was the good
Samaritane only, that had compassion on us. Ez. 16. verse 5. None eye pitied
us, to do any thing to us that might do us any good: we were cast out in the
open yield to the loathing of our person in the day wherein we were borne. But
if they would, yet none could. Alas! they had been all Physicians of no value;
man had been past their cure. Here was the state of a poor Creature: An
infinite debt was due to infinite justice, for man's offense; Alas, where shall
it be had? as Job said concerning wisdom, Job 28.13, 14. Man knows not the
price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living. The depth says
it is not in me, and the sea says it is not with me, etc. So may we say: The
Angels said, it is not in us; for could we assume bodies and dye, yet we were
but finite Creatures, and there could not be an infinite value in our death.
Come we down to the earth, the Beasts and other Creatures say, it is not in
us: for is God pleased with the deaths of Bulocks, and Goats, and Lambs? Ah,
no! what says David, Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it; thou
delightest not in burnt Offering. And again, Psalm. 40 verse 6. Sacrifice and
Offering thou did not desire; Burnt-Offering and Sinne-Offering thou have not
required. Besides, how shall the flesh of Bulls satisfy the guilt of another
Nature? Man said. it is not in me: No, Physician heal thy self; We were all
sinners, and how should we pay the debt, that if we could have paid our
brothers debt, had had as great a one for our selves to pay? Can that
Malefactor by his suffering death, expiate for another, when himself deserves
to dye also, and stands condemned to death for his own demerits? Besides, had
all mankind dyed, they had been but as so many Prisoners laid in Jail for
debt that had not a groat to pay; their lying in hell for ever had paid no
debts, but still increased them. Well, how shall the satisfaction be made? shall
we buy man off? Alas no, Salvation cannot be gotten for gold, nor shall silver
be weighed for the price of it, it cannot (as job says of wisdom) be valued
with the gold of Ophyr, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphir: The Gold and the
Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of
fine gold: no mention shall be made of Corals, and of Pearls, for the price
of salvation is above Rubies. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it,
neither shall it be valued with pure gold: whence then comes salvation? and
where is the place of it, seeing it is hid from all loving eyes, and kept close
from the Fowls of the air. Destruction and Death say, we have heard the fame
thereof with our ears. God, Christ, understands the way thereof, and he
knows the place thereof. Let us consider but what was necessarily required, of
whosoever should raise l^st, fallen man, and we shall find this plain enough,
that if Christ had not raised us up, we had not been raised to this day. I
conceive these four things were required of him that should undertake the
raising, and redemption of man, in point of Justice and Reason, so as to gain
acceptance with God.

First, One that could dye: God had made it his Statute; The day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Nothing but blood would do it, Hebr.
9.22. Without shedding blood there is no remission. Justice must have its
course. Now upon this score, neither any person of the Trinity, (as merely so)
nor any Angel in Heaven could help us; for these had no blood to shed: And
without shedding of blood there is no pardon, and remission of sins.

Secondly, It must be the offending Nature that must satisfy again. God is
the Fountain of Justice, he will not let the beasts suffer for man's
transgression: The Lords ways are equal; The soul that sins that shall
dye. Ezech. 18.4. This shuts out all the Earth, but mankind, from making a
sufficient satisfaction to infinite justice.

Thirdly, It must be one that can merit and satisfy by death: for if by death
he barely pays his own debts, what becomes of ours? You would laugh at that
Debtor, that if himself owes five hundred pound, would undertake with four
hundred to discharge both himself and another too: or at a Malefactor, that
being condemned himself to dye, should offer to his fellow under the same
condemnation to dye for him. Now upon this score all mankind is excluded,
from finding out in it self a sufficient Savior: they are all under the same
condemnation, and when every one lay under a guilt and condemnation to dye for
himself, surely none could merit for another by dying; especially if we
consider,

Fourthly, that the Savior of man was not only to satisfy, but to pay an
infinite satisfaction. It was was an infinite God, an infinite Justice that was
offended, and must be satisfied; and a finite satisfaction would have been too
short a pay for an infinite debt. And now upon this score again are all
creature-satisfactions excluded. Let them do their utmost, infiniteness is
not in them, they have a bottom may be seen. Now by this time, me thinks
you should be wondering at man's salvation, and crying out, Lord how comes any
man ever in heaven? The Text tells you, I raised you. Christ did the work.
Hark, Christian, and I will tell thee, neither heaven nor earth could save
thee alone: there was nothing in heaven could suffer, and there was nothing on
earth could satisfy; and as there was no mercy without satisfaction, so there
could be no satisfaction without suffering: Heaven and earth therefore must be
mingled together. From Heaven we must have a satisfying Nature, from earth a
guilty Nature, and a suffering person. God the Father says to Christ, thou
shall go and do it. Christ says I go: It is written that I should do thy
will: Father, it is my delight, I am content to do it. But how shall it be
done? (says God) There shall spring up a branch out of the root of Jesse. A
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son; and that Son shall be my Son; yet
my Son shall not be her Son; he shall take unto him the humane Nature, and
he shall be despised, smitten of God, rejected of men, full of sorrows; yea,
he shall dye, and by death satisfy my wrath. Thus, in carne patitur Deus
creator ne caro creaturae patiatur. God the Creator suffers in the flesh of the
Creature, that the flesh of the Creature might not suffer. I raised thee (says
he) yes, he did it, when none else could do it: his arm brought salvation to
us, when every creatures Arm was too short; yea and he did it alone, he
needed no other; his own merits were enough in themselves, for they were
infinite, and they were enough to his Father, for his Father says he was well
pleased with him; and as he needed none, so he had no other, Isaiah 63. verse
3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with
me. I raised thee (says he) yes, it was he, and he alone: so I have made out
my third Proposition. Yet further.

Fourthly, he has done it. This is more than all the Prophets could say, they
could believe that he would raise his redeemed ones, we can say he has done
it: He has raised all of them meritoriously, some of them actually. I
understand by Raising, a contrary condition to our Original condition in which
Adam left us, he has brought them out of their misery, who were his elected
and redeemed ones; He has pardoned their sins, acquitted them of their
guilt, paid their debts, set them clear again in Gods books, and this he has
done for all those that are his Spouses (for to them only he speaks, saying, I
raised thee) meritoriously, when he dyed upon the Cross for them: he did it
intentionally from all Eternity, he gave his word to his Father for the debt
that it should be paid upon demand; but when he dyed, he made payment and
discharged his word; yet he does not come and proclaim the soul discharged
till justification, when the Lord actually and formally acquits the soul from
all, and accepts it as perfectly clear of all accounts due upon any score
whatsoever to God; and therefore I say in the second place, That some he has
raised Actually, that is, Actually and formally justified them, pardoning all
their sins, and imputing his own righteousness to them, and accepting of them
as Righteous for his own sake, even for his own Names sake. He has done it
meritoriously, he said upon the Cross, All is finished; he bore our griefs,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we were healed
(says the Apostle) Isa. 53. And he has done it for some Actually, having
justified them, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God:
where the Apostle speaks of justification, as of a past act of grace,
concerning the believing Romans, and so 1 Cor. 6* 1. concerning the believing
Coriathians. And Christ is still justifying every day all his time is spent,
either in reading pardons for his redeemed Saints, or in presenting Petitions
from them, and pleading for them: I raised thee, I have done it, and I will do
it. That is my last Proposition.

Fifthly, He will do it. I mean actually and formally; he has done it
already. 1. By the engaging of his word to his Father, nay more than so, by
paying down the price, his father abated him not an ace, he paid every groat,
yea and left a surplusage too, only he has not taken out their pardon yet; the
Actual and formal discharging of some is behind, but they need not fear, it
is to come out of course, without a farthing more paid, 1 John. 1.9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins. There
is not a farthing more due, and it were in justice with God to deny
justification to those that sue it out by confession of their sins, and
seeking of his face. God speaks of it here therefore as done [ I raised thee.]
I take the words to imply the whole reparation of mankind: I mean that part of
mankind whom the Lord had from Eternity chosen to everlasting life, and for
whom Jesus Christ had paid the Ransom of his precious blood. Christ, I say,
speaks of it here as done, because of the certainty of it. Take only one
place for this, John 10.27, 28, 29. My sheep he are my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave
me them is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Fathers hand; I and my Father are one. Observe the thing proposed, to be
confirmed, that is, that those that are Christ's should never perish. Now to
root this in their minds, he tells them, 1 That they were his sheep, and he
knew them, they could not be lost then, at unawares, and he not miss them. 2.
They were his Fathers gifts to him, therefore they should not be lost, he
would have a care of his Fathers love tokens. 3 But may they not be taken away?
No: for 1. He is resolved to give them eternal life. 2. He has given his sure
word for it: Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. They cannot do
it whether he will or no; for (says he) my Father which gave them me is
greater than all. Yea and further, I and my Father are one. My own power, and
my fathers power united, are engaged for their preservation. Those therefore
that are elected, though for the present they may be out of Christ, yet they
shall be raised. But what I have already said may be enough to prove the in of
the Doctrine, that it is Jesus Christ that raises his elected ones out of
their natural undone condition. It is he that was designed by the Father to
do it, that can, and that alone could do it; he therefore must, or none else
can: that he has done it meritoriously for all his Elect, and actually for
some of them, and that in his due time he will do it actually and formally for
all. Now for a little further explication and clearing of this truth, let us
examine how he has done, or will do it? To that question I shall answer in
these particulars, and indeed the answer may be drawn out of what I have
already said.

First, he did it, [ stipulatione.] by entering into a Covenant, and engaging
his word for us: The Covenant of Grace (from which flows all salvation to
poor Creatures) was originally made with the Lord Jesus Christ, as I before
prooved from Gal. 3.15, 16. Christ engaged himself to his Father, for the
fulfilling of the Law, and satisfying his Fathers wrath for us: and hence it
is, that the Prophet says, speaking Prophetically concerning the Lord Jesus
Christ, He shall bear their iniquities, Isaiah 53. verse 11. and Isa. 53.6. He
has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. and verse 5. He was bruised for our
iniquities. With what Justice could God our Father lay our iniquities upon the
Lord Jesus Christ? Christ was a guiltless person, nor could we engage him in
our cause; but it was a voluntary engagement that himself entered to his
Father. As it is with us; A poor Debtor is ready to be arrested for a debt
that he is not able to pay, there is no way but one, either pay or to prison:
Let him have never so rich, and great friends, the Creditor cannot charge a
farthing of the Debt upon them, it is no Justice. But if this poor Debtor has
some rich friend that will step in and say, Sir, this is my friend, I pray be
patient with him, I will undertake for the debt, I will engage my word and
bond, that the debt shall be paid at such a time, or when you will please to
call for it, etc. The Creditor it may be will be so favorable as to say, Sir,
I know you are able to do it, if you will engage your word, I shall spare your
friend; pay it at such a time, or when you will set the time, and I will acquit
your friend. The engagement is entered in the Creditors Book, and from that day
forward the Creditor looks upon this his Debtors friend, as now by his own
voluntary engagement become his Debtor, and never regards his old Debtor more.
This is our case, Adam had run us in debt, an infinite debt, which neither he
nor we are able to pay; A Writ of Vengeance was out, mankind ready to be
arrested and bound in Chains, and thrown into an everlasting prison, from
whence he should have been sure never to come out, till he had paid the
utermost farthing, which he could never have done with all the friends and
estate he could have made: Jesus Christ seeing some of his elected friends that
his Father had given him, having their names in the Writ, steps in and says,
Father, these are my friends, Isa. 63.8. Surely they are my people, children
that will not lie, so he was their Savior) I will undertake their debt upon
me, charge it upon my score, I will pay every farthing, if thou please to
accept it, it shall be paid at such a time, ( Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
sons.) The Father accepts this tender: therefore he is styled, Gods beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased. The word is [ in whom(...)] An emphaticall
word, which generally signifies to love, but more specially, and properly, it
signifies to love something by adhering to it with the mind and heart, and so
to be content, and fully satisfied with it, that one desires nothing else. Me
thinks I cannot but observe three things in it. 1. God signifies by it that he
is pleased with him, and with his tender: As if we should say, I like that
well. 2. God signifies by it, that he is fully content with him, so that he
desires nothing else: As if we should say, I desire no better security than
his. 3. God does signify by it, that he will trust to it: As it we should say,
in such a case to a surety, Well then, I will no more look after my Debtor, now
I will trust to you only. So upon Christ's offer, says God, I like thy tender
as sufficient, and am so fully content with it, that I desire no more, but now
I shall wholly trust to thee for all. Now God repeateth these words in the
Gospel at Christ's Baptism, and at Christ's Transfiguration, Matthew 3. Mat. 17.
And to what purpose? but to witness to the world, as that he was well pleased
with Christ as his Son, that in heaven, his work was to delight in his
Son; and he did so delight in him, that he desires no other pleasure than
the company and beholding of his Son, (which puts me in mind of a sweet
notion of Master Rutherfords, that God spent all his time from Eternity, till
the Creation of the World, in delighting himself in Christ.) But I say, as it
does signify that, and so set out the infinite love of the Father, that he
would be pleased to part with such a darling of glory for us: as also in this
it sets out the Fathers love, that he should send to look after inglorious
wretches, when he needed not our companies; for he had pleasure and delight
enough in the company of his Eternal Son; whose company did so content him,
that he desired nothing else for himself. So I also think, that God by his
twice repeating of it, after Christ came, would have us understand, that God
was well pleased with him as our Surety, Heb. 7.22. Christ is called our Surety.
with what payment he should make, etc. But now, in regard it was in time,
that Christ came in the fullness time (says the Apostle) Gal. 4.4. How did the
Lord Jesus make our payment sure? I answer, By engaging his word. God the
Father had nothing but the Lord Jesus Christ's word, for the payment of all the
Elects debts, not from eternity, till Christ came and made payment, according
to his engagement. Now thus has the Lord Jesus Christ raised us out of our
lost condition, by engaging his word, and entering into a Covenant.

2. He did it Assumptione carnis, By assuming of our flesh. He made a Covenant
with his Father for us from all Eternity. But he took out this Bond in time,
canceling it with his own blood: Therefore says the Apostle, Galatians Chapt.
4. Verse 4. God in the fullness of time, sent forth his Son made of a Woman,
born under the Law, to Redeem those that were under the Law, that they might
receive the adoption of sons. He could Covenant for us as God, but he must dye
for us as man: In the fullness therefore of time, he bowed the heavens, and came
down, and took upon him our flesh, not changing the Godhead into flesh,
neither confounding the substances, nor the Natures, but personally uniting of
them, that the two Natures became one Person, and so he became a Savior fit to
raise us. Now to him that raised, this was necessary, 1. That justice might be
done. It had been no justice in God to have charged the guilt of one Nature
upon another. Gods ways appear equal in charging the guilt upon the guilty,
Ez. 18.3. Forasmuch then as the children [whom he came to redeeme] were
partakers of flesh and blood: he also took part with them, that through death
he might destroy him that had the power of death, even the Devil. Heb. 2.14.
and ver. 17. In all things it behoved him to be made like to his brethren, and
why, ver. 16. He had taken upon him the seed of Abraham [that is, the guilt of
the seed of Abraham to satisfy for them.] 2. It was requisite, That he might
be a faithful High Priest, faithful to his word. You shall observe it, that
Christ gives it as a great reason of his condescentions, and actions of Grace;
That all righteousness may be fulfilled, and that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet, etc. Christ is tender of his Fathers Truth: Now God
had said, that the woman's seed should bruise the serpents head Genesis 13 ver. 15.
And though by Abraham's seed was spiritually meant Christ, Gal. 3.15, 16. to
whom the Promises were made, yet the Promises had not been fulfilled if that
Christ had not also been Abraham's seed, and therefore Heb. 3.17. one reason is
given why the Lord Jesus became man, and took part of flesh and blood with us,
that he might be a faithful High Priest. 3. It was requisite that he should
thus raise us, that he might fulfill the Law for us. Now the Law was to be
fulfilled two ways, 1. Actively. 2. Passively. Neither could have been done
without the Assumption of our flesh. There is not such a contradiction between
the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works, as some ignorant Libertines
would this day make: God gave a Law, and his Covenant was, do this and live;
this is that which we call the Covenant of Works, man could not do it. What is
Gods mind altered now? no such matter, God says, Do this and live still, and
if you do not this you shall dye. It was written long since that time, Deuteronomy.
27. ver. 26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them. And all the people must say Amen to it now as well as they did then. But
herein is the Covenant of Grace more favorable: The Covenant of Works says,
thou shall personally do them or dye; The Covenant of Grace says, thou shall
do it, or get Christ to do it for thee* the Covenant of Works says, I will
take no bail; no surety, do it or dye: Durus est hic sermo; an hard saying,
who can hear it? The Covenant of Grace says, Get me Christ's Bail, and I will
acquit thee, if thou beleevest in him. Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 3.10,
11. As many as are of the works of the Law, that look to be justified by their
own works, by their own righteousness in fulfilling the Law, are under the
curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Law to do them. Look to it, (says the Apostle) if
you look to be justified by obeying the Law in your own persons, take my word
for it, you have an hard task. But verse 13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law. But how was that? it follows in the next words. Being made a
curse for us, ver. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through.* Jesus Christ. He was to fulfill the Law Actively, that he might
fulfill what we through the weakness of the flesh could not, and in regard that
he was to fulfill it for us, it was requisite he should have our nature; and as
he was to fulfill the Law Actively, so in regard that his Elect by their past
Transgressions had broken the Law of God, Adam for himself and all his
posterity, and the body of death which (he knew) was to remain after
sanctification in his Elect ones, would lay them open to hell, He also was to
fulfill the Law Passively for us; therefore says the Apostle, He has redeemed
us from the curse of the Law. Now he tells you how that was verse 13. by being
made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a
tree. Now he could not have been in capacity of being subject to the curse of
the Law, by hanging upon the tree for us, unless he had taken upon him our
flesh. Nay, yet a

Fourth Reason may be given, why it was necessary that Jesus Christ should
raise up his redeemed ones by the assuming their flesh. viz. That he might be a
merciful High Priest. It is the Reason that the Apostle gives, Hebr. 2. verse
17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in all things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in
that he himself suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. I shall add nothing to it. Thus he raised us by Assuming of our
flesh, which in order to our raising it was necessary for him to do.

3. He raised us Passione, by his precious death upon the Cross; his falling
was our rising, his life our death The chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and by his stripes we are healed. His own blood was the balm from Gilead, as
well as himself the Physician there. Now in order to the raising of his Elect
ones, it was requisite that he should dye. 1. That he might satisfy. 2. That
he might conquer. 1. That he might satisfy and purchase Remission. He that
will redeem any slave out of Captivity must pay the sum of Redemption-money
required. Now Death was that which could alone satisfy for the redeemed ones.
It was the Lords first Law, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die, temporally, and eternally. Now a death must be paid, or justice is
not satisfied, therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. Without blood there is
no remission: he therefore, dyed for our sins says the Apostle, he was our
sacrifice, 1 Cor. 4.7. And he is no sacrifice till slain. This was typified by
the slaying of beasts for sacrifices in the old Law, which God required of all
those that would obtain pardon. And in regard that man had deserved hell as
well as death, Christ by dying that he might raise us, and and make the face of
God again to shine upon us, was content to suffer the withdrawings of his
Fathers love, and to feel as it were the pains of hell to raise us to the
joys of heaven.

Secondly, as it was necessary in order to our raising, that Christ should dye,
to the intent that he should satisfy for us, so it was also necessary that he
should dye, that he might conquer for us. This the Apostle fully expresses,
Heb. 2.14, 15. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that has the power of death, even the Devil, and deliver them, who through
fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. Christ was to lead
Captivity captive, to take away deaths sting, and hels victory, which he could
not have done without wrestling with death himself; had he not been deaths
captive, he had never been deaths conqueror. He raised us by dying for us.

4. He has raised us, Resurrectione, by rising again from the dead, therefore
says the Apostle, Romans 4.25. He was delivered to death for our offenses, and
rose again for our justification. Now his Resurrection had and has an
influence upon raising his Elect ones, 1. By witnessing to them Christ's
conquest for them, and therefore the Apostle makes the work of satisfaction
for us to be proper to his death, and the work of our justification he
appropriates to his Resurrection, Romans 4.25. When he dyed, he went down that
he might conquer; but it was his coming up out of the grave that witnessed his
conquest over death and hell. It was in that day that this Song was sung, O
death, where is thy sting! O hell, where is thy victory! When the Prisoner is
freed, it is a sign the debt is paid or the Jailer beaten: It was a sign of
both in Christ, as that the debt was paid due to his Fathers justice, so also
that death and hell were beaten. 2. Christ's Resurrection had an influence upon
our raising, by quickening us, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein
you are also risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. And being dead in your sins has he quickened,
together with him, etc. and Col. 3 1. If then ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above: and ver. 2. Set your affections on things which
are above, etc. We are risen (...) with him, and this should quicken us, and
strength derived from Christ's Resurrection by faith, does quicken the Saints of
God, to live to God, as becomes the redeemed ones of the Lord. -- 3. It has an
influence upon our raising, by being a pledge to us of our own rising unto
everlasting glory, to live with that Christ who was dead, and is alive again.
This the Apostle fully proves in that fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle of
St. Paul to the Corinthians, from the thirteenth Verse to the five and
twentieth. Now I take by raising [ I raised thee] not only to be understoed of
the work of Redemption, but also all the privileges that from that work of
Redemption flow out of course to the servants of God, being but as several
steps from one of which to another the Saint is raised, till he be got to the
top staire of glory. Christ has raised us by his own rising from the pit of
the grave.

5. He has raised us by his Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of his
Father. Now Christ's Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the Father,
has an influence upon our raising, these ways. -- 1. In going before he
provides a place for us. Take this out of his own mouth, John 14.2. I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also.
Christ is now preparing Mansions for his redeemed ones; for in his Fathers
house are many Mansions: never a Saint of his shall want a seat, or a room in
glory. -- 2. In going he has raised us in being our Way. He being ascended and
with the Father, we have through him a way unto the Father, John 14. verse 6.
I am the way; he was the way by which the Father came to us; he communicated
himself unto us, in, and by, and through the Lord Jesus Christ; and he is our
way by which we go to God, whatsoever we ask in his Name, if we believe we
shall receive it, we shall receive it. The Saint could not pray with comfort,
if he did not remember that Rev. 13.8. There is an Angel that stands before
the Throne, to whom much Incense is given, to offer up the prayers of his
people unto God. But knowing we have a friend in the Court, we offer up our
prayers with boldness, and a great confidence in his goodness. -- 3. His
Ascension has an influence upon our raising, in that we know now we have an
Advocate with the Father, even Christ. Alas, with what comfort can the child of
God, whose conscience the Lord has awakened to consider his daily sins and
corruptions, think upon God, or look up unto God, if he did not know Christ
were with him? But now, that Christ is with his Father, we know, 1 John 2.1.
That if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, even Christ the
righteous. Hebr. 7.25. He is therefore able to save them to the utmost that
come unto God through him; because he ever lives to make Intercession for
them, Romans 8 27. yea and verse 34. Now, Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand, who
also makes Intercession for us. Observe there how the Apostle gives Christ
ascension and sittting at the hand of God, as the proximate cause of our
Intercessor: his Death and Resurrection made him not our Intercessor, his Death
made him our Savior, his Resurrection our Conqueror, but his Ascension and
sitting at the right hand of God, has ultimately made him in a capacity to be
our Advocate, and Intercessor: Thus he has raised us by Ascension. -- Yea, 4.
His Ascension and sitting at the right hand of the Father, has an influence
upon our raising* in that now from thence he gives gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.8.
When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto
men. The Psalmist, Psalm 68.18. (from whence that passage is taken) says he
received gifts for men, he received them from his Father. Now says the
Apostle, when he led Captivity Captive, he distributed these to men: As
Conquerors use when they have taken the spoil, to deal it out in gifts. What
gifts? The Apostle expounds it in part ver. 11. He gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists. In short, I take to be meant by it,
all the gifts of Gods Spirit, whether of common, or special grace, whether
external or internal, gifts for the benefit of the Church, and gifts for the
benefit of our souls: Nay the descending of the Spirit was a fruit of Christ's
Ascension. See it, Joh. 14.16. and John 16.7. I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away the comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you. Now it is plain, that
the internal gifts of the Spirit, and works of it, are fruits of Christ's
Ascension as well as the more common and external gifts, given in the days of
Pentecost, from the 14. of Joh. ver. 16. where Christ promises them that the
comforter which upon his departure he would send to them should abide with them
for ever.

And thus I have showed you now, what course the Lord Jesus Christ has taken
to raise his redeemed ones, that had lost all their life, and strength, and
comfort in Adam, out of this their lost condition: thus he did it
meritoriously. These were his acts for us. But now to what purpose is all this
for any souls wounds, that there is Balm in Gilead, that there is a Physician
there, without the Balm be applied to its soul?

6. Lastly therefore, as Christ has meritoriously thus raised the whole number
of the Elect ones; so he Particularly, and Actually raises each one of those
whom he has purchased by his blood, by applying himself unto each of their
souls. Now for the manner of this Application, the blessed Apostle describes
it, Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified: under Predestination is included Redemption, and Sanctification
under Justification. Now therefore a little to open this mystery of our
Redemption, in the Application of it to the souls of them that shall be saved.
You have seen how there came to be Balm in Gilead, and that there is a
fullness and sufficiency in Christ. Now what does the poor Electone want that
it has lost in Adam? I conceive three things, 1. Life. 2. Strength. 3. Light.
1. Life. It is a damned Creature in Adam, it wants a way of salvation, a pardon
for its sins, a righteousness to appear in the sight of God. 2. Adam has
left it a weak creature, not able to do any thing that is good; no not so much
as to think a good thought: it wants a strength to Act in, so as to please God.
3. Adam has left it a comfortless creature, without any light of Gods
countenance shining upon it. Now all these are purchased. The first of them is
necessary, to give the first being to a Saint. The second is necessary, to
preserve the Christians being. The third, ad been esse, for the comfortable
being of all. Christ is all to the Child of of God, Psalm 27. verse 1. But
how does Christ apply these to the souls of his redeemed ones? 1. Says the
Apostle, He calls them. We say that in effectual calling, which is when God
joins the irresistible power of his Spirit, with the outward preaching of the
Word, God does these three things. 1. Convince the soul of his elect vessel,
(that is a child of wrath by Nature as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3.) what a
condition it is in by reason of its Original, and its Actual sins. 2.
Humble the soul for its sins, and discover unto the soul the insufficiency
of all its own righteousness, that it is undone in its sins, and undone in
its righteousness: and thirdly, he says to the soul, Yet there is hope,
look up to me and live; I am as the brazen Serpent, only look up, and thou
shall live. And that the soul may be able to look up with a true eye, Christ
gives faith to the soul, to behold him, come unto him, and to receive him by a
true resting, and relying upon his Merits for salvation. 2. And having thus
Called the soul, he then justifies it: He has in his Decree justified it from
eternity; he has meritoriously justified it by his Death upon the Cross; but
now he does actually and formally justify it. 1. By pardoning its sins, and
acquitting the soul from the obligation it till now lay under to death, and
forgetting the injury done to himself by any of its sins. 2. By imputing the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, to the soul; by which it appears, the sinner
is pardoned, not without a satisfaction first given to Justice. 3. By accepting
graciously the soul thus justified as perfectly righteous for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, as if it had never sinned. And the work of true faith in this
Justification, is to lay hold upon it. And thus now, Christ applies the merits
of his Death to the soul, in conveying life and pardon to it: thus he raises
it, saying to it in its blood, live. But this is not all.

2. The soul is weak, and is not able to live an hour of it self; Christ
therefore in the next place, in order to its more perfect raising, sanctifies
the soul: which implies two things. 1. He gives unto the soul new principles
of grace, 2. He gives the soul power to act these principles, for as (except
from him) we have nothing, so without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. Which
power being given the soul from above, the soul is raised, and becomes strong
in the strength of Christ, and sets upon works, 1. Of Mortification, to subdue
the strong holds of Satan, viz. the remainder of corruption in the soul. 2. Of
Vivification, setting upon such Duties as God has required of his redeemed
ones, being exercises of the grace which they have received from the Lord Jesus
Christ; he gives the soul power to live upon faith, to love, to desire him, to
delight in him, to do, and to suffer for him, to be content with him, etc.

Yea, and thirdly, In his due time he raises the soul to a comfortable life,
in giving it the sense of his love, a persuasion of its Union with the Lord
Jesus Christ, peace in the inward man, thining upon it with the light of his
Countenance, which is better to it than thousands of Gold and Silver. This I
say he does in his due time, not to all, nor continuing it constantly to any,
but according to his good pleasure; thus making known to it the Redemption he
has purchased for it, and the Justification of its soul which is past in
heaven before.

4. And lastly, in his due time he will yet further raise the soul, by taking
it to himself, and glorifying it with himself for ever. He will come again on
purpose to raise the souls of his redeemed ones from the dust, and to take
them up to himself in glory, that where he is there they may be also, John 16.
verse 3. Thus Christ has meritoriously raised all his redeemed ones; and will
apply their Redemption with the fruits of it to them in his due time; applying
life to them by Vocation, and Justification, strength to them by
Sanctification, light and comfort to them by shining with the Light of his
Countenance upon them, and finally giving them Glorification; he shall then
perfect his work of raising us, and we shall live with him in the Highest
Heavens for ever. I have now done with the Doctrinall part, so far as to show
you, 1. That it is Christ that raises his Elect ones. 1. He is designed. 2. He
can do it. 3. He only can. 4. He has done it meritoriously for all. 5. He
has done it actually and formally for some, and will do it for the rest. And
so far as to show you the manner how he did it, and does it; both in respect
of his own acts, in relation to the fitting himself for the work, and in
respect of his application of it to the souls of his servants. If now you ask
me the Reasons, why, and to what end he did it? for the reasons of the
particular Propositions, I have given you them before. Now for Reasons in the
General, I shall give you them in two words.

1. The moving cause was his own grace, because he would.

2. The final cause was his own glory.

1. The moving cause and reason, was his own grace and goodness. This is the
reason of all Gods acts of grace toward the Creature, whether Election, or
Redemption, or Vocation, or Justification, or Sanctification, or Glorification,
the sole cause was in himself, because he loved us, and delighted in us, for
his own Names sake, etc. Isa. 43.25. Deuteronomy. 7.7. Hos. 14.4. His own will was
all the reason, he did it freely, we buy without money, or money-worth. Isa*
55.1, 2.

2. If you ask to what end he did it, It was his own glory; that he might
get himself glory from poor dust and ashes, that little thank him for all
this mercy declared to their souls. He Predestined, Redeemed, and Adopted us,
merely to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. verse 6. The end
which he aimed at in Calling us was his glory, Romans 9.23, 24, 25, 26. If you
ask me, why God that could as well have been glorified in the damnation of
poor wretches, would choose rather to be glorified in their salvation, and
bringing them to life; I must run back again, to the Fountain again, merely
because so it pleased him, because it was his will: There we must rest. I
shall now proceed to the Application of this mysterious, sweet and precious
Doctrine; and it might be applied several ways: But I shall only apply the
consideration of it, as offering you ground and matter, First, of Humiliation.
Secondly, of Instruction. Thirdly, of Examination. Fourthly, of Exhortation.
Fifthly, of Consolation.

First of all for Humiliation. done it when none else could, and will raise thee
higher yet: and this he could not have done without taking thy flesh, dying
upon the Cross, suffering the bitterness of his Fathers wrath? consider then,
what cause thou have to be humbled for thy sins. 1. Considering that these were
they put Christ to death. 2 that by these, since that time thou have crucified
the Lord of life. 1. Consider that thy sins were those that put Christ to
death, Romans 4.25. He was delivered to death for our sins. Me thinks every one
when they hear of Christ's Agony and bloody Sweat, of his Whippings,
Buffetings, of his bitter Sufferings, etc. should be ready to cry out with
Pilate, Quid mali fecit? What evil (I pray) has he done? Ah none Christian,
it was to raise thee; thou were dead, lost, undone, he dyed to raise thee; thou
stolest the fruit, he climbed the tree; thou enjoyedst the sweetness of
sinning, and he for that was acquainted with the bitterness of suffering; He
bore thy iniquity, even thine and mine too, if we be elected. Certainly, it was
a great grief of heart to David, to remember that he had an hand in the blood
of Uriah; that was surely the great transgression that he complained of; to be
sure, that heart-troubling sin, for which he puts up that particular
Petition, Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God: And questionless it was
no small Trouble of Spirit to Paul, afterward to consider, that he was one of
them that were consenting to Stephens death, Acts 7.59, 60. Chap. 8. verse 1.
he afterward repeats it with shame, I was a persecuter. Christian, here is one
murdered by cruel hands, not an Uriah, not a Stephen; but he that is worth
ten thousand of these; not an Abell, (yet his blood troubled Cain all his life
time) but one, whose blood cries for better things than the blood of Abell did;
here is the Lamb of God slain, slain by thy hands, he was bruised for thine
iniquities, and his soul was made an Offering for thy sins. Is it nothing to
thee, O Christian! when Pilate was but about to condemn him, his wife came
startled in, and cries, Have nothing to do with that just man; and when
Stephen charged the Jews, Acts 7.52. for being the betrayers and murderers of
the Lord Jesus, they apprehended it as a thing so heinous, that they would not
endure him beyond that word, but were cut to the heart, and gnashed upon him
with their teeth. verse 54. Christians, there is none of you here, but your
sins were the betrayers and murtheres of the Lord Jesus, that Christ that had
such eternal, sure and unchangeable thoughts of love to your souls. Ah! how
great were those sins which could not be remitted without the blood of the
immaculate Lamb of God? Me thinks every one of you should sit down and say, Ah
Lord, that ever I should be such a wretch, so far to provoke the fire of thy
wrath, that nothing could quench it but the blood of thy Son, that I should
throw my self so deep into Hell, that nothing could raise me but the
bloud-shedding of the dear Son of Gods love. You have had to do with that
just man, Christians, not to do with condemning him, but even with the vildest
acts of Barbarism were done unto him; your hypocrisy was the kiss that
betrayed him; the sins of your hands and feet were the nails that fastened
his hands and feet to the Cross; the sins of your body were the Spears that
pierced his sacred side; the sins of your souls were they that made his
soul heavy to the death, that caused the with-drawings of his Fathers love
from him, and made him in the heaviness of his panged soul to cry out. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O sit down, go alone, weep, and weep
bitterly for him whom you have pierced; for those stripes by which you are
healed.

2. But secondly, (if any thing will move your souls to make your head a
Fountain of water, and your eyes Rivers of tears.) Consider, That this Christ
you have crucified, even since his death upon the Cross for you. When the
Apostle St. Peter Acts ^. had made a long Sermon of Christ's love, showing the
Auditors, what Christ had done, and what he was, he summeth up all, verse 36.
God has made that same Jesus, ( whom ye have crucified) both Lord and Christ.
Now says the Text, verse 37. When they heard this, viz. (that they had
crucified this Christ) they were pricked at the heart. This Christ (my beloved)
whom you have crucified, by your youth sins, and life sins, this was he that
was crucified for you. O be pricked at the hearts at this saying. Was it not
enough that he once was pierced, scoffed, wounded, crucified for you, but must
you again crucify him? and which of you do it not daily? Causinus tells us a
story of Clodoveyus one of the Kings of France, that when he was converted from
Paganism to Christianity, while Remigius the Bishop was reading in the Gospel
concerning the Passion of our Savior, and the abuses he suffered from Judas,
and the rest of the Jews, he brake out into these words; If I had been there
with my Frenchmen, I would have cut all their throats; In the mean time, not
considering that by his daily sins he did as much as they had done. Which of us
is not condemning the crucifiers of Christ for their cruelty, and in the mean
time we condemn not our selves, who by our daily sins make him to bleed
again afresh? Ah, let us judge our selves, and sit down and mourn; we are
they that have added to Christ's bonds, that have increased his wounds, and the
pangs of his grieved soul, (which is now glorified) with our renewing lusts
and corruptions: I shall conclude this use with a prayer, that God would
fulfill to all our souls, that gracious promise, Zach. 12.10. That he would
pour out the spirit of grace and of supplications upon us, and make us to look
upon him whom we have pierced, and do pierce daily, and mourn as a man mournes
for his only Son. And be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness
for his firstborn.

I pass on to a second way of Application, viz. by way of Instruction. Has
Christ and Christ alone raised us?

1. Let us hence be instructed, Instruction.
How much the Lord Jesus Christ loved us. And here, let my soul be drowned in
sweetness, and in sinking cry out, O the depth of unfadomable love! What
tongue? what Saint? what Angel can speak out this unspeakable love? Pray,
Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
O pray (Christians,) That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
What is the breadth, and length, and depth and height, and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge. Is it love in a friend, to pass his word for
his friend, arrested, and ready to be haled to jail, and to take the debt upon
himself? and is it no love in Christ? yea is it not the (...), the unspeakable
of loves, for Jesus Christ, when a writ of eternal vengeance was Ready to issue
out against you, to be your surety and bear the blow off, to the breaking of
his own arms? Was it love in the Roman to personate his friend, and upon the
Scaffold, and after to suffer for him, and is it not infinite love, for Jesus
Christ to take the rags of your flesh upon him, and indeed to dye a death upon
the cross for you? for you (dear friends) for you he was smitten, despised,
rejected of men, he dyed to make you live, he was content to fall, so you might
rise. Let your thoughts sink in this ocean, and spend your lives in spelling
the letters of love that must be joined in this one word, or sentence [ I
Raised thee]

From hence (Secondly) be Instructed, What a perfect Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ is, he leaves nothing for thee to do but to thank him: he makes the
plaster and lays it on; he trod the Wine Press alone, and there is none
with him; he has left thee nothing to do but to believe his last words, All is
finished; he conquered sin upon the Cross, and death and hell in the grave.
He will have none to be a sharer with him, either in his work of Merit, or
Application; get but hands, he will deliver thee thy pardon ready written,
granted, sealed; nay he will help thee with hands too, He was made perfect
through sufferings, Hebr. 2.10. Heb. 5.9. Being made perfect he became the
author of salvation to them that obey him.

3. From hence (again) be instructed (Christian) What need thou and every
poor soul has of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou were fallen, and layest as
unable to help thy self, as an Infant thrown into an open field: Men and
Angels were at their wits ends to answer to this question, How then can any be
saved? The Heavens said, Salvation was not in them; and Earth says, Salvation
is not in us; nothing but God-man can do this great work. There is no other
name but only the Name of Jesus, by which thou, or I, or any of the children
of men can be saved. If thou have him, thou have enough; if thou have not him,
it is not all the righteousness of Saints, and Angels that will make a garment
which will not be too short to cover thy nakedness. O cry, Lord give me
Christ, Lord give me Christ, or else I dye. Think not of thy own merits, thy
righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, and as a filthy ragge. Christ's
Righteousness is sufficient for thee.

4. Let all the redeemed ones of the Lord be instrushed, How much they owe, and
shall for ever owe to him that is become their Savior. It is no slight mercy
(Sirs) to be saved out of everlasting burnings. It is a piece of love, which as
we can never comprehend, so we can never walk up to. O let us all say, What
shall we render unto the Lord for his mercies? we will take the cup of
salvation, and praise the Name of the Lord. You would think you owed a great
deal to him, that should exalt you from a Dungeon to a Throne Mephibosheth
thought he was mightily honored to be admitted to eat bread at the Kings
Table: How much? Ah! How much, Christians. is every of your souls indebted to
the Lord Jesus Christ, who remembered you in your low estate? For his mercy
endures for ever. But I pass on further.

From hence may every one try himself, you are raised by Christ's merits. 2.
You are raised according to Christ's method.

1. If you be raised, It is by Christ's merits, all the Abana, and Parphars, of
thy own merits would not do it. One drop of that fountain that was set open
for Judah and Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanenesse, is worth all the
waters of thine own Damascus. What trusts thou in Christian? Is it what thou
have done? Alas, thou art so far from having any natural strength (as
Pelagians and Arminians dream) or any other strength of merits, either of thy
own, or thy friends, (which Papists dream of) that if all the Saints in the
earth, and all the Angels of heaven, could unite their forces in one arm, and
to one act, they could as little have lifted thee up out of the pit into which
thou were fallen, as thou could lift up an house with the palm of thy hand
if it were fallen down. It was only this mighty one, this Prince of glory,
this King of power that could do it. Say therefore as they say that great
Papist concluded, Tutissimum est Christi meritis confidere, it is most safe
only to rest upon him, believe it, all other trusts are as the bruised Reed of
Egypt, and as the broken staff of Assyria, which if thou trusts too, they
run into thy hand, and pierce thee, they will cause thee to fall many strides
short of heaven, when they have carried thee to their furthest, their Nil
ultra. O trust not in them, if there be all thy confidence, thou art not yet
raised.

2. If Christ has raised you, it has been in his method of Application.
Christ saves none but whom he sanctifies, and sanctifies none but whom he
justifies, and justifies none but whom he calls; Some men are justified they
think, but they know not which way, and they shall be saved I know not which
way too. Christian, thou were lost and undone, thou were in Adams loins as
well as any, thou had an adventure in his ship as well as any, the ship was
wrackt. Did the Lord ever call thee? Did thou ever yet find a powerful work
of Gods spirit (joined with the word) upon thy heart? Did the Lord ever make
thee in any measure to see thy lost condition? Did the Lord ever yet bid thee
(when thou saw thy self lost, and were confounded in thy own
insufficiency) look upon Jesus Christ and live? Was sin ever yet a sting to
thy soul? if not, I doubt (yea I am out of doubt) Christ was never a true
comfort to thee. Christ was lift up as the brazen serpent; now for whom was
that lift up, but for those that felt the smart of the fiery serpent? and no
way else be cured. Again, Christ sancrifies before he glorifies, he has
ordained us to good works, and then to obtain everlasting life (though not for
them) this is Christ's method of raising. Do thou look to be saved? Art thou
sanctified Christian? Is thy heart changed, and thy tongue changed? Believe it,
no unclean thing shall ever enter into the new Jerusalem. Christ uses to
raise to holiness, before he raises to happiness. But I have in the former
Doctrine spoke so fully to this work of Examination, in relation to this thing
(of so great a concernment to every soul as nothing can be more) that I shall
now add no more, but pass on.

This Doctrine may in the fourth place be applied by way of Exhortation: 1. To
those that yet have no part at all in the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. To those that
through free grace have an interest in this Savior, and have been raised by
him. -- 1. Is there any poor soul here, that is to this day so miserable as
that it has no portion in the Lord Jesus Christ? Now I beseech you as an
Ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ, as in Christ's stead, I beseech you get an
interest in him. You have heard, he is he whom the Lord has ordained to be the
Savior of the world; he is the mighty one, upon whom help was laid, yea the
only mighty one upon whom help could be laid: O then, above all things, look
for a portion in him in whom alone you can be rich. Would thou be saved? This
all desire; Glory and happiness are fine things, Omnibus in voto, every man
would dye the death of the Righteous, and have his later end like his; Would
thou go to Heaven Christian? he is the way: Would thou live? he is the life,
yea, he, and none but he. Be assured, thou art now a child of wrath, and there
is but an hairs breadth betwixt thee and hell; thou art wounded, past the cure
of the whole Creation, lo here is balm in Gilead: If thou will enquire,
enquire, return, come. Were there a poor wretch sick of an incurable disease
to ordinary Physicians and Chirurgians, and some rare one should come to the
Town, that alone had found out the mystery in the Art of curing that very
trouble, he should be thronged with Patients: How is it that Christ has no
more practice? he that is the great Physician, that all the creatures are
Physicians of no value to him? Alas, the reason is too perspicuous; men are
sensible of their bodily troubles, but their soul-troubles are not felt by
them. To direct thee a little to him; were thou sick of such a disease, and
had heard of so rare a Physician, what would thou ask? 1. How shall I
speak with him? 2. What must I give him? 3. How must I apply his physic? 4.
What Rules of diet or walking, etc. must I observe? 1. Do thou ask how thou
shall speak with the Lord Jesus Christ, to lay open thy souls wounds unto
him? And where does he exhibit his balm? I answer to thee: The word is near
thee, even in thy mouth, it is the word of faith which we preach. Behold,
Christ keeps open shop: Wisdom cries and Understanding puts forth her voice,
she stands in the top of the high Places, by the way in the places of the
paths. She cries at the gates, at the entering in of the doors. Unto you (O
men) she calls, and her voice is to the sons of men. O ye simple understand
wisdom, and ye fools be of an understanding heart, Prove. 8. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. The Lord Christ keeps open shop in every place. We as the Ambassadors of the
Lord Jesus Christ, entreat you to be reconciled to God. Did ever such natural
balm go on begging? The word is near thee, there Christ offers himself.
Do thou ask what is his price: 2. He offers it freely. Hear the Market
proclaimed, and the price set, Isa. 55.1, 2. Hoe every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy, and eat, wine and
milk without money, and without price. This is the condition, bring nothing;
the way to have thy sack filled as full as thou can carry it, is to bring it
empty: Only come, and live, look up, and be healed; was there ever so cheap a
Market, of so rich commodities? Christian, poor Christian, were thou but
sensible of thy souls wants, thou would give as many thousand worlds (if
thou had them, and they could be given) as there are grains of dust upon the
face of the earth, to have a portion in the Lord Jesus Christ. Imagine but what
a poor damned wretch would give to have but so much liberty, as to cast up a
long look to Heaven; what a comfort it would be to them, if the light of the
Gospel might but shine into hell a few days? And is mercy offered freely?
may thou be saved if thy own cursed will were not in the way? Ah
(Christian) turn, turn, why should thy soul dye, when there is balm in
Gilead, and so glorious a Physician there? Do thou ask how must I apply his
blood? 3. I answer, only by Faith. God so loved the world (says the Apostle)
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life:
Nay to speak lower yet, on thy part is only required a seeking of Christ's
face. Thus says the Lord, seek my face and live. The truth of it is, as the
merit was Christ's, so the Application is his too; Faith is required, but it is
a gift infused, it is the gift of God: Indeed it is an act too, but as so, it
is Gods gift, I mean the strength by which thou must act, He is the Author and
finisher of our faith (says the Apostle to the Hebrews.) O therefore cry, cry
mightily unto God (he will help thee do this too.) Go alone and wrestle with
God, and take no answer without Christ, cry, and take no denial, like the
blind man, that when the Disciples discouraged him, and Christ seemed to slight
him, cried yet the more earnestly, till the Lord said, What will thou? And he
answered, Lord that I might receive my sight. Go thou and do likewise, beg,
Lord, that I might be washed with thy blood; Lord, that my sins might be
pardoned; though thou meetest with discouragements, and thou think that thou
art one that art a dog, to whom the childrens bread must not be given, yet
leave not, beg again but for a crumme of mercy, a drop of blood, verily thou
shall not go away without comfort. 4. There is but one Querie more. What Rules
must I observe in the using of his physic: To this Christ has shaped an
answer for me, Go thy way, sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee. Thou
must take heed that thou do not return again with the dog to the vomit, and
the swine to the wallowing in the mire. He that is borne of God sins not,
says the Apostle, not constantly, nor wilfully, but weakly. This for
direction: And remember this last, which I shall conclude with that of the
Prophet, Ez. 18.24. If the Righteous man turns away from his righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin
that he has sinned, shall he dye, says the Lord. Shall I need add any thing
for motive? I should think not, but only call upon you to get eyes to see your
sad and undone condition in which you are. It is no wonder that you should say,
we have need of nothing, when you think you are rich. Get but a true
understanding, 1. Of your own vile and undone condition, what an hell you
carry about with you. 2. What an hell you tread over every day, and it will be
enough to prick on your souls to seek a portion in the Lord Jesus Christ:
especially, if ye well consider (what I have sufficiently proved to you) that
it is impossible that in Heaven and earth there should be found any way of
salvation for your poor souls but in himself. Now the Lord work these
things upon your hearts. 2. Give me leave now to speak a word of Exhortation
to you my Brethren, to whom the Lord has of his free grace given a portion in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and you are become his raised, redeemed ones. The duty
which I shall in general press upon you, is thankfulness. O give thanks unto
the Lord, he remembered you in your low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.
O what shall ye render? Christians, what can ye render to the Lord for this
mercy? For Motives, Consider but every word of the Text apart, and methinks it
should be Motive enough to prevail with those that have any thing tasted of
this heavenly gift.

First [ I.] To open this word a little, and show you what there is in it to
melt your hearts into obedience. 1. I that was infinitely above thee. Christ
was the brightness of his Fathers Image, God blessed for ever, even from all
Eternity. He was from Eternity, (...), the unice dilectus, the only beloved of
his Father, in whom his Father took infinite delight; he was the Prince of
glory, God blessed for ever. Now for an Eternal God to stoop to a poor worm: O
mercy! for a King to visit an Hospital, to come with his own hands and dress
the putrified wounds of his meanest subject, it is a condescension scarce found
amongst the sons of men, and yet if you could find it, it should come
infinitely short of this condescension. 2. I that did not at all need thee. The
Lord stood not in need of a worm, the Father was pleased with the Son from
all Eternity, and taken up with delighting himself in him, and the Son was
again pleased with the Father. They had an (...), a self-sufficiency of glory,
and were enough each of them to other; had it not been his bowels of mercy that
had yerned toward thee for thy good, he had never been moved toward thee from
any other principle. 3. I whom thou had offended. Greater love than this is
not found amongst men, than for one to dye for his friend, yet greater love
than this has Christ shown, that he dyed for his enemy, Romans 5.8. Scarcely
for a righteous man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some will
dare to dye. But God commends his love to usward, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. O love! infinite! unfadomable love!

Secondly, consider the Act with its circumstances. I raised thee, 1. Out of a
low condition. What lower than hell? that was thy portion Christian, thou were
a child of wrath by nature even as others: He remembered thee in thy low estate;
his mercy endures for ever. 2. To a glorious condition. It is an estate more
glorious than thy natural estate was or could be miserable, to be free men in
Jesus Christ, Romans 6.18. into mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. to to be children,
and if children then heirs of God, and joynt-heires with the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 8.17. Heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. Heirs of the Promises, Heb. 11.9.
Heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Ye which in times past were not a people, are
now the people of God, you that had not obtained mercy, have now obtained
mercy, and are become, 1 Pet. 2.10, 11. A chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a pecullar people: wherefore is it, but that you
should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into
mavelous light? 3. He raised you by his own falling, yes, nothing else could
do it; Without blood there had been no remission, Heb 9.22. His own soul
must be grieved to the death, that your souls might be comforted; He must be
smitten, despised, rejected of men, that the chastisement of your peace might
be upon him, and by his stripes you might be healed. Was ever love like his?

Thirdly, Consider it further, in the object of this Act, I raised thee. 1.
Thee, not others; Thee, not Angels; Thee, not many other men. 1. Not Angels,
yet the Angels were far more glorious creatures, which (if raised) had sinned
no more, but spent their time in singing forth his glory, and serving him with
cheerful readiness all their days, yet Heb. 2.16. He in no wise took upon
him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 2. If the
Lord would have chosen men, might not he have chosen ten thousand more great,
more noble, more wise, that in a carnal eye were by Nature cut out far more
fit to have made vessels of glory of than thou art? yet the Lord has passed
them by, he has passed by Eliab and Shammah, that were sons of the same
Father with thee, and has chosen thee that were the least of all, Ishmael and
Esau that were thy elder brethren, and has chosen thee. 2. Thee, that were as
low as others. Adam left thee as deep in hell as any reprobate there. Lo here,
the infiniteness of free grace! Two were in the same house, yea grinding at
the same mill of iniquity, and thou art taken, and the other is left; possibly
thou were in thy wildest youth, seeming to ride faster to hell than the other
were that were thy brethren, friends and acquaintance, yet the Lord has raised
thee, and let the others lie wallowing in their blood, he has not said to
them, live. 3. Thee, that were his Enemy. Was ever dying love, yea love in
dying extended to an enemy before? You have heard of two stories, one of a
Grecian, the other of a Roman pair; Theseus and Perithous, Pilades and
Orestes, that would have dyed for their friends, each for another, but has any
offered to dye for his Enemy? Moses would offer to have his name blotted out
for his people, that were Gods people, and which he loved, but would Moses have
done it for a Philistine? yet this has Christ done. O love ye the Lord all his
Saints! 4. Thee that never asked it. He was found of them that sought it not.
Alas, mankind lay as well without a tongue to ask, as an hand to help
themselves, and behold, Christ pitied them, and amongst them thee; his love
declared from Eternity toward thee, had not so much cause in thee as a poor
prayer would have amounted to; he was not moved by thy sighs and tears, but by
his own infinite love. 5. Lastly, thee that have still Rebellion in thee.
Christ said within himself, when he dyed upon the Cross, Now is my heartbloud
powered out for as vile wretches as any are, and for those that I know will
requite my bleeding wounds, my dying love, with new spears and thorns; thus
he knew that thou would do in the time of thy unregeneracie, yea and after
thou should be called too: Who lives, and sins not? Now Christian, lay
these things to thy heart, meditate of, study out this love, and see if thou
have not cause to say, My soul and all that is within me, my tongue and all
that is without me, praise the Lord. But, O remember I Christian, Remember!
Burnt offering and sacrifice he does not require, but this he requires, that
thou should do his will. O say, Lo I come: I am ready to do it. But more
particularly let me point thee out some particular duties, that the Lord
requires of thee, in a poor answer to his rich Acts of eternal love.

First, has not he thought his glory too dear to lay aside for a while for
thee, nor his Word and Truth too dear to pawn for thee, not his blood too
dear to spill for thee? has he valued nothing in comparison of thee? O do
thou value nothing in an equal balance with him; be willing to deny thy self
for him, who in every thing has denied himself for thee. Thy Lusts cannot be
so pleasing to thee, as Christ's glory was to him; Be content to leave them. Thy
Honor cannot be so great as his was, which he left for thee, and became
ignoble in our eyes. Surely when we saw him, we esteemed him despised, smitten
of God, and afflicted, Isa. 53.4. But it was when he was wounded for our
Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities, when the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and that by his stripes we might be healed. Thy Riches
cannot be greater than his; yet remember him, O remember the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who though he was rich, yet for your sake became poor, that you
through his Poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 7. Thy life cannot be more
dear than his; yet he valued not his life for thee, but powered out his blood,
his precious blood, upon the Cross, that through his blood thou might have
remission purchased. Learn hence Christian a lesson of self-denial: Be
content to suffer for him, who was content to suffer that he might raise thee;
value nothing in comparison of him. This Lesson had Saint Paul learned, Phil.
3. v. 7, 8. What things were gain to me I counted loss for Christ, yea
doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung that I may win Christ, etc. ver. 10. That I may know
him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death. Look upon nothing in an equal balance
with him, 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing amongst you, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

Secondly, has Christ entered into a Covenant, and given his word to his
Father, and kept his word with his Father for you? O then, learn of him: Vow
your selves to him, and keep the vows of your lips. Say with David, Psalm. 116.
ver. 16. Ah Lord! truly we are thy servants, we are thy servants, and the sons
of thy handmaids, for thou have loosed our bonds. Say with David, Psalm. 40.
Mine ears have thou opened, and bored them. Say, Ah Lord, we come to do thy
will. Christ kept his word with his Father for you, Ah, keep your word with
him, pay him the vows which you have made.

Thirdly, Has Christ to raise you taken upon him your flesh? O then, Take ye
upon your selves his spirit: He has become for you the child of man, do you
become for him the children of God; Be made partakers of the divine Nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Your Nature was full of imperfection and weakness, the divine Nature is full
of perfection and glory: He has raised you, be raised, put off your filthy
rags, and put on change of Raiment.

Fourthly, Has Christ died that he might raise you from the death of Sin,
and from the power of the Second death? O then, dye to sin, Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry, for which things, etc. The Apostle Saint Paul presses the
great duty of mortification from this very principle, Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead to sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 6.11. and so on, ver. 12, 13. Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal bodies, etc. Ah, throw away the nails that pierced your Christ.

Fifthly, Did Christ rise from the dead, that he might raise you from the death
of sin? O then rise to newness of life. The Apostle Saint Paul presses this
work of Vivification also, from Christ's Resurrection, Romans 6. ver. 4. We are
buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so, we also should walk in newness
of life; and so all along that Chapter.

Sixthly, Has he ascended that he might raise us? O then let us likewise
ascend after him, setting our affections upon things which are above, not upon
things which are below. Christ who is our treasure is ascended: Let our hearts
also be where our treasure is, Col. 3. ver. 1. If then ye be risen with Christ,
secke those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God.

7. Lastly, Will he yet once again come and raise you by glorification? O
then, Let Christ in you be the hopes of glory. Look for him, he is making
ready his chariot, He is bowing the Heavens, and coming down, He has
prepared a place for his redeemed ones, and he is coming: Lo, he is coming
to take them up into the chambers of glory, that where he is, there they may be
also. But to sum up all, let me only add,

5. A fifth and last use of Consolation, To all the Saints and servants of God,
both touching themselves, and touching others. 1. Touching themselves, against
their worldly miseries and spirit-feares. 1. Art thou disconsolate (Christian,
Compl.
) to think what a poor low estate God has given thee in this world, that
thou art poor, despised, rejected? O consider, thou shall have better in
heaven. The Martyrs could be comforted at their bitter breakfast, to think
they should have a good supper. There is a room prepared for thee in glory: O
be comforted in the hopes of glory. When thou can say, I have not bread to
eat, yet Christ is mine; I have not a foot of land, yet Heaven is mine; I am
worth nothing, yet I bless God I have a portion in Jesus Christ; It is enough
Christian, it is enough; against thy spirit-fears be comforted. 2. Compl.
Ah (says a Christian) my sins my great sins that my youth has been guilty of
make me fear, and sit down in bitterness; yet be comforted, if thou be
changed: Christ has raised thee, he paid ransom enough for thee, if thy
sins were greater than they are. It was a sad saying to remember, such were
some of you: but it was joyful news to consider, But now you are washed, now
you are cleansed, 3. Compl.
etc. But alas (says the Christian,) I sin every day, my backslidings are
many, I sin in my righteousness, my best duties are sin. Consider
Christian, Christ is still raising thee by pleading for thee, it is his work to
make intercession for the Saints. 4. Compl.
But alas (says the Christian) If God be with me, if Christ be mine, why am I
thus? why do I walk heavily? I answer, Because God sees it fit for thee, thou
may be raised, both meritoriously and actually, though not comfortably and
sensibly: God will shine upon thee when he thinks good, the Sun shines where it
lists. 5. Compl.
Ah, But I fear I shall fall away (says another) I have a base heart full of
corruption, etc. Do thou fear, and why do thou so sin? Do thou think
Christ has taken all this pains with thee for nothing? No, no, be assured, as
Heaven is purchased for thee, so it shall be given to thee. Christ uses not to
do his work by the halves. I have not lost one of them (says Christ) he
knows them by name, they cannot be missing, his work shall not be in vain
concerning any one of his chosen ones.

Secondly, Let Christians from hence be comforted concerning others. 1. Such of
their friends as they may sadly fear, have as yet no portion in the Lord Jesus
Christ. O pray for them, weep for them, speak to them in the name of the Lord,
and yet hope, that though they be not actually raised, yet they may be
meritoriously raised: There is many a one that has a white name in Gods
Election-booke, and whose name Christ has engraven upon his hands, that to us
is yet a black child of wrath, a stranger to the Covenant of Grace. If their
names be there, Christ will in his own time raise him betwixt this and the
Judgment day; there is a spare room in Heaven for them. 2. Art thou
disconsolate to see some of thy friends in great terrors, in great afflictions
of spirit? O rejoice over them Christian, it is probable Christ is raising of
them. Be assured, if they be his, he will raise them, there is not the lowest
worm that belongs to Christ, but he has provided an high place for them; Not
the most blubber'd-eyed, uncomely Christian (in thine eyes) in the world, but
Jesus Christ has provided an handkerchiefe to wipe all tears from their eyes;
Christ has raised them, and will raise them.

One Branch of my use of Instruction I forgate in its due place, take it now in
a word.

We may hence be instructed, and let us learn, how much Christ deserves our
cleaving to him in the wilderness, in all trials, and crosses whatsoever. I
take this to be the proper use of this Text. The Spouse had fancied to her
self what the world would say of her, how they would admire her dependence
upon Christ, when he seemed to leave her, and make her sad; Christ replies in
the words of the Text, I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, etc. As much as
to say; And do I not deserve all this love, and a great deal more? Is it for
nothing that thou thus cleavest to me? Remember what thou were by Nature;
Remember who has done all the good for thee that is done for thy soul.

I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.


