The SPOUSES Carriage in the Wilderness.
Song of Solomon. Chap. 8. ver. 5. Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her welbeloved?
WE have already taken notice of two Travelers in the Text. Christ is a
Traveller: For had he not come up with his Garments died from Bozra, we had
been in the wilderness still. And the Spouse is a Traveller; The Text says,
She comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her welbeloved. The Text
presents us the Spouse in motion.

Observe first, From whence she moves, the Terminus a quo, that the Text tells
us is the wilderness.

2. What her motion is, it is ascensive, she comes up.

3. Her moving posture, it is leaning upon her beloved.

The Doctrine that yet remains in the Text, which I promised to handle, is,

Doct. 3. That the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ (being raised by him)
comes out of every wilderness, leaning upon her beloved.

I must take it in pieces, and handle the parts severally.

These four things be couched in it:

1. That the Spouse of Christ has had, and may sometimes have, her dwelling in
the wilderness. That is implied.

2. Though she has had, and may sometimes have, her dwelling in the
wilderness, yet she rests not there; She comes up from it. Who is this that
comes up?

3. She cannot come up alone; She must come up leaning.

4. She will lean upon her Beloved, and he will, and only can bear her.

First, She has had, and sometimes may have, her dwelling in the wilderness.
Here first I must open the term Wilderness. Secondly, I shall show you what
Wilderness the Spouse has had, or may have, her dwelling in.

I shall open the first in five or six particulars.

1. The Wilderness is an untilled place, where wild nature is yet seen, that
Art has not yet tamed, no pruning hook has lopt, the overgrown trees, no
plow broke up the soil to make it fruitful; The husbandman has not tilled
the ground there, nor can the reaper fill his hand; It is a place just in its
natural state, not yet manured.

2. The Wilderness is a losing place; no beaten road for the Traveller there
to follow, no landmarks, nothing to guide him in his way, he is lost if once
in it; he looks on this side, and on the other, forward, backward, every way,
still he sees himself lost, knows not whither to go: He is in a Wilderness,
and knows not the way out.

3. The Wilderness is a dangerous place; A man in the Wilderness is a prey to
the mouth of every Lion; the Lion is the King of those waste places; and the
Bears, Wolves, Cockatrices, and Adders, his lesser subjects: There dwells the
young Lion, the Cockatrice and the Adder together, each one searching for his
prey. It is a dangerous place.

4. The Wilderness is a solitary place; where he that walks, as he has no
path, so he has no company: The paths in the Wilderness are not trodden, no
beaten high ways are there; no company but the Owls and the Ostriches, the
beasts of the field, and creeping things of the earth. Nothing fit to be a
companion for man: No, it is a Wilderness.

5. The Wilderness is a disconsolate place; no curiosities of nature to
refresh his spirits with: Terror is round about him; no pleasure to delight him.

6. Lastly, the Wilderness is a place void of all provisions; There is neither
bread for the hungry, nor water for the thirsty soul; no necessaries, much
less superfluities.

The expression is very apt: such a Wilderness, yea many a such Wilderness
the Spouse of Christ has had, and may have, her dwelling in.

1. A Wilderness of Sin. 2. A Wilderness of Sorrow. 3. A Wilderness of
Affliction. 4. A Wilderness of Temptation. 5. A Wilderness of Desertion. Nay,
lastly, This whole life is but a wilderness to her. She has been in some of
these, and may be in all of them; but out of all She comes up leaning. Every
one of these is the souls Wilderness: and as they come up to Christ, they
come up from some of them; and in their walking with the Lord Christ, they go
through some of them; and some go through all of them.

The first is Eremus peccati, The Wilderness of sin; and every soul is born
in this Wilderness. Man at first created dwelt in Paradise; but alas, he threw
himself out into the Wilderness, and God locked the Garden gate against him.
Sinful man perferr'd the Wilderness before Paradise, and God allots him his
dwelling there: There was man thrown, and all mankind born in it. We are all
Wilderness brats by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. You were children of wrath by nature,
even as others. And sin may well be called a Wilderness; it is status
naturalis, our natural condition: We are in a Wilderness habit, when we are
clothed with the rags of iniquity. Ay and it is a state as dangerous as the
Wilderness: The Lion claims him in the Wilderness as his prey; and if he
scapes his teeth, it will be hard to escape the Cockatrice, and young Lion, and
Adder, the lesser fry of destroyers: If in this sinful natural condition we
do escape the mouth of the roaring Lion the Devil, it is greatly to be feared
that the Bear, and the Wolf, and the Cockatrice, the lesser judgments of God,
will swallow us up: we are children of wrath, as well passively as actively, in
a dangerous condition. Lastly, as the Wilderness is a place void of all
necessary provisions for the body, so is sin a state void of all necessary
provisions for the soul: We are hungry, and naked, and bloody, and filthy in
our sins, it is a wilderness dress, Ezekiel. 16. As for thy nativity, in the
day that thou were born, thy navell was not out: neither were thou washed in
water to supple thee, thou were cast out in the open field, Verse. 5. Every
spouse of the Lord Christ has been in this Wilderness. Who is this that
comes up? of this I have spoke before, and therefore pass it over.

The second Wilderness is Eremus contritionis, The wilderness of contrition,
or sorrow for sin. Every soul is naturally in the Wilderness; but every one
that is in it sees not that it is there: Every soul is born blind, though most
think they see. When God opens the souls eyes, and shows it the hell that it
treads over every hour, and makes the soul apprehensive of its danger, it
conceives it self in a worse Wilderness than before; the physic works, the
Patient thinks it is nearer death than before it took it. Here it cries out,
Oh, I am a lost undone creature! Oh, whither should I go? on one side behold
terror! on the other side despair! If it looks up to heaven, there is an
angry God; if downward, there is a gaping hell: Oh! whither should it go? Now
it cries out (with the Iaylor) O what shall I do to be saved? I am lost in my
sins! I am lost in my own righteousness! I know not what to do: If I stay
in my sins I perish; if I go out of the world I perish. Here stands the soul
turning it self every way, and seeing comfort no way, till the Lord Christ
bows the heavens, and thrusts out his arm of salvation, his shoulder of
merits, and takes the soul by the hand, saying, Come (my Beloved) I will tell
thee what thou shall do; I am the way out of this wilderness, come out
leaning; lean thy arm of faith upon the shoulder of my merits; Free grace is
able to bear thee: I am thy Welbeloved, and thy Welbeloved is thine. And
ordinarily the soul when it comes to the Lord Christ, comes through this
wilderness, this losing place of conviction and contrition, and weeps her
self a path, where she would drown in the waters of Marah, if Christ did not
hold her up. Indeed God could have brought the Israelites a shorter Journey,
than through the wilderness to Canaan; and sometimes God miraculously draws a
soul to himself, only by the cords of mercy: God is not tied always to bring
a soul the same road to heaven; Elijah was carried to heaven in a fiery
chariot; but the more ordinary way is by Jacobs ladder. The common way to
heaven is by the gates of hell; the way to life is through the chambers of
death, through a wilderness. Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness?

The third Wilderness in which Christ's Spouse may sometimes have her dwelling
in, is the Wilderness of affliction; bodily afflictions I mean. A Wilderness
is a place full of briars and thorns; and through such a wilderness (the holy
Ghost tells us) lies the Saints way to heaven: By much tribulation [much
pricking of thrones, thorns in the flesh somtimes] must we enter into the
kingdom of God. The Spouse has a dirty way to go to marrying in; and when
she is married, she has a dirty way home too: A wilderness on either side.
The Apostle speaks plain, Heb. 11.37, 38. They wandered about in Sheepskins,
and Goat-skines, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, they wandered in
deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth; And who
were these that wandered thus in the wilderness? They were such of whom the
world was not worthy; the Spouses of the Lord Christ. And truly afflictions
may be called a wilderness, for the disconsolacy of them too; they are times
of sorrow, no delights please; the spouse in affliction is in a wilderness.

4. A fourth wilderness that the Spouse sometimes dwells in, is the
wilderness of temptations, The Bridegroom himself was in this wilderness; He
was led into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; The spirit took him
thither, Matthew. 4. verse. 1. and Paul was in this wilderness, troubled on every
side; this is Satan's wilderness, that he leads many a poor soul into, and it
had been a sad wilderness, had not our WAY been their first: If the Devil
could have lost our Savior in it, we should never have found the way out of
it. A dangerous, a disconsolate place, well termed a wilderness, as the Saint
will tell you that has been in it.

5. A fifth Wilderness that the Spouse is sometimes in, is the Wilderness of
desertion. Here Is a sad wilderness, a desert indeed, Quum Deus deseruit, When
God has forsaken or withdrawn himself from the Soul; this Desert Christ
himself was in, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? was the voice of the Lord Jesus hollowing in the wilderness: such
a wilderness was the Spouse in, when she sought him, but found him not, Cant.
3. v. 2. In this desert the soul is solitary, her God is gone, and she knows
not what is become of him; the soul never calls any company her company, if
her God be not there. David was in this wilderness too, he is often crying out
of the wilderness he was in, when God hid his face from him. The soul that
belongs to the Lord Jesus goes through many a wilderness in this world, but
scarce any which Christ has not walked in before it, and hewn a way through it;
through every wilderness we may follow the Lamb in his own path.

6. Nay lastly, The Saints whole life below, is but a wilderness. Earth is a
Christians desert; while she lives here, she lives in widowhood; it is a
sinful place, a dangerous place, a thorny place, and a place where she finds
an abatement of the joys she shall be swallowed up in in glory. Mortality is
but Meshech, and her best habitations are but tents of Kedar, nothing to the
temple of Glory she shall worship her God in hereafter; and the former deserts
are but as several corners of this wilderness; but she comes up out of
every wilderness: That is the next branch of Doctrine I hasten to.

Branch 2. That though the Saint of God has had, and may have, her dwelling in
the wilderness, she rests not there, but comes up out of it.

She comes up. It seems to argue a propriety in the motion, as if she were
not driven nor drawn up, nor made to come, but of her self came, and of her
own strength, and yet not of her own strength neither; her own legs would
not bear her, for the text tells us she comes up leaning, she had fallen had
she not leaned.

Here is the Question stated; what the soul does toward its conversion, what
power of doing any thing tending toward its conversion before it is
sanctified, or after it is sanctified, whether it may merely passive, what she
may do, what she cannot do, how far she may come, where she must lean?

Whether has the soul any power to come up out of the wilderness of sin to
the Lord Christ, to move one step heaven ward of it self? And here I have a
narrow path to tread betwixt the Pelagians and Arminians on the one side, that
would make the soul have more power than it has: and the Antinomians and
Sectaries on the other side, that are so far from holding that the soul has
no power to come to Christ, that they would make us believe she has no power
to come to Church neither.

I shall not know how to determine this Question better than in the words of
pious and learned Bishop Davenant, Determ. Q. 9.49. Non potest quodvis opus ex
divina promissione, ad impetrandam peccatorum remissionem, aut adeundam
possessionem regni coelorum ordinatum, The soul cannot do any thing that is
ordained by God, or has the promise of God, to obtain pardon of sins, or
possession of the Kingdom of heaven; she cannot savingly believe, repent,
love, etc. for these are the acts of grace, and God is the fountain and donour
of all grace.

1. But first, she may, by Gods general restraining grace, without special
and saving grace, abstain from gross sins; the heathens did so; the light
of nature which God keeps from none, will show her that this is darkness.

2. Secondly, She may by Gods exciting grace, without any saving grace,
perform many previous actions that are required of men to faith and
repentance; she may by virtue of Gods general grace, his exciting grace, go
to Church, hear the word of God, meditate of God, peccata propria considerare
and se^su eorum expavescere, says Davenant; Ay, and she may beg deliverance
from that woeful condition, which she apprehends her self in; but she stirrs
not one of these stepps after a spiritual, but after a natural manner, till
the quickening grace of God come: A man may in a wilderness conceive himself
lost, look about for the way out, call for help, be willing to be out, yet not
be one step in the way that will lead him out; and this the soul must do so
far as it can: Negamus etenim hanc gratiam regen^rantem infundi hominibus
inertibus, sed animis per verbum Dei erectis, and subact is, and per praedict
as actiones quodammodo dispositis, viz. We deny that regenerating grace is
infused into sloathfull men, but into souls subdued by Gods word and law, and
after a manner disposed by the foregoing actions; yet we say, that even these
foregoing actions have their first motions from God; and the question is
whether God does not first work a sight and sense of sin, and an humiliation
for it by his exciting grace, before he comes with his regenerating, quickening
and saving grace into the soul; we say he does in his ordinary course of his
dispensations. Only I must be here safely understood, that I speak according
to man's apprehension; for in respect of God, nothing is first or last, he works
all in an instant, all graces together in the soul; but the question lies not
whether God works the habit of Repentance before the habit of Faith, or no; for
without question he works together all his works; but whether God makes
humiliation act before faith, which we say he does; Esau and Jacob may be in
their mothers womb together, but Esau may come out and be seen in the world
before Jacob; yet not tying up the Almighty to this method, who can and will
work any way, even which way it pleases him. Nor do we say any such previous
action can be performed by the Creature, ut de merito congrui teneatur Gratiam
dare, That God is bound for the desert of any such privious action to give his
inward and regenerating quickening grace; But yet this we say, Dave. ibid.
that in the Church of God, where men are daily stirred up by the word and
spirit to repent and believe savingly, God will give (though not for any of
these previous or dispository actions, yet) freely, regenerating grace to all
such as are capable of it, unless they have resisted the spirit of God in the
preceding operations, and rejected his quickening grace; but yet we deny, that
any man can perform these actions so but he will offend and resist the Spirit
of God in them: Now why, when as all resist. God should reject some, as they
have rejected him, and leave them to the hardness of their own hearts, and
work irresistibly on others who have resisted their God as much, and break open
their hearts, though locked and barred against him, and fill them with
quickening grace, and pull a Lot out of Sodom by force, and draw a soul out of
the wilderness by head and shoulders, I say, why he should do it, when two
are grinding at the same mill, take one and leave the other; when two are in
the same field, why-the one should be taken the other left; when two souls are
equal in duties, fasting, mourning, in the way that God has appointed, why he
should baulke this and take the other, when perhaps that which is taken has
been the least penitent too, I will conclude with Dr. Davenant, is Sacrum
Misterium divinae voluntati reliquendum. A sacred and secret mystery to be left
to the divine pleasure, and the reason lies in the agents own breast; It is
because he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he wills he
hardens: God is his own reason, and his free grace its own cause.

So then we conclude, that the soul cannot move one foot to a spiritual
action spiritually, not by any common grace, it must be only by Gods
regenerating and saving grace. So that to answer yet more distinctly to the
Question.



of God, then the soul comes, then the soul which was merely passive
before, is active, and will endeavor to do something for that God that has
done so much for her. It follows, the drawing of Gods most holy Spirit: Draw
me (says the Spouse) and I will run after thee, First, I must be drawn; but
then I will run: In the same moment God makes us to will, and we will; and yet
all the efficacy of the Action comes from Gods most holy Spirit.

Certum est nos velle quum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus qui operatur in
nobis velle.
It is certain (says Augustine) that we are willing when we are willing; but
he makes us willing, that works in us to will and to perform, Phil. 2.13. And
so he, (...), God draws, but he draws the soul that is willing, Ay, but
first, (...), he makes it willing. So, I have showed what propriety the soul
has in the Action, how she comes, and how willing she is to the motion. She
is drawn, but she is willing to be drawn to Jesus Christ. But first, she is
made willing before she is willing, ay, and in her life, after she is come to
Christ, in her walking with Christ, Non suis confidit viribus, she trusts not
her own strength, she even then comes leaning, which is the next Branch of
the Doctrine I have to handle.

Though she comes up from the wilderness, she comes up, not of her own
strength, but leaning.

First, Let us enquire what the expression holds out to us.

Secondly, What is the souls hand.

Thirdly, Who is it she leanes upon.

Fourthly, What in him she has to trust to, and how in every wilderness she
leans, and out of every wilderness comes up leaning.

I conceive, here are four things hinted in this expression leaning, which I
may term the four fingers of the Spouses hand, which she lays upon her
Saviors shoulders.

First, It does argue that the soul is weary, otherwise she would not lean.

Secondly, It is a willing posture; I am not forced to lean, I do it
willingly: The soul that comes up with Christ is willing.

Thirdly, It is a posture of love; Otherwise she would not lean.

Fourthly, It does argue a confidence that the soul has in the Lord, that he
is able to bear her; Otherwise she would not trust the weight of her soul
upon him.

First, it does argue weariness; If she were not weary she would not lean.
Humiliation is a preface to faith, and the way to be found is to be lost. It is
not a leaning of wantonness, but a leanning of weariness. O Lord, I am
sinking into Hell, let me save my self from sinking by thy shoulders; I am
falling, Lord let me lean; whiles the soul has any strength to go, it is
too proud to be beholden to lean; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11.29. First, weary, then come: First, heavy
laden; then I will ease you: What shall I do to be saved (says the Gaolor?) O
I am lost! undone! I am at a Nonplus! O what shall I do? I am weary! for I am
far readier to believe, that that Voice, What shall I do? is rather the
Voice of the soul (at it is nil ultra) sadly sensible of it is lost and miserable
condition, sufficiently humbled in the sense of it, than the voice of a soul,
thinking it might do any thing that might be but in the least contributary to
the desert of salvation. I cannot be persuaded, to think, that when the Gaolor
spoke those words, prostrated by humiliation at the Apostles feet, that he had
the least thought that he could throw in so much as two mites into the Treasury
of free grace. But as it is the ordinary speech of one drowned in the depth of
sorrow; O what shall I do? What shall I do? though at that instant they know
they can do nothing to help themselves: So the Jailer, in a true sense of his
own lost condition, cries out, O what shall I do? he was weary, it was time
for the Apostle to bid him lean, then believe (says the Apostle) and thou
shall be saved. It is but a wresting of the place, or mocking it rather, to
bring it to persuade that duties preparatory were here excluded. Surely, had
not the Apostles seen him humbled in some degrees, they would as well have
prefixed Repent here, as Peter did to them, Act. 2. Repent, and be baptized.
Christ came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance. He is a
Savior, but it is for them that are lost in their own feeling too. And the
truth of it is, the soul scorns to lean upon Christ so long as it is able to
go alone, when it has never a crutch of merits or duties to rest upon, then
it looks out for some rest for it is foot, for some shoulder to bear up, for
some staff to stay it self upon. Leaning does argue weariness, that is the
first.

Secondly, It does argue a willingness in the soul to come to Jesus Christ;
Leaning is not a forced action. Indeed (as I said before) Christ first works
this willingness; he it is that gives us power to will, and it is by his power
that we are willing, as it is written, Psa. 110.3.
They shall be willing in the day of my power; But he does not let us lean
before we are willing. Leaning is an action proceeds from the will, Who is this
comes up leaning?

Thirdly, leaning does argue love; who leans upon his enemies? I will not lean
upon one whom I cannot trust, I must have some good thoughts of his love. The
soul that leans upon the Lord Jesus Christ loves Christ, that Faith, that
pretended dependancy of any upon Christ, that proceeds not out of a principle
of love, grows out of a false root; the loving soul is only the truly
believing soul. Leaning is a loving posture, that is the third.

Fourthly, It does argue fiduciam, a resting, a trusting the soul upon Christ;
he that leans upon another reposeth his whole weight, trusts his whole
strength upon him: He does as much as say, well, I know I cannot go alone, I
cannot stand; but I will trust my self, upon thy strength will I lean, if I
fall, I fall: So the soul that comes up out of the wilderness of sin to the
Lord Jesus Christ, does repose it is whole weight upon the Lord Christ, it
says, O Lord, I am a great and grievous sinner, I am not able to stand upon
mine own legs, but I trust my soul upon thy arms; thou have mercies, and
great mercies, and free mercies, if I fall, I fall; if be damned, I am damned;
here I will lean. And here you have the second thing plain, viz,

Secondly, The souls hand with which she leanes upon Jesus Christ for
salvation, and these 4. things which I have hinted from this expression,
leaning, are as the four fingers of the hand of Faith. And we may thus give a
description of it.

Faith is the hand of a soul which God has humbled, whereby the soul being
not able to stand alone, nor daring to trust to any thing else, and being made
willing by God, out of a principle of love, lays hold upon Jesus Christ, and
trusts, and rests it self upon him for her salvation. And that leads me to the
third thing I propounded, the Person upon whom she leanes, the text renders it,
Her beloved; or as I conceive, the old Translation better, Her welbeloved: The
Latin dilectum suum, him that is her conjugally beloved.

This is the last Branch of the doctrine, That though the believing soul comes
up from the wilderness leaning, yet she will only lean upon her beloved, and
he only can and will bear her.

We know, that whosoever leanes, must have a person to lean upon. Secondly,
There must be a capacity in this arm to bear her, some strength, yea, there
had need to be a great deal to hold up the weight of a soul. First, let us
enquire who the Person is, rendered in the Text dilectum, Her welbeloved; in
plain terms her Husband, one that has more than an ordinary portion of her
love.

Here are five things hinted in this Expression.

1. It is one whom she loves. The word signifies a special sort of love; and
every greater includes a less. 2. One that she is married to, he is
welbeloved, her dearest love; not charum, but dilectum; one that has a title
to her. 3. Her Beloved, not another Beloved. 4. Her Beloved, He that is her
Beloved, not who was her Beloved. 5. Her Beloved, not her Beloveds.
First, It is one whom she loves. This I hinted at before; it is a principle of
love that draws the Soul to lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ. The hatred of
her self, has bred the love of her Savior in it. And no Soul loves Christ
more than that which loathes it self most. When the soul shall consider what a
Brand for Hell it was in its original, how worthless a worm it is, how
basely it has dealt by God, trampling upon his rich offers of Grace, scorning
his Invitations. And again consider, that God has no need at all of it; But if
it were burning in hell, could be as glorious as in its Salvation, and yet
would be pleased to power out his precious blood for it, yet so unworthy: To
woo the Soul that has need of him, and yet never prays to him, nor ever was
a suitor for mercy; This breeds love in the Soul: And the more the Soul
sadomes her own misery, the more yet she loves and admires the Lords mercy,
and loving thus, she leanes upon him.

Secondly, It is one that she pleades some title to, and interest in, she calls
him hers. Christ is the Bridegroom of the Soul, and the Soul is Christ's
Bride. Beloved, in all this Song is taken for the highest degree of love, and
nearest relation, conjugall love, therefore Christ elsewhere calls her his
Sister, his Spouse; she has a title to, and interest in him, possession of
him; and in another place, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine. She
is his, and he is hers: they have a propriety each in other. But suppose we
should put the Spouse to prove her title to him, What is thy Beloved more than
another Beloved? Or, why is he thy Beloved (O believing soul) more than the
Beloved of another? show thy title to him: And again, why is she Christ's more
than another? Why should the believer monopolize Christ? and how came Christ to
be hers? by right of gift, her heavenly Father has given her unto him; hence
is that Phrase of her Saviors Prayer, John. 17.9. All that the Father has
given me, and I pray for them that thou have given me. She has given her self
to him, Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love
is better than wine. She has said, Draw me, and I will run after thee; ay, and
he has given himself to her; he has given his grace unher, Gal. 1.6. And his
glory unto her. The glory which thou have give^ me I have given them. Her
Beloved by right of gift. by right of bargain and sale. The Ancients had three
ways to get themselves wives; by gift, purchase, or desert. The Fathers sold
their Daughters, and the Bridegroom bought his Bride, he gave a Dowry for her.
Hence when Sechem had a mind to Dinah the daughter of Jacob, he says, Ask me
what Dowry thou will, and I will give it thee. Christ has bought his Beloved;
hence (says the Apostle) He has paid a price for us. A bloody price: more
than all the world was worth. But he would have her because he delighted in
her, and so she is his, and he is hers, by right of purchase.

3. She is his Beloved, and he is hers, by right of desert, she deserved not
him, but he deserved her. This was a third way by which the Ancients got them
wives, by some gallant expl^it, or great service. Their wives were sometimes
given them for wages; Jacob served 14. years for Rachell, Genesis 29.17. David for
his Sovereigns daughter, encountered great Goliath; and afterward robbed the
Philistines of their foreskins: he paid more for her, than she proved to be
worth. By this right, the believing soul is the beloved of Christ, he has
served a long service for her; not fourteen, but above thirty years, he has
vanquished the Goliahs of our souls, and has conquered our Spiritual Enemies.

4. He is hers, and she is his, by right of possession, he dwells in her, and
she dwells in him. The second person in the Trinity is an inmate with the
believing soul, He dwells under the roof of her heart, He has a chamber in
the soul, and has pitched his tent within her, and she is in him too, united
each unto other, this is very plainly expressed, Gal. 2.20. I live, but yet not
I, but Christ lives in me. I am the Carcass, Christ the Soul; the soul
moves the body, so Christ moves my soul; I move not from any principle in my
self, but from a principle of Grace. The life I live in the flesh, I live by
the life of the Son of God who dwells in me, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. Thus you see she may well call Christ her Beloved, and Christ
may well call her his Beloved, He has a propriety in her, and she has a
propriety in him also; he has married her, and dwells with her, yea, and in
her, dilectum suum, her wellbeloved indeed.

Thirdly, It is her beloved, not another beloved. Every soul has a Beloved;
the Drunkard has his beloved cups; the wanton has his beloved Queanes; the
Covetous person his beloved gold; The soul that leanes upon Christ, goes not a
whoring after other Gods. The Spouse of Christ leanes not upon the Papists
beloved merits, nor upon the Turks beloved Mahomet, nor upon the Pharisees
beloved duties, nor upon the Idolaters beloved Saints; she says, Abraham
knows her not, and Israel is ignorant of her, Isa. 63.16.
but the Lord is her Father, Christ is her Redeemer, and her Maker, her
Redeemer, is her Husband, Creator tuus est sponsus tuus. Her beloved, not
another Beloved.

Fourthly, He that is her Beloved, not that which was her Beloved. She once
loved her sins, and her lusts were the beloveds of her soul. The name of Baalim
was in her mouth; her lusts were her Lords, and they ruled over her. But now
the name of Baalim is taken out of her mouth: she calls the Lord Ishi, God
alone is her beloved. Sin was the dearly beloved of her soul, but now she
calls sin no more Naomi, she calls it Marah; that which was once the
sweetness, is now the bitterness of her soul, she takes no pleasure in it*
no, nor does she account her duties her beloved; she uses them, but she dares
not trust her soul upon them; she dares not plead any desert in them though
once perhaps she had a Pharisaicall conceit, that her duties would be her
healing, yet when she comes to the Lord Christ to lean upon his Arm, though
she uses duties, and is as full of Prayer and humiliation as ever, she knocks
her hand upon her breast, and cries she is a sinner. Oh, but what remedy? the
knocking her hand upon her breast she knows cannot save her; no, for that,
God be merciful to her, she leanes upon Christ, that is her now Beloved, not
upon any duties, or any other merits that was before her Beloved.

Fifthly, Her beloved, not her beloveds, The soul that comes to the Lord Jesus
Christ loves him intensly, and as she loves him best, so she loves him only.
As nothing shall have her whole heart, so neither will she divide her heart
betwixt him and another: he shall have her heart, and he only shall have her
heart, and he shall have her whole heart too; she dare trust her strength upon
Christ, and upon him alone: she desires only to be found in the Lord Jesus,
who is her Bridegroom; she is a Virgin, not a Whore; she leanes not upon
Christ with one hand, and her own Merits with another, no, nor dares she
lean upon the Merits of another; she durst not trust the weight of her soul
upon the wings of an Angel, nor to the Prayers of a Saint; she relies upon God,
and upon God only. The Papists lean upon Christ, but not upon him alone: she
knows it will be a dishonor both to her and her husband, to take any thing in
partem amoris, to share with her husband in his love; she will keep her honor
in being the wife of one Husband.

And so I have showed you how she leanes, what is her hand, who it is she
leanes upon, what title she has to him, what rules she observes in her
leaning. I have but one thing more, and that is, to show you what strength
there is in the Lord Christ's shoulders to bear her; how she leanes even in
every wilderness, and what fullness of strength there is in her husbands arm
to keep her up from falling.

the wilderness of sin: Here the Spouse cannot be said properly to lean
upon her beloved, for she wants the hand of faith to lay hold upon Christ, and
indeed she is not weary: yet I do not know why in some sense, even in this
estate, the elect soul is not beholding to free grace; he is her Christ here,
though he has not yet manifested himself to be her Jesus, her Savior. The
elect soul in sin is elect, and decreed to be saved, though she be not
declared to be elect; she is beloved in decree, though God has not actually
manifested his love unto her: he is not her beloved, but the soul is his
beloved, not actually but decretally, he has thoughts of good to her, but his
thoughts are kept within himself, till he is pleased to reveal them to her at
his best time: she is his beloved, though there be no correlation, she is in
his thoughts, his Spouse, aye, and positively, not conditionally. The Arminians
falsely dream of Gods conditional decrees, because they comprehend not the
ways of God: Believing is necessarily required, yet it was not a condition in
Gods decree: The soul is his beloved, though yet there be no correlation,
though she be not his wife yet, yet she is intended for his wife. To speak
according to the ways of men, I may intend to make a woman my wife, before I
actually declare my intentions to her; she is my wife in my determinations and
thoughts before I woo her, though not actually my wife before I have wooed
her, and she has ^^elded too, there lies only this difference, my
determination must be but conditionally, if she will accept of my proffered
love: There lies a power in her to refuse. We may therefore make the simile a
little higher; A great Emperor buyeth a woman that is a slav^ which he intends
to marry, and will, whether she will or no; yet he will woo her, and if it be
possible marry her will, as well as her person; yet whether she will or no, he
will and may marry her, for she is his purchase, she is his wife in his
determination before he has married her. But yet even this simile is lame.
(Every simile, comparing the ways of God, with the ways of man, must at least
halt of one foot) for though this Emperor has power to force the woman's body
to the action, yet he has no power to force her will, to be willing to the
action, The will is always independent, sui juris; but God has power, not
only to marry the soul, which he has bought from being a slave to the Devil,
but to make her willing to marry him; yet she is in Christ's decree his Spouse,
before he has actually revealed his decree unto her: so though strictly and
properly the soul cannot be said to lean upon Christ in the wilderness of
sin, yet she may be said to be beholden unto the Lord Christ, and that thus:

1. Every soul has the like principles of corruption, and would act to the
full of it is depraved operations, were it not for Gods preventing and
restraining grace, She is beholding unto God for his preventing and restraining
grace, though here she is merely passive.

Secondly, She is beholden unto God for his exciting grace. The soul hears,
and fasts and prays, meditates of her own sad condition though for the
substance of the action it is her own, yet it is Gods exciting grace makes her
willing to hear, fast, pray, though not his special saving-grace, yet his
common grace: But this is not the leaning meant in the Text she leanes here
upon Christ, but not upon Jesus [a Saviour] upon God, but not as her Beloved.
And here the soul is brought into a second wilderness.

2. The wilderness of Sorrow, Contrition, Repentance, call it what you please,
though I know the later term Repentance, be controverted by some.

Yet I know not why we may not say, That a man may repent without saving-grace.
And for that Repentance which they say must be the effect of faith, If I were a
School-man, I should rather call it Godly Sorrow, but I desire not to play upon
terms: And for their defining Repentance, To be a sorrow for sin out of the
sense of the love of God revealed in Jesus Christ, it is a definition they have
devised for their own purpose; And give them their premises according as they
please, they would be poor Logicians if they made the conclusion to displease
them: For from hence they argue, If the love of God be the ground and cause of
Repentance [ viz. the love of God manifested and sensible to us, we having
apprehended it by faith] the special love of God, then faith must go before
Repentance, viz. an apprehension of Gods saving love, and reliance upon it. But
I answer, the definition which they give us of Repentance is deceitful; it is
a definition of a Species in stead of a Genus (as we say in Logic) As some
unwary Divines define Faith, to be an assurance of Gods love in Jesus Christ.
This is true, but this is a faith of the highest stamp, and many a precious
soul is without this faith to his dying day.

Faith of adherence is another thing; as if I should go to define a man to be
a reasonable creature, skilled in all sorts of Learning, Any man would
understand me, that I did not go about to describe a man in general, but this
or that particular man. And I say once again, if I were a School-man, I should
rather call this A godly sorrow, and define Repentance in general to be A
sorrow for sin, there is the genus and differentia: Or if there be required a
fuller definition with the ground, though I conceive such a definition would be
more proper to give of Repentance in it is several kinds, than of Repentance in
general; yet we may give it thus, It is a sorrow for sin, arising out of the
fear of Gods wrath, or apprehensions of Gods love. And I know not, why we may
not say, That a man may repent without saving grace. Bishop Davenant says, A
man by exciting the grace of God, may Peccata propria considerare, ad sensum
corundem expavescere, and liberationem ab hoc metu exoptare, tremble for his
sins, and mourn for them, and desire deliverance out of them, and if this be
not Repentance, I know not what is, (not taking Repentance for the whole work
of conversion, as sometimes it is taken in Scripture, but) taking Repentance
for a weariness of sin and sorrow for it.

But those of our Brethren here (that are so afraid of Babylon, that they will
run quite beyond Jerusalem, so afraid of being Arminians, or Papists, to
ascribe any desert to duties, or tie that God has to concur with our duties,
that they are resolved they will not be sober Protestants; So afraid of being
Heterodox, that to avoid it, they will not be Orthodox,) tell us, that this is
a legal, not a saving Repentance. It sounds ill to distinguish between a
legal and saving Repentance. I will digress a little to rend this Fig-leafe,
being all they have to cover the nakedness of their opinion: I would feign
understand that term, saving Repentance, in what sense they take it; the
Scripture warrants no such distinction.

1. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance as merits Salvation,
or such a Repentance as God is tied necessarily to concur with, with his
saving grace, I say, no Repentance can be saving repentance. No Repentance
(says Learned Davenant) can so dispose the heart, Ut ex merito c^ngrui
teneatur Deus gratiam cuiquam infundere.

2. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance, as of it self
without any more ado shall be sufficient to Salvation, I say again, no
Repentance can be called a saving Repentance. For, Without Faith, it is
impossible to please God.

3. If they mean by saving Repentance, a repentance that conduces to
Salvation, I say, this kind of Repentance (let them call it legal, or what
they please) is a saving Repentance.

4. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance as is wrought
ordinarily in such as shall be saved, I say, in that sense this Repentance is a
saving Repentance.

Now, Whether it ought not to be preached, as Well from law as Gospell-motives,
is a question lies not in my way to determine; only I here my Savior (though
he were Gospel it self) preaching it from a Law-motive, Luke 13.2. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Let the unprejudiced Reader judge, if
damnation be not there preached as a terrible motive to Repentance: Surely I
then may learn to preach from the Best of Preachers, and preach, Repent, or
you will go to Hell; Repent, or you will be damned, as well as Repent, because
God has loved you: Yea, and John too preached repentance as well because The
axe was la^d to the root of the tree, and whatsoever tree brought not forth
good fruit, should be hewn down and cast into the fire, as because The Kingdom
of Heaven was at hand. I dare not learn contrary to Christ, and the Baptists
Copy; I will preach Mercy and Judgment: The Law and the Gospel go well
together, let me not be accursed for separating what God has joined. But

Lastly, I conceive, We cannot call any R^pentance saving Repentance, til the
work of conversion be wrought fully in our souls. Nay, I make a question,
whether any man (without the grace of Assurance) can properly call his
Repentance saving Repentance, till he comes in Heaven. And for my own part, I
am full in the Negative. But I have digressed too far, to convince some (who
I fear are not so willing to suffer the word of conviction, as I to speak it.)

We left the Spouse in the second wilderness, The wilderness of sorrow, it is
time we now return to her, and comfort her, and show you how she comes out of
that, leaning upon her Beloved.

Here now the beloved Soul is mourning like a Turtle, and crying, O what shall
I do to be saved? I am lost! oh, how shall I find the way out of this
wilderness? O my sins pull me back! I cannot set a step forward! Sin trips up
my heels. The Devil tells me I am his; and my sins bear witness to his
words? Now she that is not the Spouse of Christ, sinkes in these mighty
wateres, she sinkes to hell in despair, is quite lost, if once she comes into
them: But he that said not one of those whom his father had given him should
perish, seeing the poor soul like Peter, ( Mat. 14.30.) that thought to have
trod upon those waters, sinking in them, and crying, Lord save me or else I
perish! when he sees such a poor souls ship in which he is, though he seems
to sleep, tossed in these bitter waves, when the tempest arises, and hearing
the soul in this Agony, crying out, Master save me or else I perish, now he
begins to arise, and stretch out his shoulder for the soul to lean upon,
speaks, and rebukes the winds, and calmes the busy tempests; when the Whale
of sorrow has sallowed up these Jonahs, and they are in the bottom of the Sea
in the Whales belly, they cry, their God hears, and causes the Whale to vomit
them out on the dry land. Me thinks that voice of Jonah, is the voice of every
penitent soul, Jonah 2. The soul cries by reason of her affliction unto the
Lord, and the Lord hears her; out of the belly of hell she cries, and he
hears her voice, for he has cast her into this deep, into the midst of the
Seas, and the floods compass her about, and all the billows, and the waves
past over her. Then the soul says, I am cast out of the Lords sight, yet I
will look again toward his holy Temple: The waters compass her about, even
to the soul, the depths closed round about her, the weeds were wrapped about her
head; she went down to the bottom of the mountains, the earth with her
bars was about her, yet her Lord her God brings up her life from corruption:
when her soul faints within her she remembers the Lord, and her prayers come
unto him, even into his holy place. And when the soul is in this wilderness,
in the deeps of sorrow, then her Beloved does throw her his shoulder of
supporting grace to lean upon: that she says as David, Psalm. 94.17, 18.
Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence, when I
said my foot slippeth, thy mercy Lord held me up. When the soul cries, I am
drowned! Then the Lords mercy holds her up: No (says God) thou art not
drowned, here is a cord of mercy for thee to lay hold upon, and I will draw
thee out by it. Here is my hand, be still O ye waves, this soul is mine. When
the soul is burdened with sins, laden with the sense of them; and in the sad
apprehension of them, cries out, my burden is too great for me to bear; I
sink, I sink under it; then Christ looks out of the heavens, and says, Cast
thy burden upon the Lord (man) and he shall sustain thee; Psalm. 55.22.
or, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you,
Mat. 11.29. The supporting grace of God is the Anchor of the soul, which
stays the Ship of the soul when a tempest of sorrow arises and the waves beat
upon it.

Now this Anchor has two flukes.

The first, is her Beloveds mercies and merits.

The second, is her Beloveds promises. When she is in this sad wilderness of
sorrow, her Beloved gives her a staff of merits, and mercy, and free grace to
lean upon, and a clue of promises to lead her out of this Labyrinth: and the
mercies and merits of her Beloved, have two hooks, both which take fast hold to
stay her soul.

1. The fullness of them.

2. The freeness of them.

Thy mercy held me up. My sins have cried up to heaven, (says the soul;) O,
but my mercies are above the heavens, (says Christ) Psalm 108.5. My sins are
more in number than the hairs of my head, (says the soul,) but my mercies
(says Christ) are more in number than the sand which lies on the Sea shore,
Psalm. 139.17, 18. My sins have abounded, (says the soul;) but my grace has
much more abounded, (says Christ) (...), Romans 5.20. O, but my heart is as hard
as Iron, and the face of my sins like Brass, (says the soul;) but that God
that made the Leviathan, is as strong as the Leviathan. He esteems Iron as
straw, and Brass as rotten wood. My sins are many (says the soul;) but
were their name Legion, (says Christ) I could cast them out. O, but I am an
old sinner, I have a mountain of sins; But my mercies are from everlasting
(says Christ,) so are not thy sins, and I came to level Mountains, Luke
3.4. The more old thou art, the more glory shall my free grace have, all the
world shall see, I do not pardon thee for any service thou can, or wilt do
me, thou must ere long lie down in the grave. Thus the soul in this
wilderness of sorrow, leanes upon the fullness of Gods mercies.

me? Because thou have nothing, therefore I will do it (says Christ) If thou
had any thing that thou thoughtest riches, I would not have married thee
(says Christ.) Thou art mistaken in my thoughts, I do not marry thee because
thou art rich, but because I have a delight in thee, and have an intention to
make thee rich, Hos. 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them
freely, Ezekiel. 16.7, 8* 9. Now the soul being fully persuaded of this, that
Christ is full of mercy, and able to pardon her, and free in his mercy,
therefore willing to forgive her, and desiring nothing for her pardon, but to
live like a Spouse in his sight, begins to lean, believing he will pardon her:
But yet says the soul, I could desire to see it under Christ's hand; I think
I could take his word now.

So she leanes upon Christ's promises, which are as the other Fluke of this
Anchor. Now says the soul, O that I might have it but under Christ's hand,
that my sins (which I am scarce able to think can be pardoned) may be
pardoned, though I staid his leisure for the sealing of it. Here she enquires
for Promises, and Presidents. Did ever Christ promise (says the Soul) to
pardon such a scarlet, crimson sinner as I am? Yes, I have (says Christ) look
Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as skarlet, they shall be as snow, though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool: and so Isa. 55.6, 7. I will have
mercy upon you, I will abundantly pardon you, Mat. 11.29. O, but where has
Christ promised freely to dispense these mercies (says the soul?) Christ
turns her again to Isa. 51.1, 2, 3. Ho every one that thirsts, come buy of
me without money, or mony-worth: But secondly, where did he ever pardon such a
sinner as I am (says the soul?) Christ puts her in mind of Mary Magdalen,
Manasses. O, but where one that was so near hell as I am (says the soul) an
old sinner? the thief upon the Cross (says Christ.)

Now it must not be understood, that Christ Jesus should reveal these Promises
Audibly to the soul, but

1. Either sets his Ministers a work to declare his Charters of Grace, and
read the souls pardon.

2. Or else he suggests into the soul such promises in such a seasonable time,
which must be taken as the voice of God to that soul. Thus the soul furnished
with presidents, trusting upon promises, wipes her eyes, comes out of the
wilderness leaning upon her blessed Savior, and saying, O my sweet Savior!
thou that have drawn me from the pit of hell, and have reached out thy arm
for a worthless lost worm, to lean upon thee. I dare believe thee. I now
roll my soul upon thee, I am shipwrackt, but thou art my harbor; and now, O,
what shall I do for thee? O my God! I am sick of love! Thou have ravished my
heart! I am thine, I am thine. Thus have I shown how the soul comes out of
the wilderness of sin, and sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved. And here the
ship is in harbor, but yet ever and anon she is tossed still, persecuted,
though not forsaken: This is the most dangerous wilderness; afterward she is
often in the corner of a Desert. I must show you how even then she leanes, and
how out of them she comes leaning upon her Beloved. She is always a dependent
creature; she leanes when ever she is wearied.

the wilderness of afflictions; in this she leanes; out of this she comes
leaning upon her Welbeloved, [id est,] in afflictions she leanes. Christ is her
comfort in her saddest troubles; She leanes upon him, viz. upon his supporting
grace: Thy rod and thy staff comforted me, Psalm. 23. The staff held him up,
while the rod was upon his back. The rod was a comfort because of the staff;
the more he had of the rod, the more he had of the staff also. In afflictions,
the believing soul leanes upon God, and says, Lam. 2.20. Behold O Lord, for I
am in distress: Out of the belly of Hell she cries, as Jonas, chap. 2.

First, She believes, that she shall suffer no more than she is able to bear,
2 Cor. 12.9. My grace shall be sufficient for thee. For Gods strength is made
perfect in the Christians weakness.

Secondly, She believes, that she shall bear no more than shall be for her
good, Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for the good of those that
love God. She has a Promise or two here to lean upon also, Job 5. v. 19. He
shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee: And Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee,
and through the Rivers, they shall not over flow thee: when thou walk
through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee. She comes out also leaning, trusting upon God as before, that he would
help her out, if he saw best, or support her in: so when she is come out, she
believes that God loves her never the worse; neither does she love him any whit
the worse, she cries, It is good for me that I was afflicted. When she is in,
she believes she shall come out; and she comes out with as much love to her
God, and confidence in him, as ever she had before, not being weary of Gods
service, because he has smitten her: She sees a smile in a smiting, favor in
a frown, love in a lowre, and she is resolved though he kills her, yet to trust
in him: she comes out of this wilderness leaning.

the wilderness of Temptations. Even in this she leanes upon the Lord Jesus
Christ. They were not the Spouses of Christ, The good ground, Luke 8.13. Which
when they heard, received the Word with joy, but having no root, for a time
believed, and in time of Temptation fell away. The true Disciples are those
that continue with Christ in tentations, Luke 22.18. First, they believe, that
God who is faithful, will not suffer them to be tempted above that which they
are able: But will with the temptation also make way to escape, that they may
be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. They believe, in that himself suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor those that are tempted, 2 Heb. 18. The
Saints that suffered many things were in many wildernesses, Heb. 11.37. Amongst
the rest were in this also; and they all leaned, v. 39. They received a good
report through faith. Yea, temptation is so far from making a child of God
let go his hold, that it makes him lay the faster hold, 1 Pet. 1.6, Though now
for a season you are in heaviness, through manifold temptations; yet it is
that the trial of your faith (being much more precious than of gold which
perishes) though it be tried with the fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory. In temptations they lean upon God; and they come out of
these temptations leaning, believing upon God too, having found, that he is
able, and knows how to deliver the godly out of all temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9.

A fifth wilderness, the wilderness of desertion. And this is one of the
saddest wildernesses that the Spouse of Christ comes in; and she has an hard
work to lean here, when Christ seems to pull away his shoulder: yet even
here she leanes. Christ himself did so: My God! my God! why have thou forsaken
me? Mark the phrase, Forsaken, yet not forsaken: the Bridegroom cries out, he
was forsaken, yet my God. Gods forsaking us is no ground for us to forsake him:
If he seems not to own us, it is no warrant, nor policy in us not to own
him. It is the duty of a pious soul, when God clouds himself, yet to cry, My
God. The bowels of the father must yearne upon the child again, if the child
cries, and will not shake him off. It is a remarkable expression of Job, chap.
13. ver. 15. Though he kills me, yet will I trust in him. How now? if thou be
killed (blessed Job) how can thou trust? O immortal faith! that put
Spirits of confidence in the dust and ashes of Job. Let God hide himself from
the soul, and so kill it (For Gods separation of himself from the Christians
soul, is a worse death than the separation of his soul from his body) Yet the
soul must trust in him, it must, it will lean upon him. The Spouse loses
not, but quickens her faith in a fit of desertion. That place of the Prophet is
remarkable, Isa. 50. v. 10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord? that
obeys the voice of his servant? that walks in darkness and has no light?
let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. They that fear
the Lord, though they may walk in a dark wilderness, and see no such light
as they were wont to see, have no such comfortable enjoyments of their God as
they were wont to have, yet they will trust and rest themselves upon the Lord,
and come out of this wilderness leaning.

In all the wildernesses of this life, the Spouse will lean upon her Beloved,
yea, and upon him alone, in all states, in all conditions, upon him for
directing grace, upon him for quickening grace, upon him for whatsoever she has
need of, either pardon, or guidance, or direction, or assistance, or comfort,
or heaven; at all times she must trust in the covert of his wings, for all
blessings. The Spouse of Christ is a most dependent creature. The Babe of grace
is never old enough to go alone, it hangs like a child upon the mothers
hands, and leanes like a Bride upon the Bridegroomes bosom.

Thus have I done with the Doctrinall part, having showed you, how she has
had, and sometimes has her dwelling in the wilderness; and how out of every
wilderness she comes up, but leaning, and what strength there is in her
Savior to bear her up leaning upon him, even in every wilderness. Who is
this comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her Beleved? Now let us see
what use we may make of it.

And first here may a word of reproof, and a brand of folly be fastened upon
diverse erroneous opinions and practices.

Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. These men
dream of Heaven, and yet never think of Repentance. Christ came to seek and
to save that which was lost (friend) how lost? what, insensibly lost, as all of
us were by Nature? This is an idle construction that giddy headed Sectaries
have of late devised to help themselves to heaven with. The Devils are so lost;
yet Christ never came to save them. No no friend, it is those that are lost in
their own apprehensions, those that know not what to dot o be saved, those that
feel themselves even in the jaws of hell: he makes apprehensions of his wrath
precede the apprehensions of his love. But woe, and alas! how many think they
have a part in Christ, That the Devil has as great a part in Christ actually
as they have? Heaven is grown the common journeyes end, and let men ride which
way they list. Not the most debauched wretch in a Congregation, but ask him
what he thinks shall become of him, if he dies in that condition: why he hopes
he shall go to heaven; nay I wish he does not say, he is sure of it too. All
men are sinners: He is lost, but Christ came to seek and save that which was
lost. Tell him of mourning for his sins, if he means to be comforted, of
humbling himself, if he means to be exalted, of feeling hell, if ever he
means to feel heaven: O then, you are a legal Preacher. Hear what the other
side says, what those you call Antinomian Preachers; O these are the only
Gospell-preachers to them. This makes them to pass for such honest men: O they
show a fine Cushion-way to Heaven! that you shall not need wet a foot or eye
in: But let them preach what they will (friend) believe him, who (although he
knows but little) yet knows you must go out of the wilderness if ever you
come there. The way is, neither the Drunkards Ale-way, nor the Aoulterers
unclean way, nor the Covetous man his dirty way, nor the Ambitious man's high
way, nor the Hypocrites hidden way, nor the Carnall-Gospellers formal way, nor
the Antinomians easy way. It is a way through a wilderness, not a way in a
wilderness: The Spouse is not described by her staying in the wilderness, but
by coming out of the wilderness; Who is this comes out of the wilderness?

come out of a wilderness of sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved? First, she is
in, then she comes out; then this reproves the folly of those that preach men
found before they were lost, and of those that dream of leaning before they
are in the wilderness: The Spouse leans, but it is when she is coming out of
the wilderness: Is there any that preaches down a needlesnesse of duties,
that mockes at mourners? that learn people a way to be found before they are
lost? Examine the Scriptures before you trust them; under a pretense of
exalting Faith, do they not cry down sorrow for sin? and all other duties?
Nay, they do cry down the preaching of the Law, to bring men to see they are
in the wilderness, that they might lean: Do they make you believe, that
preaching the Law is a price of Anti-christianisme, and no one ought to preach
it? And for their part, they will take heed of it, for fear of preaching away
their hearers. O beware of this leaven! For my part, I cannot close with this
novell Doctrine, when I consider,

First, that this other way of preaching, has bin that which God has most
blessed by his servants labors: Witness our Rogers, our Hooker, our Pious
Shepard; those three, to which many threes may be added, though they will
scarce come up to the first three. Those three Constellations of Heaven, that
have more light to dark Travelers, that wandered in the night of sin while
they shined in our Firmament, then all these Ignes fatui; mis-leading poor
Travelers. Was ever any of these Leaders so honored (though they have beat up
the Drums almost in every street of the Kingdom for followers) as to gather
such Troops of Saints to the Christian warfare, as these before mentioned? Did
ever God honor their labors so much as these? who (poor souls!) shone in
their days like lights under Bushels too, had only the corner of a Pulpit, or
a Pulpit in some blind corner tolerated them. Nay, look upon these that have
lately fallen into this Vein, and were Preachers of Gods whole truth before;
was not their first fruits better, and more accepted of God then their harvest
is now? Has not God distinguished which way of preaching he will must honor, by
making the first ripe grapes sweeter then the whole Vintage? were it only for
this, And

Secondly, For the constant experience of the Saints of God, let them speak
their minds freely; has not this been the way of their conversion? Have not
the best Saints in Heaven cried out of the belly of Hell before God heard their
voice? Was not Paul stricken down to the earth before he went in the Triumph
of Glory? Did not the Gaolor come in trembling, and fall at the Apostles feet,
and cry, what shall I do to be saved; before they bid him believe, and thou
shall be saved. Neither can they evade it with saying, That trembling was not
an humiliation for sin, but occasioned for fear his prisoners were gone.
Least people should wrest in that manner, The Holy Ghost has cleared it to
their hand; for before we read of his trembling, Paul had cried with a loud
voice, verse. 28. Do thy self no harm for we are all here. Neither do we
read, that he trembled for that at all; but like one struck senseless, and his
spirits dead as it were, in a fit of desperate madness, was about with his
Sword to let out his own blood. Now I say, were it no more then to hear such
Doctrine, contrary to the Doctrine which God has chiefly honored in his
Servants lips, by making it efficacious for the salvation of their souls, and
contrary to the experience of the generality of Gods Servants, if not contrary
to the Preachers own former and better thoughts and practice, it would be
sufficient to make me suspend my faith, from being too hasty to believe this
new way to heaven: But it is enough to confirm me, to hear my Christ calling.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.
Before you are sensible of an heavy load you will need no ease, and to hear my
Text speaking of leaning, but in a wilderness; Nay, it may be noted too, The
Text says, Who is this that comes? Not who is this that jumpeth up from the
wilderness; I cannot fancy this going to Heaven at a running jump, nor can I
like this pressing faith without preaching repentance also: Faith is an act of
an humble soul. Nor can the soul apprehend the beauty of Christ, and love
Christ, before it apprehends it is own miserable conditions. The only harm
this Doctrine does, is to make poor souls presume, instead of believing, for
alas! Tell an impenitent soul of believing, it apprehends it easy, because it
does not understand it, and runs upon a supposition, that it has faith,
when, alas, it believes no more then the Devil believes: sorrow for sin is
better understood by a carnal heart then faith is; for the truth of it is, the
humble soul only can tell what faith is: The other sees, neither the want
they have of faith, nor yet the nature of that precious grace. Shall I tell you
what pious M. Rutherford says concerning this.

Faith (says he) is bottomed upon the sense and pain of a lost condition;
Poverty is the nearest capacity of believing. This is Faiths method, be
condemned, and be saved; be hanged, and be pardoned; be sick, and be healed.
Faith is a flower of Christ's only planting, yet it grows out of no soil, but
out of the margin and bank of the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone
-- Antinomians (says he again) make faith an act of a lofty Pharisee,
applying, (immediato contactu) presently, his hot boiling and smoking lusts to
Christ's wounds, blood, and merit, without any conscience of a precedent
command, that the person thus believing should be humbled, wearied, laden,
grived for his sins: I confess (says he) This is hasty, hot work, but it
is a wanton, fleshly, presumptuous opinion, that it is an immediate work to lay
hold on the promises and be saved. In his Book of the Trial and Triumph of
Faith, you hear the opinion of Gods Servants, and the Text mentions a coming
too; pedetentim, gradatim, little by little, step by step: Those that come,
cannot go so fast as these, because they are weary and heavy laden. Those
that learn people to jump, must take away Math. 11.29. the heavy load of
sins which the Spouse has upon her shoulders, keeps her from that hasty
motion that Antinomians make. I do not speak to limit the Almighties power,
but to show you his ordinary dispensations; not what he can do, but what he
will do, what he has used to do, and God ordinarily walks in his own
paths, not in the paths our fancies make for him: we may look for God in his
ordinary ways of Providence and dispensations of the soul; if he comes in a
new way, it must be beyond our expectations; though not beyond our faith that
he can do it, yet beyond our faith that he will do it. When we have no word
to assure us, what shall faith be builded upon? God can turn midnight into
midday, ipso facto: But we know in Gods ordinary course of Providence, first
comes the dawning of the day, then the morning, then the nooneday: God can take
a soul and marry it, and never humble it, but where has he promised it? where
has he done it? or if he has done it, we say, one Swallow makes not a
Summer, one example makes not a Rule, one president makes not a law. It is no
rule for thee or me to trust in that, no more then the saving of the thief
upon the Cross, might be a safe president for us to defer repentance till
our dying day. Let thee and I learn to be humbled, to get broken hearts, to
loath our selves, see our own misery. Sorrow is the ordinary door to joy,
Humiliation the ordinary step to exaltation, Mourning for sin the only
preface to Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, in Gods ordinary way of dealing out
grace. The Latin is full, Quae est illa quae ascendit, that ascends from the
wilderness: Our Translation comes up, implying an ascensive motion, it is her
running up an hill. They that run up a mountain, if they run too fast, they may
quickly run themselves out of breath: it is bad jumpping over a broad ditch
(especially if it be drowning depth) for fear if we jumpe short we jumpe our
last. It is a great jump from the bottom of Hell to Heaven, to take it at one
leap. I wish, those that dare take it, do not fall short and drown
themselves eternally. I had rather go up Gods steps, then make such a hasty
motion, God give me grace to ascend up the Saints stairs to the chambers of
glory. Elijah was such a favorite to heaven, that God sent a coach for him;
But those that will expect till that fiery Chariot be sent down for them too,
I suppose may wait something a longer time then they desire. O beg of God to
humble you, to power out his spirit of mourning, and supplications upon you,
this will learn you to believe (friends) It is the humbled soul only that
construe that word Faith: it is Hebrew to others, it poseth the impenitent
heart, Faith is a riddle to them: Christ finds his Spouse in the wilderness,
and there he gives her his shoulder to lean upon: But,

Thirdly, She comes up leaning out of the wilderness.

Is it the duty of a soul that is in a wilderness of affliction, or
temptation, or desertion, to lean upon the Lord Christ? Then this may reprove
those that are in these wildernesses, and yet cannot be persuaded to lean upon
the Lord Christ: hence they cry out, O, faith is impossible! is it possible to
believe that Christ will save me? me, that have scorned his salvation, and
slighted his mercies? And because thou have slighted mercy, will thou therefore
still slight mercy? still refuse his offer of grace? Thou sinnest as much now
in not believing there is mercy for thee, that have despised mercy, as thou
did sin in dispising that mercy. O why is it harder to rise up, then to
cast down a soul? Why will thou not believe, O thou of little faith? Is the
molehill of thy sins, like the mountain of his mercies? does the voice of
thy sins roar like the voice of his loving kindness? Is there any humbled
soul before the Lord? O do not provoke God by thy infidelity now he has made
thee capable of faith: You that are Christians, for shame, in your several
wildernesses of afflictions, temptations, and desertions, do not, O do not
cast down your heads, and say, who shall show us any good? or if you do, say
again with the Saint in the ensuing words, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us: Believe in your depths of sorrow, believe in your most
trying afflictions, most sadding temptations, most killing desertions, believe
me, it is the greatest honor you can put upon the Lord Christ: And it is the
greatest dishonor you can put upon your God, to have any diffidence in the
Lords arms, any distruct in the Lords free grace. It is the property, nay, it
is the duty of the Spouse to come out of wildernesses leaning.

Fourthly, Does she lean upon God before she can come? must he work the
first motion to make her willing, before she can believe in him?

Then how are those to be here reproved, that would make man's will to be the
Author of its first motions unto God. Pelagius was a great defender of it.
First he would hold, That the grace of God was not necessary, but by the law of
nature we might be saved. 2. That the grace of God (which the Apostle speaks
of) was only in giving the law of nature. 3. Driven from this, he would
maintain, that the faculties of the soul, and their natural Actions was the
grace of God, understood by the Apostle. Yet here is no leaning upon our
Beloved. Afterward he would maintain. Si quaeratur an ex suis Naturalibus
viribus anima aliquid afferat ad suam conversion^e, vel renovationem, vel
aliquam facultat^e, vel action^e, quae vel partiat is causa, vel quocunque alio
modo appelletur, vere respondetur quod habet se mere passive. Chemni. in loc.
de lib. Arbitr.
4. That the grace of God was necessary for sins past, but it was in the
power of man's free will, to avoid or commit sins for the time to come, and to
resist rebellious corruptions. 5. After this, he would maintain, That some men
indeed were weak, and must do all by the grace of God, others that were
stronger might act good by their own will. But still only some Spouses lean.
Lastly, he would maintain, (and the Arminians still from him:) That grace did
indeed help a good work, but it had its first motion from our wills, or at
least might have: and the will had a negative voice, and might resist and
cross grace which did not work irresistably in the soul, to force the soul
to him. Quae de gratia Dei praeveniente, and praeparente, and operante
traduntur, hunc babent sensum, quod non nostrae parts priores sunt in
conversione, sed quod Deus per afflatum divinum praeveniat, post hunc autem
motum, voluntatis divinae factum, voluntas humana, non habet se mere passive
sed mota and adjuta, a spiritu sancto non repugnat sed assentitur. Ib.


Cassianus Monachus Pelagii Doctrinam amplexus est. Faustus Hormisda and Ben.
I would not rake up these graves, did not these ghosts walk in these our
days, when every grave of Heresy is unbowelled, and no one takes care to
throw the dirt upon them again. Nay, and the Papists having been tainted with
this Leven, the Sententiaries now tell us, Hominis est preparare cor. Aqui. in
Sum. Theo. Acquiescre and assentiri est nostrum.
That a man without grace, merely by the strength of his free will, may avoid
any mortal sin, and prepare himself for Gods free grace, and fulfill the
Commandments of God; Quoad substantiam actus, for the substance of the Act,
Quibus de congruo mereatur gratiam facientem. Scotus.
And another more impudently maintains, That a man without any grace of God (by
the mere strength of nature) may do works morally good, yea, even such as
God shall be bound to concur with, and give his special grace for. Even thus
going back from their own great Rabbis, one of which was pleased to confess,
Homo sine gratia Dei non potest non peccare and mortaliter and venialiter, Lom.
That a man without the grace of God, could not but sin both mortally and
venially. What is become here of the Beloveds leaning? but no more of these;
only if you hear such Doctrines (as you may hear any thing in these days)
believe them not.

5. Spirities Sactus praevenit, movel and impellit voluntatem in conversione,
non otiosam, sed attendentem verbo. Chemnit. Vel per speculationem somniorum,
vel per simulationem oration is ill abi efficaciam. Spiritus Sancti. Vid. D.
Featly. Dippers dipped.
Does God move the will attendding him in duties, first? secondly, when the will
is thus moved, does it then come? when it is drawn, does it run? Then this
reproves the Enthusiasts of old, the Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seekers of our
days, that hold, first, there is no need of duties. Enthusiasts of old
affirmed, That for the receiving of the Spirit of Promise and saving grace, the
Spirit of God was either infused to them in a dream, Vel per simulationem
orationis: Ay, and the motions of the Spirit, were as sensible in their flesh
as the beating of the pulse, so blasphemous were they grown; and thence they
would lie, and gape for Revelations, and so indeed they may have a suggestion
from the Devil, but scarce a Revelation from God. Oh! How in these days are
men tainted with these lazy. Opinions! slighting duties, vilifying Sabbaths,
neglecting Ordinances; that if poor people would truly now give account of
their growth in grace, and of their learning godliness: many of them might
truly. As the child that ye have heard a story, in the learning of its Primmer,
boasted to the father that it had learned past grace. Is not this the miserable
learning of our days? that men are grown past grace, past Prayer, past
Ordinances, past all duties?

6. Again what you have heard, that after the soul is drawn, then it comes,
may show us the falsenesse of another Doctrine of Enthusiasme, too brief even
in these days also: that the soul is merely passive, even after the work of
conversion also, and is even then a mere stone. See the Book set out from the
Ministers of New England of the Heretics, etc. Post conversionem concurrit
voluntas, non tamen quasi suis viribus adjuvet spirituales actiones. Semper
addendum est non esse plenam libertatem, in sancto renato, sed virtutem in
infirmitate perfici, Chemnit. Intelligant si filii Dei sint spiritu Dei se agi,
ut quod agendum est agant, and cum egerint, ^lli, a quo aguntur gratias agant.
Aguntur enim, ut agant, non ut ipsi nihil agant. Aug.
Draw me (says the Spouse) and then, I will run after thee. Indeed, after
our conversion, the will is but in part sanctified, and the Image of God in us
will want of his first integrity, after it is renewed: but Christ's strength is
perfected in our weakness; we must understand if we be the children of God,
that God has therefore wrought in us, that we might also work something, and
when we have wrought it, give thanks to God, who has made us to work; for
God has wrought in us, that we might work, not that we should be idle. Thus I
have labored to you to divide the Truth from Error; Now you have heard of the
leaven of these Pharisees; take heed of it.

In the next place, what you have heard, that the soul that comes to the Lord
Jesus Christ, leanes upon a new Beloved, not upon her old beloveds, may serve
to reprove those that would feign plead a title to Christ and have a portion in
Christ, but they will not take Christ alone: two sorts there are of these; The
one cannot leave their old beloveds, and the other cannot trust this Beloved. O
the wicked man would have his portion in Christ, if he might but have his lusts
too, his pleasures, his profit; but to take Christ, alone, O this is such a
hard saying that they cannot bear by any means; If Christ and his lusts would
lie both in one bed, Christ at the feet, and his lusts at the head, then Christ
should be as welcome as any thing to him; but he is loath to sue a divorce from
this Beloved, he is loath to part with his old love for a new, till he sees how
he can love him; but at a venture he will take him in partem amoris. O wretch!
flatter not thy self, if Christ be thy Beloved, he will endure no Polygamy;
you must leave your sins, or be without Christ. The true Spouse leanes upon
her Beloved; not upon her Beloveds, upon her now Beloved, she forsakes her old.

Lastly, this may serve to reproove,

1. Those that would lean upon Christ, but they dare not trust their souls
upon Christ alone. Forsooth he will be the Spouse of Christ, but he must lean
upon Christ with one hand, and his good works with the other. The whore of
Babylon commits adultery with her self.

2. Under this lash comes a better rank of people, that when God has showed
them their own sinful, sad condition, they do not only perform duties,
pray, and mourn, and repent, and be humbled, all which they ought to do, but
they are ready to rest in them, and make them their Beloved: It is natural to
the soul, that God has made to loath its sins, to love its duties; it finds
duties almost as consentaneous to its nature, as sins were before; and it is
too ready to think that its saving, or damning, depends upon such a quantity
of tears, and humiliation: Hence, you hear souls in this condition, often
complaining; Oh! I could believe, if I were humbled enough, if I could but
mourn enough. This soul does well to be sensible of the hardness of its own
heart; and it is too true, it can never mourn, it can never be humbled enough.
But it does ill to think that free grace stints its operation, and blessed
influence, to such a quantity of tears, if it be humbled enough, to see its
want of Christ. The water runs through the river, that is the way to the Sea,
but it does not rest in the river, but with a swift and continued motion, runs
betwixt the banks, till it comes, and is swallowed up in the Sea: Even so the
soul ought to run through duties, but not to rest betwixt the banks of duties,
but to run through, till it come to the Sea of free grace, where it will be
swallowed up of infinite mercy; and our imperfections will be drowned in his
infinite perfection; we ought to take duties in our way to Christ, but not to
make duties our Jesus. God has ordained that they should sit us for him; but
it is written, My glory will I not give to another. The glory of the Lords free
grace, is his greatest glory; he will not give that to any other: None shall
share with him in his Spouses love, he is a jealous Savior. The Spouse leanes
upon her Beloved, not Beloveds: Thus I have done with my use of reproof.

The next use is for examination, here may every one try himself whether he be
the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ, or no: Even by what has been already
said; I will reduce it all to three heads:

First, Examine thy self, whether thou be out of the wilderness of sin,
yea, or no.

Secondly, Whether thou were, or art in any other wilderness, yea, or no.

Thirdly, What was, or is thy demeanor in these wildernesses thou have been,
or art in, and how have thou come, or do thou come out.

Examine whether thou be not in the wilderness of sin, yea, or no: It was
given as the Character of the Spouse, to come out of this wilderness. O, but
how shall I know that? (will the soul say.) I will name two or three notes, by
which thou may suspect thy self as from probabilities.

1. The wilderness, it is an incult place; a place where the soil was never
tilled, it is hard almost as a millstone; the over-growne Trees were never
pruned, the unruly boughs never lopt, the bushes never cut or stubbed: do
thou find thy heart in such a condition, that it is as hard as ever; neither
judgment breaks it, nor mercy melts it, the fallow ground of it is not plowed,
nor the seed of righteousness sown in it? Thy unruly lusts are not tamed, thy
life is as much overgrowne with sin as ever it was: thy sins were never yet
cut off from the body of thy life. O friend! suspect thy self; Thou may
justly fear, yea, and know too, that thou art not the Spouse of Christ, thou
art in the wilderness, in thy natural estate.

Secondly, The wilderness is a barren place, it brings forth no corn for the
sickle, no wholesome fruit, no grapes for man's pallat; for can a man gather
grapes of thistles, or figgs of thorns? No pastures wholesome for the beasts.
The fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, Joel 1.19. And God
complained that Nineveh was dry like a wilderness, Zeph. 2.13. Art thou a
barren, and unfruitful creature, that do nothing for God? thy heart is a
barren heart, no seeds of good are sown there; thy tongue is a barren tongue,
no good words come out thence; thy whole soul a barren soul; not a good
action upon the record of thy life. Indeed, no soul can be barren, the soul
is of a working nature; but sinful works are unfruitful works (in the
Apostles language.) The unfruitful works of darkness, and what fruits had ye
of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Gods Spouse is a fruitful
creature, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. A barren soul is always a wildernesse-soule. Those that
are borne of God, bring forth fruits unto God.

Thirdly, thou may know whether thou be in the wilderness or no, by the
company thou delightest in: It is a known rule, Noscitur ex socio qui non
dignoscitur ex se.

He that is a wildernesse-creature, loves wildernesse-company; the Wolves, and
Bears, and Foxes: but he that is out, keeps the company of men; do thou love
the wildernesse-company? the swinish drunkard, the politic Fox, the malicious
Lion, the venomous liar and slanderer, the lascivious wanton, more than the
Children of God? Oh suspect thy self l By this we know (says John) that we
are translated from death to life if we love the Brethren. Lazarus when he was
raised from the grave, we do not read he went to keep the dead men company
again: those that God has raised from the death of their sins, live amongst
living men, and delight in living men's company. Thus examine whether thou be
come out of the wilderness of sin, or no.

Secondly, As coming out of the wilderness is a sign of the child of God: so
being in the wilderness, is likewise a note whereby thou may know thy
self. Gods Spouse comes out of one wilderness into another, out of the
wilderness of sin into the wilderness of sorrow, and out of that to their
Savior. Would thou know whether thou art found, or no; Examine whether thou
were lost or no: Would thou know whether ever thou were a believer; examine
whether ever thou were a penitent, or not. This is Gods ordinary way; thence he
complains of his people, that they would not repent, that they might believe
in him. Do thou find God in another manner of working in thy soul? bless
God for it; and if thy title be good to heaven, which will be known by thy
walking with God, believe me, God has used thee kindly, heaven has cost thee
cheaper then it costs many a poor soul; and walk humbly before God, because
he has not humbled thee under his mighty hand, as he has done many another
poor creatures: And though I would not condemn those that plead their title
to heaven this way, for fear I should condemn the generation of the
righteous, yet believe me, I should suspect it in my own cause. They that go
out weeping, and carry precious seed, shall return rejoicing, and bring their
sheaves with them.

2. Examine thy self, What other wildernesses thou meetest with? Afflictions,
temptations, etc. I would not give this as an infallible mark, yet God says,
whom he loves he chasteneth, and scourges every child whom he receives: and
thence the Father drew out his Conclusion, Unicum Deus habuit filium sine
peccato, nullum sine flagello; God had one Son without sin, but none
without a rod. But I know, even the wicked sometimes begin their hell upon the
earth: and though I would suspect my self if I met with no afflictions, yet I
would not be glad to have a life full of crosses and afflictions, my best
evidence for heaven. I rather named this for a preface to the next note.

3. Examine how thou carriest thy self in the wilderness; there is a
different carriage betwixt the child of God, and the child of the Devil in
afflictions: the one sinkes into the grave with despair, the other lifts up
his head to Sion with hope: the one is pressed to death under crosses, the other
above all crosses. Cain cries, my punishment is too heavy for me to bear; Job
cries, though he should kill me, yet I will trust in him: The Reprobate cries,
Who is the Lord that I should wait for him? The Saint says, I will patiently
wait for the Lords Salvation: the wicked man dies, the Saint leanes: the eyes
of the sinners fail that day; but the Saints look up to Sion, from whence
comes their help that day.

4. Examine How thou have come out of thy wilderness? of thine own strength
or leaning? Can thou say, That God knew thee in the wilderness, in the land
of great drought, Hos. 13.5. If thou think thou came out alone, thou art
there still, What gave thee comfort in the depths of sorrow? what? thy merry
company? did thy duties do it? If any thing did it but thy Christ, I fear thou
art still in the Wilderness: when thou did mourn, as one that mourns for
his only begotten son, did thou look upon him whom thou had pierced?
there is nothing but the blood of Christ can give a cordial to a fainting
soul; nothing but the hand-kerchiefe of free grace that can wipe thine eyes;
nothing but the blotting out of the handwriting, which was written in Gods
Book, and thy own conscience against thee, that can make thy heart leave
trembling, and thy knees leave beating together for terror. Thou can not come
out alone, if ever thou came out, it was leaning.

5. Examine thy self, How thou have carried thy self since thou came out?
How have thou been since thou were humbled, and lost in the wilderness of
sorrow? What effects has the wilderness of sorrow wrought upon thee? Has thy
sorrow been like the sorrow of Achan, that thou have been only sorry because
thou have been under an Attachment of wrath? Or like Ahab. renting his
clothes, putting on his sackcloth, and going softly? 2 Chronicles. 22. Or like
Pharaoh, saying, I have sinned? Exodus Or like Balaam, saying, I have sinued, I
will return back again? when he might have had more thanks for his labor and
never have come there, he had checks enough. Art thou worse when thou come
out of the wilderness of affliction, that we may brand thee with Ahaz his
Brand, This was that King Ahaz? Or do thou come out of thy Afflictions
leaning, with thy weak faith strengthened, and thy strong faith confirmed? Have
thou lost no grains, but got in the fire? Is thy gold as good weight now as
before? it is a good sign it is good then. But I hasten to the next Use, which
may be to inform us;

First, The sad condition that all unbeleevers are in.

Secondly, The joyful condition that all the Children of God are in.

Thirdly, The great love of God, that he would send Christ to seek us up in
the wilderness, and give his hand to poor creatures to lead them out.

And lastly, If in every wilderness we must lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
It may inform us, what need we have at all times to walk close with the Lord
Christ. First, here see the sad condition that all men and women by nature are
in, that have not the Lord Jesus Christ. It consists in two things:

First, They are in a wilderness: Sin is a wilderness. Now which of you
(friends) but would think himself as good as a dead man if he were in the
midst of an Arabian desert, that he could not see any possibility of getting
out, nor any comfort he could enjoy there: terror on every side, comfort on no
side; the Lions and beasts of prey of every hand ready to devour him, and it is
well if he can keep his flesh for food for himself, for he can get no
provision for his body, nothing, except he would eat the bark of trees, or
the parched grass. What man would not tremble, to think of one that should be
condemned to such an axile? Do not your hearts pity as often as you think of
those poor men that were left but half a year in Greenland? And yet O Lord!
How few pity themselves! O poor creatures! Mutato nomine de te fabula
narratur; the Story is thy own, apply it therefore: You that are in your
sins are all in a sad wilderness; the judgments of God, like the beasts of
prey, are ready to swallow you up on every hand; it is a miracle of mercy you
are not in hell; there is but a thread betwixt you and death; the Sword of Gods
wrath hangs over your head, while you are at your Drunken Banquets of sin:
Oh! what comfort? what joy can can you have in the wilderness (friends?) that
when you lie down at night, you know not but you may wake in the morning past
Repentance, even with Hell flames about you; as the Lord lives, there is but a
hairs breadth betwixt you and Hell.

2. Consider, That you have no one to help you out of any wilderness; if
Christ be not yours, nothing is yours: what will you do in a stormy day of
Affliction, when you shall cry unto God, and he shall say unto you, as he once
said to the roaring Isralites, Jud. 10.14. Go, and cry unto the gods which you
have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Cry unto
your Gold now, unto your Lusts now, trust your Riches now, make you a golden
Calfe! See if it will now save you. O think! You that live in sin, and love
and delight in sin, what shall I do in a sad day of sickness, when the
fear of the grave shall surround me, and the terrors of Hell shall make me
afraid? What shall I lean upon when these comforts shall be no comforts? when
I shall l say to all creature-enjoyments, miserable comforters are you all.
Where shall I warm me when these flashes will be out? when the sparks of
pleasure and profit shall be choakt, and killed with the dust and ashes of my
grave? Hear ye this all ye, That kin^le a fire, that compass your selves
about with sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that
you have kindled; This shall ye have at the Lords hand, you shall lie down in
sorrow: Your pleasurable sins are but as sparks (Sirs,) What will you do
when your sparks are out? They are (as we say of a short flame) but a Widows
joy for a moment: Take heed, that when your sparks are out, you blow not your
nails in hell: Take heed, that your sparks do not kindle everlasting
burnings for you. What will you do in a wilderness of Affliction? how will
you come out? what will you come out? What will ye lean upon?

Secondly, This may serve to inform us of the happy condition of Gods
children, and that e contrario, in a just position to the others misery: O lift
up your heads ye righteous, and be glad ye upright in heart: Your happiness
consists in these two things:

First, You are out of the wilderness, out of the danger of Hell; and those
that can spell in their thoughts but that word hell, will know it to be a mercy
to be out of the fear of it. You are out of the wilderness, O bless that God
that has helped you out: it is a great happiness to be delivered of fears;
believe me! Did the wicked men seriously think what a weight of wrath they lie
under, what a cloud of blood hangs over their heads, they would pray till all
their knees were melted (though they were all steel) to be delivered from it.
Hold up your hands that you have escaped a drowning; that you fear not the
wild beasts that belong to the wilderness; Gods dreadful judgments you dare
meet, the Lion and the Bear, and they dare not set the print of their teeth
upon you. A godly man is like a man under protection, he owes much, but the
Bayliffe dares not meddle with him; Christ has undertaken the debt for him, he
is under the protection of the Son of God; he can look a Judgment in the
face, and never run for it. The wicked man, on the contrary, is like one that
hangs upon every bush (as we say) owes more than he is worth; he dares scarce
look out of the doors whiles the Bayliffes are about: when the judgments of
God are about, the wicked wretch dares not look out, he sinks into his grave
in the thoughts of it. This Plague, this Fever, this Ague, may be a Bayliffe
to arrest me, that God has sent to carry me bound hand and foot and thrown
into Hell, where is weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth. And then thinks
with himself (O that they did so!) Where is my surety (if it should be so?)
who would be bound for the payment of the Debt due for my sins, and to be
paid at Gods Judgment Seat? The godly man, he likewise says; This Plague,
this Fever, this Sickness, may arrest me: But suppose they should, the Son of
God is bound for my Debt; My Judge surely will not demand better Surety then
his own Son. I bless God I am out of the wilderness: O happy man! Here Is a
portion of thy happiness; but here is not all.

2. Consider, That if thou should fall into the corner of another
wilderness: Thou have one to lean upon, even in every wilderness: If thou
should have a rod upon thy back, thou have a staff to comfort thee. Thou
have one to lead thee out, whenever thou art in: an arm that thou may
trust to. Happy is he that has a friend in the Court, such is thy friend. A
friend in adversity, is better than a brother, (says Solomon) thou have a
friend in adversity, and he is thy brother: Thy brother Christ is thy friend,
that will lead thee through, and out of every wilderness. Is the child happy,
that in want has a father to run unto? the wife happy, that has a husband in
time of sickness to comfort her? The servant happy, that has a Master in
adversity to pity him? then I dare pronounce thee in all times happy: Thy
husband loves thee, thy father sends his son to lead thee, thy husband is
always by to comfort thee, and lead thee by his hand. God has said, Esaias
58.11. That he will guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones. Thou have always a friend at need, a brother in
adversity.

Thirdly, Is it so that the Spouse comes out of the wilderness leaning upon
her Beloved? This may then show us the infinite love of God to the creature;
that he would be pleased to look us up in the wilderness, and let us lean
upon him: Christ was led into the wilderness because thou were there, he had a
bad journey to fetch thee come: Oh! what should? what could (besides his
infinite free grace) make his bowels of mercy so yerne toward the creature, as
to look it up in the wilderness, to cloth it naked, to wash it polluted, to
save it damned? Christ the shepherd had lost his stray sheep, and goes after
that which was lost in the wilderness until he finds it, then he lays it
on his shoulders, and brings it home. O, blessed be the name of the Lord for
his free grace and mercy! The shepherd followed the sheep, whiles the sheep
regarded not the shepherd; we were in a wilderness, he came to find us out.
O! was not this infinite love, astonishing mercy?

Lastly, Is it so? that we must come out of every wilderness leaning upon our
Beloved? O then let this inform us what need we have to walk close with the
Lord Jesus Christ; what need we have to be fearful of offending, and careful
to please him: It is he that must help us in every need, he that must lead us
in every wilderness: If he forsakes us we are undone. Have we but one friend?
let us keep him then: if we anger him, we lose our best friend. Has the
shiftlesse child need to keep the love of the Father? the Babe need to keep in
the arms of the Nurse? the wife need to keep the love of the husband? the
blind man need to keep the love of his guide? O Christian, thou have much more
need to keep the love of thy Christ: It is he that must succor thee at every
need; he that must make the rugged ways plain for thee; It is he that must
carry the Babe of grace in his arms, lest it should dash its feet against the
stones of affliction: It is he that must lead the child of God upon his hand,
lest in this world of afflictions it fall, and hurt it self. O keep close in
his arms, keep thy self warm in his bosom; fear that which may make thy
God go free from thee. Gods departing from the creature is a piece of hell:
thou know not how soon thou may need him; yea, thou always need him,
therefore take heed of sinning against him; thou will anger thy best friend, I
will assure thee.

I hasten to the last Use, which shall be a word of Exhortation: Does the
Spouse of Christ come out of the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved?

First, O then, you that are yet in the wilderness of sins, come out, come
out, get this Spouses Beloved, and then lean upon him.

2. You that are in the wilderness of sorrow for sin, afflictions,
temptations, desertions, lean upon your beloved, live leaning and dye leaning:
you that say you are sinking, and you cannot believe. Oh lean! and come out of
this wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

A word to the first: Is there any before the Lord this day that is yet in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, with what arguments shall I
plead with such a soul? Those are not wanting, but with what arguments shall I
prevail with such a soul, to come unto the Lord Christ? were any here drowning
in the water, a little Rhetoric would persuade them to let me help them out?
were any lost in a wood, I should not need much entreat them to give me their
hand, and I would show them a way out of that loosing place? why should I not
as much prevail for heaven this day?

1 Consider what estate it is that thou take such pleasure to continue in?
first, it is a dangerous place, more dangerous then the sands to the ship: thou
art ready to be swallowed up of hell every hour in it. A troop of judgments
waits upon thee to destroy it; how can thou abide consuming fire? or dwell
in everlasting burnings?

Secondly, Consider, it is a joylesse condition: There is no true joy to the
sinner, though he sings sometimes amongst his drunken cups, yet he cannot feed
heartily upon a feast of joy, because the Sword hangs over his head, it is but
a fained joy that the sinner has, a sudden short lived flame, without any
coals underneath to preserve it. There is no peace to the wicked (says God)
and if no peace, there can be no joy; when the sinner is serious he cannot
rejoice, his rejoicing is like the skipping of mad men that know not what they
do.

Thirdly, Consider, it is a starving condition; The sinners soul starves
whiles he feasts his body like a glutton, his soul dies for thirst, when his
body is overslowne with drunkenness. It is impossible the puffe-past of
iniquity should nourish a soul: Does an Angel feed upon the earth? does a
Saint feed upon hell? The soul is of an Angelicke substance, it cannot feed
upon sin: sin starves it. Do thou love to be in the midst of thorns?
do thou delight to lie down in sorrow? can thou endure to see thy better
part starved, whiles thou pamperest thy filthy Carcass? O let this deter
thee from the wilderness of sin, and persuade thee to come out of it unto
Paradise. There,

First, Thou shall be in a safe condition: Out of the fear of judgments, out
of hells gunshot: There life or death will be either peace temporal, or else
eternal, either grace, or glory unto thee; here thy soul shall be in a
harbor, if thousands fall at thy left hand, and ten thousands at thy right:
none shall make the afraid, thou shall laugh at trouble when it comes. Thou
shall be sure to go to heaven either by land, or water: If thou go through
the fire, thou shall be sure to have Christ with thee. Heaven is a security in
all estates, a protection from all Arrests, if the King of glory has a mind to
sue thee, thou shall not be arrested (like other men) with a writ of wrath, but
invited to sup with him in glory, only by a letter of love, and he will send
his Ushers of glory to wait upon thy soul to the chambers of glory, Luke,
16.22. The soul of good Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom:
you shall not live like other men, haunted with the bloodhounds of wrath, nor
dye like other wretches, that go out of the world, haled by the Sarjeants of
hell to everlasting prison; but quietly sleep, and awake again one day in
glory. O who would not desire such a protection for himself? such a security
for his soul? who would not throw off his rags of sin, to put on Christ's
livery of grace, when Christ's badge upon his shoulder shall free him from all
Arrests? That he shall walk up and down, and nothing shall make him afraid?

Secondly, Consider that Heaven is a place as full of joy, as ever the
wilderness was full of sorrow and trouble; of this I spoke before. O think of
the joy of the Saints, you children of vain pleasure, you madmen of the
earth, that can dance over the hole of the Aspe, and put your hands on the
Cockatrices den. Your false and flattering joy is nothing to the real joys of
heaven; There is joy like the joy of the harvest, like the joy when men divide
the spoil: The yoke of their burden is broken, and the rod of the
oppressor. O you that love your drinking meetings, and dancing days, that you
would but love heaven, where you might drink new wine with your Lord Christ:
where you might dance in glory, and make all your days, days of joy, and
every hour, an hour of pleasure.

Thirdly, consider, that there, and there only, is provision for your soul.
Christ's robes is the only clothing that will cover the nakedness of it; his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed; there my friends, Eat
and drink, and be merry, there you may have wine and milk, without money, or
without price. O, spend not your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which profits not?

Here you may eat that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness. Here is a Feast of fat things; The fatlings are killed: O come to the
wedding! Why should your rooms be empty in the day of the Lords Espousals?
You shall be welcome to my Masters Table: Now, O now, Behold he stands at the
door and knocks: (Lord, break where thou knockest) If any man will hear his
voice, and open the door, he will come into him, and sup with him, and he
shall sup with him. O let me entreat you, to pity the yerning of your
Saviors bowels toward you; pity the groaning of his tender heart for you;
pity your selves, if not your Christ; and, O come, come out of the
wilderness of sin into this wilderness of sorrow; that of a drunken profane
creature, thou may be a mourning pious soul; of a proud careless sinner,
become a poor humbled paenitent; that the world may admire, Saul amongst the
Prophets, and Paul amongst the Apostles, and thee amongst the Saints of Christ;
and say of thee, who art now a profane Swearer and Blasephemer, Behold he
Prays! Of thee that were a filthy Wanton, Behold he Mournes! Of thee that
were a filthy Drunkard and Glutton, Behold he fasts! And may in time say of
thee, Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved? But,

Secondly, Is there any before the Lord this day, that is in any other
wilderness of Sorrow, Affliction, Temption, Desertion, etc? O lean! Come out
of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

First, Is there any one here, to whom the Lord has shown their own sad
condition too, and yet has not revealed the fullness of his free grace to
them? O lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and leaning come out of thy
wilderness; Believe and thou shall be saved. But here is the hard task, to
persuade such a soul to believe.

Consider but these few things.

1 That now thou art in a capacity of believing. Poverty of spirit is the
nearest capacity of faith; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness. Now thou art weary, Christ has promised to ease thee; now thou
art heavy laden, he has promised to help thee.

Secondly, Consider that thou have ground enough to build thy faith upon;
Christ's power and love are two Pillars, able to hold up the weakest faith.

First, Believe; lean upon Christ, for he is able to pardon thy sins; thou
should blaspheme in thy thoughts if thou should not think this. Can
infinite mercy be fadomed think thou? Can any one plead his underservings
against free grace? Were thy burden far heavier then it is, cast it upon
Christ, for he is able to bear it; Art thou thick darkness? he is infinite
light: Art thou all sin? he is all pardon: Art thou altogether lovely? why
Christ is altogether lovely.

Secondly, Believe; because Christ is as much love as he is power: he is not
only able, but he is willing to pardon thee; free grace thirsts after thee.
Nay, believe me, thou can give Christ no greater satisfaction then to receive
his mercies. Christ is with child of free grace (to speak it with reverence)
and he desires nothing more then to be delivered in thine heart. He is a Sea of
mercy, and he would rejoice to empty himself by drops into his peoples hearts.
But why did I say empty? Can the Sun lose any light by communicating his light
to others? When the creature speaks of God, he must speak (...), he would fill
thee, and yet continue full himself. He is satisfied when thou art full. He
shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Thou art not so
willing to receive, as he is to bestow free grace. O then lean upon him.

Thirdly, Consider, that can not dishonor thy God; more then when thou art
humbled by him for thy sins, and cast down in thine own thoughts, and called
to believe in his mercies, and secured upon his word, if thou will but trust
him. If thou will not, then believe in him, Surely then thou art of a little
faith, if not an Infidel. Thou could not believe when thou were an
impaenitent hard-hearted creature. Why? because thou knew no need thou had
of faith: Neither could thou hear Christ's invitation, because thou were not
weary and heavy laden; but now that the Lord has humbled thee, now the
promises belong unto thee; what? dare thou not take Christ's word? Suppose a
Traitor were condemned to dye, and the King should send a Pardon by the hand
of h^s own Son to this forlorn wretch, and he should refuse it, saying; The
King cannot pardon me; what has he to do to send me a Pardon? I know he does
but mock me, he means nothing less, etc. Were not this a piece of
unworthiness, by which he should dishonor his Prince as much as with his
Treason before? O take heed of provoking the Lord still; it is enough that thou
have provoked him once, yet he will pardon thee. And on the contrary, thou
can not honor Christ more then in believing; for thou acknowledgest the
unfadomable depth of his free love and mercy; Thou proclamest God, to be a God,
gracious, long-suffering, a God that may be trusted by the creature which has
deserved nothing at his hand; that he is so pure an Essence of love, that he
will create himself a cause of love where is none. And though he coould find
nothing in thee to pardon thee, for thy sake, yet he would pardon thee for his
own Name sake.

So likewise, you that are in any wilderness, or shall be, of Affliction,
Desertion, Temptation, etc. O lean! lean! It Is that which God requires at your
hand; it is that which will ease you when you are weary; help you when you are
heavy laden; Believing will ease you when complaining will not; it is that
which honors God, and honors Christ; It gives him the glory of his Power, and
Providence, and Dominion, and free Grace, and mercy. Christ, believe me, will
take it kindly at your hands, that you will try him in need, and trust him even
in despair; though he kills you, yet you will trust in him. Those that venture
upon Death with such a faith cannot dye: Those that have such a Spirit must
live eternally. The way to live, is to dye believing, and the way to stand, is
to lean falling. O come all ye that love the Lord trust in his mercies: I
have done, only I conclude with my Text.

O you that are falling, as you think into the pit of despair, that are lost
in the wilderness of sorrow: Believe, believe, and you shall be saved. Come
out trusting upon God; resting upon the fullness of his mercy, and the
freeness of his grace; come out, come out leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in a wilderness of afflictions, lean upon Gods staff, let his
rod comfort you; believe that he smileth while he smites thee; believe in
affliction you shall have no more then you are able to bear; he will let his
grace be sufficient for you, and all shall work for your good. And come you
out of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in the wilderness of temptation, in the snare of the Devil,
believe, and lean, your Christ was tempted, and he knows how to succor those
that are tempted: lean upon him to bear you up in, and to give you an happy
issue out of your temptations in which you are in, for the trial of your
faith; and come you out likewise leaning upon your Beloved.

You that are in the wilderness of Desertion, cry, My God though you be
forsaken, keep your faith, retain your Interest; O lean, lose not your hold
you have upon the Almighty, lean in: and come out of this your wilderness
leaning upon your Beloved.

Finally. All you that are in the wilderness of sin; the worst wilderness of
all: Let me conclude with you, And once more as the Ambassador of Jesus Christ
in my Masters name, as if he himself were here: I beseech you, by the many,
and tender mercies of him, whose bowels yerne toward you, by his precious
blood, which was powered out upon the Cross for sinners (and who knows whether
not for you, as well as others) as you tender the life and happiness of your own
souls, the joy of your faithful Pastors: nay, (which is most of all) as you
tender the honor of God, come out, O come out of your sad wilderness! be
humbled, and mourn, sit down in dust and ashes, that you may rise up, adorned
with grace, and be crowned with glory, that you may lean upon your Beloved;
and O that my first or last words might prevail with some great sinner this
day for whom we might all rejoice, concerning whom we might all say, who is
this that comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her beloved.

FINIS.

