A SUPPLEMENT OF Original Papers AND LETTERS, RELATING To the Scots Company
Trading to Africa and the Indies.

Anno Dom. 1700.

To the Honorable My Lord Seafield, Secretary for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
My Lord,
THis is by Order of the Council General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to
Africa and the Indies, to acquaint your Lordship, That we have prevailed upon
Lord Basil Hamilton to be at the trouble of going up with an Address to His
Majesty from our said Council-General, on behalf of Captain Rob. Pinckartan,
and Thirty more, who were wrongfully detained Prisoners at Carthagena since the
beginning of Feb. last, and (as we are informed) are most inhumanely treated.

We are daily importuned by their Relations (who are very considerable) for
their Relief; and it is of great concern to our Company, that something
material be speedily done therein, not only for the sake of the said Prisoners,
but also that others may thereby see, we do not abandon the Interest of such as
engage themselves in our Company's Service.

Lord Basil Hamilton is fully instructed in all matters relating to the said
Address, and other Affairs relating to our Company, of which he will inform your
Lordship. Wherefore we entreat that your Lordship be pleased to introduce him
to His Majesty, in presenting of the said Address; and to assist him in
procuring a gracious return from His Majesty; in the confidence whereof, I
remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Yester, J. P. C. G.
Sedr. 4th Decr. 1699.
The Company's Address to His Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, the Council-General of the Company of
Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, having formerly, in most humble
manner, represented to your Majesty, how that we have, with much Trouble, great
Expense, and after many unexpected Stops and Difficulties, settled a Plantation
and Colony on the North-side of the Isthmus of Darien, on the Continent of
America, precisely in the Terms of your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and
Letters Pattent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom.

We now, in all Duty and Humility, beg leave to represent further to your
Majesty, That whereas in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Pattent there
is a special Clause, by which your Majesty is graciously pleased to promise,
That if contrary to the Rights and Privileges therein mentioned, or contrary to
the General Treaties of Peace and Commerce between your Majesty and any
Potentate Prince or State in Amity with your Majesty, the Ships, Goods,
Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the said
Company, should happen to be stopped, detained, embezell'd, or taken away, or
in any sort prejudiced or damnified, That your Majesty would interpose you
Royal Authority, to have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made for the
damage done; and that upon the public Charge.

And whereas likewise by the X and XI Articles of the Treaty concluded between
the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain, at Madrid the 8/18 day of July 1670. It
is specialy stipulated, that in case any of the Subjects of either the
Confederates with their Shipping be forced at any time, through stress of
Weather, pursuit of Pirates, or Shipwreck to retreat and enter for shelter, and
harbor into any of the Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Havens, Roads and Ports belonging
to the other in America, That the Persons so Shipwrack'd or forced a Shore,
shall in no sort be detained Prisoners but that on the contrary, all friendly
assistance and relief shall be administered to their distress, both for the
Sustenance of their Persons and reparation of their Ships and convenience of
their Voyage, and that Letters of safe conduct shall be given them, for their
free and quiet passage thence.

Yet notwithstanding thereof a Ship called the Dolphin belonging to our
Company, being sent from our said Colony to some of the Leeward Islands, with a
Cargo for buying Provisions, and the said Ship in a few days time after her
going to Sea and plying to windward, for the speedier passage stricking
unfortunately upon a Rock, sprung a Leak and being forced to run ashore, under
the very Walls of Carthagena to escape Shipwreck, not only the said Ship and
Goods were violently seized and disposed of as prize but also the Men to the
number of thirty, and a Boy (whose Names are here subjoyned) were detained and
made close Prisoners, contrary to the express Terms of the said Treaty.

Upon notice whereof, the Council of the said Colony sent, in your Majesty's
and said Company's Name, a Messenger with a very civil Letter, to the Governor
of Carthagena, to demand your said Subjects, who were wrongfully detained
Prisoners, as aforesaid; and likewise Restitution of the said Ship and Goods,
pursuant to the Treaty above-recited; and sent also Copies of the Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent abovementioned, in English, Latin, and Spanish,
for the Governors information; but instead of any compliance to those just and
reasonable Demands, the Messenger was threatened to be put in Chains, and not so
much as allowed to see any of the said Prisoners.

And being lately assured that (notwithstanding of all endeavors hitherto used
for their Liberation) they are, contrary to the Rules of Christianity,
Humanity, and the Law of Nations, still detained Prisoners under very severe
treatments, we think our selves in Duty and Conscience bound to lay their
deplorable Case before your Majesty; and for that effect have commissioned Lord
Basil Hamilton, one of our number, to present this our humble Address on their
behalf to your Majesty, and to give your Majesty a further account of our
Company's other Affairs, as he is particularly entrusted therein; not doubting
but that your Majesty will, in your Royal Wisdom, take speedy and effectual
Measures for the redress of those Damages, and the freedom of those distressed
Prisoners, in the number of which there are some young Gentlemen of good
Quality, and related to the best Families in this Kingdom.

Signed at Edinburgh the 4th Day of December, 1699; In Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Sic Subscribitur, Yester, J. P. C. G.

The Chancellours Letter to the Directors of the Company.
Holyrood-house, Saturday the 6th of January 1700. Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty's Secretaries of State have acquainted me, That the King will not
allow my Lord Basil Hamilton access to him, Because he did not wait on his
Majesty when he was formerly in London. And that he has never since given any
public Evidence of his Loyalty, nor has hitherto owned and acknowledged His
Majesty's Government. But his Majesty will not refuse to hear what my Lord
Basil's Instructions are, and has Declared his willingness to be informed of
what the Company desires. And if my Lord Basil will give in Writing to His
Majesty's Secretaries, what he had to represent, His Majesty will receive
Information from their hands of what is Demanded, and will give his Answer to
the Company; His Majesty does not refuse to Receive the Petition, though he will
not allow my Lord Basil to be the presenter of it. This is from

To the Right Honorable The Court of Directors of the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Indies.
Right Honorable Your very humble Servant, Sic subscribitur Marchmont
Chancellor.

A Letter from the Directors of the Company, to the Secretaries for Scotland.
My Lord,
THE Council-General of our Company, having lately at a very frequent Meeting;
thought fit to send up one of their own Number, with an Address to His Majesty,
and with Instructions concerning the Contents of our Company's former
Petitions; they thought that none could be more Capable to Discharge that
Trust, than Lord Basil Hamilton, as being thoroughly Versed in the course of the
Company's Affairs, nor more acceptable to His Majesty, as having had no
objection made against him when he was appointed; several Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council being then present. And the Council-General having
signified so much to your Lordship by a Letter, wherein they entreated; that
you would be pleased to Introduce him to the King, and give your Concurrence in
procuring a Gracious Return to what he had in Commission, and which he was to
Communicate to from Lordship. We are surpised to find this day by a Letter to
the Lord Chancellor; that the King will not allow Lord Basil Hamilton to have
Access, because he did not wait upon His Majesty when he was formerly at
London. But his Lordship being sent by, and having his Instructions from the
Council-General: We the Court of Directors can say nothing to it, other than to
entreat your Lordship that you would use your Interest with His Majesty, to allow
Lord Basil Hamilton, to have Access to His Royal Person, least the Refusal
thereof be not only a great Discouragement to the Company and all its
Wellwishers, under its present Difficulties and repeated Misfortunes; but give
also ground to the World, to believe that his not being allowed Access to His
Majesty, is upon the Account of his carrying an Address from this Company,
which every Body knows stands in great need of, and has a just Right to his
Majesty's Royal Favor and Protection, And which being the General Concern of
the whole Nation, is confidently expected and signified to your Lordship, by
Order and in name of the Court of Directors by

Edinbur. the 9th day of January, 1700. My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble
Servant, Sic Subscribiter Pat. Scot. I. P. C. D.

From the Company, to my Lord Basil Hamilton.
My Lord,
WE have your Lordships Letter, of the 2d. Instant, by yesterdays Post in
relation to the Contents of which, we send you herewith the Copy of a Letter,
which we have written by this Night's Post, to both the Secretaries of State,
and likewise the Copy of another Letter, which we had this morning from the
Lord Chancellor upon the same head.

As our Company cannot but have a just sense of your Lordships generous
condescension, to the Council-General's Request, in undertaking a troublesome
Journey to London, this time of the Year, to wait upon and Solicit his Majesty
about our Company's Affairs, with no other view but frankly to serve the
Interest of your Country to the manifest neglect of your own, So we cannot but
heartily regret that the carrying of the Company's Commission, should be the
occasion of putting any such distinguishing Mark, upon a person of your
Lordships Quality and merit, as to be denied access to His Majesty's Person,
because you did not wait upon His Majesty when you were formerly at London. No
body can be so blind as not to see through this. And whereas we never could
hear that your Lordship did ever any thing unworthy of your Quality, or
inconsistent with the duty of a Loyal and Peaceable Subject. So we are still
hopeful, that by your own prudent management, His Majesty may be undeceived of
any misrepresentation, he might have had of you, and that he will yet condesend
to grant your Lordship access to his Royal Person, with the Companies said
Address, and give you a gracious Answer, to the Contents thereof, and to the
other particulars mentioned in your Instructions; An account whereof would be
very welcome News, in the midst of our misfortunes, to the Company in general,
and particularly to the Court of Directors in whose name, and by whose order
this is from,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Pat. Scot. I. P. C. D.
Edinburgh the 9th day of January, 1700.
His Majesty's Letter to His Council of Scotland. William R.
Sic suprascribiter,
RIght Trusty and Right well Beloved Cousin and Councellor, Right Trusty and
entirely beloved Cousin an Counselor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins
and Councillors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Councillors, And Trusty and
well Beloved Councillors, We greet you well, WHEREAS The Council-General of
the Company of that our Kingdom, Trading to Africa and the Indies, By their
Letter to our Secretaries of the Fourth day of December last; did desire, That
they might give their concurrence to procure a Gracious Return from Us, to the
Petition which they had sent with Lord Basil Hamilton. And the said Lord Basil,
having communicated to Our Secretaries, both the foresaid Petition and His
Instructions; And they having Represented to Us what is desired in behalf of
the said Company, and We having refused the said Lord Basil Hamilton Access, to
present the foresaid Petition to Us, for the Reasons, We did Order Our
Secretaries to Communicate to Our Chancellor; Yet We being willing to give an
Answer to what the said Company does desire. You are therefore to call for some
of the Council-General, and acquaint them that We are Resolved in the terms of
our Treaties, to demand from the King of Spain, that Captain (...) Pinkarton
and these of his Crew, who are detained Prisoners at Carthagena be Released and
set at Liberty. And you may also acquaint them, That our Subjects of that our
Kingdom, shall be allowed the same Liberty of Trade, that others enjoy with the
English Plantations; And in general, You may signify to them, Our Resolution to
promote and advance the Trade of the Kingdom, And the three Friggots they
demand, having been given by Parliament for guarding the Trade of the Coasts,
We are not resolved to dispose of them till We have the Advice of Our
Parliament, And so We bid you heartily Farewe. Given at your Court at
Kensington, the Tenth day of January 1700, and of our Reign the Eleventh Year,
By His Majesty's Command Sic. Sub. Seafield Directed thus, To Our Right Trusty
and Right well Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Our Right Trusty and Entirely
Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Our Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins and
Councillors, Our Right Trusty and well Beloved Councillors, And to our Trusty
and well Beloved Councillors, Patrick Earl of Marchmont our Chancellor, and
the rest of the Lords and others of our Privy Council, of our Ancient Kingdom
of Scotland. This is a true Copy taken from the Principal and Subscribed by Sic
Subscribitur.

Gilb. Eliot Cls. Sti. Con.

An other Letter from the Company, to my Lord Basil Hamilton.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letters to the Court of Directors, having been by them
Communicated to us, We cannot but acknowledge, that as you have at our request
Frankly undertaken a troublesome Journey and Task, to serve the Interest of
your Country and our Company: So we are fully satisfied, that you have
acquitted your self with a great deal of Prudence and Discretion in the
execution of that Charge, for which we render you most hearty Thanks: But
finding by a Letter of the 10th. instant from His Majesty to the Lords of His
Privy Council, and by a former from the Secretaries of State, to the Lord
Chancellor (Copies of both which are herewith enclosed) That His Majesty has
determined not to allow your Lordship access to present our Address, nor to
impart to His Majesty, what other things we gave you in charge by your
Instructions. We are heartily Sorry that your Lordships carrying of our
Address, should bring you under any such disagreeable circumstances with His
Majesty. But the matter being so, we cannot think it just to detain your
Lordship any Longer at London, to the neglect of your own affairs at home, and
do therefore hereby signify that your Lordship may use your own Freedom, to
take Journey homeward as soon as you think fit, and as may suit best with your
convenience. This is in name, presence and by order of the Council-General of
our Company from

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, John Home P.
Edinburgh the 29th of January, 1700.
FINIS.

