I Have delightfully read over this following Treatise, entitled, Five Lessons
for a Christian to learn, being the sum of five Sermons, and finding them to
be sound, solid, zealous, pious, powerful, and very profitably seasonable, I
judge them well worthy to be printed and published.

John Downame.

FIVE LESSONS FOR A Christian to learn.

OR, The sum of several Sermons; Setting out,

1. The state of the Elect by Nature. 2. The way of their Restoration and
Redemption by Jesus Christ. 3. The great duty of the Saints, to lean upon
Christ by faith in every condition. 4. The Saints duty of Self-denial, or the
way to desirable Beauty. 5. The Right way to true peace, discovering where the
troubled Christian may find Peace, and the Nature of true Peace.
By John Collings, M. A. And Preacher of Gods word in Norwich.

London, Printed for Rich: Tomlins, and are to be sold at his house at the Sun
and Bible in Pye-corner. 1650.

THE SPOUSE UNDER The APPLE TREE: OR, The state of the Elect by Nature.

Wherein is discovered, The distance that the highest Saints by grace stand at
by Nature from the Lord Jesus Christ, by which they may know they have nothing
to boast of, but what they have received.

By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Psa. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. LONDON, Printed for Rich: Tomlins. 1649.

TO THE Right HONORABLE, the LADY St John, Grace, Mercy and Peace.
Madam,
THe deep sense that I have had of those Engagements by which it has pleased
your Honor to oblige me to your service, has imboldned me to command these
Papers to wait upon your Ladyship to pay a debt, by incurring ^ further one (if
your Ladyship shall please to honor them with Acceptance.) These Sermons
(Madam) were but ordinary labors, and very unfit for a public view, in this
extraordinary time. It was only a Sermon before published upon the Text, that
tempted out these to bear it company, yet did I not part with them without
some parley. The world is full of Writers, and the Press as much overgrowne
with Authors, as the Age we live in is with Professors: But as the appearing
spiritualnesse of many carries with it too much suspicion, that they would have
the spiritualnesse of a Christian merely to consist with a luxuriant wit, and
the superbiency of fancy; so too many Writings seem to have forgot the
plainness of the Gospel, which they so much pretend to, and would make it the
work of a Christian merely to gape for Notions, and turn Religion into
speculation: To be able to speak high Notions of Christ, and to wrap up the
mysteries of truth in Parables of wit and expression, is almost grown to be
thought the All of a Saint. And we may sadly fear, lest we should be about to
study more to admire Christ than understand him, more to contemplate Saints
dignity than remember the Saints duty; lest we should make it all our work, as
Kings and Priests, to be so taken with our Honor, that we should forget that
we are thus of Grace. Humility is the Saint in Great. If any one thinks he
knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to know it. The high spirit is
infinitely more below Christ than he thinks himself above others. Lest in
these privileged days, whiles so many are proclaiming before the Saints, Thus
shall it be done to the persons whom Christ delights to honor; Christians
should so far admire their beauty, that they should forget their dust, I
have been content to let these unpolished Sermons go out to follow their
Triumphs, with Christian memento quid fueris, Christian remember what thou
were. It is as much a duty, and will one day be found as Beneficial, to keep
a Saint humble, as to make him thankful; to learn him to abase himself, as
well as to admire his fellows; to show him, that all he has is of Grace, as
well as to tell him what he has in the possessions of grace, and the
Reversions of glory. I wish professors carriages spoke not too much
heart-Popery, as if they thought their dignity were earnings, not Alms; and I
am sure, no soul is truly thankful that is not thoroughly humble. This for
the subject of the Sermons. For the phrase Madam, I remember it was Paul's glory
that he came not 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 4.
(to the Corinthians) with excellency of speech or wisdom to declare unto them
the testimony of God. And his speech and preaching, was not in entising words
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and in power. Gospel
Mysteries had not need be darkened with a misterious phrase. It does not please
me to see Religion in a Lantskip. Christ crucified, was plain English.
Seneca-Sermons, are for the most part but like the superfluous dishes of the
table, that serve merely for sight, but must not be tasted: Preaching surely
was never ordained to tickle the ear, it is business lies deeper then
scratching an humor. Wit is the souls worst carver; and pieces of wit, are no
better than pieces of self. Christ never intended us an interpreter for every
Sermon. Madam, as they were preached, so they are humbly presented to your
Honors hands. I know your Ladyships humility to be such, that it will spare
an eye to look upon them though not commended by any novelty of matter or
excellency of Phrase. I trust thus far the meannesse of their worth will
advantage the worthless author, viz. By letting your Honor know how much that
weak nothing of a preacher stands in need of an improved interest in your
Ladyships prayers, who so much as he is, truly is,

Madam, Your Honors most humbly obliged servant in the Lord Jesus, John
Collings.
Chaplyfield house, May 21. 1649.
To the Courteous and Conscientious Reader of these SERMONS.
Reader,
SOme two years since, some friends prevailed with me to let the last of these
Sermons slip out of my hands into thine. What was done then was in have, which
has put me to the charge of correcting some slighty mistakes; Thy courtesy to
the first has troubled thee with the second impression, in which thou art
againer, and a loser: Thou have lost the Sermon that was then its partner, the
narrow handling of the subject of it not pleasing my second thoughts; but thou
have gained a further addition of some more Sermons since preached upon the
same Text. I have made thee a gainer in thy hand, and eye; the Lord make thee a
gainer in thy heart. If thou please to read these Sermons, The first part may
make thee humble, The second may make thee thankful, The third may make the
careful. If thou learnest humility from the first, thankfulness from the
second, and thy great duty of believing from the third, I am sure thou will
learn from all the weak nesse of a poor creature, and if thy self be in
ought a gainer, if thou will let the author also be a gainer of thy prayers,
thou have rewarded him, and engaged him still to be,

The servant of thy soul in the work of his Master, John Collings.
Chaplyfield house, May 21. 1649.
THE LOST SHEEP brought home, etc.
Solomon's Song, Chapter 8. v. 5. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness,
leaning upon her weld beloved? I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy
mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
THis book is called the Song of Songs, that is, Canticunt excellentissimum,
the most excellent song; so Vatablus and Estius gives the reason, because it
contains a discourse between Christ, the most glorious Bridegroom, and his
Church, or the believing soul, the Bride; The song of songs as a note of Quia
sermocinationem co^tinet Christi, Sponsi, and Ecclesiae spo^sae. Estius.
eminency. Mr. Brightman will have it as well Nota distinctionis, quam
eminentiae, a note of distinction, as well as of eminency. A song more
excellent than any of those that Solomon made: the song that sounded sweetest
to Canticum excellentius omnibus quae Solomon composuit. Brightman.
Solomon's penitent heart, whose penman was Son and heir to the sweet singer of
Israel; Whose every note is a note of free grace, where every strain is
breathed by the spirit of the most high, and every close sounds the believers
close with Christ, an union with him who is the head of the Church: A song
(finally) wherein every line breathes the perfume of the Rose of Sharon, and is
beautified with the color of the Lilly of the Valleys.

It is a song of love, sung in parts, by the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of his
Fathers love, and the wife of his bosom; whether the society of believers, his
Church in general, or every believing soul in particular. It beginns with
love. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better
than wine; and it ends with love: Make have (my Beloved!) and come away. The
fountain from whence it arises, is a spring of love, and the Sea into which
it falls, is an ocean of love, where the soul that enters is swallowed up of
love, and drowned in sweetness: The whole stream of the book, is a stream of
love, running betwixt two precious banks, Jesus Christ, and the believing
soul: sometimes it is an higher, sometimes a lower water; it is always some,
though the floodgate be not always open. The two lovers, spend their long in
feasting themselves with each others embraces: One while the Bridegroom courts
his bride with ravishing strains of grace, another while she is emptying her
soul into her beloveds bosom; In the whole there is nothing but a sweet
enterchange of delightful expressions, while both seem to be ravished with
each others embraces.

I shall in handling of the text: first open it to you. 2 Raise some
propositions of Doctrine from it, and 3. Handle them by explication,
confirmation, and application.

For the finding out the meaning of the words, it is necessary we should
consider them in a double Notion.

1. Relatively. 2. Absolutely.
1. Relatively as they stand in a necessary connection with the former verses.
It was now the spouses course to power out her soul into her beloved's bosom:
her part began at the 10. ver. of the former Chapt. and continues to this
verse. My text in the former part of it seems to be a Parenthesis, and the
voice of a third person, (considering the great love expressed by the spouse, and
her following of him through the most rugged wildernes-ways, and even then
leaning upon him: or considering the great glory and happiness of the Spouse
from the influence of Christ love upon her) either in admiration of Christ's
condiscention, that will admit a worm to lean upon him, and will stoop to lead
it, and uphold it, in darkest, saddest conditions, and fill it with light in
peace at such times; or in admiration of the Spouses glory and beauty, by the
reflection of her Beloveds countenance; or of her constancy, and secret power
of grace in her, that in the wilderness saddest condition she could lean,
that the briars and thorns would not separate her Beloved, her quos Deus
conjunxit, etc. or out of an ignorance of her, and the secret power of grace in
her carrying her out in darkest times, and in a wilderness condition to such
an affiance, cries out, Qua est illa? What manner of creature is this, that she
should lean? Or, who is this so glorious a creature, that comes up leaning? Or
what manner of love is this, that makes her follow a Beloved through such
uncoth, rugged, dangerous ways as these?

2. But to consider the words Absolutely now in themselves.

Who is this that comes up?

The first question is, whose words these are. The second, what the meaning of
them is.
Expositors differ upon the first. Some would have them to be the continued
speech of the Church, and say, They are an expression of the great love
believing souls bear to Expositio summi amoris quo Ecclesia prosequitur
Sponsum, an suit ulla unquam Ecclesia quae tot ac tantos labores perferret,
tantaque pericula susciperet ad consequendum dilectum suum? Haec igitur sunt
pignora voluntat is meae quod fide difficultates omnes superavi. Tremell. ad
locum.
the Lord JESUS CHRIST by comparison. What Church, or what person ever (says
she) would undertake so many and so great labors to obtain her Beloved? These
are pledges of my good will, that by faith I have overcome all difficulties,
leaning upon him in the wilderness.

I shall neither wholly embrace, nor altogether reject this sense. I am
inclinable to think the words may be the Spouses, but not spoken in Tremelius
his sense, as from her self, boasting of her self; but spoken by a
Prosopopeia, the Spouse speaking what she conceived others would say concerning
her, and rather incline to think the words should be a Parenthesis, than
otherwise.

Beda and M. Brightman with the rest, that would have this whole Book to be a
Prophecye of the calling of the Church of the Gentiles, will have the words to
be the voice of the Jewish Church, admiring at the calling of the Church of the
Gentiles, Who is this? What wildernesse-creature is this, that she should have
any thing to do with the promised Messiah: Quem me solum deligere caeteris
autem Nationibus rebar esse ignotum. Cujus nominis sit haec gens quae ascendit
ex deserto? Institui videtur haec question de grandioribus natu sororibus quae
stupescent hoc novo and inaudito spectaculo. Bright. ad loc.
Beda ad locum. And therefore those Expositors read it, Dilectum meum, my
Beloved, who I thought only had loved and chosen me, and should have been
unknown to any other Churches.

But I see no reason why the words should be only restrained to the Jewish
Church, nor why [illa] this, should only be understood of the Church in
general, whiles that which is predicated of the subject is common to every
particular soul as well as to the believing Church: For every believer leanes
by faith upon the Lord Jesus, and comes out of his particular wildernesses,
leaning upon him.

And therefore I rather agree with Non solum vicinae gentes, sed etia^ ipsi qui
sunt in populo hanc mirantur sic ascendente^ ex deserto. Luther.
Luther upon the place: not only (says he) the Neighbor Nations, but those of
the same Nation shall admire her coming out of the wilderness.

In short, I conceive the words have a Prosopopeia in them. The Church or soul
speaks them, as if she should have said: Methinks I fancy the world standing
wondering at me, how I can lean upon Christ in my wildernesseconditions; and
out of the saddest wilderness, how I can come up by the strength of Christ,
leaning upon him? They will wonder at my glory, and honor, that Christ will
privilege such a worm as I am, so as to lean upon him, and that he will help
me. They will not understand how I can come leaning in the wilderness, they
will say, Who is this? Christ's power of Grace in me will be hidden to them, and
yet they will admire, Who is this?

That comes up out of the wilderness.] Out of a sad, low condition, out of a
lost, rugged condition, out of crosses, trials, afflictions inward or outward.
But I shall open this term more hereafter. Leaning] Tremellius reads it,
associans, associatura, joining or marrying, or about to join or marry her
self. Vatablus, Hierome and Lyra read it, Deliciis ^ffluens, flowing,
abounding with delights. Beda and Brightman read it Innixa, leaning upon her
Beloved; And so our Translation. The quarrel betwixt these Expositors is not
so great, but I conceive it may easily be thus taken up:

1. Leaning is a posture of familiarity; And she that is so bold as to lean
upon her Beloveds arm, is surely lodged in her Beloveds heart; and is
associans, marrying, or associatura, about to marry to her Beloved; and 2.
Leaning is a posture of love too. She that leanes, loves; and surely she takes
pleasure in her posture, she takes delight in her Beloveds company.

Upon her Beloved] Christ Jesus, who loves her, and having first loved her, is
now beloved of her. He is called Her, to denote her propriety in him. Thus you
have the sense of the former part of the Text.

The Church, or the believing soul, fancies that the world seeing her keep her
hold on Christ, in saddest conditions, and keep a close communion with Christ
in the midst of briars and thorns, in a barren heath, and dry ground, in the
midst of trials, would be ready, either out of ignorance, not knowing the power
of grace that upheld, and helped and sustained her; or else admiring her happy
and glorious condition, that in the wilderness she had such a Beloved to lean
upon; or admiring the strangeness of her constancy and patience, that she would
adhere to Christ at such a low ebb, would either by way of scoffing or
admiring, cry out, Who is this, that nothing will part from Christ? Or, Who is
this that Jesus Christ will thus own, and uphold in saddest conditions? Or,
Who is this? What power is this that upholds this man or woman in such estates,
as every one else would be lost in? Who is this that comes by the feet of
faith and patience, up out of these deep sad wildernes-straights, and yet comes
up with such a fixed temper of spirit, with such a stayed mind, and with such a
steadfastness of reliance upon the Lord Jesus Christ? Who is this that comes
up? Thus you have the former part opened.

It follows now in the Text.

I raised thee up under the Appletree, there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

For the opening of these words, and making my way clear, these two things
must be resolved:

1. Whose part of the Dialogue, whose speech these words be.

2. What the meaning of them is.

The first great question is, whose part in this dialogue of love these are?
This is certain, they are either Christ's or the believers: the opinions of
men are divided about it; Some think that the words are the continued speech of
the Spouse; their great reason is, because the words both before it and after
it, are the Spouses: Of this opinion are Gregory, Aquinas, Lyra, Hierom; yea
and learned Mercer and M. Ainsworth. There are some others that think they are
the words of Jesus Christ, minding the Spouse, how he raised up his Church (say
some) which I do not deny, so they do not limit it to the body of believers
collectively: for my own part I strongly incline to the latter, viz. That the
words are the words of Christ; my reasons are, 1. Partly because the 4 verse
contains a phrase of speech, with which she had twice closed a speech before,
viz. chap. 3. 5, 6. chap. 5. 8. and partly because of the congruity, which
appears to me in the sense thus: The Spouse before had seemed to cast out
words as if she had bin almost ashamed of Christ's company, and by her walking
with him had made her self a laughing stock, or a wondering stock to the world
(for so the phrase, Who is this? may also be taken) to which Christ replies: I
raised thee, etc. as if he should have said: and do I not deserve this? and a
great deal more too? Remember but what I have done for thee, I have raised
thee up under the Apple Tree, etc. To which (as overcome with love) the soul
replies, v. 6. Set me as a seal, etc. As if she should say, Truth indeed; Lord
thou have done it: O set me now as a seal upon thine arm, as a seal upon thy
heart, etc. A third reason is, the incongruity of the sense, if the word be
taken as the words of the Spouse, which will further appear in the opening of
the words. The first question being resolved, I come to the second; To show you
what is the meaning of these words. In doing of which, 1. I shall show you the
opinion of others. 2. I shall reject most of them; showing you reason why I do
so. 3. I shall give you my own opinion concerning the words and reasons for
it. I (say they) that is, the Spouse the believing soul: [raised thee]
awakened and applied thee; under the apple tree, hanging upon the cross.
Gregory says that the apple tree is [procul dubio arbor sanctae crucis] the
tree of the holy Cross. Ainsworth and Mercer carry it another way. I (says M.
Ainsworth) that is, the Spouse raised thee up, by earnest prayer, Psa. 44. 24.
Raised up Christ under the apple tree, the tree of free grace, and life
mentioned, Chap. 2. 3. To this sense Mercer inclines. Gentiles; they
understand it thus: I, that is Christ, raised thee, that is, the Church of the
Gentiles, under the Apple Tree, out of a low estate (say some) by the help of
some inferior Magistrate, says M. Cotton. But I want an instance of the
Metaphor so used, to patronize that opinion. I have showed you now the several
opinions, which I shall reject for these reasons:

For the Popish opinion, If we understand the sense of the words to be this,
That the Spouse raised Christ upon the Cross, what shall become of the next
words, there thy mother brought thee forth? Did Christ's mother bring him forth
there? if so: either his personal mother, or his mystical and metaphorical
mother; for his personal mother, in respect of his divine Nature, he had none;
for his humane Nature, Mary was his mother: But how can we say concerning the
Cross, There Christ's mother brought him forth? If it be understood of Christ's
mystical, or metaphorical mother, which say some, is the Church. 1. Besides
that, I never read the Church called Christ's mother, though his wife and
sister: And I do not like creating senses without we be put to great
straights: I say, besides that, it is to me very harsh sense, which I scarce
understand, viz. how the Church is said to have brought forth Christ under the
Cross: For holy M. Ainsworth's and learned Mercer's opinions, my reason or
objection is the same. If we do understand the sense of the words thus: I,
that is [thy Spouse] raised thee up, by [earnest prayer] under the Apple Tree
[in thine Ordinances;] I do not know how to make sense of the next words;
There thy mother brought thee forth, etc. How can we say that Christ's mother,
whether his natural mother, Mary, or his metaphorical mother, the Church (as
some would have it) painfully brought forth Christ (for so the word is) under
the tree of free grace of life? To me it almost sounds a making of Christ the
object of free grace, and life, who is indeed the subject of it.

For the third sort I reject their opinion. 1. Because I see no reason why we
should turn this whole book into a Prophecye. 2. And for M. Cottons single
opinion I gave my reason against it before.

I shall now propound my own opinion, and rather seek for company than follow
any. 1. I lay it down for a ground, that the words are the words of the Lord
Jesus Christ, speaking concerning the believing soul. 2. I take it for
granted, that the design of Christ's speech to the believing soul his Spouse,
is to mind her of some notable engaging mercy he had bestowed upon her; a
deliverance, 1. Out of some low estate; that methinks is plain, both from the
word used [raised] which presupposes a fallen estate. 2. Out of some estate in
which it was naturally; that me thinks is plainly hinted in those words; There
thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

Now to give you the sense of the words:

[I] the Lord Jesus Christ, thy husband, The words opened.
thy Redeemer [raised thee up] exalted thee by the great work of my redemption
[under the Apple-tree] The Apple Tree is Christ, Cant. 2. ver. 3. Under my
self by the use of mine Ordinances, which are the fruit of the Apple Tree,
Christ: or [I raised thee up under the Apple-tree] when thou were not ingrafted
in me, but in a state of disunion, indeed [under the Apple-tree] in respect of
eternal ordination, but not in the Apple Tree by an actual implantation and
union: When thou were in that sad estate I raised thee up, by the great work
of my redemption. It follows, there thy mother brought thee forth, etc. there!
where? in a lost condition, in a state of disunion, a stranger to me. There,
under the Tree of forbidden fruit, involved in Adams first guilt, weltring in
blood, etc. There she brought thee forth that bare thee.

So the sense of the words is this:

Do thou think much to lean upon me in the wilderness O my Spouse! remember
thou were in a poor lost undone Condition, in such an estate thy natural
mother brought thee forth; it is true thou were under an eternal ordination to
obtain Salvation by me, but thou were far from such an union: there thy mother
left thee, and could not help thee, and then I raised thee. I by the great
work of my redemption, covenanting, coming, dying, etc. for thee, raised thee
from this misery to eternal life, and all the privileges of it, and this I did
when all other means failed, [There thy mother brought thee forth] by the use
of my ordinances thou were raised under the apple tree: so that the design of
the Lord Jesus Christ in the speech, Is to show the believing soul what cause
she had in all estates to cleave to him, more than all the world besides; and
this he demonstrates, 1. By letting her see her miserable estate by nature. 1.
She had need of raising. 2. She was in a state of disunion, not united to the
apple tree. 2. By letting of her see the hopelesnesse of any remedy from any
thing in the world, any friend in the world; surely the mother is the best
friend, and yet (says he) this estate she left you in, yea she that bare you.
3. By letting of her see the Honorable condition that she was now in,
expressed in that word raised, which contains as much as can be spoken, even
all the fruits and privileges of Redemption. 4. By letting of her know the
Author of this happiness and redemption. That is I (says he,) all the world
could not, I did. 5. By letting of her know the means were his (for so also
the words [under the apple-tree] may be understood) I raised thee. The soul
may say, why? the word raised me? yes, it is true, but still thou art raised
under Christ: For Christ is the apple tree, The ordinances are the apples, and
they also grow out of Christ, even as naturally, as the Apples grow out of the
apple tree.

The text being thus opened, holds out to us many precious truths. In general
it is the description of a Saint, a primo ad ultimum, from first to last. In
particular you have here the Spouse described, 1. In her natural Condition,
where you are told, 1. What she is originally, so she is in a state of disunion
to Christ, in such a condition that she has need of raising, so her mother
brought her forth, so she brought her forth that bare her. 2. What she is then
virtually, though not implanted into Christ, yet within a reach of him; under
the applee-tree, though not implanted in it; under an eternail ordination to
life, though for the present a Child of wrath; in a wilderness, yet coming
out, or to come out.

2. She is described in her gracious condition, and there we have these things
noted.

1. The author of grace unto her, I raised thee, Jesus Christ the author and
finisher of our salvation.

2. The means of this grace, the apples that grow upon Christ the appletree.

3. The effect of this grace in her, she comes up out of the wilderness.

4. The isntrumental means, for the application of meritorious grace, that is
faith in Jesus Christ, she comes up leaning upon her well-beloved.

5. The opinion of others concerning her in this estate of grace. 1. She is
glorious, and creates admiration in some. 2. The hidden principle of life in
her makes her not to be understood of others, all say, who is this?

Here are two great things hinted in the text. 1. The misery that the elect are
in by nature 2. The happy condition they are in by grace. I might handdle the
words in order, and raise many profitable Doctrines from them: But I will only
pitch upon 3. which will comprehend all, and not handle the text as the words
lie in order, but according to the order of the things contained in them; The
3. I will pitch upon are these.

1. That Gods gracious Saints, and every one of them, though they lie under a
gracious ordination to eternal life, yet are borne in a lost undone condition.
1. They have need of raising; 2. they are under (not in) the apple tree, there
their mother brought them forth.

2. That it is the Lord Jesus that helps his redeemed ones out of this
condition. I raised thee.

3. That by the power of Jesus Christ the Spouse being raised comes up out of
every wilderness leaning upon her Beloved.

I shall begin with the first Doctrine.

Doct. 1. That the best of Gods Saints by nature were born in a lost condition,
in a state of disunion to Jesus Christ, there their mother brought them forth,
there she brought them forth that bare them.

I say the best, though they all of them lie under a saving ordination to
eternal life, and though many of them may be borne of holy and godly parents,
yet if you look upon them as they are by Nature, they are in a lost, undone
condition, and had need of a raising. Now for the prosecution of this Doctrine,
I shall 1. prove it by testimony of Scripture. 2. I shall open it to you how it
comes to pass that they are so borne. 3. I shall make application of the
Doctrine. 1. That they are by Nature in a lost, undone condition. 1. In respect
of finne. 2. In respect of punishment. Take that pregnant place for it, Ephesians.
2. where the design of the Apostle is plain to advance Christ in the hearts
of the believing Ephesians: To this end, 1. he discovers what need they had of
him, that he opens by setting out their sad and woeful condition without him.
1. They were dead in trespasses and sins, ver. 7. 5. 2. They lived according to
the Devils will, ruled and acted by him, v. 2. 3. They were tainted with the
lusts of the flesh, and inclined to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and of the
mind, v. 3. 4. They were Gentiles in the flesh, v. 11. 5. They were without
Christ. 6. Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. 7. Strangers from the
Covenant of Promise, 8. having no hope. 9. Without God in the world, ver. 12.
10. Afar off, irreconciled, ver. 13, 14. 11. To sum up all in a word, ver. 3.
The children of wrath by nature as well as others: Children of wrath Active;
Actively inclined or disposed to nothing but that which will undoubtedly bring
down the wrath of God upon their souls: And children of wrath Passive;
passively being originally so guilty, that they deserve, and in respect of
themselves, are liable to the eternal wrath of God. And who are these, ver.
19. They were such as were quickened, ver. 1. such as v. 19. were now no more
strangers and forraigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God: They were borne under the Apple Tree, but raised up. A second
place is that known place, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my mother conceive me. They are David's words, that man of God,
that man according to Gods own heart; yet he confesses he was borne under the
Apple Tree, there his mother brought him forth, he was shapen in iniquity, yea
in sin did his mother conceive him. I will add but that one place more Ez.
16. Where God setting out the native condition of his Church, sets it out by
the resemblance of a newborn infant. For her parents, her father was an
Amorite, and her mother an Hittite; For her own person, In the day wherein she
was borne her navell was not cut, nor was she washed in water to supple her:
she was not salted at all, nor swadled at all, cast out into the open field, to
the loathing of her person, v. 3. 4. 5. Polluted in her blood, v. 6. Yet she
was one, to whom God had said live, v. 6. Whom God had beautified and adorned
with special graces, v. 8. with whom God had made a covenant, and she was Gods
claim, v. 8. and, v. 9. viz. How it comes to pass, that all the Saints of God
are originally in a lost undone condition, The words of the text answer this,
their mother brought them forth so. Adam eat of the tree of forbidden fruit, he
fell, and that guilt cleaves to all our natures. This the Apostle speaks fully
to in the 5 chap. of the Epis: to the Romans, v. 12. By one man sin entered
into the world; and death by sin. v. 15. Through the offense of one many were
made dead. v. 18. By the offense of one Judgment came upon all to Condemnation.
v. 19. By one man's disobedience many were: made sinners, How the sin of Adam
should leave a defilement upon all his Children to the end of the world;
because The father has eaten sour grapes shall all the childrens teeth be set
an edge? My intention is not here to dispute like a sophister, concerning those
many questions about the propagation of Original sin. Quid quaeris apertam
rimam (Says Augustine) quum habes apertam Ianuam, etc. what need we seek for a
rift for it to creep in, when the Apostle has showed us an open door for it to
come in with a full body? he says by one man it came into the world, not by
imitation of his example (as the Pelagians dream) So he might have said [per
diabolum intravit] that it entered in by the Devil as well as [per unum
hominem] by one man: but it entered [propagatione carnali] by carnal
propagation: what could be clean that was borne of a woman? M. Perkins says
it may be done two ways. Adam being a public person carrying all us in his
loins, and God ordering that what he received he should receive for himself,
and all his posterity, hereupon Adam Sinning deprived himself, and all his
pesterity, So we became miserable, God dealing like a judge, depriving us, for
Adams sin, of his Image, which except he would he need never have stamped upon
us, (not any ways becoming by this act of judgment an author or maintainer
of sin) thus we become guilty Imputative, by imputation; and privative, God
depriving us of his image by denying to restore it to us again when we had
once lost it. Another way is by carnal propagation: Our mother the Hittite
brought us forth, our father the Canaanite begat us, what can be clean that
is borne of a woman says Job. chap. 25. v. 4. As sweet oil powered into a
fusty vessel (says M. Perkins) loses its pureness, and becomes infected by
the vessel, So the soul created good, and put into a corrupt body, and made
one with it, receives contagion thence; only Christ who was borne of a woman,
was borne clean, and the reason for that, was (say the schoolmen) Ab Adamo
humanam accepit natural non tanquam a principio agente sed tanquam a principio
materiali: His body was from Adam, but not from the seed of Adam. And thus you
see how it comes to pass that our mother brings us forth under the Apple Tree
in a poor lost undone condition, there your mothers brought you forth, that
bare you. Nor let any one think himself in a better condition, because his
parents have been elect ones: what then? Except a man be born again, says
Christ, he shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3. 3. Whatsoever is
borne of flesh Joh. 3. 3.
is flesh. Parents beget not grace but nature. Though they have no sin to
communicate in respect of Gods grace justifying their persons, and not seeing
sin in them so as to impute it to them; yet they have sin, a body of death;
so holy Paul had; he groned under it, Romans 7. Yea and if we say we Romans 7. 23.
have no sin, we do but deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. (Says
the blessed Apostle) who lives and sins not? This question was propounded to
Saint Austine, How the Saints of God that had no sin could convey sin to
their children: he replies to it, Vicissim and ego interrogo, etc. Let me ask
you (says he) how one that is circumcised can beget one that is uncircumcised?
and how it comes to pass that when you sow your wheat in your field without
any chafe cleaving to it, you should reap it with chafe? how one that is a
baptized Christian can beget one that is an unbaptized heat hen? you will
answer, Quia non facit generatio sed regeneratio Christianos. M. Perkins says,
God took this order in the creation, that whatsoever evil Adam procured, he
should bring it not only on himself but all his posterity, by virtue of which
decree the propagation of sin is continued without any interruption, though
Parents them-selves be borne anew by the spirit of God; even as God has set it
in the order of nature that the wheat thrown pure into the ground, should yet
spring and grow (so often as it is sowed) with stalk, ear, blade. And all this
I conceive is the truth concerning the manner of conveyence of this sad legacy
to all the Children of Adam. Without fifting those Philosophical, and school
questions about it, I shall conclude this Particular with only this note of M.
Perkins. It may be this will not satisfy the minds of all; if any be so curious
that he has a mind yet to seek further, let them know there is another matter
of more concernment, for us to look unto: when a man's house is on fire it is no
time to enquire, when, and how, and in what manner, it came to be so, but it
will be our policy to use all means possible to quench it. That it is so, it is
plain, our souls are all undone by nature. Do you ask how this thing could be?
first remedy it, then enquire the manner how it came to pass: quench the fire,
then ask how it came in thy dwelling. Quid quaeris rimam? in the mean time why
seek thou a crevis (says Austine,) Quum habes apertam Ianuam; per unum
hominem intravit peccatum: have thou not an open door? does not the Apostle say
it entered in by one man's disobedience, and death by it, and so went over all?
So much therefore shall serve briefly to have spoken of the doctrinal part:
Give me leave to come now to an application of it, in which the Lord give me an
heart affected in speaking, and you ears and hearts truly affected in hearing.

The first part of my application shall be more notionall, the other will be
more particular; for the first.

1. This may discover unto you, the lying falsehood of the Pelagian Doctrine,
and of diverse in these times, that have been so unhappy as to rake up all the
putrified dunghills of errors, and vend them for new truths.

Maniches of old would confess this, but 1. Would have it to be the direct
work of God, and to this end made a God on purpose that should be such a
principium mali, carrying on the wicked designs in the world efficiently, as
their other God (who was their principium boni) was by their appointment to
carry on good designs.

in part confess it: they would have some to be borne clean, others defiled;
but even the best (as you have heard) were borne defiled, there their mother
brought them forth; there she brought them forth that bare them. The Pelagians
denied any Original sin by way of propagation but only by Imitation, if say
they the Child walks in its parents stepps, or because we tread Adams path,
therefore we are defiled; but this is false, in the very day of our birth we
were in a lost undone condition.

days, viz, that Christ by his death, Originale peccatum ex humana natura
sustulit, took away original sin out of our natures, they are the very words
of Chemnitius, repeating the error of the old Anabaptists concerning this
point, and this I perceive many people harping on even in this City, especially
those that have so good an opinion of Christ's death, that he (as they dream)
died for all; pinch them a little and they will confess, that all shall not be
saved, but this is in regard for their actual sins, for their original sin,
Christ has paid that score: if now they can but stand upon their own legs,
and will but walk in their strength, and keep their feet for the time to come,
then all shall be well. But mistake not (Christians) your mother (says the
text) left you not raised, but in a lost condition; not your grandmother Eve,
but your immediate mother, brought you forth there, and left you there long
since Ephesians, that they were Children of wrath by nature, even as others,
Ephesians. 2. 3. Besides that Christ uses not to pay any debts by halves, it were as
good as nothing for Jesus Christ to pardon a reprobates Original sin to whom
he never intends to pardon all sin; yea Original sin does not only remain
upon elected ones as an offense to God, and laying upon them an obligation to
death, since Christ dyed, until their Justification, but even after
Justification there is a body of death; it has lost its condemning power, and
its reigning power, but it yet cleaves to our flesh, as Ivy to the tree, so
deep an impression it has upon all our natures. But this opens a way to
another question, whether original sin remains in any of the elect after
Justification? the affirmative is truth: but in regard that my text strikes not
directly against the error I shall pass it by, and refer you to those that
have defended the truth in it, as Zanchi, etc. and leaving this first use,
shall proceed to some further application, which shall be more Particular.

1. By way of Instruction. 2. By way of Examination, and Trial. 3. By way of
Exhortation. 4. By way of Consolation.
Of all these in their order.

By way of Instruction: what a sad condition the most men of the world are in?
Ah! Lord, how few are they whom thou have chosen ever to obtain eternal life?
and yet these are children of wrath by nature as well as others. Poor
creatures! my heart trembles to think of you: How many in this Congregation
yet lie in a condition low enough, and the Lord knows whether ever to be
raised yea or no. If a child should be borne with some natural weakness in
its arms, or legs, and it should live six, or ten, or twenty years, and yet
not be able to use its limbs, you would say it would be a very great hazard if
ever that child did recover its limbs, so as to have the strength and exercise
of it, it would be almost a miracle; It was such a miracle, that in the ninth
of John, when Jesus Christ had restored sight to one that was borne blind, the
Jews would not believe it possible, and ver. 32. we find a positive
determination upon the question, Since the world began, it was never heard that
any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind: How many poor wretches
that are come here into the presence of the Lord, that were all borne blind,
deaf, dead, and have lived some ten, some twenty, some thirty years, some
more, and all this time have continually had all the means that could be
applied to them for recovery, and yet are in the same lost, undone condition?
Ah (my friends!) what can you neither stretch out hand, nor foot, nor tongue,
nor any member, notwithstanding all the means of grace astoorded you for
quickening? Let me tell you, it is ten thousand to one, if you do not perish
for ever: My friends! It is a miracle, a great miracle of mercy, that any one
poor wretch, considering in what condition it is borne, should ever come out
of it. The Jews would hardly believe the report, therefore they say, Joh. 9.
19. Is this your son that was borne blind, how then does he now see? We may
say so concerning every one that has any thing of God in him: Was not this
poor creature borne blind? how does he now see? was not he borne lost? How is
he now raised? but for those that in stead of growing better, are grown ten
times worse, that have hardened their hearts, and gone on in riot, and
wantonness, and are yet in their blood, it is ten to one if ever the Lord say
to them, live; they are grown to such a shameless impudence in wickedness, I
dare not say, there is no hope; But let me sadly say, there is small hope that
ever the Lord should raise such wretches: And if he does not, better ten
thousand times, better (sinner,) had it been for thy soul, that thou had
never seen the light of the morning, nor heard the voice of the Gospel in
thine ears. This is your condition, the Lord awaken you.

Whom we have cause to thank that any of us are this day out of hell. Who art
thou O man that boasts thou art of good parentage, or of a great birth? hark
in what language my Text speaks thy birth: Thou were borne under the
Apple Tree; there thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth
that bare thee. If thy heavenly Father does no more for thee than thy earthly
mother, woe to thee that ever thou were borne. What a boasting we have of
pedegrees, and great descents? What a great word it is in the world, I was
better borne than you, My father was such a Gentleman, so great, so rich, etc.
My mother was of such or such an ancient Family? O vanity! vanity of vanities!
Poor creature! thy mother brought thee forth under an Appletree. The very
heathen out of a mere rational principle, could scoff at such brags: --
Genus and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi Vix ea nostra voco. Tully could
retort to the Roman, bragging of his descent, Domus mea a me incipiet, tua vero
in te desinet, My house shall have its Original from me, my Nobility and
worth; thy Noble Family shall have an end in thy Baseness. Christian! what is
thy birth? consider it but in a spiritual notion; the poorest wretch in the
world is borne in as good a condition as thou art, and thou in no better an
estate toward God than he. Suppose a man were borne of some great parentage,
and had no Lands, no estate left him, but could only boast of fumos, and nomina
vana Catonum, his fathers name, and the smoke of his chimney; Possibly he has
some gorgeous suit of apparel left him, this he wears and glisters in for a
while, yet a little while and these tear, and then he has not a rag left him,
nor a penny to buy one to cover his nakedness: how contemptible would such a
poor wretch be in every man's eyes? And is not this the condition of the most
of the great men, gallants of the world, they glister with an outside a little
in the world, their names are great, their persons admired; yet a little while,
and these wear out, the men dye, and lie down in hell. Ah! that those that
glory would glory in this, that God is their Father, and Jesus Christ their
portion: Thus your Houses would have a beginning of Glory from you, and their
Glory should not end with you.

2. Nor is the boasting of those much better that can boast of their Religious
Parents. I confess it is the better of the two, an heir of Glory being far
more noble than the greatest worldling, and in regard that the Election of God
runs much in a line; but this will not do Christian: Esau was rejected though
he was Isaacs son; and Ishmael though he was Abraham's son. Justus non
gignit justum, gignit hominem; Thy righteous father did not beget thee a
righteous man, but he begat thee a child of flesh, corrupt flesh and blood. Thy
godly mother brought thee forth under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought
thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee. This was the Jews
great brag, that they came forth out of the waters of Judah, and were called by
the name of Israel, and were of the house of Jacob, Isa. 48. 1. They called
themselves of the Holy City, and this made them stay themselves upon the God of
Israel; but for all this observe what God says to them, v. 4, 5, 6, etc. This
was that which the Jews had to boast of to the Lord Jesus Christ, Joh. 8. 33.
We are Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man, how say thou,
you shall be made free? They took it ill, that they being Abraham's seed,
should be so much as supposed to be in a bad condition. But observe how Christ
takes away their brag in the 39. Jesus says unto them, if you were Abraham's
children [that is, his spiritual children] you would do the works of Abraham:
But in plainer English, ver. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
lusts of your Father you will do. Hear this you that had godly parents, and
your selves have no goodness in you. Abraham's faith will carry none to heaven
but himself: your parents faith will want a way of conveyance to do good to
your souls.

Graft a sweet Pear or Plumme upon a wild or sour Crab-stocke, it will grow,
and yield a pleasant fruit, the nature will be changed in the fruit; but now
take the stone or kernel of that fruit, and set it in the earth, it shall not
come forth a Plum-tree, but a Crabstock again. It is thy case (Christian,) thy
parent was a natural Crabstocke, the Lord grafted grace upon him, then he
brought forth sweet and pleasant fruit, worthy of amendment of life: But now
thou art his kernel come out of the earth; thou art not come forth gracious,
but natural. Thy parents grace was by virtue of an inoculation, not by nature.
Therefore to conclude this use, let me mind you of the words of the first
Gospell-preacher, John the Baptist, Mat. 3. ver. 8. Bring forth fruit therefore
worthy of amendment of life, and think not to say within your selves we have
Abraham to our Father. Look to your condition Christians: It is neither your
noble, nor yet gracious parentage, and descent, will carry you to heaven; think
not to say within thy self, I had a gracious parent.

There is no need of Repentance, or faith, or such holy and strict life: if we
be elected, we shall be saved, if not, we shall be damned. Suppose thou be
elected, poor creature yet know thou art borne under the Apple Tree. O turn
not the grace of thy God into wantonness; look to find thy self raised, or
thou shall never see thy soul saved. It is true, for the sins of those whom
the Lord has chosen by name to everlasting life, they are decretally pardoned
from all eternity, and meritoriously pardoned in the death of Christ; but still
they remain as offenses to God, and keep the soul under a real obligation
unto death, till the Lord comes, and actually and formally in justification
acquits the believing soul from hels claim, and frees it out of the Devils
imprisonment. Suppose a condemned man in prison, the Prince has determined to
pardon him, and some friend of his possibly has purchased his pardon for him;
but yet he is in the dungeon in fetters, in the Gaolers hand, till he be
actually set free, etc. So it is with every Elect Vessel. Cheat not thy self
therefore with such licentious, souledeceiving principles of Libertinisme. I
have done with the first Use of Instruction, I pass on to a second.

yet, yea or no. Christians, the weight of your souls hangs upon this
Examination: This was your and my condition, Try therefore your selves whether
you be in the faith or no; prove your own selves, know you not that more, more
than nature is in you] Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. I have
in this place not long since handled this point so fully, that I shall at this
time add very little to what I have already said: Only (it lying so full in my
way) give me leave to speak a word or two, and the Lord speak it to your
hearts. I will speak but four words: 1. Therefore know this, If none has done
more for you than your mother has done, you are under the Apple Tree still.
That is plain in the Text: There your mother brought you forth, there she
brought you forth that bare you. What does our Mother do for us? she
conveighes Nature to us, from her we derive flesh and blood, and our natural
dispositions; if thou be nothing but Nature, thou have nothing of Grace. But
some will say, this is a note as dark as the other: To make it therefore so as
to be understood by the meanest capacities, we must understand that there are
two sorts of Natures, A more corrupt, or a more refined sort of Nature. All
short of Grace is Nature.

1. If thou have nothing seen in thee but corrupt filthy nature, That thy
natural inclination carries thee out to acts of profane wickedness, and thou
have not so much as put a bridle upon thy wild spirit, but letst it run at
random, and carry thee out to drunkenness, wantonness, lying, swearing, all
manner of ungodliness, This thou may be sure of, thou art not raised yet
out of thy hellish danger in which thou were borne, Ephesians. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
Rev. 21. 8. Rev. 22. 15. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

But secondly, If thou have no more than bridled and refined Nature, I call
Bridled Nature, a kind of civility which thou pridest in, that thou art not so
debauched a wretch as others are: It consists first of all in a Negative
righteousness; Thou can say thou art no Papist, no Malignant, and perhaps as
much as the Pharisee, Luke 18. v. 11. I thank thee I am not (as other men are)
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane; Secondly, In a
Positive righteousness; Thou can say, whose Ox have I taken? whose Ass
have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? Thou tythest Mint and Annis, and do
no more to others than thou would be content they should do to thee; thou
art a good Second-table-man, keep the rule of justice strictly; Thus had he
done. To whom Jesus Christ said, (...), One thing is wanting to thee, Go sell
all that thou have; Christian, let me tell thee, all this self-Righteousnes
must be sold, not lost, but slighted. If thou have no more than a Bridled
nature, it is not enough, the young man went away from Christ sorrowful, Mar.
10. The Pharisee went away not justified, Luke 18. ver. 14. Nay secondly, if
thou have no more than a refined Nature, it is nothing, though it be seven
times refined. It is a piece of Nature, That there is a God, Nature reveals
it to men; and that this God is a spirit, and that, Si Deus est animus, etc.
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus. Seeing God is a spirit, he must 1.
Be worshipped. 2. Be worshipped sincerely, Cato could say so; this is all but
Nature, the finest of Nature. Thou may pray in thy Family Morning and
Evening, the Heathen would do as much, they would cry to their Penates, yes
thou may do it, and (without the Common Prayer Book too, I do not read
that they had one in use to worship their Idols with (Nature had given them a
tongue to speak their wants without a Tutor) and yet be a wretch under the
Apple Tree. The Pharisee would be so far from being ashamed to pray in his
Family, that he would not be ashamed to come and pray in the Temple, Luke 18.
v. 10, 11. He fasted twice a week; They fasted often, Mat. 9. 14. They were
strict observers of the Sabbath: how many quarrels had they with our Lord Jesus
Christ for healing, for his Disciples but plucking of ears of corn, on the
Sabbath day? Here was Nature seven times purified and yet for all this Christ
tells his Disciples, Mat. 5. 20. That except their righteousness exceeded the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they should never enter into the
Kingdom of God. Tremble at this you that are liars, Sabbath Breakers, profane
persons, unjust in your Callings, unconscionable in your walkings with God.
Tremble at this you that never pray in your Families, in your Closets; God
never hears of you but when you come to Church, and then to no purpose
neither: you are not yet raised, nay far from it. Flesh and blood might have
revealed this unto you. This is the first Note.

If you have not plucked and tasted of the fruit of the Apple Tree, you are
still but under it. You may remember I construed [under the Apple-tree] out of
Jesus Christ. If you have got no benefit by Jesus Christ, you have no portion
in him; if you be not in him, and if he be not in you: It is the Apostles Note,
2 Cor. 13. ver. 5. Know you not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates. The Apple is in the man that has eat it: Christ is in the soul by
a spiritual union, if the soul has any part in him, or shall ever have any
benefit by him. Free Grace is the fruit of this Apple Tree of Paradise. Are the
Graces of God in you? but some may say, how shall we know that? The tasted
Apple is,

1. Sweet. 2. Cordial. 3. Nutritive. 4. Diffusive.
1. Sweet, Cant. 2. 3. As the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Wood, so is
my Beloved amongst the Sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight,
and his fruit was pleasant to my taste. The Spouse there compares the Lord
Jesus to an Apple Tree, a rare Apple Tree; as an Apple Tree amongst the trees
of the wood. Now he was not only an Apple Tree in himself, a sweet Tree full
of the Apples of Life, and free Grace; but he was [an Apple Tree to her] he was
her beloved, and she sat down under his shadow. Now it was, 1. With great
delight. 2. His fruit was sweet to her taste. If Christ be in thee, and thou
be in Christ, Christ is very sweet to thee, thou sit under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit is pleasant to thy taste, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you
that believe he is precious; His name to thy soul is as an ointment powered
forth, Cant. 1. 3. Why like an ointment powered forth? Mar. 14. v. 3. Joh. 12.
3. When the box of ointment was broken, and powered forth on Christ's head, the
whole house was filled with the savor of it. Is it thus with thy soul
Christian? Is Jesus Christ precious to thee? Is his name to thy soul like an
ointment powered forth? Is thy whole heart filled with the sweet smell of Jesus
Christ? Art thou ravished with his love, his incomprehensible, his unfadomable
love? Is Christ in his Ordinances precious to thy soul, that thou desire the
sincere milk of the word, as the newborn babe desires the milk of the
breasts? Does the very thinking of Christ ravish thy heart? Does the naming of
him carry thy soul almost above it self in an ecstasy of love? Is he like an
Apple to thy taste, that thy mouth is filled with the sweetness of his juice?
High thoughts of Jesus Christ argue that Jesus Christ is spiritually tasted by
thy soul. Art thou melted with his love? It is a sign thou have tasted of the
fruit of the Apple Tree.

2. The tasted Apple is cordial, Cant. 2. 5. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me
with Apples. Cant. 7. 8. The smell of thy nose is like Apples: It is spoken
there of the Church. Apples are cordial in taste, and comfortable in smell. Try
thy self by this Christian: Is Christ cordial to thy soul? when thy soul is
fainting, swooning, in the thoughts of thy self, and thine own wickedness and
vileness, Does it then comfort thee to remember Jesus Christ his love and
merits? Christ is no cordial to wicked, unbeleeving wretches, it terrifieth
them the more to remember Jesus Christ. When the Lord has awakened their
consciences, and startled them in their natural condition, tell them of
Christ, this adds fuel to the flame. Why? It is this Christ, whom they have
scorned, abused, crucified. It is this Christ, concerning whom they have said,
We will not have this Christ to reign over us. Now they think that they hear
that scorned Christ ringing a doleful peale in their ears; Bring those mine
enemies that said I should not rule over them, and slay them before me. But to
the Believer, Christ is comfortable; when he looks upon himself as a great
sinner, the naming of Christ comforts him; Ah! (says he) that is he that dyed
for my sins, and rose again for my justification, Romans 5. 25. When he looks
upon all his righteousness, as a monstrous cloth, and as filthy rags, the
naming of Christ is again a cordial to him; Ah! (says the soul) that is he
that was made for me wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. When he looks upon himself as a debtor to an infinite justice, the
name of Christ is a cordial again; that's he says the soul, that has paid
the debt to infinite justice for me, that for me, has satisfied his Fathers
wrath, that powered out his soul unto death, and was Esa. 53 4, 5, 6, 11, 12.
numbered with the transgressors, that bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressor. That same Christ is he that bore my griefs,
and carried my sorrows, that was smitten of God, and afflicted, that was
wounded for my transgressions, and bruised for mine iniquities, the
chastisement of my peace was upon him, and by his stripes I am healed. When he
looks upon himself as a daily backslider, renewing his sins as the days of
his life, and the mercies of his days are increased, and is ready to swoone in
these sad thoughts, the name of Christ is a cordial again; Ah! (says the
soul) that same Christ is that righteous one that is my advocate 1 John 2. 1.
with the Father, and makes intercession for me. When he looks upon himself,
as unfit to do any duty, and upon all his prayers, as poor, livelesse,
heartlesse duties, and considers, the deadness, dullness, distraction, vanity,
that constantly accompanies him, and is ready to swoone in the thoughts of
this, the naming of Christ is a cordial to him again; Ah! (says the
Christian) that is he, that is the Angel that stands at the Altar, having a
golden Censer, and to him there is given much incence, that he should offer it
up with the Prayers of all Saints, upon the golden Altar which is before the
throne, Rev. 8. 3. Thus now try (Christian) whether thou have tasted of the
fruit of the Apple Tree; is Jesus Christ a Cordial to thy soul, in
soule-swoonings?

3. The apple is Nutritive. Eaten, moderately, and seasonably, it affords
nourishment, and maintains life, and strength: This is a plain consequence
from the other, were it not nutritive it would not be cordial. Try thy self
by this, Christian, whether Christ be in thee yea or no: If he be, thou
derivest strength from him, and he maintains spiritual life in thee. Observe
that place, Joh. 4. v. 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him, shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water springing up to everlasting life. Do thou find that thy heart
is growing? that by a strength derived from Jesus Christ, thou walk and
go on from strength to strength? Do thou find that from a digestion of
Jesus Christ's death, resurrection, and Ascension (the fruits that grow upon
that Apple Tree of free grace) thou gettest strength against thy Corruptions,
against the Devels temptations? that upon thy tasting of Christ thou growest in
grace? when thou tastest him afresh in the Sacrament, if thou have a part in
him, thou will find that he is Nutritive to thy soul, thou will quicken thy
life, and increase thy strength by all the ordinances which hold out, and set
forth, Jesus Christ unto thy soul. God says, that those that are of clean
hands shall grow stronger, and stronger; And that the Righteous shall grow up
like the calves in the stall, which grow apace, and fat. Nay thou will find not
only a growth, but that thou growest from that Nourishment that Christ Jesus
affords thy soul, that thou walk in his strength, and that all the strength
of thy soul is purely derived from him, not from thy own endeavors, and
walkings: Try therefore thy heart Christian, if thou have eaten of the Apples,
thou will find them Nutritive, it will not be like the swallowing of a dry
stone or stick, that have no nourishing quality in them.

Lastly, the Apple Eaten is diffusive, the Virtue, and Nutritive, or comforting
quality and juce of it, diffuseth it self into all the body. If thou have
tasted of Jesus Christ, and have swallowed the Apples of free grace, the virtue
of them diffuseth it self into thy whole soul, and body. Grace is in every
vein of thee. There is something of Jesus Christ, in thy eyes, face, tongue,
hands: and abundance of him in thy heart. Thy head is full of thoughts of
Christ, and plottings, and designs for Christ. The wantonness of thy eye is
restrained by the law of Christ; the vanity of thy tongue is taken away, and
the Lord has made thee one of a pure lanquage; thy hand is awed by Christ,
that it dare not stretch forth it self to do any iniquity; thy feet are
guided by Christ, His word is a light unto thy feet, and a lanthorn unto thy
paths. And now for thy soul and inward man, thy Understanding is full of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, Yea thou have determined with thy self to know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified. Thou see abundance of Christ in the
rich dispensations of free and infinite grace. Thy Will has taken the oath of
Allegiance to Jesus Christ, Thy will is subordinated to his, his will is thy
law, and thy will. Thou art ready to do his will, or suffer his will. Thy
Affections are wholly carried out to Christ, him thou love, desire,
delightest in, above all things in the world whatsoever. In short, It makes
thee to present thy body, as a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, and
this thou judge thy reasonable service. Thou art not conformed to the world,
but thou art transformed by the renewing of thy mind, that thou may try, and
prove what that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of thy God is, Romans 12.
1.

2. Is it thus now with thee Christian? is the virtue of the Apple thus
diffused throughout thy whole Soul? then thou may be of good comfort. So I
have done with the second note of Trial: If thou have not tasted of the fruit
of the Apple Tree, thou art yet but under it.

3. A third note of Trial may be this: Thou may be sure thou could not
pluck, and eat of the fruit of the Apple Tree, without an hand to reach, and a
mouth to eat. Christ is the Apple Tree, faith is the hand; without faith it is
impossible to please God (says the Appostle to the Hebrews) He that believes
not is condemned already. Therefore the Apostle* 2 Cor. 13. 5. says, Examine
your selves whether you be in the faith or no; prove your selves: And this goes
before the next words, Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates. Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, that is his position:
Now if you would know whether Christ be in you or no, you must examine whether
you be in the faith or no. In Scripture you shall frequently find the work
of faith set down as the Action of the feet, coming to Christ; Come unto me
all ye Joh. 6. 35, 37, 45.
that are weary and heavy laden: who so comes to me has everlasting life,
etc. As the Action of the hand, receiving Jesus Christ, as the Action of the
mouth, eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ. All unbeleevers Joh.
6. 51, 53, 54.
are yet out of Christ. Nay more, you must not only have an hand, but such an
hand as will reach, to this end, 1 A true hand. 2 A perfect hand. 3 A lively
hand. -- 1 It must be a true hand. A painted hand reaches nothing; the hand
must be a real hand that plucketh the Apple Tree. There is a great deal of
drossy counterfeit faith in the world. The Devils have some grains of faith
amongst them, the Apostle says, They beloeve and tremble. Wicked and profane
wretches have their degrees of faith too; they will at least tell you they
believe that Christ came into the world, and dyed, they give credence to the
story, etc. But this faith is no true hand, it will pluck never an apple of
Life. -- 2. As the hand must be true, so it must be perfect, it must have
fingers enough to do it: It must be perfect justifying faith, though it reach
not the perfection of faith that a justified person may have. There are
several acts of faith: some will have knowledge to be an act of it; others,
and the most say, that knowledge is supposed to faith, but Assent is the first
and lowest act. Many go hither, and no further, they go away not justified:
but the perfection of that faith which justifies, lies in a trusting too, and
a relyance upon, the Lord Jesus Christ. To this faith are all the promises
pronounced, Blessed is that man that puts his trust in the Lord; And who is he
that sits in darkness, and sees no light? Let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. I say, this is the perfection of that faith which
must be [de necessitate,] necessarily required to justification: It is not the
reflection of faith that is in a justified person. Try thy self, O Christian,
do thou truly believe then, not barely assenting, and giving credence to the
word of God as a word of truth, but being sensible of thy own vileness, and
the insufficiency that is in thy self for any salvation? do thou truly rely
upon Jesus Christ? and this will be tried by the third particular, necessary to
the hand that reaches. -- 3 The hand that reaches must be lively: It must
have a principle of life in it self, and must act in lively operations. The
dead hand, let it be never so true flesh and blood, it reaches nothing, it
has no internal principle of life in it self to carry it out in external
operations of Life: so must it be with the souls hands, that reach, and pluck
the Apples of free grace of the Tree of Life, mentioned, Rev. 22. 1. It must
have an internal principle of Life. The hypocrites faith has no internal
principle of life in it, the soul is not quickened, neither has it any power
to act external operations: Viva fides est operosa, is a known maxim, Faith
in the Saints is powerful, 2 These. 1. 11. The work of faith with power, Jam.
2. 17. Faith without works is dead. Now it is lively, 1. Internally, purging the
heart, It purifieth the heart. 2. Externally, it works by love; it works as
a loving heart toward God; so in acts of love. Faith, if it be true, has not
only a persuading and comforting quality, to persuade the soul of God, and the
faithfulness of him that has promised, and to refresh the soul by staying
upon God, but it has a quickening quality, to enliven the soul, and quicken it
to an holy close walking with God. The same faith that says to the soul, this
promise is the truth of God, stay thy self upon it, says also to the soul,
this precept is the rule of God, walk according to it. Now Christian, try thy
self whether thou have tasted of the fruit of the Apple Tree, whether thou
have a portion in Jesus Christ, yea or no: If thou have reached to thy soul an
Apple of free grace, thou have an hand by which thou did it; it must be a
true hand: Faith is the hand. Have thou not the painted faith of the hypocrite,
but the true faith of the Saints, called by a distinguishing character, The
faith of Gods Elect, Titus 1. v. 1. Have thou not a finger only, but the
perfect hand, that faith which truly justifies thy soul, which does not
consist in a bare notion and knowledge, nor yet in a bare assent, but in a
fiduciall cleaving to the Lord Jesus Christ? Is it lively? as living, in
respect of the inward principle, so lively, in respect of the outward
operations? If so, then it may be a true faith, and thy hand with which thou
have reached the fruit of the Appletree for the comfort of thy soul, may be
such a one as will do it, and thy hope may be upon good and justifiable
grounds; but if not, deceive not thy own soul, Christ and you are strangers
yet, and thou art out of Christ. I shall add but one Note more, which shall be
yet further for the clearing of this. Lastly therefore know, Thou can have no
such hand, unless it be given thee from above. The hand of Faith is none of
Natures products. Alas, how many cheat themselves with Faith, when the Devil
has (indeed) as much true faith as they have? There is a natural persuasion,
and there is a moral persuasion, and there is a traditionall persuasion, and a
diabolical persuasion, all these differ from the work of Faith, which is
true, and that hand which must reach Jesus Christ to my soul.

1. There is a natural persuasion. Nature has principles to persuade the
soul by to some Assent: Nature persuades us, there is a God, and he must be
worshipped. Look upon me says Nature, Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba
Deum, I have not a spire of grass, but tells thee there is a God. See the
variety, greatness, beauty of my work; Read a great God, in a great Whale or
Elephant; a beauteous God, in a glorious flower; A wise God, in my choice of
works. Behold a God, in the order thou have seen in me. See him in my Law
written in thy heart, Romans 2. 15. From these and such like things, Nature
bequeathes a faith to the soul, and learnes it, credere Deum, to believe a
God: But this is far from faith, not only from justifying faith, but also from
faith, as to that point. It wants that steadiness of assent which must be in
assent when an act of faith. A Roman writ to Tully, to write him something
concerning the immortality of the soul. Tully writ back again to him, Evolve
libr^m Platonis and nihil amplius est quod desideres. Read (says he) Plato's
Book over concerning it, and you will desire no more. The Roman returns him
answer, Evolvi, iterum atque iterum evolvi, etc. I have read it over, says he,
again and again, but I know not whence it is, when I read it, I assent to
it, but I have no sooner laid the book out of my hand, but I begin to doubt
again, whether the soul be immortal yea or no. So it is with all persuasion
from natural principles; as to that extent of Doctrine it would persuade us of,
the persuasion that arises from them is faint, and weak; one while we think
it is true, another while we question, or deny the same principle. Natural
persuasion is no faith; if Nature gave thee all thou have, thou have none at
all.

Secondly, If it be Moralities gift to thee, it is no faith. I call that a
Moral persuasion, which is wrought from the consideration, and improvement of
Moral Principles: if thou be persuaded to rest, and rely upon God and his
promises for salvation, merely upon this skore, I live justly, I tithe Mint
and Annis, I have taken no man's Ox or Ass from him, whom have I defrauded?
Alas, thus Aristides and Cato might believe.

Thirdly, If thy Faith be thy grandfathers Legacy to thee, it is no hand that
will reach the Lord Jesus Christ. A traditionall persuasion is no faith. If
thou be persuaded that Christ dyed for thee, etc. upon this skore, My Mother
told me so, our forefathers held so, and they were wiser than we, etc. Alas
friend, there is as much difference betwixt faith, and thy soul, as there is
betwixt heaven and hell. This was the Samaritanes Religion, which the good
woman was as tenacious of, as ours are now of the Common Prayer Book, Joh. 4.
20. Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you say in Jerusalem is the
place to worship. It is the great objection we have against the Church of
Rome, That they would have men believe as the Church believes: But for the most
part we are condemned in what we condemn. Do not most men believe as their
Fathers believed? What a sin it is thought to think of stripping Queen
Elizabeth's Reformation? Are not most men limited to this faith? and is not
here all the persuasion that men have of the saving Truths of God, that Christ
was God and man, that he dyed, rose, and is ascended? Why? this was our Fathers
Faith, this we were taught when we were little ones. and upon this skore
(being persuaded) they must go under the Notion of Believers; and when heaven
and hell meet, this Faith shall save them.

Fourthly, If thy faith be the Devils gift to thee, it is no hand that will
reach Christ. The Devil has his Apes-faced-Graces; Moral walking instead of
Gospell-obedience; Fear of Hell in stead of fear of God; and so presumption
instead of Faith. He carries too great designs. 1. To flatter the soul to
hell, by presumption. Think nothing ill of thy self says the Devil, venture
upon God, let it never trouble thee, venture all, yes do, and cry confidently,
Lord, Lord, open to me, I have prayed in thy name, etc. He knows well enough,
that the answer will be, Depart from me, I know you not, you workers of
iniquity. Fear not, says the Devil, to apply hot boiling Lusts to the
bleeding wounds of Christ, you may rest upon him that dyed for you, though you
do not take any such care to live strictly and holily with him: other folk
shall go to heaven besides Puritanes; God is merciful. Is thy faith such a
one as this Christian? O tremble at that Mat. 7. 24. And would not one think
that this were the miserable faith of most of men. It is impossible, but when
you hear so many peales in your ears of repentance, as you hear in these
days, but you should have some thoughts what shall become of your poor souls:
And who so looks upon your lives again, and sees no repentance, no sitting
down and saying, What have I done? no care of future obedience, but a loose
irreligious walking; would he not be confident that the Devil has persuaded
you to venture? it is but a soul lost, (but poor wretch it is lost for ever)
and Christ is merciful (but to no such hell hounds as thou art wretch) O Lord!
it would make an heart tremble to come to some poor Creatures upon their
Deathbed, and examine the condition of their souls: Why? they are well, they
rest upon Jesus Christ, they are confident he will save them, (who is bolder
than blind Bayard, is our Country Proverb?) though all know, the wretch never
was sensible of his lost condition, nor ever careful to conform himself in
the least to Jesus Christ. Faith is not the devils gift. Diabolical persuasion
widely differs from faith. But lastly.

Fifthly, Faith is the gift of God. It is grounded upon divine persuasion, The
Spirit of God, and the Word of God, and the Merits of Jesus Christ: these are
the grounds that persuade the soul to rely upon Jesus Christ, Romans 14. 14. I
know my self, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus Christ. The worldling is
persuaded after another fashion, from natural or moral Principles, or
Tradition; or at best, as concerning Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 21. There is an evil
Spirit gone forth, and said, I will persuade him; and the Lord has permitted,
and assented to it, ver. 22. Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also. But
now the child of God is persuaded another way; come to him, and ask him,
Christian, what persuades thee to rest upon Jesus Christ? he answers with
Paul, I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus Christ. Sir, Ah Sir, I was
despairing almost, and the spirit of God by its inward motions inclined me to
roll my self on Christ, Or the word of God persuaded me, I heard a Voice
saying, come, I knew, he that had promised was faithful and able to perform
it, Romans 4. 21. Faith is the gift of God, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 8. It is
the Fathers work and gift, the Sons gift and work, the 1 Phil. 3. 9.
Spirits work, and the Words work, 1. It is the Fathers work and gift, John
6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me; Faith is of his [willing]
John 6. 40. It is the Sons gift and work, I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus Christ; It is a piece of Grace, and Christ is the wellhead of all divine
Grace, 1 Cor. 1. 4. He is therefore called, The author and finisher of our
faith, Hebr. 12. 2. It is the gift and work of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. 9.
To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another, faith by the
same Spirit. It is therefore reckoned as one of the Spirits works, Gal. 5. 22.
It is a fruit of the Spirit. It is wrought by the Word, which therefore is
called, the Word of faith, Romans 10. 8. Now try thy self Christian, whether thy
hand be a true hand: Is thy faith a gift of God wrought by his Spirit, and
grounded upon his Word? such must that hand be that plucketh the fruit of this
Appletree of free grace; Not man's, much less the devils gift, but Gods gift:
it will quicken thee in Gods ways, but I spoke of that before. I have now done
with my rules of examination; the Lord perfect this Application in every one of
your souls.

To all those that are through the mercy of God recovered out of that sad
condition in which we were all by Nature, that are now cleansed, washed and
sanctified. You hear, what you were by Nature, borne out of Christ, Children
of wrath as well as others: has the Lord raised you up? has he given you to
taste of the Apples of freegrace? let the remembrance of your former condition
persuade you, 1. To get thankful hearts. 2. To get pitying hearts. 3. To keep
humble hearts. A word or two of each of these.

1. Let this consideration persuade with you to get thankful hearts; Let
every soul of you say, sing, that 103 Psalm, verse 1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord,
O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O
my soul, and forget not his benefits; who has forgiven all thine iniquities,
who has healed all thy diseases, etc. to the 6. verse. Christians, I have
heard a Story of a Gentleman, that having rid over a dangerous Passage in the
night, returning in the morning to see it, at the beholding of it, sunk down
and dyed; Astonishment killed him. Ah, Christian, would thou be but persuaded
in the morning of thy Conversion, when the Lord has brought thy soul to
himself, would thou be but persuaded to look with a serious eye of
meditation, what dangers thou have escaped, now many times in the mad age of
thy youth thou ranst over everlasting burnings, and were just sinking; would
thou but remember how often thou dividedst an hair betwixt thy soul and hell,
and this not once, but again, and again; that the Devil had not thy soul
only in chase, but was bearing at thee many a time, and hell was opening its
jaws upon thee, and thy soul was just going alive into the pit. Ah,
Christian, would thou but think of this, me thinks thou should even be
ready to sink down, and dye in astonishment: nay rather live, Christian,
ascend, let thy heart ascend in praises; O say, Bless the Lord, O my soul; My
heart, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name; My tongue, and all that
is without me, sing unto his glory. Ah! what a miracle of mercy it is that ever
one poor soul should come to heaven? Stand amazed at it, O my soul! were not
we all borne blind? How do any of us see? O now let us all say with David,
Psalm 116. verse 16. O Lord! truly we are thy servants, we are thy servants,
and the children of thine hand-maidens, for thou have loosed our bonds. I shall
shut up this first Branch of the Exhortation, with the words of the blessed
Apostle, Romans 12. verse 1, 2. Now, I beseech you (brethren) by the mercies of
God, that you offer up your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service: And be not conformed to this world, but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is
that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God. Ah, Christians, God
deserves your hearts and hands. O be thankful. But I shall now pass over
this first Branch of the Exhortation, and the rather, because I shall have a
more full opportunity to meet with it again, and press it more home in the
next Doctrine: which I shall note from those words, I raised thee.

Secondly, were you, even you Christians, also out of Christ when your Mother
brought you forth? Ah, methinkes then, the sense of your own misery should
call for the yernings of your souls to those poor creatures that are yet in
it. I beseech you therefore brethren, to put on (as the elect of God holy and
beloved) bowels of mercies. It was the Apostles exhortation, Col. 3. verse. 12.
though in another case. Ah, how many objects of such Charity is there every
where? How many poor wretches in every Congregation, in every family, that the
Lord knows are yet in the state of Nature? It is ten to one but all of us
have either an Husband, or a Wife, a Father, or a Mother, or a child, or a
brother, or a sister, or a friend so. As the Elect of God put on bowels of
mercy for them, pity them, pray for them, mourn before God for them; pluck
them, as brands out of the fire: you know what their condition is, how sad and
deplorable, and what an object of pity they are. We that never were yet in
the Spanish Inquisition, nor ever were yet in the Turkish Captivity, yet from
but the mere reports of the slavery that poor Creatures suffer there, our
souls yerne toward their sufferings, and we sometimes could weep to think
of them, and could be content to part with some pence to contribute toward
their relief. So for our poor brethren of Ireland, though (praised for ever
be our God) we have not seen such butcherings, and rapes, as they have done,
nor felt such penury and pinching want as they have done, yet he scarce
deserves the name of a Christian amongst us that has not a yerning soul
toward them, that does not pray for them, that is not afflicted to hear those
sad and doleful relations concerning their sufferings, and that would not to
his ability contribute something to relieve them. Ah, (Christians,) that you
would be but as sensible of soule-evills, as bodily trifling calamities. Is
not, think you, the Captivity of hell as sad and dreadful as to be a Turkish
Gally-slave? Is not it as sad to be under the Devils clutches as it can be to
be in the fingers, and under the power of the Irish Rebels. Alas! let them do
what they can, they shall do no more but kill the body, there is their malice
spit, if that be done; but here both body and soul are in danger for ever.
And my friends, do you think that the Turk has the tenth part of the Captives
that the Devil has? Do you think there is not ten thousand times more poor
souls under the Devils Lashes, than there is Christians under the power of
the Irish Rebels? and have they a sword, have they torments like him? and
where is the soul mournes over the Drunkard, vain person, the swearer, or
blasphemer? where is the soul that says to him, what are you about to do?
and yet I dare say, here is not one in this Congregation, that has not a
Father, or a Mother, a child, a brother, or a sister, or a friend, in that
Captivity. O Christians, consider, did not you need pity and prayers, think
you, when you were there? O, save others with fear, pulling them out of the
fire: O pray, pray. It may be it is but yet a day, and this Herod, the Devil,
intends to make an end of these poor souls: Cry, cry mightily to God for your
poor Children, Friends, Acquaintance. Hark how the Church of the Jews prayed
for the Church of the Gentiles when they were strangers to God, Cant. 8. verse
8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our
sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? So say, O Lord, I have a
little Child, a Father, a Mother, an Husband, a Brother, a Sister, a Friend,
that has no grace; Lord what shall I do for her in the day when she shall be
spoken for. Remember your own misery, and you will pity their poor souls.

Thirdly, and lastly, Were you all borne out of Christ? in a sad undone
condition by Nature? Then let me persuade you to keep humble hearts: Remember
but what you were. It is enough to tame the swellings of your spirits, to
think that you were not borne worth a ragge to cover your nakedness, you were
cast out into the open field, to the loathing of your person. It was that which
the Apostle urged, to bring down the swellings of pride in the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 4. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou that
thou did not receive? Now if thou have received it, why do thou glory as if
thou had not received it? Let me apply those very words to thy soul
Christian. Art thou proud of thy gifts, and proud of thy graces, that thou
differest from another, and excellest another, others are nothing to thee, etc.
I beseech thee to consider, who makes thee to differ? How came there to be
such a difference betwixt thee and other Christians? I am sure you were once
both under the Apple Tree together, there your mothers brought you forth, there
she brought you forth that bare you. Has Christ made thee to differ? What have
thou then that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why
did thou glory as if thou had not received it? Will thou boast? boast of
thy own then Christian; boast of thy works, not of thy gifts: give Christ his
own, and thou art not worth a farthing, yea the Lord knows ten thousand times
worse than a beggar. We say, (and truly too) that one that has been very
scandalous, if ever the Lord brings him in, he had need be very circumspect
and humble. And so concerning one that has been of a very low and mean
condition, and by the mere favor of the Prince is raised up to some great
dignity, we say it will be a great deal of policy in him to carry himself
humbly in his place. Truly, Christian, I know no actual difference, by
Nature, betwixt thee, and the vildest damned Reprobate in Hell. Indeed there
was a difference in God the Fathers Book of Election, and in Christ's Book of
Redemption, (which is but a transcript of the other) but a Creature difference
there was none, no selfe-difference at all. Has the Lord brought thee in? thou
had need walk humbly, and circumspectly. Philip would have the Boy to cry at
his Chamber door, Philippe memento mortalis es; Philip thou art a mortal man,
remember it: be not proud of thy Empire, thy Diadem must lie down in the dust.
I would have the Christian that the Lord has given great gifts, and parts, to
be minded of his first estate: I would have my Text written in his heart,
repeated in his ears. O remember, Christian, who it was that Raised thee up
under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought
thee forth that bare thee. And now I have done with my Use of Exhortation in
its several Branches.



1. To those that upon serious examination the Lord has made seriously
sensible, that to this hour they are out of the Lord Jesus Christ, if yet they
be willing to get into him.

2. To those of Gods people that walk with sad hearts, for the spiritual
estate of their children, husbands, wives, friends, etc. considering that they
were all borne out of Christ, and for ought they can yet see they have yet no
portion in him.

For the first, Is there any whose hearts the Lord has smitten with the sad
apprehensions of this Truth, that they are all borne out of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that begin to say, what shall we do to be saved? Lo here is some
comfort yet, though thou be borne for the present out of Christ, yet
possibly thou may be borne under the Appletree, yea for ought thou know
thou art. Christ is the Apple Tree, Christ exhibited in his Gospel, in the
preaching of the Word, etc. is a glorious Apple Tree, full of ripe Apples,
dropping into the hands of every soul that does but lift up his believing hand
to take and eat. This is certain, whomsoever Gods secret will shuts out of
heaven his revealed will shuts out none who does not shut out himself. Come
therefore, Turn, turn, why will thou dye O thou sinful creature? For ought
thou know, thou art in no worse condition than Manasses, and Paul, and Mary
Magdalene, all of them were borne such as thou art. Christ calls, Hoe every one
that thirsts, come, etc. Come then, let not thy sins hinder thee; there is
merit enough and mercy enough in him, O let not faith be awanting in thee.
Behold, it is now Autumn with us, Autumn indeed, for Gospell-dispensations
have been but as green Apples formerly, to the times wherein the Lord has cast
our lot, never was there such a plenty of soule-enlightening powerful
preaching; plenty enough, the Lord grant we surfeit not with it. O reach out an
hand, take, eat, live. To encourage, consider how the Lord pleads with you.
Some Apple Trees are so laden with fruit, that when the Apples grow once to
their full quantity, the boughs bend even to the hand of the gatherer: such my
friends are our days, the boughs laden with Apples of free Grace, even bend
again to your souls; O take, eat, and your souls shall live The Autumn is
plenteous. The Gospel is free, you may take what you will it shall cost you
nothing. Christ even bends to you laden with Apples of Love. Ah! how he
reaches out himself to your souls; despair not, only pluck and eat; you
are under the Apple Tree.

Secondly, Is there any one here that has a child, husband, wife, friend,
brother, sister, etc. that he can have no comfort concerning, in regard that
they can see no sigues of grace in them, let this comfort them yet, they may be
under the Apple Tree; though the Lord has not discovered himself yet to their
souls, yet he may do it: All the Apples are not gathered off the Tree of
Life, it is laden yet; pray, cry for them, mourn for them, the Lord may yet
give them an heart to repent. I think it was Ambrose told Saint Austines
mother, being sadly lamenting the condition of her son then a Manichee: Be of
good comfort (says he) it is impossible that a son of so many tears should
perish. I will not say so concerning any one, but I will say, vix probabile
est, it is scarce probable, that a child or friend of many tears and prayers
should perish: Give not over therefore mourning over them, crying, praying to
God for them, the Gospell-day lasts. What though thy friend by his life yet
declares himself to be out of Christ, yet he may be under the Appletree for
ought thou know, though not upon it, yet under it. Christ that saw Nathaniel
under the Fig Tree, may see thy child or friend under the Apple Tree, and call
him, and raise him up: it is Christ's place where he uses to raise his Elect
ones.

I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
THE SPOUSE Raised FROM Under the APPLE TREE: OR, The way by which Children of
Wrath come to be made the Children of Grace.

Opening the Doctrine of our Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, both in
respect to the Purchase and Application.

By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Isa. 63. 5. And I looked and there was none to help, and I wondered that there
was none to uphold, therefore my own arm brought salvation unto me. LONDON,
Printed for Rich: Tomlins. 1649.

The Spouse raised from under the APPLE TREE.
CANT. 8. ver 5. I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother
brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
I Have now done with my first general Doctrine, containing Man's misery: He
was brought forth under the Apple Tree, there his mother brought him forth,
there she brought him forth that bare him.

I am now come to the second General part, expressing Gods mercy to poor man,
fallen, and undone in this condition, expressed in those words, I raised thee,
you may observe, 1. The Agent, I. 2. The Act, Raised. 3. The Object, Thee.

I, thy Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus Christ, [raised] It presupposes a fall, I
helped up [thee] My Spouse being in a sad and undone condition.

The Doctrine is shortly this:

Doct. 2. That it is the Lord Jesus Christ that helps his redeemed ones out
of their undone condition.

1. I shall enlarge and prove this truth in the general, In these particulars,
1. He was designed to do it. 2. He can do it. 3. He must do it, for none
else could. 4. He has done it. 5. He will do it. After this I shall explicate
to you the manner how the Lord Christ raised up his servants under the
Appletree, then thirdly I shall give you the reasons, and lastly, I shall come
to Application. First, in regard that the Doctrine is propounded indefinitely,
I shall prove it to you in several particulars, which possibly may some of
them bear the force of Reasons too.

1. He was designed to do it. It was a design of Eternity that Jesus Christ
should step out of heaven, and raise up his elected ones from their lost
condition: therefore Christ is said by the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 3.
ver. 2. To be an High Priest, faithful to him that appointed him. The
business from Eternity lay thus: Here is man lost, and here are those amongst
others lost (says God the Father to his Son) that I have given thee for a
portion, what shall be done for man? Well, yet I will study to do good to a
wretched creature: Thou shall in the fullness of time go and be borne of
flesh and blood, and dye for them, and satisfy my justice, and they shall be
thine for a portion; therefore they are called the Lords Redeemed ones, Isa.
35. 9. The holy People, the redeemed of the Lord. Isa. 62. 12. This thou shall
do (says the Father) and upon these terms they shall live, believing in thee.
This was Gods Covenant with the Son of his love for us: For it is worth the
noting, that though the Covenant of Works was made betwixt the Lord and Adam
personally, yet the Covenant was made with Christ, and all us in him
mystically; this the Apostle largely proves, Gal. 3. 26. The promises were made
to Abraham and his seed: he says not to seeds, as of many, but as of one; And
to thy seed, which was Christ. The Covenant was made then betwixt God and our
representative, The Lord Jesus Christ. God says, thou shall go and dye for
them, and I will yet save them, believing in thee. Content, says the Lord
Jesus Christ, I will go, and fulfill thy pleasure, and they shall be mine for
ever. I will in the fullness of time dye for them, and they shall live in me,
Psalm 40. verse 6. Burntoffering and Sinne-offering thou have not required,
[no it was Self-offering] Then said I, Lo I come; in the Volume of thy book
it is written of me, [to do thy will, O my God, Hebr. 10. verse 5, 6.] In
what Book was it written, that Christ should come to do the will of God? It
was written in Ciphers in the Ceremonial Law, it was written in plainer
English in the Prophets, But it was written in the Book of Gods Decrees; in
this sense, the Lord Jesus Christ is called, Rev. 13. verse 8. The Lamb slain
before the beginning of the World. And in regard of Gods Decree, we may say,
the Saints were redeemed, pardoned, Justified from eternity. His Father from
before all time appointed him to be our High Priest, and he from before all
Eternity subscribed to his Fathers pleasure in it. Thus from Eternity he raised
us up.

Secondly, as he was designed to do it, so it was not a work beyond the
greatness of his strength: God in doing it, laid help on one that was mighty.
There was power enough in his mercy, price enough in his merits, to have bought
more than the handful of his redeemed ones out of the hands of the Devil, had
they been to be sold. It is a slandering thought of infinite mercy, for me to
think, there is no balm in Gilead, there is no Physician there: though our
sins be mighty, yet he that has help laid upon him, is mighty too; and the
might of our sins is nothing to the power of his mercies. He was God as well
as man: his manhood made him our helper, his Godhead made him a Mighty helper,
able to pardon all the sins of his Saints, and to furnish all their souls
with long white Robes of his Righteousness.

Yea, thirdly, Such a work it was to raise us, that it was he alone that
could do it: all heaven and earth had been at a loss for a satisfaction for
divine Justice, if it had not satisfied it self upon it self. See it in Gods
word, Isaiah 63. verse 5. And I looked, and there was none to help, and I
wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought
salvation to them. And so Isaiah 59. verse 16. And he saw there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor; therefore his arm brought salvation
unto him, and his righteousness sustained him. He saw none would: (And no
wonder at that, for none could;) but if they could they would not. All
creatures would have been like the Priest and Levite, Luke 10. verse 31, 32.
they would have passed by on the other side. Christ was he that was the good
Samaritane only, that had compassion on us. Ez. 16. verse 5. None eye pitied
us, to do any thing to us that might do us any good: we were cast out in the
open field to the loathing of our person in the day wherein we were borne. But
if they would, yet none could. Alas! they had been all Physicians of no value;
man had been past their cure. Here was the state of a poor Creature: An
infinite debt was due to infinite justice, for man's offense; Alas, where shall
it be had? as Job said concerning wisdom, Job 28. 13, 14. Man knows not the
price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living. The depth says
it is not in me, and the sea says it is not with me, etc. So may we say: The
Angels said, it is not in us; for could we assume bodies and dye, yet we were
but finite Creatures, and there could not be an infinite value in our death.
Come we down to the earth, the Beasts and other Creatures say, it is not in
us: for is God pleased with the deaths of Bullocks, and Goats, and Lambs? Ah,
no! what says David, Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it; thou
delightest not in burnt Offering. And again, Psalm. 40 verse 6. Sacrifice and
Offering thou did not desire; Burnt-Offering and Sinne-Offering thou have not
required. Besides, how shall the flesh of Bulls satisfy the guilt of another
Nature? Man said* it is not in me: No, Physician heal thy self; We were all
sinners, and how should we pay the debt, that if we could have paid our
brothers debt, had had as great a one for our selves to pay? Can that
Malefactor by his suffering death, expiate for another, when himself deserves
to dye also, and stands condemned to death for his own demerits? Besides, had
all mankind dyed, they had been but as so many Prisoners laid in Jail for
debt that had not a groat to pay; their lying in hell for ever had paid no
debts, but still increased them. Well, how shall the satisfaction be made? shall
we buy man off? Alas no, Salvation cannot be gotten for gold, nor shall silver
be weighed for the price of it, it cannot (as job says of wisdom) be valued
with the gold of Ophyr, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphir: The Gold and the
Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of
fine gold: no mention shall be made of Corals, and of Pearls, for the price
of salvation is above Rubies. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it,
neither shall it be valued with pure gold: whence then comes salvation? and
where is the place of it, seeing it is hid from all l^ving eyes, and kept close
from the Fowls of the air. Destruction and Death say, we have heard the fame
thereof with our ears. God, Christ, understands the way thereof, and he
knows the place thereof. Let us consider but what was necessarily required, of
whosoever should raise l^st, fallen man, and we shall find this plain enough,
that if Christ had not raised us up, we had not been raised to this day. I
conceive these four things were required of him that should undertake the
raising, and redemption of man, in point of Justice and Reason, so as to gain
acceptance with God.

First, One that could dye: God had made it his Statute; The day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Nothing but blood would do it, Hebr. 9.
22. Without shedding blood there is no remission. Justice must have its course.
Now upon this score, neither any person of the Trinity, (as merely so) nor any
Angel in Heaven could help us; for these had no blood to shed: And without
shedding of blood there is no pardon, and remission of sins.

Secondly, It must be the offending Nature that must satisfy again. God is
the Fountain of Justice, he will not let the beasts suffer for man's
transgression: The Lords ways are equal; The soul that sins that shall
dye. Ezech. 18. 4. This shuts out all the Earth, but mankind, from making a
sufficient satisfaction to infinite justice.

Thirdly, It must be one that can merit and satisfy by death: for if by death
he barely pays his own debts, what becomes of ours? You would laugh at that
Debtor, that if himself owes five hundred pound, would undertake with four
hundred to discharge both himself and another too: or at a Malefactor, that
being condemned himself to dye, should offer to his fellow under the same
condemnation to dye for him. Now upon this score all mankind is excluded,
from finding out in it self a sufficient Savior: they are all under the same
condemnation, and when every one lay under a guilt and condemnation to dye for
himself, surely none could merit for another by dying; especially if we
consider,

Fourthly, that the Savior of man was not only to satisfy, but to pay an
infinite satisfaction. It was was an infinite God, an infinite Justice that was
offended, and must be satisfied; and a finite satisfaction would have been too
short a pay for an infinite debt. And now upon this score again are all
creature-satisfactions excluded. Let them do their utmost, infiniteness is
not in them, they have a bottom may be seen. Now by this time, me thinks
you should be wondering at man's salvation, and crying out, Lord how comes any
man ever in heaven? The Text tells you, I raised you. Christ did the work.
Hark, Christian, and I will tell thee, neither heaven nor earth could save
thee alone: there was nothing in heaven could suffer, and there was nothing on
earth could satisfy; and as there was no mercy without satisfaction, so there
could be no satisfaction without suffering: Heaven and earth therefore must be
mingled together. From Heaven we must have a satisfying Nature, from earth a
guilty Nature, and a suffering person. God the Father says to Christ, thou
shall go and do it. Christ says I go: It is written that I should do thy
will: Father, it is my delight, I am content to do it. But how shall it be
done? (says God) There shall spring up a branch out of the root of Jesse. A
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son; and that Son shall be my Son; yet
my Son shall not be her Son; he shall take unto him the humane Nature, and
he shall be despised, smitten of God, rejected of men, full of sorrows; yea,
he shall dye, and by death satisfy my wrath. Thus, in carne patitur Deus
creator ne caro creaturae patiatur. God the Creator suffers in the flesh of the
Creature, that the flesh of the Creature might not suffer. I raised thee (says
he) yes, he did it, when none else could do it: his arm brought salvation to
us, when every creatures Arm was too short; yea and he did it alone, he
needed no other; his own merits were enough in themselves, for they were
infinite, and they were enough to his Father, for his Father says he was well
pleased with him; and as he needed none, so he had no other, Isaiah 63. verse
3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with
me. I raised thee (says he) yes, it was he, and he alone: so I have made out
my third Proposition. Yet further,

Fourthly, he has done it. This is more than all the Prophets could say, they
could believe that he would raise his redeemed ones, we can say he has done
it: He has raised all of them meritoriously, some of them actually. I
understand by Raising, a contrary condition to our Original condition in which
Adam left us, he has brought them out of their misery, who were his elected
and redeemed ones; He has pardoned their sins, acquitted them of their
guilt, paid their debts, set them clear again in Gods books, and this he has
done for all those that are his Spouses (for to them only he speaks, saying, I
raised thee) meritoriously, when he dyed upon the Cross for them: he did it
intentionally from all Eternity, he gave his word to his Father for the debt
that it should be paid upon demand; but when he dyed, he made payment and
discharged his word; yet he does not come and proclaim the soul discharged
till justification, when the Lord actually and formally acquits the soul from
all, and accepts it as perfectly clear of all accounts due upon any score
whatsoever to God; and therefore I say in the second place, That some he has
raised Actually, that is, Actually and formally justified them, pardoning all
their sins, and imputing his own righteousness to them, and accepting of them
as Righteous for his own sake, even for his own Names sake. He has done it
meritoriously, he said upon the Cross, All is finished; he bore our griefs,
the chastilement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we were healed
(says the Apostle) Isa. 53. And he has done it for some Actually, having
justified them, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God:
where the Apostle speaks of justification, as of a past act of grace,
concerning the believing Romans, and so 1 Cor. 6 1. concerning the believing
Corinthians. And Christ is still justifying every day all his time is spent,
either in reading pardons for his redeemed Saints, or in presenting Petitions
from them, and pleading for them: I raised thee, I have done it, and I will do
it. That is my last Proposition.

Fifthly, He will do it. I mean actually and formally; he has done it
already. 1. By the engaging of his word to his Father, nay more than so, by
paying down the price, his father abated him not an ace, he paid every groat,
yea and left a surplusage too, only he has not taken out their pardon yet; the
Actual and formal discharging of some is behind, but they need not fear, it
is to come out of course, without a farthing more paid, 1 John 1. 9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins. There
is not a farthing more due, and it were injustice with God to deny
justification to those that sue it out by confession of their sins, and
seeking of his face. God speaks of it here therefore as done [I raised thee.] I
take the words to imply the whole reparation of mankind: I mean that part of
mankind whom the Lord had from Eternity chosen to everlasting life, and for
whom Jesus Christ had paid the Ransom of his precious blood. Christ, I say,
speaks of it here as done, because of the certainty of it. Take only one
place for this, John 10. 27, 28, 29. My sheep he are my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave
me them is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Fathers hand; I and my Father are one. Observe the thing proposed, to be
confirmed, that is, that those that are Christ's should never perish. Now to
root this in their minds, he tells them, 1 That they were his sheep, and he
kew them, they could not be lost then, at unawares, and he not miss them. 2.
They were his Fathers gifts to him, therefore they should not be lost, he
would have a care of his Fathers lovetokens. 3 But may they not be taken away?
No: for 1. He is resolved to give them eternal life. 2. He has given his sure
word for it: Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. They cannot do
it whether he will or no; for (says he) my Father which gave them me is
greater than all. Yea and further, I and my Father are one. My own power, and
my fathers power united, are engaged for their preservation. Those therefore
that are elected, though for the present they may be out of Christ, yet they
shall be raised. But what I have already said may be enough to prove the (...)
of the Doctrine, that it is Jesus Christ that raises his elected ones out of
their natural undone condition. It is he that was designed by the Father to
do it, that can, and that alone could do it; he therefore must, or none else
can: that he has done it meritoriously for all his Elect, and actually for
some of them, and that in his due time he will do it actually and formally for
all. Now for a little further explication and clearing of this truth, let us
examine how he has done, or will do it? To that question I shall answer in
these particulars, and indeed the answer may be drawn out of what I have
already said.

First, he did it, [stipulatione.] by entering into a Covenant, and engaging his
word for us: The Covenant of Grace (from which flows all salvation to poor
Creatures) was originally made with the Lord Jesus Christ, as I before prooved
from Gal. 3. 15, 16. Christ engaged himself to his Father, for the fulfilling
of the Law, and satisfying his Fathers wrath for us: and hence it is, that the
Prophet says, speaking Prophetically concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, He
shall bear their iniquities, Isaiah 53. verse 11. and Isa. 53. 6. He has laid
upon him the iniquity of us all. and verse 5. He was bruised for our
iniquities. With what Justice could God our Father lay our iniquities upon the
Lord Jesus Christ? Christ was a guiltless person, nor could we engage him in
our cause; but it was a voluntary engagement that himself entered to his
Father. As it is with us; A poor Debtor is ready to be arrested for a debt
that he is not able to pay, there is no way but one, either pay or to prison:
Let him have never so rich, and great friends, the Creditor cannot charge a
farthing of the Debt upon them, it is no Justice. But if this poo^^ Debtor has
some rich friend that will step in and say, Sir, this is my friend, I pray be
patient with him, I will undertake for the debt, I will engage my word and
bond, that the debt shall be paid at such a time, or when you will please to
call for it, etc. The Creditor it may be will be so favorable as to say, Sir,
I know you are able to do it, if you will engage your word, I shall spare your
friend; pay it at such a time, or when you will set the time, and I will acquit
your friend. The engagement is entered in the Creditors Book, and from that day
forward the Creditor looks upon this his Debtors friend, as now by his own
voluntary engagement become his Debtor, and never regards his old Debtor more.
This is our case, Adam had run us in debt, an infinite debt, which neither he
nor we are able to pay; A Writ of Vengeance was out, mankind ready to be
arrested and bound in Chains, and thrown into an everlasting prison, from
whence he should have been sure never to come out, till he had paid the
utermost farthing, which he could never have done with all the friends and
estate he could have made: Jesus Christ seeing some of his elected friends that
his Father had given him, having their names in the Writ, steps in and says,
Father, these are my friends, Isa. 63. 8. Surely they are my people, children
that will not lie, so he was their Savior) I will undertake their debt upon
me, charge it upon my score, I will pay every farthing, if thou please to
accept it, it shall be paid at such a time, (Gal. 4. 4. When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
sons.) The Father accepts this tender: therefore he is styled, Gods beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased. The word is [in whom (...)] An emphaticall
word, which generally signifies to love, but more specially, and properly, it
signifies to love something by adhering to it with the mind and heart, and so
to be content, and fully satisfied with it, that one desires nothing else. Me
thinks I cannot but observe three things in it. 1. God signifies by it that he
is pleased with him, and with his tender: As if we should say, I like that
well. 2. God signifies by it, that he is fully content with him, so that he
desires nothing else: As if we should say, I desire no better security than his,

3. God does signify by it, that he will trust to it: As it we should say, in
such a case to a surety, Well then, I will no more look after my Debtor, now I
will trust to you only. So upon Christ's offer, says God, I like thy tender as
sufficient, and am so fully content with it, that I desire no more, but now I
shall wholly trust to thee for all. Now God repeateth these words in the
Gospel at Christ's Baptism, and at Christ's Transfiguration, Matthew 3. Mat. 17.
And to what purpose? but to witness to the world, as that he was well pleased
with Christ as his Son, that in heaven, his work was to delight in his
Son; and he did so delight in him, that he desires no other pleasure than
the company and beholding of his Son, (which puts me in mind of a sweet
notion of Master Rutherfords, that God spent all his time from Eternity, till
the Creation of the World, in delighting himself in Christ.) But I say, as it
does signify that, and so set out the infinite love of the Father, that he
would be pleased to part with such a darling of glory for us: as also in this
it sets out the Fathers love, that he should send to look after inglorious
wretches, when he needed not our companies; for he had pleasure and delight
enough in the company of his Eternal Son; whose company did so content him,
that he desired nothing else for himself. So I also think, that God by his
twice repeating of it, after Christ came, would have us understand, that God
was well pleased with him as our Surety, with what Heb. 7. 22. Christ is called
our Surety.
payment he should make, etc. But now, in regard it was in time, that Christ
came in the fullness time (says the Apostle) Gal. 4. 4. How did the Lord Jesus
make our payment sure? I answer, By engaging his word. God the Father had
nothing but the Lord Jesus Christ's word, for the payment of all the Elects
debts, not from eternity, till Christ came and made payment, according to his
engagement. Now thus has the Lord Jesus Christ raised us out of our lost
condition, by engaging his word, and entering into a Covenant.

2. He did it Assumptione carnis, By assuming of our flesh. He made a Covenant
with his Father for us from all Eternity. But he took out this Bond in time,
canceling it with his own blood: Therefore says the Apostle, Galatians Chapt.
4. Verse 4. God in the fullness of time, sent forth his Son made of a Woman,
born under the Law, to Redeem those that were under the Law, that they might
receive the adoption of sons. He could Covenant for us as God, but he must dye
for us as man: In the fullness therefore of time, he bowed the heavens, and came
down, and took upon him our flesh, not changing the Godhead into flesh,
neither confounding the substances, nor the Natures, but personally uniting of
them, that the two Natures became one Person, and so he became a Savior fit to
raise us. Now to him that raised, this was necessary, 1. That justice might be
done. It had been no justice in God to have charged the guilt of one Nature
upon another. Gods ways appear equal in charging the guilt upon the guilty,
Ez. 18. 3. Forasmuch then as the children [whom he came to redeeme] were
partakers of flesh and blood: he also took part with them, that through death
he might destroy him that had the power of death, even the Devil. Heb. 2. 14.
and ver. 17. In all things it behoved him to be made like to his brethren, and
why, ver. 16. He had taken upon him the seed of Abraham [that is, the guilt of
the seed of Abraham to satisfy for them.] 2. It was requisite, That he might
be a faithful High Priest, faithful to his word. You shall observe it, that
Christ gives it as a great reason of his condescentions, and actions of Grace;
That all righteousness may be fulfilled, and that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet, etc. Christ is tender of his Fathers Truth: Now God
had said, that the woman's seed should bruise the serpents head, Genesis 13. ver.
15. And though by Abraham's seed was spiritually meant Christ, Gal. 3. 15, 16.
to whom the Promises were made, yet the Promises had not been fulfilled if that
Christ had not also been Abraham's seed, and therefore Heb. 3. 17. one reason is
given why the Lord Jesus became man, and took part of flesh and blood with us,
that he might be a faithful High Priest. 3. It was requisite that he should
thus raise us, that he might fulfill the Law for us. Now the Law was to be
fulfilled two ways, 1. Actively. 2. Passively. Neither could have been done
without the Assumption of our flesh. There is not such a contradiction between
the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works, as some ignorant Libertines
would this day make: God gave a Law, and his Covenant was, do this and live;
this is that which we call the Covenant of Works, man could not do it. What is
Gods mind altered now? no such matter, God says, Do this and live still, and
if you do not this you shall dye. It was written long since that time, Deuteronomy.
27. ver. 26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them. And all the people must say Amen to it now as well as they did then. But
herein is the Covenant of Grace more favorable: The Covenant of Works says,
thou shall personally do them or dye; The Covenant of Grace says, thou shall
do it, or get Christ to do it for thee. the Covenant of Works says, I will
take no bail; no surety, do it or dye: Durus est hic sermo; an hard saying,
who can hear it? The Covenant of Grace says, Get me Christ's Bail, and I will
acquit thee, if thou beleevest in him. Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 3. 10,
11. As many as are of the works of the Law, that look to be justified by their
own works, by their own righteousness in fulfilling the Law, are under the
curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Law to do them. Look to it, (says the Apostle) if
you look to be justified by obeying the Law in your own persons, take my word
for it, you have an hard task. But verse 13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law. But how was that? it follows in the next words. Being made a
curse for us, ver. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ. He was to fulfill the Law Actively, that he might
fulfill what we through the weakness of the flesh could not, and in regard that
he was to fulfill it for us, it was requisite he should have our nature; and as
he was to fulfill the Law Actively, so in regard that his Elect by their past
Transgressions had broken the Law of God, Adam for himself and all his
posterity, and the body of death which (he knew) was to remain after
sanctification in his Elect ones, would lay them open to hell, He also was to
fulfill the Law Passively for us; therefore says the Apostle, He has redeemed
us from the eurse of the Law. Now he tells you how that was verse 13. by being
made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a
tree. Now he could not have been in capacity of being subject to the curse of
the Law, by hanging upon the tree for us, unless he had taken upon him our
flesh. Nay, yet a

Fourth Reason may be given, why it was necessary that Jesus Christ should
raise up his redeemed ones by the assuming their flesh. viz. That he might be a
merciful High Priest. It is the Reason that the Apostle gives, Hebr. 2. verse
17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in all things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in
that he himself suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. I shall add nothing to it. Thus he raised us by Assuming of our
flesh, which in order to our raising it was necessary for him to do.

3. He raised us Passione, by his precious death upon the Cross; his falling
was our rising, his life our death The chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and by his stripes we are healed. His own blood was the balm from Gilead, as
well as himself the Physician there. Now in order to the raising of his Elect
ones, it was requisite that he should dye. 1. That he might satisfy. 2. That
he might conquer. 1. That he might satisfy and purchase Remission. He that
will redeem any slave out of Captivity must pay the sum of Redemption-money
required. Now Death was that which could alone satisfy for the redeemed ones.
It was the Lords first Law, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die, temporally, and eternally. Now a death must be paid, or justice is
not satisfied, therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 9. 22. Without blood there is
no remission: he therefore, dyed for our sins says the Apostle, he was our
sacrifice, 1 Cor. 4. 7. And he is no sacrifice till slain. This was typified
by the slaying of beasts for sacrifices in the old Law, which God required of
all those that would obtain pardon. And in regard that man had deserved hell as
well as death, Christ by dying that he might raise us, and and make the face of
God again to shine upon us, was content to suffer the withdrawings of his
Fathers love, and to feel as it were the pains of hell to raise us to the
joys of heaven.

Secondly, as it was necessary in order to our raising, that Christ should dye,
to the intent that he should satisfy for us, so it was also necessary that he
should dye, that he might conquer for us. This the Apostle fully expresses,
Heb. 2. 14, 15. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that has the power of death, even the Devil, and deliver them, who through
fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. Christ was to lead
Captivity captive, to take away deaths sting, and hels victory, which he could
not have done without wrestling with death himself; had he not been deaths
captive, he had never been deaths conqueror. He raised us by dying for us.

4. He has raised us, Resurrectione, by rising again from the dead, therefore
says the Apostle, Romans 4. 25. He was delivered to death for our offenses, and
rose again for our justification. Now his Resurrection had and has an
influence upon raising his Elect ones, 1. By witnessing to them Christ's
conquest for them, and therefore the Apostle makes the work of satisfaction
for us to be proper to his death, and the work of our justification he
appropriates to his Resurrection, Romans 4. 25. When he dyed, he went down that
he might conquer; but it was his coming up out of the grave that witnessed his
conquest over death and hell. It was in that day that this Song was sung, O
death, where is thy sting! O hell, where is thy victory! When the Prisoner is
freed, it is a sign the debt is paid or the Jailer beaten: It was a sign of
both in Christ, as that the debt was paid due to his Fathers justice, so also
that death and hell were beaten. 2. Christ's Resurrection had an influence upon
our raising, by quickening us, Col. 2. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein
you are also risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. And being dead in your sins has be quickened,
together with him, etc. and Col. 3. 1. If then ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above: and ver. 2. Set your affections on things which
are above, etc. We are risen (...) with him, and this should quicken us, and
strength derived from Christ's Resurrection by faith, does quicken the Saints of
God, to live to God, as becomes the redeemed ones of the Lord. -- 3. It has an
influence upon our raising, by being a pledge to us of our own rising unto
everlasting glory, to live with that Christ who was dead, and is alive again.
This the Apostle fully proves in that fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle of
St. Paul to the Corinthians, from the thirteenth Verse to the five and
twentieth. Now I take by raising [I raised thee] not only to be understoed of
the work of Redemption, but also all the privileges that from that work of
Redemption flow out of course to the servants of God, being but as several
steps from one of which to another the Saint is raised, till he be got to the
top staire of glory. Christ has raised us by his own rising from the pit of
the grave.

5. He has raised us by his Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of his
Father. Now Christ's Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the Father,
has an influence upon our raising, these ways. -- 1. In going before he
provides a place for us. Take this out of his own mouth, John 14. 2. I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also.
Christ is now preparing Mansions for his redeemed ones; for in his Fathers
house are many Mansions: never a Saint of his shall want a seat, or a room in
glory. -- 2. In going he has raised us in being our Way. He being ascended and
with the Father, we have through him a way unto the Father, John 14. verse 6.
I am the way; he was the way by which the Father came to us; he communicated
himself unto us, in, and by, and through the Lord Jesus Christ; and he is our
way by which we go to God, whatsoever we ask in his Name, if we believe we
shall receive it, we shall receive it. The Saint could not pray with comfort,
if he did not remember that Rev. 13. 8. There is an Angel that stands before
the Throne, to whom much Incense is given, to offer up the prayers of his
people unto God. But knowing we have a friend in the Court, we offer up our
prayers with boldness, and a great confidence in his goodness. -- 3. His
Ascension has an influence upon our raising, in that we know now we have an
Advocate with the Father, even Christ. Alas, with what comfort can the child of
God, whose conscience the Lord has awakened to consider his daily sins and
corruptions, think upon God, or look up unto God, if he did not know Christ
were with him? But now, that Christ is with his Father, we know, 1 John 2. 1.
That if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, even Christ the
righteous. Hebr. 7. 25. He is therefore able to save them to the utmost that
come unto God through him; because he ever lives to make Intercession for
them, Romans 8* 27. yea and verse 34. Now, Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand, who also makes Intercession for us. Observe there how the Apostle gives
Christ ascension and sitting at the hand of God, as the proximate cause of our
Intercessor: his Death and Resurrection made him not our Intercessor, his Death
made him our Savior, his Resurrection our Conqueror, but his Ascension and
sitting at the right hand of God, has ultimately made him in a capacity to be
our Advocate, and Intercessor: Thus he has raised us by Ascension. -- Yea, 4.
His Ascension and sitting at the right hand of the Father, has an influence
upon our raising, in that now from thence he gives gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.
8. When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto
men. The Psalmist, Psalm 68. 18. (from whence that passage is taken) says he
received gifts for men; he received them from his Father. Now says the
Apostle, when he led Captivity Captive, he distributed these to men: As
Conquerors use when they have taken the spoil, to deal it out in gifts. What
gifts? The Apostle expounds it in part ver. 11. He gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists. In short, I take to be meant by it,
all the gifts of Gods Spirit, whether of common, or special grace, whether
external or internal, gifts for the benefit of the Church, and gifts for the
benefit of our souls: Nay, the descending of the Spirit was a fruit of Christ's
Ascension. See it, Joh. 14. 16. and John 16. 7. I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away the comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you. Now it is plain, that
the internal gifts of the Spirit, and works of it, are fruits of Christ's
Ascension as well as the more common and external gifts, given in the days of
Pentecost, from the 14. of Joh. ver. 16. where Christ promises them that the
comforter which upon his departure he would send to them should abide with them
for ever.

And thus I have showed you now, what course the Lord Jesus Christ has taken
to raise his redeemed ones, that had lost all their life, and strength, and
comfort in Adam, out of this their lost condition: thus he did it
meritoriously. These were his acts for us. But now to what purpose is all this
for any souls wounds, that there is Balm in Gilead, that there is a Physician
there, without the Balm be applied to its soul?

6. Lastly therefore, as Christ has meritoriously thus raised the whole number
of the Elect ones; so he Particularly, and Actually raises each one of those
whom he has purchased by his blood, by applying himself unto each of their
souls. Now for the manner of this Application, the blessed Apostle describes
it, Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified: under Predestination is included Redemption, and Sanctification
under Justification. Now therefore a little to open this mystery of our
Redemption, in the Application of it to the souls of them that shall be saved.
You have seen how there came to be Balm in Gilead, and that there is a
fullness and sufficiency in Christ. Now what does the poor Elect one want that
it has lost in Adam? I conceive three things, 1. Life. 2. Strength. 3. Light.
1. Life. It is a damned Creature in Adam, it wants a way of salvation, a pardon
for its sins, a righteousness to appear in the sight of God. 2. Adam has
left it a weak creature, not able to do any thing that is good; no not so much
as to think a good thought: it wants a strength to Act in, so as to please God.
3. Adam has left it a comfortless creature, without any light of Gods
countenance shining upon it. Now all these are purchased. The first of them is
necessary, to give the first being to a Saint. The second is necessary, to
preserve the Christians being. The third, ad been esse, for the comfortable
being of all. Christ is all to the Child of of God, Psalm 27. verse 1. But
how does Christ apply these to the souls of his redeemed ones? 1. Says the
Apostle, He calls them. We say that in effectual calling, which is when God
joins the irresistible power of his Spirit, with the outward preaching of the
Word, God does these three things. 1. Convince the soul of his elect vessel,
(that is a child of wrath by Nature as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3.) what a
condition it is in by reason of its Original, and its Actual sins. 2.
Humble the soul for its sins, and discover unto the soul the insufficiency
of all its own righteousness, that it is undone in its sins, and undone in
its righteousness: and thirdly, he says to the soul, Yet there is hope,
look up to me and live; I am as the brazen Serpent, only look up, and thou
shall live. And that the soul may be able to look up with a true eye, Christ
gives faith to the soul, to behold him, come unto him, and to receive him by a
true resting, and relying upon his Merits for salvation. 2. And having thus
Called the soul, he then justifies it: He has in his Decree justified it from
eternity; he hathmeritoriously justified it by his Death upon the Cross; but
now he does actually and formally justify it. 1. By pardoning its sins, and
acquitting the soul from the obligation it till now lay under to death, and
forgetting the injury done to himself by any of its sins. 2. By imputing the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, to the soul; by which it appears, the sinner
is pardoned, not without a satisfaction first given to Justice. 3. By accepting
graciously the soul thus justified as perfectly righteous for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, as if it had never sinned. And the work of true faith in this
Justification, is to lay hold upon it. And thus now, Christ applies the merits
of his Death to the soul, in conveying life and pardon to it: thus he raises
it, saying to it in its blood, live. But this is not all.

2. The soul is weak, and is not able to live an hour of it self; Christ
therefore in the next place, in order to its more perfect raising, sanctifies
the soul: which implies two things. 1. He gives unto the soul new principles
of grace, 2. He gives the soul power to act these principles, for as (except
from him) we have nothing, so without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. Which
power being given the soul from above, the soul is raised, and becomes strong
in the strength of Christ, and sets upon works, 1. Of Mortification, to subdue
the strong holds of Satan, viz. the remainder of corruption in the soul. 2. Of
Vivification, setting upon such Duties as God has required of his redeemed
ones, being exercises of the grace which they have received from the Lord Jesus
Christ; he gives the soul power to live upon faith, to love, to desire him, to
delight in him, to do, and to suffer for him, to be content with him, etc.

Yea, and thirdly, In his due time he raises the soul to a comfortable life,
in giving it the sense of his love, a persuasion of its Union with the Lord
Jesus Christ, peace in the inward man, shining upon it with the light of his
Countenance, which is better to it than thousands of Gold and Silver. This I
say he does in his due time, not to all, nor continuing it constantly to any,
but according to his good pleasure; thus making known to it the Redemption he
has purchased for it, and the Justification of its soul which is past in
heaven before.

4. And lastly, in his due time he will yet further raise the soul, by taking
it to himself, and glorifying it with himself for ever. He will come again on
purpose to raise the souls of his redeemed ones from the dust, and to take
them up to himself in glory, that where he is there they may be also, John 16.
verse 3. Thus Christ has meritoriously raised all his redeemed ones; and will
apply their Redemption with the fruits of it to them in his due time; applying
life to them by Vocation, and Justification, strength to them by
Sanctification, light and comfort to them by shining with the Light of his
Countenance upon them, and finally giving them Glorification; he shall then
perfect his work of raising us, and we shall live with him in the Highest
Heavens for ever. I have now done with the Doctrinall part, so far as to show
you, 1. That it is Christ that raises his Elect ones. 1. He is designed. 2. He
can do it. 3. He only can. 4. He has done it meritoriously for all. 5. He
has done it actually and formally for some, and will do it for the rest. And
so far as to show you the manner how he did it, and does it; both in respect
of his own acts, in relation to the fitting himself for the work, and in
respect of his application of it to the souls of his servants. If now you ask
me the Reasons, why, and to what end he did it? for the reasons of the
particular Propositions, I have given you them before. Now for Reasons in the
General, I shall give you them in two words.

1. The moving cause was his own grace, because he would. 2. The final cause
was his own glory.
1. The moving cause and reason, was his own grace and goodness. This is the
reason of all Gods acts of grace toward the Creature, whether Election, or
Redemption, or Vocation, or Justification, or Sanctification, or Glorification,
the sole cause was in himself, because he loved us, and delighted in us, for
his own Names sake, etc. Isa. 43. 25. Deuteronomy. 7. 7. Hos. 14. 4. His own will
was all the reason, he did it freely, we buy without money, or money-worth.
Isa. 55. 1, 2.

2. If you ask to what end he did it, It was his own glory; that he might
get himself glory from poor dust and ashes, that little thank him for all
this mercy declared to their souls. He Predestined, Redeemed, and Adopted us,
merely to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. verse 6. The end
which he aimed at in Calling us was his glory, Romans 9. 23, 24, 25, 26. If you
ask me, why God that could as well have been glorified in the damnation of
poor wretches, would choose rather to be glorified in their salvation, and
bringing them to life; I must run back again, to the Fountain again, merely
because so it pleased him, because it was his will: There we must rest. I
shall now proceed to the Application of this mysterious, sweet and precious
Doctrine; and it might be applied several ways: But I shall only apply the
consideration of it, as offering you ground and matter, First, of Humiliation.
Secondly, of Instruction. Thirdly, of Examination. Fourthly, of Exhortation.
Fifthly, of Consolation.

done it when none else could, and will raise thee higher yet: and this he
could not have done without taking thy flesh, dying upon the Cross, suffering
the bitterness of his Fathers wrath? consider then, what cause thou have to be
humbled for thy sins. 1. Considering that these were they put Christ to death.
2 that by these, since that time thou have crucified the Lord of life. 1.
Consider that thy sins were those that put Christ to death, Romans 4. 25. He was
delivered to death for our sins. Me thinks every one when they hear of
Christ's Agony and bloody Sweat, of his Whippings, Buffetings, of his bitter
Sufferings, etc. should be ready to cry out with Pilate, Quid mali fecit? What
evil (I pray) has he done? Ah none Christian, it was to raise thee; thou were
dead, lost, undone, he dyed to raise thee; thou stolest the fruit, he climbed
the tree; thou enjoyedst the sweetness of sinning, and he for that was
acquainted with the bitterness of suffering; He bore thy iniquity, even thine
and mine too, if we be elected. Certainly, it was a great grief of heart to
David, to remember that he had an hand in the blood of Uriah; that was surely
the great transgression that he complained of; to be sure, that
heart-troubling sin, for which he puts up that particular Petition, Deliver
me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God: And questionless it was no small Trouble of
Spirit to Paul, afterward to consider, that he was one of them that were
consenting to Stephens death, Acts 7. 59, 60. Chap. 8. verse 1. he afterward
repeats it with shame, I was a persecuter. Christian, here is one murdered by
cruel hands, not an Uriah, not a Stephen; but he that is worth ten thousand
of these; not an Abell, (yet his blood troubled Cain all his life time) but
one, whose blood cries for better things than the blood of Abell did; here is
the Lamb of God slain, slain by thy hands, he was bruised for thine
iniquities, and his soul was made an Offering for thy sins. Is it nothing to
thee, O Christian! when Pilate was but about to condemn him, his wife came
startled in, and cries, Have nothing to do with that just man; and when
Stephen charged the Jews, Acts 7. 52. for being the betrayers and murderers
of the Lord Jesus, they apprehended it as a thing so heinous, that they would
not endure him beyond that word, but were cut to the heart, and gnashed upon
him with their teeth. verse 54. Christians, there is none of you here, but your
sins were the betrayers and murtheres of the Lord Jesus, that Christ that had
such eternal, sure and unchangeable thoughts of love to your souls. Ah! how
great were those sins which could not be remitted without the blood of the
immaculate Lamb of God? Me thinks every one of you should sit down and say, Ah
Lord, that ever I should be such a wretch, so far to provoke the fire of thy
wrath, that nothing could quench it but the blood of thy Son, that I should
throw my self so deep into Hell, that nothing could raise me but the
bloud-shedding of the dear Son of Gods love. You have had to do with that
just man, Christians, not to do with condemning him, but even with the vildest
acts of Barbarism were done unto him; your hypocrisy was the kiss that
betrayed him; the sins of your hands and feet were the nails that fastened
his hands and feet to the Cross; the sins of your body were the Spears that
pierced his sacred side; the sins of your souls were they that made his
soul heavy to the death, that caused the with-drawings of his Fathers love
from him, and made him in the heaviness of his panged soul to cry out. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O sit down, go alone, weep, and weep
bitterly for him whom you have pierced; for those stripes by which you are
healed.

2. But secondly, (if any thing will move your souls to make your head a
Fountain of water, and your eyes Rivers of tears.) Consider, That this Christ
you have crucified, even since his death upon the Cross for you. When the
Apostle St. Peter Acts 2. had made a long Sermon of Christ's love, showing the
Auditors, what Christ had done, and what he was, he summeth up all, verse 36.
God has made that same Jesus, (whom ye have crucified) both Lord and Christ.
Now says the Text, verse 37. When they heard this, viz. (that they had
crucified this Christ) they were pricked at the heart. This Christ (my beloved)
whom you have crucified, by your youth sins, and life sins, this was he that
was crucified for you. O be pricked at the hearts at this saying. Was it not
enough that he once was pierced, scoffed, wounded, crucified for you, but must
you again crucify him? and which of you do it not daily? Causinus tells us a
story of Clodoveyus one of the Kings of France, that when he was converted from
Paganism to Christianity, while Remigius the Bishop was reading in the Gospel
concerning the Passion of our Savior, and the abuses he suffered from Judas,
and the rest of the Jews, he brake out into these words; If I had been there
with my Frenchmen, I would have cut all their throats; In the mean time, not
considering that by his daily sins he did as much as they had done. Which of us
is not condemning the crucifiers of Christ for their cruelty, and in the mean
time we condemn not our selves, who by our daily sins make him to bleed
again afresh? Ah, let us judge our selves, and sit down and mourn; we are
they that have added to Christ's bonds, that have increased his wounds, and the
pangs of his grieved soul, (which is now glorified) with our renewing lusts
and corruptions: I shall conclude this use with a prayer, that God would
fulfill to all our souls, that gracious promise, Zach. 12. 10. That he would
pour out the spirit of grace and of supplications upon us, and make us to look
upon him whom we have pierced, and do pierce daily, and mourn as a man mournes
for his only Son. And be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness
for his firstborn.

I pass on to a second way of Application, viz. by way of Instruction. Has
Christ and Christ alone raised us?

1. Let us hence be instructed, How Instruction.
much the Lord Jesus Christ loved us. And here, let my soul be drowned in
sweetness, and in sinking cry out, O the depth of unfadomable love! What
tongue? what Saint? what Angel can speak out this unspeakable love? Pray, O
pray (Christians,) That Christ Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.
may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love,
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, What is the breadth, and length, and
depth and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Is it
love in a friend, to pass his word for his friend, arrested, and ready to be
haled to jail, and to take the debt upon himself? and is it no love in
Christ? yea is it not the (...), the unspeakable of loves, for Jesus Christ,
when a writ of eternal vengeance was Ready to issue out against you, to be your
surety and bear the blow off, to the breaking of his own arms? Was it love in
the Roman to personate his friend, and upon the Scaffold, and after to suffer
for him, and is it not infinite love, for Jesus Christ to take the rags of
your flesh upon him, and indeed to dye a death upon the cross for you? for you
(dear friends) for you he was smitten, despised, rejected of men, he dyed to
make you live, he was content to fall, so you might rise. Let your thoughts
sink in this ocean, and spend your lives in spelling the letters of love that
must be joined in this one word, or sentence [I Raised thee]

From hence (Secondly) be Instructed, What a perfect Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ is, he leaves nothing for thee to do but to thank him: he makes the
plaster and lays it on; he trod the Wine Press alone, and there is none
with him; he has left thee nothing to do but to believe his last words, All is
finished; he conquered sin upon the Cross, and death and hell in the grave.
He will have none to be a sharer with him, either in his work of Merit, or
Application; get but hands, he will deliver thee thy pardon ready written,
granted, sealed; nay he will help thee with hands too, He was made perfect
through sufferings, Hebr. 2. 10. Heb. 5. 9. Being made perfect he became the
author of salvation to them that obey him.

3. From hence (again) be instructed (Christian) What need thou and every
poor soul has of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou were fallen, and layest as
unable to help thy self, as an Infant thrown into an open field: Men and
Angels were at their wits ends to answer to this question, How then can any be
saved? The Heavens said, Salvation was not in them; and Earth says, Salvation
is not in us; nothing but God-man can do this great work. There is no other
name but only the Name of Jesus, by which thou, or I, or any of the children
of men can be saved. If thou have him, thou have enough; if thou have not him,
it is not all the righteousness of Saints, and Angels that will make a garment
which will not be too short to cover thy nakedness. O cry, Lord give me
Christ, Lord give me Christ, or else I dye. Think not of thy own merits, thy
righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, and as a filthy ragge. Christ's
Righteousness is sufficient for thee.

4. Let all the redeemed ones of the Lord be instrushed, How much they owe, and
shall for ever owe to him that is become their Savior. It is no slight mercy
(Sirs) to be saved out of everlasting burnings. It is a piece of love, which as
we can never comprehend, so we can never walk up to. O let us all say, What
shall we render unto the Lord for his mereies? we will take the cup of
salvation, and praise the Name of the Lord. You would think you owed a great
deal to him, that should exalt you from a Dungeon to a Throne* Mephibosheth
thought he was mightily honored to be admitted to eat bread at the Kings
Table: How much? Ah! How much, Christians, is every of your souls indebted to
the Lord Jesus Christ, who remembered you in your low estate? For his mercy
endures for ever. But I pass on further.

you are raised by Christ's merits. 2. You are raised according to Christ's
method.

1. If you be raised, It is by Christ's merits, all the Abana, and Parphars, of
thy own merits would not do it. One drop of that fountain that was set open
for Judah and Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanenesse, is worth all the
waters of thine own Damascus. What trusts thou in Christian? Is it what thou
have done? Alas, thou art so far from having any natural strength (as
Pelagians and Arminians dream) or any other strength of merits, either of thy
own, or thy friends, (which Papists dream of) that if all the Saints in the
earth, and all the Angels of heaven, could unite their forces in one arm, and
to one act, they could as little have lifted thee up out of the pit into which
thou were fallen, as thou could lift up an house with the palm of thy hand
if it were fallen down. It was only this mighty one, this Prince of glory,
this King of power that could do it. Say therefore as they say that great
Papist concluded, Tutissimum est Christi merit is confidere, it is most safe
only to rest upon him, believe it, all other trusts are as the bruised Reed of
Egypt, and as the broken staff of Assyria, which if thou trusts too, they
run into thy hand, and pierce thee, they will cause thee to fall many strides
short of heaven, when they have carried thee to their furthest, their Nil
ultra. O trust not in them, if there be all thy confidence, thou art not yet
raised.

2. If Christ has raised you, it has been in his method of Application.
Christ saves none but whom he sanctifies, and sanctifies none but whom he
justifies, and justifies none but whom he calls; Some men are justified they
think, but they know not which way, and they shall be saved I know not which
way too. Christian, thou were lost and undone, thou were in Adams loins as
well as any, thou had an adventure in his ship as well as any, the ship was
wrackt. Did the Lord ever call thee? Did thou ever yet find a powerful work
of Gods spirit (joined with the word) upon thy heart? Did the Lord ever make
thee in any measure to see thy lost condition? Did the Lord ever yet bid thee
(when thou saw thy self lost, and were confounded in thy own
insufficiency) look upon Jesus Christ and live? Was sin ever yet a sting to
thy soul? if not, I doubt (yea I am out of doubt) Christ was never a true
comfort to thee. Christ was lift up as the brazen serpent; now for whom was
that lift up, but for those that felt the smart of the fiery serpent? and no
way else be cured. Again, Christ sanctifies before he glorifies, he has
ordained us to good works, and then to obtain everlasting life (though not for
them) this is Christ's method of raising. Do thou look to be saved? Art thou
sanctified Christian? Is thy heart changed, and thy tongue changed? Believe it,
no unclean thing shall ever enter into the new Jerusalem. Christ uses to
raise to holiness, before he raises to happiness. But I have in the former
Doctrine spoke so fully to this work of Examination, in relation to this thing
(of so great a concernment to every soul as nothing can be more) that I shall
now add no more, but pass on.

1. To those that yet have no part at all in the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. To those
that through free grace have an interest in this Savior, and have been raised
by him. -- 1. Is there any poor soul here, that is to this day so miserable
as that it has no portion in the Lord Jesus Christ? Now I beseech you as an
Ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ, as in Christ's stead, I beseech you get an
interest in him. You have heard, he is he whom the Lord has ordained to be the
Savior of the world; he is the mighty one, upon whom help was laid, yea the
only mighty one upon whom help could be laid: O then, above all things, look
for a portion in him in whom alone you can be rich. Would thou be saved? This
all desire; Glory and happiness are fine things, Omnibus in voto, every man
would dye the death of the Righteous, and have his later end like his; Would
thou go to Heaven Christian? he is the way: Would thou live? he is the life,
yea, he, and none but he. Be assured, thou art now a child of wrath, and there
is but an hairs breadth betwixt thee and hell; thou art wounded, past the cure
of the whole Creation, lo here is balm in Gilead: If thou will enquire,
enquire, return, come. Were there a poor wretch sick of an incurable disease
to ordinary Physicians and Chirurgians, and some rare one should come to the
Town, that alone had found out the mystery in the Art of curing that very
trouble, he should be thronged with Patients: How is it that Christ has no
more practice? he that is the great Physician, that all the creatures are
Physicians of no value to him? Alas, the reason is too perspicuous; men are
sensible of their bodily troubles, but their soul-troubles are not felt by
them. To direct thee a little to him; were thou sick of such a disease, and
had heard of so rare a Physician, what would thou ask? 1. How shall I
speak with him? 2. What must I give him? 3. How must I apply his physic? 4.
What Rules of diet or walking, etc. must I observe? 1. Do thou ask how thou
shall speak with the Lord Jesus Christ, to lay open thy souls wounds unto
him? And where does he exhibit his balm? I answer to thee: The word is near
thee, even in thy mouth, it is the word of faith which we preach. Behold,
Christ keeps open shop: Wisdom cries and Understanding puts forth her voice,
she stands in the top of the high Places* by the way in the places of the
paths. She cries at the gates, at the entering in of the doors. Unto you (O
men) she calls, and her voice is to the sons of men. O ye simple understand
wisdom, and ye fools be of an understanding heart, Prove. 8. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. The Lord Christ keeps open shop in every place. We as the Ambassadors of the
Lord Jesus Christ, entreat you to be reconciled to God. Did ever such natural
balm go on begging? The word is near thee, there Christ offers himself.
Do thou ask what is his price: 2. He offers it freely. Hear the Market
proclaimed, and the price set, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Hoe every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy, and eat, wine and
milk without money, and without price. This is the condition, bring nothing;
the way to have thy sack filled as full as thou can carry it, is to bring it
empty: Only come, and live, look up, and be healed; was there ever so cheap a
Market, of so rich commodities? Christian, poor Christian, were thou but
sensible of thy souls wants, thou would give as many thousand worlds (if
thou had them, and they could be given) as there are grains of dust upon the
face of the earth, to have a portion in the Lord Jesus Christ. Imagine but what
a poor damned wretch would give to have but so much liberty, as to cast up a
long look to Heaven; what a comfort it would be to them, if the light of the
Gospel might but shine into hell a few days? And is mercy offered freely?
may thou be saved if thy own cursed will were not in the way? Ah
(Christian) turn, turn, why should thy soul dye, when there is balm in
Gilead, and so glorious a Physician there? Do thou ask how must I apply his
blood? 3. I answer, only by Faith. God so loved the world (says the Apostle)
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life:
Nay to speak lower yet, on thy part is only required a seeking of Christ's
face. Thus says the Lord, seek my face and live. The truth of it is, as the
merit was Christ's, so the Application is his too; Faith is required, but it is
a gift infused, it is the gift of God: Indeed it is an act too, but as so, it
is Gods gift, I mean the strength by which thou must act, He is the Author and
finisher of our faith (says the Apostle to the Hebrews.) O therefore cry, cry
mightily unto God (he will help thee do this too.) Go alone and wrestle with
God, and take no answer without Christ, cry, and take no denial, like the
blind man, that when the Disciples discouraged him, and Christ seemed to slight
him, cried yet the more earnestly, till the Lord said, What will thou? And he
answered, Lord that I might receive my sight. Go thou and do likewise, beg,
Lord, that I might be washed with thy blood; Lord, that my sins might be
pardoned; though thou meetest with discouragements, and thou think that thou
art one that art a dog, to whom the childrens bread must not be given, yet
leave not, beg again but for a crumme of mercy, a drop of blood, verily thou
shall not go away without comfort. 4. There is but one Querie more. What Rules
must I observe in the using of his physic: To this Christ has shaped an
answer for me, Go thy way, sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee. Thou
must take heed that thou do not return again with the dog to the vomit, and
the swine to the wallowing in the mire. He that is borne of God sins not,
says the Apostle, not constantly, nor wilfully, but weakly. This for
direction: And remember this last, which I shall conclude with that of the
Prophet, Ez. 18. 24. If the Righteous man turns away from his righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin
that he has sinned, shall he dye, says the Lord. Shall I need add any thing
for motive? I should think not, but only call upon you to get eyes to see your
sad and undone condition in which you are. It is no wonder that you should say,
we have need of nothing, when you think you are rich. Get but a true
understanding, 1. Of your own vile and undone condition, what an hell you
carry about with you. 2. What an hell you tread over every day, and it will be
enough to prick on your souls to seek a portion in the Lord Jesus Christ:
especially, if ye well consider (what I have sufficiently proved to you) that
it is impossible that in Heaven and earth there should be found any way of
salvation for your poor souls but in himself. Now the Lord work these
things upon your hearts. 2. Give me leave now to speak a word of Exhortation
to you my Brethren, to whom the Lord has of his free grace given a portion in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and you are become his raised, redeemed ones. The duty
which I shall in general press upon you, is thankfulness. O give thanks unto
the Lord, he remembered you in your low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.
O what shall ye render? Christians, what can ye render to the Lord for this
mercy? For Motives, Consider but every word of the Text apart, and methinks it
should be Motive enough to prevail with those that have any thing tasted of
this heavenly gift.

First [I.] To open this word a little, and show you what there is in it to
melt your hearts into obedience. 1. I that was infinitely above thee. Christ
was the brightness of his Fathers Image, God blessed for ever, even from all
Eternity. He was from Eternity, (...), the unice dilectus, the only beloved of
his Father, in whom his Father took infinite delight; he was the Prince of
glory, God blessed for ever. Now for an Eternal God to stoop to a poor worm: O
mercy! for a King to visit an Hospital, to come with his own hands and dress
the putrified wounds of his meanest subject, it is a condescension scarce found
amongst the sons of men, and yet if you could find it, it should come
infinitely short of this condescension. 2. I that did not at all need thee. The
Lord stood not in need of a worm, the Father was pleased with the Son from
all Eternity, and taken up with delighting himself in him, and the Son was
again pleased with the Father. They had an (...), a self-sufficiency of glory,
and were enough each of them to other; had it not been his bowels of mercy that
had yerned toward thee for thy good, he had never been moved toward thee from
any other principle. 3. I whom thou had offended. Greater love than this is
not found amongst men, than for one to dye for his friend, yet greater love
than this has Christ shown, that he dyed for his enemy, Romans 5. 8. Scarcely
for a righteous man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some will
dare to dye. But God commends his love to usward, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. O love! infinite! unfadomable love!

Secondly, consider the Act with its circumstances. I raised thee, 1. Out of a
low condition. What lower than hell? that was thy portion Christian, thou were
a child of wrath by nature even as others: He remembered thee in thy low estate;
his mercy endures for ever. 2. To a glorious condition. It is an estate more
glorious than thy natural estate was or could be miserable, to be free men in
Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 18. into mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. to to be
children, and if children then heirs of God, and joynt-heires with the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 17. Heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. Heirs of the
Promises, Heb. 11. 9. Heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2. 5. Ye which in times past
were not a people, are now the people of God, you that had not obtained mercy,
have now obtained mercy, and are become, 1 Pet. 2. 10, 11. A chosen Generation,
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people: wherefore is it, but
that you should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of
darkness into mavelous light? 3. He raised you by his own falling, yes,
nothing else could do it; Without blood there had been no remission, Heb 9.
22. His own soul must be grieved to the death, that your souls might be
comforted; He must be smitten, despised, rejected of men, that the chastisement
of your peace might be upon him, and by his stripes you might be healed. Was
ever love like his?

Thirdly, Consider it further, in the object of this Act, I raised thee. 1.
Thee, not others; Thee, not Angels: Thee, not many other men. 1. Not Angels,
yet the Angels were far more glorious creatures, which (if raised) had sinned
no more, but spent their time in singing forth his glory, and serving him with
cheerful readiness all their days, yet Heb. 2. 16. He in no wise took upon
him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 2. If the
Lord would have chosen men, might not he have chosen ten thousand more great,
more noble, more wise, that in a carnal eye were by Nature cut out far more
fit to have made vessels of glory of than thou art? yet the Lord has passed
them by, he has passed by Eliab and Shammah, that were sons of the same
Father with thee, and has chosen thee that were the least of all, Ishmael and
Esau that were thy elder brethren, and has chosen thee. 2. Thee, that were as
low as others. Adam left thee as deep in hell as any reprobate there. Lo here,
the infiniteness of free grace! Two were in the same house, yea grinding at
the same mill of iniquity, and thou art taken, and the other is left; possibly
thou were in thy wildest youth, seeming to ride faster to hell than the other
were that were thy brethren, friends and acquaintance, yet the Lord has raised
thee, and let the others lie wallowing in their blood, he has not said to
them, live. 3. Thee, that were his Enemy. Was ever dying love, yea love in
dying extended to an enemy before? You have heard of two stories, one of a
Grecian, the other of a Roman pair; Theseus and Perithous, Pilades and
Orestes, that would have dyed for their friends, each for another, but has any
offered to dye for his Enemy? Moses would offer to have his name blotted out
for his people, that were Gods people, and which he loved, but would Moses have
done it for a Philistine? yet this has Christ done. O love ye the Lord all his
Saints! 4. Thee that never asked it. He was found of them that sought it not.
Alas, mankind lay as well without a tongue to ask, as an hand to help
themselves, and behold, Christ pitied them, and amongst them thee; his love
declared from Eternity toward thee, had not so much cause in thee as a poor
prayer would have amounted to; he was not moved by thy sighs and tears, but by
his own infinite love. 5. Lastly, thee that have still Rebellion in thee.
Christ said within himself, when he dyed upon the Cross, Now is my
heart-bloud powered out for as vile wretches as any are, and for those that I
know will requite my bleeding wounds, my dying love, with new spears and
thorns; thus he knew that thou would do in the time of thy unregeneracie,
yea and after thou should be called too: Who lives, and sins not? Now
Christian, lay these things to thy heart, meditate of, study out this love, and
see if thou have not cause to say, My soul and all that is within me, my
tongue and all that is without me, praise the Lord. But, O remember! Christian,
Remember! Burnt offering and sacrifice he does not require, but this he
requires, that thou should do his will. O say, Lo I come: I am ready to do
it. But more particularly let me point thee out some particular duties, that
the Lord requires of thee, in a poor answer to his rich Acts of eternal love.

First, has not he thought his glory too dear to lay aside for a while for
thee, nor his Word and Truth too dear to pawn for thee, nor his blood too
dear to spill for thee? has he valued nothing in comparison of thee? O do
thou value nothing in an equal balance with him; be willing to deny thy self
for him, who in every thing has denied himself for thee. Thy Lusts cannot be
so pleasing to thee, as Christ's glory was to him; Be content to leave them. Thy
Honor cannot be so great as his was, which he left for thee, and became
ignoble in our eyes. Surely when we saw him, we esteemed him despised, smitten
of God, and afflicted, Isa. 53. 4. But it was when he was wounded for our
Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities, when the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and that by his stripes we might be healed. Thy Riches
cannot be greater than his; yet remember him, O remember the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who though he was rich, yet for your sake became poor, that you
through his Poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 7. Thy life cannot be more
dear than his; yet he valued not his life for thee, but powered out his blood,
his precious blood, upon the Cross, that through his blood thou might have
remission purchased. Learn hence Christian a lesson of self-denial: Be
content to suffer for him, who was content to suffer that he might raise thee;
value nothing in comparison of him. This Lesson had Saint Paul learned, Phil.
3. v. 7, 8. What things were gain to me I counted loss for Christ, yea
doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung that I may win Christ, etc. ver. 10. That I may know
him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death. Look upon nothing in an equal balance
with him, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined not to know any thing amongst you, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

Secondly, has Christ entered into a Covenant, and given his word to his
Father, and kept his word with his Father for you? O then, learn of him: Vow
your selves to him, and keep the vows of your lips. Say with David, Psalm. 116.
ver. 16. Ah Lord! truly we are thy servants, we are thy servants, and the sons
of thy handmaids, for thou have loosed our bonds. Say with David, Psalm. 40.
Mine ears have thou opened, and bored them. Say, Ah Lord, we come to do thy
will. Christ kept his word with his Father for you, Ah, keep your word with
him, pay him the vows which you have made.

Thirdly, Has Christ to raise you taken upon him your flesh? O then, Take ye
upon your selves his spirit: He has become for you the child of man, do you
become for him the children of God; Be made partakers of the divine Nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Your Nature was full of imperfection and weakness, the divine Nature is full
of perfection and glory: He has raised you, be raised, put off your filthy
rags, and put on change of Raiment.

Fourthly, Has Christ died that he might raise you from the death of Sin,
and from the power of the Second death? O then, dye to sin, Col. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry, for which things, etc. The Apostle Saint Paul presses the
great duty of mortification from this very principle, Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead to sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 6. 11. and so on, ver. 12, 13. Let not sin therefore reign in
your mortal bodies, etc. Ah, throw away the nails that pierced your Christ.

Fifthly, Did Christ rise from the dead, that he might raise you from the death
of sin? O then rise to newness of life. The Apostle Saint Paul presses this
work of Vivification also, from Christ's Resurrection, Romans 6. ver. 4. We are
buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so, we also should walk in newness
of life; and so all along that Chapter.

Sixthly, Has he ascended that he might raise us? O then let us likewise
ascend after him, setting our affections upon things which are above, not upon
things which are below. Christ who is our treasure is ascended: Let our hearts
also be where our treasure is, Col. 3. ver. 1. If then ye be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God.

7. Lastly, Will he yet once again come and raise you by glorification? O
then, Let Christ in you be the hopes of glory. Look for him, he is making
ready his chariot, He is bowing the Heavens, and coming down, He has
prepared a place for his redeemed ones, and he is coming: Lo, he is coming
to take them up into the chambers of glory, that where he is, there they may be
also. But to sum up all, let me only add,

5. A fifth and last use of Consolation, To all the Saints and servants of God,
both touching themselves, and touching others. 1. Touching themselves, against
their worldly miseries and spirit-feares. 1. Art thou disconsolate Compl.
(Christian,) to think what a poor low estate God has given thee in this
world, that thou art poor, despised, rejected? O consider, thou shall have
better in heaven. The Martyrs could be comforted at their bitter breakfast, to
think they should have a good supper. There is a room prepared for thee in
glory: O be comforted in the hopes of glory. When thou can say, I have not
bread to eat, yet Christ is mine; I have not a foot of land, yet Heaven is
mine; I am worth nothing, yet I bless God I have a portion in Jesus Christ; It
is enough Christian, it is enough; against thy spirit-fears be comforted. Ah
(says 2. Compl.
a Christian) my sins, my great sins that my youth has been guilty of make me
fear, and sit down in bitterness; yet be comforted, if thou be changed:
Christ has raised thee, he paid ransom enough for thee, if thy sins were
greater than they are. It was a sad saying to remember, such were some of you:
but it was joyful news to consider, But now you are washed, now you are
cleansed, etc. But alas (says the 3. Compl.
Christian,) I sin every day, my backslidings are many, I sin in my
righteousness, my best duties are sin. Consider Christian, Christ is still
raising thee by pleading for thee, it is his work to make intercession for the
Saints. But alas (says the Christian) If God be 4. Compl.
with me, if Christ be mine, why am I thus? why do I walk heavily? I answer,
Because God sees it fit for thee, thou may be raised, both meritoriously and
actually, though not comfortably and sensibly: God will shine upon thee when he
thinks good, the Sun shines where it lists. Ah, But I fear 5. Compl.
I shall fall away (says another) I have a base heart full of corruption, etc.
Do thou fear, and why do thou so sin? Do thou think Christ has taken
all this pains with thee for nothing? No, no, be assured, as Heaven is
purchased for thee, so it shall be given to thee. Christ uses not to do his
work by the halves. I have not lost one of them (says Christ) he knows them
by name, they cannot be missing, his work shall not be in vain concerning any
one of his chosen ones.

Secondly, Let Christians from hence be comforted concerning others. 1. Such of
their friends as they may sadly fear, have as yet no portion in the Lord Jesus
Christ. O pray for them, weep for them, speak to them in the name of the Lord,
and yet hope, that though they be not actually raised, yet they may be
meritoriously raised: There is many a one that has a white name in Gods
Election-booke, and whose name Christ has engraven upon his hands, that to us
is yet a black child of wrath, a stranger to the Covenant of Grace. If their
names be there, Christ will in his own time raise him betwixt this and the
Judgment day; there is a spare room in Heaven for them. 2. Art thou
disconsolate to see some of thy friends in great terrors, in great afflictions
of spirit? O rejoice over them Christian, it is probable Christ is raising of
them. Be assured, if they be his, he will raise them, there is not the lowest
worm that belongs to Christ, but he has provided an high place for them; Not
the most blubber'd-eyed, uncomely Christian (in thine eyes) in the world, but
Jesus Christ has provided an handkerchiefe to wipe all tears from their eyes;
Christ has raised them, and will raise them.

One Branch of my use of Instruction I forgate in its due place, take it now in
a word.

We may hence be instructed, and let us learn, how much Christ deserves our
cleaving to him in the wilderness, in all trials, and crosses whatsoever. I
take this to be the proper use of this Text. The Spouse had fancied to her
self what the world would say of her, how they would admire her dependence
upon Christ, when he seemed to leave her, and make her sad; Christ replies in
the words of the Text, I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, etc. As much as
to say; And do I not deserve all this love, and a great deal more? Is it for
nothing that thou thus cleavest to me? Remember what thou were by Nature;
Remember who has done all the good for thee that is done for thy soul.

I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
THE SPOVSES Carriage In the Wilderness, in her leaning upon her Welbeloved,
Opening the temper of the Beleeving-soule in her several Wildernesses; And
discovering the way of her coming out, by her acting of Faith on the Lord
JESUS CHRIST.

In a Sermon formerly preached in Andrews Parish in Norwich: Now reprinted,
being corrected by the Author.

By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Isa. 50. 10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice
of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. LONDON, Printed for Rich: Tomlins.
1649.

TO The Right Honorable, his never enough Honored Lady, FRANCES HOBART,
Increase of Grace, etc.
Madam,
SOme time since, I presumed to present this Sermon to your Honors hands; your
Ladyships acceptance then has emboldened me now to present it again, with
some (though very small) alterations. It presents your Ladyship with a great
piece of your Honors duty and practice: Faith (Madam) is almost the Christians
All; the Life of Faith is distinctively the Christians life; and if ever there
were a time for a Christian to live this life, surely this time in which the
Lord has cast our lot is the time. The whole Church of Christ is this day in
the Wilderness; the Israelites way to Canaan lay that way; And for my part, I
look still, that the Church should keep the beaten path: and as all that have
lived godly in Christ Jesus hitherto have, so I expect that all that will live
godly, should still suffer persecution. The portion in this life, (surely) is
not the portion of the Saints; here, and hereafter is too much. After Christ's
Suffering time we quickly read of his Ascension. The mountains of Edom are
given to the children of Esau for a possession. Immediately after the days of
Tribulation shall the Son of Man come. And truly, the little experience of
the best Saints temper in this breathing time that England has had, has made
me as little to desire, as to expect an Earthly happiness. Saints have Nature
in them as well as Grace: Wantonness is the Daughter of Peace; and in our time
the Mother has brought forth twins. The extravagancies of Opinion, and
estrangements of affection, the cooled love of truth, and forgetting first
love, of which we have had, and have too large experiences, I confess have
made me little less than an enemy, I am sure an Infidel, to the Churches
continued Peace. Broken metalls must be melted before they will run together
again; it must be a fire that must thoroughly purge away our dross, and take
away our tin. And as I expect for the whole, so for every member, at least I
would have them expect it for themselves. Let us seek the Kingdom of God, for
the (...), all things else (...), if they come, let them be thrown in; let us
bless God if we receive them. It is a Benjamins double Mess to have earth
and heaven too. Let us not build our expectations high; if we have them, we
shall but have (...) and (...), (...) quasi (...).
Dogs meat (God feeds his Dogs with such Crumbs,) and they will be loss
unto us: Much less, let us make it our work, to get great things for our
selves. (Madam,) to me it seems a business of far greater concernment to
enquire and learn rather what to do in a straight, than whether we shall
have a time that shall be without streights. I had rather be prepared for the
worst, than filled with expectations of the best. Here is Isa. 43. 2.
our comfort, that in the floods, and the flames, he will be with us, that
will not suffer the floods to drown us, nor the flames to kindle upon us. This
short Sermon will direct your Ladyship to a posture that in every condition
will afford your Honor ease. It need not trouble us, that there is a Lion in
our way, if we have strength to encounter him. We need not be troubled, that
our way to Canaan lies through wildernesses, if we have the cloud, and pillar
of fire. Much fear will argue little faith. Yet a little while Madam, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Yet a while, and we shall be
beyond the fear of drownings; more above fears than we are now below
enjoyments. The great God that has directed your Honors steps toward him,
multiply the days of Peace to your Ladyship, that you may find a nearer way
to heaven, than through much tribulation; and go Jacobs way, betwixt Egypt and
Canaan. But if for trial the Lord shall carry your Honor the way of the
Israelites, it is more trial, and may ask more time; but in heaven there
cannot be a Saint missing. Iniquity only shall be purged Fsa. 27. 9.
away, and this shall be all the fruit, to take away sin, and when the Lord
shall make the stones of the Altar chalkestones that are beaten in sunder, the
Groves and the Images shall not stand up. The Lord in every Wilderness
preserve your Ladyships faith, by his power to salvation; and if he brings your
Honor in, doubt not (Madam,) but he will also bring you out of every
Wilderness leaning on your wel-beloved; Which may be your Ladyships assured
faith, and shall be (Madam) the constant prayer, of

Your Honors most obliged Chaplain, and humble Servant in the Lord Jesus, John
Collings.
Chaplyfield house, May 21, 1649.
The SPOUSES Carriage in the Wilderness.
Song of Solomon. Chap. 8. ver. 5. Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her welbeloved?
WE have already taken notice of two Travelers in the Text. Christ is a
Traveller: For had he not come up with his Garments died from Bozra, we had
been in the wilderness still. And the Spouse is a Traveller; The Text says,
She comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her welbeloved. The Text
presents us the Spouse in motion.

Observe first, From whence she moves, the Terminus a quo, that the Text tells
us is the wilderness.

2. What her motion is, it is ascensive, she comes up.

3. Her moving posture, it is leaning upon her beloved.

The Doctrine that yet remains in the Text, which I promised to handle, is,

Doct. 3. That the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ (being raised by him)
comes out of every wilderness, leaning upon her beloved.

I must take it in pieces, and handle the parts severally.

These four things be couched in it:

1. That the Spouse of Christ has had, and may sometimes have, her dwelling in
the wilderness. That is implied.

2. Though she has had, and may sometimes have, her dwelling in the
wilderness, yet she rests not there; She comes up from it. Who is this that
comes up?

3. She cannot come up alone; She must come up leaning.

4. She will lean upon her Beloved, and he will, and only can bear her.

First, She has had, and sometimes may have, her dwelling in the wilderness.
Here first I must open the term Wilderness. Secondly, I shall show you what
Wilderness the Spouse has had, or may have, her dwelling in.

I shall open the first in five or six particulars.

1. The Wilderness is an untilled place, where wild nature is yet seen, that
Art has not yet tamed, no pruning hook has lopt, the overgrown trees, no
plow broke up the soil to make it fruitful; The husbandman has not tilled
the ground there, nor can the reaper fill his hand; It is a place just in its
natural state, not yet manured.

2. The Wilderness is a losing place; no beaten road for the Traveller there
to follow, no landmarks, nothing to guide him in his way, he is lost if once
in it; he looks on this side, and on the other, forward, backward, every way,
still he sees himself lost, knows not whither to go: He is in a Wilderness,
and knows not the way out.

3. The Wilderness is a dangerous place; A man in the Wilderness is a prey to
the mouth of every Lion; the Lion is the King of those waste places; and the
Bears, Wolves, Cockatrices, and Adders, his lesser subjects: There dwells the
young Lion, the Cockatrice and the Adder together, each one searching for his
prey. It is a dangerous place.

4. The Wilderness is a solitary place; where he that walks, as he has no
path, so he has no company: The paths in the Wilderness are not trodden, no
beaten high ways are there; no company but the Owls and the Ostriches, the
beasts of the field, and creeping things of the earth. Nothing fit to be a
companion for man: No, it is a Wilderness.

5. The Wilderness is a disconsolate place; no curiosities of nature to
refresh his spirits with: Terror is round about him; no pleasure to delight him.

6. Lastly, the Wilderness is a place void of all provisions; There is neither
bread for the hungry, nor water for the thirsty soul; no necessaries, much
less superfluities.

The expression is very apt: such a Wilderness, yea many a such Wilderness
the Spouse of Christ has had, and may have, her dwelling in.

1. A Wilderness of Sin. 2. A Wilderness of Sorrow. 3. A Wilderness of
Affliction. 4. A Wilderness of Temptation. 5. A Wilderness of Desertion. Nay,
lastly, This whole life is but a wilderness to her. She has been in some of
these, and may be in all of them; but out of all She comes up leaning. Every
one of these is the souls Wilderness: and as they come up to Christ, they
come up from some of them; and in their walking with the Lord Christ, they go
through some of them; and some go through all of them.

The first is Eremus peccati, The Wilderness of sin; and every soul is born
in this Wilderness. Man at first created dwelt in Paradise; but alas, he threw
himself out into the Wilderness, and God locked the Garden gate against him.
Sinful man perferr'd the Wilderness before Paradise, and God allots him his
dwelling there: There was man thrown, and all mankind born in it. We are all
Wilderness brats by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. You were children of wrath by nature,
even as others. And sin may well be called a Wilderness; it is status
naturalis, our natural condition: We are in a Wilderness habit, when we are
clothed with the rags of iniquity. Ay and it is a state as dangerous as the
Wilderness: The Lion claims him in the Wilderness as his prey; and if he
scapes his teeth, it will be hard to escape the Cockatrice, and young Lion, and
Adder, the lesser fry of destroyers: If in this sinful natural condition we
do escape the mouth of the roaring Lion the Devil, it is greatly to be feared
that the Bear, and the Wolf, and the Cockatrice, the lesser judgments of God,
will swallow us up: we are children of wrath, as well passively as actively, in
a dangerous condition. Lastly, as the Wilderness is a place void of all
necessary provisions for the body, so is sin a state void of all necessary
provisions for the soul: We are hungry, and naked, and bloody, and filthy in
our sins, it is a wilderness dress, Ezekiel. 16. As for thy nativity, in the
day that thou were born, thy navell was not cut: neither were thou washed in
water to supple thee, thou were cast out in the open field, Verse. 5. Every
spouse of the Lord Christ has been in this Wilderness. Who is this that
comes up? of this I have spoke before, and therefore pass it over.

The second Wilderness is Eremus contritionis, The wilderness of contrition,
or sorrow for sin. Every soul is naturally in the Wilderness; but every one
that is in it sees not that it is there: Every soul is born blind, though most
think they see. When God opens the souls eyes, and shows it the hell that it
treads over every hour, and makes the soul apprehensive of its danger, it
conceives it self in a worse Wilderness than before; the physic works, the
Patient thinks it is nearer death than before it took it. Here it cries out,
Oh, I am a lost undone creature! Oh, whither should I go? on one side behold
terror! on the other side despair! If it looks up to heaven, there is an
angry God; if downward, there is a gaping hell: Oh! whither should it go? Now
it cries out (with the Iaylor) O what shall I do to be saved? I am lost in my
sins! I am lost in my own righteousness! I know not what to do: If I stay
in my sins I perish; if I go out of the world I perish. Here stands the soul
turning it self every way, and seeing comfort no way, till the Lord Christ
bows the heavens, and thrusts out his arm of salvation, his shoulder of
merits, and takes the soul by the hand, saying, Come (my Beloved) I will tell
thee what thou shall do; I am the way out of this wilderness, come out
leaning; lean thy arm of faith upon the shoulder of my merits; Free grace is
able to bear thee: I am thy Welbeloved, and thy Welbeloved is thine. And
ordinarily the soul when it comes to the Lord Christ, comes through this
wilderness, this losing place of conviction and contrition, and weeps her
self a path, where she would drown in the waters of Marah, if Christ did not
hold her up. Indeed God could have brought the Israelites a shorter, Journey,
than through the wilderness to Canaan; and sometimes God miraculously draws a
soul to himself, only by the cords of mercy: God is not tied always to bring
a soul the same road to heaven; Elijah was carried to heaven in a fiery
chariot; but the more ordinary way is by Jacobs ladder. The common way to
heaven is by the gates of hell; the way to life is through the chambers of
death, through a wilderness. Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness?

The third Wilderness in which Christ's Spouse may sometimes have her dwelling
in, is the Wilderness of affliction; bodily afflictions I mean. A Wilderness
is a place full of briars and thorns; and through such a wilderness (the holy
Ghost tells us) lies the Saints way to heaven: By much tribulation [much
pricking of thrones, thorns in the flesh somtimes] must we enter into the
kingdom of God. The Spouse has a dirty way to go to marrying in; and when
she is married, she has a dirty way home too: A wilderness on either side.
The Apostle speaks plain, Heb. 11. 37, 38. They wandered about in Sheepskins,
and Goat-skines, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, they wandered in
deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth; And who
were these that wandered thus in the wilderness? They were such of whom the
world was not worthy; the Spouses of the Lord Christ. And truly afflictions
may be called a wilderness, for the disconsolacy of them too; they are times
of sorrow, no delights please; the spouse in affliction is in a wilderness.

4. A fourth wilderness that the Spouse sometimes dwells in, is the
wilderness of temptations, The Bridegroom himself was in this wilderness; He
was led into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; The spirit took him
thither, Matthew. 4. verse. 1. and Paul was in this wilderness, troubled on every
side; this is Satan's wilderness, that he leads many a poor soul into, and it
had been a sad wilderness, had not our WAY been their first: If the Devil
could have lost our Savior in it, we should never have found the way out of
it. A dangerous, a disconsolate place, well termed a wilderness, as the Saint
will tell you that has been in it.

5. A fifth Wilderness that the Spouse is sometimes in, is the Wilderness of
desertion. Here Is a sad wilderness, a desert indeed, Quum Dens deseruit, When
God has forsaken or withdrawn himself from the Soul; this Desert Christ
himself was in, Eli, Eli, lama-sabachthani? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? was the voice of the Lord Jesus hollowing in the wilderness: such
a wilderness was the Spouse in, when she sought him, but found him not, Cant.
3. v. 2. In this desert the soul is solitary, her God is gone, and she knows
not what is become of him; the soul never calls any company her company, if
her God be not there. David was in this wilderness too, he is often crying out
of the wilderness he was in, when God hid his face from him. The foul that
belongs to the Lord Jesus goes through many a wilderness in this world, but
scarce any which Christ has not walked in before it, and hewn a way through it;
through every wilderness we may follow the Lamb in his own path.

6. Nay lastly, The Saints whole life below, is but a wilderness. Earth is a
Christians desert; while she lives here, she lives in widowhood; it is a
sinful place, a dangerous place, a thorny place, and a place where she finds
an abatement of the joys she shall be swallowed up in in glory. Mortality is
but Meshech, and her best habitations are but tents of Kedar, nothing to the
temple of Glory she shall worship her God in hereafter; and the former deserts
are but as several corners of this wilderness; but she comes up out of
every wilderness: That is the next branch of Doctrine I hasten to.

Branch 2. That though the Saint of God has had, and may have, her dwelling in
the wilderness, she rests not there, but comes up out of it.

She comes up. It seems to argue a propriety in the motion, as if she were
not driven nor drawn up, nor made to come, but of her self came, and of her
own strength, and yet not of her own strength neither; her own legs would
not bear her, for the text tells us she comes up leaning, she had fallen had
she not leaned.

Here is the Question stated; what the soul does toward its conversion, what
power of doing any thing tending toward its conversion before it is
sanctified, or after it is sanctified, whether it may merely passive, what she
may do, what she cannot do, how far she may come, where she must lean?

Whether has the soul any power to come up out of the wilderness of sin to
the Lord Christ, to move one step heaven ward of it self? And here I have a
narrow path to tread betwixt the Pelagians and Arminians on the one side, that
would make the soul have more power than it has: and the Antinomians and
Sectaries on the other side, that are so far from holding that the soul has
no power to come to Christ, that they would make us believe she has no power
to come to Church neither.

I shall not know how to determine this Question better than in the words of
pious and learned Bishop Davenant, Determ. Q. 9. 49. Non potest quodvis opus ex
divina premissione, ad impetrandam peecatorum remissionem, aut adeundam
possessionem regni coelorum ordinatum, The soul cannot do any thing that is
ordained by God, or has the promise of God, to obtain pardon of sins, or
possession of the Kingdom of heaven; she cannot savingly believe, repent,
love, etc. for these are the acts of grace, and God is the fountain and donour
of all grace.

1. But first, she may, by Gods general restraining grace, without special
and saving grace, abstain from gross sins; the heathens did so; the light
of nature which God keeps from none, will show her that this is darkness.

2. Secondly, She may by Gods exciting grace, without any saving grace,
perform many previous actions that are required of men to faith and
repentance; she may by virtue of Gods general grace, his exciting grace, go
to Church, hear the word of God, meditate of God, peccat a propria consider are
and se^su eorum expavescere, says Davenant; Ay, and she may beg deliverance
from that woeful condition, which she apprehends her self in; but she stirrs
not one of these stepps after a spiritual, but after a natural manner, till
the quickening grace of God come: A man may in a wilderness conceive himself
lost, look about for the way out, call for help, be willing to be out, yet not
be one step in the way that will lead him out; and this the soul must do so
far as it can: Negamus etenim hanc gratiam regenerantem infundi hominibus
inertibus, sed animis per verbum Dei erectis, and subact is, and per praedictas
actiones quodammodo dispositis, viz. We deny that regenerating grace is infused
into sloathfull men, but into souls subdued by Gods word and law, and after a
manner disposed by the foregoing actions; yet we say, that even these foregoing
actions have their first motions from God; and the question is whether God does
not first work a sight and sense of sin, and an humiliation for it by his
exciting grace, before he comes with his regenerating, quickening and saving
grace into the soul; we say he does in his ordinary course of his
dispensations, Only I must be here safely understood, that I speak according
to man's apprehension; for in respect of God, nothing is first or last, he works
all in an instant, all graces together in the soul; but the question lies not
whether God works the habit of Repentance before the habit of Faith, or no; for
without question he works together all his works; but whether God makes
humiliation act before faith, which we say he does; Esau and Jacob may be in
their mothers womb together, but Esau may come out and be seen in the world
before Jacob; yet not tying up the Almighty to this method, who can and will
work any way, even which way it pleases him. Nor do we say any such previous
action can be performed by the Creature, ut de merito congrui teneatur Gratiam
dare, That God is bound for the desert of any such privious action to give his
inward and regenerating quickening grace; But yet this Dave. ibid.
we say, that in the Church of God, where men are daily stirred up by the word
and spirit to repent and believe savingly, God will give (though not for any of
these previous or dispository actions, yet) freely, regenerating grace to all
such as are capable of it, unless they have resisted the spirit of God in the
preceding operations, and rejected his quickening grace; but yet we deny, that
any man can perform these actions so but he will offend and resist the Spirit
of God in them: Now why, when as all resist, God should reject some, as they
have rejected him, and leave them to the hardness of their own hearts, and
work irresistibly on others who have resisted their God as much, and break open
their hearts, though locked and barred against him, and fill them with
quickening grace, and pull a Lot out of Sodom by force, and draw a soul out of
the wilderness by head and shoulders, I say, why he should do it, when two
are grinding at the same mill, take one and leave the other; when two are in
the same field, why the one should be taken the other left; when two souls are
equal in duties, fasting, mourning, in the way that God has appointed, why he
should baulke this and take the other, when perhaps that which is taken has
been the least penitent too, I will conclude with Dr. Davenant, is Sacrum
Misterium divinae voluntati reliquendum, A sacred and secret mystery to be left
to the divine pleasure, and the reason lies in the agents own breast; It is
because he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he wills he
hardens: God is his own reason, and his free grace its own cause.

So then we conclude, that the soul cannot move one foot to a spiritual
action spiritually, not by any common grace, it must be only by Gods
regenerating and saving grace. So that to answer yet more distinctly to the
Question.



of God, then the soul comes, then the soul which was merely passive
before, is active, and will endeavor to do something for that God that has
done so much for her. It follows, the drawing of Gods most holy Spirit: Draw
me (says the Spouse) and I will run after thee, First, I must be drawn; but
then I will run: In the same moment God makes us to will, and we will; and yet
all the efficacy of the Action comes from Gods most holy Spirit.

It is certain (says Augustine) that Certum est nos velle quum volumus, sed
ille facit ut velimus qui operatur in nobis velle.
we are willing when we are willing, but he makes us willing, that works in
us to will and to perform, Phil. 2. 13. And so he, (...)* God draws, but he
draws the soul that is willing; Ay, but first, (...), he makes it willing.
So, I have showed what propriety the soul has in the Action, how she comes,
and how willing she is to the motion. She is drawn, but she is willing to be
drawn to Jesus Christ. But first, she is made willing before she is willing,
ay, and in her life, after she is come to Christ, in her walking with Christ,
Non suis confidit viribus, she trusts not her own strength, she even then
comes leaning, which is the next Branch of the Doctrine I have to handle.

Though she comes up from the wilderness, she comes up, not of her own
strength, but leaning.

First, Let us enquire what the expression holds out to us.

Secondly, What is the souls hand.

Thirdly, Who is it she leanes upon.

Fourthly, What in him she has to trust to, and how in every wilderness she
leans, and out of every wilderness comes up leaning.

I conceive, here are four things hinted in this expression leaning, which I
may term the four fingers of the Spouses hand, which she lays upon her
Saviors shoulders.

First, It does argue that the soul is weary, otherwise she would not lean.

Secondly, It is a willing posture; I am not forced to lean, I do it
willingly: The soul that comes up with Christ is willing.

Thirdly, It is a posture of love; Otherwise she would not lean.

Fourthly, It does argue a confidence that the soul has in the Lord, that he
is able to bear her; Otherwise she would not trust the weight of her soul
upon him.

First, it does argue weariness; If she were not weary she would not lean.
Humiliation is a preface to faith, and the way to be found is to be lost. It is
not a leaning of wantonness, but a leanning of weariness. O Lord, I am
sinking into Hell, let me save my self from sinking by thy shoulders; I am
falling, Lord let me lean; whiles the soul has any strength to go, it is
too proud to be beholden to lean; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11. 29. First, weary, then come: First, heavy
laden; then I will ease you: What shall I do to be saved (says the Gaolor?) O
I am lost! undone! I am at a Nonplus! O what shall I do? I am weary! for I am
far readier to believe, that that Voice, What shall I do? is rather the
Voice of the soul (at it is nil ultra) sadly sensible of it is lost and miserable
condition, sufficiently humbled in the sense of it, than the voice of a soul,
thinking it might do any thing that might be but in the least contributary to
the desert of salvation. I cannot be persuaded, to think, that when the Gaolor
spoke those words, prostrated by humiliation at the Apostles feet, that he had
the least thought that he could throw in so much as two mites into the Treasury
of free grace. But as it is the ordinary speech of one drowned in the depth of
sorrow; O what shall I do? What shall I do? though at that instant they know
they can do nothing to help themselves: So the Jailer, in a true sense of his
own lost condition, cries out, O what shall I do? he was weary, it was time
for the Apostle to bid him lean, then believe (says the Apostle) and thou
shall be saved. It is but a wresting of the place, or mocking it rather, to
bring it to persuade that duties preparatory were here excluded. Surely, had
not the Apostles seen him humbled in some degrees, they would as well have
prefixed Repent here, as Peter did to them, Act. 2. Repent, and be baptized.
Christ came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance. He is a
Savior, but it is for them that are lost in their own feeling too. And the
truth of it is, the soul scorns to lean upon Christ so long as it is able to
go alone, when it has never a crutch of merits or duties to rest upon, then
it looks out for some rest for it is foot, for some shoulder to bear up, for
some staff to stay it self upon. Leaning does argue weariness, that is the
first.

Secondly, It does argue a willingness in the soul to come to Jesus Christ;
Leaning is not a forced action. Indeed (as I said before) Christ first works
this willingness; he it is that gives us power to will, and it is by his power
that we are willing, as it is written, They shall be Psa. 110. 3.
willing in the day of my power; But he does not let us lean before we are
willing. Leaning is an action proceeds from the will, Who is this comes up
leaning?

Thirdly, leaning does argue love; who leans upon his enemies? I will not lean
upon one whom I cannot trust, I must have some good thoughts of his love. The
soul that leans upon the Lord Jesus Christ loves Christ, that Faith, that
pretended dependancy of any upon Christ, that proceeds not out of a principle
of love, grows out of a false root; the loving soul is only the truly
believing soul. Leaning is a loving posture, that is the third.

Fourthly, It does argue fiduciam, a resting, a trusting the soul upon Christ;
he that leans upon another reposeth his whole weight, trusts his whole
strength upon him: He does as much as say, well, I know I cannot go alone, I
cannot stand; but I will trust my self, upon thy strength will I lean, if I
fall, I fall: So the soul that comes up out of the wilderness of sin to the
Lord Jesus Christ, does repose it is whole weight upon the Lord Christ, it
says, O Lord, I am a great and grievous sinner, I am not able to stand upon
mine own legs, but I trust my soul upon thy arms; thou have mercies, and
great mercies, and free mercies, if I fall, I fall; if be damned, I am damned;
here I will lean. And here you have the second thing plain, viz,

Secondly, The souls hand with which she leanes upon Jesus Christ for
salvation, and these 4. things which I have hinted from this expression,
leaning, are as the four fingers of the hand of Faith. And we may thus give a
description of it.

Faith is the hand of a soul which God has humbled, whereby the soul being
not able to stand alone, nor daring to trust to any thing else, and being made
willing by God, out of a principle of love, lays hold upon Jesus Christ, and
trusts, and rests it self upon him for her salvation. And that leads me to the
third thing I propounded, the Person upon whom she leanes, the text renders it,
Her beloved; or as I conceive, the old Translation better, Her welbeloved: The
Latin dilectum suum, him that is her conjugally beloved.

This is the last Branch of the doctrine, That though the believing soul comes
up from the wilderness leaning, yet she will only lean upon her beloved, and
he only can and will bear her.

We know, that whosoever leanes, must have a person to lean upon. Secondly,
There must be a capacity in this arm to bear her, some strength, yea, there
had need to be a great deal to hold up the weight of a soul. First, let us
enquire who the Person is, rendered in the Text dilectum, Her welbeloved; in
plain terms her Husband, one that has more than an ordinary portion of her
love.

Here are five things hinted in this Expression.

1. It is one whom she loves. The word signifies a special sort of love; and
every greater includes a less.

2. One that she is married to, he is welbeloved, her dearest love; not charum,
but dilectum; one that has a title to her.

3. Her Beloved, not another Beloved.

4. Her Beloved, He that is her Beloved, not who was her Beloved.

5. Her Beloved, not her Beloveds.

First, It is one whom she loves. This I hinted at before; it is a principle of
love that draws the Soul to lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ. The hatred of
her self, has bred the love of her Savior in it. And no Soul loves Christ
more than that which loathes it self most. When the soul shall consider what a
Brand for Hell it was in its original, how worthless a worm it is, how
basely it has dealt by God, trampling upon his rich offers of Grace, scorning
his Invitations. And again consider, that God has no need at all of it; But if
it were burning in hell, could be as glorious as in its Salvation, and yet
would be pleased to power out his precious blood for it, yet so unworthy: To
woo the Soul that has need of him, and yet never prays to him, nor ever was
a suitor for mercy; This breeds love in the Soul: And the more the Soul
fadomes her own misery, the more yet she loves and admires the Lords mercy,
and loving thus, she leanes upon him.

Secondly, It is one that she pleades some title to, and interest in, she calls
him hers. Christ is the Bridegroom of the Soul, and the Soul is Christ's
Bride. Beloved, in all this Song is taken for the highest degree of love, and
nearest relation, conjugall love; therefore Christ elsewhere calls her his
Sister, his Spouse; she has a title to, and interest in him, possession of
him; and in another place, I am my welbeloved^, and my welbeloved is mine. She
is his, and he is hers: they have a propriety each in other. But suppose we
should put the Spouse to prove her title to him, What is thy Beloved more than
another Beloved? Or, why is he thy Beloved (O believing soul) more than the
Beloved of another? show thy title to him: And again, why is she Christ's more
than another? Why should the believer monopolize Christ? and how came Christ to
be hers? by right of gift, her heavenly Father has given her unto him; hence
is that Phrase of her Saviors Prayer, John. 17. 9. All that the Father has
given me, and I pray for them that thou have given me. She has given her self
to him, Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love
is better than wine. She has said, Draw me, and I will run after thee; ay, and
he has given himself to her; he has given his grace unher, Gal. 1. 6. And
his glory unto her. The glory which thou have give^ me I have given them. Her
Beloved by right of gift. by right of bargain and sale. The Ancients had three
ways to get themselves wives; by gift, purchase, or desert. The Fathers sold
their Daughters, and the Bridegroom bought his Bride, he gave a Dowry for her.
Hence when Sechem had a mind to Dinah the daughter of Jacob, he says, Ask me
what Dowry thou will, and I will give it thee. Christ has bought his Beloved;
hence (says the Apostle) He has paid a price for us. A bloody price: more
than all the world was worth. But he would have her because he delighted in
her, and so she is his, and he is hers, by right of purchase.

3. She is his Beloved, and he is hers, by right of desert, she deserved not
him, but he deserved her. This was a third way by which the Ancients got them
wives, by some gallant explcit, or great service. Their wives were sometimes
given them for wages; Jacob served 14 years for Rachell, Genesis 29. 17. David for
his Sovereigns daughter, encountered great Goliath; and afterward robbed the
Philistines of their foreskins: he paid more for her, than she proved to be
worth. By this right, the believing soul is the beloved of Christ, he has
served a long service for her; not fourteen, but above thirty years, he has
vanquished the Goliahs of our souls, and has conquered our Spiritual Enemies.

4. He is hers, and she is his, by right of possession, he dwells in her, and
she dwells in him. The second person in the Trinity is an inmate with the
believing soul, He dwells under the roof of her heart, He has a chamber in
the soul, and has pitched his tent within her, and she is in him too, united
each unto other, this is very plainly expressed, Gal. 2. 20. I live, but yet not
I, but Christ lives in me. I am the Carcass, Christ the Soul; the soul
moves the body, so Christ moves my soul; I move not from any principle in my
self, but from a principle of Grace. The life I live in the flesh, I live by
the life of the Son of God who dwells in me, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. Thus you see she may well call Christ her Beloved, and Christ
may well call her his Beloved, He has a propriety in her, and she has a
propriety in him also; he has married her, and dwells with her, yea, and in
her, dilectum suum, her wellbeloved indeed.

Thirdly, It is her beloved, not another beloved. Every soul has a Beloved;
the Drunkard has his beloved cups; the wanton has his beloved Queanes; the
Covetous person his beloved gold; The soul that leanes upon Christ, goes not a
whoring after other Gods. The Spouse of Christ leanes not upon the Papists
beloved merits, nor upon the Turks beloved Mahomet, nor upon the Pharisees
beloved duties, nor upon the Idolaters beloved Saints; she says, Abraham
knows her not, and Israel is ignorant of her, but Isa. 63. 16.
the Lord is her Father, Christ is her Redeemer, and her Maker, her Redeemer,
is her Husband, Creator tuus est sponsus tuus. Her beloved, not another
Beloved.

Fourthly, He that is her Beloved, not that which was her Beloved. She once
loved her sins, and her lusts were the beloveds of her soul. The name of Baalim
was in her mouth; her lusts were her Lords, and they ruled over her. But now
the name of Baalim is taken out of her mouth: she calls the Lord Ishi, God
alone is her beloved. Sin was the dearly beloved of her soul, but now she
calls sin no more Naomi, she calls it Marah; that which was once the
sweetness, is now the bitterness of her soul, she takes no pleasure in it;
no, nor does she account her duties her beloved; she uses them, but she dares
not trust her soul upon them; she dares not plead any desert in them, though
once perhaps she had a Pharisaicall conceit, that her duties would be her
healing, yet when she comes to the Lord Christ to lean upon his Arm, though
she uses duties, and is as full of Prayer and humiliation as ever, she knocks
her hand upon her breast, and cries she is a sinner. Oh, but what remedy? the
knocking her hand upon her breast she knows cannot save her; no, for that,
God be merciful to her, she leanes upon Christ, that is her now Beloved, not
upon any duties, or any other merits that was before her Beloved.

Fifthly, Her beloved, not her beloveds. The soul that comes to the Lord Jesus
Christ loves him intensly, and as she loves him best, so she loves him only.
As nothing shall have her whole heart, so neither will she divide her heart
betwixt him and another: he shall have her heart, and he only shall have her
heart, and he shall have her whole heart too; she dare trust her strength upon
Christ, and upon him alone: she desires only to be found in the Lord Jesus,
who is her Bridegroom; she is a Virgin, not a Whore; she leanes not upon
Christ with one hand, and her own Merits with another, no, nor dares she
lean upon the Merits of another; she durst not trust the weight of her soul
upon the wings of an Angel, nor to the Prayers of a Saint; she relies upon God,
and upon God only. The Papists lean upon Christ, but not upon him alone: she
knows it will be a dishonor both to her and her husband, to take any thing in
partem amoris, to share with her husband in his love; she will keep her honor
in being the wife of one Husband.

And so I have showed you how she leanes, what is her hand, who it is she
leanes upon, what title she has to him, what rules she observes in her
leaning. I have but one thing more, and that is, to show you what strength
there is in the Lord Christ's shoulders to bear her; how she leanes even in
every wilderness, and what fullness of strength there is in her husbands arm
to keep her up from falling.

the wilderness of sin: Here the Spouse cannot be said properly to lean
upon her beloved, for she wants the hand of faith to lay hold upon Christ, and
indeed she is not weary: yet I do not know why in some sense, even in this
estate, the elect soul is not beholding to free grace; he is her Christ here,
though he has not yet manifested himself to be her Jesus, her Savior. The
elect soul in sin is elect, and decreed to be saved, though she be not
declared to be elect; she is beloved in decree, though God has not actually
manifested his love unto her: he is not her beloved, but the soul is his
beloved, not actually but decretally, he has thoughts of good to her, but his
thoughts are kept within himself, till he is pleased to reveal them to her at
his best time: she is his beloved, though there be no correlation, she is in
his thoughts, his Spouse, aye, and positively, not conditionally. The Arminians
falsely dream of Gods conditional decrees, because they comprehend not the
ways of God: Believing is necessarily required, yet it was not a condition in
Gods decree: The soul is his beloved, though yet there be no correlation,
though she be not his wife yet, yet she is intended for his wife. To speak
according to the ways of men, I may intend to make a woman my wife, before I
actually declare my intentions to her; she is my wife in my determinations and
thoughts before I woo her, though not actually my wife ^^fore I have wooed
her, and she has y^elded too, there lies only this difference, my
determination must be but conditionally, if she will accept of my proffered
love: There lies a power in her to refuse. We may therefore make the simile a
little higher; A great Emperor buyeth a woman that is a slave which he intends
to marry, and will, whether she will or no; yet he will woo her, and if it be
possible marry her will, as well as her person; yet whether she will or no, he
will and may marry her, for she is his purchase, she is his wife in his
determination before he has married her. But yet even this simile is lame.
(Every simile, comparing the ways of God, with the ways of man, must at least
halt of one foot) for though this Emperor has power to force the woman's body
to the action, yet he has no power to force her will, to be willing to the
action, The will is always independent, sui juris; but God has power, not
only to marry the soul, which he has bought from being a slave to the Devil,
but to make her willing to marry him; yet she is in Christ's decree his Spouse,
before ^e has actually revealed his decree unto her: so though strictly and
properly the soul cannot be said to lean upon Christ in the wilderness of
sin, yet she may be said to be beholden unto the Lord Christ, and that thus:

1. Every soul has the like principles of corruption, and would act to the
full of it is depraved operations, were it not for Gods preventing and
restraining grace, She is beholding unto God for his preventing and restraining
grace, though here she is merely passive.

Secondly, She is beholden unto God for his exciting grace. The soul hears,
and fasts and prays, meditates of her own sad condition though for the
substance of the action it is her own, yet it is Gods exciting grace makes her
willing to hear, fast, pray, though not his special saving-grace, yet his
common grace: But this is not the leaning meant in the Text she leanes here
upon Christ, but not upon Jesus [a Saviour] upon God, but not as her Beloved.
And here the soul is brought into a second wilderness.

2. The wilderness of Sorrow, Contrition, Repentance, call it what you please,
though I know the later term Repentance, be controverted by some.

Yet I know not why we may not say, That a man may repent without saving-grace.
And for that Repentance which they say must be the effect of faith, If I were a
School-man, I should rather call it Godly Sorrow, but I desire not to play upon
terms: And for their defining Repentance, To be a sorrow for sin out of the
sense of the love of God revealed in Jesus Christ, it is a definition they have
devised for their own purpose; And give them their premises according as they
please, they would be poor Logicians if they made the conclusion to displease
them: For from hence they argue, If the love of God be the ground and cause of
Repentance [viz. the love of God manifested and sensible to us, we having
apprehended it by faith] the special love of God, then faith must go before
Repentance, viz. an apprehension of Gods saving love, and reliance upon it. But
I answer, the definition which they give us of Repentance is deceitful; it is
a definition of a Species in stead of a Genus (as we say in Logic) As some
unwary Divines define Faith, to be an assurance of Gods love in Jesus Christ.
This is true, but this is a faith of the highest stamp, and many a precious
soul is without this faith to his dying day.

Faith of adherence is another thing; as if I should go to define a man to be
a reasonable creature, skilled in all sorts of Learning, Any man would
understand me, that I did not go about to describe a man in general, but this
or that particular man. And I say once again, if I were a School-man, I should
rather call this A godly sorrow, and define Repentance in general to be A
sorrow for sin, there is the genus and differentia: Or if there be required a
fuller definition with the ground, though I conceive such a definition would be
more proper to give of Repentance in it is several kinds, than of Repentance in
general; yet we may give it thus, It is a sorrow for sin, arising out of the
fear of Gods wrath, or apprehensions of Gods love. And I know not, why we may
not say, That a man may repent without saving grace. Bishop Davenant says, A
man by exciting the grace of God, may Peccata propria considerare, ad sensum
eorundem expavescere, and liberationem ab hoc metu exoptare, tremble for his
sins, and mourn for them, and desire deliverance out of them, and if this be
not Repentance, I know not what is, (not taking Repentance for the whole work
of conversion, as sometimes it is taken in Scripture, but) taking Repentance
for a weariness of sin and sorrow for it.

But those of our Brethren here (that are so afraid of Babylon, that they will
run quite beyond Jerusalem, so afraid of being Arminians, or Papists, to
ascribe any desert to duties, or tie that God has to concur with our duties,
that they are resolved they will not be sober Protestants; So afraid of being
Heterodox, that to avoid it, they will not be Orthodox,) tell us, that this is
a legal, not a saving Repentance. It sounds ill to distinguish between a
legal and saving Repentance. I will digress a little to rend this Fig-leafe,
being all they have to cover the nakedness of their opinion: I would feign
understand that term, saving Repentance, in what sense they take it; the
Scripture warrants no such distinction.

1. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance as merits Salvation,
or such a Repentance as God is tied necessarily to concur with, with his
saving grace, I say, no Repentance can be saving repentance. No Repentance
(says Learned Davenant) can so dispose the heart, Ut ex merito congrui
teneatur Deus gratiam cuiquam infundere.

2. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance, as of it self
without any more ado shall be sufficient to Salvation, I say again, no
Repentance can be called a saving Repentance. For, Without Faith, it is
impossible to please God.

3. If they mean by saving Repentance, a repentance that conduces to
Salvation, I say, this kind of Repentance (let them call it legal, or what
they please) is a saving Repentance.

4. If they mean by saving Repentance, such a repentance as is wrought
ordinarily in such as shall be saved, I say, in that sense this Repentance is a
saving Repentance.

Now, Whether it ought not to be preached, as Well from law as Gospell-motives,
is a question lies not in my way to determine; only I here my Savior (though
he were Gospel it self) preaching it from a Law-motive, Luke 13. 2. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Let the unprejudiced Reader judge, if
damnation be not there preached as a terrible motive to Repentance: Surely I
then may learn to preach from the Best of Preachers, and preach, Repent, or
you will go to Hell; Repent, or you will be damned, as well as Repent, because
God has loved you: Yea, and John too preached repentance as well because The
axe was laid to the root of the tree, and whatsoever tree brought not forth
good fruit, should be hewn down and cast into the fire, as because The Kingdom
of Heaven was at hand. I dare not learn contrary to Christ, and the Baptists
Copy; I will preach Mercy and Judgment: The Law and the Gospel go well
together, let me not be accursed for separating what God has joined. But

Lastly, I conceive, We cannot call any Repentance saving Repentance, til the
work of conversion be wrought fully in our souls. Nay, I make a question,
whether any man (without the grace of Assurance) can properly call his
Repentance saving Repentance, till he comes in Heaven. And for my own part, I
am full in the Negative. But I have digressed too far, to convince some (who
I fear are not so willing to suffer the word of conviction, as I to speak it.)

We left the Spouse in the second wilderness, The wilderness of sorrow, it is
time we now return to her, and comfort her, and show you how she comes out of
that, leaning upon her Beloved.

Here now the beloved Soul is mourning like a Turtle, and crying, O wh^^ shall
I do to be saved? I am lost! oh, how shall I find the way out of this
wilderness? O my sins pull me back! I cannot set a step forward! Sin trips up
my heels. The Devil tells me I am his; and my sins bear witness to his
words? Now she that is not the Spouse of Christ, sinkes in these mighty
wateres, she sinkes to hell in despair, is quite lost, if once she comes into
them: But he that said not one of those whom his father had given him should
perish, seeing the poor soul like Peter, (Mat. 14. 30.) that thought to have
trod upon those waters, sinking in them, and crying, Lord save me or else I
perish! when he sees such a poor souls ship in which he is, though he seems
to sleep, tossed in these bitter waves, when the tempest arises, and hearing
the soul in this Agony, crying out, Master save me or else I perish, now he
begins to arise, and stretch out his shoulder for the soul to lean upon,
speaks, and rebukes the winds, and calmes the busy tempests; when the Whale
of sorrow has sallowed up these Jonahs, and they are in the bottom of the Sea
in the Whales belly, they cry, their God hears, and causes the Whale to vomit
them out on the dry land. Me thinks that voice of Jonah, is the voice of every
penitent soul, Jonah 2. The soul cries by reason of her affliction unto the
Lord, and the Lord hears her; out of the belly of hell she cries, and he
hears her voice, for he has cast her into this deep, into the midst of the
Seas, and the floods compass her about, and all the billows, and the waves
past over her. Then the soul says, I am cast out of the Lords sight, yet I
will look again toward his holy Temple: The waters compass her about, even
to the soul, the depths closed round about her, the weeds were wrapped about her
head; she went down to the bottom of the mountains, the earth with her
bars was about her, yet her Lord her God brings up her life from corruption:
when her soul faints within her, she remembers the Lord, and her prayers come
unto him, even into his holy place. And when the soul is in this wilderness,
in the deeps of sorrow, then her Beloved does throw her his shoulder of
supporting grace to lean upon: that she says as David, Psalm. 94. 17, 18.
Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence, when I
said my foot slippeth, thy mercy Lord held me up. When the soul cries, I am
drowned! Then the Lords mercy holds her up: No (says God) thou art not
drowned, here is a cord of mercy for thee to lay hold upon, and I will draw
thee out by it. Here is my hand, be still O ye waves, this soul is mine. When
the soul is burdened with sins, laden with the sense of them; and in the sad
apprehension of them, cries out, my burden is too great for me to bear; I
sink, I sink under it; then Christ looks out of the heavens, and says, Cast
thy burden upon the Lord (man) and he shall sustain thee; or, Psalm. 55. 22.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you, Mat.
11. 29. The supporting grace of God is the Anchor of the soul, which stays
the Ship of the soul when a tempest of sorrow arises and the waves beat upon
it.

Now this Anchor has two flukes.

The first, is her Beloveds mercies and merits.

The second, is her Beloveds promises. When she is in this sad wilderness of
sorrow, her Beloved gives her a staff of merits, and mercy, and free grace to
lean upon, and a clue of promises to lead her out of this Labyrinth: and the
mercies and merits of her Beloved, have two hooks, both which take fast hold to
stay her soul.

1. The fullness of them. 2. The freeness of them.
Thy mercy held me up. My sins have cried up to heaven, (says the soul;) O,
but my mercies are above the heavens, (says Christ) Psalm 108. 5. My sins are
more in number than the hairs of my head, (says the soul,) but my mercies
(says Christ) are more in number than the sand which lies on the Sea shore,
Psalm. 139. 17, 18. My sins have abounded, (says the soul;) but my grace has
much more abounded, (says Christ) (...), Romans 5. 20. O, but my heart is as
hard as Iron, and the face of my sins like Brass, (says the soul;) but
that God that made the Leviathan, is as strong as the Leviathan. He esteems
Iron as straw, and Brass as rotten wood. My sins are many (says the soul;)
but were their name Legion, (says Christ) I could cast them out. O, but I am
an old sinner, I have a mountain of sins; But my mercies are from
everlasting (says Christ,) so are not thy sins, and I came to level
Mountains, Luke 3. 4. The more old thou art, the more glory shall my free
grace have, all the world shall see, I do not pardon thee for any service thou
can, or wilt do me, thou must ere long lie down in the grave. Thus the
soul in this wilderness of sorrow, leanes upon the fullness of Gods mercies.

me? Because thou have nothing, therefore I will do it (says Christ.) If thou
had any thing that thou thoughtest riches, I would not have married thee
(says Christ.) Thou art mistaken in my thoughts, I do not marry thee because
thou art rich, but because I have a delight in thee, and have an intention to
make thee rich, Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them
freely, Ezekiel. 16. 7, 8. 9. Now the soul being fully persuaded of this, that
Christ is full of mercy, and able to pardon her, and free in his mercy,
therefore willing to forgive her, and desiring nothing for her pardon, but to
live like a Spouse in his sight, begins to lean, believing he will pardon her:
But yet says the soul, I could desire to see it under Christ's hand; I think
I could take his word now.

So she leanes upon Christ's promises, which are as the other Fluke of this
Anchor. Now says the soul, O that I might have it but under Christ's hand,
that my sins (which I am scarce able to think can be pardoned) may be
pardoned, though I staid his leisure for the sealing of it. Here she enquires
for Promises, and Presidents. Did ever Christ promise (says the Soul) to
pardon such a scarlet, crimson sinner as I am? Yes, I have (says Christ) look
Isa. 1. 18. Though your sins be as skarlet, they shall be as snow, though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool: and so Isa. 55. 6, 7. I will
have mercy upon you, I will abundantly pardon you, Mat. 11. 29. O, but where
has Christ promised freely to dispense these mercies (says the soul?) Christ
turns her again to Isa. 51. 1, 2, 3. Ho every one that thirsts, come buy of
me without money, or mony-worth: But secondly, where did he ever pardon such a
sinner as I am (says the soul?) Christ puts her in mind of Mary Magdalen,
Manasses. O, but where one that was so near hell as I am (says the soul) an
old sinner? the these upon the Cross (says Christ.)

Now it must not be understood, that Christ Jesus should reveal these Promises
Audibly to the soul, but

1. Either sets his Ministers a work to declare his Charters of Grace, and
read the souls pardon.

2. Or else he suggests into the soul such promises in such a seasonable time,
which must be taken as the voice of God to that soul. Thus the soul furnished
with presidents, trusting upon promises, wipes her eyes, comes out of the
wilderness leaning upon her blessed Savior, and saying, O my sweet Savior!
thou that have drawn me from the pit of hell, and have reached out thy arm
for a worthless lost worm, to lean upon thee. I dare believe thee. I now
roll my soul upon thee, I am shipwrackt, but thou art my harbor; and now, O,
what shall I do for thee? O my God! I am sick of love! Thou have ravished my
heart! I am thine, I am thine. Thus have I shown how the soul comes out of
the wilderness of sin, and sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved. And here the
ship is in harbor, but yet ever and anon she is tossed still, persecuted,
though not forsaken: This is the most dangerous wilderness; afterward she is
often in the corner of a Desert. I must show you how even then she leanes, and
how out of them she comes leaning upon her Beloved. She is always a dependent
creature; she leanes when ever she is wearied.

the wilderness of afflictions; in this she leanes; out of this she comes
leaning upon her Welbeloved, [id est,] in afflictions she leanes. Christ is her
comfort in her saddest troubles; She leanes upon him, viz. upon his supporting
grace: Thy rod and thy staff comforted me, Psalm. 23. The staff held him up,
while the rod was upon his back. The rod was a comfort because of the staff;
the more he had of the rod, the more he had of the staff also. In afflictions,
the believing soul leanes upon God, and says, Lam. 2. 20. Behold O Lord, for I
am in distress: Out of the belly of Hell she cries, as Jonas, chap. 2.

First, She believes, that she shall suffer no more than she is able to bear,
2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace shall be sufficient for thee. For Gods strength is made
perfect in the Christians weakness.

Secondly, She believes, that she shall bear no more than shall be for her
good, Romans 8. 28. All things shall work together for the good of those that
love God. She has a Promise or two here to lean upon also, Job 5. v. 19. He
shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee: And Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee,
and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through
the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. She
comes out also leaning, trusting upon God as before, that he would help her
out, if he saw best, or support her in: so when she is come out, she believes
that God loves her never the worse; neither does she love him any whit the
worse, she cries, It is good for me that I was afflicted. When she is in, she
believes she shall come out; and she comes out with as much love to her God,
and confidence in him, as ever she had before, not being weary of Gods service,
because he has smitten her: She sees a smile in a smiting, favor in a frown,
love in a lowre, and she is resolved though he kills her, yet to trust in him:
she comes out of this wilderness leaning.

the wilderness of Temptations. Even in this she leanes upon the Lord Jesus
Christ. They were not the Spouses of Christ, The good ground, Luke 8. 13. Which
when they heard, received the Word with joy, but having no root, for a time
believed, and in time of Temptation fell away. The true Disciples are those
that continue with Christ in tentations, Luke 22. 18. First, they believe, that
God who is faithful, will not suffer them to be tempted above that which they
are able: But will with the temptation also make way to escape, that they may
be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. They believe, in that himself suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor those that are tempted, 2 Heb. 18. The
Saints that suffered many things were in many wildernesses, Heb. 11. 37.
Amongst the rest were in this also; and they all leaned, v. 39. They received a
good report through faith. Yea, temptation is so far from making a child of
God let go his hold, that it makes him lay the faster hold, 1 Pet. 1. 6,
Though now for a season you are in heaviness, through manifold temptations;
yet it is that the trial of your faith (being much more precious than of gold
which perishes) though it be tried with the fire, might be found unto praise,
and honor, and glory. In temptations they lean upon God; and they come out of
these temptations leaning, believing upon God too, having found, that he is
able, and knows how to deliver the godly out of all temptations, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

the wilderness of desertion. And this is one of the saddest wildernesses that
the Spouse of Christ comes in; and she has an hard work to lean here, when
Christ seems to pull away his shoulder: yet even here she leanes. Christ
himself did so: My God! my God! why have thou forsaken me? Mark the phrase,
Forsaken, yet not forsaken: the Bridegroom cries out, he was forsaken, yet my
God. Gods forsaking us is no ground for us to forsake him: If he seems not to
own us, it is no warrant, nor policy in us not to own him. It is the duty of
a pious soul, when God clouds himself, yet to cry, My God. The bowels of the
father must yearne upon the child again, if the child cries, and will not
shake him off. It is a remarkable expression of Job, chap. 13. ver. 15. Though
he kills me, yet will I trust in him. How now? if thou be killed (blessed Job)
how can thou trust? O immortal faith! that put Spirits of confidence in
the dust and ashes of Job. Let God hide himself from the soul, and so kill it
(For Gods separation of himself from the Christians soul, is a worse death
than the separation of his soul from his body) Yet the soul must trust in
him, it must, it will lean upon him. The Spouse loses not, but quickens her
faith in a fit of desertion. That place of the Prophet is remarkable, Isa. 50.
v. 10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord? that obeys the voice of his
servant? that walks in darkness and has no light? let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God. They that fear the Lord, though they may
walk in a dark wilderness, and see no such light as they were wont to see,
have no such comfortable enjoyments of their God as they were wont to have, yet
they will trust and rest themselves upon the Lord, and come out of this
wilderness leaning.

In all the wildernesses of this life, the Spouse will lean upon her Beloved,
yea, and upon him alone, in all states, in all conditions, upon him for
directing grace, upon him for quickening grace, upon him for whatsoever she has
need of, either pardon, or guidance, or direction, or assistance, or comfort,
or heaven; at all times she must trust in the covert of his wings, for all
blessings. The Spouse of Christ is a most dependent creature. The Babe of grace
is never old enough to go alone, it hangs like a child upon the mothers
hands, and leanes like a Bride upon the Bridegroomes bosom.

Thus have I done with the Doctrinall part, having showed you, how she has
had, and sometimes has her dwelling in the wilderness; and how out of every
wilderness she comes up, but leaning, and what strength there is in her
Savior to bear her up leaning upon him, even in every wilderness. Who is
this comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her Beleved? Now let us see
what use we may make of it.

And first here may a word of reproof, and a brand of folly be fastened upon
diverse erroneous opinions and practices.

Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. These men
dream of Heaven, and yet never think of Repentance. Christ came to seek and
to save that which was lost (friend) how lost? what, insensibly lost, as all of
us were by Nature? This is an idle construction that giddy headed Sectaries
have of late devised to help themselves to heaven with. The Devils are so lost;
yet Christ never came to save them. No no friend, it is those that are lost in
their own apprehensions, those that know not what to dot o be saved, those that
feel themselves even in the jaws of hell: he makes apprehensions of his wrath
precede the apprehensions of his love. But woe, and alas! how many think they
have a part in Christ, That the Devil has as great a part in Christ actually
as they have? Heaven is grown the common journeyes end, and let men ride which
way they list. Not the most debauched wretch in a Congregation, but ask him
what he thinks shall become of him, if he dies in that condition: why he hopes
he shall go to heaven; nay I wish he does not say, he is sure of it too. All
men are sinners: He is lost, but Christ came to seek and save that which was
lost. Tell him of mourning for his sins, if he means to be comforted, of
humbling himself, if he means to be exalted, of feeling hell, if ever he
means to feel heaven: O then, you are a legal Preacher. Hear what the other
side says, what those you call Antinomian Preachers; O these are the only
Gospell-preachers to them. This makes them to pass for such honest men: O they
show a fine Cushion-way to Heaven! that you shall not need wet a foot or eye
in: But let them preach what they will (friend) believe him, who (although he
knows but little) yet knows you must go out of the wilderness if ever you
come there. The way is, neither the Drunkards Ale-way, nor the Adulterers
unclean way, nor the Covetous man his dirty way, nor the Ambitious man's
high*way, nor the Hypocrites hidden way, nor the Carnall-Gospellers formal
way, nor the Antinomians easy way. It is a way through a wilderness, not a
way in a wilderness: The Spouse is not described by her staying in the
wilderness, but by coming out of the wilderness; Who is this comes out of
the wilderness?

come out of a wilderness of sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved? First, she is
in, then she comes out; then this reproves the folly of those that preach men
found before they were lost, and of those that dream of leaning before they
are in the wilderness: The Spouse leans, but it is when she is coming out of
the wilderness: Is there any that preaches down a needlesnesse of duties,
that mockes at mourners? that learn people a way to be found before they are
lost? Examine the Scriptures before you trust them; under a pretense of
exalting Faith, do they not cry down sorrow for sin? and all other duties?
Nay, they do cry down the preaching of the Law, to bring men to see they are
in the wilderness, that they might lean: Do they make you believe, that
preaching the Law is a price of Anti-christianisme, and no one ought to preach
it? And for their part, they will take heed of it, for fear of preaching away
their hearers. O beware of this leaven! For my part, I cannot close with this
novell Doctrine, when I consider,

First, that this other way of preaching, has bin that which God has most
blessed by his servants labors: Witness our Rogers, our Hooker, our Pious
Shepard; those three, to which many threes may be added, though they will
scarce come up to the first three. Those three Constellations of Heaven, that
have more light to dark Travelers, that wandered in the night of sin while
they shined in our Firmament, then all these Ignes fatui; mis-leading poor
Travelers. Was ever any of these Leaders so honored (though they have beat up
the Drums almost in every street of the Kingdom for followers) as to gather
such Troops of Saints to the Christian warfare, as these before mentioned? Did
ever God honor their labors so much as these? who (poor souls!) shone in
their days like lights under Bushels too, had only the corner of a Pulpit, or
a Pulpit in some blind corner tolerated them. Nay, look upon these that have
lately fallen into this Vein, and were Preachers of Gods whole truth before;
was not their first fruits better, and more accepted of God then their harvest
is now? Has not God distinguished which way of preaching he will must honor, by
making the first ripe grapes sweeter then the whole Vintage? were it only for
this, And

Secondly, For the constant experience of the Saints of God, let them speak
their minds freely; has not this been the way of their conversion? Have not
the best Saints in Heaven cried out of the belly of Hell before God heard their
voice? Was not Paul stricken down to the earth before he went in the Triumph
of Glory? Did not the Gaolor come in trembling, and fall at the Apostles feet,
and cry, what shall I do to be saved; before they bid him believe, and thou
shall be saved. Neither can they evade it with saying, That trembling was not
an humiliation for sin, but occasioned for fear his prisoners were gone.
Least people should wrest in that manner, The Holy Ghost has cleared it to
their hand; for before we read of his trembling, Paul had cried with a loud
voice, verse. 28. Do thy self no harm for we are all here. Neither do we
read, that he trembled for that at all; but like one struck senseless, and his
spirits dead as it were, in a fit of desperate madness, was about with his
Sword to let out his own blood. Now I say, were it no more then to hear such
Doctrine, contrary to the Doctrine which God has chiefly honored in his
Servants lips, by making it efficacious for the salvation of their souls, and
contrary to the experience of the generality of Gods Servants, if not contrary
to the Preachers own former and better thoughts and practice, it would be
sufficient to make me suspend my faith, from being too hasty to believe this
new way to heaven: But it is enough to confirm me, to hear my Christ calling,
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.
Before you are sensible of an heavy load you will need no ease, and to hear my
Text speaking of leaning, but in a wilderness; Nay, it may be noted too, The
Text says, Who is this that comes? Not who is this that jumpeth up from the
wilderness; I cannot fancy this going to Heaven at a running jump, nor can I
like this pressing faith without preaching repentance also: Faith is an act of
an humble soul. Nor can the soul apprehend the beauty of Christ, and love
Christ, before it apprehends it is own miserable conditions. The only harm
this Doctrine does, is to make poor souls presume, instead of believing, for
alas! Tell an impenitent soul of believing, it apprehends it easy, because it
does not understand it, and runs upon a supposition, that it has faith,
when, alas, it believes no more then the Devil believes: sorrow for sin is
better understood by a carnal heart then faith is; for the truth of it is, the
humble soul only can tell what faith is: The other sees, neither the want
they have of faith, nor yet the nature of that precious grace. Shall I tell you
what pious M. Rutherford says concerning this.

Faith (says he) is bottomed upon the sense and pain of a lost condition;
Poverty is the nearest capacity of believing. This is Faiths method, be
condemned, and be saved; be hanged, and be pardoned; be sick, and be healed.
Faith is a flower of Christ's only planting, yet it grows out of no soil, but
out of the margin and bank of the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone
-- Antinomians (says he again) make faith an act of a lofty Pharisee,
applying, (immediato contactu) presently, his hot boiling and smoking lusts to
Christ's wounds, blood, and merit, without any conscience of a precedent
command, that the person thus believing should be humbled, wearied, laden,
grived for his sins: I confess (says he) This is hasty, hot work, but it
is a wanton, fleshly, presumptuous opinion, that it is an immediate work to lay
hold on the promises and be saved. In his Book of the Trial and Triumph of
Faith, you hear the opinion of Gods Servants, and the Text mentions a coming
too; pedetentim, gradatim, little by little, step by step: Those that come,
cannot go so fast as these, because they are weary and heavy loadcn. Those
that learn people to jump, must take away Math. 11. 29. the heavy load of
sins which the Spouse has upon her shoulders, keeps her from that hasty
motion that Antinomians make. I do not speak to limit the Almighties power,
but to show you his ordinary dispensations; not what he can do, but what he
will do, what he has used to do, and God ordinarily walks in his own
paths, not in the paths our fancies make for him: we may look for God in his
ordinary ways of Providence and dispensations of the soul; if he comes in a
new way, it must be beyond our expectations; though not beyond our faith that
he can do it, yet beyond our faith that he will do it. When we have no word
to assure us, what shall faith be builded upon? God can turn midnight into
midday, ipso facto: But we know in Gods ordinary course of Providence, first
comes the dawning of the day, then the morning, then the nooneday: God can take
a soul and marry it, and never humble it, but where has he promised it? where
has he done it? or if he has done it, we say, one Swallow makes not a
Summer, one example makes not a Rule, one president makes not a law. It is no
rule for thee or me to trust in that, no more then the saving of the thief
upon the Cross, might be a safe president for us to defer repentance till
our dying day. Let thee and I learn to be humbled, to get broken hearts, to
loath our selves, see our own misery. Sorrow is the ordinary door to joy,
Humiliation the ordinary step to exaltation, Mourning for sin the only
preface to Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, in Gods ordinary way of dealing out
grace. The Latin is full, Quae est illa quae ascendit, that ascends from the
wilderness: Our Translation comes up, implying an ascensive motion, it is her
running up an hill. They that run up a mountain, if they run too fast, they may
quickly run themselves out of breath: it is bad jumpping over a broad ditch
(especially if it be drowning depth) for fear if we jumpe short we jumpe our
last. It is a great jump from the bottom of Hell to Heaven, to take it at one
leap. I wish, those that dare take it, do not fall short and drown
themselves eternally. I had rather go up Gods steps, then make such a hasty
motion, God give me grace to ascend up the Saints stairs to the chambers of
glory. Elijah was such a favorite to heaven, that God sent a coach for him;
But those that will expect till that fiery Chariot be sent down for them too,
I suppose may wait something a longer time then they desire. O beg of God to
humble you, to power out his spirit of mourning, and supplications upon you,
this will learn you to believe (friends) It is the humbled soul only that
construe that word Faith: it is Hebrew to others, it poseth the impenitent
heart, Faith is a riddle to them: Christ finds his Spouse in the wilderness,
and there he gives her his shoulder to lean upon: But,

Thirdly, She comes up leaning out of the wilderness.

Is it the duty of a soul that is in a wilderness of affliction, or
temptation, or desertion, to lean upon the Lord Christ? Then this may reprove
those that are in these wildernesses, and yet cannot be persuaded to lean upon
the Lord Christ: hence they cry out, O, faith is impossible! is it possible to
believe that Christ will save me? me, that have scorned his salvation, and
slighted his mercies? And because thou have slighted mercy, will thou therefore
still slight mercy? still refuse his offer of grace? Thou sinnest as much now
in not believing there is mercy for thee, that have despised mercy, as thou
did sin in dispising that mercy. O why is it harder to rise up; then to
cast down a soul? Why will thou not believe, O thou of little faith? Is the
molehill of thy sins, like the mountain of his mercies? does the voice of
thy sins roar like the voice of his loving kindness? Is there any humbled
soul before the Lord? O do not provoke God by thy infidelity now he has made
thee capable of faith: You that are Christians, for shame, in your several
wildernesses of afflictions, temptations, and desertions, do not, O do not
cast down your heads, and say, who shall show us any good? or if you do, say
again with the Saint in the ensuing words, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us: Believe in your depths of sorrow, believe in your most
trying afflictions, most sadding temptations, most killing desertions, believe
me, it is the greatest honor you can put upon the Lord Christ: And it is the
greatest dishonor you can put upon your God, to have any diffidence in the
Lords arms, any distruct in the Lords free grace. It is the property, nay, it
is the duty of the Spouse to come out of wildernesses leaning.

Fourthly, Does she lean upon God before she can come? must he work the
first motion to make her willing, before she can believe in him?

Then how are those to be here reproved, that would make man's will to be the
Author of its first motions unto God. Pelagius was a great defender of it.
First he would hold, That the grace of God was not necessary, but by the law of
nature we might be saved. 2. That the grace of God (which the Apostle speaks
of) was only in giving the law of nature. 3. Driven from this, he would
maintain, that the faculties of the soul, and their natural Actions was the
grace of God, understood by the Apostle. Yet here is no leaning upon our
Beloved. Afterward he would maintain. Si quaeratur an ex suis Naturalibus
viribus anima aliquid afferat ad suam conversione^, vel renovationem, vel
aliquam facultate^, vel actione^, quae vel partiatis causa, vel quocunque alio
modo appelletur, vere respondetur quod habet se mere passive. Chemni. in loc.
de lib. Arbitr.
4. That the grace of God was necessary for sins past, but it was in the
power of man's free will, to avoid or commit sins for the time to come, and to
resist rebellious corruptions. 5. After this, he would maintain, That some men
indeed were weak, and must do all by the grace of God, others that were
stronger might act good by their own will. But still only some Spouses lean.
Lastly, he would maintain, (and the Arminians still from him:) That grace did
indeed help a good work, but it had its first motion from our wills, or at
least might have: and the will had a negative voice, and might resist and
cross grace which did not work irresistably in the soul, to force the soul
to him. * Quae de gratia Dei praeveniente, and praeparente, and operante
traduntur, hunc habent sensum, quod non nostrae parts priores sunt in
conversione, sed quod Deus per afflatum divinum praeveniat, post hunc autem
motum, voluntatis divinae factum, voluntas humana, non habet se mere passive
sed mota and adjuta, a spiritu sancto non repugnat sed assentitur. Ib


( Cassianus Monachus Pelagii Doctrinam amplexus est. Faustus* Hormisda and Ben.
) I would not rake up these graves, did not these ghosts walk in these our
days, when every grave of Heresy is unbowelled, and no one takes care to
throw the dirt upon them again. Nay, and the Papists having been tainted with
this Leven, the Sententiaries now tell us, ( Hominis est preparare cor. Aqui.
in Sum. Theo. Acquiescre and assentiri est nostrum.
) That a man without grace, merely by the strength of his free will, may avoid
any mortal sin, and prepare himself for Gods free grace, and fulfill the
Commandments of God; Quoad substantiam actus, for the substance of the Act, (
Quibus de congruo mereatur gratiam facientem. Scotus.
) And another more impudently maintains, That a man without any grace of God
(by the mere strength of nature) may do works morally good, yea, even such
as God shall be bound to concur with, and give his special grace for. Even
thus going back from their own great Rabbis, one of which was pleased to
confess, ( Homo sine gratia Dei non potest non peccare and mortaliter and
venialiter. Lom.
) That a man without the grace of God, could not but sin both mortally and
venially. What is become here of the Beloveds leaning? but no more of these;
only if you hear such Doctrines (as you may hear any thing in these days)
believe them not.

Does God move the will attendding him in duties, first? secondly, 5. Spiritus
Sa^ctus praevenit, move^ and impellit voluntatem in conversione, non otiosam,
sed attendeniem verbo. Chemnit. Vel per speculationem somniorum, vel per
simulationem oration is illabi efficaciam. Spiritus Sancti. Vid. D. Featly.
Dippers dipped.
when the will is thus moved, does it then come? when it is drawn, does it
run? Then this reproves the Enthusiasts of old, the Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Seekers of our days, that hold, first, there is no need of duties. Enthusiasts
of old affirmed, That for the receiving of the Spirit of Promise and saving
grace, the Spirit of God was either infused to them in a dream, Vel per
simulationem orationis: Ay, and the motions of the Spirit, were as sensible in
their flesh as the beating of the pulse, so blasphemous were they grown; and
thence they would lie, and gape for Revelations, and so indeed they may have a
suggestion from the Devil, but scarce a Revelation from God. Oh! How in these
days are men tainted with these lazy. Opinions! slighting duties, vilifying
Sabbaths, neglecting Ordinances; that if poor people would truly now give
account of their growth in grace, and of their learning godliness: many of
them might truly. As the child that ye have heard a story, in the learning of
its Primmer, boasted to the father that it had learned past grace. Is not this
the miserable learning of our days? that men are grown past grace, past
Prayer, past Ordinances, past all duties?

6. Again what you have heard, that after the soul is drawn, then it comes,
may show us the falsenesse of another Doctrine of Enthusiasme, too brief even
in these days also: that the soul is merely passive, even after the work of
conversion also, and is even then a mere stone. Draw me (says See the Book
set out from the Ministers of New England of the Heretics, etc. Post
conversionem concurrit voluntas, non tamen quasi suis viribus adjuvet
spirituales actiones. Semper addendum est non esse plenam libertatem, in sancto
renato, sed virtutem in infirmitate perfici, Chemnit. Intelligant si filii Dei
sint spiritu Dei se agi, ut quod agendum est agant, and cum egerint, illi, a
quo aguntur gratias agant. Aguntur enim, ut agant, non at ipsi nihil agant. Aug.
the Spouse) and then, I will run after thee. Indeed, after our conversion,
the will is but in part sanctified, and the Image of God in us will want of his
first integrity, after it is renewed: but Christ's strength is perfected in our
weakness; we must understand if we be the children of God, that God has
therefore wrought in us, that we might also work something, and when we have
wrought it, give thanks to God, who has made us to work; for God has
wrought in us, that we might work, not that we should be idle. Thus I have
labored to you to divide the Truth from Error; Now you have heard of the
leaven of these Pharisees; take heed of it.

In the next place, what you have heard, that the soul that comes to the Lord
Jesus Christ, leanes upon a new Beloved, not upon her old beloveds, may serve
to reprove those that would feign plead a title to Christ and have a portion in
Christ, but they will not take Christ alone: two sorts there are of these; The
one cannot leave their old beloveds, and the other cannot trust this Beloved. O
the wicked man would have his portion in Christ, if he might but have his lusts
too, his pleasures, his profit; but to take Christ, alone, O this is such a
hard saying that they cannot bear by any means; If Christ and his lusts would
lie both in one bed, Christ at the feet, and his lusts at the head, then Christ
should be as welcome as any thing to him; but he is loath to sue a divorce from
this Beloved, he is loath to part with his old love for a new, till he sees how
he can love him; but at a venture he will take him in partem amoris. O wretch!
flatter not thy self, if Christ be thy Beloved, he will endure no Polygamy;
you must leave your sins, or be without Christ. The true Spouse leanes upon
her Beloved; not upon her Beloveds, upon her now Beloved, she forsakes her old.

Lastly, this may serve to reproove,

1. Those that would lean upon Christ, but they dare not trust their souls
upon Christ alone. Forsooth he will be the Spouse of Christ, but he must lean
upon Christ with one hand, and his good works with the other. The whore of
Babylon commits adultery with her self.

2. Under this lash comes a better rank of people, that when God has showed
them their own sinful, sad condition, they do not only perform duties,
pray, and mourn, and repent, and be humbled, all which they ought to do, but
they are ready to rest in them, and make them their Beloved: It is natural to
the soul, that God has made to loath its sins, to love its duties; it finds
duties almost as consentaneous to its nature, as sins were before; and it is
too ready to think that its saving, or damning, depends upon such a quantity
of tears, and humiliation: Hence, you hear souls in this condition, often
complaining; Oh! I could believe, if I were humbled enough, if I could but
mourn enough. This soul does well to be sensible of the hardness of its own
heart; and it is too true, it can never mourn, it can never be humbled enough.
But it does ill to think that free grace stints its operation, and blessed
influence, to such a quantity of tears, if it be humbled enough, to see its
want of Christ. The water runs through the river, that is the way to the Sea,
but it does not rest in the river, but with a swift and continued motion, runs
betwixt the banks, till it comes, and is swallowed up in the Sea: Even so the
soul ought to run through duties, but not to rest betwixt the banks of duties,
but to run through, till it come to the Sea of free grace, where it will be
swallowed up of infinite mercy; and our imperfections will be drowned in his
infinite perfection; we ought to take duties in our way to Christ, but not to
make duties our Jesus. God has ordained that they should fit us for him; but
it is written, My glory will I not give to another. The glory of the Lords free
grace, is his greatest glory; he will not give that to any other: None shall
share with him in his Spouses love, he is a jealous Savior. The Spouse leanes
upon her Beloved, not Beloveds: Thus I have done with my use of reproof.

The next use is for examination, here may every one try himself whether he be
the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ, or no: Even by what has been already
said; I will reduce it all to three heads:

First, Examine thy self, whether thou be out of the wilderness of sin,
yea, or no.

Secondly, Whether thou were, or art in any other wilderness, yea, or no.

Thirdly, What was, or is thy demeanor in these wildernesses thou have been,
or art in, and how have thou come, or do thou come out.

Examine whether thou be not in the wilderness of sin, yea, or no: It was
given as the Character of the Spouse, to come out of this wilderness. O, but
how shall I know that? (will the soul say.) I will name two or three notes, by
which thou may suspect thy self as from probabilities.

1. The wilderness, it is an incult place; a place where the soil was never
tilled, it is hard almost as a millstone; the over-growne Trees were never
pruned, the unruly boughs never lopt, the bushes never cut or stubbed: do
thou find thy heart in such a condition, that it is as hard as ever; neither
judgment breaks it, nor mercy melts it, the fallow ground of it is not plowed,
nor the seed of righteousness sown in it? Thy unruly lusts are not tamed, thy
life is as much overgrowne with sin as ever it was: thy sins were never yet
cut off from the body of thy life. O friend! suspect thy self; Thou may
justly fear, yea, and know too, that thou art not the Spouse of Christ, thou
art in the wilderness, in thy natural estate.

Secondly, The wilderness is a barren place, it brings forth no corn for the
sickle, no wholesome fruit, no grapes for man's pallat; for can a man gather
grapes of thistles, or figgs of thorns? No pastures wholesome for the beasts.
The fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, Joel 1. 19. And God
complained that Nineveh was dry like a wilderness, Zeph. 2. 13. Art thou a
barren, and unfruitful creature, that do nothing for God? thy heart is a
barren heart, no seeds of good are sown there; thy tongue is a barren tongue,
no good words come out thence; thy whole soul a barren soul; not a good
action upon the record of thy life. Indeed, no soul can be barren, the soul
is of a working nature; but sinful works are unfruitful works (in the
Apostles language.) The unfruitful works of darkness, and what fruits had ye
of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Gods Spouse is a fruitful
creature, Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. A barren soul is always a wildernesse-soule. Those that
are borne of God, bring forth fruits unto God.

Thirdly, thou may know whether thou be in the wilderness or no, by the
company thou delightest in: It is a known rule, Noscitur ex socio qui non
dignoscitur ex se.

He that is a wildernesse-creature, loves wildernesse-company; the Wolves, and
Bears, and Foxes: but he that is out, keeps the company of men; do thou love
the wildernesse-company? the swinish drunkard, the politic Fox, the malicious
Lion, the venomous liar and slanderer, the lascivious wanton, more than the
Children of God? Oh suspect thy self! By this we know (says John) that we are
translated from death to life if we love the Brethren. Lazarus when he was
raised from the grave, we do not read he went to keep the dead men company
again: those that God has raised from the death of their sins, live amongst
living men, and delight in living men's company. Thus examine whether thou be
come out of the wilderness of sin, or no.

Secondly, As coming out of the wilderness is a sign of the child of God: so
being in the wilderness, is likewise a note whereby thou may know thy
self. Gods Spouse comes out of one wilderness into another, out of the
wilderness of sin into the wilderness of sorrow, and out of that to their
Savior. Would thou know whether thou art found, or no; Examine whether thou
were lost or no: Would thou know whether ever thou were a believer; examine
whether ever thou were a penitent, or not. This is Gods ordinary way; thence he
complains of his people, that they would not repent, that they might believe
in him. Dos thou find God in another manner of working in thy soul? bless God
for it; and if thy title be good to heaven, which will be known by thy walking
with God, believe me, God has used thee kindly, heaven has cost thee cheaper
then it costs many a poor soul; and walk humbly before God, because he has
not humbled thee under his mighty hand, as he has done many another poor
creatures: And though I would not condemn those that plead their title to
heaven this way, for fear I should condemn the generation of the righteous,
yet believe me, I should suspect it in my own cause. They that go out
weeping, and carry precious seed, shall return rejoicing, and bring their
sheaves with them.

2. Examine thy self, What other wildernesses thou meetest with? Afflictions,
temptations, etc. I would not give this as an infallible mark, yet God says,
whom he loves he chasteneth, and scourges every child whom he receives: and
thence the Father drew out his Conclusion, Unicum Deus habuit filium sine
peccato, nullum sine flagello; God had one Son without sin, but none
without a rod. But I know, even the wicked sometimes begin their hell upon the
earth: and though I would suspect my self if I met with no afflictions, yet I
would not be glad to have a life full of crosses and afflictions, my best
evidence for heaven. I rather named this for a preface to the next note.

3. Examine how thou carriest thy self in the wilderness; there is a
different carriage betwixt the child of God, and the child of the Devil in
afflictions: the one sinkes into the grave with despair, the other lifts up
his head to Sion with hope: the one is pressed to death under crosses, the other
above all crosses. Cain cries, my punishment is too heavy for me to bear; Job
cries, though he should kill me, yet I will trust in him: The Reprobate cries,
Who is the Lord that I should wait for him? The Saint says, I will patiently
wait for the Lords Salvation: the wicked man dies, the Saint leanes: the eyes
of the sinners fail that day; but the Saints look up to Sion, from whence
comes their help that day.

4. Examine How thou have come out of thy wilderness? of thine own strength
or leaning? Can thou say, That God knew thee in the wilderness, in the land
of great drought, Hos. 13. 5. If thou think thou came out alone, thou art
there still, What gave thee comfort in the depths of sorrow? what? thy merry
company? did thy duties do it? If any thing did it but thy Christ, I fear thou
art still in the Wilderness: when thou did mourn, as one that mourns for
his only begotten son, did thou look upon him whom thou had pierced?
there is nothing but the blood of Christ can give a cordial to a fainting
soul; nothing but the hand-kerchiefe of free grace that can wipe thine eyes;
nothing but the blotting out of the handwriting, which was written in Gods
Book, and thy own conscience against thee, that can make thy heart leave
trembling, and thy knees leave beating together for terror. Thou can not come
out alone, if ever thou came out, it was leaning.

5. Examine thy self, How thou have carried thy self since thou came out?
How have thou been since thou were humbled, and lost in the wilderness of
sorrow? What effects has the wilderness of sorrow wrought upon thee? Has thy
sorrow been like the sorrow of Achan, that thou have been only sorry because
thou have been under an Attachment of wrath? Or like Ahab, renting his
clothes, putting on his sackcloth, and going softly? 2 Chronicles. 22. Or like
Pharaoh, saying, I have sinned? Exodus Or like Balaam, saying. I have sinned, I
will return back again? when he might have had more thanks for his labor and
never have come there, he had checks enough. Art thou worse when thou come
out of the wilderness of affliction, that we may brand thee with Ahaz his
Brand, This was that King Ahaz? Or do thou come out of thy Afflictions
leaning, with thy weak faith strengthened, and thy strong faith confirmed? Have
thou lost no grains, but got in the fire? Is thy gold as good weight now as
before? it is a good sign it is good then. But I hasten to the next Use, which
may be to inform us;

First, The sad condition that all unbeleevers are in.

Secondly, The joyful condition that all the Children of God are in.

Thirdly, The great love of God, that he would send Christ to seek us up in
the wilderness, and give his hand to poor creatures to lead them out.

And lastly, If in every wilderness we must lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
It may inform us, what need we have at all times to walk close with the Lord
Christ. First, here see the sad condition that all men and women by nature are
in, that have not the Lord Jesus Christ. It consists in two things:

First, They are in a wilderness: Sin is a wilderness. Now which of you
(friends) but would think himself as good as a dead man if he were in the
midst of an Arabian desert, that he could not see any possibility of getting
out, nor any comfort he could enjoy there: terror on every side, comfort on no
side; the Lions and beasts of prey of every hand ready to devour him, and it is
well if he can keep his flesh for food for himself, for he can get no
provision for his body, nothing, except he would eat the bark of trees, or
the parched grass. What man would not tremble, to think of one that should be
condemned to such an axile? Do not your hearts pity as often as you think of
those poor men that were left but half a year in Greenland? And yet O Lord!
How few pity themselves! O poor creatures! Mutato nomine de te fabula
narratur; the Story is thy own, apply it therefore: You that are in your
sins are all in a sad wilderness; the judgments of God, like the beasts of
prey, are ready to swallow you up on every hand; it is a miracle of mercy you
are not in hell; there is but a thread betwixt you and death; the Sword of Gods
wrath hangs over your head, while you are at your Drunken Banquets of sin:
Oh! what comfort? what joy can can you have in the wilderness (friends?) that
when you lie down at night, you know not but you may wake in the morning past
Repentance, even with Hell flames about you; as the Lord lives, there is but a
hairs breadth betwixt you and Hell.

2. Consider, That you have no one to help you out of any wilderness; if
Christ be not yours, nothing is yours: what will you do in a stormy day of
Affliction, when you shall cry unto God, and he shall say unto you, as he once
said to the roaring Isralites, Jud. 10. 14. Go, and cry unto the gods which
you have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Cry unto
your Gold now, unto your Lusts now, trust your Riches now, make you a golden
Calfe! See if it will now save you. O think! You that live in sin, and love
and delight in sin, what shall I do in a sad day of sickness, when the
fear of the grave shall surround me, and the terrors of Hell shall make me
afraid? What shall I lean upon when these comforts shall be no comforts? when
I shall say to all creature-enjoyments, miserable comforters are you all. Where
shall I warm me when these flashes will be out? when the sparks of pleasure
and profit shall be choakt, and killed with the dust and ashes of my grave?
Hear ye this all ye, That kind a fire, that compass your selves about with
sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled; This shall ye have at the Lords hand, you shall lie down in sorrow:
Your pleasurable sins are but as sparks (Sirs,) What will you do when your
sparks are out? They are (as we say of a short flame) but a Widows joy for a
moment: Take heed, that when your sparks are out, you blow not your nails in
hell: Take heed, that your sparks do not kindle everlasting burnings for you.
What will you do in a wilderness of Affliction? how will you come out? what
will you come out? What will ye lean upon?

Secondly, This may serve to inform us of the happpy condition of Gods
children, and that e contrario, in a just position to the others misery: O lift
up your heads ye righteous, and be glad ye upright in heart: Your happiness
consists in these two things:

First, You are out of the wilderness, out of the danger of Hell; and those
that can spell in their thoughts but that word hell, will know it to be a mercy
to be out of the fear of it. You are out of the wilderness, O bless that God
that has helped you out: it is a great happiness to be delivered of fears;
believe me! Did the wicked men seriously think what a weight of wrath they lie
under, what a cloud of blood hangs over their heads, they would pray till all
their knees were melted (though they were all steel) to be delivered from it.
Hold up your hands that you have escaped a drowning; that you fear not the
wild beasts that belong to the wilderness; Gods dreadful judgments you dare
meet, the Lion and the Bear, and they dare not set the print of their teeth
upon you. A godly man is like a man under protection, he owes much, but the
Bayliffe dares not meddle with him; Christ has undertaken the debt for him, he
is under the protection of the Son of God; he can look a Judgment in the
face, and never run for it. The wicked man, on the contrary, is like one that
hangs upon every bush (as we say) owes more than he is worth; he dares scarce
look out of the doors whiles the Bayliffes are about: when the judgments of
God are about, the wicked wretch dares not look out, he sinks into his grave
in the thoughts of it. This Plague, this Fever, this Ague, may be a Bayliffe
to arrest me, that God has sent to carry me bound hand and foot and thrown
into Hell, where is weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth. And then thinks
with himself (O that they did so!) Where is my surety (if it should be so?)
who would be bound for the payment of the Debt due for my sins, and to be
paid at Gods Judgment Seat? The godly man, he likewise says; This Plague,
this Fever, this Sickness, may arrest me: But suppose they should, the Son of
God is bound for my Debt; My Judge surely will not demand better Surety then
his own Son. I bless God I am out of the wilderness: O happy man! Here Is a
portion of thy happiness; but here is not all.

2. Consider, That if thou should fall into the corner of another
wilderness: Thou have one to lean upon, even in every wilderness: If thou
should have a rod upon thy back, thou have a staff to comfort thee. Thou
have one to lead thee out, whenever thou art in: an arm that thou may
trust to. Happy is he that has a friend in the Court, such is thy friend. A
friend in adversity, is better than a brother, (says Solomon) thou have a
friend in adversity, and he is thy brother: Thy brother Christ is thy friend,
that will lead thee through, and out of every wilderness. Is the child happy,
that in want has a father to run unto? the wife happy, that has a husband in
time of sickness to comfort her? The servant happy, that has a Master in
adversity to pity him? then I dare pronounce thee in all times happy: Thy
husband loves thee, thy father sends his son to lead thee, thy husband is
always by to comfort thee, and lead thee by his hand. God has said, Esaias 58.
11. That he will guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and
make fat thy bones. Thou have always a friend at need, a brother in adversity.

Thirdly, Is it so that the Spouse comes out of the wilderness leaning upon
her Beloved? This may then show us the infinite love of God to the creature;
that he would be pleased to look us up in the wilderness, and let us lean
upon him: Christ was led into the wilderness because thou were there, he had a
bad journey to fetch thee nome: Oh! what should? what could (besides his
infinite free grace) make his bowels of mercy so yerne toward the creature, as
to look it up in the wilderness, to cloth it naked, to wash it polluted, to
save it damned? Christ the shepherd had lost his stray sheep, and goes after
that which was lost in the wilderness until he sindeth it, then he lays it
on his shoulders, and brings it home. O, blessed be the name of the Lord for
his free grace and mercy! The shepherd followed the sheep, whiles the sheep
regarded not the shepherd; we were in a wilderness, he came to find us out.
O! was not this infinite love, astonishing mercy?

Lastly, Is it so? that we must come out of every wilderness leaning upon our
Beloved? O then let this inform us what need we have to walk close with the
Lord Jesus Christ; what need we have to be fearful of offending, and careful
to please him: It is he that must help us in every need, he that must lead us
in every wilderness: If he forsakes us we are undone. Have we but one friend?
let us keep him then: if we anger him, we lose our best friend. Has the
shiftlesse child need to keep the love of the Father? the Babe need to keep in
the arms of the Nurse? the wife need to keep the love of the husband? the
blind man need to keep the love of his guide? O Christian, thou have much more
need to keep the love of thy Christ: It is he that must succor thee at every
need; he that must make the rugged ways plain for thee; It is he that must
carry the Babe of grace in his arms, lest it should dash its feet against the
stones of affliction: It is he that must lead the child of God upon his hand,
lest in this world of afflictions it fall, and hurt it self. O keep close in
his arms, keep thy self warm in his bosom; fear that which may make thy
God go free from thee. Gods departing from the creature is a piece of hell:
thou know not how soon thou may need him; yea, thou always need him,
therefore take heed of sinning against him; thou will anger thy best friend, I
will assure thee.

I hasten to the last Use, which shall be a word of Exhortation: Does the
Spouse of Christ come out of the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved?

First, O then, you that are yet in the wilderness of sins, come out, come
out, get this Spouses Beloved, and then lean upon him.

2. You that are in the wilderness of sorrow for sin, afflictions,
temptations, desertions, lean upon your beloved, live leaning and dye leaning:
you that say you are sinking, and you cannot believe. Oh lean and come out of
this wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

A word to the first: Is there any before the Lord this day that is yet in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, with what arguments shall I
plead with such a soul? Those are not wanting, but with what arguments shall I
prevail with such a soul, to come unto the Lord Christ? were any here drowning
in the water, a little Rhetoric would persuade them to let me help them out?
were any lost in a wood, I should not need much entreat them to give me their
hand, and I would show them a way out of that loosing place? why should I not
as much prevail for heaven this day?

1 Consider what estate it is that thou take such pleasure to continue in?
first, it is a dangerous place, more dangerous then the sands to the ship: thou
art ready to be swallowed up of hell every hour in it. A troop of judgments
waits upon thee to destroy it; how can thou abide consuming fire? or dwell
in everlasting burnings?

Secondly, Consider, it is a joylesse condition: There is no true joy to the
sinner, though he sings sometimes amongst his drunken cups, yet he cannot feed
heartily upon a feast of joy, because the Sword hangs over his head, it is but
a fained joy that the sinner has, a sudden short lived flame, without any
coals underneath to preserve it. There is no peace to the wicked (says God)
and if no peace, there can be no joy; when the sinner is serious he cannot
rejoice, his rejoicing is like the skipping of mad men that know not what they
do.

Thirdly, Consider, it is a starving condition; The sinners soul starves
whiles he feasts his body like a glutton, his soul dies for thirst, when his
body is overslowne with drunkenness. It is impossible the puffe-past of
iniquity should nourish a soul: Does an Angel feed upon the earth? does a
Saint feed upon hell? The soul is of an Angelicke substance; it cannot feed
upon sin: sin starves it. Do thou love to be in the midst of thorns?
do thou delight to lie down in sorrow? can thou endure to see thy better
part starved, whiles thou pamperest thy filthy Carcass? O let this deter
thee from the wilderness of sin, and persuade thee to come out of it unto
Paradise. There,

First, Thou shall be in a safe condition: Out of the fear of judgments, out
of hells gunshot: There life or death will be either peace temporal, or else
eternal, either grace, or glory unto thee; here thy soul shall be in a
harbor, if thousands fall at thy left hand, and ten thousands at thy right:
none shall make the afraid, thou shall laugh at trouble when it comes. Thou
shall be sure to go to heaven either by land, or water: If thou go through
the fire, thou shall be sure to have Christ with thee. Heaven is a security in
all estates, a protection from all Arrests, if the King of glory has a mind to
sue thee, thou shall not be arrested (like other men) with a writ of wrath, but
invited to sup with him in glory, only by a letter of love, and he will send
his Ushers of glory to wait upon thy soul to the chambers of glory, Luke, 16.
22. The soul of good Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom: you
shall not live like other men, haunted with the bloodhounds of wrath, nor dye
like other wretches, that go out of the world, haled by the Sarjeants of hell
to everlasting prison; but quietly sleep, and awake again one day in glory. O
who would not desire such a protection for himself? such a security for his
soul? who would not throw off his rags of sin, to put on Christ's livery of
grace, when Christ's badge upon his shoulder shall free him from all Arrests?
That he shall walk up and down, and nothing shall make him afraid?

Secondly, Consider that Heaven is a place as full of joy, as ever the
wilderness was full of sorrow and trouble; of this I spoke before. O think of
the joy of the Saints, you children of vain pleasure, you madmen of the
earth, that can dance over the hole of the Aspe, and put your hands on the
Cockatrices den. Your false and flattering joy is nothing to the real joys of
heaven; There is joy like the joy of the harvest, like the joy when men divide
the spoil: The yoke of their burden is broken, and the rod of the
oppressor. O you that love your drinking meetings, and dancing days, that you
would but love heaven, where you might drink new wine with your Lord Christ:
where you might dance in glory, and make all your days, days of joy, and
every hour, an hour of pleasure.

Thirdly, consider, that there, and there only, is provision for your soul.
Christ's robes is the only clothing that will cover the nakedness of it; his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed; there my friends, Eat
and drink, and be merry, there you may have wine and milk, without money, or
without price. O, spend not your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which profits not?

Here you may eat that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness. Here is a Feast of fat things; The fatlings are killed: O come to the
wedding! Why should your rooms be empty in the day of the Lords Espousals?
You shall be welcome to my Masters Table: Now, O now, Behold he stands at the
door and knocks: (Lord, break where thou knockest) If any man will hear his
voice, and open the door, he will come into him, and sup with him, and he
shall sup with him. O let me entreat you, to pity the yerning of your
Saviors bowels toward you; pity the groaning of his tender heart for you;
pity your selves, if not your Christ; and, O come, come out of the
wilderness of sin into this wilderness of sorrow; that of a drunken profane
creature, thou may be a mourning pious soul; of a proud careless sinner,
become a poor humbled paenitent; that the world may admire, Saul amongst the
Prophets, and Paul amongst the Apostles, and thee amongst the Saints of Christ;
and say of thee, who art now a profane Swearer and Blasephemer, Behold he
Prays! Of thee that were a filthy Wanton, Behold he Mournes! Of thee that
were a filthy Drunkard and Glutton, Behold he fasts! And may in time say of
thee, Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved? But,

Secondly, Is there any before the Lord this day, that is in any other
wilderness of Sorrow, Affliction, Temption, Desertion, etc? O lean! Come out
of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

First, Is there any one here, to whom the Lord has shown their own sad
condition too, and yet has not revealed the fullness of his free grace to
them? O lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and leaning come out of thy
wilderness; Believe and thou shall be saved. But here is the hard task, to
persuade such a soul to believe.

Consider but these few things.

1 That now thou art in a capacity of believing. Poverty of spirit is the
nearest capacity of faith; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness. Now thou art weary, Christ has promised to ease thee; now thou
art heavy laden, he has promised to help thee.

Secondly, Consider that thou have ground enough to build thy faith upon;
Christ's power and love are two Pillars, able to hold up the weakest faith.

First, Believe; lean upon Christ, for he is able to pardon thy sins; thou
should blaspheme in thy thoughts if thou should not think this. Can
infinite mercy be fadomed think thou? Can any one plead his underservings
against free grace? Were thy burden far heavier then it is, cast it upon
Christ, for he is able to bear it; Art thou thick darkness? he is infinite
light: Art thou all sin? he is all pardon: Art thou altogether lovely? why
Christ is altogether lovely.

Secondly, Believe; because Christ is as much love as he is power: he is not
only able, but he is willing to pardon thee; free grace thirsts after thee.
Nay, believe me, thou can give Christ no greater satisfaction then to receive
his mercies. Christ is with child of free grace (to speak it with reverence)
and he desires nothing more then to be delivered in thine heart. He is a Sea of
mercy, and he would rejoice to empty himself by drops into his peoples hearts.
But why did I say empty? Can the Sun lose any light by communicating his light
to others? When the creature speaks of God, he must speak (...), he would fill
thee, and yet continue full himself. He is satisfied when thou art full. He
shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Thou art not so
willing to receive, as he is to bestow free grace. O then lean upon him.

Thirdly, Consider, that can not dishonor thy God; more then when thou art
humbled by him for thy sins, and cast down in thine own thoughts, and called
to believe in his mercies, and secured upon his word, if thou will but trust
him. If thou will not, then believe in him, Surely then thou art of a little
faith, if not an Infidel. Thou could not believe when thou were an
impaenitent hard-hearted creature. Why? because thou knew no need thou had
of faith: Neither could thou hear Christ's invitation, because thou were not
weary and heavy laden; but now that the Lord has humbled thee, now the
promises belong unto thee; what? dare thou not take Christ's word? Suppose a
Traitor were condemned to dye, and the King should send a Pardon by the hand
of his own Son to this forlorn wretch, and he should refuse it, saying; The
King cannot pardon me; what has he to do to send me a Pardon? I know he does
but mock me, he means nothing less, etc. Were not this a piece of
unworthiness, by which he should dishonor his Prince as much as with his
Treason before? O take heed of provoking the Lord still; it is enough that thou
have provoked him once, yet he will pardon thee. And on the contrary, thou
can not honor Christ more then in believing; for thou acknowledgest the
unfadomable depth of his free love and mercy; Thou proclamest God, to be a God,
gracious, long-suffering, a God that may be trusted by the creature which has
deserved nothing at his hand; that he is so pure an Essence of love, that he
will create himself a cause of love where is none. And though he coould find
nothing in thee to pardon thee, for thy sake, yet he would pardon thee for his
own Name sake.

So likewise, you that are in any wilderness, or shall be, of Affliction,
Desertion, Temptation, etc. O lean! lean! It Is that which God requires at your
hand; it is that which will ease you when you are weary; help you when you are
heavy laden; Believing will ease you when complaining will not; it is that
which honors God, and honors Christ; It gives him the glory of his Power, and
Providence, and Dominion, and free Grace, and mercy. Christ, believe me, will
take it kindly at your hands, that you will try him in need, and trust him even
in despair; though he kills you, yet you will trust in him. Those that venture
upon Death with such a faith cannot dye: Those that have such a Spirit must
live eternally. The way to live, is to dye believing, and the way to stand, is
to lean falling. O come all ye that love the Lord trust in his mercies: I
have done, only I conclude with my Text.

O you that are falling, as you think into the pit of despair, that are lost
in the wilderness of sorrow: Believe, believe, and you shall be saved. Come
out trusting upon God; resting upon the fullness of his mercy, and the
freeness of his grace; come out, come out leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in a wilderness of afflictions, lean upon Gods staff, let his
rod comfort you; believe that he smileth while he smites thee; believe in
affliction you shall have no more then you are able to bear; he will let his
grace be sufficient for you, and all shall work for your good. And come you
out of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in the wilderness of temptation, in the snare of the Devil,
believe, and lean, your Christ was tempted, and he knows how to succor those
that are tempted: lean upon him to bear you up in, and to give you an happy
issue out of your temptations in which you are in, for the trial of your
faith; and come you out likewise leaning upon your Beloved.

You that are in the wilderness of Desertion, cry, My God! though you be
forsaken, keep your faith, retain your Interest; O lean, lose not your hold
you have upon the Almighty, lean in: and come out of this your wilderness
leaning upon your Beloved.

Finally All you that are in the wilderness of sin; the worst wilderness of
all: Let me conclude with you, And once more as the Ambassador of Jesus Christ
in my Masters name, as if he himself were here: I beseech you, by the many,
and tender mercies of him, whose bowels yerne toward you, by his precious
blood, which was powered out upon the Cross for sinners (and who knows whether
not for you; as well as others) as you tender the life and happiness of your own
souls, the joy of your faithful Pastors: nay, (which is most of all) as you
tender the honor of God, come out, O come out of your sad wilderness! be
humbled, and mourn, sit down in dust and ashes, that you may rise up, adorned
with grace, and be crowned with glory, that you may lean upon your Beloved;
and O that my first or last words might prevail with some great sinner this
day for whom we might all rejoice, concerning whom we might all say, who is
this* that comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her beloved.

FINIS.
A LESSON OF SELF-DENIAL: OR, The true way to desirable BEAUTY.

By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Mat. 10. 37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Ver.
38. And he that takes not up his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy
of me. Printed for Rich: Tomlins. 1649.

TO THE Right Honorable, The Lady Frances Cecill, the only Daughter of the
Right Honorable the Lady Elizabeth, Counteise Dowager of EXETER.
Increase of true Honor, and Peace, and Happiness.
Madam,
WHen I considered the plenty of Gospell-sheaves, which the Gracious Lord of
the Harvest has in our days caused his reapers to bind up, I could not but
question whemy gleane were worth your Ladyships stooping to take up. God has
seemed to empty his treasuries upon our heads, that there is scarce a
gospell-duty but some or other more eminent laborers in the Lords harvest have
undertaken to discover and urge, which makes me sometimes tremble to think at
what disadvantage they must perish, that are yet dead or unfruitful. But if
there be any lesson that has been lesser urged, or practiced than other, it is
this of self Denial. I rejoice to see the flowings of the spirit of grace in
those eminent Servants of the Lord, that have both hunted for venison, and
caught it, to make savory meat for the Saints, discovering those secrets of the
Lords strength, and unsearchable riches of love, beyond the pens or tongues
of those that have gone before them. But methinkes, I have sometimes feared
lest while those Eminent ones have driven according to the peace of their own
souls, and made it their work almost only to dress out the strong meat, they
should have driven beyond the pace of the Lambs, and only go away with part of
the flock who are able to receive and have ears to hear, such sublime gospel
mysteries. I have sometimes wished a Shepard or Hooker, or two more to stay
behind, and to drive the remnant of the flock, which in heaven will overtake
the other, though there be many things to be spoken which (without over driving
them) they are not yet able to bear. I (being one borne out of due time) am
only fit for such a work, the opening the Rudiments of Christianity, and it
shall be my crown if by teaching the A B C of the ways of grace, I may be
made isntrumental but to fit Saints for their highschooles. I have presumed
here to present your Honor with the first Lesson of Grace. He that will be my
disciple (says Christ) let him deny himself, and take up the cross and
follow me; first deny himself, then follow me. Not but that I hope your
Ladyship can readily endorse this sermon, with that speech of the young man,
All these have I kept from my youth. Though I need not mind your Honor, that
it is a lif's not a days practice. (Madam) there can be no Mistress like
Experience, which easily convinces me, that your Ladyship (who have had a
constant sight of sublunary vanities, an enjoyment of creature-contentments) is
far more able to read him (who now writes) a lecture of the Vanity of every
thing under the Sun, than he is to read it your Ladyship, who has been blessed
in the want of those advantages, and only (from a guess at the body by the
foot) can subscribe Solomon's account of them: surely (Madam) there is nothing
under the Sun, but in cleaving to it, and neglecting Christ, a rational
creature must dishonor himself as well as his Savior, and as well call in
question his own judgment, and outlaw his own reason, as disobey his God.
Christ, (Madam!) Ah! Christ, Christ alone is the excelling one; that is
Altogether desires; It is the Rose of Sharon only that wants prickles. His name
is the only box of Ointment, which one fly or other will not make to stink.
And now I mention his name, I remember what the spouse says, Thy name is an
ointment powerd forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Of those Virgins,
I trust your Ladyship is, those that love Christ for the ointment of his name
powered forth; (so I trust has the Ointment of grace powered upon that head from
which you drew your natural breath, ran down to the skirts of all her
Relations.) (Madam) This world is not so well bred, but in Christ's ways if
your Ladyship desire to walk, you must expect to be a sharer in the scoffs of
those that put out the finger at those that run not with them to the same
excess of Riot. I need not mind your Ladyship of the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who patiently endured the cross and despised the shame for your sake.
(Madam) the ways of Christ, the paths of holiness, are only uncomely to
those before whose eyes the Devil has cast a mist, and the God of this world
has blinded their eyes, lest the glorious light of of the gospel should shine
upon them. If the King desires our beauty, no matter, whether our rate be high
or low amongst the children of Vanity, whose God is their Belly, and whose
glory is their shame. May your Ladyship strive after perfection, and yet dance
before the Ark, though Michal mocks out at the window. The Moon keeps its
course though the dogs bark. This Sermon (Madam) was formerly dedicated to your
Ladyships ears, I never thought then, that the noise of it should have gone
beyond the chapel it was preached in, nor indeed had it, had not your
Ladyships noble Mother commanded the transcription of a copy, which desire was
also seconded by other Noble friends, whose commands I was as unwilling to
disobey, as unable to perform, through my multitude of other occasions, which
is the only reason of my publication of it, that I might be thrifty of my time
for my other studies, and by troubling the world work my own ease. Having
resolved upon this course, I was desirous it should appear as covertly as
might be, and have therefore added it to some other Sermons, preached long
before then, sent to the press to gratify the desire of the Printer. (Madam)
your Ladyship I trust will easily excuse me for the want of pains in it; If I
should spend time to tickle some few ears, it would be unthriftily done, and
possibly I might by it lose the advantage of speaking to many another heart; I
had rather so preach and write that those that hear or read my sermons, should
read and hear with a trembling heart, than with a tickled fancy. (Madam) Such
as it is) I crave leave to present it to your Ladyship, Beseeching the God of
grace so to empower every line, that it may be a drop of mercy to your Honors,
and every Readers soul, That your Ladyship may grow up like the tree planted
by the rivers of water, and bring forth fruit in your season, That in the
renewing of every week, there may appear in your Ladyships heart and
conversation, an answer of those old prayers newly returned to your Ladyships
Noble Parent. That the Lord may have glory, your soul peace, and he the daily
answer of his prayers, who truly is Madam,

Your Honors most humbly obliged servant in the Lord Jesus, John Collings.
Chaplyfield house, Aug: 21. 1649.
A LESSON OF Self-denial.
Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Hearken O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear:
Forget also thy own people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King desire thy
beauty, --
IT is agreed (almost amongst all Expositors) that this Psalm is a
Marriage-Song, and principally relating to the spiritual marriage between
Jesus Christ, and the believing soul, or between Christ and his Church: But
there is a little question amongst them, whether the spiritual sense of it be
couched under a type, or an Allegory; Some think that the Holy Ghost here
treates of that spiritual marriage, under the type of Solomon's marriage to
Pharaohs daughter, of which we read, 1 King. 3. 11. Of this opinion (says D.
Rivet) are D. Rivet Pref. in hunc Psalmum.
the Hebrew Interpreters, and most others, as Calvin, Bucer, Junius, Jansenius.
etc. yet these grant that there are some things in the Psalm not capable of
that literal sense. Others are against this, partly because (as they say) that
marriage of Solomon's was wicked, and against Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 7. and partly
because it is probable that Solomon having before that time (as 1 King. 3. 3.)
the fear of the Lord in his heart, it is not probable he would have contracted
that marriage, had not she first contracted to have forsaken her fathers house
(which the Hebrews also say was one of the marriage-Articles.) But it is
probable that that marriage gave occasion to the writing of this Psalm; and
for the reason against it, Rivet answers by a Rule of S. Hieroms, Homines mali
in re non bona, sanctissimarum rerum imo ipsius Dei typi esse possunt.
That In Scripture, evil men, and that in wicked actions, are oft-times types
of holy actions, and that of Gods own too often times; Ishmael was a type of the
old Testament (according to the Apostle) an many other instances might be
given. Whether it be a Type or an Allegory is not much material, nor worth the
disputing: Rivet thinks neither sense improbable, but conceives it might be
both; nor do I see any thing of value against it. In the Psalm observe:

1. The Preface, verse 1. Wherein he Psalmist declares the readiness of his
heart, and instinct of the spirit, putting him upon the Composure of it.

2. The narrative part of the Psalm, from the 2 verse to the last.

3. The Conclusion of it, verse ult.

In the narrative part is something, 1. Relating to the Bridegroom. 2. Relating
to the Bride.

The Bridegroom is commended from his Beauty, v. 2. Thou art fairer than the
children of men. 2. From his Eloquence, v. 2. Grace is powered into thy lips. 3.
From the blessing of God upon him; God has blessed thee for ever. 4. From his
Glory and Majesty, v. 3. 5. From his success, v. 4. 6. From his Temper and
Disposition, verse 4. 7. From his Valor, verse 4, 5, 6. 8. From the nature of
his Kingdom, v. 6. 9. From his love to Justice, v. 7. 10. From the perfume of
his Garments, v. 8. 11. From his choice in his Queen and his Attendants, v. 9.
So far it relates to the Bridegroom.

The other part relates to the Bride; and in it is a Lesson of Instruction and
Exhortation read to her, pressed from several Motives.

The Exhortation is in the two verses in which my Text lies; And it is
fourfold, pressed from several Arguments. In the Text then you may consider,
1. An Exhortation, enforced upon the former Description. 2. Several Motives to
press this Exhortation.

1. In the first consider,
1. The person exhorted; set out by the name of Daughter, (O Daughter.) 2. The
Exhortation; which is five-fold: 1. Hearken. 2. Consider. 3. Incline thin ear.
4. Forget thy people, and thy fathers house. 5. Worship him.
3. The Motives enforcing it, which are, 1. The former description of him; now
thou art married to such an husband, hearken, etc. 2. The Relation of Daughter;
Children should harken to their Parents. 3. She should be beautiful. 4. Her
beauty should be desirable. 5. The King should desire it; yea, greatly desire
her beauty.

Let me a little open the words, and then proceed.

[O Daughter,] Quae consentit viro in matrimonium est viro in loco filiae,
says Rivet: The woman that consents to her Husband in marriage, is to him in
stead of a Daughter: So says the Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 3. The Ewelambe, which
signified the wife, laid in the poor man's bosom, and was unto him as a
daughter, Jer. 3. 4. Will thou not from henceforth cry unto me, Thou art my
Father, the guide of my youth, the guide of her youth, that is, an Husband, and
yet her Father. God can marry his Daughter, and yet the marriage not be
incestuous; Yea, he first marryes the soul, and then makes it his Daughter,
according to that 2 Cor. 6. 18. Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and I will be a Father unto you, and you shall be
to me Sons and Daughters, says the Lord; Daughters by Adoption, Gal. 4. 6.
Nor in vain called a Daughter: It is a courteous compellation, as both Rivet
and Mollerus note, by which the Lord will let his Saints know, that he will
extend toward them the care of a father, as well as the love of an Husband, he
will love them like an husband, and protect them like a father. Hark
Christians! Saints are Sons and Daughters, as well as Spouses to Christ. If he
be a father where is his honor? If an husband where his love? But to proceed.

Hearken O Daughter] Audi filia,] What should she hear? She should hear her
husband. There was a voice from heaven, Matthew. 17. 5. This is my well-beloved
Son hear him. Christ's Sheep are eare-marked, John 10. 11. The good sheep are
thus marked, They hear his voice. Faith comes by hearing, yea and it grows up
by hearing too; they are over-growne Saints that are grown past Ordinances, I
am afraid they are grown out of Christ's knowledge; it is the deaf adder stops
her ear. David's ear was opened, Psalm. 40. They that are too proud to hear
Christ's Voice on Earth, I am afraid will be thought too vile ever to see his
face in heaven. Hearken therefore (O Daughter) Gods way to the Heart lies
through the Ear, that is his ordinary way; if he at any time comes another way,
I am afraid it is not when we have wilfully blockt that up, but when himself
has stopped it.

Hearken O Daughter, and Consider, or see] and vide: First hear, then see.
There is a seeing of Faith. Faith is the daughter of hearing; the Ear must
open before the soul. Do not only hear but also see. Hearing is not enough.
He that believes not, is damned already. Seeing may be of experience. As we
have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God. The soul that hears well
shall see. John 1. 50. Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the Fig Tree,
beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things than these. Faith must go before
Sight, but Sight shall succeed says: yet Faith is a Sight, though not of
experience.

And incline thine ear.] Expositors make this Phrase to contain three things.
1. A Repetition of the first Branch, Hearken. It is a difficult duty, the word
is doubled, that it may be enforced; the Psalmist speaks twice, considering
our deafness, yet he speaks louder in this than in the other phrase. Secondly,
therefore To incline the ear, is more than to hear, it does argue a notable
stirring of Attention He that inclines his ear, affert aliquem animi motum
and propensionem, quickens up his mind, and brings with him to the duty a
readiness of Spirit, and an intentnesse of mind. 3. Inclining the Ear say
some is Nota demissionis, a Note of that subjection and obedience which should
be found in the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ toward him. It follows in
the Text,

And forget thine own people, and thy Fathers house.] Here are two things to
be enquired into. 1. What is meant by her own People, and her Fathers House.
2. What is meant by forgetting of them. For the first, we must be guided by the
Knowledge of the Spouse, to whom these words are spoken; if you look upon, 1.
The Church of the Jews as the Spouse meant here to be married to Christ,
without question it is meant of the Jewish Worship. the Ceremonial Law and
Worship, and their Traditions, they were to he forgotten, and the
Gospell-worship to be embraced; the worship of Christ's Institution, consonant
to that of Christ to the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 21, 22, 23. 2. If you
understond by the Spouse, the Church of the Gentiles, then the Fathers house is
all the Gentile worship and Paganish Idolatry, which must all be left upon
their turning to Christ. 3. If you understand by the Spouse the particular
believing soul, the Fathers house, is old Adams house, all sinnne and
wickedness, all traditionall worshipping. Renounce the Per patris domum
intelligo, quicquid corruptionis ex utero afferimus, aut quaecunque ex prava
institutione nobis adhaerent quasi ad nos haereditario jure aut educatione
transfusa. Rivet ad loc.
World (says Deodate) and cleave to Christ: It is a Lesson of Selfe-Denyall,
consonant to that of Christ, Matthew. 10. 37. By Fathers house, says Doctor
Rivet, we may understand whatever corruption we either brought out of the
womb with us, or have contracted by ill education or custom, so that they
cleave to us as our inheritance. And by People, says he, I understand [ea quae
ex mala consustudine, and conversatione cum impiis acquisita, nos a Deo
abducunt, quae omnia nobis sunt deponenda] all those Corruptions, and whatever
they be, which we have contracted by ill acquaintance, and conversing amongst
the wicked, which estrange us from God, these must all be laid down, Luke 9.
23. Luke 14. 26. I shall anon in the opening of the Doctrine, open this term
more fully. I now proceed.

So shall the King desire thy Beauty.] Some read it, Quia concupivit, because
the King has desired thy beauty, making it a motive to induce her to forget
her fathers house. So August. Cyprian. etc. Others read it, according to our
Translation, [The King] The King of Glory, the King of Peace, Christ that King.
I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion: He is the King, [Greatly desire]
Out of his love to thee, his great love to thee, he shall desire it; not only
love thee, but desire thee; yea not only desire thee, but greatly desire thee.
He speaks after the manner of men, whose desire is to the women they love, Genesis
4. 7. Unto thee shall be his desire. And so, Deuteronomy. 21. 11. If thou see
amongst the Captives a beautiful woman, and thou have a desire to her to make
her thy wife. Christ's Love is such to the soul, that he has a desire to her,
yea not a desire barely, but a passionate desire, he shall greatly desire, he
shall be in love with the soul. [He shall greatly desire thy Beauty.] What
Beauty? Pulchritudo est in mente credentium, (says Musculus) it is meant not
of a face Beauty, but an heart Beauty. Decor Ecclesiae (says Mollerus) est in
fide, obedientia, and dilectione. In the graces of the soul, it is a Beauty
that the Lord Christ puts upon the soul, it is not a Beauty of nature, but of
grace that is the Saints Beauty: Sanctitas Ecclesiae est pulchritudo Eeclesiae
(says Piscator) the holiness of the Church is the Churches beauty, and so the
holiness of the soul is the souls beauty. This is the fairenes, this the Beauty
that is meant in those places of Solomon's Song, Cant. 1. 10, 11. Cant. 4. 1.
Cant. 6. 1. Cant. 7. 1. This is the Beauty that the Lord Jesus Christ, the
great King shall so desire in the soul, this is the comeliness that shall
make any poor soul desirable in the eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ; This is
the Beauty which will make the King of Glory rest and content himself in his
Love to the soul that has it, and make him be delighted with the
acquaintance of the soul, and in conversing, and having Communion with the
soul. This is it that which (where it is found) will so ravish Christ's heart,
that he will never part from the soul (as Mollerus expounds that phrase
[greatly desire.] Thus (as shortly as I could dispatch it) you have the sense
of the Text. Now in it there lies these truths.

1. That the gracious soul, by marriage to Jesus Christ, becomes his Daughter
as well as his Spouse. He will not only love her as a Wife, but care for her
as a Daughter, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

2. That it is a great piece of the Daughters work to hearken to Christ in his
Word. It is no height of Saintship, to be beyond Ordinances, if we be out of
Heaven: It is a note of a Reprobate, being once enlightened, to fall back; but
it is a new degree of Saintship; they are deaf Adders, that have lived thus
long no Saints; Children of the Devil, not of God; his Daughters must hearken.
[Hearken O Daughter.]

3. Christ's Daughter must and shall see as well as hear. Hearing is not
enough; the soul must be open to receive Christ as well as the ear to hear
his voice, and if they will hear, they shall see. [Hearken O Daughter, and
see.]

4. Christ's Daughters must incline their ear as well as hear and see.
Obedience must be joined to Faith and Worship. Inward affection and intention
of mind must be joined with outward hearing.

5. Which is the Doctrine I will Insist upon.

Doct. That soul that would have the Lord Jesus Christ desire its beauty, must
forget its own people, and its Fathers House. And whosoever does that shall
be beautiful.

And the Lord-Jesus shall desire its Beauty. In the handling of this Doctrine I
shall do these 5 things.

1. I shall show you what it is for a soul to forget its own people, and its
Fathers house.

2. I shall show you how, and in what sense the soul that does it shall be
beautiful.

3. I shall show what is meant by the Lord Christ's desiring such a souls
beauty.

4. I shall give you some reasons, why it is requisite that the soul that
would endeare it self to Christ, and make it self desirable, should forget
its Fathers house.

5. Lastly, I shall apply the whole Doctrine suitably.

First, what is meant by the souls own people, and Fathers house; and
secondly, by forgetting of them. What was meant in general I showed before.
Our Fathers house is old Adams house, the world and all therein. I shall now
show you in some particulars, First, What of our Eathers must be forgot.
Secondly, how and in what sense we must forget it. The first I shall dispatch
in these few following particulars, as briefly as I can.

The soul must forget the manners of its Fathers house. Our Fathers house
(ever since God and he parted houses in Paradise) is an house of ill manners,
an house of sin and wickedness. Now every soul that would make it self
beautions or desirable in the sight of Christ's eyes, must shake hands with
sin. Is. 55. 7. Let the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and
unto our God, and he will abundantly pardon him; ay then the King shall desire
his beauty, but first let him forget the manners of his Fathers house. All
sin must be forgotten: But I take it especially four sorts of sins are
hinted to us in this Phrase, and may more properly be called the sins of our
Fathers house.

1. Original sin. If we have any thing of Grace or Goodness, we never
learned that at home. It is the gift of God through the tutoring of the Spirit.
But for Sin, we need not go abroad to learn that, it was bred in the bone,
that is one reason why it will never out of the flesh, Ez. 16. Thy Father was an
Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite. We are chilnren of wrath by nature, Ephesians.
2. 3. Psalm. 51. 4. In sin did my mother conceive me; Now this must be
forgotten; this is a piece of our Fathers house. Men and Women you know are
usually borne in their Fathers House; We are all borne in the house of bondage,
which must be forgotten, if ever the soul be desirable to Jesus Christ. It is
a usual saying of Divines, that he that was never truly humbled for Original
sin, was never truly humbled for any sin.

2. The sins of our Education. The Fathers house is the house where the
Child is brought up: All sin is not bred in us; that which is bred in us may
be improved. Original sin is sin in the seed; Actual sin is sin in
the Blade and Fruit. The World is a dusty house, you can set a Creature in
never a corner of it, but it will contract some dust. Joseph by being in the
King of Egypts house, learned to swear by his Masters life. According to
different breedings, are men addicted to different Vanities, whether pleasure,
or honor, etc. Now when the soul comes unto Christ he must come off these, he
must forget his Fathers house, all his vain sinful breeding, and all the
filth his soul has contracted by reason of it.

3. Sins of Conversation and company. The Fathers house, and the company of
it, is the child's company, those of his Fathers house, are his own people. It
is true, as well for Religion as any thing else, Magni refert quibuscum
convixeris. It is a great matter with whom we converse; from accompanying with
vain persons, thou shall learn to be vain: Cum lupis ululare. When the
soul comes to Christ, it must leave all; sins thus contracted, they are part
of the manders of the Fathers House. Paul left his Pharisaisme that he had
learnt at Gamaliels feet.

4. Customary sins must be left. The Child learnes customs in his Fathers
House. Customary sinning must be left of that soul that would render it self
for beauty desirable to Jesus Christ; Those sins which are to the soul as
the Leopards spot, and the blacknes of the blackamores skin. Inded this is
hard; Custom hatcheth a second nature, Jer. 13. 23. How can you that are
accustomed to do evil, do well? Yet it must be done, the Fathers house must
be forgotten: ill customs must be laid aside, or good ones will not be taken up.

5. Beloved sins must be left. Every thing of the Fathers House almost is
dear to the child. But the dearest sin must be shaken hands with, Matthew.
18. 9. If it be a right hand it must be cut off: if a right eye, it must be
plucked out. Our Members must be Mortified, Col. 3. 5. Thus the manners of our
Fathers house must be forgotten. All sins, but especially these sins. I
proceed now.

Secondly, The soul must forget the Company of us Fathers house. What is that
you will say? I will answer you in two particulars. 1. Our most near and
dearest Relations. See Luke 14. 26. If a man comes to me (says Christ) and
hates not Father, and Mother, and Children, and Brethren, and Wife, and
Sisters, yea and his own life also, he is not worthy of me. He shall not be
so beautiful; not so beautiful, as that the King shall desire his beauty. As
it was said Levi did in another sense, so must the Saint do in some sense: He
must say unto his Father, and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither must
he acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own children. Otherwise he will
never have Levie's Character, to be one that observes the Lords Word and
keeps his Covenant. Not that Religion teaches, or commands, or indureth a
Saint to break the ties of all Religion; No, besides that it does not discharge
a Saint of his Duty of Nature; it puts in a Plea also against such
unnaturalness; Honor thy Father and Mother, etc. is the fifth Commandment,
the first with promise (says the Apostle) neither does it allow a Saint to rob
his parents of their due, with saying, Corban, it is a gift: The Ravens of the
valleys shall pick out the eyes of such persons, as well as the Devil has
done of their Religion. Neither does it discharge a Saint of his providentiall
duty, and respect to his relation. He that provides not for his Family is
worse than an Infidel. 1. In point of due honor. 2. In point of natural
affection. 3. In point of Providentiall care. We must not forget the Company
of our Fathers House. Gods Commands do not enterfiere, nor will the Gospel in
that case give a supersedeas to the Law. But 1. if God and they draw several
ways, if the Parents commands cross Gods, then (...), It is better to obey
God than men: The Parent is to command for God, not against him, subordinately,
not supremely; he must be obeyed for Gods sake, and God too for his sake, as by
his command he seconds God; but Parents can as little, yea less discharge the
child of its duty to God, than the Pope can discharge the Subject of his
Allegiance to his Prince. 2. If their love becken us out of the way when God
calls us, or would entice us to make halts in our running through fire and
water to him, then we must forget them. I have somewhere met with a Speech of
St. Hierome to that purpose: Says he, If the Lord Christ should call me to
him, though my Father should lie in my way, and my Mother should hang about my
neck, I would go over my Father, and shake off my Mother, and run to my
Christ. Shetterden a Martyr (as it is storied of him) writ to his Mother thus;
Dear Mother, embrace the Counsel of Gods Word with Heart and Affection, read
it with obedience, so shall we meet in joy at the last day, Or else I bid you
farewell for ever. In these now and such like cases, that soul that would make
its beauty desirable in the eyes of Jesus Christ, must like Levi say to his
Father and his Mother, I have not seen you; in these cases he must not
acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own Children: They stand in Christ's
way, and Christ calls hastily. The Saint must spare no time to parley. Natural
affection with them he must forget his Fathers house, the dear company of it,
his Rolations.

Secondly, all sinful Company is the Company of our Fathers house, The Company
of fools, as Solomon calls it. Now all this must be forgotten, or else in
stead of being saved, thy soul will be destroyed. Prove. 13. 20. A Companion
of fools shall be destroyed. Psalm 119. 63. I am a companion (says David)
of those that fear thee. You must leave your swearing Company, and your
drinking Company, and your vain Company, or the King will never desire your
beauty. The soul that would render it self desirable in the eyes of the Lord
Jesus Christ, must make all its delight, (with David) in those that excel in
virtue, the Saints upon the earth. Saul before his Conversion was a companion
of those that stoned Stephen, and persecuted the Saints. Like to like, for
himself consented to his death, and was a Persecutor; but no sooner had the
Lord made his Motion to him, but he forgot this company, and assayed to join
himself to the Church.

Thirdly, the soul that would render its beauty desirable in Jesus Christ's
eyes, must forget the Honor and Pomp, and Riches and Greatness of his
Fathers house, all the high-Towers and Treasures of it, etc. They that will be
Christ's Disciples must not take up Crowns, and advance themselves, and follow
him: No, they must deny themselves, and take up the cross and follow him;
their Crowns must be of Thorns, made after their Masters Copy: They must not
be such as love the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats of the
Synagogues, and Greetings in the Market, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi.
Be not ye called Rabbi (says Christ) for one is your Master, even Christ,
and all ye are brethren. He that is greatest amongst them that are Saints,
must be as a Servant, Matthew. 23. 7, 8, 9, 10. They must forget that natural
itching which is in the children of Adam usually, and must be scratched with
Madam, or Rabbi, or some high-swelling words of vanity: they must not be such,
as will swell (like that Toad Haman) if Mordecay give him not the knee, or if
their Brother give them not the wall or the way; Saints are no such creatures;
they are such as are not at all taken with any such high titles, but Romans 12.
10. In honor they prefer one before another. And they must look upon it as the
greatest honor in the world, not that they are masters, and descended* --
atavis Regibus, of great Parentage* etc. but that they are servants of Jesus
Christ; the name of Christian (the badge of honor first created at Antioch)
must appear to them, better than the names of Lord or Lady. Theodosius was
wont (they say) more to glory that he was a servant of Christ, than that he
was Emperor of the East. Now I say, That soul that would make its beauty
desirable to Christ, must forget all these, not affect any of them, not value
them; for he that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. Behold a miracle (says Mat. 23. 12.
Augustine) God is an high God (yea, the most high) yet the higher thou liftest
up thy self, the further thou art off him; the lower thou humblest thy self,
the nearer he draws to thee; he looks near to the humble, that he may raise
them up, but sees the proud afar off, that he may depresse them. The proud
Pharisee pressed as near God as he could, the poor Publican durst not, but
stood afar off; God was far from the one and near to the other. The high
towers of the fathers house must be forgotten, yea, and so must all the rich
coffins and chests of it: these are part of the furniture of our fathers house.
You know what Christ said to the young man, when he seemed to be in love with
Christ, Matthew. 19. 21. If thou will be perfect, if thou will make thy beauty a
desirable beauty, Go, and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, and again v. 24.
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God. You know what Christ says, Mat. 11.
(...), the poor are those that are gospellized. But to proceed yet.

The soul that would render its beauty desirable in Christ's eyes, must forget
the pleasures and vanities of its fathers house, all that is in the world, 1 John 2. 16. whether it be the lust of the eyes, or the lust of the flesh, or
the pride of life. When the Apostle speaks of lovers of pleasures, he puts in
more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Jude tells us, such as are sensual have
not the spirit, Jude 18. 19. Job in the description of the wicked, Job. 21. 12,
13. tells us, that they are such as take up the tymbrell and harp, and rejoice
at the sound of the Organ, their children dance, they spend their days in
wealth, etc. These are they that say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire
not the knowledge of his ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him?
and what profit is there, that we should pray unto him, v. 15. Their fiddles
must be laid in the water of true repentance and contrition. The daughters of
pleasure must undresse, if they will be beautiful in Christ's eyes; they must
lay aside their paintings and dressings, their curlings and perfumings of the
hair, where (as he wittily says) the powder does forget the dust; their
ornament must not be the outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing
gold, and putting on of apparel; but the hidden man of the heart in that which
is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. The daughters of pleasure must
undresse (I say) for the Lord, as he threatened he would do in the day of
judgment, Is. 3. 18, 19, 20. so in the day of mercy, to the soul of the vain
creature, he will also take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments
about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tyres like the moon, the
chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers, the bonnets, and the ornaments of
the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the carerings, and the rings,
and the nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoods, and the vailes, and instead of these send in mercy, a girding with
sackcloth, a rent heart, and a weeping eye, and a serious soul. It was a sure
rule that a Divine once gave to another, enquiring of him why he did not
persuade a Gentlewoman (with whom he was acquainted) to leave off some vain
dresses she wore; (Says he) I will first persuade her to get Christ into her
heart, and then she will leave these of her self. The soul that has Christ
in his heart, need not to be persuaded to leave its fidling and dancing, and
love songs, and vain dresses, and paintings, and revellings, and naked
breasts; it knows these will not make its beauty desirable in Christ's eyes;
and it is lost labor to persuade others to it. When Solomon forsook God, then
he ran to pleasures and vanities, and sought every thing that should please his
carnal eye, and tickle his vain fancy; but he no sooner returns to Christ,
but he says of mirth it is madness, and of laughter what does it? Christians
you must forget these, or Christ will overlook you. Tertullian called the
unvailed virgins of Tetull. in lib. de velandis virginibus.
his time Capita Nundinalitia, and Pudor ostentatitiae Virginitatis, Phrases I
will not English. You must forget the pleasures and vanities of your fathers
house: that is the fourth. I will instance but in one thing more.

Fifthly and lastly, You must forget the Religion and Righteousness of your
fathers house. Indeed, there is not much there, it may quickly be all
forgotten; but what there is must all be forgotten. There is a conceited
Religion, at least, a selfe-righteousnesse, which is natural to all the sons
of Adam. Master Hooker gives this reason for it, because our first father Adam
was worth so much he could have gone to Heaven upon his own legs. Now as it is
with a young spenthrift, though he has spent all his fathers estate, and be
not worth a groat, yet he cannot abide to think he should be a worse man
than his father; so it is with the sons of Adam, because he could once have
done enough for heaven, we that are his children, though he lost all his power
before he died, yet we cannot endure to think our selves worse than our
father, and are ready to think heaven may be erned still, and we may do
something for our selves. The young man, Mat. 19. was at it, Master, what good
thing should I do to inherit everlasting life? and so the converts at Peter's
Sermon, Acts 2. and the Jaylour, Acts 16. What shall we do to be saved? hence
is Morality and Civility taken up by some, and formality in duties taken up by
others, and man pitcheth his staff in himself, and resolves there to rest;
but this must be forgotten if ever we would be desirably beautiful in Jesus
Christ's eyes; for all our Righteousnesses are as menstruous clothes, and as a
filthy ragge in the sight of God, Is. 64. 6. and again, Matthew. 5. 20. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees you
shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. Civility rested in (says a Divine
of our own) is but a beautiful abomination, it is but a smooth way to hell.
It is true, in the world a civil man is valued at an high rate, because the
world is full of gross profaneness, and outrageous wickedness; but Civility
is like the Cab of 2 Kin. 6. 25
Doves dung, or the asses head: the latter was worth fourscore pieces of
silver, and the fourth part of the first valued at five picces of silver; but
it was because there was a famine in Samaria. This is that makes Civility rated
so high in the world, but in it self it is worth nothing, and Formality in
duties as little, though it amounts to as much as the Pharisees fasting twice a
week, and praying thrice a day, and paying tithe of all that he has.
Notwithstanding all this, all God, I thank thee, I am not, etc. yet the poor
wretch is poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked. All this must be left,
and another righteousness sought and found, before the soul comes up to a
desirable beauty. And thus I have showed what of our fathers house, and our own
people must be forgot.

Let me come in the next place, to show you how, and how far these things
must be left and forgot; To that I answer.

1. Some of these must be absolutely forgot. The manners of our fathers house,
all sin and wiekednesse must be so forgot, Is. 55. 7. Let the wicked man
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim
shall say, what have I to do with Idols. There must be no willing purposed
practice of any sin how dear soever, how accustomed soever, however acquired,
how long soever lived in; the wicked man must forsake his way, the evil of our
doings must be put away; evil must be eschewed, so must sinful company too.

2. The rest of them must be secundum quid forgotten, in a great measure. Our
relations must not be doted upon, our honors and worldly glory not hunted
after, nor must our hearts be taken with them; we must not be lovers of
pleasure, we must not rest in our righteousness, not dote upon it; our heat
of affection to these things, the running out of our hearts to them, the fixing
of our hearts upon them, this must be forgotten, etc.

3. Conditionally they must be forgotten. If they clash with Christ's commands,
if our Relations would draw us from Christ, or retard our way to Christ; if in
our acts of love to them we must forget the commands of Christ, that either we
must not obey God in our places, or we must break with them, and not be
thought to love them, in this sense they ought to be forgotten, yea, to be
hated. Christ in this case called Peter Satan; this is Christ's command, Luke
14. 26. If our honors and glory in the world would lie in the way, to keep us
from stooping to Christ's command; and from thence our flesh it would fetch such
conclusions as these, It is not fit for so great a person as you to have such
strictness in duties, to be acquainted with such mean creatures (as many
Saints are) to go to Church so often, to be at private meetingt so much, etc.
In this case we must forget them. If our riches begin to stick to our heart,
and to tempt our heart from God, that we cannot enjoy them, but our hearts
will cleave to them, In such a case a Christian shall be a saver, if (as
Crates threw his gold into sea, that he may study Philosophy) he also throw
away his estate to study Jesus Christ. If our pleasures be such, as in the
substance (if such shadows have any) are sinful, or draw away the heart too
much from God, take up our Church-time, or family duty-time, or secret
duty-time, etc. in such case they must be forgot too.

4. Comparatively they must be forgot. God must be greater than they in the
throne of our heart, we must not love father, nor mother, nor daughter, nor
wife, nor child, more than Christ. So Matthew expounds that place, Luke 14. 26.
in Matthew. 10. 37. we must not be lovers of any pleasures more than of Christ,
nor of house, or lands, or honor, or any piece of vanity under the Sun. This
is plain, for we must love Christ with all our heart and soul; and though the
second commandment be, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, yet it does
not say, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy Christ.

5. Lastly, In effect they must be forgot. Christians must do as if they had
no relations; they may rejoice, and buy, and sell, and purchase, and use the
world, but mark how, it is in a forgetting manner, 1 Cor. 7. 30. they that
rejoice must be as if they rejoiced not, and they that buy as if they possessed
not, and they that use the world as if they used it not. Christians may be
called by their titles of Rabbi, and my Lord, and Madam; but while they are so,
they must have a scornful, low, slight, esteem of these swelling words of
vanity, not despising the meanest of Gods Saints, but ready in honor to
prefer them above themselves, and accounting the title of Christian, of a
servant of God, to be a greater title of honor than worldly dignities can
invest them with. And now I have finished my first task in the explication of
the doctrine, in which I have showed you, what of our fathers house must be
forgotten. 2. How far we must forget it.

The second thing I propounded, was to show you how that soul is beautiful,
with what beauty the soul is beautiful that thus forgets its own people, and
its fathers house. This I shall show you, 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

1. Not with a corporal beauty, this makes not the flesh beautiful. It ads no
luster to flesh and blood, possibly it may discolor that.

2. Not by a native beauty, no natural beauty. The beauty that will appear in
the soul, upon this self denial, is not like the beauty of the face which
appears after washing off dirt, which clouded natures colors.

3. Not in the eye of the vain creature, nor in its own eyes. Ask a vain
creature, he will tell you, that the leaving of vain dresses, and patches, and
plaitinge of the hair, is the way to make the creature look like no body, to
make it despised in the world, etc. and such a one perhaps lothes and abhors it
self as a vile creature, Jo. 42. 6. Thus it shall not be beautiful, and it is
no matter whether it be or no. But secondly such a soul shall be beautiful
these three ways.

1. Imputatione, By the beauty of Christ put upon it; see for this that notable
place, Ezech. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Then wast thou decked with silver
and gold, and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work.
-- and thou were exceeding beautiful. -- And thy renown went forth amongst
the heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect through the comeliness which I
had put upon thee (says the Lord God.) Christ makes the reflection of his
beauty to be cast upon such a soul, and it becomes beautiful through his
comeliness; the souls doing these things, does not make it spiritually any
more than corporally beautiful, but (they being done) it becomes comely
through Christ's comeliness, comely through a comeliness that is put upon it,
that is the first way. Secondly, It is beautiful,

2. Through Christ's Acceptance, Of free grace; Christ said to the young man in
the 19 of Matthew. Sell all thou have, etc. and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, not thou shall earne it, but thou shall have it. Christ accepts the
soul as beautiful, and accounts the soul as beautiful, that for his sake
will forget its own people, and its fathers house, Cant. 4. 1. Behold, thou
art fair (my love) behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes, etc.

3. Such a soul is beautiful, though not in the worlds eyes, yet in the
Saints eyes; The world will hate and despise them, but the Saints will love and
value them, Cant. 6. 1. the Daughters of Jerusalem say unto the spouse,
whither is thy beloved gone, O thou Fairest amongst women, the daughters of
Jerusalem, the Saints, account such a soul beautiful. It may be that she
may call her self black the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints, yea,
and the world may so call her; but those that are godly shall esteem her
comely, and the King shall desire her beauty. And that leads me to the last
particular in the explication of the Doctrine.

3. What is the meaning of that phrase, The King shall desire thy beauty.

1. Generally. It is a speech according to the manner of men, Genesis 4. 7. it is
said of the husband toward the wise, Unto thee shall be his desire. And we
meet with that phrase, Deuteronomy. 21. 11. when thou see amongst the Captives a
beautiful woman, and thy desire shall be toward her, to make her thy wife.

2. But more particularly, I think the true meaning of the phrase may be
understood in these particulars.

First of all it implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ shall discover and see an
excellency in such a soul; we can desire nothing, but we shall first discover
some excellency in it. Now the Lord discovers an excellency in such a soul;
he shall eye such a soul as an excelling soul, as a lovely soul, worthy of
him (though not through its own worthiness) and suitable for him.

2. It implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ shall love such a soul, discovering
in it a suitable excellency; he shall love it, his heart will be ravished with
it, Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have
ravished my heart. Christ's affections will be drawn out to a soul that so
forgets it self, his heart will be melting toward it, and on fire for it;
there must first be a love in the soul to the object, before the heart be
drawn forth to covet an union with it.

3. It implies, That the Lord Christ will in his heart prefer such a soul;
when a man's desire is toward a particular woman, to make her his wife, he
preferres her above other women; his desire is not to her sex, but to her, to
her rather than ten thousand others. The Lords desire shall be toward such a
soul, As you have heard described to you, that he will prefer her above ten
thousand of his creatures, though the Lord sees thousands of his creatures,
hundreds in a congregation, that the world dotes upon, some for their fair
faces, and on others for their brave parts, this Eliab and the other Shammah;
yet the Lord that sees all, and can judge best, lets Eliab and Shammah pass,
and fixes his eye upon this self denying (in the world) despised creature,
and upon it he fixes his heart, and prizeth such a soul above all the other
trumperies and kickshawes of beauty. The Lord culs out such a soul, his desire
is toward her, she is the Esther he picks out, and such a soul is more
preferred in Christ's eye, than this witty man or woman, or that gallant, this
Lord or that Lady, Christ has no desire to them, but to this soul his desire
is.

4. It implies, That Jesus Christ will endeavor and effect an union, and enjoy
such a soul; what is the meaning of that phrase, the man's desire shall be to
his wife, but he shall desire to be joined in marriage to her, that they may
be no longer twain, but one flesh? and if his desire be toward her, and it
be a feasible thing he will effect it, if she consent and friends consent,
etc. The Lords desire shall be to the soul, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ
shall endeavor, yea, and unite himself to effect an union with such a soul,
he shall woo it, yea, and she shall yield, for when he works who can let
him? Christ will marry himself to such a soul, make a marriage covenant, and
tie himself in a marriage bond to it; for though in man desire may be
frustrated, so that desire and enjoyment are two things, yet it is necessarily
to be understood in Christ's desiring, whose power is such, that he shall not
need starve his desire longer than he pleases.

5. It implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ will court near communion with such
a soul; mark how he speaks to the Spouse, Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in
the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely; he will not only
have communion, but he will covet communion with such a soul; he will desire
to have it draw nigh, and dwell in his presence, to have it come near him in a
duty, in an ordinance, etc.

6. Lastly, He will love such a soul with a constant and inseparable love, it
is said, The King shall desire thy beauty, he shall desire it, and never cease
desiring of it, he shall for ever desire thy beauty. And thus I have opened to
you all the three terms, now I come to the second task. As I have gone along
in opening the generals in several particulars, I have proved the Doctrine
that it is so. But may some say, what ground is there that the Lord Jesus
Christ should desire this of every soul that he will love and marry and have
communion with, that it should thus forsake its own people, and its fathers
house? why should Christ hold the soul to this hard meat? I shall therefore in
the next place show you the reasons of it: And there is a very great deal of
Reason for it.

1. Because it is the very law of marriage, Genesis 2. 24. Therefore shall a man
forsake father and mother, and cleave to his wife. The Lord Christ marries
himself to the soul. It is written, I will betroth thee unto me; yea, I will
betroth thee unto me: for this cause the soul shall forsake its own people,
and its fathers house, and shall cleave to its Christ; for this cause because
the soul is married, or about to marry to the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore
must look to do as married persons use to do, leave all for their husband.

2. A second reason is, because while the soul lives at home with its own
people, and at its fathers house, it cannot be beautiful nor desirable. Our
own people are a filthy people, our fathers house a nastie house; the soul
while it has left that cannot be beautiful nor desirable. The most beautiful
creature you know, if she be brought up by sluttish people (as we say) and
goes in a filthy habit, there is a cloud cast over her beauty. So it is with a
soul, while it has left its sins and vain company, and pride, and ambition,
and pleasures, and riches, and selfe-righteousnesse, it cannot be beautiful in
Christ's eyes. Now beauty is the attractive of the soul, the soul must see a
beauty, in that, which it lets out it self to in desiring: let that be a
second reason.

3. Because there cannot be a cleaving to Christ, unless there be a parting
with these. Christ requires the highest love of our souls, it is the first
commandment you know (with our Saviors gloss upon it) Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and all thy soul. Hence Christ tells us, no
man can serve two masters, you cannot serve God and Mammon; that soul that
will hug sin must hate God; that soul that will be a companion of Jesus
Christ, and a companion of Saints, must not be a companion of sinners, for what
fellowship has Christ with Belial, righteousness with unrighteousness, light
with darkness, the temple of God with Idols, and so the rest? Your soul
cannot love two thengs with an highest love. 2. You cannot in heart truly
cleave to two contraries. There is a third reason, especially if you consider,

4. That God is a jealous God: you meet with the phrase often, and given as a
reason, why they should do this or that, For the Lord thy God is a jealous
God. Jealousy is a passion in the soul, non patiens consortium in re amata
(says Aquinas) that will not endure, or that makes the soul that it will not
endure any sharing in the object beloved. The woman that has a jealous husband
must leave all her old companions. Christian, thy God is a jealous God, if
therefore thou would have him desire thy beauty, if thou would have him
care for thee, thou must forget thine own people, and thy fathers house. I
will add but one reason more. Lastly,

5. Because It is the will of Christ. It was the Apostles precept, that wives
should obey their husbands. Now self denial is a great piece of Christ's
command. It is his first request, He that will be my Disciple let him deny
himself; self denial is the first of Christianity. He that has not learned
this, has not learned the A, B, C, of Christianity, not so much as the
Christcrosse row, as you call it. Here should be reason enough if (...), [hee
has said so] was enough in Pithagoras his school, to put the business past
disputing amongst his scholars, I am sure it should be much more in Christ's
school, we will therefore enquire no further reason for it. Let me now come
to application.

I shall apply it, by way 1. Of Instruction. 2. Of Examination. 3. Of
Consolation. 4. Of Exhortation.

Instr.It may serve to instruct us in the truth of several Positions, I will
only pick out some few.

1. It may instruct us, That the most part of the world, yea, of those that the
world most esteems of, and sets the highest rate and value upon, are poor,
indesirable, uncomely wretches, in the eyes of Jesus Christ. Christ's eye sees
not as man's eye sees, man sees beauty, where Christ sees none; man sees a
desirablenesse, where Christ's eye sees none; man dotes upon what Christ cares
not for; man calls the proud blessed, but the Lord's soul abhors them;
they have not yet left their own people, and their fathers house. You see many
a gallant strut it in the world, and who but they are the people of fashion (as
you call them) the glory, the beauty of the world, every one admires them, etc.
many that in respect of their wisdom, or parts, or behavior, and civility,
are the desire of those amongst whom they live, and there is not one in ten of
all these that the Lord Jesus Christ has any desire too; they are poor,
uncomely, indesirable creatures in Christ's eyes, notwithstanding all their
honor, and greatness, and nobility, notwithstanding all their beauty, whether
natural or artificial, borrowed from the Painter or Tailor, notwithstanding
all these Christ sees no excellency in them at all. The vain creature dotes,
Christ scorns; the vain creature loves, Christ sees no loveliness in them,
but looks upon them black with the soot of hell, eyes their countenance, all
blots, and their souls too, the vain creature preferres them: there is many a
poor creature that lives in a cottage, that is at an higher rate in Christ's
thoughts; the poor worms soul is carried out to desire matches, an union and
a communior. with them. Jesus Christ scorns them, and has no desire either to
any union, or to enjoy any communion with them: Christ says of such vain
creatures, There go poor wretches that my soul loathes, I am sick of them,
ashamed of them as my creatures; And is this nothing to you? O you sons and
daughters, is this nothing to you? it vexes you to think that you live in a
place where none desires you, and if you were gone none would lament you: It
was an untoward character of an unworthy Emperor; and is it no trouble to you
to think I live not desired, not cared for of Jesus Christ? Zeph. 2. 1. The
Lord calls his people to repentance under this notion; Gather together, O nation
un desired. O that it might call you to some serious thoughts, vain creatures!
you are people not desired of the Lord Jesus Christ, as uncomely, and despised
in his eyes, as you are beautiful, and admired in the eyes of men; nay, and
more, and let me tell you in your ears, and (oh that it may make your hearts
rend, and your ears tingle) if you be not desired of him here, you shall never
enjoy him, nor be enjoyed of him hereafter. Haman was such a poor wretch, the
King had ennobled him, every hat and knee did him homage, and took notice of
the Kings respects to him, at last he came to the gibbet; have a care poor
creatures else, though you compass your selves about with sparks, poor
sparks of friends, honors, riches, pleasures; sparks that will extinguish as
quickly as rise, yet this, and only this, you shall have at the Lords hand,
you shall lie down in sorrow, everlasting sorrow; you shall lie down in hell.
It is an ill place to leave you in, but the Lord pluck you as firebrands out of
the burning. I pass on.

2. From what you have heard you may be instructed, which way the way to heaven
lies; and 2. That it is no easy way, we are all pilgrims and strangers here,
we were bred so, our fathers were so. Now the journies end which all pretend to
(though the most ride backward) the coast which all say they are bound for
(which way soever their compass guides them) is Heaven, this is omnibus in
Voto, though few so run that they may obtain. But has any blind or misled
traveller a mind to know the way? Is any poor soul startled this day? does
hellfire flash in any of your faces, and are you crying out, Sir, What shall
we do to be saved? which way lies our way to heaven? Learn hence, that the
next way to heaven is not the beaten road, but quite cross Natures-fields, and
so through the long street of self-denial, and up the mountain of holiness,
at the top of which you shall see God; it lies over hedge and ditch, over
rocks and mountains: you must leave your youth sins as you go on your
right hand, your education and custom sins on your left hand, your beloved
sins behind you; if your father, or mother, or husband, or wife, or brother,
or sister, or child lie in your way, you must make no halis, but over their
necks; if all your vain acquaintance, your drunken, swearing, wanton
companions, stand of each side and becken you another way, you must decline
their invitation and go quite cross; you must tread upon all your glory and
pomp, and greatness; you must avoid the mountain of Gold, and the rocks of
Pearl; you must take heed of the pleasant brook of carnal and vain pleasures;
avoid your dancing, and painting, and patching, and decking your selves: In
short, you must put your self in an habit fit to carry a cross, This is the
next way to heaven. And now I need not tell you in the second place, That
strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that leads to everlasting life, and
few there be that find it. By this time you will know, that if you will go to
heaven, you must go like, and with, very few in this age of wantonness and
dotage. By this time you will easily guess sinners are out of the way, and
proud men are out of the way; those that glory in riches, and worldly
greatness, are out of the way; the careless daughters of Sion, that stretch
out their necks, and mince it as they go, are out of the way; the
selfe-righteous men are out of the way. Ah Lord! who are in it? Heaven is a
difficult journey, it is an hard way to find, it is hard to flesh and blood to
do these things. It was the Martyrs speech, that the cross way was the way to
heaven. The way to heaven is astrait way, no dancing way, dancers must have the
elbowroome of hell-road; they that will walk in this strait way must crowd,
they must not think to walk thither in state; no, they must crowd, and never
be afraid of wrimpling a neat handkerchiefe or cuffe, it is not opus
pulvinaris (said one) but pulveris, you shall be sure to meet with all the
opposition that nature can make, all the forces of flesh and blood, and all the
forces the devil can add; who then shall be saved? even those that God has
appointed to life, those to whom the Lord shall give such an heart as I have
told you, strait is the way, and few there be that find: If you will have a
broader way you may, Mat. 7. 13, 14. but then you must not look for the same
journies end. The Lord give you hearts to consider it, and fear to tremble at
it.

3. And from hence thirdly, you may be instructed, that it must be something
more than nature that must make a poor soul beautiful, and desirably
beautiful in Jesus Christ's eyes. It must neither be natural beauty will do
it, nor yet natural parts; no, nor natures glory, nor the best of nature,
natural righteousness, Matthew. 5. 20. It must be something more than flesh and
blood, yea, something more than flesh and blood can help us with. But I pass
over this.

4. From hence fourthly, you may be instructed, What an infinite love the Lord
Jesus Christ has loved his Saints with, 1 John 3. 1. Behold (says the
Apostle) with what manner of love the father has loved you with, that you
should be called the sons of God. Here he says, hearken O Daughter; the
Daughter of a King is honorable, but the daughter of the King of Kings is much
more honorable. But (if I may say it) here seems to be a degree of love
beyond it, the Kings wife is more honorable than the Kings daughter. Behold
therefore (O ye upright in heart) with what manner of love the Lord Jesus
Christ has loved you, that he should desire your beauty; not only love you,
but if uncomely, poor wretches, make you beautiful, according to that, Ezech.
16. 13, 14. nay, not only so, but desire your beauty; not only like it, but
desire it; O love! infinite love! when David sent his servants to let Abigail
know that he desired her beauty, mark how she admires at it, 1 Samuel 25. 41.
she arose and bowed her self on the earth, and said, Behold, let thine
handmaid be a servant, to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, Do you
hear this news, O ye daughters of men? do you hear this news? that the
King of glory, the Lord Jesus Christ, that has no need of you, that is
infinitely above you, has sent me this day to tell you, that he desires your
beauty. Rise up, O ye Saints, bow your selves, and say, Let us be servants to
wash his feet, etc. Let us be the doore-keepers of his house, his meanest
servants. No Christians, you shall be his sons and daughters: Nay, hearken O
daughters, here is more for you, The King desires your beauty; Spell this love
at leisure, and now wash your souls, follow after Jesus Christ, study it with
your most serious thoughts, live to it with strictest lives. What conversation
becomes the gospel? what manner of persons should you be? Follow on, make
haste and rise, and follow him, singing, crying, as you go, O the height, and
depth, the incomprehensible height! the unfadomable depth of love wherewith
the Lord Jesus Christ has loved sinners, before the beginning of the world,
etc. And lastly.

5. Can you learn a less result from hence than this, that Saints
selfe-denying, despised Saints, are happy creatures; Terque quaterque beati,
blessed again, and again. Surely you have not heard me all this while, but
you are preventing me in the words of the Psalmist, Happy are the people that
are in such a case; yea, blessed are the people that have the Lord for their
God; we may say of them, O nimium dilectis Deo, creatures strangely beloved of
their God, strangely happy in this, that the King should desire their beauty.
Let the world scorn one, let them put out the finger and bark at the moon,
let them mock puritanisme, let the way of holiness be every where spoken
against, pro hominum arbitrio, let them talk, so long as you gain; you dance
before the ark, though Michal mock out at the window: You shall be more
beautiful, the more vile they think you; it is for the Kings sake, that has
desired your beauty and scornd theirs; for the Kings sake, that has chosen you
to obtain everlasting life through Jesus Christ, but has ordained them to
wrath* and neglected their beauty. One would not think now, that these
creatures that ravish Christ's heart, should offend worldlings eyes so much:
surely Christ should have no judgment, if these were the contemptible ones of
the earth, the unlovely creatures. Well* well, Christians, let them mock on,
after the way which they call simplicity and foolery, moping; etc. worship thou
the God of thy fathers; thou shall have thy pleasures, when they shall have
torments; thou shall have thy crown and honor, when the pride of their glory
shall be stained, and that shall lie in the dust. These children of vanity
forget what Abraham (though something too late to do him good) advised their
brother to remember, Luke 16. 25. That in their life time they received good
things, and those precious Lazarus'es, evil things, but yet a little while and
you shall be comforted, and they tormented; yet a little while and you shall be
honored, and they shall be cursing the womb that bare them, and the paps that
gave them suck, cursing the honor that ruined them, the pleasures that damned
them, the worldly glory which has made them inglorious for ever; yet a little
while and instead of their sweet smells they shall have the stinkes of fire and
brimstone, and instead of their girdles rentings of heart for ever, instead of
their well-set hair they shall have baldness; they shall spend more time in
rending and tearing their hair, than ever they did in curling or powdring it.
Yet a little while, and instead of their stomachers, they shall have girdings
with sackcloth, and everlasting burnings instead of their present beauty. But
blessed shall you be, for you shall shine like the Sun in the firmament of the
father, for the King has desired your beauty. I have at last done with my
first use of Instruction: I proceed now to a second, and that shall be of
examination.

Try whether you have forgotten your own people, and your fathers house.

The most men and women are afraid of the touchstone, and are willing rather to
take heaven for granted, though they find hell for certain; but this is not
safe with you. Try your selves then (Christians) I will help you a little in
so good a work.

1. If you have forgotten your fathers house, you have (first) seen a great
deal of folly and vanity in it: Man is a reasonable creature, and will never
leave any thing, but he will see some cause to leave it. Did the Lord ever yet
convince you thoroughly, not with a Notionall, but an heart conviction of the
folly of your fathers house? Did the Lord ever thoroughly convince you of your
evil ways, the sins of your natures, the customary sins of your lives, of
your education sins, and your beloved sins? Had you ever a through
conviction of the vanity of your evil company, the vanity of your pleasures
and carnal delights? Did your souls ever taste a real bitterness in them? if
not, I fear me you have not left them.

2. Have you had another excellency discovered to your souls? Had your souls
ever yet a real discovery made to you of the excellency of the ways of
holiness, those ways that you once hated? Do you now see a beauty, a glory in
them, so much that you can even stand, and hold up your hands and admire, that
you should be blind so long? A present pleasant thing will scarce be left, but
upon a discovery of, and an obtaining of something more excellent. Christians,
under what notion do you look upon Christ, and his ways? Do you look upon them
as excellent, the ways of strictness, as excellent, sanctifying a Sabbath,
praying, the frequenting of the communion of Saints? Do you look upon them as
excellent? If you do not, I fear me, you but cheat your selves with a
conceit, that you have forgot your fathers house.

3. If you have parted with them I am afraid it cost you some tears, you did
not part with so many friends with dry eyes; friends cannot ordinarily pats
without tears, but your weeping has not been such a weeping if it has been
true; it has not been, because you have parted with them, but because you
abode with them so long; it has for measure been like the mourning of him that
has lost his only begotten son, Zach. 12. 10. but not upon the same
account, not because you must now part with them, but because you embraced them
so long. See the effects of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. it works carfulness
and indignation, etc. Were your souls ever in such a true bitterness for
sin, that it wrought in thee an indignation against your selves: that you
could even eat your own flesh, to think you should ever have been such a
vain, wanton wretch, such a proud sinner as you have been? This is a good
sign you and your fathers house are parted, and that at the parting you
sorrowed after a godly sort.

4. If ever you truly parted with it, both at the parting, and since too, you
have found something to do with your own spirit, some struglings and
combatings with your self. Before you parted you were at a dispute with your
souls; shall I leave this or that corruption, or shall I not? and since you
have been at some debates with your spirit, shall I go home again? shall I
return to such a vomit? to such a wallowing in the mire? even Paul himself
found the law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing
him into captivity to the law of sin, Romans 7. 23. the flesh lusting against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these contrary one to
another, Gal. 5. 17. I dare almost say, that that soul never conquered sin,
that is not yet in combat with it; never truly overcame it, that is not still
in combat; never yet forgot its fathers house, that has not some strong
inclinations, sometimes to be going to its old home again, and sometimes finds
not that it has something to do to keep his heart from (a second time)
embracing what it has been once ashamed of.

5. Do you make Christ all your delight, and your sole delight? is he to you
solus desideria, and totus desideria? Are your hearts taken more with Christ
than with all the world besides, and so taken with your husband, that nothing
of him, nor from him, displeases you? can you be content with Christ alone,
and say with David to the Lord, Thou art my portion? could you quest all things
else for him? and is there nothing of him but seems lovely to you? do his
strictest laws seem excellent to you? Is he excellent to you in the intent of
his Kingly office, as well as in the comfort of his Priestly office? does his
very yoke seem easy, and his burden seem light to you?

6. Do you abide with Christ, as the wife abides with the husband, and the
branch abides in the vine? every true branch abides in him, Joh. 15. 4. is your
dwelling with him? or are you only religious by fits? the hypocrite may be so
religions, but the Saint makes the Lord his dwelling place. Which is that which
you count your home? the best of Gods Saints may have some inclinations to
vanity, and be sometimes trading with the world; Ah! but Christ is his home,
Christ is his dwelling place; he thinks himself in a strange place, when he
is not with Christ in duties of holy communion. Christian, which is thy
element? Is your soul in its element, when it is conversing with things below
Christ? that is an ill sign, by these things you may take a scantling of your
own haarts. The Lord help you in applying these things to your souls. I
proceed to a 3d use.

3. Here Is comfort to the Saints, joy to the upright in heart, especially

1. Against all the uncomelinesse and indesireablenesse the Saint apprehends in
himself. There Is none so comely as the Saint in Christ's eyes, nor any so
uncomely and ugly in their own eyes; Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am,
Romans 7. 24. and again, I am as one borne out of due time, the least of the
Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 8, 9. It is an usual
account the Saints give of themselves, ah wretched creatures, poor
indesireable wretches, hard-hearted sinners, vile persons, etc. Be of good
cheer Christian, The King has desired thy beauty; thou art black in thine
own eyes, but comely in Christ's eyes: Black in respect of thy merit, but
comely in respect of imputation; comely through the comeliness that he has
put upon you. Secondly,

2. Here Is comfort against all the dirt the world casts upon you, all the
uncomelinesse they conceit in you; who so despicable creatures in the eyes of
the world, as those men and women whom the Lord delights to honor? these are
the despised ones; upon the backs of these it is that the Plowers plow, and
make long furrows; they are the upright in heart, that they privily bend their
bow to shoot at, against these are the puttings out of the fingers, and the
liftings up of the hands; upon these are laid all the scoffs of the ungodly,
and through their weakness the barkings of these dogs sometimes trouble
them. But Christians, has not the King desired your beauty? the beauty that
these wretches are so blind they cannot see. Has not the King desired it? Is
it desirable in Christ's eyes, and despised in their eyes? which is the best
judge, think you? is it not enough for you, that you please your husband?

3. Here Is comfort for you, not only against all their scoffs, but against all
their low esteem of you. David says, I am small, and of no reputation. Christ
was accounted the least in the kingdom of Heaven; he was the stone which the
builders refused. A man of no fashion in the world, who cared for him? did any
of the Pharisees believe on him? The wife, you know, takes her honor from her
husband, and usually, if he be accounted one of no fashion, she is not valued
at a very high rate; Saints, though they be indeed the worlds pillars, yet in
the vulgar estimate they are the worlds burdens; and where ever they live,
they usually live at a low rate in worldlings desires, if any (of note before)
turn puritan, he loses his rate in the worlds thoughts presently, the
Gentleman loses his honor, the Lady her repute; but it is because their
prizers have lost their wit, and their eyes, and it need not much trouble a
Saint, for Christ desires their beauty still: They have put themselves out of
the worlds reckoning, and heightend themselves in Christ's esteem. Despise on
(sooles) the King has desired these souls beauty,

Ah! but will a poor misdoubting Christian say, I am afraid they have a true
object of laughter in me. I am afraid I have not that desirable beauty, but am
a painted sepulcher; were I but convinced, that I had indeed truly forgot my
fathers house, and that the Lord Christ had indeed desired my beauty, I could
nail their scoffs to my heels, and mourn over their gallant follies: But I
fear.

1 Obj. Alas! I am going home to my fathers house ever and anon, I am ready to
yield to temptations, ready to fall into sin; yea, and the Lord pardon me, I
fall seven times a day. If I had forgot my fathers house, should I have such
inclinations to go home? would my heart draw so hard for vanity, as it does
sometimes? should I sin so often, etc.

I answ. 1. Which way stands your affection? your heart you say bends that way,
but which way stands your affection? do you take pleasure in such
inclinations? have you a good mind to sin, if you durst? to return to your
old vanities, if you durst? only you durst not, that is an ill sign. But upon
such inclinations, does there presently arise a loathing in your souls? do
you say, Get thee behind me Satan, that is a good sign, that though you be
invited by a temptation of vain company, or the Devil, etc. yet you have
truly forgotten your fathers house.

2. You go home sometimes you say, it may be you fall into some of your former
vain courses, and are with some of your vain companions. But I pray, What do
you when you are in your fathers house? are you pleased with your vanities, or
with the vanities of your friends? or do you spend your time in chiding? It
may be your heart sometimes declines to some vanity, or you are sometimes in
converse with vain persons. Are you one with vanity, one with sinners? or do
your spirits rise against your selves, and against the vanities of those with
whom you are? What indignation is wrought? if any, you may have forgot your
fathers house, for all this going home.

3. You go home sometimes you say. But I pray, How long do you stay there? Is
sin your trade? Do you live in known sins? this indeed will argue your
profession but hypocrisy. But (on the contrary) though you fall through
weakness, yet do you rise through grace; though you sin sometimes, yet is
sin as David's concupiscence, called a stranger in the Parable. Thus the best
Saints have sinned, yea, and may sin; not of wilfulness, but of weakness;
not trading in sin, nor lying in it, but falling into it, and rising by
repentance.

2. Obj. Ah! but will another Christian say, I cannot deny my self in the
company of my fathers house, wretch that I am. I got acquaintance when I was
young with vain persons, or I am related to such, and I dare not say, but I
love their company, and often times leave better for them; neither can I deny my
self in my relations. My heart is excessively let out after them.

1. Thou say thou art often times yet a companion of vain persons, but
consider (Christian) are they thy invited ghests, or accidental merely? are
they intruders, or are they the welcome crmpanions of thy life? are they thy
picked company or no, thy intimates, or merely companions in respect of thy
trade, and converse with the world? If thou delightest not in them, they indeed
are sometimes thy companions, but thou art not theirs.

2. Art thou a companion with them in sin, or only in civil actions, or for
discourse, etc. sometimes? if the first indeed it is a sign thou have not left
thy fathers house; but if the latter only, it is no such sign, thou keep
thy course, they come to thee, and it may be disturb thee, but thou do not
go to them.

3. Thou say thou love them. But it would be considered, Whether thy love
be merely natural or more? It may be thou love them because they are witty
people, or of ingenuous dispositions. Thus Christ loved the young man, Matthew.
19. and thus thou may love them. It is an ill sign, if thou love them,
because they will drink, or swear, or be vain and wanton in their discourse
or carriages.

4. Thou say thou love thy relations, and thou can not deny thy self in
them, thy heart is so glued to them, etc. and God forbid but thou should love
them, 1. with a natural affection, its a sign of a wretch, Romans 1. 31. to be
without natural affection, and 2. with a providentiall love and care; he that
provides not for his family (says the Apostle) is worse than an infidel. But
1. Suppose Christ should call thee to suffer for him, and thou had a good
mind to it, and they should plead hard for thee to spare thy self; would
thou with Hierom shake off thy father, and mother, and children, and run to
Christ? this would be a sign thou had forgot them, Though thou love them.
2. Notwithstanding that thou love them, would thou favor them in any sin
against God, and only lukewarmely reprove them, like old Elie? It is not well
done of you, O my sons, because thou love them: will thou rather let them
dishonor God, damn their own souls, do any thing, rather than reprove, or
smite them? this love indeed is a real hatred, and will argue little love to
God in thy soul. But on the contrary, though thou love them with the
tenderest love, and wilt provide for them with the most providential care; yet
is thy love so truly tempered, that it shall not in the least hinder thee from
doing thy duty to Christ; no, nor yet from doing thy duty to them; from
reproving sharply, admonishing severely? is thy love such, that it shall not
blind thy eyes, so as thou will wink at the least neglect of duty in them, not
at the least sin in them? Love them then as well as thou can, it shall be no
sad evidence against thy soul, otherwise (Parents look to it) your children
will curse you another day for your love to them: you have heard of killing
with kindness; let the kind of death be never so sweet, yet the death will be
bitter. Take heed not of killing the bodies (alas, that were nothing) but of
damning your childrens souls, and your own too, with miscalled kindness.

3 Obj. But will another Christian say, I have not forgot my honor and glory, I
am not low enough, I fear, to get in at heavens gate. I answer first.

1. This is like the melancholy conceit of her, that a Divine of our own
speaks of; of a woman that conceited, she was so fat, she could not get to
heaven; it is the lowness of mind that God looks at, Lords and Ladies, if
their hearts be not as high as their titles, may sit in heaven as well as
meaner persons. I do not say, they shall have chaires of state set for them,
but they may have a room there; it may be one or two may sit above them (if
there be degrees in glory) that gave them place here: but as Master Rutherford
says, the least place in Heaven is Heaven, though it be behind the door. But
secondly,

2. Is not thy outward Pomp and glory that which thou affectest, and
delightest in it, and huntest after? Does not thy title tickle thy ear, nor
swell thy heart, if not, it can do thee no hurt? all the fear of those
swelling things is, lest they should breed tympanies in the soul.

3. Do you look upon the title of the servant of Jesus Christ, the title of
Christian, as the far more honorable title? Are you of Theodosius his
temper, which would you rather choose, to be called my Lord, or Madam, or to be
called the servant of Christ; which do you prefer? if the latter, it is a
sign you have forgot the former, though you retain it.

4. Is your outward greatness and pomp no snare to your soul in the ways of
God? Great persons are too ready to think they are above prayers, above
hearing, above mean Saints; should such ones as they pray in their families;
no, let their boy do it? should they pray in secret, and run up and down to
lectures? O no (forsooth) it is a dishononour to them (Heaven was made, I
confess, for the most part, for people of lesser quality, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.
James 2. 5.) should such as they go to private meetings? no, better go to a
tavern, there they shall only foul their souls, but keep their clothes
clean. But now, has the Lord given thee another spirit? it is true, thou art
great, but thy greatness is no such snare to thy soul; thou can pray for
all thy greatness, and hear sermons, and kneel in a duty for all thy silk
stockings, and entertain communion with the meanest Saint; yea, and for a need
prefer a lether dublet in honor before thy self. Though thou be great it
seems thou have forgot it.

4 Obj. Ah, but will a Christian say, I am so addicted to mirth, and pleasure;
I must have my vagary, and tickle my sense sometimes, etc.

1 Answ. Christian, do thou love thy pleasures more than thy God, that indeed
were something? art thou more pleased with hearing a song, than hearing a
sermon? this sounds high. But love God best, and for ought I know, thy eye (for
thy recreation) may be delighted in seeing, and thy care with hearing too.

2 Answ. Will thou baulk an opportunity of communion with Christ, or with his
Saints, for a vain pleasure? Will thou be a loser in thy heart, to gain a
little pleasure for thine eye, or ear, or any sense? will thou miss a family
duty, an opportunity of hearing Gods word privately or publicly, thy time of
secret duty, a time of communion with the Saints to wait upon thy pleasure? In
such a case I would have thee suspect thy heart, otherwise thou may recreate
thy self with them, and yet have forgotten them.

3 Answ. Suppose thy pleasures have been such, and are such, as are in
themselves sinful, as wantonness, drunkenness, etc. Do thou love them so,
that thou will have them whether God will or no? thou will break with God to
enjoy thy lust; this is an ill, and a very ill sign. But possibly thy
pleasures are such as God allows thee (temperately used) if such, thou may
so use them, and yet the King desire thy beauty. I have finished this branch of
application, I have but one word more to add: It shall be of

Exhortation. Let me now persuade with you Christians; And (oh that the Lord
would help me to persuade) 1. with you, who have not at all yet forgate your
fathers house, and so consequently, your beauty is not at all desirable to
Christ. 2. With you that have begun to do well; I have a word to both sorts,

1 Br. Is there, alas, is there any poor soul before me this day, whose heart
smites him, and tells him, that his soul is not at all yet desirable in the
eyes of Jesus Christ? is there any poor creature so sadly miserable? possibly
the world dotes on you for beauty, wit, parts, behavior, etc. but in the mean
time, do your souls* tell you in plain English, that you are despised in
Christ's eyes. As though God did beseech you by me, I pray you in Christ's stead
be reconciled to God. Ah poor soul, would thou be desired of Jesus Christ?
Hearken then O daughter and consider, and incline your ear, forget thy own
people, and thy fathers house. I know I am pleading with you for an hard thing,
especially for you that have all the world at will: But I beseech you by the
love you bear to your precious souls, which shall last for ever; do it, ah
do it. I had need now have the Rhethorick of an Angel, yea, if I had; yet God
must persuade Japhet to come and dwell in the tents of Shem. Let me offer but
a few considerations, and venture at a persuading of you, and leave the issue
with God.

1. Consider, How will you live when your fathers house fails you? for the
present it is a full house, and you live, as we say, as well as a carnal
heart would wish; you have pleasures, and honors, and riches, even what you
would ask: the color is in your cheeks, and the marrow in your bones. But
will this last always? does not the fashion of this world pass away? and will
not the fashion of your bodies pass away? what will you do in that day of
your visitation? These things may last a while, till God comes to keep a Court
in your Conscience, or he summons you to a particular judgment, or lays you
upon your back in a bed of affliction, or comes to his last judgment: But in
any of these days (poor creature) what will thou do? when thy perfumed body
shall come to stink in the nostrils of men, thy soul shall be more loathed of
God; a future livelihood would be thought of, This will persuade a virgin to
marry sometimes. But besides.

2. Christian, Do thou know the joys of a married life to Christ? do thou
put no difference betwixt being a bondslave to hell, and one free in Jesus
Christ; betwixt the enjoying the communion of the children of the Devil, and
enjoying the communion of Saints? no difference betwixt enjoying the communion
of devils, in everlasting torments, and the communion of God, Angels, and
Saints, in the highest Heavens, where eye has not seen, nor has ear heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of man, to conceive what things God has
prepared for them that love him? now (if thy conscience be not seared) thou
have ever and anon some flashes of hell in thy face. The merriest sinner of you
all, I believe is not always free. Is there no difference betwixt that
condition, think you, and a peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost?
Now, you never lie down in your beds, but (if you dare look back, and consider
how you have spent the day) your soul is stricken with terror, and there is a
dart almost struck through your liver, and you dare not let your souls feed
upon the thoughts, but are glad to shusfle it over, for fear you run mad;
but if your souls would but forget these vanities, ah, how sweetly would you
sleep; and when you had spent a day in duties of hearing or praying, how
sweetly would your souls look back upon it. Now if you were not rock't into a
sleep of damnation, you would scarce lie down to sleep, but you would fear
lest you should wake in the morning with hell flames about your ears; nor
walk in the day, but (like the selfe-accused murderer) your eye would be over
your shoulder, for fear the devil should be laying hold of you: then you
would lie down in peace, and rise up in peace, and nothing would make you
afraid. Is this world nothing Christian? ah, that the Lord would persuade you
of this. Besides,

3. Consider (Christian) there is nothing in your fathers house but you shall
find in Christ, by a way of eminency. Must you forsake your sins, you shall
be filled with the graces of the spirit of God? Must you forsake a little idle
vain company, you shall have the communion of Saints, yea, a fellowship with
the father, and the son the Lord Jesus Christ? 1 John 1. 3. Must you forget
your pomp and glory, etc. you shall be called the sons and daughters of
God, heirs, coheires with Christ? Romans 8. Must you forget worldly riches, you
shall have the riches of grace? Must you forget a few vain pleasures, you
shall have a fullness of pleasures, at Christ's right hand, and that for ever
more? Psalm. 16. 11. Must you forget your own righteousness, you shall be
clothed with the righteousness of Josus Christ? what is lost by the exchange
Christian?

4. Consider again, Christ forgot his fathers house for you, and yet it was
worth many of yours; he forgot the glory, the company, the pleasures of his
fathers house for you; he was content, for you, to be a companion of fishermen
yea, of sinners, yea, of thieves, when he died upon the cross for you: this he
did freely, he made himself of no reputation, he nothinged himself for you:
Hark what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8. 9. you know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who though he was rich, yet for your sake be became poor; that you
through his poverty might be made rich. Let that melting love win you.
Besides,

5. It is the way to be beautiful: what abundance of pains poor vain
wretches take to be beautiful? surely this must move. Beauty is a desirable
thing, the vain creatures of the earth would never else set nature with the
heels upward, do any thing to obtain it; we should never else have so much
precious time lost, and so many precious souls undone with paintings, and
trimmings, patchings, and perfumings, and a thousand such apish tricks: but
beauty is the idol of the world, to which the very soul shall be offered up
in sacrifice, and when all this is done the soul is amiss, and the way to
adorn that, is to undresse all again. Hark, you that desire beauty, here is
the way of beauty which you have not known; it is to deny your selves in all
these things, and whatsoever else is contrary to the law of Christ, or short of
him; yea, and this,

6. Shall make you desirably beauteous, that Christ shall desire you, and the
Saints shall desire you; this is the way to ravish his heart. But no more by
way of motive, God must do all I know when I have spoke my utmost.

I might tell you who it is will desire your beauty; It is the King of heaven,
of glory, and peace; the King shall desire your beauty. If this, all this will
not do, the Lord open your eyes, and then I am sure it will.

But this is an hard work, and young ones especially had need of a great deal
of help to it, and truly nature affords none, all is laid up in Christ only;
In order to the getting of it from Christ, let me advise you;

With a serious eye to look upon your fathers house, and see what there is in
it desirable, that should so bewitch one that has not outlawed his or her
reason to it. Look seriously upon your sins, will you not see a filthiness
in them? Look upon your vain company, be they what they will, will you not
discern some sordidnesse or baseness in their actions? upon your honors and
greatness, will they not appear bubbles? upon your pleasures, will they not
appear shadows? You look upon these things as pictures, side-wayes, or at a
distance; that makes you admire them, and run after them: come nearer to
them, will they not look dawbed with some uncomelinesse or other? Will not the
colors that looked so sweetly afar off, stink if you bring them near your
nose? Let that be the first piece of advice.

While you enjoy these things, take heed of letting out your heart to them;
rejoice as if you rejoiced not, and use the world as if you used it not; be not
too much intent upon your fathers house, converse not too much with any thing
there; things of the world have a glutinous quality, the heart will cleave to
them, if you let it lie very long amongst them; and if it once cleaves, there
will be no ways, but either your heart must be soundly rent upon the
severing, or hellfire must part them.

Learn to live from your fathers house betimes, take the wise man's counsel,
it was after a large survey and discourse of every room, and the vanity of
every room in our fathers house, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth; if rottenness enter into the bones, it will hardly ever
^ut. You that are young, for the Lords sake think of this: Ah, come off your
youthful vanities before they can plead custom with your souls, live from
home betimes, believe it, there will be more weeping else when you come to
part.

Cry, cry mightily unto God, that he would take off your heart: Believe it,
it must be his work, you will be wearied else in the multitude of your own
endeavors; if the Lord draw off the heart, it will be drawn indeed. Be much
in public prayer, but especially be much in secret prayer. I must conclude.

2. Br. Lastly, you that have been taught of the Lord to forget your fathers
house, that so the King might desire your beauty, Let me plead with you still
to forget it more. Selfedeniall is a long and hard lesson, a Christian must be
learning it from his cradle to his grave, and every time he studies it he
shall find something to be done that is yet behind, and all that he has done
to be done better: you have learned in part how to do it, I need not direct
you, you need no other directions then*

1. To study every day more and more the vanity of the creature. Read over the
book of Ecclesiastes well, it is enough to teach you that lesson.

2. Converse little with your fathers house, have as little to do with the
world, the pleasures, or profits, or riches, or company, or manners of it as
you can, the lesser the better.

3. Be more acquainted with Jesus Christ, get nearer to him, be more in
communion with him, get more tastes of Heaven, Earthw ill relish the worse for
it. I might press upon you the same motives I urged before, and I should do
it with advantages; you know what this King is, how much to be desired, how
much to be odored; you know what a difference there is betwixt the worlds
comeliness, and the comeliness which he puts upon his Saints. Let me
only urge one word, or rather name it:

Some read the words, quia concupivit, Because the King has desired thy
beauty, here is an argument, an engaging argument to a Saint. The Lord has
effectually made it known in your souls, that he desires your beauty more
than ten thousands of others. He has whispered, not only in your ears,
but in your heart, his desire to you. Ah, now Christians be you humble,
self-denying ones, because the King has desired your beauty. Let the love of
Christ constrain you, to order your hearts and conversations as becomes the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ: According to the laws of this King that has
so passionately desired, and so effecaciously declared his desire to your
beauty. I must have done: The Lord add his blessing.

FINIS.
THE RIGHT WAY TO TRUE PEACE: OR, A discovery of a Gospell-Mystery, how the
spirit that is troubled may find Peace in Christ; and how, A Christian may know
whither the Peace which his spirit has in trouble, or with which it comes out
of any trouble, be Christ's Peace.

Discovered in a Sermon, Joh. 16. 33.

By John Collings, M. A. and Preacher of Gods word in Norwich.

Joh. 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in God, believe also
in me. London, Printed for R. Tomlins. 1649

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Katharine Courteen, Grace, Mercy, and true
Peace.
Madam,
WHen this Sermon was first preached, your Honor was pleased to entitle your
self to it, conceiving it (which indeed was composed for my self) to have
been prepared and suited to the temper of your Ladyships spirit, at that time.
So far my Master onoured me that day, as to do him a double work with the
same hand. Truly (Madam) it was a salve provided for my own use, and not
intended further, than for my friends, in that assembly where first I published
it; and accordingly was laid up in my closet, till I brought it forth
privately, for the use of some other noble friends, who were better able then
my self to judge of the efficacy of it; having received from some of them a
probatum est, and God having made it acceptable, and in their estimation more
useful, than my own low opinion of the workman's pains in it conceived it.
They were pleased to desire the recent, which (to spare my own pains in
transcribing it) was the only cause of my least thoughts of the publication of
it. Truly (Madam) in these unhappy times, wherein the Press is become such a
prostitute, I think I may easily be excused of my ambition, to have this or any
other worthless notes of mine come under it. To abate the noise of many things
in Print, (which, believe it, sounds not at all sweet in my ears) I have
desired it should be added to some former Sermons which before were in the
Printers hands, in which also I satisfied but his desires, in denying my self
in my own: But to those worthless precedent pieces, it comes in a fit place.
The first of the Sermons tells us what is the state of the Elect by nature. The
second, what is their estate in Christ, and describes their way of
Restoration. The third, points out their duty, as redeemed ones, to lean upon
their beloved. The fourth, minds them of the Saints great duty of
selfe-denyall. Now in regard that the soul reconciled to God, may be
sometimes saying, where is my God become? and as there is none lives and sins
not, so none shall live, but at one time or other shall meet with trouble; I
have added this to the other, in which I have endeavored to discover to a
Christian, how he may recover his quiet, and in the midst of those troubles,
which in the world he shall be sure to meet with, find that peace which
passes all understanding. The first of these Sermons shows us our original
want of peace, being not reconciled to God. The second describes our
Peacemaker, and his several acts, both of purchase and application; by which
he both made peace for his elect in general, and applies it to each of them in
particular. The third discovers the instrument, and directs the soul, in the
particular use of Faith, which is the instrument to convey this peace to the
soul upon all occasions. The fourth will teach the soul, how to keep its
peace. And this, in case the soul has lost its peace, and the spirit of the
Christian be over whelmed with trouble, will in some measure direct him how to
find his peace, and how to come out of trouble by the hand of Christ. (Madam)
this is a great Gospel mystery; It is a subject that deserved a more learned
pen, and one more experienced in the ways of God, to have discussed and
resolved it, than that poor worthless creature who has undertaken it. That
in the world the Saints must look for trouble, your Honor knows (I believe)
by as sad experiences as most of those that tread the ways of God. That in the
midst of these troubles, in Christ the soul of the Christian may have peace,
This Text and Sermon (Madam) I trust will sufficiently make good both by
general proof, and particular demonstrations. In troubles to have peace, is
no characteristicall note of a Saint; To come out of troubles, and reduce the
spirit to a quiet composure, is a work may be done, by those that have not
tasted how good the Lord is: But in the midst of oppressing troubles to draw
peace from Jesas Christ, and to come out of worldly troubles with a
Gospell-peace, to have a soul calmed upon Gospell-principles, Hic labor, hoc
opus est, This is a work worthy of a Saints endeavor, and a wages worthy of
his pains. Disturbed spirits may quiet of course; nature may be out of breath
with sighing, and the fountain of tears dried up; the spirit of a man, merely
as a man, of an heroic, highborne, gallant temper, may bear his infirmity,
and he may break through an host of troubles, merely by the strength of his
own spirit, or the force of his own reason: But to come out of trouble this
way, shall bring no comfort to the soul. This is but breaking prison, without
a fair dismission, or paying the Jaylors fees; Troubles will overtake such
souls, with an hue and cry, and fetter them in a worser manner; and God will
again arrest them upon quare clausum fregit, an heavier action than before.
But by this shall a Christian know, if the wound of the spirit be healed, it
is with the balm of Gilead; if he has come out of trouble fairly, he has
come out upon Gospell-considerations. The peace in trouble, that is not found
in Christ, is not worth the taking up; and from it a Christian shall extract no
comfortable evidence of peace to his own soul, but in his peace he shall
have great bitterness. I have often thought that a watching Christian might
be justly troubled, to consider sometimes, how he comes off a trouble; for it
is usual with us, either to let nature tire out it self, and when our
Passions are ridden off their legs, then they lie down. or else, to conclude
it upon moral principles. Thus if our spirits be sick, as if there were no
God in Israel, we for the most part send to Beelzebub, the God of Ekron, and
forsake the cistern of living waters, to dig up to our selves ciflernes that
will hold no water, or if any, none long. O that those, that profess to live
above nature, and carnal reason, would also act above them. If our bodies be
sick, nature prompts us to a Physician, and our reason forbids us to use an
Emperick. O that Gods children would learn this reason, in the midst of all
trouble to run to the balm of Gilead, to the Physician there, for all other
Physicians are of no value; and will profess much, but do little, to the
settling of a disturbed spirit. (Madam) I have presumed, out of all those noble
friends which God has made me happy in, to pick out your Ladyship, to present
this worthless piece of my labors to: partly, because I know it holds out to
your Ladyship a great piece of your Honors gracious practice; and partly,
because it has seemed good to our wise God, to (...) nothingnesse of the
creature. I am afraid the City will run out at the Gates, I shall therefore
add no more, but humbly offering it to your Ladyship, shall take my leave and
rest,

Your Honors most humble servant in the Lord Jesus. John Collings.
Chaplyfield-house, September. 3. 1649.
THE RIGHT WAY to true Peace, etc.
JOHN, 16. 33. These things have I spoken, that in me you might have peace. In
the world you shall have trouble: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.
THis (with the two former Chapters) contains Christ's last Sermon to his
Disciples; having foretold them of his death and passion, Chapter 13. they were
troubled; upon that occasion he preaches this Sermon, which in whole is a
consolation. They were troubled, and who could be less, to part with such a
friend? They lived under the protection of his wings. He begins his Sermon
with, Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in God, believe also in me.
The whole Sermon, is partly an Exhortation, partly a consolation; he exhorts
them chiefly to continuance in the faith, and to brotherly love; he comforts
them, partly against his death, partly against their own death, and partly
against that opposition which he knew would usher in their death, and be
intermediate betwixt his departure from them, and their following after. This
is the sum of his whole Sermon.

In this Chapter Christ chiefly does four things. 1. He foretells them
what they should meet with from the Jews, viz. That they should be put out of
the Synagogue, that they should kill them, and think they did God good service;
and as he foretells, so he comforts them against this ill measure, from the 1
verse, to the 15 verse, 2. He foretells his own death, and comforts them, in
respect of his departure from them, from the 5 v. to the 20 v. 3. He foretells
their flight and desertion of him, yet before his death, and comforts himself
(as to that by the consideration of his fathers presence with him, which made
him not to be alone, though in respect of creatures he should be alone, v.
32. 4. He concludes the Sermon in this verse which I have read to you, in
which you may consider these three things.

1. A Disease; In the world you shall have trouble; where note the subject of it
you. 2. The disease it self, (...) Trouble, Tribulation. 3. The climate where
it rages, that is, (...) in the world. 4. The fate of it, it is inevitable to
those that live in that lower region; you shall have trouble. But as here is the
disease, so here is,

2. A Remedy too. The Antidote stands near the Poison; there you may consider,
1. What it is, Peace. 2. Where it is to be found, that is, (...), says Christ,
in me you shall have peace. 3. Quibus? for whom? it is you (says Christ.) 4.
The care Christ has taken in providing it, (...), These things have I spoken,
etc. And for fear of fainting, during the Physic, here is also,

3. A Cordial to refresh, and uphold the spirits, during the fit; and there
you may consider, 1. The Physician administering it, Christ. 2 The way of
administration of it, by words, and words of command; Be of good cheer. 3.
The chief ingredient in the cordial; I have overcome the world: Christ's
victory over the world, that was it. Let me add a few words now, for the
explication of the words before I come to the Doctrine, (...), These things
have I spoken to you; seeing your hearts dejected, and cast down, because I
told you I must go away, I have taken pains now to preach this Sermon to you,
wherein I have hinted to you many comfortable notes: I have now done; And the
end that I have aimed at in all, is your peace, (...), that you might have a
quietment, and rest of spirit in me, in the midst of all those troubles, and
causes of disquietment, you will meet with in the world; for, (...), In the
world, while you have any thing to do with it, any converse in it, yea, any
being in it. (You) who are my disciples, whom I have called out of the world;
you who are not of the world (you shall have trouble) trouble of all sorts,
inward, outward, corporal, spiritual ((...)) But be of good cheer; Gather up
your spirits; Take heart to you; nay more, be confident; Be bold, and
courageous ((...)) I have overcome the world, all the opposition of it. I have
taken out the sting of every cresse, the venom out of every arrow (I have
overcome the world) and what I have done is for you, that is implied. If there
be any thing else needful for the explication of the words, you shall have it
in the explication of the Doctrine. In the words lie these Doctrines plain.

1. In the world Christ's Disciples must look for trouble.

2. In their trouble they may have peace.

3. Christ has taken care for their peace in the midst of trouble.

4. Though the Disciples of Christ meet with trouble in the world; yet they
ought to be of good cheer.

5. Christ's overcomming of the world is a sufficient ground of good cheer,
for the Saints, in the midst of their earthly troubles.

I cannot run through all these at large, I shall sum up the most of them
in one proposition of Doctrine, and handle that more fully. It is this,

Doct. That though in the world the true Disciples of Christ must look for
troubles, yet Jesus Christ has taken such order, that in the midst of their
troubles, in him they may have peace. In the discoursing of this, for the more
full orderly handling of it, I shall do these things.

1. I shall show you what is meant by THE WORLD, what that phrase implies.

2. I shall show you, what is meant by troubles, and what troubles the true
disciples of Christ must look for in the world.

3. I shall show you the grounds, and from what causes, Saints troubles in the
world arise.

4. I shall show you, what peace is, and what kind of peace this is, that in
the Saints troubles, they may have in Christ; how it is in Christ, and how the
Saint may draw it out of Christ for himself.

5. I shall show you, what order, what pains, Christ has taken, for the
Saints peace, in the midst of earthly troubles.

6. Lastly, I shall apply the Doctrine. Of all these I shall speak briefly.

1. What is meant by the world? what does our Savior mean, by that phrase, In
the world? Shortly, the world, I conceive, is usually made use of in Scripture,
and to be taken in Scripture Phrase, in one of these three senses.

First, Sometimes, for the men of the world, and that either largely, for all
of all sorts, without any respect, as Joh. 18. 20. I have spoken openly to the
world, to hearers of all sorts; so the Apostle says, Rom: 5. 12. By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; all were sinners, and all must
die. Or more Restrictively for some particular sort or company of people in the
world, and so it is used diversely.

1. Sometimes, for many of all sorts, as Joh. 12. 19. The world is gone after
him, that is, many of all sorts are gone after him.

2. Sometimes, for the unregenerate only, in opposition to those that are
borne again, not of flesh and blood, but of the spirit, called, and
sanctified, so Joh. 15. 18, 19. If the world hate you, you know that it hated
me before it hated you, etc. It is put there in opposition to those that were
chosen out of the world, v. 19. so Joh. 16. 8. Christ says, that the spirit
should reprove the world of sin.

3. Sometimes it is taken, for the Reprobates only, not at large, for those
that were uncalled, but yet might be called; but for those, that neither were
already, nor yet ever should be called; so Joh. 14. 17. it is said, that the
world cannot receive the spirit of truth, not, they had not yet received it,
but they could not receive it.

4. Lastly, It is sometimes taken for the Elect, which live in the world,
though they be the least considerable part of it, and the least flock in it;
so it is taken, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their sins. Surely, the Arminians and Universalists
themselves must grant, that their bold assertion* that the world, in Scripture,
is no where taken for the world of the Elect, must fail, and be dashed in
pieces upon that portion of Scripture, unless they will hold universal
Justification, and Salvation too, as well as universal Redemption. That Is the
first sense, (World) is used in Scripture, For the men of the world.

Secondly, sometimes it is used, for the things of the world, and that either

1. For the whole fabric of the creation, Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, etc, So
it is taken, Joh. 1. 10. The world was made by him, the Apostle expounds that
place, Col. 1. 16. By him were all things created that are in Heaven and Earth,
visible and invisible, etc. or

2. Sometimes it is taken, for the earth only, so says Christ, Joh. 16. 28. I
leave the world, that is, the earthly part of the world; for it follows, I go
to the father.

3. Sometimes it is taken, for the vanities of this world, whether the lust of
the eyes, or the lusts of the flesh, or the pride of life (according to Saint
John's distribution of them) 1 John 2. 16. whether ticklings of pleasure, or
pomp, and honor, and greatness. In this sense S. Paul uses it, Gal. 6. 14.
when he tells us, that the world is crucified to him, and he unto the world.

4. Sometimes, for the profit, and traffic of it, so you shall find it, 1
Cor. 7. 31. using the world as if you used it not; it is expounded before,
where the Apostle advised, that those that bought, should be as though they
possessed not, v. 30. This is a second sense.

Thirdly, sometimes it is used, for our state, and present condition of life,
which is in the world, so 1 Cor. 7. 3. The Apostle tells us, that she that is
married cares for the things of this world, that is of this life; she takes
care how to live, and maintain her family, etc.

You may in the Text and Doctrine, take it in all three senses: The Saints

1. While they have to do with the men of the world, in tradings, and
conversings, while they have any thing to do with them; or Secondly,

2. While they have any thing to do with the things of this world, the
pleasures or profits, the businesses or tradings of it; with any thing of it.

3. Or finally, While they are in this present life, while they have a being
on this side of Heaven, and live in a state of life on this side of glory, be
it what it will, yet if it be in this world, if there way be here they shall
meet with rubs; In the world they shall have trouble: But what troubles? That Is
the next thing to be enquired into. What are those troubles which Saints must
look to meet with in the world?

The word translated Troubles, is 1. What troubles.
(...), it will help us to understand what troubles the Saints shall meet
with, et in specie, et in gradu, both in the kind and in the degree. For the
Kind first, The word does generally signify all kinds of troubles, be they
upon our souls or bodies, in respect of our estaies or relations, Acts 14. 22.
We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God; the word
there used is the same, and it were easy to prove by an induction of
particular instances, that the word comprehends all troubles of all sorts. 1.
It is taken for bodily sorrow, and pangs, like the pangs of a woman in
travail, Joh. 16. 21. 2. For outward crosses and afflictions that men meet
with from others, and relate to their outward estate, and take away their
prosperity and happiness, Acts 7. 10, 11. 3. For spirit-troubles and burdens,
in that sense the Apostle uses the word, 2 Cor. 2. 4. where he tells them,
that he wrote to them in much affliction, and anguish of heart, etc. So then
for the kind of them, it is plain, that they must meet with all sorts of
troubles, afflictions in their body, crosses in their estates, relations, in
all their outward enjoyments and contentments, Adversity on all hands, yea, and
they shall meet with anguish of heart too, spirit-burthens, and troubles, and
vexations. Now if you enquire into the degree of them.

The word (...) will help you to 2. What degree.
find out that too: Critics tells us it comes either from (...) which
signifies to tear and oppress, and wear out; or from (...) which signifies
to break. Saints must look for troubles on all hands, both without and within,
from friends and foes, in bodies, and souls, and estates; and they shall not
be light ones neither, but such as shall even weigh down their spirit, and
wear out their strength, and break their heart in pieces, breaking-troubles,
and heart-rending, and oppressing-troubles; such degrees of heaviness as shall
make the heart to stoop, as the wise man speaks; such as shall make their
hearts groan, and their backs break again; such troubles, such afflictions
are meant, so much the word imports. But may some say, whence shall this
trouble, this affliction arise to the Saints? shall it come out of the dust?
from what root of causes shall these branches of bitter fruit spring forth?
That is the third thing which I propounded, 3. What are the causes of the
Saints trouble,
and shall now speak to.

I conceive, first and last they may spring from a threefold cause; from God,
from themselves, and from the world.

1. First of all the cause may lie in God; and it does so originally and
primarily, God may be the cause of it. 1. In respect of his just ordination.
God has determined, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. 1 Timothy 3. 3.
The Apostle says we are appointed thereto, 1 These. 3. 3. The Apostle lays
our suffering here upon the will of God, 1 Pet. 3. 17. It is better if the will
of God be so, that you should suffer, and so again, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Let them
that suffer according to the will of God. Marlorate says, Meminerimus nos sub
hac condition esse Christianos, etc. We may remember we are Christians upon
this condition. He that will be my disciple let him deny himself, and take up
the cross, and follow me; No following of Christ without a cross on our
back. Frustra conamur Christum a cruce disjungere, says Mr. Calvin, It is a
lost labor to think to part Christ and the cross, they are nailed together.
Me thinks it is worth the taking notice of, our crosses and afflictions come to
us from the same hand and the same cause that heaven, and glory, and happiness
come. Christ says, fear not little flock, it is your fathers will to give you
a Kingdom. We hold that from Gods will, and he also says, It is your fathers
will to give you a cross; it is the will of God, that you should suffer:
surely then he wills us the first as the end, the second as the means; the
first ultimately, the cross mediately. The cause may lie, yea; and does lie,
in Gods ordination.

2. It may lie nearer in Gods wise providence, he sees it best for his Saints,
either to purge them, according to that, I will purely purge away thy dross,
and take away thy trim, and that Is. 27. By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob
be purged, and all the fruit shall be to take away his sin; or else to try
them, I will melt them and try them says the Lord; so the Apostle says, that
their afflictions and temptations were, that the truth of their faith might
appear more precious than that of gold, which perishes; or else 3. to weane
them, them from the world, therefore are the bigs of it rubd with wormwood.
Ideo (says the father) Deus terrenis foelicitatibus amaritudinem miscet, ut
alia quaratur foelicitas, cujus dulcedo non est fallax. God therefore here puts
gal into our sweetness, and imbittreth our happiness, that we might look
after another happiness, whose sweetness is not deceitful. Thus God is the
cause of the Saints troubles, while they are in the world: But secondly,

2. Themselves may be a great cause, yea, and are, 1. Through the infirmity of
their natures, and that is the reason, I conceive, why outward crosses, and
trials, and afflictions are called our infirmities, as because they do
infirmos reddere, make us weak, by 1 Cor. 12. 5.
bowing down the soul, and drinking up the spirits, or enervating the body
before they leave us: So also, because through the weakness of our natures,
they are troubles to us. Saints have flesh and blood in them, and that is not
able to bear such a cross, such a trial, the loss of such a friend, of such
a near and dear relation, but it must even break them in pieces, and oppress
them. This is through their weakness. You know that the tenderness of the
skin, and body, will double every lash; so the weakness of our nature makes
every cross a double trouble, and of a double weight to a Christian, and so he
is in a great measure, through the mere weakness and inability of his nature,
a cause of his own trouble. Secondly, We may be, yea, and are the proximate
causes of them, through the sinfulness of our souls; we are here full of
sin, and it is but righteous with God, to render trouble to them that trouble
him; we press God with our sins, as a cart is pressed with sheaves (it is his
own similitude) no wonder if he lades us with troubles, to the breaking of
our hearts, when we take such liberty to break his laws. I am not of their
mind, that think Saints troubles come not upon them for their sins: that they
come not as law demands, for satisfaction. I grant, that they may come
medicinally, or merely for the exercise of faith, or patience, or some other
graces, I also easily grant. Whether we may call them punishments or no
(though I see no solid reason against the affirmative in that nicety) I will
not dispute, but this is sure enough, If the Saint were not a sinner, he
should not be a sufferer, neither in body, nor in spirit, nor in his estate,
nor his relations. Death with all the appurtenances of it, death both in the
egg and bird is sins wages, sins offspring. Saints by their sinnings, by
their inconstant and uneven walkings, are causes of their own sufferings,
causes of their own miseries.

A third head of causes for the Saints troubles, may be the world. And that

1. In respect of the incertainty of its comforts, 1 John 2. 17. The world
passes away, and again, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passes away;
Job complains that his welfare past away as a cloud, Job 30. 15. Take what you
will, of the world, it passes away, our friends pass away; One generation
goes, and another comes. Our prosperity passes away; Job's sunshines had a
cloud came over them. Riches take themselves the wings of the morning and fly
away: Now hence of course arises trouble, when the heart of the creature is
fixed upon a Relation, and the Generation passes; the parent dies, the husband,
wife, child, friend, or what ever the Relation be it is gone. Man goes to his
long home, the mourners (of course) go about the streets; the affection
remains, but the object being gone, the spirit is disquieted, the heart
dissetled, etc. and so for other things. Trouble follows of course upon the
flitting, and passing away of what the heart was let out after.

2. The world is also a cause of the Saints troubles, In respect of the ill
nature of its inhabitants, the malice of them, Joh. 15. 19. Because you are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. The world is very selfish in its love; it loves none but its own:
If ye were of the world, the world would love its own: The world cares for
none, but those that are it is own; it hates Christ, and all that claim
kindred of him, all that are in relation to him, Joh. 15. 18. it hated Christ,
before it hated the Saints; but hating him, it hates those that are flesh of
his flesh, and bones of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. Thus you see various causes of
the Saints troubles, and so I have dispatched the third thing I promised you.
The fourth follows.

What peace is that, that the Saint may have in Christ, in the midst of this
worlds troubles? how is it in Christ? and what pains has Christ taken
concerning it? and how may the Saint get this peace, and find it out in Christ,
and draw it from Christ. To this I shall answer, and first, we must enquire
what peace is; Pax est concordia, Peace is an agreement, say some,
tranquillitas ordinis, a quiet of order (says Aquinas) (...). Because it
draws into an unity, unio cordium and rerum, an union of hearts and actions
say others, tranquilla constitutio animorum ac rerum (say others) a quiet
composure of differing spirits and actions; Mutuus consensus, say others, a
mutual consent betwixt persons. All amount to the same peace is a quiet
composed frame of spirit amongst diverse parties. Now as there are many
different parties in the world to agree, and many different cases upon which
agreements may be; so there are different sorts of peace. There is an outward
peace, or an inward peace; a peace with men, and a peace with God; peace with
men, may be either Political with Princes and subjects of different Kingdoms,
or amongst the subjects of the same Kingdom, or betwixt the head and members
of the same body politic, or amongst men of the same City and Corporation:
contrary to foreign or civil wars and dissentions. Or it may be domestic,
which is an agreement betwixt Husband and Wife, Parents and Children,
Governors or Servants of the same family; or more private, betwixt party and
party, called pax sociorum, the friendship and agreement of friends and
companions, etc. All these now are the worlds peaces, which Christ puts in
opposition to his peace, Ioh. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you. There is a peace that is
properly called Christ's peace; It was Christ's legacy, he left it by his last
will and testament, to his Disciples and Saints; he distinguiguisheth it from
all other peace whatsoever. Now in general this is the peace that the Saints
may find in Christ, in the midst of this worlds troubles; it is Christ's peace.
But more particularly, what is that? what peace is that that the world cannot
give, that Christ's peace?

This is that peace with God, which is nothing else than mutuus consensus Dei
and hominis, an agreement betwixt God and man, the Creator and the creature; it
may be considered in the root, and in the fruit, in the cause, and in the
effect, in the original, and in the copy.

1. The original is our Justification, in foro Dei, in Gods Court. A peace
betwixt God and the soul, by virtue of an Act of Oblivion that the Lord has
passed in Heaven, concerning all the sinners sins; he has said, I will
remember your sins no more, he makes them as if they never had been: now
upon the passing this Act, there is an agreement concluded, betwixt God and the
sinner; the differing parties are one, the peace is made, and entered in the
rolls of heaven. God looks upon the sinner no more as his enemy, but as his
son, daughter, friend, in the nearest relation to him. From hence arises;

2. A piece of conscience, which is nothing else, but the agreement of the
sinner within himself. Conscience that is Gods agent in the soul, proclaims
no more war, bids no more defiance; the man is at peace with himself, he
dare say to himself, conscience is it peace? and his conscience shall make him
answer, it is peace. Now this peace is but the sealing up of the other in the
court of the man's own bosom; A copy of the other taken out by faith,
according to that, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ; this is also Christ's peace. Now this peace with
God, whether considered in the original, or the transcript; it is a peace with
the whole Trinity. The Father is he with whom it is made, the Son is he by
whom it is made, the Spirit seals it, and becomes Nuntius pacis, the Messenger
of that peace to the soul, being he to whom it belongs of office to set the
broad seal of the Court to every pardon, Ephesians. 1. 13. Ephesians. 4. 30. But why then
is it called Christ's peace? I easily answer,

1. Because he is the meritorious cause of it, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, etc. v. 16.
and that he might reconcile both to God, in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity thereby. And the spirit which conveyeth the news of this
peace to the soul, is sometimes called his spirit; he was he that while he
lived upon tho earth came and preached peace to them that were afar off, and
to them that were nigh, Ephesians. 2. 17. and through him we have an access, by one
spirit, unto the father, verse. 18. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their sin, 2 Cor. 5. 19. We that preach the Gospel
of peace to you, as though God did by us beseech you, are Ambassadors for
Christ, and as in Christ's stead, we entreat you to be reconciled to God;
therefore it is called his peace, and it is said to be laid up in him: and
from this peace of justification, and peace of conscience proceeds

A third peace, which is the peace of the members each with other (a peace
which is too sadly broken, and too little pursued in our days) 1 John 1. 3.
The Saints have fellowship one with another, and their fellowship is with the
father, and the son Jesus Christ; and could they walk together except they
were agreed? And thus I have now (though in a discourse something too large)
showed you what peace is, and what this peace is that is Christ's peace, and
that is laid up in Christ for the Saints, and they may find it in him in the
midst of their earthly troubles. But yet more particularly, In what of Christ
is this peace laid up for the Saints? 2. How shall they come by it in the day
of trouble. To each of these give me leave to speak a word or two.

To the first, In what of Christ is this peace laid up? I answer in three
particulars.

1. It is laid up in the blood of Christ, in his bitter death and passion, as
the meritorious cause. This peace, Christian, is written and sealed with the
blood of the Lamb, the immaculate Lamb of God; this is clear, in that place
I before quoted, Ephesians. 2. 16. He reconciled us both unto God in one body by the
cross, verse. 13. you are made nigh by the blood of Christ, his blood was the
blood of expiation.

2. It is laid up in the word of Christ, in his precious promises. That is
plain from the very words of the Text: These things have I spoken, that in me
you might have peace. David had peace many a time, out of a promise, the word
of the Lord quickened, and comforted him; he had once a trouble that had sunk
him, had he not found peace here; they are his own words, Psalm. 119. I had
perished in my affliction, if thy law had not been my delight. The Gospel is
therefore called the Gospel of peace, and the word of Christ, is as well the
word of peace, as the word of truth: how many poor souls have found this
true, by many precious experiences; they hove been in spirit-troubles,
heaviness has made their heart to stoop, till a good word has come, and made
it better.

3. It is in the spirit of Christ, who is the Nuntius pacis, he that declares,
and seals up the peace to the soul, and is the messenger of peace betwixt God
and Christ, and the soul that truly believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
believing in him has life. Thus it is in him. Now if you ask how the child of
God may draw this peace from Christ, I answer these three ways.

1. By Meditation of him; thus David, Psalm. 104. 34. my meditation of him shall
be sweet, the soule-feeding upon (...) of (...) ^^on the gracious acts of
grace, in which the Lord Jesus Christ has declared the yernings of his love to
poor souls, shall rather peace a quietment, and establishing of spirit in the
midst of all its troubles: when the poor Christian is in the midst of
troubles, to sit down and think, well, yet my sins are pardoned, yet God and
I are at agreement; this affliction, this cross comes not to me as a law
demand, not as a piece of vindicative justice, but as a fatherly chastisement;
this shall administer peace to his soul, his meditation of Christ shall be
sweet to his soul: That Is one way to gain it.

2. By a believing application, both of what Christ has spoke, and what he
has done. Faith is the hand that the soul reaches out for peace, and by
which the soul brings in peace to it self, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Those that
believe shall be established, and the more a soul believes, the more it is
established; it is from some unbeliefes or other, that any soul is disquieted.
Faith brings in peace, it is not the bare knowing of the promise, or the bare
knowing of what Christ has done, but the chosen with the promise, the chosen
with Christ in what he has done and suffered, for the soul that brings in
peace to the soul.

3. The soul gains this place, by a close walking with Jesus Christ, a
walking in the spirit, Is. 32. 17. The work of righteousness shall be peace;
mark the upright man, consider the just man, the end of that man is peace; the
wicked man's conscience is continually throwing out mire and dirt. There is no
peace to the wicked (says our God.) Peace indeed is not the wages of a day
well spent; not a natural result and fruit of a strict walking, but peace is
the reward of righteousness, the reward not of debt, but of grace. The words
of the Psalmist hint thus much to us; To him that orders his conversation
aright will I show the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23. When a Christian has
ordered his conversation aright, the salvation of God must be shown him.

I have only one thing remaining, as to the doctrinall part of my discourse:
that is, to show you what pains, what order Christ has taken for his Saints
peace in him, while in the world they meet with trouble. It may easily be
gathered, from what I have already spoken, in short, take it in these three
words;

1. He has died upon the cross, that he might do it, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. It
cost him his blood to work out our peace.

2. He has given us many precious promises, many things has he spoken, that
in him through them we might have peace.

3. He has sent his spirit, Ioh. 14. he promised the sending of his spirit,
whom he there calls the comforter, in relation to the peace, that the spirit
conveyes, and seals to the souls of his Saints. Thus much may serve briefly
to have spoken to the doctrinall part, I proceed now to the application of what
I have said; I shall apply it variously. First, by way of instruction.

Instr. Let us learn from hence, the nature of the world, and what to expect
from it, from the men of it, from the Contentments of it, or while we have any
thing to do in, and with it; one wittily says, it is like the straits of
Magellane, where, which way soever a ship was bound, to be sure the saylors
found a wind against them. world; let a man be bound for the coasts of hell or
heaven, if he sails through the world, he shall be sure to find a wind against
him: they that have most Contentments in it, that think they have the world at
will, they shall find, that in the world, even they shall meet with trouble.
Though they be the world's own, and so it does not hate them, and the cause
of their troubles lies not there; yet in respect of the very incertainties of
all things in the world, the flitting condition of every thing under the Sun,
where there is nothing certain, they shall meet with troubles. Sirs, you may
look for all fair weather, but you will not find it; you may think you are
above crosses, when you are upon your mountains of gold, and worldly
greatness. But (believe it) besides the clouds of divine vengeance, which hang
over your heads, and threaten you disturbance hereafter, you will find that
there will be earthquakes here below, that will hinder your quiet sitting. In
the world all shall have trouble: But more properly,

What is the peace or lot of the Saints, while they live on this side their
fathers house. Every one that lives in the world shall have his hand and heart
full of trouble, but all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must look for it
in a more especial manner. I told you before, that Christ and his cross
cannot be parted; if you take him, you must have him with all the
appurtanances, of which the cross is one; there is an emphasie in the word
you: In the world you shall have trouble, others shall have trouble, but you
especially; others may have, but you shall have. David was flattering himself
into another opinion, Psalm. 30. 6. In his prosperity he said he should never
be moved, but he was quickly consuted; the Lord hid his face, and he was
troubled. The man eat his own words, and confuted himself. Is there any
before me, that has undertaken the ways of God upon another expectation, that
has forgot that he was made a Christian upon this condition, that he should
take up the cross and follow Christ? Christians, you may ratify your error
before experience confutes you in it; if you look for earthly peace, for
immunity from troubles, it is more than Jesus Christ ever leased out for life
to his Saints: feed not your expectations high, for fear your quick
experiences low them. Trouble is the lot of the Saints here, as sure as heaven
is their portion hereafter. But thirdly,

the miserable condition of those poor wretches that are without Christ: They
shall be sure to meet with trouble, and for the way of peace they have not
known it. Let me a little speak to such poor creatures; Is there any poor
wretches before me (and O Lord, that there were not many such) that are yet,
such as the Apostle says the Ephesians once were, Ephesians. 2. 12. that are without
Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the Covenant of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: Poor wretches, my soul
trembles for you. Let me but propound to you, the same question that the
Prophet propounds, Is. 10. 3. What will you do in the day of visitation, and in
the day of desolation which will come from far? to whom will you flee for
help, and where will you leave your glory? you are now in prosperity and
plenty; you have no disturbances, no dissettlements of spirit, but what will
you do in the day of your visitation? If the Lord should come but to keep
court in your conscience, to visit there a little, for all your abused mercies,
for all your original and actual sins, for all your youth, and life sins;
if the Lord but comes and beats up your quarters, poor creatures, what will
you do in that day? whether will you fly for help? a wounded spirit who can
bear? though none can bear it, yet Christ can heal it. Ah, but this Christ
is none of your Christ, you never looked upon him as your Priest, or your
Prophet, or your King; poor wretches what will you do? whether will you fly?
Ah, that poor creatures should so quietly sleep over damnation as you do;
that you should sit at your tables of gluttony and drunkenness, and eat, and
drink, and rise up to play so freely, when there is but an hairs breadth
betwixt your poor souls and everlasting burning. The sword of divine
vengeance, that sharp two-edged sword hangs over your head, every moment, and
there is nothing but the twine thread of your life keeps it from dividing you
and all your comforts; from (indeed) dividing you from all manner of hope and
comfort, and peace, either from the Creator or Creature, and that for ever,
(poor halfe-damned wretch) spell that word, and tell me how many syllables of
time go to the compounding of it. Good Lord, how it would pose reason to find
out the ground of any souls rest, or peace (though but for an hour, without
Christ) after what rate they dance about the take, that burns with fire and
brimstone, and play about a nest of adders, and a cockatrices den. You that
think your selves at such good quarter with God, because he is not upon your
neck every day: I will tell you what, you are like a Gentleman that rides out
in a flashed suit of apparel; If the Sun shines, he is well enough, and
glisters bravely upon the road; but if the weather proves cold, or a shower of
rain comes, and he has never a coat to put on, nor ever an hedge to shelter
himself under, is he not washed for his bravery? what will he do? may he not
chance to get a cold will (with his leave) bear him company to his grave? So
long as the Sun shine of prosperity lasts, that your conscience does not flash
in your face, and you meet with no crosses in the world, you are well enough,
and all the world well be fools in your eyes, but especially Puritanes. Ride
on Gallants, but take heed of breaking your necks in hell; what will you do in
the day of the Lords visitation, when the reckoning day comes? friends, what
will you have to pay, when the shower of divine vengeance comes? will your
huffled suit of worldly vanities cloth you? will your sack cheer your heart,
when it is wounded with an arrow of divine vengeance, drawn by the strength of
an Almighty arm, and let fly at the very eye of your pleasures? Nay, suppose
on this side of such a time you should meet with a shower of worldly crosses,
two or three, as Job (a better man than any of you) did Job 1. Suppose the Lord
should take away the delight of your eyes with a stroke, as from Ezechiel; your
dear children, as from Eli and Aaron; your husband, as from Phinehas his wife;
all your pleasures, riches, comforts, al your castles of greatness and riches.
Suppose you should be thrown into prison, and have nothing given you, but the
bread of affliction to eat, and the water of affliction to drink. What shall
bear up your spirits in such a day? what will you do? ah, what can you do in
the day of the Lords visitation? The conie (if it be started, and pursued, by a
dog) it has a burrow in the rock, thither it runs and is safe: But the Hare,
and such like beasts of sport, that have no burrowes, no holes, if once they
be found out in their covert, and be pursued by dogs, they are wurried down;
why? alas they have no places of security. The poor wretch that has no part
in Christ, if a day of trouble comes, he has no place of security, but he is
like a poor manslayer, pursued by the avenger of the blood, and either knows
not where a City of refuge was, or at best is at such a distance from it, as
he could not possibly have hopes of reaching it, before the pursuer and
avenger of blood overtook him, and he died without mercy. Poor creatures, this
is your condition, the Lord give you an heart to consider it; you have no way
of peace, that you will be able to find in a day of trouble.

in the happy condition of all those that have a true interest in the Lord
Jesus Christ; they are provided for Winter and Summer if in the world they meet
with trouble, they may retire to Christ, and be at peace; if they be pursued by
the dogs of the world, they have a burrow in the rock of ages. What Job
says of the grave, we may say of that hiding place; There the wicked cease
from troubling, there the weary be at rest; they can never be so tossed, never be
in such a deep of troubles, but they can cast anchor in the Lord Jesus Christ;
when the kitchen of the world is on fire, they have an upper-roome, that they
can go sit and sleep in, and the heat shall never trouble them. No

-- totus si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum feriant ruinae.
They can but run up the stairs, and sit with Jesus Christ, and they are at
peace; they are at any time within a reach of peace, and may in any condition
say to their souls as David, Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down O my soul?
why art thou disquieted within me; trust still in God, for I shall yet praise
him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. See a notable experiment
of this in David, 1 Samuel 30. 6. It was a sad day with him, his City was burnt
with fire, and his and his men's wives, and his sons and their daughters were
taken captives, and to none of the kind'st enemies neither, the Amalekites had
done it. David was greatly distressed v. 6. and to add affliction to
affliction, when he was almost dead of grief, the people were almost of the
mind to have helped him on to his grave, for they also spoke of stoning him.
What does David do? does not his back break with all this load upon it? does
not his heart sink to the very bottom of despair, with all this weight of
lead hung upon it? mark the latter end of the sixth verse. But David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, for all this he encouraged himself in his God.
In the world he met with trouble, in his Christ he finds peace. Thus may all
that fear the Lord; why is there a disturbed sad heart amongst them? Happy is
the people that have the Lord for their God; Happy are those creatures that
have an hole in the rock. But to proceed.

what is the only way to find true peace, in a day of trouble; it is to look
for it only in the Lord Jesus Christ. Acquaint thy self now with Christ, and
be at peace, thereby shall good come unto you; fetch peace from Christ (O ye
Saints) and be at peace, thereby shall good come unto you. There be many
courses which men use to gain peace in a day of trouble, whether outward or
inward; many ways by which men wring their spirits out of trouble, and patch
up peace to their own spirits; but the right way of peace few have known.

1. Some let nature work out peace, like some foolish country people, that
conceive nature will work out all distemperatures, and they need no Physic.
Some of them are confuted by their grave, others of them, that are of more
stout iron natures, possibly recover their health, but their diseases make a
truce only, not a peace with their bodies; the latent cause remains, and
watches its advantage of the next heat or cold the body takes, or the next
intemperate season comes. And thus many deal with their souls, never
regarding when their spirits are troubled, to heal up the wound with the balm
of Gilead, but go on in their worldly way, at last their wiled spirits are
quiet again, so they get their peace of course: but alas, the latent cause of
their trouble watches but the next advantage, their soul festers within, and
within a while they are ready to hang themselves again.

2. Other wretches, in a time of trouble, are like those, that upon that
principle, Satanas per Sathanam expellitur, one Devil drives out another. If
they be in an ague, or the like, will drink hot-waters, or store of sack, to
prevent their cold-fit, and out burn nature; but alas, all the good comes is,
they fall into a burning-feaver, and perhaps burn their dust to ashes. So
there are such profane wretches, that if their conscience alarum's them, if
their spirit troubles them, or if they meet with crosses, etc. think there is
no way to wind out of the Devils fingers, but by going into his arms, and
making themselves twice more the children of the Devil than they were before:
they must run to the alehouse, seek out drunken company, drink away
melancholy, etc. But had Zimri peace that slew his master? is damning a soul
the way to save it?

A third sort dispute themselves out of troubles, and come out of disquietments
of spirit upon moral principles; these will argue the case with themselves,
what a shame it is, that they should be ^ so much troubled for a lost friend,
or for a cross in a worldly estate, and conclude, this is below a man, or
below their spirits: the peace of these men is but a logical conclusion, upon
false premises. All these have not known the way of true peace; no Christians,
no, the way of peace they have not known. True peace neither grows in the
alehouse garden, nor in natures garden, no nor yet in the Philosophers neither.
It is a branch that springs out of the root of Jessee, a conclusion upon
gospell-premises, an effect of the balm Gilead. Are you under any burdens of
spirit, in any troubles, and would you have peace? run up to Jesus Christ,
fetch it from his bosom, extract it out of his blood, gather it out of his
word. This, this is the peace which passes all understanding, this is the
lasting peace that has no worm at the root, no defect, no rottenness in it.
All other peace will be as easily broke, as it is slightly made. Come out of
your crosses and troubles (Christians) with a peace drawn from Jesus Christ;
come out this way, I say, otherwise you mistake the way of peace. But I shall
proceed no further in this first branch of application.

peace? what means this weeping then Christians? why does Rachel refuse to be
comforted? why does Asaph or David's soul run, and not cease? why does their
soul refuse comfort? what is the business with Christians, that their spirits
are heavy night and day? and no oil will make their face to shine? All the
balm of Gilead will not close their wounds? if the Lord does but lay an
outward cross upon them, if he does but take away a friend, call in the money
he lent them, cross them in a relation, let their spirits but fall a little,
how are they troubled, as if their fountain of Peace were dried up, and
justification and Gospell-promises had lost the Nature of a Cordial?
Christians, do not your sad disquieted troubled spirits deserve chiding, when
Christ has taken such pains, that in him you might have peace, and yet you
walk under a cross, as if there were no way of peace discovered? For shame
(Christians) know your duty; are you troubled? you are by your trouble invited
to Christ, that you might find peace; show (for shame) show that your condition
is different from those that have not tasted how good the Lord is, that know
not how to improve Christ in a day of adversity, and

be of good cheer, It is Christ's own application, (...) Get heart, be of
good cheer, though in the world you meet with troubles: if you walk long with
troubled spirits, it is your own fault, for in Christ you may have peace: who
will pity your starving, when you refuse your meat? you may have peace if you
will take it; Lift up your heads therefore in the midst of your worldly
troubles; Be of good cheer, Christ has overcome the world. Disquieting your
self is not your duty, believing is your duty, and will ease you, when that
will but add vexation unto your spirit. Are you under burdens of spirit? do
worldly crosses trouble you? what then? these should drive you to Christ, but
not into the cave; go and pray, believe, etc. But what do thou do in the
cave Eliah? Run to Christ as fast as thou will; but why sit thou still to
weep? be of good comfort, there is no trouble upon thy spirit, be it what it
will. But Christ has spoken some word or other, done some action or other,
from whence thou may extract peace in that trouble.

Ah, but will a poor Christian say, this is spoken to Christ's Disciples; to
them indeed Christ speaks, in me you shall have peace; but I am afraid I am
none of that number, and then what have I to do with peace. How may I know,
whether I be Christ's disciple yea or no? and secondly, I am afraid, if I
should make up peace, that it would not be Christ's peace. To speak a litttle
to these two things, Let me in the fourth place insist a little upon an use of
examination.

whether you be Christ's Disciples or no? 2. Whether the peace of your
spirits, with which you content your selves, and in which you satsfie your
selves, after trouble sometimes, be a peace of Christ's making, or of your own
making, and so false and uncomfortable. I shall speak shortly to both these,
etc. 1. Would you know whether you be Christ's Disciples yea or no? I will
give you notes from his own mouth, to inform you in that point.

1. Did your souls ever effectually hear and embrace the word of Jesus
Christ? this is one note, Joh. 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice; you have heard
with your ears, but have you had ears to hear? have you heard with a poor
and contrite spirit, so that you have trembled at it? Is. 66. 2. Has the Lord
bored your ears with the word? Has the word of Christ been transmitted, as
from the preachers mouth to your ear, so from your ear to your souls? you
have heard the Ministers voice, but have you heard Christ's voice to your
souls in an ordinance, that the word came not only to you in the letter, but
in power and in the spirit of God? This is one sign, but not enough. Many are
called.

2. Do you continue in the word of Christ? this is a notable mark; mark that
place, Joh. 8. 31. If you continue in my word, then are you my Disciples
indeed, not in name, not in profession, not in the account of men only; no,
but indeed, Disciples to purpose; can your souls say, that you have made the
word of God a light unto your feet, and a la^ horn to your paths; that you
have set the law of the Lord ever before you; that as you have learned Christ,
so you walk in him; you fall not back, but continue in the word of Christ? then
are you Disciples indeed.

3. If you bear much fruit, then are you Christ's Disciples, Joh. 15. 8.
Herein is my father glorified, that you bear much fruit, so shall you be my
Disciples: Do you bring forth much fruit of holiness unto God, and
righteousness before men? thus you glorify the father, thus you shall
evidence your selves to be Christ's disciples, by growing in Grace, and
thriving in Godliness.

4. If you be humble, selfe-denying, selfe-hating, meek creatures: This is a
sign that you have learned of Christ, for he is meek and lowly, see Luke 14.
26, 33. concerning this note Christ in plain English says, whosoever has it
not cannot be his Disciple; it is the first lesson of Grace, Deny your selves.
But are you humble, and selfe-denying ones, selfe-loathing, and abhorring
creatures? do you even loath your natural self, and hate your righteous
self, and forsake all your self, then are you Christ's Disciples? does the
spirit of Christ, which is the spirit of meekness, dwell in you, and rest upon
you? then have you learnd of him.

5. If you bear the cross with that faith and patience which you should bear
it, then you may know you are Christ's Disciples, Luke 14. 27. without this you
cannot be Christ's Disciple; there is nothing shall more evidence a Christian
to himself, and to others, to be Christ's Disciple, than his religious
bearing of the cross, his religious carriage under trialls, and burdens of
spirit; this is a great piece of the way in which Christ will be followed of
all those that are his Disciples.

Lastly, If you love one another, then you may know, and all men may know
concerning you, that you are Christ's Disciples, Joh. 13. 35: By this shall all
men know, that you are my Disciples, if you love one another. Saint John in his
Epistles beats much upon this, to love the Saints, merely because they are
Saints, not for their good nature, or wit, or parts, or greatness, or any
respect, but impartially, because they are Saints. It is a good note. By these
things you shall know your selves, whether you be Christ's Disciples or no; if
you be, you have a title to his peace.

And from what you have heard, that true peace for the soul, in the midst of
this worlds troubles, is only to be found in Christ, and only that which is
drawn from Christ. Every Christian has ground to bring the peace of his
spirit, the coming of his spirit after trouble to the touchstone, that he may
be able to know, whether it be Christ's peace or his own: I shall give you five
or six notes for that.

1. If it be drawn from some word of God, it is true peace. Thy soul has
been troubled, thy spirit has been burdened, now it is quieted. I pray, how
came your spirit off trouble? what was it that helped thy spirit out of the miry
clay? what, did thou close with some Gospell-promises? did thou bosom a
promise, and was that peace to thee? this is Christ's peace, such a peace was
David's, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has
quickened me, so v. 81. My soul faints for thy salvation, but I hope in thy
word, so v. 114. Thou art my hiding place, and my shield, I hope in thy word,
so v. 147. David's peace was drawn from the word of God, from what God had
spoken in reference to him in particular, or at least in general, to one in
such a condition, Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and
thy word was unto me, the joy, and rejoicing of my heart. Many a poor soul
before me (I doubt not) but has known this way of getting peace, when his
spirit has been full of trouble, that he has not known what to do, perhaps
has not been able to eat, or drink, or sleep, through anguish of heart;
perhaps a Minister has been made the sweet messenger of peace to the soul,
and God has used him as an instrument to mind the soul of some promise or
other, which at such a time has come into the soul as water to the thirsty
ground, and has been even as an apple of gold in a picture of silver; perhaps
the spirit of God according to that promise, Joh. 14. 26. Brings to remembrance
something that Christ has spoken, some general promise, or some particular
promise which proves as the balm of Gilead to the soul, to heal its wounds;
This is a Gospell-peace, a sweetly made peace, a peace of Christ's making in the
soul, according to the text.

2. If thy peace arises from a due consideration and application of some thing
in the nature of God, as he has revealed his nature to us; whether it be from
Gods will, or 2. from the meditation of Gods mercy and goodness, or 3. from a
meditation of Gods faithfulness: the consideration of many things in Gods
nature may command peace in a soul, but especially these three are fountains
out of which the Saint draws peace. The consideration of the stroke that Gods
will had in David's affliction brought him peace, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because I knew it was thy doing: hence was Elie's peace, 1 Samuel 3. 18. when his ears (amongst the rest) could not but tingle at Samuels
news, he said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Hence was
Hezekiah's peace, when he could not but be troubled to hear what should
become of his sons and daughters, 2 Kin. 20. 17, 18. yet he had peace, v. 19.
he said, good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken. Hence was those
good peoples peace, Acts 21. 13, 14. They were troubled at Paul's departure,
considering what Agabus had prophesied concerning him, v. 11. At last they
quieted themselves, and their minds stood upon this bottom, v. 14. They said,
The will of the Lord be done: now if thy peace be concluded upon this account,
the Lord has sent a grievous cross, a grievous affliction upon thee, and thou
were troubled, but thou begannest to think, why this was the will of the Lord
concerning me: this is the Lords doing, and upon the due meditation of this,
thy spirit grows quiet, out of a mere submission, and obedience to Gods
dispensation; This is true peace, it was the Saints peace,

2. Or perhaps it is, from a due meditation of the Lords mercy and goodness;
thou have a cross and trial befallen thee, but thou beginnest to think, well,
yet the Lord is good to my soul, yet the mercy of the Lord indureth for ever,
and upon this consideration thy soul has peace: this is true peace, upon this
account was the Churches peace, Lam. 3. 21. This I recall to mind, therefore
have I hope. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not; they are new every morning, etc. v. 25. The Lord is good
to them that wait upon him, even to the soul that seeks him, etc. Hence she
concludes peace in sad troubles.

3. Or is it from a consideration of the nature of God in his faithfulness?
Lam. 3. 23. Great is thy faithfulness. Thou sit down with thy self, and
considerest, why am I troubled? the Lord has promised that joy shall be to the
upright of heart, and that light shall arise out of darkness to the upright;
and that though sorrow be for a night, yet joy shall come in the morning. This
God is a faithful God, he has said it, and shall he not do it? he has
spoke it, and shall he not bring it to pass? and upon such like
considerations thy spirit begins to be composed, and to return to its rest.
This is likewise a gospell-peace, a true made, right bred peace. This was
likewise something, which the Church called to mind, from whence she had peace,
Lam. 3. 31, 32, 33. The Lord will not cast off for ever; though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion, etc. She lived upon the reversions of his
love, by virtue of his faithfulness, that stood bound for the fulfilling it.
In short, be it from these particulars, or any of the like nature, if thy
peace be hatched up in thy soul, from a due consideration, and application of
the nature of God, as he has revealed himself in his word, it is a true
Gospel peace, a peace of Christ's making in thy soul.

3. If the peace that arises in thy soul, arises from a due meditation, and
a believing application of any thing that Christ has done or suffered for thee,
it is a true peace; if it arise from a meditation of Christ dying for thee, and
washing thee with his blood, from Gods accepting thy soul in Christ; this is
true peace. As suppose that thou art under some heavy burden of spirit, in
respect of some outward crosses and trialls, and now thou sitt'st down and
think, well, yet my sins are pardoned, yet my soul is washed with the
blood of sprinkling, yet the Lord has accepted me in his well-beloved, why
should I be troubled? this is a blessed peace, Eccles. 9. 7. Go thy way, eat
thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now
accepts thy work. The Lord commands us to be at peace, if we be at peace upon
this account. Rejoice (says Christ) that your names are written in the book of
life. Or if thy soul be troubled under the sense of thy sins, and thou
know not what to do; at last thou resolvest to cast thy self upon a
promise to venture in upon Christ, saying, If I perish, I perish; and hence
thou have peace; this is a true Gospell-peace of spirit. In short, if it be
upon the consideration, and application to thy self, of any thing Christ has
done; it is true peace. Suppose thou have some grievous affliction befallen
thee, thou art afflicted in thy body, or in thy estate, or in thy relations,
and this is a sad trouble to thee, but now thou sit down, and think
with thy self, why should I be thus troubled? has not Christ taken out the
sting of this cross? has it any poison in it? is it not a mere fatherly
chastisement? has not Christ overcome the world? and upon the due
consideration of these things, and believing application of such meditations,
thou find a quiet secretly steal upon thy soul, and thy spirit is
becalmed; this is a sweet peace, a peace of Christ's concluding in thy soul;
this is according to Christ's rule, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

A fourth note, by which thou may judge thy peace, is this, If it be a
peace concluded upon thy former experiences, then is it a true peace; such was
David's peace, Psalm. 119. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and I
comforted my self. David many a time made peace with his spirit this way,
looking over the old records of mercies, and concluding confidently from the
past or present mercy to the future, Psalm. 116. 7. Return to thy rest, O my
soul, for God has dealt graciously with thee. If upon this account thou
command thy soul to rest, because the Lord has dealt graciously with thee,
it is a sign the peace of thy spirit is right made. The Psalmist (whosoever
he was, whether Asaph, or David, that composed that 77 Psalm.) when he could
find peace no way, he took this course, he went and looked over the old records
for it, Psalm. 77. 11, 12. It may be thou art under heavy burdens, in respect
of manifold corruptions, or manifold temptations, or in respect of some crosses
and afflictions that are befallen to thee in this world, or thou have been
troubled for some such thing, and nothing would comfort thee; But at last it
came in thy mind, the Lord has delivered me in many a strait, I have seen
mercy in many a judgment, I have felt his upholding power many a time, when I
was even sinking, and saying, my hope is cut off from before the Lord, why
should I distrust him now? why should not that God that has delivered me in
six troubles keep me in the seventh also, that it should not hurt me? well, I
will trust in him, etc. This peace now is a true peace, this is a peace of
Christ's making in the soul.

Fifthly, If faith be a commissioner on thy souls part in making thy peace,
thou may then know it is a true peace. Such was David's peace, Psalm. 27. 13.
I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living: his believing kept him from faintings, and settled his
soul. How is thy peace handed to thy soul (Christian?) is it handed by faith?
is faith the Dove that thou sendest out of the Arc of thy soul, when the
waters of trouble are high? and does that return with the olive branch in her
mouth? Open the windows of thy soul, and let it in; never doubt but it is an
olive branch of peace. Is it a believing, a trusting in the Lords providence,
or promise? a believing, a closing with God, that works out thy peace? fear
not thy peace, fear not any news for not being good if faith brings it to thy
soul; faith sees God sealing before it seals to thee. Let that be a fifth
note of trial, I will add but a

Sixth, Lastly, Peace after prayer is ordinarily true peace; It is not earned
by prayer, but it is usually a fruit that grows upon that root, and if thine
be such, rejoice in it. Such was Hannah's peace, 1 Samuel 1. 15. 18. Hannah was a
woman, as she reports her self of a troubled spirit, she goes and powers out
her soul before the Lord, and the words say, her countenance was no more sad;
no, she had peace; her prayer was answered, she had true peace. Indeed any
temple-peace is true peace, any peace that the soul truly extracts out of
ordinances is true peace. David when he was so unreasonably troubled with that
temptation [Psal. 73.] of the wickeds prosperity, at last he goes into the
Sanctuary, there his soul was stayed, Psalm. 73. 17. Would thou know then
whether thy peace be true or no? whether it be Christ's peace yea or no? such a
peace as thy soul may trust yea or no, and not in thy peace have great
bitterness? examine thy peace whence it came, examine thy self how thou
came by it; did thou in trouble go and power out thy soul before the Lord,
and cry mightily to him, wrestle with him? etc. Did thou wait upon God in
the Sanctuary, and from hence did peace flow in like a river to thy soul? I
say, that peace is a true peace, Christ's peace, in which thy soul may rejoice,
and triumph. But I shall add no more to this use of examination, I have but
one more to add, and that is of exhortation.

That in the world Saints must look for trouble, but in Christ they may have
peace; the best peace, peace without bitterness, joy without sorrow. 1. Let me
plead with you that yet are strangers to the Lord Jesus, yet unbelievers. Poor
creatures, O that this might persuade you to look after an interest in Jesus
Christ (who is our peace.) Indeed you make to your selves peace, none live so
joyfully, and spend their days so in wealth as you; there are none sing
requiem's to their souls like you: But consider,

1. Your peace is a false peace, you have cried unto your souls, Peace, peace,
when indeed their has been no true peace to you. There is no peace to the
wicked (says my God) no true peace: It may be when you hear the words of the
Lords curse you will bless your selves in your hearts, saying, we shall have
peace, though we walk in the imagination of our hearts, to add drunkenness to
thirst; but is there any such presumptuous wretch that says so in his heart?
Hark what the Lord says, The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of
the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in the book of God shall light upon his head, and the Lord
shall blot out his name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate that man
to evil, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, etc. It is true, you have a peace sometimes
under trouble, but a cursed peace (the Lord knows) a dreadful peace, indeed
no peace, for there is no peace to the wicked (says my God.) Nay, not only so,

2. The very shadow of your peace is an inconstant shadow, and will fail you
shortly: If you be put to it, you will not know what to do. What will you do
in the day of your visitation? whether will you fly for help? but to this I
spoke before. O now that you would be wise; it is the wise man's part to see
things a far off, and provide for them, prudens quasi providens, or procul
videns, but your trouble is not far off, and you have no way of peace, for
Christ is not known to your souls: the way of peace you have not known. When
all your contentments are gone in the creature, where will you have peace? Now
the Devil, the world, many say unto you, as Jael to Sisera, turn in hither,
fear not; turn in to us, fear not; and it may be, in a time of prosperity,
they may cover your conscience with a mantle of security, and give you a bottle
of milk; but if once you be in the midst of a sleep of security, they will
take an hammer in their hand, and come softly to you, and smite a nail into
you temples, and fasten it into the ground. What will you do when you find
trouble? Poor creatures, my soul trembles for you, O that you would consider.
But behold, Christ says to you (and there is no deceit in his words) Sinners,
turn in to me, and fear not, in me you shall have peace; while the day
lasts, before the decree goes forth, and the day passes away as the chafe;
before terror strikes into your soul, and seizes upon you like an armed man.
O that you would be wise, that you would look out for a portion in Christ, that
you would make him your friend; that when your sinful peace fails, and your
natural shadowy peace fails, Christ may receive you into everlasting peace,
and you may rest in his bosom. Turn in to him (sinners) and you need not
fear, he shall be your peace. But secondly, Let me speak to you that are
believers, to you that have known the way of Peace, true Peace, which flows to
your soul from Jesus Christ; Let me press 3 words upon you.

Be not disquieted with worldly trouble, Christ is your peace, in him you may
have peace, it was his legacy to you: O let not your hearts be troubled, you
believe in God, believe also in Jesus Christ: Know you not that he is your
Peace? why are you cast down? why are your souls disquieted within you? if
you meet with frowns from the world, crosses in your worldly interests, yet
why are you troubled? In Christ you may have Peace. To this end consider,

1. That Christ has overcome the world, he has qualified the Mercury and
Quickesilver of it, and made that which was in it self poison, no more then
Medicinal; he has overcome the world, he has taken the sting out of every
cross, the poison of every affliction. The world is crucified to you, O be you
also crucified to it; be of good cheer (O you Saints) for Christ has
overcome the world.

2. Do but consider what a loser Christ is by your troubles. If you be
disquieted, if you be troubled, as other men, you make Christ a loser by you, a
great loser. 1. He is a loser in his blood, in the end of his death; he died
upon the cross, that he might bleed out balm of Gilead for you, that he
might bleed out peace for his Saints under every trouble. 2. You make him a
loser in his breath: To what purpose are the multitudes of his precious
promises, but that by these things should men live, and in these the Saints
might find peace? so David, Psalm. 56. 4. What time I am afraid I will trust in
thy word; hark what he says in the Text, These things have I spoken, that in
me you might have peace. To what purpose has Christ held out his Gospel
promises, his good words, but that they should make the hearts of his Saints
better, when heaviness makes them stoop? 3. As to you, you make him a loser in
his victory; to what purpose has he taken pains to conquer the world for
you, if you must yet be slaves to it, and every cross and trial, every
frown and ill-look from the world, must bring you into a distemperature? Lift
up your heads therefore (Christians) lest Jesus Christ be a loser by your
souls: Be of good cheer, know, and believe, that Christ has indeed (and
that for you too) overcome the world.

live much with Jesus Christ, gain more and more acquaintance with him, with
his word, with his spirit, heighten your communion with him. Thus shall you
know every hiding place, and be acquainted with every hole of the Rock. This
is that that makes many a poor much at loss oft-times. It is a truth, that
there is peace laid up in Jesus Christ, for a poor soul in every trouble,
under every cross; whence is it then, that their spirits are sometimes so much
down so much sunk? whence is it, that as soon as ever a Saint is troubled, he
does not presently (without any more ado) run to Christ, and secure
himself, and be at rest? but we hear day after day, that the Spirit of the
Saint is under the same burdens, overwhelmed in the same manner, as if there
were no balm in Gilead, no Physician there. Truly there may be many causes,
possibly there may be a sullenness in the soul, that it will not out of the
cave; it is angry with God, and will refuse comfort. Possibly God may please to
deny a present application of a comfort, by the hand of the spirit, which can
alone make a plaster stick upon a wounded spirit (be it never so well made and
spread) But I persuade my self two great and very usual causes, yea, most
usual, are Ignorance and negligence. Either the soul is a stranger to the
Rock, or else it does not put forth its legs in running to it.

1. A Christian may have a great interest in Christ, a great portion in the
rock of ages, and yet be in a great manner ignorant of him; and this partial
ignorance, though it shall not hinder their final salvation, for our
high priest has compassion on the ignorant (says the Apostle to the Hebrews)
yet it may hinder their present comfort. It may be the soul is not so
acquainted with the word of God, that when it is in trouble, it can turn to a
promise presently, that shall relate to its condition; it may be it may not be
so acquainted with all the corners of Christ's gracious heart, that it can
presently consider Christ in a suitable notion to comfort it under its present
burden. Now this very ignorance, and not being acquainted with Jesus Christ,
may a great deal hinder the souls comfort, and make him go with a sad heart,
a great deal longer than that soul that is more grown in the knowledge of
Christ, more acquainted with every piece of his nature, more experienced in his
ways.

Indeed secondly, a great cause may be the souls negligence, a knowledge, may
lie dormant in the soul; a man may have legs and not use them; so a
Christian may have a sufficient acquaintance with Christ in his words of
promise, and ways of mercy, and yet for all this, if it will sit still in an
hour of trouble, and never set it self to meditate upon these things, never
put forth it self to try if it can close with the promise that it knows,
never try whether its faith will efficaciously work upon the merciful nature
of Jesus Christ, though it knows it, A soul may walk troubled long enough;
(but this I have nothing to do with here.) Christians, ah, you that fear the
Lord in the days of your peace, be every day gaining more and more knowledge
of God in his ways of mercy; be every day gaining more and more knowledge of
God in his precious promises; learn to know every hole of the rock, that so
you may readily fly to it in an hour of straits, readily run to it in an
hour of trouble. That your spirits may no sooner be troubled, but you shall
(being so acquainted with the book of God) presently turn to a good word of
promise that shall make it better, or presently fix your eye upon Christ, and
consider him in some suitable notion of love or other, from which your souls
shall gather peace. This shall be your wisdom.

that there is peace laid up for the Saints against the days of trouble? Then
learn (if ever you meet with trouble in the world) whether outward or inward:
Not only to look after peace, and a quietment, and settling of your spirits
again, but look to draw your peace from the Lord Jesus Christ, in the day of
trouble, to quiet your spirits in him, and to heal your spirits with something
drawn from him, some word of his, some meditation concerning him, etc. Fetch
out your peace and quietment, in all troubles, from the bosom of the Lord
Jesus Christ. Let me for this exhortation only give you some few directions,
and then I shall conclude with two or three motives. I know every child of God
is listening after this, and apprehends a great deal of sweetness in this,
fully conceiving, that it would be a very sweet thing, if he could bring this
about, that his soul should come out of every disturbance, Walking upon
Christ's hand, you cannot but say, this would be a sweet coming off, indeed.
Ah, but (will some say) how should this be? what course should we take to
work this about? what would you advise a poor creature to do, that it might
come out of troubles on this fashion? To this I shall answer in a few
directions, and that briefly.

to sit down and think, what is now a bitter dispensation that does not please
me. I am troubled at it, but let me think, is there nothing of God in this
dispensation? comes this affliction out of the dust? see if thou can see
nothing of Gods power or sovereignty, wisdom or justice, providence, love and
goodness, etc. I dare say there is scarce any affliction befalls thee, but if
thou studiest it well, thou will see all of these; yea, more of God than these
come to in it, thou will be brought at last to conclude, surely God was in this
cross, in this loss of a friend,, in this loss of estate, and I was not
aware of it; surely it is the will of the Lord concerning me, and shall I not
submit? God might do what he has done, he is my Lord and sovereign, why then
does my spirit rise up in arms against him? this is the ordering of a wise
Providence: If what I would have had had come to pass, then surely I could not
have mended it, it would have been worse for me; surely here is love in this
dispensation, for that God is all love that measured it out to me. Thus by
understanding, what of God there is in thy trial, thou will gain a true
peace. The truth is, it is the usual course of men and women, holy men and
women (as well as others) if a trouble come upon them, to sit down, and
conceit what of man there is in it, and say, This was such a ones malice to
me, now he has done me an ill turn, etc. whereas this (instead of bringing
the soul off trouble in a sanctified manner) does nothing else but involve the
soul in an inextricable Labyrinth of afflictions; and if ever it comes out, it
is at the back-doore too.

mediate a little, what there is in God to mend it. Sit down, and think with
thy self, is there not love enough of God remaining, to sweeten this sour
potion, to make pleasant this bitter dispensation? will not Christ's dying for
my sins, and washing me with his blood, make me amends for Gods present
bitter dealing with me? is there not faithfulness in that God, who has said,
He will never leave, nor forsake his people? who has said, joy shall come in
the morning, and that light is sown for the upright in heart. But thirdly,

what particular promises the Lord has made out to his Saints under such
troubles, that so thy soul may close with them, and thou may be stilled
with a good word from God; some of you know what it is, so to be stilled, to
have a disturbed spirit quieted, by the seasonable coming in of a Gospel
promise in an hour of straits: oh! how sweet is that peace say now to your
selves, The Lord has here brought an hour of trouble upon me, has he no
where made out a word of promise to suit my condition? I dare say it, there is
no condition, no sad, dark condition, that a poor Christian can be in, (but
somewhere or other) the Lord in his word has suited the soul in that
condition with a special promise; find it out Christian, it is the bladder,
that under the arme-holes of the soul, must keep the soul from sinking in the
deep waters of afflictions. Peace made by Gods good words (you heard before) is
a true peace, a peace of Jesus Christ's making in the soul.

Sit down in thy day of trouble, and weigh Gods mercies against his frowns,
then thou shall find, that the beam of thy soul will stand even, nay, it will
lean to the scales, where his mercies are; sit down, and think with thy self,
here is a bitter trial, a bitter affliction; but have I no mercies to
countervaile them? The Lord has taken away one of my children, but has he
not left me my fruitful vine yet? he has nipt off one of my olive branches,
but has he not left me many remaining about my table? he has left me my
husband, my wife yet: It may be he has taken away part of thy estate, but has
he not left thee food convenient for thee? If not, has he not left thee an
estate in Christ's love yet? a sure estate in Grace, and a richer reversion in
glory? It may be he has hid his face from thee, for a moment, for a little
moment; but has he not given thee everlasting mercies? Think of this,
Christian, and do thus, and thou will find thy spirit will begin to be
rightly quieted.

Study in the day of trouble, how far Christ has overcome the world; the
frowns of the world as well as any thing else; and is not his victory thine
(Christian?) sit down and think, well, here is a bitter cross, a sad
dispensation, but my Savior has pulled out the sting of it, it comes not upon
me as a law demand. O cross where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory?
this comes not upon me as it would have come upon another, as it would have
come upon a Reprobate, Is. 27. 7. Has he smitten them, as he smote those that
smote them? the gall and vinegar is taken out of the cup; Christ had that when
he hung upon the cross for me; this will help something to calm thy spirit,
to think it is a fathers rod, not a sword of an enemy.

Consider the days of old, thus I told you before David did, Psalm. 119. 52.
and the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. sit down and think how God has dealt bitterly
with thee, but did he never deal kindly with thee? had thou never the
shinings of his countenance. Think how graciously God has formerly dealt with
thee; and see what that will do toward thy peace.

Let reason sleep, and set faith on work, I told you before, that in a day of
trouble peace may be brought to the spirit as a conclusion from reason. I
cannot help it, and it is a foolish thing in me, to fear what I cannot avoid;
I cannot alter this dispensation, why should it trouble me? etc. Let Tully or
Cato work out their peace upon this account, let heathens (that know not
faith's nature or objects) quiet themselves upon such considerations,
Christian; In the day of trouble, if thou would have peace let reason sleep,
and let faith act upon the promises, and providence, and nature of God.

Pray unto God to settle thy soul, to send thee his peace, and wait upon God
in his ordinances. The way of peace is in the Sanctuary; True Peace is some of
the water of life, that must be drawn by the bucket of faith, out of the wells
of salvation. I shall add no more by way of direction: But now lest Christians
should think this of flight concernment, and that if they can get their spirits
quiet, it is no matter what quiets them, Christian, know there is a great
difference betwixt Peace and Peace, betwixt the world's Peace and Christ's
Peace, betwixt adulterate and true borne Peace. I will not stand at large to
set them together (though they would best appear so) but in short says
Musculus; the worlds peace is, Fusa, instabilis, nudis verb is ad perditionem,
a large peace (upon no good grounds) an instable peace (upon no good bottom) a
mere verbal Peace, and that which will end in everlasting trouble. But on the
contrary, consider by way of motive, that the Peace which I have been
describing to you, which is laid up in Christ for the Saint, and may be drawn
from Christ by the Saint in a day of trouble is,

1. A true Peace, the other is no Peace, a mere truce Peace, made with the
spirit for a while, till some new breakings forth; a flattred shadowy Peace, a
conceited imaginary Peace: Peace in a Picture, where is only the resemblance,
not the substance. This is a true Peace, Peace indeed to the soul.

2. This Peace is a sweet Peace, a Rose without Prickles, a Potion without
Gall, a sweetened Cup without any rubbings of Wormwood; Hezekiah complained,
that in his Peace he had great bitterness. It is true (though in another
sense) concerning all the world's Peace, and all moral Peace, but Prove. 10.
22. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and adds no sorrow therewith: This is
Peace with the Lord's blessing, the other is, but at the best, the Peace of a
warm Sun; there will be no sorrow added with this Peace, with all other Peace
sorrow will be added.

3. This Peace is a lasting Peace, all other Peace will fade and die. Nature in
time may be out of breath, of course, that it can sigh, and groan, and weep
no more: But let it get but breath again, and that Peace will be disturbed.
Reason may tame Passion a while, but let but Passion at any time get the upper
hand in Reason's sleeping time, or let it but get any Reason of its side, and
that Peace will be broken. Ah, but let the soul be quieted by Gospell-courses;
let it but draw forth its Peace out of the bosom of Christ, and as the
foundation lasts, so shall the structure of Peace that is builded in the soul,
last too. I can add no more, the Lord give his blessing to what has been
spoken, and send your troubled souls his Peace.

FINIS.
An exact Alphabeticall table of the several things contained in the preceding
Sermons, Cant. 8. 5.
The first figure denotes the part, the second the page.

A
ADam's sin how it defiles all. 1 p. p. 25 Afflictions a wilderness, why p. 3.
p. 9. how the soul in that wilderness leanes upon Christ, and comes out of it
leaning. p. 3. p. 52, 53 Anabaptist's errors concerning original sin. p. 1.
p. 32. Appletree, what 1 p. p. 16, 17. Christ the Appletree Ib. p. 47. his
Apples must be tasted, and being tasted are sweet, cordial, nutritive,
diffusive. 1 p. p. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 The Application of our purchased
redemption how it is. p. 2. p. 40. 41 The Ascension of Christ has a fourefold
influence upon our raising. p. 2. p. 37, 38, 39
B
THe Beloved of believers, a new one, but one, Christ he. p. 3. p. 31, 32, 33
Believers title and interest in Christ, how and what. p. 3. p. 28, 29, 30.
Birth, Noble, or Religious, neither will do us good. p. 1. p. 37 Religious
Birth most noble, yet not to be rested in. p. 1. p. 38. 39
C
CAlling effectual, what it is God does in it, 3 things. p. 2. p. 41, 42
Christ, how he was free from original sin. p. 1. p. 27. he has not taken
away original sin out of our nature, he pays no debts by halves, he does
nothing to so little purpose. p. 1. p. 33. how sweet he is to the Believer.
Ib. p. 48. how he is cordial to them. Ib. p. 50. how nutritive. By. p* 53.
how diffusive. Ib. p. 54. he raises his elect from under the appletree. p. 2.
p. 4. he was designed for that work. p. 2. p. 5, 6. the Covenant of Grace for
us was made between his father and him. Ib. p. 6. he alone could go through
the work of our Redemption. ib. p. 8, 9. Reasons for it. ib. He has redeemed
us. p. 2. p. 16, 17. He from eternity gave his Word for us. ib. He has raised
some, and will raise all his Elect actually and formally. p. 2. p. 17, 18. his
and his Fathers power are jointly engaged for Saints salvation. p. 2. p. 18,
19. How he has raised, and will yet further raise his Elect. ib. p. 20, 21,
22. 1. By his voluntary engaging his Word, and entering into an everlasting
covenant with his Father for them. p. 2. p. 20, 21. 2. By assuming their flesh.
ibidem. p. 26. How he assumed it. ibidem. 3. By his Passion. How. p. 2. p. 31,
32. Why that was necessary. ib. 4. By his Resurrection, how and why. p. 2. p.
33, 34, 35. 4. By his Ascension. What influence that has upon our raising. p.
2. p. 37, 38, 39. Christ gives his Saints new principles of grace, and power to
act those principles. p. 2. p. 43, 44. He will in his own time raise up the
soul to a sight of its salvation, how. p. 2. p. 44. He will at last perfectly
raise it by glorifying it. ib. He is moved by his own grace, and aims only at
his own glory. p. 2. 46, 47. He has infinitely loved us. p. 2. p. 53. He is a
complete Savior. p. 2. p. 55. He is highly needful to every poor soul. p. 2.
p. 55, 56. He is the greatest Physician, yet he has but little practice. ib.
p. 62. yet his Fee for soule-Physick is nothing. ib. p. 64. He keeps open shop.
ib. p. 62, 63, 64. He is highly to be valued by Saints. p. 2. p. 74. He is an
high pattern of Self-denial to Believers. p. 2. 74, 75. What his several
Acts of grace, in order to our redemption should teach us. p. 2. p. 75, 76, 77,
78. He deserves Saints cleaving to him in saddest straights. p. 2. p. 82, 83.
Covenant of God with Christ for us, That of Works was made between God and man
personally, that of Grace between God and Christ personally, and God and man
representatively. p. 2. p. 6. How the Covenants of Grace and Works differ, that
of Grace how more favorable than the other. p. 2. p. 28. Consolation for
Saints, in respect of themselves and of their friends yet in the state of
Nature. p. 1. p. 80, 81. against several complaints relating to themselves,
and concerning others. p. 2. p. 79, 80, 81, 82, 83.
D.
DEsertion, a Wilderness state: why. p. 3. p. 11. How in that wilderness the
soul leanes and comes out leaning on Christ. p. 3. p. 55, 56. The Design of
Heaven for man's salvation. p. 2. p. 5, 6, 7. Diabolical persuasion sinful
presumption. p. 1. p. 66, 67. Diffusivenesse of grace. p. 1. p. 55.
E.
ELect, v. pl. Saints, Believers. How raised by Christ's several acts of Grace
in order to the purchase of our Redemption. p. 2. p. 24, 25, 26, 27. They were
to fulfill the Law two ways; How Christ did it for them. p. 2. p. 29, 30. They
naturally want three things in order to their restoration, viz. life,
strength, light, p. 2. p. 40, 41. They are highly in Christ's debt. p. 2. p. 56,
57. They are called unto for thankfulness for their redemption, and persuaded
to it by Motives. p. 2. p. 68, 69, 70. How they are beloved before calling. p.
3. p. 35. How in their wilderness of contrition they lean upon Christ, and come
out of it leaning. p. 3. p. 45. Errors concerning Original sin discovered and
confuted. p. 1. p. 31, 32. Experiences of Saints prove that sorrow for sin
goes before comfort. p. 3. p. 63.
F.
FAith is the only hand can pluck fruit of the Appletree Christ. p. 1. p. 56,
57. it must be 1 True, 2 Perfect, 3 lively. Its life will appear, Internally,
and Externally. p. 1. p. 58, 59, 60. How it is the gift of God. p. 1. p. 68,
69. How it is grounded on a divine persuasion. p. 1. p. 68, 69. What Faith is.
p. 3. p. 25. Freeness and Fullness of mercy in Christ, how, supporting to the
soul that is broken with the sense of sin. p. 3. p. 47, 48, 49.
G.
GOd well pleased with Christ as our surety. p. 2. p. 24, 25. Grace tasted, how
sweet, cordial, nutritive, and diffusive. p. 1. p. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
How Grace supports the soul broken with the sense of its sins. p. 3. p. 46, 47.
By Gods General Grace the soul may avoid gross sins. p. 3. p. 14. and by
Gods exciting grace it may do many actions that are praevious to Faith and
Repentance. p. 3. p. 14, 15.
H.
HOpe for those yet in the state of Nature. p. 1. p. 81, 82. Humiliation
whether before Faith or no, and how. p. 3. p. 16, 17. it is. p. 64, 65, 66.
Humiliation for Saints, from the considerations of the great work of our
Redemption by Christ. p. 2. p. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. Humility becomes Saints
that were borne children of wrath by Nature, as well as others. p. 1. p. 77,
78.
I.
INcarnation of Christ, how it conduces to our Raising. p. 2. p. 25, 26. in
what respects it was necessary as to that work. p. 2. p. 26, 27, 28. Justice of
God in charging our debts upon Christ, cleared from his voluntary engagement
for us. p. 2. p. 21, 22. Justification of a sinner what it is. God does in it
three things, by Calling, and that the dead soul gets life. p. 2. p. 42, 43.
L.
LEaning implies four things, 1 Weariness, 2 Willingness, 3 Love, 4
Confidence. p. 3. p. 20, 21, 22. 23. Christ only leaned upon by Saints. p 3 p.
25.
M.
MAnichees errors concerning Original sin. p. 1. p. 31. Most Men and Women in a
dreadful condition. p. 1. p. 34, 35. yet they are not so sensible of soul
diseases as of bodily. p. 2. p. 63. Mercies of Christ in their fullness and
freeness, how they support the soul in a broken conditition. p. 3 p. 46, 47,
48. Moral persuasions nothing to faith. p. 1. p. 64. Mortality a Wilderness
state to Saints. p. 3. p. 12. Mothers convey Nature, nothing saving. p. 1. p.
43. Motives to persuade Saints to be thankful for their Redemption. p. 2. p.
68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, Mourners for sin exhorted by several Arguments to lean
upon Christ. p. 3. p. 99, 100, 101.
N.
NAture whether corrupt or refined will not carry any to heaven. p. 1. p. 44.
Natural Righteousness, Negative, or Positive, will not. p. 1. p. 44, 45, 46.
Nature may beget a persuasion in us. p. 1. p. 62. Natures persuasion and faith
is sickly. p. 1. p. 63, 64. Natural men persuaded to look for a part in
Christ. p. 2. p. 61, 62.
O.
Original sin how dangerous, how it defiles all. p. 1. p. 25, 26.
P.
PArentage, whether Noble or Religious not to be gloried, nor rested in, we
may be damned notwithstanding it. p. 1. p. 36, 37, 38, 39. Pardon of sins in
several senses. p. 1. p. 42. How it is from eternity, how in time. ib. Papists
error about Free Will. p. 3. p. 73, 74. Passion of Christ how necessary, why.
p. 2. p. 31. Pelagians errors about Original sin. p. 1. p. 27, 28. about
Free Will. p. 3. p. 71, 72. Persuasions, various; natural, moral,
traditionall, diabolical; what all these are. p. 1. p. 62, 63. 64, 65. all
differ from the persuasion of faith. p. 1. p. 62, 63, etc. Preaching of the Law
ought to be. God has honored that way of preaching. p. 3. p. 61, 62. Promises,
how they support the soul broken for sin. p. 3. p. 49, 50, 51. Propagation of
original sin how it is. p. 1. p. 25, 26, 27. Whether the soul has any
Propriety in its action of coming to Christ. p. 3. p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20.
Q
A Question answered, viz. Whether the soul does any thing, and what it does or
can do toward its conversion. p. 3. p. 14, 15, 16, 17. 18. The question
determined by Dr. Davenant. ibid.
R
RAised, what it means. p. 2. p. 2, 3. How the elect are raised. p. 2. p. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. those that are raised, are raised by Christ's means,
and in Christ's method. p. 2. 58, 59. To accomplish our Redeemer 4 things
necessary, all found in Christ only. p. 2. p. 12, 13, 14. Redemption of
sinners, not a work beyond Christ's strength. p. 2. p. 7. but beyond all
strength but his. p. 2. p. 8, 9, 10. Reasons for it. ibid. Repentance and
holiness needful to the Elect. p. 1. p. 41, 42. How far it may be without
saving grace. p. 3. p. 38, 39, 40. In what sense it is saving or not. p. 3. p.
40, 41. How it ought to be preached. p. 3. p. 42. Reproofs for several sorts
of people. p. 3. a p. 58. ad p. 75. Especially for such as will not lean on
Christ alone. p. 3. p. 74, 75, 76. Resting in the soul that leanes. p. 3. p.
24. Resurrection of Christ in what respects necessary to our raising. p. 2. p.
33, 34. Righteousness moral and negative, not sufficient to salvation. p. 1.
p. 45.
S
SAints by nature in a state of disunion to Christ. p. 1. p. 22, 23. Proved.
ibid. How they are originally guilty. p. 1. p. 25, 26. They beget not Saints,
why. p. 1. p. 28, 29. How highly they are engaged to thankfulness. p. 1. p.
71. They should pity those in natural conditions. p. 1. p. 74. 75. They
should be humble considering their natural estate. p. 1. p. 77. Their
weakness how helped by Christ. p. 2. p. 43. All is done for their
justification, they have only to believe that all is finished. p. 2. p. 55.
Saints called upon for thankfulness for their Redemption, by several
arguments suasory. p. 2. p. 68, 69, 70. They should value nothing equally with
Christ. p. 2. p. 74. They should tie themselves to God by a perpetual
Covenant, and keep their words. p. 2. p. 76. They should assume the divine
nature. p. 2. p. 76, 77. Die to sin and arise to newness of life. p. 2. p.
77. and set their affections on heavenly things. p. 2. p. 78. Christ should be
in them the hopes of glory. ibid. They may have dwellings in six wildernesses.
p. 3. p. 5, 6, 7, etc. They are in an happy condition p. 3. p. 87. 88, 89.
Highly beloved of Christ. p. 3. p. 90, 91. They had need walk close with
Christ. p. 3 p. 91, 92. Their estate is safe, and joyful, and full. p. 3. p.
95, 96. In any wilderness they are persuaded by several arguments to lean on
Christ. p. 3 p. 99, 100, 101, 102, 103. Self-denial taught Saints from Christ's
example. p. 2. p. 74, 75. Sin is a wilderness condition. p. 3. p. 5, 6, 7.
Sinne-sick souls how they may speak with Christ their Physician. p. 2. p 63.
Sinners reproved that dream of a portion in Christ, and yet are in the
wilderness of sin, and think not of coming out. p. 3. p. 59 60. Song of Songs,
why the Canticles are so called. p. 1. p. 1, 2. Sorrow for sin, a wilderness
state, why. p. 3. p. 7, 8. Every Soul has infinite need of Christ. p. 2. p.
55, 56. The Soul sanctified is not merely passive, p. 3. p. 75. Spouse of
Christ who is, she has had and may again have her dwelling in the
wilderness: in what wildernesses, what the term means, and how it is true.
p. 3. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc, She comes up out of the
wilderness. p. 3. p. 12, 13, 14. Strength enough in Christ's arm to bear up
the soul coming up out of every wilderness. p. 3. p. 34, 35, 36. Sufferings
of Christ how they were conducible to our raising, and why necessary. p. 2. p.
31, 32. Sweetness of Christ to the soul that tastes him. p. 1. p. 48.
T
TEmptations a Saints wilderness, why. p. 3. p. 10. How the soul in them
leanes and comes out of them leaning on Christ. p. 3. p. 54, 55. Thankfulness
how highly the duty of Saints. p. 1. p. 71, 72, 73. Motives to it. p. 2. p. 68,
69. Traditionall faith nothing. p. 1. p. 64, 65. Trial of our selves whether we
be in the state of nature or grace, how it may be made. p. 1. p. 43, 44. Notes
of Trial whether we be raised or no. p. 2. p. 57, 58. Whether we be the
Spouses of Christ, or no. p. 3. p. 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81.
V
Unbelievers sad condition opened. p. 3. p. 83, 84. They are exhorted to look
out for a part in Christ. p. 3. p. 93. 94, 95.
W
Weakness of the soul how helped by Christ. p. 2. p. 43. Weariness in the
soul that will lean on Christ. p. 3. p. 27, 28. Wellbeloved of the soul who.
p. 3. p. 26. Will of man, does not first stir in the soul for God. p. 3. p.
71, 72. Wilderness what it means, what manner of place it is, opened in six
particulars. p. 3. p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 76, 77. Saints may dwell in a
sixfold Wilderness. p. 3. p. 5, 6, 7, 8. Wilderness company what it is. p. 3.
p. 78. How sad a condition it is to be in the wilderness. p. 3. p. 84.
Willingness: how, and when in us. p. 3. p. 17, 18, 19. willingness in the soul
that comes to Christ, how. p. 3. p. 21.
An Index of the several Contents of each Sermon in the following Treatise.
In the first Sermon and Part.
THe words considered, Relatively, Absolutely. p. 4, 5. Several senses of the
words given by Expositors, declared and rejected, with reasons for the
rejection. p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The true sense given
(according to the Authors judgment) with his reasons for it. p. 16, 17, 18,
19. The words analyzed. 19, 20. 3 Doctrines propounded to be insisted upon. 21.
1. Doct. The best of Gods Saints by nature were borne in a lost condition. 22,
23. The doctrine proved by Scripture. ibid. 24. Adams sin how it goes over all,
and how all are Originally defiled. ib. 25, 26. How Christ came to be free of
this guilt. 29. Saints beget not Saints, why. 28, 29. St. Austines and Mr.
Perkins his opinion. 28, 29. Mr. Perkins his counsel to such as are
inquisitive to know how Original sin came to be propagated. 29, 30. 1. Use of
the Doctrine, to discover the errors of Pelagians, Manichees, Anabaptists, and
Universalists. 30, 31, 32. Christ by his death has not taken Original sin
out of our nature. 32. Christ pays no debts by halves for any. 33. Christ
uses not to do things to no purpose. 33. 2 Use for Instruction. 34. 1. What a
sad condition most men and women are in. 34. It is a miracle if withered
sinners be saved. 34. 2. Whom we have cause to thank that we are this day out
of hell. 36. Not our Noble Parentage: there is a great deal of bragging of
that in the world to little purpose. 36, 37. Vain-glorying will have an end in
hell. 37, 38. Religious Parentage best; most noble, most to be gloryed in, 38,
39. but not enough. 39. It was the Jews brag. 39, 40. Parents faith wants a
way of conveyance to save our souls. 40. This made plain by a familiar
instance. 40. 3. Br. From hence we may be instructed what a
soule-cheating-Principle it is of Libertanisme to say we have no need of
Repentance, etc. If we be elected we shall be saved, if not, damned. 41. 3.
Use. Let us try our selves whether we be not yet in a state of disunion to
Christ. 4^, 43. 4. Notes of Trial, 43, 44. 1 Note. If none have done more for
us than our Mother has done, we are yet in the state of Nature. 43. Mothers
convey Nature. 43. Nature is either corrupted or refined, neither enough. 45,
46. 2. Note. If we have not tasted of the fruit of the Apple Tree we are yet
but under it. 47. Christ is the Apple Tree. ib. 1. The Apple if tasted is
sweet. 48. Christ sweet to Saints. 48, 49. High thoughts of Christ argue a
spiritual taste of him. ib. 2. The tasted Apple is cordial. 50. 1 In taste. 2.
In smell. ib. Christ how cordial to swooning Saints. ib. No Cordial to
unbeleevers. ib. 50, 51, 52. 3. Tasted Apples are nutritive. 53. Souls that
have tasted Christ will from him draw nourishment. 54. 4. The tasted Apple is
diffusive of its virtue. 54, 55. 3. Note of Trial: If thou have plucked the
fruit of the Apple Tree, thou have a hand to do it. 56. Faith is the hand. 57.
This hand must be, 1 True, 2 Perfect, 3 Lively. 58, 59. Painted hands pluck no
fruit. ib. Faith, how perfect is necessary, 58, 59. Dead hands pluck nothing.
59, 60. Faith is lively, Internally, Externally. 60. It must be given us from
above. 62. Persuasions various, Natural, Moral, Traditionall, Diabolical, etc.
63, 64, 65. All these good for nothing. ib. Nature's Legacy of faith. 63.
Natures faith is sickly. ib. Moral persuasions nothing. 64. Legacies of faith
from Parents will not bring heaven and Christ. 65. Most men believe there is a
God and Christ, etc. because their Father taught them so, and their Mother so
learnt them their Catechism. 65. This was the good woman's Religion. 65. Most
believe as their Fathers believed. 65, 66. True faith is the gift of God. 68.
it is grounded upon divine persuasion. What that is, etc. 68, 69. Use 4.
Exhortation in several Branches. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. 1 Br. To persuade Saints
to thankful hearts, what cause they have. 71, 72. 2 Br. Put on Bowels of
mercy to other lost undone souls. 73, 74. We pity bodies, but not souls. 74,
75, 76 3 Br. The consideration of this Doctrine calls to Saints for humble
hearts. 77, 78, 79. Use 5. It may be applied to give us a ground, 1 of
Consolation, 2 of Hope. 80, 81, 82. Hope for those yet in the state of Nature.
81. Hope for Saints, concerning their friends yet in the state of Nature. 82,
83.
An Index of the several things contained in the second part.
2 Doct. It is the Lord Jesus Christ that helps his redeemed ones out of their
lost condition. 4. The Doctrine enlarged in five particulars. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
etc. 1. Christ was assigned to do it. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. The Covenant of Grace
was made betwixt the Father and Christ personally, and us representatively in
him. 6. God in laying our Redemption on Christ's shoulders laid help on one that
was mighty. 7, 8. 2. Christ alone was able to go through with the work of our
Redemption. 8, 9. Reason for it. ib. Angels, Creatures, man, could not do it.
9, 10. Four things necessary to accomplish our Redemption, which alone could
be found in Christ. page 12. 1. One that could dye. 12. 2. One that had the
offending nature. 12. 3. One that could merit by death. ib. 4. One that could
pay an infinite satisfaction. 13.
The Riddle of man's Redemption solved. 14. 3. Christ has done the work of our
Redemption. 14, 15. Christ has raised all Intentionally, and Moritoriously,
whom his Father elected, some also Actually and formally, 16, 17. 4. Christ
will raise all his chosen ones actually, and formally. 17, 18. Pardon is to
come out of course to all the Elect. 18. Christ's and his Fathers power are
united and jointly engaged for his Elects salvation. 18, 19. 5. Christ has
raised, and will raise his Elect; How he has already, and will yet further do
it. 20, 21. 22, 23. 1. By entering into a Covenant and engaging his word for
them. 20, 21, 22. The justice of God in charging our debts on Christ cleared by
his voluntary engagement for us. 21, 22. How the Father is well pleased, and
satisfied in Christ, as Mediator. 23, 24, 25. Till Christ came, God the Father
had nothing but Christ's word for the payment of our debts. 25. 2. How Christ
raised us by assuming our flesh. 26, 27. That was necessary in order to our
redemption, 1 That he might suffer, 2 That the same Nature might. suffer. 3
That righteousness might be fulfilled. 4 That he might fulfill the Law for us.
27, 28. The Govenant of Grace and Works how they differ, how the latter is more
favorable. 28. Christ was to be a merciful high Priest. 30, 31. 3. Christ
raised his Saints by his suffering. How and why that was necessary. 31, 32. 1.
That he might satisfy. ib. 2. That he might conquer for us. 32, 33.
4. Christ raised us, by his resurrection. 33, 34, 35. What influences Christ's
Resurrection had upon our raising. 33, 34, 35. 1. It witnesses Christ's
Conquest for us. 33. 2. It quickens us. 34. 3. It is a pledge to us of our
rising to glory. 35.
5 Christ has raised his Elect by his Ascension. 35, 36. What influence that
act of Christ's had on our raising. 35, 36, 37. 1. In going before he provides
a place for us. 36. 2. He is by that our Way to the Father. 36. 3. He is by
that our Advocate with the Father. 37, 38. 4. In that ascending up on high, he
gave gifts to men. 38.
Elect ones Naturally want three things, 1 Life, 2 Strength, 3 Light. 40, 41.
1. Christ first calls the soul effectually, in that work he usually, 1
Convinces the soul of its misery, 2 Humbles it, 3 Gives it hope. This is the
first means of Application of the purchased Redemption to the soul. 41, 42.
2. He justifies the soul. What that is. Three things God does in
justification. 1. He pardons the souls sins. 2. He imputes Christ's
Righteousness unto it. 3. He accepts it. 42, 43.
By these two acts the soul has life given it. ib. Weakness of the soul how
helped by Christ. 43. 1. Christ gives the soul new principles of Grace. ib. 2.
He gives the soul power to act those Principles. ib. 3. How Christ will in his
own time raise up the souls of his Saints to a sight of their salvation. 44.
4. Christ will at last fully raise them up, by taking them to glory. 44.
Why Christ undertook the work of our Redemption. 46, 47. The moving cause was
his own grace. The final cause his own glory. 46, 47. The Application of the
Doctrine variously. a 47. ad 83. 1. Use For Humiliation. 47, 48. For our sins;
and that from hence upon a double ground. 1. To consider that our sins put
Christ to death. 48, 49. 2. That by any renewing sins we should again
crucify the Lord of life. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52.
2. Use For Instruction, in four Branches. 1. Br. How much has Christ loved
us? 53. 2. Br. Christ is a complete Savior, he has left us nothing to do,
but to believe all is done. 55. 3. Br. Christ is highly needful to every poor
soul. 55, 56. 4. Br. All the Elect and Redeemed ones are highly indebted to
Christ. 56, 57.
3 Use For Trial, whether we be yet raised or no. 57. 58. 2 Notes of Trial.
ib. 1. N. If we be raised it is by Christ's act. 57, 58. 2. N. It is in Christ's
Method of Application. 59. What that is. ibid.
4. Use. Of Exhortation. 1. To Natural men. 2. To Saints. 61, 62, 63, etc. 1.
Let poor undone creatures look for a portion in Christ. 61, 62, 63. Men are
not, so sensible of soule-diseases as of bodily sicknesses. 62. 4. Directions
for such poor creatures. 62, 63, 64. 1. How they may speak with Christ. ib. 2.
What his Fee is. ibid. The condition is, Bring nothing. ib. 3. How they must
use his Balm. 64. 4. What rules of Diet must be observed after taking it. 66.
The second part of the Exhortation turned to Believers. 67. Saints exhorted to
thank fullness. 67, 68. From the consideration, 1. Of the person of their
Redeemer, in three particulars. 68, 69. 2. Of the act and manner of their
Redemption, in three things. 69, 70. 3. Of the Object of this act opened in
five particulars. 71, 72, 73.
He has done it, that was 1. Infinitely above thee. 2. In no need of thee. 3.
The offended Creator.
He raised thee 1. Out of a low condition. 2. To a glorious condition. 3. By
his own falling.
He raised Thee 1. Not others Angels. Great persons.
2. That were as low as others.
Thee. 3. That were his enemy. 4. That never asked it before it was done. 5.
That have still rebellion in thee. p. 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73.

Particular exhortations to believers to the performance of several duties.
All which are enforced from Christ's several acts of grace in raising us. 74,
75 76, 77, 78, etc. 1. Value nothing in an equal balance with Christ. 74. 2.
Vow your selves to God, and keep your vows. 76. 3. Believers, as Christ has
taken upon him their nature, should likewise strive to be made partakers of his
Nature. 76. 4. From Christ's death they should learn to die to sin. 77. 5. From
Christ's resurrection they should learn to rise to newness of life. 77, 78. 6.
From Christ's ascension, Believers should learn to ascend, by setting their
affections on heavenly things. 78. 7. Let Christ be in you the hopes of glory,
ibid.
5. Use. This doctrine affords consolation for believers. 1. Against their
outward poverty. 79. 2. Against their fears because of their many and great
sins. 80. 3. Against their daily back slidings. ib. 4. Against their present
sadness. ib. 5. Against their fears of falling away. 80, 81.
Belevers from hence may be comforted with hope. 1. Concerning such of their
friends as are no^ yet raised. 81. 2. Concerning such as are full of terror and
sadness. 81. 82.
A Branch of instruction added that was forgotten in its order. viz. How much
Christ deserves our cleaving (...) him in saddest conditions. 82, 83.
An Index of, the several contents of the third part.
Doct. 3. The Spouse of Christ (being raised by him) comes out of every
wilderness, leaning upon her beloved. p. 2. The Doctrine divided into four
branches. ib. 1. Br. of the Doctrine. Christ's Spouse has had and may again
have her dwelling in the wilderness. 3. The wilderness is 1. Untilled. 2. A
losing place. 3. A dangerous place. 4. A solitary place. 5. A disconsolate
place. 6. A place void of all provisions. 3, 4. Saints have had and may have
their dwelling in a sixfold wilderness. 1. Of sin, why that is called so. 6.
2. Of sorrow for sin. 7, 8. 3. Of bodily afflictions, this is a
wildernesse-state, why. 9. 4. Of temptations. 10, 11. 5. Of divine desertions.
11. 6. Of mortality. 12.
2. Br. of the Doctrine. viz. The Spouse of Christ comes out of the
wilderness. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. The question answered, whether the soul does
any thing, and what it does or can do toward its conversation. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20. The soul by Gods general grace denied to none, may avoid
gross sins. 2. By Gods exciting grace it may perform many praevious
actions. 14, 15. It cannot move one foot to a spiritual action spiritually.
18. When the Lord changes the soul then it comes. 18. 3. Br. of the
Doctrine. The soul in coming up out of the wilderness, comes not in its own
strength but leaning. 20. Leaning implies four things. ib. 1. Weariness. 21,
22. 2. Willingness. 23. 3. Love. 23. 4. Resting. 24.
A description of faith. 25. The fourth Br. of the Doctrine. viz. The Spouse of
Christ coming up out of every wilderness, will lean upon her wellbeloved,
and him only. 25, 26, 27. The Spouse. 1. Leanes upon one whom she loves. 26. 2.
Upon her wellbeloved, one that she is married to. 27. Christ's near relation to
saints and theirs to him, by. 1. The Fathers, and their own gift. 2. By
Bargain. 3. By purchase and desert. 4. By right of possession. 28, 29, 30. 3.
The soul leanes upon her Beloved, not another. 31. 4. It leanes upon him,
that is, not those that were her Beloveds. What strength there is in Christ's
shoulders to bear up the soul coming out of every wilderness. 34 etc. How
the elect are beholden to Christ before effectual Vocation. 36. 1. For his
preventing and restraining grace. 37. 2. For his exciting grace. ib. Some
Repentance may be without saving grace. 40, 41. Repentance in what sense called
saving. 40, 41. how it ought to be preached. 42. How in the wilderness of
sorrow the soul leanes upon Christ, and comes out leaning. 44, 45. Gods
supporting grace how it stays up the soul at such a time. 46. How the
fullness and freeness of Christ's mercy supports the soul broken with the
sense of sin. 46, 47, 48. How Christ's promises support the soul broken with
sorrow for sin. 49, 50. How Christ speaks to the soul in such a condition, 1.
By his ministers, 2. By his spirit. 50, 51. How the soul leanes upon Christ in
the wilderness of affliction, and comes out of it leaning. 52, 53. What Acts
of faith the believing soul puts out in affliction. ib. How the believer
leanes upon Christ in temptations, and comes out of them leaning. 54, 55. How
in desertions the gracious soul leanes upon Christ, and comes out of them
leaning p. 55, 56. The application of the Doctrine. a p. 58. ad p. 104. 1. Use
Reproof, First, To such as think to get to heaven, and are not com out of the
wilderness of sin. 58, 59, 60, etc. Secondly, Those are reproved that preach
down sorrow for sin as a precedent work. 61, 62.
The Law ought to be preached. 60. God has most honored such preachers. 61,
62. Experiences of Saints prove that sorrow for sin goes before comfort. 63.
Mr. Rutherfords opinion of precedent Humiliation. 65. God is not to be limited,
he can save without it, but he rarely does. 67, 68. Thirdly, Those are reproved
that are in wildernesses, and yet will not lean. 69. Fourthly, And those That
would make man's will the author of his first motion to God. 71. Pelagians and
Arminians errors about freewill. 72, 73. Fifthly, Those are reproved That deny
any motion of the sanctified will. 74, 75. Sixthly, Those are reproved That
will not lean upon Christ alone. 1. Such as would have Christ and their sins
too. p. 75. 2. Or Christ and their merits. Or 3. Christ and their duties. 73,
74, 75. 2. Use of Examination and trial whether we be the spouses of Christ or
no. 75. 1. Examine whether thou be come out of the wilderness of sin or no.
ib. Three notes to know that by. 76, 77, 78. 1. The wilderness is an untilled
place. 76. 2. It is a barren place. 77. 2. Those that are in the wilderness
keep wilderness company. 78. 2. Examine whether ever thou were in the
wilderness of contrition of no. 78. 3. Examine what other wildernesses thou
have met with. 80. 4. How do thou carry thy self in the wilderness? 81. 5.
How have thou used to come out of the wilderness? 81. 6. How have thou carried
thy self since thuo came out? 82. 3. Use, for information. 1. Br. What a sad
condition all believers are in. 83, 84. 1. They are in a wilderness. ib. 2.
They have no way to get out. 85. 2. Br. What an happy condition Gods people are
in. 87, 88, 89. 1. They are out of the wilderness of sin. ibid. 2. In every
wilderness they have one to lean upon. 88. 3. Br. How great is the love of
God to us that he would look us up in the wilderness, and let us lean upon
himself. 90, 91. 4. Br. What need we have to walk close with Christ. 91, 92.
4. Use, for exhortation. 1, Br. To unbeleevers to come out of their
wilderness of sin to Christ. 93, 94, 95, etc. 2. Motives to persuade them.
ib.
1. The danger of their present state. 94, 95. 1. It is a dangerous condition.
2. It is a joylesse condition. 3. It is a starving condition. 94, 95.
2. Motive, The happiness of the believers state. 95, 96, etc. 1. It is a safe
condition. 95. 2. It is a joyful condition. 95, 96. 3. In that estate and that
only there is provision for the soul. 97. 98.
2. Br. To exhort those that are in any other wilderness to come out of it,
leaning upon Christ. 99, 100, etc. 1. Consider thou art how in a capacity of
believing. 99. 2. Thou have ground enough to build thy faith upon, there is, 1.
power enough, 2. love enough, in Christ to save thee. 100, 101. 3. Thou can
not dishonor Christ more than not to believe in him. 101, 102.
Christ will take believing kindly at our hands. p. 103.
Courteous Reader,
THe Author upon a slight perusal of these sheets, finds that the Printer
has bin so courteous to him in his absence, that for the escapes of the
Press, they are either literal, which thou may easily see and correct, or
some few, so gross, that thou will easily discern the mistakes; he has
therefore rather chose to put himself upon thy charity, then put thee or
himself to the trouble of a table of Errata's, which is usually made with
trouble, and seldom used when it is done.

A short Table of the several things contained in the two last Sermons.
THE Psalm analyzed, and the words of the Text opened. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 5. Doctrines noted out of the words. 13, 14. The fifth
Doctrine handled, viz. That soul that would have the Lord Jesus Christ desire
its beauty, must forget its own people, and its Fathers house, and whosoever
does that shall be beautiful. 14, 15, 16, etc. The Method of handling the
Doctrine propounded. 15. What is meant by our Fathers house. 15. What of our
Fathers house must be forgotten, opened in five particulars. 1. The manners of
our Fathers house, viz. our sins. 16. 5. Sorts of sins chiefly hinted in that
expression. 16, 17, 18, 19. Sins 1 Original. 16. 2 Of Education. 17. 3 Of
Company and Conversation. 18 4 Of Custom. 18, 19. 5 That are our beloved sins.
19.

2. The Company of our Fathers house. 19, 20. That is twofold. ib. 1. Our
dearest Relations. 19, 20. How they must, and must not be forgotten. 20. Not 1
in honor, 2 nor affection, nor 3 providentiall care: but. 1. If God and they
draw several ways. 20, 21. 2. If their love becl^e^ us out of the way, when
God calls us. 21.
2. Sinful Company is the company of our Fathers house. 23. 3. The soul must
forget the honor and pomp, and riches, and greatness of its Fathers house.
24, 25, 26. How that must be. ibid. 4. The soul must forget the pleasures and
vanities of its Fathers house. 27. That explained. 28, 29. 5. The soul must
forget the Righteousness of its Fathers House. 30, 31. What that is. ib.
Civility is but a smooth way to hell, it is worth nothing, no more is f^^^^lity
in duties* ^^ 2. Br. Of Explic. How these things must be forgotten. 32, 33, 34,
45. etc. 1. Sin and sinful Company must be forgotten absolutely. 32, 33. 2.
The rest must be forgotten secundum quid. 33. 3. They must be forgotten
Conditionally. 33. that explained. 34. 4. Comparatively they must be forgotten.
35. 5. In effect they must be forgotten. 35, 36.
3 Br. of the Explication, viz. How that soul shall be beautiful that thus
forgets its Fathers house. 36, 37, 38. That showed Negatively, Positively. 36,
37.

Negatively, not with A corporal beuty. 36. A natural beauty. 37.
in its own eyes, a creatures eye. 37.

Positively it shall be beautiful, 1. By Imputation. 37. 2. By Christ's
Acceptance. 38. 3. In Saints eyes. 38, 39.

4. Branch of the Explication, viz. what is meant by that phrase, The King
shall desire* thy Beauty. 39, 40. Opened Generally. 39. 2. Particularly. Six
things employed in it. 40, 41, 42, 43. 1. Christ shall see an excellency in such
a soul* 40. 2. He shall love such a soul. ib. 3. He shall in his heart
prefer such a soul. 40, 41. 4. He will endeavor and effect an union with
such a soul. 42. 5. He will covet a near Communion with such a soul. 4. 6.
He will love such a soul with a constant and inseparable love. 43.
5. Reasons of the Doctrine. 44, 45, 46. Because, 1. It is the very law of
marriage. 44. 2. While the soul lives in its Fathers house it cannot be
beautiful. 44. 3. Till the soul part with these it cannot cleave to Christ.
45. 4. Because God is a jealous God. 46. 5. Because it is the will of Christ,
to whom a^ an Husband the united soul must be obedient* 46* The Application
of the Doctrine, a 47* ad 89. 1. For Instruction in several Branches. Br. 1.
That the most part of the world (...) those which the world esteems of are
uncomely indesireable creatures in Christ's eye. 47, 48, 49, 50. Br. 2. Which
may the way to heaven lies, and that it is a straight way. 51, 52, 53, 54. Br.
3. That something more than Nature must make a soul beautiful in Christ's
eyes. 54. Br. 4. With what an infinite love has Christ loved his Saints. 54,
55, 56. Br. 5. What happy creatures are poor self-denying Saints. 56, 57, 58.
2. Use, For Examination: Whether we have forgotten our fathers house, and our
beauty be desirable in Christ's eyes or no. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, etc. 1. You
have seen a great deal of folly in your Fathers house. 60. 2. You have had
another excellency discovered to you. 60, 61. 3. Your parting has not been
without some tears. 61, 62. 4. You have some combatings of spirit with your
fleshly inclinations to go home again: 62, 63. 5. Christ is your sole delight,
and all Christ is your delight. 63, 64. 6. Do you abide and dwell with Christ.
64.
3 Use. For Consolation. 1. Against all the uncomelinesse Saints apprehend in
themselves. 65. 2. Against all the dirt the world casts upon Saints. 65, 66. 3.
Against the worlds low esteem of them, 66.
Several Objections of misdoubtings Christians answered. 67, 68, 69, 70, 71. 1
Ob. I am ready to yield to temptations, and fall into sin, I fear I have not
forgot the manners of my Fathers house. An. Notwithstanding thy falling into
sin sometimes, yet thou may have forgot it: try therefore, 1. Which way
stands thy Affection. 68. 2. Do you not chide your selves back. 69. 3. How
long do you stay at home. 69.
2. Ob. I have not forgotten my Fatheas house, I am often in vain company, yea
and I love them: my heart is too much glued to my Relations. Answ. 1. Are they
thy invited guests, or intruders? 71. 2. Art thou a companion of them in sin,
or only in civil actions. 71. 3. Do thou love them with a mere natural
love, or more? 71. 4. Could thy Relations hinder thee from Christ, or thy love
hinder thee from discharging thy duty to them faithfully. 72, 73. 3. Ob. I am
not low enough for Christ, I am rich and noble, etc. Answ. 1. This is a
melancholy fancy: fat folk may get in at the straight gate with crowding. 74.
2. Do thou not affect and delight, and hunt after worldly pomp and glory.
74. 3. Do thou look upon thy title of the servant of Christ as the highest
title of honor. 74. 4. Is thy outward greatness no snare to thee in the ways
of Christ; if none of these it cannot hinder thee. 74, 75, 4. Obj. Ah! But I am
so much addicted to vain pleasures, etc. 1. Answ. Do thou love thy pleasures
more then God? 76. 2. Will thou baulk an opportunity of communion with Christ
or his saints, to enjoy a vain pleasure. 76. 3. Do thou affect pleasures
that cannot consist with holiness, as adultery, etc. 77.
If none of these, thou may enjoy them and yet be beautiful in Christ's
eyes. ib. Use 4. For exhortation. 1. To those who have not forgotten their
fathers house. 77 78, 79, 80, 81. They are exhorted to forget it. 78. The
exhortation urged by 6 motives. 79, 80, 81, 82, 83. Consider, 1. How will you
live when your fathers house fails. 79. 2. The great joys of a married life
to Christ. 79, 80, 81. 3. There is nothing in our fathers house but is more
eminently in Christ. 81, 8^. 4. Christ left his fathers house for us. 82. 5. It
is the way to be beautiful. 83. 6. It shall make you desirably beautiful to
the King. 84.
4. Directions for such people to help them in that hard work. 84, 85, 86. 1.
With a serious eye look upon your fathers house, and see what in it can be
desirable. 84, 85. 2. While you enjoy the things of the world let not your
hearts out to them. 85, 86. 3. Learn to live from home betimes. 86, 87. 4. Cry
to God to part you. 86.
2. Br. Of the exhortation to Saints. They are exhorted more and more to forget
their fathers house. 87. Three directions propounded. 87. 1. Direct. Study the
vanity of the Creature more. 87. 2. Direct. Converse little with your Fathers
house. 87. 3. Direct. Be more acquainted with Jesus Christ. 87.
One motive urged. 88. Viz. Because the King has desired your beauty. 89.
In the second Sermon upon that Text, John, 16. 33.
The Chapter and text analyzed and opened. p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 5. Doctrines noted
out of the words. 5. The doctrine insisted upon, propounded, viz. That though
in the world the true disciples of Christ must look for trouble, yet Jesus
Christ has taken such order, that in the midst of their troubles in him they
may have peace. 5, 6. The method of handling it propounded. 6. 5. Things to be
done in order to the explication of it. 6, 7. 1. Br. To open what is meant by
the term world. 7. It is taken chiefly in three senses. 1. For the men of
the world, and that either, 1. largely, or 2. restrictively several ways. 7,
8. For 1. Many of all sorts. 8, 9.
2. The unregenerate only. 3. The reprobates only. 4. The elect only.

2. It is taken For the things of the world. Sometimes 1. For the whole fabric
of the creation. 9. 2. For the earth only. 9. 3. For the vanities of the world.
10. 4. For the trafique of it. 10.

3. For our present state of life in the world. 10. In what sense it is taken
in the doctrine. 10. 11. 2. Br. Of the explication: What is meant by troubles,
and what troubles Saints must meet with. 11, 12. What the word signifies. 11.
For the kind. 1. Bodily sorrows. 12. 2. Outward crosses. 12. 3. Inward
troubles. 12.
For the degree, the word signifies, wearing, breaking, crosses. 13. 3. Br.
From what causes do Saints troubles arise. A threefold head of causes assigned.
1^. 1. From God: two ways God may be the cause. 1. In his just ordination. 14.
2. In Gods wise providence may lie hid a cause, he may bring them upon his
people,
To 1. Try them. 15.
2. Purge 3. Weane

2. Themselves may be a great cause of their own troubles. 16. 1. Through the
infirmities of their natures. 16. 2. Through the sinfulness of their souls.
17, 18. 3. The world may be a cause of the Saints troubles. 18
1. In respect of the incertainty of its comforts. 18, 19. 2. In respect of the
malice and ill nature of it inhabitants. 19.
4. Br. What is peace? what is Christ's peace? why is it called his? how is it
laid up in him? how may Saints draw it from him? what pains has he taken
about it? What peace of every sort is. 20. What peace with God is. 22. What
Christ's Peace is. 22. What the peace of our Justification is. 22. What peace of
conscience is. 23. Saints have peace with the whole Trinity. 24. It is called
Christ's peace because he is the meritorious cause of it. 24. What peace with
the Saints is, how that is Christ's peace. 25. Peace is laid up for the Saints
in the 1. Blood of Christ. 26, 27.
2. Words 3. Spirit

3. Ways by which a Christian may draw forth this peace from Christ. 27, 28.
1. By meditation of him. 27. 2. By a believing application of what Christ has
spoke and done. 28, 29. 3. A close walking with Christ. 29.
Now to gain this peace, Christ has taken great pains. He has 1. Died upon
the Cross for it. 30. 2. Given us many precious promises. ib. 3. Sent us his
Spirit. ib,

The Application of the Doctrine. ^ p. 31. ad finem. 1. For instruction in
several branches. 1. Br. Learn hence what we are to expect from the world.
31. 2. Br. Learn what is the peculiar lot of the Saints while they live here
below. 32, 33. 3. Br. What a miserable condition poor creatures are in that are
out of Christ. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. 4 s Br. What an happy condition are
those in that have a part in Christ. 39, 40. 5. Br. Learn hence, the only way
to find true peace in a day of trouble. 40, 41.
3. False ways of peace discovered, by which men use to come out of trouble.
41, 42, 43. 1. Some let Nature work out peace. 41. 2. Some drink a way
trouble. 42. 3. Some dispute themselves out. 43.
2. Use. For Reprehension. Of such Christians as have a part in Christ, yet
walk heavily. 44, 4. 3. Use: For Consolation to such as have an interest in
Christ. 46, 47. 4 Use: For Trial. Br. 1. Whether we be Christ's Disciples, or
no. 47, Six Gospel Notes to know that by. 47, 48. 49, 50. 1. If you have
effectually heard Christ. 48. 2. If you continue in Christ's Word. 48, 49. 3. If
you bear much fruit. 49. 4. If you be humble, self-denying, self hating, meek
creatures. 49, 50. 5. If you bear the cross aright. 50. 6. If you love one
another. 50, 51.
2. Branch of the Use of Trial. How we may know, if the peace our spirits come
off a trouble with, be Christ's peace or no, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. It is a true
peace, if N. 1. If it be drawn from some Word of God. 51, 52. N. 2. If it
arises from a due consideration and true application of something in the
nature of God commanding it silence. 53, 54. 3. Things in Gods nature, which
considered may still a spirit troubled: 1 His Will, 2 His Goodness, 3 His
Faithfulness. 53, 54. How to improve each of them accordingly. 53, 54, 55. N.
3. If it arises from a due meditation and application of what Christ has done
for us. 57. N. 4. If it be concluded upon some former experiences. 59, 60. N.
5. If faith be a Commissioner in making the peace. 60, 61. N. 6. If it be a
peace after prayer. 61, 62. Any Temple-peace is true, 62, 63. 5. Use: For
Exhortation. 1. To such as are strangers to Christ, to get an interest in him.
63. 2. Motives to persuade it. 63, etc. Consider.
Your peace is 1. A false peace. 63. 2. An unconstant peace. 64, 65.

2. Branch of Exhortation, to those that have a portion in Christ. 66, 67, etc.
1. Be not disquieted with worldly troubles. 66. To this end Consider, 1. Christ
has overcome the world. 66. 2. Christ by your troubles is a great loser by you,
In his 1. Blood. 67.
2. Breath. 3. Victory. 68.

2. Exhortation: Live much with Christ. 68, 69. Causes of Saints trouble
notwithstanding the peace laid up in Christ for them. 69 70. 1. Ignorance. 69,
70. 2. Negligence. 70, 71. 3 Exhortation to Saints. Learn in all your troubles
to look to draw peace from Christ. 72, 73, etc.
8 Directions given to Christians in this case. 73, 74, 75, 76, etc. 1 Dir. In
the beginning of a trouble sit dow^ and think what there is of God in it. 73. 2
Dir. Then consider what there is in God to help thee. 75. 3 Dir. Consider what
promises God has made to his Saints under such troubles. 75. 4 Dir. Weigh Gods
mercies against his frowns* 77. 5 Dir. Study how far Christ has overcome the
world. 77. 6 Dir. Consider the days of old. 78. 7 Dir. Let Reason sleep and
set faith on work 78. 8 Dir. Pray unto God to settle thy soul in peace. 79.
Motives to persuade Christians to look for such a peace. 80, 81. Consider this
peace will be 1. A true peace. 80. 2. A sweet peace. 80. 3. A lasting peace. 81.


FINIS.
A Note of the chief Errata's of the Press in the two last Sermons.
PAge 18. for mand^rs, read manners. P. 19. for nundinalitia, r. nundinatitia.
P. 42. for cour^, r. covet. P. 57. for dilectis Deo, r. dilecti Deo. P. 58. for
they received, r. he received. P. 63. for quest, r. quit. P. 64. for intent, r.
extent.
In the last Sermon.
P. 28. for rather, r. gather peace. P. 32. for peace or lot, r. peculiar lot.
P. 33. for ratify, r. rectify your error. P. 42. for wiled, r. veiled.

