Believers-Baptism from Heaven, and of Divine Institution. Infants Baptism from
Earth, and Human Invention.

Proved from the Commission of Christ, the great Lawgiver to the Gospel Church.

With a Brief, yet sufficient Answer to Thomas Wall's Book, called, Baptism
Anatomized.

Together with a brief Answer to a part of Mr. Daniel Williams's Catechism, in
his Book unto Youth.

By Hercules Collins, a Servant of the Servants of Christ.

Luke 7.29, 30. -- And the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
Baptism of John. But the Pharisees, and the Expounders of the Law, rejected the
Counsel of God against themselves, in not being baptized with the Baptism of
John. London, Printed for the Author, and sold by J. Hancock, in Castle-Alley
near the Royal Exchange, 1691.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. An Introduction, Page 5 Chap. 2. Contains the Doctrines, Page 8 Chap.
3. That Baptism is Dipping, Page 11 Chap. 4. Showing Believers only are the
proper Subjects of Baptism, Page 20 Chap. 5. Answer to Objections, Page 27
Chap. 6. Natural Inferences, Page 63 Chap. 7. Arecital of those Scriptures
speaking of Baptism, Page 72 Chap. 8. Of great Sufferings undergone, for
maintaining Believers, and denying Infants Baptism, Page 76 Chap. 9. The Book
epitomized, in comparing Believers-Baptism and Infant Baptism together, Page 81
Chap. 10. The Miscarriage of the German Anabaptists, (falsely so called)
examined, and the Reproach from thence reflected upon that way, removed, Page
95 Chap. 11. A brief, but sufficient Answer to Tho. Wall's Book, called Baptism
Anatomized, Page 108 Chap. 12. A brief Answer to a part of Mr. D. Williams his
Catechism, in his Book unto Youth, Page 128
ERRATA.
In Page 108, 114, 115. for John Wall, read Thomas Wall.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
MY desire is, that Thou would spend one Hour or Two seriously to read this
small Book; first of all begging of God it may be sanctified to thy Soul. Read
it without prejudice or partiality; and as one that is willing to receive the
Truth, and entering into another World, be like the Noble Bereans, search the
Scriptures to see whether these Things be so or no: Take nothing from Man, tho
never so Learned and Holy, upon trust, without trial. With what confidence may
a Man die when he has, Thus says the Lord, for his Faith and Practice? This
is all from him that wishes your Soul's welfare,

H. C.

Water Baptism Discoursed,
From St. Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.
CHAP. I.
IT was God's Command unto the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 43.11.
to show his People the Form of his House, with the goings in thereof, etc.
Know therefore, ye Servants of the Lord, as Circumcision was the Door into the
Jewish Church, which was National; so Baptism is the Door into the
Gospel Church, which is Congregational. Hence St. Luke says, They that gladly
received the Apostles Words, were baptized, and added unto the Church in number
about three thousand Souls, Acts 2.41.

The Ancients call Baptism, Janua Sacramentorum. As Listing is the solemn
engaging Sign into an Army, so is Baptism into the Church.

Mr. Baxter. Baptism is a sign of entering into the Church.

Ursinus. Baptism is the solemn admission of the Party into the visible Church.

Assemb. Catechism.
the Gate of the Sacraments, because by it we enter into the Church, and have
Communion with Saints.

In the Jewish Church they became Members, as they were the fleshly, or natural
Seed of Abraham; but now Members of the Gospel Church, as the spiritual Seed of
Abraham. Now we must not reckon from Abraham unto Christ, but from Christ to
Abraham: If we are Christ's, then are we Abraham 's Seed, Gal. 3.29. not
Christ's because we are Abraham's, or our Parents Believers.

Under the Old Testament, Persons became Members of the Church by Generation;
under the New by Regeneration, Baptism is a Foundation-Principle of
Church-Constitution, Heb. 6.1, 2. But the Foundation-Principle of Salvation, is
Faith in Christ.
or at least a Profession of it. Hence we read, Persons were first Converted,
then Baptized, after added unto the Church, Acts 2.41.

My Intent is, to display this Sacrament in its Apostolic Primitive Purity,
free from the Adulterations of Men, a Sin which God charged upon the Learned
Jews, that they made void the Commands of God by their Traditions. O that none
of the Learned among the Gentiles, especially those of the Reformed Churches,
may be chargeable with setting up Men's Inventions in the room of Christ's
Institutions. Mat. 15.6, 9.


CHAP. II.
THis Text, He that believes, and is Baptized, is a great part of the
Commission, which is the Foundation and Warrant for all Gospel Ministers
Preaching and Baptizing unto the end of the World.

Obedience is to be grounded upon the Majesty of the Commander, not the
Judgment of the Subject.

The Architect was rewarded with a bundle of Rods, for bringing, as he thought,
a fitter piece of Timber than was commanded by the Roman Consul.

And it cost a Roman Gentleman his Life, his own Father being Judge, tho
conquering an Enemy, being done contrary to his General's Command. Remember
Nadab and Abihu.


It Is worth our noting;

Here is first Faith, then Baptism. Therefore to baptize before there be any
appearance of Faith, is directly contrary unto this unerring standing Rule, and
does reflect upon our Lord and Lawgiver, as if he spoke rashly and
inconsiderately, putting that first which should be last, and that last which
should be first. And so in the parallel Text, Mat. 28.18. there is first
Teaching before baptizing, not first baptized, but taught first.

From this part of our Lord's Commission, we collect these Truths.

Doct. 1. It Is the unalterable Will of Jesus Christ, who is King and Lawgiver
to his Gospel Church, that all Persons believe before they are baptized.

Doct. 2. It Is the indispensable Duty of all true Believers to be Baptized.

I call it an indispensable Duty, because I know no Place where our Lord has
left this to the Liberty of Believers to do it, or leave it undone, as best
pleases them.

Therefore if this be your Lord and Savior's Will, Believers, pray obey him.
In your Prayers you desire you may be enabled to do his Will on Earth as it is
in Heaven: This is one part of his Divine Will; Your Redeemer was willing to be
baptized in Blood for your Salvation, and will not you be baptized in Water, in
obedience to his Commission? Moreover, Christ calls it, Mat. 3.15.
a fulfilling of all Righteousness. I am persuaded, should God have commanded
some great Thing, as was once said to Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5.13.
it would have been done by many in the Reformed Churches before now: How much
rather, when he only says, Go, wash and be clean? Or, as Ananias unto St.
Paul, Arise, and wash away thy Sins, viz. Sacramentally and Symbolically, as it
is in the Lord's Supper. Take heed, my Friends, you are not guilty of Contempt,
looking upon Christ's Ordinances as mean low and little things; for nothing is
mean that has Christ's Authority stamped upon it, tho it were the blowing of
Rams-horns round the Walls of Jericho: Josh. 6.13.
Exodus 20.24, 25.
Making an Altar of Earth, or rough Stone; taking the Blood of the
Trepass Offering, putting it on the Lap of the High-Priest's right Ear, Levit.
8.24.
the Thumb of the right Hand, the great Toe of the right Foot, having on it a
Divine Stamp, is an Argument sufficient for our Obedience.

Acts 9.18.
St. Paul, a very learned Man; the Eunuch who was Lord Treasurer under Candace
Queen of Ethiopia, Crispus a chief Ruler, Constantine and Theodosius great
Emperors, our Lord, the only Potentate, accounted it so honorable a thing, as
to practice it, when about thirty Years of Age, and led us the way, as well by
his Example as Commission. Nothing sure can be more obliging Believers unto
Obedience, than their Savior's Precept and Precedent.

CHAP. III. What Baptism is.
FIrst, Negatively; Not (...), but (...), Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
It Is not sprinkling, dropping, or pouring of Water. Sprinkling is known to be
Rantising, not Baptising, or Baptism. Baptism is an external washing, plunging
or dipping a professed Believer, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Which I thus demonstrate.

The Hebrew word Tabal, (...) Dip. The Septuagint translate it (...), as Dr.
Hammond notes on John 13.10. Genesis 37.31. Levit. 4.6. Deuteronomy. 33.24. 2 Kings 5.14.
Josh. 3.15.
1. From the Scripture-acceptation of the Word; the word Baptize in the New
Testament, is taken from the word Dip in the Old, as the Learned do know: Where
it is said, Joseph 's Coat was dipped in Blood. The Priest's Finger dipped in Blood.
Asher 's Foot dipped in Oil. The Priests Feet dipped in Jordan. Naaman washed or
dipped seven times in the same River; with many more places of Scripture.
Moreover, it is worth our noting, the word translated Dip, John 13.26. Rev.
19.13. Luke 16.24.
concerning the Sop Judas had: And where it is said, Christ's Vesture was dipped
in Blood, it is from the same Original word Baptism is, that our Translators
might (had they pleased) have rendered the word Baptizing, Dipping, being from
the same Theme Bapto, as Baptism is.

We are much to be governed by the Common and Vulgar acceptance of words, as
they were used and understood among all Nations. God so inspired the Prophets
and Apostles, to deliver his Mind always in such words, as were understood
among the vulgar and ordinary People, or else they would have been Barbarians
unto them. We cannot understand each other in Discourse, but this way; I call
for a Book, it is readily given me, because every one knows what it is we call a
Book: So if Tabal were used among the Hebrews for Dip, in the common
Acceptance; and the Learned Hebrews, by the Order of Ptolomy King of Egypt,
did translate that word Baptizo, which was commonly accepted for Dip among the
Grecians; and we also translate Baptizo, Dip; none but an Enthusiast will
object against the common acceptance of words.

This puts me in mind of a Discourse between Bishop Usher and Mr. Hanserd
Knowllys, about the Propriety of the word Baptizo; the Bishop said it signified
to sprinkle as well as dip. Mr. Knowllys said, it signified only to dip, there
being other words in the Greek for sprinkling and pouring. It Is observable,
(...) to wash, (...) to pour, (...) to sprinkle, are never taken or used for
Dip or Baptize; nor (...), simply taken for Washing, by sprinkling or pouring.
Danvers on Baptism, p. 206.
To end this Controversy, those who could produce the best and most Authors for
their Sense, should carry it: the Bishop, after some search, found Two for his
Opinion; Mr. Knowllys brings Seventy for his Two, namely, the Septuagint; and
so the Controversy ended.

The Writings of the most Learned of the contrary Mind, do confess, that the
Original Word (...).
from whence Baptism is taken, signifies properly to dip. Leigh's Critica
Sacra, says, The native signification of the Word, is, to dip into, or plunge
under Water, as the Dyer dips his Cloth in his Fats. The Book of Canons says,
You shall dip, etc. So the Dutch translate the Word, In those Days came John
the Dipper; End doc Jesus ghe Doope was quam hysterstont vanden Water.
and when Jesus was dipped, he came out of the Water. Calvin says, We see what
Fashion the Ancients had to Administer Baptism, for they plunged the whole Body
into Water.

2. The end of the Ordinance shows Baptism to be dipping; which is to hold
forth unto a Believer, the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ; as the
Apostle says, Romans 6.4. We are buried with him in Baptism. Although there be
no manner of similitude and likeness between Christ's Death and Burial, with
sprinkling a little Water on the Face, yet burying in the Water is as lively a
Similitude and Likeness of Jesus Christ's Death, as the breaking Bread, and
pouring out the Wine is at the Lord's Table: So that they lose one great End of
this Ordinance, who Rantize instead of Baptize; for no Man accounts him buried,
who has only Earth cast on his Face, but he who is in the Heart of the Earth,
and covered with the same.

3. John the beloved Disciple, gives this as the Reason why John the Baptist
baptized in Enon, John 3.23.
because there was much Water there, the place was commodious for that
Ordinance: Hence our blessed Savior came from Galilee to Jordan, From Galilee
to Jordan, where John baptized, is about thirty or forty miles.
to be baptized of him there; which if Sprinkling would have done, there had
been no need of much Water nor Rivers.

4. That Baptism is Dipping, appears from Scripture-Metaphors explaining it:
Luke 15.50.
Our Lord's Sufferings are called a Baptism, because his Pains were not only
upon one part of his Body, No such thing as Sprinkling or Rantizing used in the
Apostles Days, nor many Ages after. Mede's Diatribe.
but his whole Soul and Body was baptized and plunged into Sorrows. Thus one
that is Baptized, is plunged under Water, to show how Christ was Baptized and
plunged into Sorrows for Man's sake. Great Measures of the Spirit are also
discovered, by Persons being said to be Baptized with the Spirit; Acts 1.5.
for where the word Baptism is used, whether it be joined with Suffering, with
the Spirit, or with Water, it always holds forth a great quantity, either of
Sufferings, of the Spirit, or Water.

5. Hence in the 5th place, The vast height of Waters which stood above the
Church in the Red Sea, like a high Wall, is called, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.
A Baptism unto Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, because encompassed with
it; for the Ordinance of Baptism was not then in force; but Circumcision
therefore cannot be meant God's Ordinance of Baptism, but shows the great
Care God had of his Church, that as he fed them miraculously, and gave them
Water out of a Rock in the Wilderness; Baptism signifies properly plunging in
Water, or washing by dipping. Dr. Taylor's Rule of Conscience.
so he did not leave them in the Red Sea, but encompassed them about by his
Divine Providence, with Water and the Cloud, as Persons are encompassed with
that Element when Baptized.

Hence in the 6th place. Baptism is explained by the Metaphor of a Garment;
which the Apostle refers unto, when he calls Baptism, a putting on Christ. Gal.
3.27.
As the Servant, by his Lord's Livery, declares whose he is; so the long white
Robe of Baptism shows us to be the Servants of the Lord Jesus.

(7.) Baptism is not only called a Washing, by Ananias and Peter, ( Acts 22.16.
1 Pet. 3.21. Tit. 3.5.) but the washing of the Soul in Regeneration, is held
forth in this Symbol and Sign, Austin and Paulinus, in the 7th Century, in
England, Baptized great Multitudes in the River Trent and Swale. Hence, says
Mr. Fox, there was no use of Fonts then. Fox's Acts and Monuments, 9 Edit. Vol.
1. p. 132.
by the Apostle Paul, when he speaks of the washing of Regeneration unto Titus.
Now we know, every Faculty of the Soul is washed in the Blood of Christ; and
every Faculty sanctified by the Holy Spirit, not a part of the Faculties, but
all the Faculties; therefore wisely set forth by Baptism, wherein not only a
part, but the whole Body is washed and cleansed in Water.

(8.) This is further cleared from the practice of the most pure Apostolic
Times. It Is said of our most blessed Lord Jesus, That he went up out of the
Water; Mat. 3.15, 16, 17.
which in common sense signifies, He first went down, not only to the Water,
but into the Water, and came up out of the Water. Of Philip and the Eunuch it is
said, Acts 8.36, 40.
They went down both, not only to the Water, but into the Water, and came up
out of the Water: if Sprinkling would have done, they need only go to and come
from it; but they knew the Commission could not be answered, unless they went
down into the Water. The Minister is to dip in Water, as the meetest Act, the
word (...) notes it. Rogers on the Sacrament.
Thus you see the Places where the Apostles Baptized, were in Rivers, and where
was much Water: You see their Act and Posture, they went down into the Water;
you see their End was, to exhibit and show forth Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurection.

If any should ask, Why Sprinkling will not do as well as Dipping?

I answer, (1.) Because that is another thing than Christ has commanded; and
it is high presumption to change God's Ordinances. Isa. 24.5.
Tho there was no more virtue in the Waters of Jordan, than of Damascus; yet
Naaman must keep to God's Appointment. (2.) In so doing, we lose the End of the
Ordinance, which as aforesaid, is to show forth the Death and Resurrection of
Christ. (3.) We must keep the Ordinances as they were delivered unto us; 1 Cor.
11.2.
It Is a known Maxim, to practice any thing in the Worship of God, as an
Ordinance of his, without an Institution, ought to be esteemed Will Worship and
Idolatry. And that there is a necessity for Scripture-Authority to warrant
every Ordinance and Practice in Divine Worship, is owned by Luther, Austin,
Calvin, Basil, Theoph. Tertul, Mr. Ball; and in the 6th Article of the Church
of England; also Bellarmine.
as Moses was to make all things according to the Pattern showed him in the
Mount. (4.) God is a Jealous God, and stands upon small things in Matters of
Worship: Had Moses and Aaron but lifted up a Tool upon the Altar of ruff Stone
to beautify it, they would have polluted it, because contrary to the Command.
(5.) This has no likeness to the holy Examples of Christ and his Apostles.

CHAP. IV. Showing that professing Believers, and them only, are the proper
Subjects of Baptism.
Which I demonstrate;

FIrst, From Gospel-Precept: Our Text says, He that believes, and is
baptized. Erasmus says, It Is no where in the Apostles Writings Infants were
baptized.
The parallel Text, Mat. 28. is worthy of consideration by way of Division. The
Commission is, Go; the Subjects spoken to, are, his Apostles; the Matter of it
is, to teach, and baptize; the Extent of it is, into all the World, not only in
hot Countries, but in Cold. The Order in this Commission is, first to teach,
(...).
then after taught and discipellized, to baptize them. Therefore to baptize
them, We meet with no Example in Scripture for baptizing Infants. Magd. Hist.
Cent. 1. L. 2. p. 196.
before taught, is quite contrary to the Command. The words of Institution, in
whose Name it is to be done, is the glorious Trinity, in the Name of Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit; this must be some great thing which is done by so great
Authority. Unto this is annexed a glorious Promise of Divine Presence, not only
to the End of that Age, but the End of the World (...).
; and to put us out of all doubt about it, it is backed with an Asseveration,
Amen, so it shall be. Finally, here is a Note of Observation, [Lo] our Lord
would not have so great a Commission and Promise disregarded; therefore says
he, Lo, that is, observe what I have said: wherever you find the word Lo, Mark,
or Behold, you will always find something very considerable it relates unto in
the Context. Now in pursuance of this Commission, Peter exhorted the Murderers
of Christ, when they were convicted, and cried out, What shall we do? he says,
Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

2ly, This appears from Gospel-Precedent and Example; the Apostles in pursuance
of their Commission, baptize none else but such. Hence John the Baptist tells
the Pharisees and Sadduces which came to his Baptism, As Isaac was brought
forth by the Word of Promise, so must we be born of the Word of God, which only
makes Baptism powerful and effectual. Magd. Cent. 5. p. 363.
they must first bring forth Fruit meet for, or to amendment of Life, and not
to think the old Argument for Circumcision, [that Abraham was their Father]
would give them a right to Gospel Ordinances. It Is not the Faith of Parents
gives Children a right to the Seals of the New Covenant, but a personal Faith;
hence Philip would not baptize the Eunuch, but upon profession of Faith. In a
word, all the Primitive Churches were constituted and planted upon this
Foundation-Principle, Heb. 6.1, 2. Acts 2.41. Chap. 8.12. Chap. 16.14. Coloss.
2.10. Acts 18.8. Romans 6.4. Gal. 3.26. Acts 19.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 4.4.
as these Scriptures show in the Margent, viz. the Church at Jerusalem,
Samaria, Cesaria, Philippi, Coloss, Corinth, Rome, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. To
conclude, If the Churches of Christ were so planted and constituted in the
Primitive Times, they ought to be so still, unless any can show where Christ
has since that altered the Constitution of his Churches.

3ly, This Ordinance cannot concern Infants, but Believers; because it is a
testification of the Remission of Sins, and Salvation, to the worthy Receiver
and Subject of it; Acts 2.38. Mark 16.16.
else why does Peter promise remission of Sin, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost
to such? And why did our Lord join Faith, Baptism, and Salvation all in one
Verse, Baptism is never enjoined as a Means of Remission of Sins and Eternal
Life, but something of Duty, Choice, and Sanctity, is joined with it, in order
to the production of the End so mentioned. Dr. Tailor.
but that the Ordinance should be a Pledge to the Believer of those great
things? We collect as much from Acts 22.16. where Ananias exhorted Paul, to
arise, and be baptized, and wash away his Sins; that is, put that Duty in
practice which will be a Confirmation of thy Justification; so we understand
Peter, The like Figure, whereunto Baptism does now save us, viz. As the Ark was
the instrumental way of God's saving Noah by his Grace, 1 Pet. 3.20. Baptism is
our Marriage-Ring, Military Pressmony, our ingrafting into Christ, our Badg and
Cognizance, our Ship, our Ark, our Red Sea, our putting on Christ. Dan. Rogers.
so Faith in Christ's Death and Resurrection, is the way God saves our Souls,
this being confirmed unto us in the Figure of Baptism, as well as at the Lord's
Table. But what have Infants to do with this, who are not capable to take in
the Comfort exhibited and held forth in it? This is Meat for strong Men, not
Babes.

4ly, Believers only must be the Subjects of this Ordinance, because it holds
forth a Covenant the Subject makes actually with God. Hence says the Apostle,
Romans 6.3. Know you not, as many as were baptized into Christ, were baptized
into his Death? as if he should say, In that Ordinance you did covenant and
promise to die unto Sin, and live a new Life; Therefore, says he, how can you
that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? And this you have professed in
your Baptism, as in the words of the Institution, Gossops and Sureties are no
where found in Holy Scripture, but in the Pope's Decree, and Common Prayer
Book. Which the Parliament in K. Edward the 6th's time, confessed, There was no
other difference between that and the Mass Book, only a few things left out,
but that one was in Latin, the other in English. Fox's Acts and Mon. Edit. 9.
Vol. 2. Book 9. p. 14, 15.
the whole Trinity gives it self unto the Believer: So he dedicates himself
voluntarily to the Service of the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit. In
all Covenants of this Nature, there is required, the Information of the
Judgment, Consent of the Will, it must be an Act of Choice: As the Eunuch said,
See, here is Water, what hinders me to be baptized? But none of these things
are agreeable to an Infant: and as they are not able to enter into Covenant
themselves, if others do it for them, it is not only Unscriptural, but
Antiscriptural. Can Persons covenant to keep others from Sin, when they find it
too hard a work to keep themselves?

5ly, Baptism is a lively representation of Regeneration, therefore can only
affect Believers. The Apostle alludes unto Baptism, when he speaks of the
washing of Regeneration, Titus 3.5. His meaning is, that the Ordinance is a
lively Badg, Symbol, and Sign of Regeneration, and the New Birth. The Apostle
to the Colossians, Chapter 2.12. tells them, That their Baptism did exhibit and
show forth their being dead, and risen with Christ through that Faith, which
was of that Omnipotent Operation, which raised Christ from the Dead; but no
Signs of Regeneration appear in Infants at Baptism: that is untruly said, Says
the Papist to the Prelat, You prove that Sacraments convey Grace in the very
Act, as we assert; for just before Baptism, the Child was an Heir of Hell, and
Child of Wrath, but being baptized, it is Regenerated and born again, as your
Common Prayer Book says.
in the Common Prayer Book, after the Child is sprinkled, Forasmuch as this
Child is regenerated and born again, which just before was acknowledged to be a
Child of Wrath, and an Heir of Hell. We say, tho God has promised his Presence
in all his Appointments; yet we also say, Persons are not to be Baptized, that
they may be Regenerated, but to hold forth and signify Regeneration, therefore
Baptism can no ways affect little Infants.

CHAP. V. Contains the Answer of Objections.
Objection 1.
FEW Learned Men own this way of Baptizing, only a few mechanic poor
illiterate Persons.

I Answer.
The Apostle says, Not many wise Men after the Flesh are called, 1 Cor. 1.24,
29. Christ did not ordinarily make use of the learned Rabbis among the Jews to
preach the Gospel, but rather those who were counted illiterate and ignorant,
that no Flesh might glory in his Presence: God gets the more praise by making
use of Babes and Sucklings. Christ thanks the Father, Psalm. 8.2.
that Divine Things were hid from the Wise and Prudent, such as the World so
accounted, Mat. 11.27.
and revealed unto Babes, because they would render the Glory unto God, while
the worldly wise Men would take it to themselves. 2. Those who have the most
humane Literature are no Rule, but God's Word: we must follow Paul no further
than he follows Christ. 3. The Holy Scriptures account no Man truly Wise and
Learned, but those taught of God, and that keep his Commands, Psalm. 111.10. The
Learned Pharisees, and Expounders of the Law, rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, in not being Baptized. 4. Are there no Learned of this
Practice? What think you of St. Augustine, See Danvers on Baptism, p. 60, 61,
62, 63. Many of those born of Christian Parents.
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Jerome, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Constantine, Theodosius,
Paul, and as the Crown of all, our Lord Jesus? were all these Illiterate and
Ignorant?

Object. 2.
The Children of Believers are in the Covenant, They say, the Foederati were to
be the Signati.
therefore ought to have the Seal of the Covenant, Baptism.

I Answer.
There is but two ways of being in the Covenant, Absolutely, or Conditionally.
Let it first be proved, the Infant Seed of Believers are in Covenant; then,
2ly, if so, that they ought to be baptized. Female Children under the Law, had
a legal or federal Holiness, yet not to be Circumcised.
No Believer dare say, all his Infant Seed are in the Covenant of Grace
absolutely, for then they must all be saved; but we see Abraham had an Ishmael,
Isaac an Esau, David an Absalom, Samuel Sons of Belial, etc. so that they
cannot be baptized under that Consideration. Or, 2. Persons are in the Covenant
of Grace Conditionally, viz. in case they Believe and Repent. Now under this
Consideration, the Children of Unbelievers have the same Interest in the
Covenant, and Sign of the Covenant. And Children of Believers have a right no
other way, to the one or other; the promise of Remission, and Gift of the Holy
Ghost, is made, as well to the Gentiles, which are afar off, as to the natural
Seed of Abraham, if they have the same Qualifications, Acts 2.37. albeit
Heathens by Nature, and these are oft-times made the Subjects of Grace, when
Believers Children are left. Hence a wicked Ahaz, has a good Hezekiah; ungodly
Abia, a good Asa; wicked Ammon, a good Josiah; idolatrous Jeroboam, a good
Abijah. But were all the Children of Believers in the Covenant of Grace, it
follows not that therefore they ought to be baptized, no more than they may
come to the Lord's Supper, because they want the Qualification required in that
Duty. And whereas it is further urged, from the 2d of the Acts, The word
Children there, is really the Posterity of the Jews, and not particularly their
Infant Children; my Child is my Child, tho 40 or 50 Years old.
the Promise is to you and your Children. The scope of that place seems to be
this; When the Jews were pricked at their Heart for their Crucifying Christ,
upon Peter's Sermon, they cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? The
Apostle exhorts them what to do, viz. Repent, and be Baptized; and for their
Comfort subjoins, that the Promise of Remission of Sins, also of the Holy
Ghost, was like to be their Portion, and their Childrens also, if they did the
same; tho they once called for Christ's Blood upon their Heads, and their
Children, yet now if you and your Children believe in that Christ you have
Crucified, those Promises are to the one and to the other, yea, to all afar
off, the poor Gentiles; for since the partition Wall is broken down, Jew,
Greek, Col. 3.11.
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond, Free, Male, Female, all one by Faith in Christ; For
we are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.

Object. 3. Infant Baptism neither has Precept nor Example in God's Word, is
confessed by Luther Erasmas, Zwinglius, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, Chochler,
Stuphilus, Rogers, Mr. Baxter. Dauvers on Baptism, p. 90, 91.

The Infant Seed of Abraham was Circumcised; therefore the Infant Seed of
Believers may be Baptized.

I Answer.
Abraham had a plain Injunction and Command for the former; Believers have none
for the latter. In Matters of Worship, we must keep to the Institution, as
Moses did to the Pattern showed him in the Mount. Tho Lot was a Believer, his
Children were not to have the sign of Circumcision, because limited unto
Abraham's Seed and Family, also to such a Sex, and such a Day. So has God
limited Baptism to Penitent Believers; Whoever practices an Institution
otherwise than was appointed by the great Lawgiver, does not honor the
Ordinance, but an Idol of his own making.
therefore let us keep to the Institution, and not be wise above what is
written; and take not up with a dark Consequence in the rejection of a plain
Command, being not so satisfying to the true Reason of a Man, nor his
Conscience. Those that argue for their Infant-Seeds Baptism from Circumcision
being entailed unto Abraham's Seed, may as well argue and say, the Priesthood
was by a Covenant entailed on the Tribe of Levi and his Seed, therefore the
Ministry is entailed upon Gospel-Preachers and their Seed: As this cannot be
warranted, no more can the other.

Object. 4.
Whole Families were Baptized: Ergo, Infants.

I Answer.
It Is said indeed, Acts 16.33. Whereas some say, No doubt but the Jailor had
Children. It may be very much questioned, seeing it has been observed, some
Years ago, that for very many Years together not one Child was born to the
Jayl-keepers in all the County of Essex.
The Jailer and all his were baptized; well they might, seeing they all
believed, verse. 34. So Crispus the chief Ruler believed in God, with all his
House, Act. 18.8. And many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were
baptized. And for Lydia and her Household, those they Baptized, those they
comforted, ver. 40. But Infants could not take in that, nor the comfort of that
spiritual Appellation or Relation of Brethren, as the Apostle calls them in
Lydia's Household.

2. The word [all] does not always intend every Individual in a Family. In 1 Samuel 1.21. it is said, Elkanah and all his House went up to the yearly Sacrifice
to Jerusalem. Yet in the 22d it is said, Hannah and the Child Samuel stayed at
Home. So Augustus Caesar is said to Tax all the Word, Luke 2.1. which was no
more of the World, than that little part where the Roman Empire stretched.
Should there be Infants in any of these Families, To carry a poor ignorant
Infant to the Ordinance of Baptism, is as much as if you should carry it to
hear a Sermon; and no more significant than to instruct a Stock or Stone, or
show some godly thing to a blind Man.
no charitable Person can think the Apostle would act contrary to his
Commission, to baptize ignorant Infants, instead of understanding Believers.

Object. 5.
Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant to Believers and their Seed under
the Law, so is Baptism to the Seed of Christian Parents under the Gospel.

I Answer.
This Objection is grounded upon Romans 4.11. where it is said, Abraham received
the Sign of Circumcision, Some unto whom the Covenant of Grace did not belong,
received the Sign of Circumcision, as Ishmael. God said, the Covenant should
not be established with him, but Isaac. So Esau, and all the Strangers in
Abraham's House, or bought with Money in Israel, that were Circumcised, of whom
it may as well be doubted whether the New Covenant-Promise did belong to them;
therefore they mistake to say Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant to
Abraham's Seed, seeing some of them had it that were out of the Covenant by the
express Word of God. Genesis 4.19, 20, 21, 25. Gal. 4.29.
a Seal of the Righteousness of his Faith. First, Consider, it is not said,
Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant to Abraham and his Seed, that is
begged in the Objection; the Text says, It was a Token of the Righteousness of
Abraham 's Faith. But it could not be a Seal of Faith to an Infant which had
none. The scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is to show, that Abraham himself
was not justified by Works, no not by Circumcision, but by Faith, which he had
long before he was Circumcised. The reason of his Circumcision was, to be a
Seal and Confirmation to him, that he by his Faith should be a Father of many
Nations; and that the poor Gentiles should be accepted of God by Faith, without
the Works of the Law, though not circumcised, seeing Abraham's Faith was
imputed to him for Righteousness, not when Circumcised, but Uncircumcised. This
being the scope of this Place, a Man had need have a great deal of skill to
prove Pedo-Baptism from it.

Object. 6.
Christ said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, etc.

I Answer. Yet Christ may be said to baptize, when his Servants do it by his
Commission.

For what were those Children brought to Christ? not to be Baptized, for he
Baptized none; it is enough for the Lord to command his Servants to do it. These
Children were brought to Christ, probably to be touched by him to the healing
some Diseases, Consider, here is not one word of Baptism in this Scripture.
Also the Greek word signifies a Child capable of teaching, for it is the same
word, where it is said, Timothy knew from a Child the Holy Scriptures, that is,
since he was a Boy, not an Infant. So Piscator maintains it.
Luke 18. and he put his Hands upon them, and prayed, Mat. 19.13. Not to
Baptize them; for we cannot imagine our Lord would act contrary to his own
Commission, which was, to Baptize them who were first taught and did believe.

Again, because Christ says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Some infer,
they may be baptized, having a right unto the greater, much more to the lesser.
We say, this is a non sequitur: It does not follow Persons may, by Election,
have a right to the Kingdom of Glory, yet no right to Gospel Ordinances,
because under no Obligation to it by any Precept or Promise, and wanting those
Qualifications which the Gospel requires. By the same Argument Infants may be
brought to the Eucharist, or Table of the Lord, because, what fits them for the
one, fits them for the other.

Object. 7.
If the first Fruit be Holy, the Lump is also Holy; if the Root be Holy, so are
the Branches. Hence some would infer a Derivative-Holiness from the Parent to
the Children, therefore to be baptized.

I Answer.
This Objection is raised from Romans 11.16. The scope of the Apostle in this
place is to show, That Abraham, Father of the Faithful, is the Root; not as a
Natural, but Spiritual Father: And if we boast our selves of being Branches of
this Root, we must have the Faith of our Father Abraham; for the grafting in
here does not consist in outward Ordinances, but in saving Grace; not in the
Visible, but Invisible Church by Faith.

Mark,
none can be called Father of the Faithful, but Abraham only: No particular
Believer, which is but a Branch of this Root, can infer they are a Holy Root to
their Posterity, See Mr. Carry of Baptism.
because Abraham is called the Father of the Faithful, for Abraham is a
Spiritual Father, but we are accounted Natural.

In this Chapter, the whole Body of Believers are compared unto the Olive Tree,
each Believer to a Branch, which partakes of the Root and Fatness of the
Olive Tree; which Root and Fatness is Christ, the grafting in is by Faith into
the Invisible Church, which was first among the Jews, therefore called, the
Olive Tree out of Abraham the Root; who is here said to bear them: for Abraham
stood in a double Capacity, God was a God unto Abraham and his natural Seed, in
giving them a literal Canaan: unto his Spiritual Seed a God, in giving them a
Spiritual Canaan.
one as a Natural Father to the Jews, the other as a Spiritual Father to the
Gentiles. According to the former Capacity, some are called Branches according
to Nature; but in the latter, the Gentiles are called wild Olive Trees by
Nature, yet grafted in by Faith, this being the Scope.

He must be a Man of great Learning, that will undertake to prove
Infant Baptism from this Scripture. Must the Child be necessarily Holy, and in
Covenant, because the Father is? Must the Child be Baptized because the Father
is Good? this has no Warrant from God's Word, which is our Rule.

Object. 8.
Many godly learned Men are for Pedo or Infant Baptism. Many Learned Men are
against Infant Baptism, the Donatists, Novations, Waldenses Albigenses, Ancient
Britains, Christ and his Apostles. Humanum est errare.


I Answer
With Sir Walter Rawleigh from Vadianus, we pass over many gross Errors by the
Authority of great Men. Are there not many in the Roman Communion who are very
Learned? The Pharisees and Lawyers were Learned Men, who rejected the Counsel
of God against themselves in not being Baptized, Luke 7.30. Say not as they
once said, Have any of the Rulers believed on him?

Godly Men are not to be imitated in their Errors, but their Virtues. Elias was
a good Man, yet called for Fire from Heaven. Luke 9.
We must not do so. Luther was sound in Justification by Faith in Christ, yet
was not to be imitated in Consubstantiation, etc. Asa and Jehoshaphat were good
Men, yet both out in not removing the High Places, 1 King. 15.4. That which is
called the Reformed Religion, had better deserved that Name, had they shut out
that Relic of Antichrist, Infant Baptism.

Object. 9.
Infant Baptism is no where forbidden.

I Answer.
Is it lawful because not forbidden? It is therefore not lawful, because the
Scripture does not command it. Every Affirmative Command of Christ includes a
Negative. Tertullian.
Wherever Christ commands the Baptizing Believers, there is an implicit
prohibition of all others not so qualified. Nadab and Abihu had no prohibition
from using strange Fire, yet destroyed for not using that Fire upon the Altar
which was commanded, and using that which the Lord commanded not. By this way
of arguing, we may bring in the Baptizing of Bells, as the Book of Martyrs
tells us of them that did it, and an hundred more Ceremonies of Rome.

Object. 10.
Those the Apostles Baptized, were converted from Paganism, Heathenism, whose
Parents never believed in Christ, as ours, but were Heathens.

I Answer.
There is no more reason to baptize the Child of a Believer, Christianity is
not hereditary, as the Son of a Freeman is free; for Isaac had an Esau, and
Samuel Sons of Belial.
than the Child of an Unbeliever as such; and there is the same reason to
baptize the Child of an Infidel, if it believes, as the Child of a Believer,
upon his or her personal Faith: The worthiness or unworthiness of the Parent,
does not affect the Children, so as to make them fitter or unfitter for
Gospel Ordinances, if they bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance; tho their
Parents were Idolaters, they are proper Subjects of Gospel Ordinances; and if
the Parents are never so Holy, unless the Children have personal actual Faith,
they are not to meddle with God's most holy Things.

Whereas you say, they were Heathens the Apostles baptized; we say, they were
Christians, Believers. Was the Lord Jesus an Heathen? The Ennuch, a Worshipper
of the true God; and Cornelius's Prayers and Alms came up before God for a
Memorial; but whatever they were before Faith, Heathens or Infidels, the
Apostles baptized them, not until they believed, and became Christians. It Is
most likely those who baptize Infants, baptize Heathens; for we are all the
Children of Wrath by Nature, Ephesians. 2.3. It is you plead for Baptizing Heathens,
we plead for Baptizing Believers and Christians.

Object. 11.
There is no express Command for Women's receiving the Lord's Supper, yet there
may be good Consequences to prove it lawful; so of Infant Baptism.

I Answer.
Who will say there is no Command for Women's communicating, so long as that
stands upon Record, 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a Man examine himself, (...) the
Common Gender.
and so let him eat? The Learned do know the original word signifies Man or
Woman. The Apostle says, There Is one Mediator between God and Man; 1 Timothy 2.5.
the word signifies Man or Woman, Gal. 3.28.
Male or Female, all one in Christ; it is the same word with the former in the
Original.

Moreover, we read of Women who believed and were Baptized, Acts 8.12. so are
fitly qualified for the Lord's Table. We have also an Example of Women's
communicating: in Act. 1.13, 14. we read, Mary, and other Women, with the rest
of the Disciples, were altogether. And in Act. 2.44. it is said, all that
believed were together; and in ver. 42. these continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and in Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer.
So that here is a Command and an Example for Women's communicating, tho none for
Infants Baptism, therefore the Objection is false and weak.

Object. 12.
Infants are Disciples, therefore they may be Baptized.

I Answer.
This Objection being grounded on Act. 15.10, 11. we shall show the Occasion
and Scope of it, and see whether it can prove Infants Disciples, or that they
ought to be Baptized.

Some having asserted, who came from Judea, Unless a Man was Circumcised, he
could not be saved. Then the Church of Antioch determined, that Paul and
Barnabas, with certain of the Church, should go to Jerusalem, to the Apostles
and Elders, concerning this Question: which when they came together to consider
this Matter, Peter rose up, and said, Why tempt you God, to put a Yoke upon the
Necks of the Disciples, Acts 15.10. This proves not Infants Disciples, neither
that they ought to be baptized.
which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear? The Meaning of the Apostle
is, Why should we impose the Yoke of Circumcision upon the Necks of the
Disciples? viz. Believing Gentiles, which are by no Law obliged unto it; this
is to bring us unto that Bondage God has delivered us from. Now how this does
prove Infants Disciples, and so ought to be Baptized, I leave to all judicious
Considerers.

Object. 13.
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a New Creature. We fear
Persons lay too much stress upon Circumstantials, not minding the Power of
Godliness.

I Answer.
Those who lay too much stress upon Circumstantials, it is doubtless their Evil:
But can any lay more stress upon it, than our Savior, who though unspotted,
yet would not live without it, Tho Circumcision be nothing, which is abolished;
is Baptism nothing, which is called Righteousness, and the Counsel of God?
and calls it Righteousness? The laying the stress of our Happiness upon
Christ, should not hinder but further Obedience; and always does, where the
Faith is of the right Kind.

And whereas the Apostle says, Circumcision avails not any thing; it did avail
something, when God threatened Moses with Death for not circumcising his Son,
Exodus 4. And when God said, Whoever was not Circumcised, should be cut off from
among the People, Genesis 17.14.

The Apostle never intended to undermine Gospel-Commands, by saying,
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing; for in 1 Cor. 7.19. he adds,
but the keeping the Commands of God. What tho Circumcision is nothing, because
abolished; is Believers Baptism nothing, which is a standing Ordinance?

What tho some Jews might lay more stress upon Circumcision, than upon the Lord
Jesus for Salvation? which might be the principal Cause of the Apostle's thus
speaking: I hope Persons have more charity than to conclude, we lay more stress
upon Baptism than our Lord's Merits.

Object. 14.
If Children may not be Baptized under the Gospel, their Privilege is less than
under the Law.

I Answer.
The Privilege under the Law, and under the Gospel, is the same to Infants as
to the Covenant of Grace; and as for Circumcision, it was indeed a Privilege to
the Jews in comparison of the Heathens, but called a Yoke in comparison of them
under the Gospel.

We grant, Why should this be esteemed the loss of a Privilege, more than not
enjoying literally a holy Land, a holy City, Temple, or Succession of a High
Priest and Priesthood by Generation?
it is a great Mercy for Children to have Godly Parents, having the advantage of
a good Education, Prayer, and good Examples. But what benefit can Infants have
from Baptism, when God never appointed it for them, nor made any Promise to
them in it? but most glorious ones are made to such as believe and are
baptized, namely, Remission of Sins, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and Eternal
Salvation, Mark 16.16.

Object. 15.
The Children of Believers are Holy, therefore they ought to be Baptized.

I Answer.
By explaining the Scripture upon which the Objection is grounded, 1 Cor. 7.14.
The Apostle is here giving an answer to a Case of Conscience; that is, Whether
it were lawful for the believing Husband or Wife, to leave or depart from the
unbelieving Wife or Husband? The Apostle in the Negative answers, By no means;
for these Reasons. First, Now your Children are Holy, viz. lawfully begotten in
Wedlock; but if the Husband leaves the Wife, The Greek Preposition (...), is
well translated to by the Geneva.
or Wife the Husband, every one will count your Children unclean, that is,
Bastards, therefore don't part, but live together, because the unbelieving
Husband is sanctified or set apart by God's Ordinance to the use of the Wife,
and the Wife to the use of the Husband, in a matrimonial way, 1 Cor. 7.14.

This is not an inherent spiritual, nor a federal Holiness, as some would beg,
and therefore argue for Baptism; this Holiness is a legitimate Holiness: And
there can be no more concluded, because these Children are said to be Holy,
therefore to be baptized, than the Baptizing Zacharias's Bells or Pots in the
Lord's House, because they are said to be Holy, Zach. 14.20.

Object. 16.
All Nations are to be Baptized; Infants are a part of the Nation, Ergo,
Infants may be baptized.

I Answer.
The Lord Jesus Christ says, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, (...), Disciple all Nations; but that must be first by Preaching and
Instructing them in the Principles of the Christian Faith. And adds, I cannot
be of their mind who think, that Persons may be baptized before taught. Pool's
Synopsis on Mat. 28.
Baptizing them, etc. Never intending any should be baptized but what were
first taught. It Is as if a King should give a Commission to an Herald, to
proclaim throughout his Dominions, whoever in the Nation, Male or Female, would
go to School and learn the Greek Tongue, should have a Wedg of Gold; Does this
follow that every one in the Nation should have a Wedg of Gold, because a part
of the Nation? No, not unless they do learn the Greek Tongue. So in like
manner, A dreadful piece of Infant Baptism appeared, when the Heads of 6000
Infants were found murdered, and buried in a Warren near a Monastry.
no more in the Nations are to be baptized, than what are first taught and
learn Christ.

Christ did no more intend that every one in the Nation should be baptized,
than the Prophet Haggai did, So superstitiously zealous were some in the 7th
Century for Infant Baptism, that a dead Child was taken from the Grave and
Christened, its Father's Name given unto it.
that every individual in the Nations of the World would desire our Lord's
coming, because, he says, the Desire of all Nations should come, Hag. 2.7.
which is only the Believers in all Nations.

God did not intend Infants had robbed him, when he said, Ye have robbed me,
even this whole Nation, they being not capable of it: No more are Infants of
Baptism, tho a part of the Nation, being not first taught and made Disciples,
according to the Commission.

Object. 17.
Men of Years were first Circumcised, afterward Infants: So in the Gospel,
Baptism was first administered unto Men and Women, but afterward Infants were
Baptized.

I Answer.
You say well, Men and Women were baptized first; Infants were never baptized,
by virtue of a Commission from Christ, tho Believers were; and it was about
three hundred Years after Christ before any Infant was Sprinkled. Danvers on
Baptism, p. 204.
Christ's Commission was to baptize Believers: now unless any can show where
this was abrogated, and a new Commission for Baptizing Infants given, this
remains, and will to the end of the World.

Indeed Abraham was Circumcised when he was old, as a Seal of the Righteousness
of his Faith, to assure him he should be a Father of many Nations, a Spiritual
Father unto Believers, Jews, and Gentiles: And after this God, commanded him to
Circumcise his natural Seed; and when any can show us as plain a Command for
Believers to Baptize their Infant Seed, as Abraham had to Circumcise his, the
Controversy shall end.

Object. 18.
Infant Baptism is an Apostolical Tradition; Tho this Tradition be not written
in any Apostolical Book, yet it is of no less Authority with us than the
Scripture. Bellarmine.
and though the Scripture be silent in the Case, the uninterrupted Tradition
and Usage of the Church makes up that Defect.

I Answer,
Tradition ought to be proved by more than one Evidence, viz. Origin, whom all
other Ages have condemned of Errors.

Dr. Tailor. And whose Works are so spurious, that he that reads them, knows
not whether he reads Origin or Ruffinus. Erasm.


With Dr. Tailor, Tradition, says he, must by all means supply the place of
Scripture; and there is pretended a Tradition Apostolical, that Infants were
Baptized: But at this, says he, we are not much moved, for we who rely upon
the written Word of God as sufficient to establish all true Religion, do not
value the Allegation of Tradition.

The pretended Proof for Infant Baptism, being an Apostolical Tradition, from
Dionysius the Areopagite, Justin Martyr's Responses, Origen's Homilies, Cyprian
in an Epistle to one Fidas a Priest, have been examined, refuted, and found
fabulous and forged. Danvers on Baptism, page 133, to 150.

It is very improbable that Infant Baptism should be an Apostolical Tradition,
when decreed by several Councils in the 4th Century, the Council of Carthage,
of Neocesarea and Laodicea, etc. they did hold forth the necessity of
Confession and Profession, before Baptism.

In short, It is against the Reason of a Man to conclude this an Apostolical
Tradition, because this were to make the Apostles act beyond their Commission,
which were to Baptize only Believers.

Object. 19.
Infants were once Church Members, and that Law was never abrogated, neither do
we find they were cut off.

I Answer.
John the Baptist abrogated this sufficiently, when he told the Pharisees and
Sadduces, it was a vain Plea to say, Abraham was their Father; that was a good
Argument for Infant-Church-membership under the Law by Circumcision, but
signified nothing to Church Membership under the Gospel by Baptism, now the
Dispensation is altered: If any bring not forth good Fruit in his own Person,
the Ax being laid to the Root of the Tree, it is to be hewn down and cast into
Eternal Fire. The Apostle Paul, in Romans 11.20. ends this Controversy plain
enough, where he asserts, the natural Branches were broken off by Unbelief; and
if they come to believe, they may be grafted in again; Who can show any
Instance where Infants were accounted Members of the Church under the Gospel?
but until then, they remain broken off, and that Law of
Infant-Church-membership is as plainly abrogated under the Gospel, as the
Passover and Circumcision, etc. which all grant is void, tho not so formally
done as once commanded, there being no need; the Substance being come,
necessarily Shadows cease.

Object. 20.
In Mat. 3.11. John Baptist said, I Baptize you with Water unto Repentance: And
in the 6th Verse, -- Were Baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their Sins.
Here, say some, is Baptism before Confession or Repentance, in the order of
words: therefore we being Baptized in our Infancy, if we repent, and confess
our Sins afterward, it is sufficient, and we need not be Baptized again.

I Answer.
1. If you were only sprinkled in Infancy, you were never yet Baptized.

2. It Is said, they were Baptized in Jordan, confessing their Sins; but I never
heard of an Infant confess Sin in the Act of Baptism, as these did. I will
gladly Baptize any Souls that shall truly confess themselves Sinners in the
very Act and Administration of that Ordinance, to the Glory of the Messiah, who
came to save Sinners.

3. Tho the Text says, I Baptize you unto Repentance, none dare say that John
Baptized them before they did manifest Repentance; because when many of the
Pharisees and Sadduces came unto John's Baptism, he said, O Generation of
Vipers, John's Baptism is called, The Baptism of Repentance for Remission of
Sins, because Christ preached Remission of Sins to the Penitent Believer.
Piscator on Mark 1.4.
bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance, and think not to say, you have Abraham
to your Father.

4. John's Baptism is called, the Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1.4. Can any
other be the meaning than this, that John was appointed of God to demand
Repentance from dead Works, of all that were Baptized, and Faith also in him
that was to come? Acts 19. and upon this John did preach unto them the
Remission of Sin. I think it never did enter into any Man's Heart, that John
did first Baptize, before he examined them of Repentance and Faith in the
Messiah to come.

5. To Baptize unto Repentance, the sense can be nothing else than my Baptism,
being the Baptism of Repentance: I Baptize them, for my Baptism is the Baptism
of Repentance; I must see something of that, else I have no Commission to
Baptize.

6. Penitent Souls may well be said to be Baptized unto Repentance, Should I
say, Sir Walter Rawleigh was beheaded in Palace-Yard, and made an excellent
Speech, none would understand that he spoke after he was dead, because Beheaded
is first, and Speech after, etc. So tho John, say I, baptized to Repentance, it
could not be he baptized first, because he required Repentance and Faith,
according to Christ's Commission, as necessary to Baptism.
because it is an every day's Work, after his Baptism, to amend and reform.
However John's words may be placed, the scope of the Place shows, they must
repent before they were baptized, because, when the Pharisees and Sadduces came
to his Baptism, that is, to be baptized, said he, O Generation of Vipers, bring
forth first Fruits meet for Repentance; or unto or according to the nature of
true Repentance, and then I will baptize you, and not without it.

Object. 21.
Water Baptism is John's Baptism. Paul was not sent to Baptize: We have the
Substance, we need not the Shadow; we are baptized with the Spirit, we need not
that of Water.

I Answer.
Cornelius and his Household were baptized with the Holy Ghost, to that degree,
as they spoke with Tongues, Acts 10. yet thought it not beneath them to submit
to Christ's blessed Ordinance of Water Baptism. I know not but this Scripture
may be an everlasting Testimony against some which pretend to the Spirit, who
have it in that degree, as now Cornelius and his Household; Where the Spirit is,
Acts 10.44, to 48.
there is Obedience to the Command.

I marvel any who pretend to great degrees of the Spirit, should call God's
Ordinances Shadows and Shells: Is it a Command of Christ, and a Shadow? did
Christ ever call it so? Thou may as well say, all other Ordinances are
Shadows, as Prayer, Preaching, etc. And where will thou run? is it a Command?
has it a Divine Stamp? if so, dispute not Christ's Authority. Are you wiser
than he who subjected himself to it? or can you think you have more of the
Spirit, than him who had it without measure, and yet was was baptized in Water?

Whereas it is Objected, Christ sent not Bullinger in his House-book says, of
1 Cor. 1.17. It Is not slightly to be understood, as if Paul was not sent to
baptize at all, but that Teaching should go before Baptism, for the Lord
commanded both Teaching, and Administering Sacraments.
Paul to Baptize, but to Preach, Paul did baptize several: either he did it by
Commission, or Presumption; surely not by the latter, therefore the former. His
meaning is, that Baptism was not his first and principal Work; he was sent to
preach, and Baptism fell in as a part of his Preaching-Office. None are fit for
Gospel Ordinances, until they have the Spirit of God.

Does Cornelius and his House submit to Water Baptism, after Baptized eminently
with the Spirit? then that can be no Argument, we are Baptized with the Spirit,
and need no Water.


This is cleared by our Lord's Word, who said, I am not sent but to the lost
Sheep of the House of Israel, not but he came also to be a Light to the
Gentiles; he was first to preach to them, hence called, the Minister of the
Circumcision.

And whereas Water Baptism is called John's Baptism, I query the Baptism of
John, Was it from Heaven, or of Men? If from Heaven, as it was, (for God sent
him to Baptize) then let all keep silent. I know no difference between John's
Baptism, and that Christ gave his Apostles, but that the former Baptized in the
Name of Christ to come, the latter in his Name being come. Whereas some urge,
John said, He must decrease, Christ increase. This has no reference to the
ceasing of Gospel Ordinances, but unto the Splendour and Glory of Christ in the
World, above what John's was in Holiness and Miracles; for John did no Miracle,
John 10.41.

Object. 22.
There are no fit Administrators; therefore, for the present, Sacraments and
Church-Ordinances cease.

I Answer.
When Christ gave Commission to Preach, he gave Power in the same to Baptize,
Mat. 28. How comes this to pass, that those very Persons which thus object, do
Preach, which requires as great Ability and Sanctity to the due performance of
the one as of the other.

I know some object that Commission ( Mat. 28.) lasted no longer than to the
end of that Age.

To which I Answer, Then Preaching ended too: Christ commands his Disciples to
teach all Nations all things which he commanded them; Now Christ's Commands
were, Holiness, Repentance, and Faith; was this to be no longer than to the end
of that Age? was Christ's Promise of his Presence but to the end of that Age?
this would be uncomfortable Doctrine. The Promise is, I will be with you to the
end of the World; the Learned know it is the same original Word as in Matthew.
13.39, 40. where it is said, The Harvest is the end of the World: As the Tares
are gathered together, and burnt in the Fire, so shall it be in the end of the
World. All conclude, (I think) or ought, that this has respect to the final
end of all things; (...).
this being the same word in Mat. 28. We conclude, teaching the Gospel,
baptizing them which are taught, and the gracious Presence of Christ, If
Baptism ended in the Apostles Age, then preaching of Repentance, Faith, and
Holiness ceased also, because all in the same Commission. Yea, the promise of
Christ's Presence must cease also in the end of that Age: a more uncomfortable
Doctrine cannot be.
is to remain in his Church till the World's end, that is, till the final end
of all things. Moreover, Paul asserts, Ephesians. 3.21. that Christ will have a
Church, and glory in the Churches throughout all Ages, World without end. From
whence I argue, if God have a Church in all Ages, he must have Ordinances
there, because no Church of Christ can be constituted without them: If there be
Ordinances in the Church in all Ages, there must be some to administer them, or
else they would be insignificant.

But that he has fit Administrators in the Church, and will have, Paul
asserts, in Ephesians. 4.12, 13. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, (For what end?) for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ,
(How long?) till we all come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Fullness of Christ.

Let Men take heed how they put a slight upon the Ordinances of God in crying
up the Spirit, with a secret Design to decry the Holy Scriptures; crying up the
Power of Godliness in Word, to undermine the Form of Godliness; cry up Faith,
and Justification by Faith, to lessen Repentance and a holy Life; crying out
against the Error of all Churches, and under that pretense, leave the true
Church, and the Communion of Saints, until at last they have lost the Church in
the Wilderness, the ready way to lose themselves too, if Grace prevent not,
which I desire may.

CHAP. VI. Contains the Use.
1. IF it be their Duty, who believe, to be Baptized: then I infer, those who
are not capable of this Grace of Faith, are under no Divine Obligation, nor
their Parents neither, to Baptize them, it is only a piece of Will Worship,
which God never required, Col. 2.23.

If any reckon themselves obliged to Baptize, or be Baptized, from Men's
Authority, let such baptize in their Name of whom they have this Authority, and
not join the Name of Christ with humane Inventions.

Baptism of Infants, was not practiced for near 300 Years after Christ; nor
enjoined, as necessary, till 400 Years after Christ. Magdeburgh Hist. Cent. 5.
p. 835. Danvers on Baptim, p. 105, 106, 107, 108, 109.
Infant Baptism was hardly heard of till about three hundred Years after Christ.
Augustine was the first that preached it necessary, in his heat against
Pelagius Bishop of Rome, who denied Original Sin, which Augustine supposed to
be taken away in Baptism about the 5th Century; it was confirmed and decreed by
the Pope and his Council, in the Milevetan Council, a Province in Africa.

2. Is Faith to precede Baptism? Then how irregular do they act, who baptize
first, before the Subject has any Grace, and know not whether ever they will?
Our Lord knew how he placed his words, when he said, Believe, and be baptized;
and for Persons to act contrary, reflects upon the Wisdom of Christ, as though
they knew it were better to Baptize first, whatever the Lord said to the
contrary.

3. Is Faith to precede Baptism? Then we infer, those who are in this practice,
are very unjustly called Anabaptists, Persons Baptized in Infancy, are to be
Baptized after they believe, which is not to be esteemed Rebaptization, but
right Baptism, as Peter Bruce the great Waldensian Martyr.
Rebaptizers. We know but of one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. and that is Believers,
having the Broad-Seal, and Stamp of Divine Authority upon it: how in derision
are such called Catabaptists, as if they were against Baptism, because they
plead for Christ's Institution against Men's Inventions?

4. Is Faith to precede Baptism? Then we infer, they are greatly Heterodox who
assert, that Baptism works Regeneration by the very Some call it Opus operatum.
Act; although we doubt not of the concurrence of the Holy Spirit to strengthen
and comfort God's People in the Way of their Duty: But to say the very Act
works it, is not allowable, forasmuch as Regeneration is required before it;
and this Sacrament is a Sign and Signification of Regeneration, therefore
called by the Apostle, the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Death to Sin, and
Sanctification, is figured out in this Ordinance, when Persons are buried with
Christ in Baptism, Romans 6.4.

Grotius says, in his Annotations upon Matthew. 19. The Synod of Neocesarea
decreed, a Woman with Child might be Baptized, because it reached not the Fruit
of the Womb, forasmuch as in Baptism each one's free choice is showed.
5. Are Persons to believe before Baptism? Then an actual personal Faith is to
precede this Ordinance; it is not the Faith of the Church, nor an imputative
Faith of the Parents in Covenant, nor the Faith of the Gossips or Sureties, can
be a sufficient Argument for any Minister to Baptize, but a profession of their
own Faith, as Philip required of the Eunuch, Act. 8.37. And whereas some
assert, Infants have Faith; what they may have, is not known by any Sign
appears in them: See Dr. Duveil, on Acts 8.
And for personal and actual Faith they have none, which the Commission
requires as prerequisite to Baptism. And for any to assert Infants have Faith,
or any other inspired Habit, may we not say with Dr. Tailor, such are
constrained to answer this without Revelation against Reason, common Sense, and
all the Experience in the World? no greater Advantage can be desired against
such a Position.

6. Is Faith to be professed before we are Baptized? Then we infer, those that
have suffered in defense of this Doctrine, had a good Foundation for what they
did.

The Waldensian Christians suffered Imprisonment, Danvers on Baptism, p. 113,
114.
confiscation of Goods, and some Death. Many in Germany, Holland, Flanders,
Vienna, Mentz, the Palatinate, for their opposing Pedo-Baptism, and asserting
Believers.

II. Let all Believers be exhorted to obey Christ, who yet lie short of their
Duty; the King or Subject, Pastor or People, Learned or Illiterate: for the
King of Kings has done it, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, and he who is
only wise.

If any Object, I was Baptized in my Infancy. I Answer,

As one says of Marriage, It Is not the Bed that makes Marriage, for then
Fornication is Marriage, but it is a lawful Consent by Covenant. So I say of
Baptism, It Is not a little Water sprinkled upon the Face makes Baptism, but
also Consent and Subjection to Christ's Command.

When thou wast an Infant, Mr. Baxter says, Entering Covenant with God, is the
essential point of Baptism; without it, it is not Baptism. Children cannot
Covenant; Sureties neither by the Law of God, nor Nature ought not; Parents by
the Canon Law must not.
thou gave no Consent, but rather Dissent, by crying when the Water was
scattered upon thy Face; thou had no Faith, no Love, no active Obedience; thy
Judgment not informed, thy Will and Affections not inclined, but wholly passive
in the thing, Dr. Barlow says, In the Primitive Times, Persons were first
Catecumini, then Illuminati or Baptizati. If Matter and Form be wanting the
Essence of the O^^inance is (...)
like a Stock or Stone, so that thou art not yet Baptized, because there wanted
then the very Essence of the Ordinance, which is right Matter and Form: as for
Matter, an ignorant Infant was the Subject, in the room of an understanding
Believer: For the Form, Sprinkling instead of Dipping, so that thy
Infant Baptism is a mere non entity, and nothing.

The Church of the Rome confesses, she changed Dipping into Sprinkling.
Cyprian is the first who pleads for Baptizing the Sick by Sprinkling, and for
Sprinkling new Converts in the Prisonhouse: Danvers, p. 204, 205, 206. Magd.
Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 126.
By degrees they brought it in for Sick Children, then for all Children.

Rome's first and great Argument, Novatians and Donatists against
Infant Baptism.
by which Infant Baptism was brought in, was their imagining it took away
Original-Sin: Upon which they made this Canon in the Milevetan Council.

It is our Will, Too many are very tenacious of this Argument now.
That all who affirm young Children have Everlasting Life, which are not
Baptized, to the taking away of Original Sin, shall be Anathemized. So in the
Fifth Council at Carthage. Fifth Council of Carthage, in the Year 416.
We will, That whosoever denies that little Children by Baptism are not freed
from Perdition, and eternally saved, that they be accursed.

This was first confirmed by Pope Innocentius and Augustine, with Seventy
Bishops: Had the Pope and Council decreed, that the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto Children, took away Original Sin, in the room of their
Infant Baptism, it had been much sounder Doctrine.

MOTIVES.
First; Sincere Obedience to the Precepts, gives you a right to the Promises
annexed, which is, Remission of Sin, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and Divine
Presence for ever.

2dly, This is Janus Sacramentorum, say the Ancients.
By this Gate you enter into the Enjoyment of all Church Priviledges, which are
very great and many. Hence Holy David preferred one Day in God's Courts, more
than a thousand in an ungodly King's Palace. The Communion of Saints is a
blessed Thing; but you cannot have this orderly, Faith the Foundation-Principle
of Salvation; but Baptism the Foundation-Principle of Church-Constitution.
without first being Baptized; the three thousand converted Jews were Baptized
before added to the Church: And in breaking Bread, Christ himself was Baptized
before he preached and broke Bread with his Disciples.

3dly, Sincere Acts of Obedience, increase Peace in the Soul like a River; yea,
One Act of sincere Obedience is more to God than if we could give him many
Worlds. Psalm. 50.8, 14.
the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding. We have heard of some which
have died uncomfortably, for not obeying Christ in this Ordinance according to
their Light.

Finally; By this Act you will obey a most glorious Precept, follow a most
glorious Precedent, have a right to most glorious Promises, enter into a most
glorious Communion; and to conclude, you will put in practice an Ordinance,
which will be a Pledge unto you, of Sins Remission, your free Justification, and
your Soul's Salvation: a Reward more than enough for our poor Obedience.

CHAP. VII. Contains plain Scriptures for Believers-Baptism, which satisfies
the Conscience better than far-fetched Consequences.
Matthew. 3.13. Then comes Jesus to John to be Baptized. Verse. 15. And Jesus
said, Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
Righteousness. Verse. 16. And Jesus, when he was Baptized, went up straightway
out of the Water.

Acts 2.38. Repent, and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus
Christ.

Acts 8.12. They were Baptized, both Men and Women.

Acts 8.36. And the Eunuch said, See, here is Water, what does hinder me to be
Baptized? Verse. 37. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine Heart,
thou may.

Acts 10.47. Can any forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, which
have received the Holy Ghost as well as we. Verse. 48. And he commanded them to
be Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be Baptized, and wash away
thy Sins.

Acts 9.18. And he arose, and was Baptized.

Mat. 28.19. Go, teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost.

Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly received his Word, were Baptized.

Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved.

Mat. 21.25. The Baptism of John, whence was it? from Heaven, or of Men? If we
say, From Heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not believe him?

Luke 20.6. But if we say of Men, all the People will stone us.

Acts 18.8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord
with all his House: and many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed, and were
Baptized.

Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by Baptism.

Luke 7.29. The Publicans justified God, being Baptized. Verse. 30. But the
Pharisees, and Lawyers, rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, not
being Baptized.

John 4.1. Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John.

Gal. 3.27. As many as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto Baptism does save us.

Acts 16.33. And he took them the same Hour of the Night, and washed their
Stripes; and was Baptized, he and all his, straightway; Verse. 34. He believing
in God with all his House.

John 3.23. John was Baptizing in Enon, near Salim, because there was much
Water there.

Heb. 6.1, 2. Of the Doctrine of Baptisms, (called God's Oracle) a Principle of
the Doctrine of Christ, and a Foundation-Principle. Heb. 5.14.

John 3.22. After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the Land of
Judea, and there he tarried and Baptized.

Luke 3.21. Jesus being Baptized, the Heavens were opened. Verse. 23. Jesus
himself being about thirty Years of Age.

1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body.

CHAP. VIII. Contains an Account of the People of God, called Anabaptists;
their great Sufferings, for maintaining Believers-Baptism in opposition unto
Infant Baptism.
IN the 4th Lateran Council, Canons were made to banish the Anabaptists for
Heretics.

Theodosius and Honorius made and published the following Edict, in the Year
413. viz. That the Person rebaptized, as well as the Administrator, should be
punished with Death. One Albanus, a zealous Minister, was put to death, with
others, upon the said Edict.

At Zurick it was decreed, If any presumed to Baptize any that were Baptized in
Infancy, they should be drowned. And that at Vienna, many for Baptizing such,
were so tied together in Chains, that they drew the other after him in the
River.

At Roplesteim, the Lords of that Place decreed, That such should be burned
with an hot Iron, and bear the base Brand of those Lords in whose Lands they
had offended.

And that through Germany, Alsatia, and Sweeden, many hundreds of this Sect,
who (as they word it) defiled their first Baptism with a Second, were the third
time Baptized in their own Blood. Dr. Featly out of Gassius, page 68, 182.

Heribertus, Lisonius, and Stephanus, with eleven more Christians, were burnt
at Orleans in France, for opposing Childrens Baptism.

At Goslar, in the Time of Henry the Third, several were put to Death for
opposing Infant Baptism.

Gerardus burnt, for opposing the Romish Church in this Point.

By the Decree of Alfonsus, five Men and three Women were burnt at Troys in
Campagn, Anno 1200.

Nineteen Persons condemned and burnt in the Bishopric of Toulouse.

Four Monks which were converted from the Romish Religion, were by Pope John
the 22d burnt, for opposing Infant Baptism.

At Cremor in Austria, many of the Waldenses were burnt, for opposing
Pedobaptism.

A pious Woman in Flanders, named Peronne, was burnt in the profession of this
Faith, with many more.

The first Edict of Zurick, 1525. five Years after Zwinglius began the
Reformation, after their own departure from Rome, In Edw. 4. and Hen. 8. many
of those burnt under the Name of Lollards. Hence we read in Mr. Fox of Lollards
Tower.
commands all sorts to Baptize their Children, and to forbear Rebaptization,
upon the penalty of Pecuniary Mulcts and Imprisonments. The second Edict
extended to Banishment, Confiscation, and Death; this was five Years after, in
1530.

Many starved and died in Prison.

The Duke of Newburgh, Anno 1653. banished all the Anabaptists out of his
Country, who thereupon disperse themselves into the Dukedom of Cleave and
Brandenburgh.

An Abstract of the bloody Edict of the Emperor, Charles the 5th of Spain, made
June 1535. against the Anabaptists, or Waldensian Christians, and the execution
thereof in the Seventeen Provinces, viz.
COmmanding all Persons to renounce those Persuasions and Practices, and
refrain the publishing the same, by Preaching, or otherwise, upon penalty of
forfeiture of Life and Goods, without Mercy: The Men to be burnt, the Women to
be drowned. And all that Conceal, Harbor, and do not in their Places prosecute
the Law against them, to suffer the same Penalty. And that those that discover
them, to have the third part of their Estates; forbidding all Mediation or
Intercession, upon severe Punishment.

Many hundreds suffered Death upon this Edict, and what his Son Philip made in
1556.

Thus you see Christ's Words made good, His People shall suffer for
Righteousness sake.

See this Chapte^ much enlarged, in Danvers on B^ptism.

CHAP. IX. Contains an Epitome of this Book, in a Comparison of
Believers-Baptism and Infant Baptism together.
Believers-Baptism.
GOd has promised in the Text, That all who believe, and are Baptized, shall
be saved, Mark 16.16.

There is a lively Similitude between Christ's Death, Burial, Resurrection, and
Believers being buried in Baptism, Romans 6.4.

Believers Baptized, are converted, and shall never come into Condemnation,
John 5.24.

Believers Baptized, love God, and keep his Commandments, John 14.15.

It Is Christ's Command, that Teaching, Repenting, and Believing, should precede
and go before Baptism, Matthew. 28.18, 19.

Those who baptize Believers, baptize Christians.

In Believers Baptism, there are no Contradictions attend the practice of it.

Believers Baptized come lawfully and immediately to the Lord's Supper, Acts
2.41, 42.

Believers Baptism is a sign of Regeneration unto them, Tit. 3.5.

Believers Baptism has a Command, Mat. 28.18, 19.

Believers Baptism confirms unto them Justification, Remission, and Salvation,
Acts 2. Chap. 22.16. Mark 16.16.

We have many Examples for Believers Baptism, Acts 8. Chap. 10. Chapter 16.18.

Christ was faithful in all his House; and St. Paul delivered the whole Counsel
of God, and so Believers Baptism is a part of God's Counsel, Luke 7.

Believers Baptism has been gloriously sealed in the Holy Ghost's coming upon
Christ in the likeness of a Dove, when he was coming up out of the Water, Mat.
3.16.

In Believers Baptism the Person baptized acts Faith, Acts 8.37.

In Believers Baptism, the Subject baptized has the Answer of a good
Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.16.

A Man might comfortably die, as many have done in Mentz, Holland, Germany, and
the Palatinate, for asserting Believers Baptism, because it has God's Word for
its Foundation.

The Publicans glorified God, in being baptized with John's Baptism, because it
was the Counsel of God, Luke 7.

The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, in
not being baptized with the Baptism of John, Luke 3.

In Believers Baptism there is a glorious Harmony with the Commission, Mar.
16.16.

Believers Baptism requires much Water, as according to God's Word, John 3.

It Is without all doubt, Believers were Baptized.

To baptize Believers, is to keep the Ordinances as they were delivered, 1 Cor.
11.2.

To baptize Belielievers, is no change of God's Ordinance.

Such as are baptized on their own Faith, shall never perish, John 10.28.

Believers are baptized as an Act of their Judgment, Choice, Will and
Affection; so worship God in Spirit and Truth, John 4.24.

All those who baptize Infants, do confess Believers were baptized.

Believers know and remember when they were baptized.

All Believers baptized, are in the Covenant of Grace.

Believers Baptism is from Heaven, and the Counsel of God, Mat. 21.25.

Believers baptized are not the Children of Wrath, John 3.36.

To baptize Believers, is to act according to the Pattern and Command of Christ.

All Believers baptized, receive Remission of Sins, Acts 2.

In Believers Baptism, the Person subjects in Acts of Obedience.

Believers Baptism has no Absurdities attending it.

Believers rejoice and show their full Consent when they are baptized, Acts 8.

Believers Baptism has the plain Word of God.

All the World may affirm, Believers were baptized by the Apostles.

All Believers baptized, are spiritual believing Stones, fit to be laid in
God's House, 1 Pet. 2.5.

Believers baptized may repel Satan, as Christ did, saying, It is written, Luke
4.

God will not say unto Believers baptized, Who has required these things at
your Hands? because it is his own Command.

Believers Baptism must stand as long as God's Word does stand, Mat. 5.18.

To baptize Believers, is to have respect unto God's Command, the only way not
to be ashamed, Psalm. 119.6.

The most Holy, the most Wise, the most Learned Person that ever was in the
World, submitted unto Believers-Baptism, Mat. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Persons baptized, believe, repent, examine themselves, make Judgment of
things, love one another, take up Christ's Cross, Watch and Pray, and have the
same care of each others Souls; these are fit Members of a Gospel Church.

Believers Baptism has Antiquity to plead, being as old as John Baptist,
Christ, and his Apostles.

Believers ought to be baptized, who have an inherent Holiness wrought by the
Holy Spirit.

Believers Baptism has many glorious Promises annexed unto it, Acts 2.38, 39.

In Believers Baptism all the holy Ends of it are preserved, as to be a sign of
present Regeneration, dying to Sin, burying, rising with Christ, Answer of a
good Conscience; a mutual Stipulation and Contract between God and the Party.

In Believers Baptism, by Dipping, the Manner and true Administration is
preserved, the Usage of the Primitive Times retained, and the Ends of it
manifest.

Believers Baptism introduces no Error nor false Doctrine into the World.

Believers baptized are taught of God, and made his Disciples, Matthew. 28.18.
Acts 15.10.

If none ought to forbid the Baptism of Water unto those who had been baptized
with the Holy Ghost, Acts 10.44, 45, 46, 47, 48.

Christ submitted unto Water Baptism, and ate the Supper with his Disciples,
who had the Holy Spirit without measure.

Water Baptism is to continue unto the End of the World, and the Sacrament of
the Supper unto the second coming of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26. Mat. 28.19, 20.

If Christ will have Glory in the Churches throughout all Ages, World without
end, then he must have a Church and Ordinances administered, which is the
Essence of a Church-Constitution, and so cannot want Administrators, because
Christ has given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, edifying of the Body of
Christ: How long? till we all come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature
of the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.21. Chap. 4.11, 12.

Infant Baptism.
GOD has not promised all Infants that are Baptized, shall be saved.

But there is no Similitude between Christ's Death, Burial, Resurrection, and
Infants sprinkled on the Face.

But Infants Baptized are not converted, and may come into Condemnation.

But Infants Baptized, do not love God, and keep his Commandments.

Therefore Infant Baptism must be of Men, because it is before Teaching,
Repenting, and Believing.

But those who baptize Infants, baptize Heathens; because all are Children of
Wrath by Nature before born again, Ephesians. 3.2.

But Infant Baptism has manifold Contradictions, by asserting that Baptism is
a Symbol of present Regeneration, yet apply it to an ignorant Infant: Also that
it figures out Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, yet do nothing but
sprinkle, or pour Water on the Face; They separate from Rome as the false
Church, yet own their Baptism, the Foundation-Stone; They own the Doctrine of
Perseverance in Grace, and no falling from it, baptizing the Children of
Believers as in the Covenant of Grace, yet afterward teach their Conversion,
and in case of Unbelief, reject them as Reprobates.

But Infants Baptized, come not to the Lord's Supper immediately nor lawfully.

But the Baptism of Infants cannot be a sign of Regeneration to them.

Infant Baptism has no Command.

But Infants have none of those confirmed to them in their Baptism.

But we have not one Example for the baptizing an Infant.

But Infant Baptism is no part of God's Counsel, appears, because Christ nor
his Apostles never delivered any such thing.

Infant Baptism never was sealed by God.

But in Infant Baptism the Infant acts no Faith.

But Infants have no answer of a good Conscience in Baptism.

But how can any die for Infant Baptism, when it wants the Broad Seal of God's
Word for the Authority?

But God is not glorified in Infants Baptism, because none of God's Counsel.

But to reject Infant Baptism, cannot be against any Person, because it is none
of the Counsel of God.

But there is no harmony with the Commission in Infant Baptism, nor with their
own Profession, which is, that Faith and Repentance is required in Persons to
be baptized, yet confess that Children, unto whom they apply it, have neither.
Again, that it is a demonstration of a Spiritual Marriage between God and the
Believer, yet assign it unto Subjects as incapable of it, as a Stock or Stone.
Moreover, that the Baptismal Covenant enters into the Visible Church, yet deny
Church Members the Lord's Supper.

But Infant Baptism needs but a little, therefore it is not according to God's
Word.

But the baptizing Infants at the best is doubtful.

But it was never delivered as an Ordinance of Christ to sprinkle Infants.

But to baptize Infants, is to change God's Ordinance in the Subject and Manner.

But such as are baptized on another Faith, may perish.

Infants cannot worship God in that Act, in Spirit and Truth, because not an
Act of Judgment and Choice, Will and Affection.

But all who baptize Believers, do deny that Infants were baptized.

Infants know not, remember not any thing of their Baptism.

All Infants baptized, are not in the Covenant of Grace.

Infants Baptism is from Earth, and the Counsel of Men.

But Infants baptized may be Children of Wrath.

But to baptize Infants, is to act without a Pattern or Command.

But all Infants baptized, do not receive Remission of Sins.

But in Infants Baptism, the Infant puts forth no Act of Obedience.

But Infants Baptism has many, namely, that Persons may have Regeneration and
Grace before Vocation; and that Persons may be visible Church Members before
Conversion. Moreover, that Persons may be baptized by another's Faith. Also
making a National Gospel Church instead of a Congregational; and bringing in a
carnal fleshly Seed into Christ's Church, in the room of a Spiritual Seed.

But Infants weep when baptized, as if they did dissent.

Infant Baptism has nothing but humane Consequence.

But all the World cannot affirm any Infants were baptized by the Apostles.

But all Infants baptized, are not living Stones fit for God's House.

But you cannot repel Satan, saying, It is written, Infants were baptized, for
it is not written.

But God may say to those who baptize Infants, Who has required these things
at your Hands? because God commanded it not.

But Infant Baptism must fall, because it has not the Word of God to support
it.

But to baptize Infants, without a Divine Command, is the way to be made
ashamed, because no respect to God's Command.

But the most Holy, the most Wise, the most Learned, never was subjected unto
Infant Baptism.

But Infants baptized, cannot repent or believe, examine themselves, make no
Judgment of things, nor take up Christ's Cross, Watch nor Pray, love not, nor
watch not over one another, cannot be Members of a Gospel Church.

Infant Baptism has started up several hundred Years since Christ and his
Apostles.

But Infants ought not to be baptized, who are only legitimately Holy, as all
born in Wedlock are; and is the Holiness mentioned 1 Cor. 7.14.

Infant Baptism has not one Promise.

But in Infant Baptism all these are frustrated, and being applied to an
Infant, are but Mock-shows, and altogether insignificant.

But Infant-Sprinkling, is an inverting the Order and Manner, and contrary to
the Usage of the Apostolic Times, and End of the Ordinance; and is a telling a
Lie in the Name of the Lord, saying, I Baptize, when he does but Rantize.

But Infant Baptism does introduce many Errors, in that it was to take away
Original Sin, work Grace and Regeneration, effect Salvation by the Work done;
that it was an Apostolical Tradition; that Children have Faith, and are
Disciples of Christ; that all Children of Believers are in the Covenant,
defiling and polluting the Church with false Matter, and confounding the Church
and the World together; introducing many heinous Traditions and Inventions of
Antichrist together with it, as Gossips or Sureties, Bishoping or Confirmation,
Chrism, Exorcism, Consignation. Lastly, It has made a great deal of Contention
in the Church of Christ, and stirred up much Hatred.

Infants baptized are not taught of God, nor made Disciples of Christ.

Then such are greatly Heterodox and unsound, who slight and contemn
Water Baptism, under pretense of being baptized with the Holy Ghost.

Then that Argument is of Flesh, and not Spirit, of Man, and not God, that
rejects Water Baptism, and the Supper, as carnal, under an ungrounded
imagination of the Baptism of the Spirit.

Then for any to neglect those Ordinances under an imagination those Commands
ceased at the end of the Apostles Age, are under a delusion.

If so, then the Church State did not end with the Apostles, neither can
Ordinances cease for want of Administrators.

CHAP. X. Contains an Enquiry into the Carriages of the German Anabaptists
(falsely so called) in Luther's Time, and the Reproach from thence reflected
upon that Way removed.
THE Matter of Fact which has caused such a Noise in the World about the
aforesaid Persons, in the Year 1520, is as follows.

There was a Conspiracy of Husbandmen against the Bishop and Canons; which
began from two Rusticks, hence called the Clowns and Rustic War. The principal
Article was, That they should shake off every Yoke, for their Exactions and
Oppressions were very great; some did pay more Rent yearly to their Lords, than
their Farms were worth. And albeit the Boors pleaded first for their Civil
Liberties, yet after cried up for Gospel-Liberty, as appears from Luther's
Admonition and Reprehension of them, for using the Sword to obtain it. It may
be supposed, many of them knew very little of the Gospel, though others might;
but both Papists and Protestants conspired against the Cruelty of their Lords.

Hence you have John of Leyden's words; Some are called Princes, but are indeed
Tyrants; they care not for you, they take your Goods, and spend them wickedly
in Pride and Riot: And for light Causes make Wars, which destroy all the Poor
have left. In the place of Widows and Orphans, they maintain the Bishop of
Rome's Authority, and Wickedness of the Clergy. Where Youth should be brought
up in Learning, and the Poor relieved, they establish the Merchandise of
Massing, and other Abominations. Think you God will suffer these any longer? we
ought rather to die, than to allow their Wickedness, and suffer the Doctrine of
the Gospel to be taken from us.

Luther confessed much of this to be true; and largely admonished Magistrates
to their Duty, tho he reproved them who made the Insurrection.

Philip Landgrave of Hesse, did confess the things they were accused of were
true, and many things ought to be amended, yet said, It was not lawful to rise
against their Prince, unto whom God had given the Sword. But we know,
Oppression, as Solomon says, makes a wise Man mad, especially when Civil and
Spiritual Liberties are invaded.

How few good People condemned the Undertaking of the Duke of Monmouth, when he
came to deliver us from Popery and Slavery?

Very few good People but rejoice in our present Condition, tho won by the
Sword. The Switzers, their Neighbors, had done the like before, and succeeded:
And had Geneva miscarried, or any of the famous Men among the Cantons, they and
their Religion might have fallen under as much Obloquy. And had the Church of
England miscarried in the bringing in our present King, (whom God cause long to
reign) no People would have been under greater Reproach in the World, by some
sort of Men, though done to preserve their Civil and Ecclesiastical Liberties
out of the Hands of Papists.

The things the Munsterians demanded, were,

1. To have liberty to choose such Preachers as might preach God's Word, without
mixture of Men's Traditions.

2. Pay no Tithes but of Corn only, and the same to be distributed according to
the discretion of good Men.

3. They refuse not to obey a Magistrate, knowing that he is ordained of God,
but cannot endure to be kept in Bonds, unless it be showed reasonable in
Scripture.

4. Eased of these Oppressions, because some did pay more Rent yearly unto
their Lords than their Farms were worth.

5. That those things which were not a particular Man's Property, might be
free, for Building, Firing, Hunting, Fishing, etc.

The Papists to this day do reflect upon the whole Reformation of Calvin,
Luther, Zuinglius, etc. upon as good grounds as the Protestants have since
reflected upon the Baptists, because several of their Persuasion were concerned
in that Attempt for Freedom; as it is well known many good Men, of most
Persuasions, of the Church of England, Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists,
were zealously concerned in the D. of Monmouth's Time, and many fell, as
thousands of those did in Westphalia. But know, Victory is no Argument of the
best Cause, nor best Men, nor a Defeat an Argument of a bave Cause, and bad
Men; for God's own Church and People have fled often before the Heathens and
Infidels. Love nor Hatred is known by External Providence, Eccles. 9. Many
times it fares with the Wicked as the Godly, and with the Godly as the Wicked,
in outward things, as Divine Wisdom pleases. No better Men in the World, than
some which fell in the Duke's Cause in the West, yet by the hands of one of the
most debauched Armies that ever was in the World: And if we think to know these
things, they are too wonderful for us, as they were for David, Psalm. 73.16.

And as to those horrible Things which are said to have been in the City of
Munster in Westphalia, from the Year 1532, to 1536. by John of Leyden in
Holland, and Matthias Gnipper-doling; it is manifest, from several Authors,
that the first stir in that City was about the Protestant Reformation, the
Synod siding with Mr. Rotomon, and others of the Ministers who were for the
Reformation, against the Papists, and their Bishops and Canons. John of Leyden,
Jo. Matthias, and Jo. Becold came after this Insurrection began.

John of Leyden by Arguments had made Mr. Rotomon, who was for Pedobaptism, a
Proselyte for Believers-Baptism, and died in that Cause in Munster. He by
Preaching brought over a great part of the City to own this Principle. He sent
Letters to the Landgrave, and a Book of his Doctrine; which Luther opposed, and
he opposed Luther as he did the Bp. of Rome: And it was no wonder Luther
opposed him, who died in the practice of Pedobaptism.

And whereas it is reported, that monstrous Wickedness was committed in the
latter part of the Siege, before they were overcome. We have good ground to
question the Truth thereof; First, Because Sleiden in his Comment, who
represents the Matter as unhandsom as he could, does confess Mr. Munzer did
preach against open crying Sins, as Murder, Adultery, blaspheming God's Name,
the Body chastened and made lean with Fasting, simple Apparel, Countenance
grave, speak seldom, get much out of Company, think often of God, what he is,
what Care he has over us, whether Christ died for our Sins, whether our
Religion be better than the Turks. Moreover, to ask of God a Sign whereby he
may testify his Care for us, and that we be in the true Religion; and though he
show no Token for Good quickly, yet must we nevertheless proceed in Prayer,
yea, expostulate with God, seeing the Scripture promises, he will grant what
we ask. These good things may make us doubt, whether some other Principles and
Practices he writes of, which are contrary to those things, were true.

Moreover, we have good reason to question these Reports, if we consider
further that those things were either written by malicious Papists, who said as
bad of Luther and Calvin, representing them no less Monsters; who asserted that
Luther and his Followers taught, that Mary the Mother of Christ had more Sons,
and that the youngest, James an Apostle, died for us, and not Christ himself.
Or these things were written by some disaffected Protestants, who were willing
to take up and improve such Reports, to blast, not only the Parties Reputation,
but their Principle also. And one thing which caused this People, called
Anabaptists, to be misrepresented, was, their Community of Goods which they
always had at Munster, which was no other than the old Waldenses did, and their
Disciples do to this day, in Poland, Hungary, Transylvania, and many parts of
Germany, living in Colleges, casting all into one Common Stock, done by them,
both from Convenience, and having respect unto the Example of the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, as it is written in Acts 4.32, 34, 35. And though we do
not believe Christians are now under that Obligation, yet I cannot have a hard
thought of any that should so do, acting from the same Primitive Spirit: And it
would be very unchristian to conclude, that such allow a Community of Women,
because they had their Stock and Goods in common, as I fear some have
uncharitably asserted, from this innocent Apostolical Primitive Practice.

To conclude; Suppose it should be granted there were some foolish Virgins in
Germany, under this Denomination of Anabaptists, it is no more than what Christ
has told us will be. Have not the Churches in all Ages had their Achan's,
Corah's, Dathan's, Abiram's, their Diotrephaes? But is it good Logic to say,
Judas had a Devil, therefore all the Apostles had Devils? Has there not been
always some bad in the most pure Churches of Christ? For any to say there are
no good Men, nor good Principles in the Communion of the Church of England,
because some of that Communion are Executed almost every Sessions, as they
confess themselves to be at Tiburn, this would be unjust and uncharitable: And
it argues weakness for any to run upon Extremes, because of others Errors. As
some of the Ministers in Holland, the Followers of Meno Symonis, and
Theodoricus, upon the Munster Report, have refused the bearing Arms, Offensive
or Defensive; or taking any Oaths, or bearing any Rule, Office, or Government
in the Commonwealth, lest they should seem to abet such Principles: It is good
to keep the golden Mean between both Extremes.

Now let us all labor to put on Charity, the Bond of Perfection; think no
Evil, nor speak Evil of no Man; Judge not, that ye be not judged: Why do thou
judge thy Brother, or set at naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. Let that great Instance of Despair in John Child never
be forgotten; that which lay with the most weight upon his Conscience, before
he hanged himself, was, the Sin for his Writing and Speaking against this very
People, as may be seen in that Book of his Despair. And those Scriptures were
of great weight upon his Soul; He that offends one of these little Ones which
believe in me, it were better a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he
cast into the midst of the Sea. O, said he, I have touched the Apple of God's
Eye: and, says he, this deserves a tearing in pieces, to sit* and speak against
thy Brother, and slander thy own Mother's Son, Psalm. 50.

Let all the People of God have such Thoughts, speak such Words, use such
Carriages one toward another, and one of another, as we may have no occasion to
repent of, when every secret Thing shall be brought into Judgment.

CHAP. XI. Containing a brief but sufficient Answer to John Wall's Book, called
Baptism Anatomized, that he may never more boast, as formerly, that none have
answered him.
I Query, 1. Whether this Man does not act against the Light of Conscience,
Experience, and Holy Scripture, when he asserts indefinitely, The Infants of
Believers have, by the free Gift of God in the Covenant of Grace, a right to
Remission of Sins, and so a right to Baptism? Come and stand before the Bar of
God's Word, and make answer, Had Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Absalom, Samuel's Sons of
Belial, all Children of Believers, a right to Remission of Sins?

Query 2. Whether there is not good ground given unto Persons to believe, (in
reading a great part of this Book, from page 25, to 41, and 168.) that he is of
Origen's Opinion, The whole World may be saved at last, and then why not the
Devils too? For (says he, page 168.) if all Infants sinned in Adam 's Loins,
when Adam was restored, they were restored in his Loins; and when born, they
were born in a Gospel Covenant. In Page 26. God freely forgave Adam and his
Posterity in him, their Sin. Now we know the whole World is Adam 's Children,
then the whole World is in the Covenant of Grace, and so the whole must be
baptized; and if in the Covenant of Grace, for any thing I see, the whole World
may be saved. Abundance of these Assertions he has in his Book. But behold, it
is a Babel, a Book of Confusion; for though he tells us, when the Parents
believe, page 27, 28. their Baptism is a sign of the Remission of Sin to their
Infants as to themselves, and that their Infants are in the Covenant of Grace
with them, it being made to Adam and his Posterity. Yet Cain, Ishmael, Esau, he
asserts were cast out of this Covenant of Grace when grown up, and have no
Remission of Sins. What, have Believers Infants Remission sealed unto them, yet
no Remission? Will Men tell a Lie in the Name of the Lord, to tell us, that
Baptism is a sign of Remission of Sin, and yet to tell us, this very Person may
be damned? Are not these Self-contradictions, and holy
Scripture-contradictions, which says, Whom God justifies and pardons, them
he glorifieth? Romans 8.30. In my Book this is more fully answered, page 29.

Query 3. Whether his Language favors not more of Ashdod than Canaan? and
whether it be not full of hard Speeches against those which John Child paid
dearly for, and of whom Christ says, It were better a Millstone were tied
about his Neck, and he cast into the midst of the Sea? For in his Preface, he
accounts the Ministers of Christ, Ministers of Satan transformed, to deceive
the Souls of the Simple. And in page 3. falsely says, if not maliciously, The
Anabaptists deny Infants to be redeemed with Christ's Blood, p. 31. And p. 55.
he says, The Anabaptists hold, Christ has no Lambs in his Fold, but all
Sheep, because we will not own Pedobaptism. And page 65. What a wicked
Principle are those Men of that deny Infants the sign of Remission of Sins, and
that we make an Idol of Baptism, is his Assertion. And because we assert,
Christ was baptized about thirty Years of Age, as our Example; Behold, says
he, what windings and turnings, by any cover of vain deceit, Men lie in wait to
deceive, by turning away from the Truth, and turning unto Fables. And further
says, page 10. We hypocritically plead for that we practice not. Whether this
Man's Discourse favors as being under the Power of a divine, or diabolical
Spirit, is left to the Godly to judge; and whether any heed ought to be taken of
such a Person's Writing.

In page 139. he asserts, We damn the Infants of all God's People of old by our
Doctrine. And enviously adds, page 171. The Anabaptists are not only
erroneous in their Faith, and there polluted, but also garnished with shame to
Nature, in page 169. calling our Faith, a Carnal Faith. I think, were he a
Spiritual Man, he could not have such carnal Language. O, how far is this poor
Man from imitating our Lord, When he was reviled, he reviled not again: But
this Man reviles when no occasion is given him. But he has not yet spit all
his Venom, for in page 71. he says, The Anabaptists Doctrine is not of God,
but a Point of their natural Faith. And further says, These Men are sensual,
having not the Spirit, calling us Beasts; page 111. And that we make Falsehood
our Refuge. And page 117. says, Christ has preserved the Infant Seed of
Believers from the Curse of Anabaptistry, whereby so many Errors are dispersed,
Scriptures wrested, and Souls perverted to their own destruction. Page 143. he
asserts the Doctrine upon which Anabaptistry is built, is a Soul-destroying
Doctrine; and that we have belied the Lord's Ministers, although we repeated
nothing but their own Words, and that, says he, to uphold our Errors, page
116. And cries out, page 66. as well he might, if true, The Anabaptists reckon
their own Children dying in Infancy, by their own judgment lost, and perish to
Eternity.

Pray consider, Is not this Man's Doctrine agreeable with the Church of Rome's,
and the Council of Carthage, who decre'd, If any asserted Baptism did not take
away Original Sin, they should be Anathematized? Is this reasoning like a Man,
or Christian? Because we dare not in Conscience give the Sacrament of Baptism
to our Infants, must they be damned therefore? We can tell you a better way of
washing away of Original Sin, namely, by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, to Infants dying in Infancy.

My Prayer shall be, John Wall, for thee, that thou may not run the hazard
of thy Soul (as John Child did) so thou may but reproach the Innocent People
of God. But as if all this were not yet enough, he asserts, Our Baptism is not
from Heaven, but Will Worship, and so to be abhorred of all Christians: for,
says he, they received their Baptism from one Mr. Smith, who baptized himself,
page 106, 107, 108. one who was cast out of a Church, and endeavored to
deprive the Church of Christ of the use of the Bible.

O full of all Subtilty, and all Mischief! Mat. 3.15.
Enemy of Righteousness, (for the Ordinance is so called) when will thou cease
to pervert the right Ways of the Lord? How many Leaves have thou spent in thy
Book, in asserting and maintaining a Lie, and to cast Filth upon the holy Ways
of the Lord? Could not the Ordinance of Christ, which was lost in the Apostasy,
be revived, (as the Feast of Tabernacles was, tho lost a great while) unless in
such a filthy way as you falsely assert, viz. that the English Baptists received
their Baptism from Mr. John Smith? It is absolutely untrue, it being well
known, by some yet alive, how false this Assertion is; and if J. W. will but
give a meeting to any of us, and bring whom he pleases with him, we shall
sufficiently show the Falsity of what is affirmed by him in this Matter, and in
many other things he has unchristianly asserted.

Mark, his second Query is, What is the End of Baptism? Page 22. says he,
John, surnamed the Baptist, has showed the End in the Sign, why Water Baptism
was ordained; namely, it was ordained, that Christ should be made manifest to
Israel; and for the washing away of Sins, Remission of Sins; and that Christ
the Lamb of God is now come, according to the Gospel-Promise, Genesis 3.15.

We answer, All these things are very good Ends in the Sign, to an
understanding Believer who can take the comfort of it. But what comfort can an
ignorant Infant take in Christ's being manifested in the Sign, or of Christ
being come, or of the Pardon and Remission of Sin? these things are Meat for
strong Men, not for Babes: answered more fully, page 23, 24.

In page 4. of his Preface, he says, We ground our Doctrine on Nature, and
plead a right to Gospel Ordinances by the Act of Man.

We answer, We never understood that we grounded our Doctrine upon Nature, but
upon the Will of God revealed in the Gospel: And for our pleading for a right
to Gospel Ordinances by Men's Actions; if you will call Repentance and Faith
Men's Actions, you may in some good sense; for though God give Faith, it is not
God's Act to believe, but Man's; though God give Repentance, it is not God's
Act to repent, but Man's: And if Persons are offended because we require what
Christ requires as prerequisite to Baptism; if that be to be vile, we must be
still so.

He would insinuate, page 3. that in Baptism a Person is wholly passive,
because he is so in the Baptism of the Spirit and of Afflictions. But shall we
believe God or Man? Christ says, He must be active in the Grace of Faith and
Repentance. Paul must be active, and arise to the Ordinance. Christ was active
in going into Jordan, and coming up; so the Eunuch went down into the Water, as
an Act of his Judgment, Will, and Affection; both Soul and Body is active in
this Ordinance: How then is Man wholly passive in Baptism?

In the last Page of his Preface he nicknames the Interest of God, calling them
Anabaptists, or Rebaptizers; yet, says he, it is no Nickname. Which indeed
must be, 1. because we own but one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. 2. Persons in Infancy
are not Baptized, but Rantized, therefore it is no Rebaptizing. 3. Should it be
said Children were Dipped, yet it was no proper Gospel-Baptism, because it
wanted a proper Subject; it was an ignorant Infant, instead of an understanding
Believer. 4. If John was called John the Baptist, because he baptized Persons
upon profession of Repentance, and Faith in him who was to come after him; why
may not those be so called that follow his Practice, tho they have no
extraordinary Commission as he had? What is more common, than to call them by
the same Name of those whose Principle and Practice they approve of; and that
innocently enough, as Calvinists from Calvin, Lutherans from Luther? so we own
the word of Baptists, because we are in the same Faith and Practice with John
the Baptist, Christ's Harbinger. So that it plainly appears, it is a Nickname,
and a Name of Reproach cast upon those of this Persuasion. Turn to Page 64 and
65 for a fuller Answer.

Page 4, 5. he will have Baptism to be a pouring of Water upon the Face,
because it is said, God will pour out of his Spirit upon his. By way of answer,
he is to know, pouring was the most proper word could be used for the Holy
Spirit's proceeding, because it is Above, with God in Heaven, and we upon Earth
below; but the Element of Water is beneath us, for Men go down into the Sea. So
accordingly it was practiced in the Apostles Time, they went down into the
Water; which if it had not been to be dipped in it, they need to have gone only
unto it: therefore, how vain is that he asserts, John baptized standing at the
brink of the River Jordan, page 8. This is to contradict the Word of God, which
says plainly, Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the Water (not to the
brink of it) and came up out of the Water.

In page 4, and 5. his great Ordnance, by which he thinks to do the most
Execution, is from 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. where it is said, All our Fathers were
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

Answer, 1. Consider, it is said, the Fathers, not the Children, were baptized.
2. If you will have it the Children also, then you must include there, Beasts
and Cattle, for the Cloud poured Water upon them all. 3. Wherever the word
Baptism is used, whether it be applied to the Spirit, to Sufferings, or to
Water, it always shows some large measure of all. So here they were baptized
in the Cloud, and in the Sea; not properly baptized, for that Ordinance was not
in use then, but the scope of that place is, the Apostle thought fit to borrow
that word Baptize, for to show God's gracious protection of them in the
Red Sea; as in the Wilderness he fed them with Manna from Heaven, and gave them
Water out of a Rock: So he left them not in the Red Sea, but encompassed them
about in safety, by his Divine Providence, with Water on each side of them, and
the Cloud over them, as Persons are encompassed with that Element when
baptized. Again, for the true understanding of the Word, we must have recourse
to the common Acceptance of it, and not imagine the Spirit of God does
contradict the common Acceptance of Words among Men. When the Prophets wrote
by Inspiration, and the Apostles, they always used such words as were vulgar,
and commonly accepted amongst Men; so that the common acceptance of the Hebrew
word Tabal among the Hebrews, and Baptizo among the Greeks, always signifying
to dip, there being other words to signify sprinkle or pour. How then can
pouring Rain from the Cloud be called Baptism? as John Wall would needs have
it, though he beg for it, because it can never be proved; see my Book page 16,
17.

And is he not full of audacity or boldness to tell the World, in page 8. That
there is not one word that any by John or Philip were dipped, when the very
word properly signifies dipping? Hence the Dutch call John the Dooper. And our
Translators might as well have rendered baptize, dip, in all the places where it
is, as to render Judas sopt, dipped; and Christ's Vesture dipped in Blood,
being all from the same Original Word.

And whereas he tells the World, page 16, 17. Though the Scripture say, they
baptized in Aenon, because there was much Water. He says, It would not be
enough to dip half the Body in. 1. I suppose he never was there to see it, but
speaks by an implicit Faith. 2. Common sense directs us to believe there was
need of much Water to the due performance of that Ordinance, or else the Holy
Spirit would not have mentioned it as commodious for that Work, because much
Water there; a little Water will sprinkle hundreds, but much Water is necessary
unto the due performance of this Ordinance of Baptism, because it must be so
done, as to figure out the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ. Now I
would fain know, how sprinkling, or pouring Water upon the Face, does figure
out Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection? Romans 6.1, 2, 4.

In page 9. how disingenuously does he deal with Coloss. 2.12. We are buried
with Christ in Baptism. To follow their natural Fancy, says he, the Person
buried, is wholly passive, and must be taken in Arms, laid upon the Water, then
Water cast upon him, till covered, as Earth is upon the Dead.

Answer, This way of discourse is a kind of trifling with God's Word. You are
to know, Similitudes do not run upon all four, as we say, but respect must
always be had to the chief intent and design of a Metaphor, which in this Text
is to hold forth the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, for our
Justification; and also holds forth our Death to Sin, and Resurrection to a new
Life. This being the prime scope of the Apostle, his way of discourse is
nothing but to evade the strength of the Argument.

Whereas in page 10. he says, The Person baptizeth part of himself, because he
goes into the Water.

We answer, That is false, because he does not lay himself down in the Water,
but that is done by the Administrator, he lays him along, as one buried under
the Water, his whole Body, not the upper part only, to figure out Christ's
lying in the Grave: for as the Persons stands upright in the Water, that is not
Baptism, but when laid along under the Water, by the Administrator, using the
words of Institution, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, this is Baptism.

In page 14. he says, The Person is not baptized, but his Clothes.

Those things are not becoming Modesty to discourse of; Let that vain Man know,
we do not baptize the Clothes in the Name of the Blessed Trinity, but the
Person; and should we baptize otherwise I fear this poor Man would be the first
would reproach the Interest of Christ upon that account.

Whereas he charge B. K. page 80. with the whole Assembly of Baptized
Believers, that they were forced to try their Wits, for want of those literal
words, Remember you keep holy the First Day.

Answ. Our Arguments for observing the First Day, do greatly satisfy our
Consciences, being grounded upon the Word of God. Also our Arguments against
Pedobaptism, and for Believers Baptism also, being proved from the same Divine
Revelation. But alas, how are Men put at their Wits end, to find Arguments for
Pedobaptism? or else they would never prefer a dark Consequence before a plain
Command, which is beneath the Reason of a Man; nor run to the Law to prove a
Gospel-Ordinance, and reject God's Institution, and set up Man's Invention.
Could he say as much for Pedobaptism, as we can for the Lord's Day, the
Controversy would not have held so long. Could he give us such Examples of
Infant Baptism, as we can for our religious observing that Day, we shall give
him thanks.

And whereas in page 104. he quarrels, because we do not Baptize always upon
the First Day. We do not judge we are confined to that Day. The Lord's Supper,
Christ himself did institute it, and practice it with his Apostles, on another
Day than the First Day of the Week.

Although we do grant it is very commendable to do such Work on such Days, when
retired from our Labor, yet we do not think we are confined to that Day; for
in the late Persecution, the Churches of Christ, some of them, did find it very
convenient to break Bread upon a Weekday, yet we always think it best on the
First, when it may be. And as for Baptism, we do not find the Apostles tarried
for the Revolution of the First Day, but as occasion offered they did it upon
any Day.

Page 69. he insists upon the order of words, Mat. 3. I baptize to Repentance.
See this answered in my Book, p. 54, 55, 56.

That is a false Argument he so largely insisted on, page 44. If Persons have a
right to Remission of Sin, they have a right to the Sign, Baptism. This
Argument I have handled in p. 36.

Infants are not called Disciples, as he supposes page 43. from Acts 15.10.
and upon his Request, we will show him a Command and Example for Women's
communicating at the Lord's Table, p. 42, 43.

For answer to page 21. where it is asserted, That many of the 3000 whom the
Apostles batized in Acts 2.39. were Children, seeing the Pardon of Sin was by
the Apostle Peter applied to their Children. O horrible perverter of the Word
of God! these Children whom he speaks of, were no more (as yet) baptized, than
the Gentiles, which were afar off uncalled. 2. Suppose some of their Children
were baptized, it must be believing Children, not Infants; my Child is my
Child, though thirty or forty Years old, for you cannot think the Apostle would
go beyond his Commission, to baptize an ignorant Infant in the room of an
understanding Believer. O how sophistically does this Man reason! see page 29,
30, 31. of this Book.

Lastly; I refer you to Mr. Cary's Solemn Call, which clears up the Covenant
made with Israel at Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.20. and that in the Land of Moab,
Deuteronomy. 29. as also the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, Genesis 17. are
plainly proved to be three several Editions of the Covenant of Works: Though
Mr. Wall will have it to be a Covenant of Grace in Christ. And though he spends
many Leaves of his Book about it, it is as far from being proved, as
Believers-Baptism is a Sign to the Infant of the Remission of Sins, and being
in the Covenant of Grace, which yet is confessed, a few Years after, he is
neither in the Covenant of Grace, nor yet one Sin pardoned. These are some of
this poor Man's Self-contradictions; is he not Felo de se, a Self-destroyer?

Whereas he says, page 117. Mr. Ainsworth's Book called, A Censure upon a
Dialogue of the Anabaptists, was never answered, That in Abraham 's Seed all
Nations should be blessed: This Grace Abraham 's Infant Seed had; this Grace
Christ gave to little Children. See your self and Mr. Ainsworth both answered,
in page 37, 38. and p. 34, 35.

CHAP. XII. A brief Answer to a part of Mr. Daniel Williams's Catechism, in his
Book of the Vanity of Childhood and Youth.
IN page 131. he propounds these Questions; What if a Child will not agree, but
refuse to agree to the Covenant to which his Infant Baptism engaged him?

Himself makes this astonishing Answer.

1. It Is a rejecting Christ our Savior, and a renouncing the Blessings of the
Gospel. 2. It Is the Damning Sin. 3. It Is the Heart of all Sin. 4. It Is
Rebellion continued against my Maker. 5. It Is Ingratitude and Perjury to my
Redeemer. 6. It Is gross Injustice to my Parents. 7. It Is an Affront to all the
Godly. 8. It Is self-killing Cruelty to my own Soul.
Here are hard and dreadful Words to make up the defect of weak Arguments; for
^hen some Persons want Arguments (...) to persuade into an Error, they do use
some terrible Words and Ways to fright People thereinto.

Pray, Sir, show your Hearers where you have Divine Authority for your
Assertions, or else there is no ground to be concerned at all about it, though
laid down in a formidable way. Though I know it is the Duty of Parents to pray
for their Children, give them moderate Correction, good Education, and good
Examples; yet God never made it the Duty of any Parent to dedicate their Child
in Baptism, nor the Duty of any Child to Engage and Covenant with God in their
Infant-State, being altogether incapable; therefore the not heeding it, cannot
be any Sin, much less a damning Sin: and if so be Persons do then engage
against the Custom of this World, as you say they do, then they must engage
against Infant Baptism, being a worldly Custom.

I shall speak briefly to all these Particulars.

1. Not to agree, or to refuse to agree to the Covenant made in Infant Baptism,
is no Sin, because, Where there is no Law, says the Apostle John, there is no
Transgression. Now if this Gentleman can show us any Law of God for Parents to
dedicat^ their Children in Baptism, or Children to covenant with God in
Baptism, I will give him the Cause; but if this cannot be done, I think he can
do no less than make a public Recantation of his Assertions, to undeceive
those whom he in ignorant Zeal may have deceived.

2. It Is no Rebellion against our Maker; because Rebellion is interpreted in
the holy Writ, to be a wilful breach of God's Law and Command; as you may see
in Numb. 20.24. Ye rebelled against my Word, Chap. 27.14. Ye rebelled against
the Command of the Lord; so Deuteronomy. 1.26. Now then let this never be more called
Rebellion, except it can be proved to be against the Command of the Lord.

3. It can be no Ingratitude nor Perjury to my Redeemer. 1. No Ingratitude,
because to own a thing he never appointed, and is the ready way to thrust out
his own Appointment, will never be accounted by Christ Ingratitude. 2. Neither
can it be Perjury. Mr. Pool on 1 Timothy 1. says, Perjury, is a false Swearing,
or swearing to an untrue thing. Now I suppose this is not Mr. Williams's
meaning by Perjury; for the Propositions were true, if any, which were promised
in Infant Baptism: But I suppose he means the Covenant the Child made in
Baptism, against being governed by Satan and the Flesh, taking up this World's
Goods as my Portion, and against the Customs of the Men of the World as my
Guide, when grown up, and found walking in the Ways of the Devil, the Flesh,
and the World, contrary to God's Command and his own Vow: This I supose he
calls Perjury to the Redeemer. But let it be considered, a Man must first make
a Vow, or take an Oath, before he can be said to break it, and be perjured. Now
if the Child never made any Vow or Covenant in Baptism, it being impossible,
how then can he be said to break Covenant, and be guilty of Perjury to his
Redeemer?

4. It cannot be Injustice, much less gross Injustice to my Parents: because
what is accounted Injustice to my Parents, the Word of God makes it appear to
be so some-where or other: but the Word of God does not any where call that
Child an unjust Child, that does not own its dedicating by its Parents in
Baptism, or that they made any Covenant with God then.

5. It cannot be an Affront to all the Godly; because there are thousands that
deny the thing; and I am bold to say it, were the Holy Apostles alive now, they
would not have been affronted for any to deny their Parents dedicating Children
in Baptism, or Children denying they made any Covenant then, because it is a
thing God never revealed.

6. It cannot be a rejecting of Christ, as he says; because there are
thousands which own Christ, and accept him for King, Priest and Prophet, who
deny Infants Baptism, and look upon it as nothing but an Invention of Men. And
it is very severe to say, that those many thousands who now deny and disown
their Parents baptizing them in Infancy, that they do reject Christ their
Savior, or the Blessings of the Gospel.

7. It cannot be a Self-killing Cruelty to my own Soul, nor a damning Sin, not
to agree to, or refuse the Covenant made in Infant Baptism, though I do not
refuse to be the Lord's, and in sincerity care to know, love, believe, obey,
and worship him, and serve him all my Days, and depend upon him, through
Christ, for all Happiness; yet this I do not, because my Parents or Sureties
did covenant or promise I should do it, nor because I my self made any such
Covenant in my Infancy, for as much as it is all unscriptural, and without a
Divine Rule, therefore cannot be Self-killing, nor Cruelty to my own Soul, nor
a damning Sin, as this Gentleman says: for the damning Sin is, final
Impenitence and Unbelief; Mark 16.16. He that believes not, shall be damned.
Persons may believe the Covenant God has made, and be saved; and though they
deny the Covenant in Infant Baptism, they cannot be damned. I do not believe in
time in Christ, because either I my self did in Infancy covenant so to do, or
because my Parents or Sureties covenanted for me; but I deny it, because an
human Invention.

Yet I believe and obey from more solid Considerations.

(1.) Because I am commanded to it by God, 1 John 3.23.

(2.) Because his great Love constrains me, 2 Cor. 5.14.

(3.) Because of those glorious Promises made to believing and obedient Souls,
2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Chap. 7.1.

(4.) I am obliged unto it from the Law of Creation, Psalm. 95.6.

(5.) Without Faith and Obedience I am in danger of losing my Soul.

Therefore for Mr. Williams to tell the World, It is a damning Sin, not to
agree to, or refuse the Covenant made in Infancy, is a new Doctrine, which has
no footing in the unerring Rule of the Word of God.

If you will see the damning Sin, read Mr. Pool's Synopsis, on John 3.18. He
that believes not the Doctrine of Christ, and does not, upon the Terms of the
Gospel, receive him for his Savior, is already condemned for his obstinate
Infidelity, which is the certain Cause of Damnation. And further, The not
believing in the only Son of God, who is able to save to the utmost all that
regularly trust in him, is such a contempt of the merciful, alsufficient, sole
Means of Salvation, that it is absolutely necessary, and most just, that all
those who refuse to be saved by him, should perish by themselves.

Thus you see what the damning Sin is. Therefore Mr. Williams's Gospel and
Doctrine is to be looked upon as New in this Thing, and not agreeing to the old
Gospel, to assert, That it is a damning Sin, the Heart of all Sin, a rejecting
Christ our Savior, a renouncing the Blessings of the Gospel, Rebellion against
my Maker, Ingratitude and Perjury to my Redeemer, gross Injustice to my
Parents, an Affront to all the Godly, and a self-killing Cruelty to my own
Soul, not to agree, or refuse to agree to that Covenant made in Baptism in
Infancy; though there be not one word in all the Holy Scripture to warrant that
Practice or Principle.

8. If refusing to agree to the Covenant to which my Baby-Baptism engaged me,
be the Heart of all Sin; then I for my part, and many thousands more, must be
guilty of all Sin; for it is the Heart of all Sin, says this Gentleman. For my
own part I do profess, that I do not observe any Gospel-Duty, neither believe
nor repent, by virtue of any Covenant my Parents made, or was made by my self
in my Baby-Sprinkling, because God did never require such a Covenant of my
Parents, nor of my Self, who was wholly incapable of such a thing in Infancy.

But the Reason why I desire to observe the Terms of the Gospel, is, because
it is God's Requirements and Command, That we believe on the Name of the only
begotten Son of God, 1 John 3.23. And since I believed, I have made that
Covenant with God in Baptism, which you say, page 131. was made in Infancy,
which I never remember, nor can I believe it is true, viz. I have engaged
against being governed by Satan or the Flesh as my Rulers, and against taking
up this World's Goods as my Portion, and against the Customs of the Men of the
World as my Guide; therefore I reject that Baptism, because a Custom of the
World. Now should I refuse to agree to this Covenant which I made after I
believed, then I were a great Sinner indeed, because one of my own making: But
if I keep this Covenant, tho I refuse to agree to that Covenant made in my
Infant Baptism, I am a great Sinner, (says Mr. Williams) for it is the Heart of
all Sin. If the Heart of all Sin, then of Murder, Adultery, Sabbath-breaking,
Incest, Heresy, Drunkenness, Idolatry, Sorcery, Lying, Covetousness, Railing,
Robbery, Buggery, Extortion, Envy, Witchcraft, Contention, Gluttony, Rebellion,
Perjury, Ingratitude, Injustice, an Affront to the Godly, Self-killing; In a
word, says Mr. Williams, it is a damning Sin. Now it is high time for the poor
Baptists to cry, Lord, have Mercy upon us, for this Gentleman damns us all at
once. But this is our Comfort, he shall not be our Judge, nor that Doctrine he
has delivered, but both he and we must be tried by another Gospel, and another
Doctrine than he preaches upon this Subject.

And whereas he calls Baptism in Infancy, a Seal of the Covenant, page 130.
Pray, Sir, what did it seal to the Infant then? did it seal the Love of God,
pardon of Sin, Reconciliation or Adoption, Justification or Remission? If so,
as you grant, by referring to Acts 2.39 then, Sir, if they are justified, and
their Sins remitted, then they must be glorified, says the Apostle, Romans 8.30.
Whom he justified, them he glorified. I suppose you may be for final
Perseverance: if so, then not an Infant of these can miscarry.

But if you say these things may be sealed in Infancy, and yet be never enjoyed
for want of actual Faith. How then! is a Person pardoned, and not pardoned;
justified, and not justified; in Covenant, and not in Covenant? these are
Contradictions with a witness. What! is the Covenant sealed, and nothing in the
Covenant enjoyed? does God seal to a Blank? Men are more wise than so to do;
for there is always something antecedent to the Seal. When a Covenant is sealed
among Men, something is sealed unto them; so when God seals, it is not to a
Blank, but it is his Covenant of Grace sealed: After you believed, you were
sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. Mark, it is not before they
believed, but after they believed they were sealed. Therefore Infant Baptism is
no Seal of the Covenant of Grace, for they do not believe. But after Persons
believe, then the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are Seals of the
Covenant of Grace, but not before.

And whereas Mr. Williams asserts, page 130. Believers and their Infant Seed
are in the Covenant.

We reply; This Word Covenant is an unintelligible word, for not one in an
Hundred, if one in a Thousand, knows what is meant by it.

I know but two ways of being in the Covenant of Grace, either Absolutely, or
Conditionally.

1. No Believers dare say, all their Children are Absolutely in the Covenant of
Grace, because there is no falling away from it: But behold, how many of God's
People have their Children die, of whom they have little hope?

Or, 2. they are in the Covenant of Grace conditionally; that is to say, If
they repent, and believe. Upon this Condition, and on these Terms, the Children
of Unbelievers are in the Covenant of Grace also, and have the same right to
the Seals of the Covenant as the Children of Believers have; and there are none
to have the Seals, or Signs of the Covenant, but those whom God has ordained
and appointed should have them, which are those who repent, and actually
believe. For, mark, though Lot was a holy Man, yet he had no such privilege to
Circumcise his Infant Seed, because it was limited unto Abraham and his Seed;
and the Male Sex, and the eighth Day, appointed by a special Command. Even so,
Baptism is limited by a special Command of God to Actual Believers.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, Page 3. line 3, 4. read, two or three hours.

In the Book. Page 35. Marg. r. Genesis 17. P. 41. l. 14. r. fit or unfit. P. 55.
Marg. l. 6. for Christ, r. John. P. 69. l. 4. r. Church of Rome. P. 90. Col. 1.
l. 1. f. Persons, r. Believers. P. 95. l. 15. r. Bishop of Munster. P. 100. l.
2. f. bave, r. bad. P. 118. l. 25, 26. r. the word Baptist.


